==PAGE:1==
Thesis Project
Exploring Carcinogenic Risk and Life Cycle
Analysis of Printed Circuit Board
Bioleaching
Technical University of Lule˚a
Department of Civil Engineering
Author:
Liam Lewis
Supervisor:
Saeed Chehreh Chelgani
June 25, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Abstract
Waste from electronic and electrical components, or WEEE, is an ever growing and important
waste stream in Europe. Biochemical leaching is a new technology that can be used as a cleaner
environmental option for metallic recovery from waste electronics. This study first compiles
past research on microorganisms that have been tested and studied for use in the bioleaching
process. From this, a hypothetical PCB leaching plant using a pre-treatment facility and a
two stage bioreactor will be simulated to find environmental impact and carcinogenic risk from
it’s operation in Northern Sweden. This will be done with HSC, OpenLCA CML-2001, and
Argo open source tools. Chromium(VI) and Lead will be the key elements of study for an LCA
analysis and Monte Carlo risk assessment. It is found through LCA simulation that there is
a reasonable risk of future marine and freshwater exotoxicity due to the waste outputs of the
bioleaching facility when regarding Pb and Cr(VI). After 100 years of simulation, concentrations
of lead and chromium in aquatic environments may pose higher than acceptable concentrations
in both sediment and water. When studying carcinogenic risk, a landfill that houses e-waste is
simulated and used as a comparison to the bioleaching process. Compared to landfilling, the
health risk for cancer effects over a lifetime is 77.9% lower when bioleaching. Non-cancer risk is
also found to be 44% higher than bioleaching when taking into account the 90th percentile of
people. From the results, statistically, 5 in every 100,000 may get cancer from the bioleaching
process but 3 in every 10,000 may be effected if it is a landfill. It is also found that children
have a higher risk of non-cancer health effects than adults due to the neurotoxic properties of
lead. Bioleaching can be considered for cold climates as it requires less energy and has lower
operation cost in long term operation. There exist some forms of microorganism which performs
at colder temperatures that may be substituted fo further aid this goal of arctic operation. If
an end of life solution for one of Europe’s largest growing waste streams must be made in a cold
climate area, in almost all regards, it is better to use bioleaching compared to landfilling when
considering the local environment and people in the region of operation.
i
==PAGE:3==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Background and Definition of WEEE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
WEEE Pre-Treatment Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Current and Past WEEE Treatment Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Pyrometallurgy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Hydrometallurgy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Bioleaching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
PCB Recovery Using Pre-Treatment and Bioleaching Methods
. . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.1
Preliminary Dismantling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2
Size Reduction Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.3
Physical Separation Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.4
Bioleaching Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Life Cycle Analysis
17
3.1
LCA Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Goal and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Life Cycle Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Life Cycle Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Monte Carlo
29
4.1
Monte Carlo Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Bioleaching Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Landfilling Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Conclusion
43
6
References
ii
==PAGE:4==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
1
Introduction
This project will focus on the environmental and human health impacts of biochemical leaching
in the processing of printed circuit boards (PCB) waste from waste from electrical and electronic
equipment (WEEE). Bioleaching in WEEE processing is an emerging technology which is still
being explored and developed around the world. With an increasing global desire for sustainable
development and environmental protection, new technology to retrieve critical metals such as
Copper, Zinc, Gold and platinum group elements to provide resource for a carbon future is
important. Also, using a technology that, itself, has a reduced environmental impact compared
to contemporary resource extraction is positive for future development. This is all especially
true if one considers Arctic communities and environments. These fragile areas of the world
have gained a greater focus globally as resource extraction of strategic metals become a larger
focus for future production.
Biochemical leaching and PCB pre-treatment is studied for the waste output of Hexavalent
Chromium (Cr(VI)) and Lead (Pb). The project aims to detect carcinogenic risk and non-
cancer health risk of these heavy metals considering prolonged exposure over a lifetime. A life
cycle analysis of the system when used to quantify long term environmental impact to terrestrial,
freshwater and marine ecosystems. A Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) and Monte Carlo risk analysis
will be conducted using data from an extensive literature review, mass balancing from HSC
and the CML-2001 method of life cycle impact assessment from OpenLCA. Monte Carlo will
be completed with Argo open source in Excel. In the end, information and advice will be given
to properly inform on the environmental and health impacts of PCB processing in an industrial
scale.
Past literature on the topic of bioleaching WEEE is studied in order to study the chemistry
and theory behind this experimental processing method. With the literature study, a process
system is chosen considering the species of microorganism as well as the required parameters
for recovery of Copper and other critical metals. A simulation of the process taken from the
literature review will then be simulated in HSC for mass balancing. With the mass balance,
waste outputs are used in OpenLCA to retrieve impact data. The mass balance also helps
in calculating output concentrations and daily rates for Monte Carlo.
Below is a flowsheet
outlining the thesis plan and sections of interest.
1
==PAGE:5==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
2
==PAGE:6==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
2
Literature Review
2.1
Background and Definition of WEEE
Waste from electrical and electronic equipment, otherwise known as WEEE or e-waste is an
ever growing resource in the EU stemming from the recycled and discarded electrical goods used
every day around the world from mobile phones to common household appliances. WEEE is
currently one of the fastest growing waste streams worldwide and contains complex mixtures of
materials. Some of these components are considered hazardous for human and environmental
health [35, 30].
Since the European Union WEEE Directive was put in place, Europe has
become the top collector of WEEE globally with a 42% recycling rate with Finland and Sweden
recovering above the European average [30]. With this wealth of resource, it is no surprise that
research to improve the recycling of these used goods back into valuable products has expanded.
Waste electric and electronic equipment have become an important resource in the field of
recycling and urban mining. In Europe alone, approximately 8 million tonnes of WEEE are
generated every year with a yearly increase of 3% to 5% [20]. Currently, electronic waste is
generated two to three times faster than other waste streams [20]. In the EU, approximately
11kg of e-waste is collected per-person [35]. This waste can contain up to 61% metals and
21% plastics which can be recycled or processed into useful material [33]. In many cases, the
amounts of metals found in WEEEs are in higher concentration than the natural ores of the
same metal [28]. Putting this in perspective, printed circuit boards contain 3% to 6% weight
metallic fraction [31]. This metallic fraction contains resources such as gold, silver, copper and
zinc which are all important metals used in technology and industries around the world as we
make the transition to a carbon free future. These precious and strategic minerals are the major
economic driver for recycling [33]. With the fast depletion of primary mineral deposits offering
these important resources, exploring recovery sources in WEEE is important to mitigate supply
risks [31].
WEEE processing comes with many health and environmental risks [30].
Chlorinated and
brominated substances, toxic metals, photoactive and biologically active materials, acids, plas-
tics and plastic additives present in WEEE are regarded as being highly toxic [33]. Plastics
found in WEEE have many silicas and flame retardant resins. These resins contain many chem-
icals which can adversely effect humans and animals if ingested or inhaled. Current land filling
of WEEE poses huge environmental and human safety concerns due to these toxic chemicals
leaching into soil and groundwater [28, 31].
Because of this, environmental precaution and
potential hazard studies must be considered when choosing pre-treatment and processing meth-
ods. Not only is processing WEEE environmentally hazardous, the pre-treatment and mixing
of different WEEE products can lead to undesirable dilutions of valuable metals [33]. Below,
Table 1 shows of the estimated percentages of resource that can be extracted from WEEEs.
3
==PAGE:7==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Composition of WEEE
Material
Content(%)
Iron / Steel
47.9
Copper
7.0
Aluminum
4.7
Non-Ferrous
1.0
Flame retardant plastics
5.3
Non- flame retardant plastics
15.3
Glass
5.4
Rubber
0.9
Wood / plywood
2.6
Ceramic
2.0
Printed circuit boards
3.1
Other
4.8
Total
100
Table 1: Percent composition of WEEE broken down to component type [33]
2.2
WEEE Pre-Treatment Methodology
The WEEE recycling process begins with pre-treatment of the e-waste product. Pre-treatment
can be composed of three main phases consisting of manual disassembly and dismantling, me-
chanical treatment then a combination of mechanical and manual treatment [7]. Manual sep-
aration is key to extract valuable components and discard hazardous waste products before
further processing. This stage is done to greatly decrease the amount of unused material in the
metal recovery phases. Despite its benefits, this process is slow and labor intensive if brought to
a massive industrial scale. Once the desired components such as printed circuit boards (PCBs)
have been extracted, it follows a traditional recycling process in which the material has valu-
ables liberated through physical characteristics such as weight, size and shape [7]. Mechanical
treatment, which occurs after the manual sorting, often begins with size reduction in the form
of shredding and/or grinding. After this, low intensity magnetic separation can be used to
separate ferrous metals such as iron, steel and nickel. Non-ferrous metals like copper can be
separated with electric conductivity based techniques such as eddy current separation or corona
electrostatics [7]. The overall goal of pre-treatment is to liberate and concentrate as much chosen
product as possible before entering treatment stages such as pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy,
or bioleaching. In the case of bioleaching, however, the use of physical separation of ferrous and
non ferrous metals may not be required due to selective leaching which occurs depending on
the leaching technique used.
4
==PAGE:8==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Figure 1: Simplified flowsheet of WEEE processing with bioleaching
Figure 1 Represents an extremely simplified WEEE process to extract materials such as copper,
gold or silver.
The pre-treatment stage of this process is where most unwanted product is
disposed of before the bioleaching commences. This step would also be completed regardless of
other downstream processes such as hydrometallurgy and pyrometallurgy if bioleaching is not
considered the optimal option. The crushing and/or grinding stages will create dust which can
be deposited on the site or become airborne. Pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy practices
for WEEE recycling will be briefly explained in the section below.
5
==PAGE:9==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
2.3
Current and Past WEEE Treatment Methods
2.3.1
Pyrometallurgy
Pyrometallurgy has been traditionally used in the past to recycle and process WEEEs to recover
ferrous and precious metals [37].
There are several approaches to pyrometallurgy including
conflagration, drossing, sintering and melting among others [37]. One example is when WEEE
is placed into a furnace or molten bath to process desired metals [20]. This system currently
focuses mostly on the production of copper bullion to be then refined into high purity copper.
Slimes are then further refined from an electrolytic process to recover precious metals defined as
”Aqueous Metal Recovery.” As a whole, Pyrometallurgy is best suited for large scale operation
with high feed rates of incoming WEEE.
The process of pyrometallurgy uses temperature ranges between 800 and 1200 degrees Celsius
to achieve and facilitate metal recovery [37].
Pyrometallurgy is not a perfect system.
The
process is energy intensive and has high costs to produce high grade feeds due to downstream
processing requirements. The formation of dioxins, furans, volatile metals and dust can occur
during the process which present high environmental and health concerns [28, 21, 37]. For this,
off-gas treatment is a prerequisite or it must be treated as a byproduct after the combustion
stage to be properly disposed of. This is done with scrubbers or filters which remove particulate
matter from the air as well as any waste products. Also, products from the pyrometallurgical
systems require extra processing for lower grades or for chemically complex streams [10]. As
an example, pyrometallurgical processes create mixes of products, sometimes with REEs (Rare
Earth Elements) which end up in slags from arc furnaces which cannot be easily recovered [10].
Technical drawbacks such as integrated smelters not recovering aluminum or iron as metals
from products have also been reported [20]. Though Pyrometallurgy is a system which can
process large quantities of WEEE, the system inefficiencies and health risks are considered
a turn off for future recovery methods when recycling WEEE. This is especially true as the
separation methods used in this system lead to very limited upgrading of metals so other
techniques must be further used [20]. It was found after experimentation that a conclusion can
be made to argue pyrometallurgical technology requires greater financial resources compared
to hydrometallurgic processes and cannot achieve equatable purity as can be derived from
hydological and electrometallurgic methods [37].
2.3.2
Hydrometallurgy
Hydrometallurgy is a multi process system to leach desired metals and minerals out of WEEEs
using several different strategies. As a whole, the process begins with disassembly much like
other methods.
The desired metal in the WEEE is then upgraded through physical means
previously outlined in the pre-treatment methodology. An example being manual separation of
6
==PAGE:10==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
WEEE components using hand tools followed by shredding, crushing and magnetic separation.
This will retrieve the valuable components [4]. The refining process is then completed through
processing, which, in this case, is leaching [20] that can be done either through chemical or caus-
tic means [4]. Leaching occurs when liquids containing leaching chemicals react with solids to
strip or dissolve elements which are deposited in the liquid solution. Generally, before leaching
can be done on some electronic components, sodium hydroxide must be used to remove inert
chemical coatings which protect the e-waste [4]. Traditionally, hydrometallurgical processes are
used in the processing of virgin metal ores as well as for recycling [4]. This process will recover
metals both from primary and secondary sources of waste streams [10]. Further hydrometallur-
gic separation comes in three main methods: solvent extraction, ion exchange and precipitation
[10, 4]. All of these methods use some form of chemical leaching. Solutions containing many
impurities in metal ions use solvent extraction in large scale separation. It is noted that ion
separation is useful as well but not for industrial productions [10]. The product is then fully
recovered through electrorefining or through electrochemical reduction reactions to create solid
metal from the impregnated solution created from the previous chemical leaching step [4].
Generally, in regards to large scale or industrial scale WEEE recycling operations, many prob-
lems emerge. One of these problems is the pretreatment processes of collection involving sort-
ing and dismantling of the e-waste electronics [10]. Many times, disassembly of more complex
WEEEs must be done before milling and shredding can occur. Beyond this, dealing with highly
reagent intensive processes and heterogeneity of the product can be a time and energy con-
suming process. It is also common that separations via physical means, such as milling, is not
always effective given the construction and locations of desired materials inside the WEEEs
[10, 21]. An example of difficult physical separation is copper recovery from PCBs. Copper
specifically can be difficult to liberate or expose due to plastics that encapsulate wiring and
other components inside circuit boards. This means that the metal may be completely stuck
inside plastics or resins which would not allow the desired metal to be reached by the leaching
agents. For this reason, grinding and shredding of the e-waste must be size controlled to get
good recoveries of the desired metal. It was found that almost complete liberation of copper
was possible when WEEE was grinded down to a particle size of less than 2 mm [33]. With
this complete hydrometallurgical liberation of copper at a 2 mm particle size, the physical sep-
aration processes lost between 10% to 35% of the metals in this stage [33]. This can be a huge
detraction from the overall product of recycled metals from WEEE.
Efficiencies of the leaching technology are influenced by a multitude of factors such as leaching
agents, concentration, pH, temperature, leach time, stirring, solid to liquid ratio, particle size,
distribution of elements and entrapment of soluble / insoluble particles [10]. Leaching agents
influence the process and the further recovery of metal ions in the solution. For this reason, the
leaching agent is directly connected to all subsequent steps of separation. pH is also important
7
==PAGE:11==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
since acid solutions at low pH favors dissolution of many metallic species [10]. With low pH
solutions, however, separating metal ions from the leachate is more difficult for chemically
complex WEEE products.
In general, fast leaching is good for the economic value of the
project but having slow kinetics is best for selectivity in leaching and getting rid of undesired
constituents [10]. This comes with the disadvantage of requiring many processing steps and
large volumes of chemicals which results in a high output of wastewater [20].
Hydrometallurgical treatments are primarily based on the use of leaching agents in aqueous
solutions. These leaching agents are typically strong acids or bases. These are then applied to
more complex agents such as oxalic acid, acetic acid, cyanide, halide, thiourea, and thiosulfate
[28, 33, 4]. A common acid for metal leaching is sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid.
Cyanide used in industrial processes for WEEE recovery, predominantly gold, have shown very
promising results despite the toxicity issues when handling such substances [4].
Potassium
cyanide and cyanide salts are the most common forms used in WEEE leaching. Copper also
readily dissolves in cyanide mixtures [4] but this has sometimes caused issues when attempting to
leach gold alongside it. Thiosulphate leaching is another choice of recovery compared to cyanide.
This alternative leachant is used for gold and silver. A major advantage of this method is that
it is non-toxic and non-corrosive compared to it’s cyanide counterpart. With this comes the
drawbacks of requiring a greater quantity of the chemical and it requires oxidizing agents such
as Cu2+ or Fe3+ along with co-leaching with other agents such as ammonia or thiourea [4].
Despite this, gold recovery from this method is still around 98%. The previously mentioned
thiourea is also a highly effective leaching agent itself. It is a complex organic, sulfur-based
agent which has seen up to 99% recovery. Since thiourea decomposes easily and is unstable in
alkaline environments, an acidic media is required to function as a leachant. In total, thiourea
is a relatively cheap chemical which is environmentally friendly and can leach gold and silver
quite quickly [4]. Using halides such as chloride, bromide and iodide can be used to leach similar
products in PCBs at high rates if in halogen-based environments [4].
The recoveries of precious metals from leach solutions can be won with ion exchange resins
[20, 4], adsorption, precipitation and cementation while selective recovery is possible but not in
all processes [4].With copper recovery, the most common techniques for separation in leaching
is crystallization, solvent extraction, precipitation and cementation [20].
Ion exchange processes can selectively recover specific metals from a liquid using chelating
resins which form complexes with metals [4].The resins are made up of a polymeric matrix
which entraps desired ions. These ions are then used for ion exchange. This makes them good
for selective recovery in the impregnated liquid. Other characteristics of ion exchange resins
take into account matrix geometry of the resins, porosity and selectivity ratios among others
[4]. Ion exchange resins have been applied to recover PGMs (platinum group metals) as well as
gold, silver, copper, nickel and several others. The recovery of gold from cyanide and thiosulfate
8
==PAGE:12==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
solutions can be done using ion exchange for higher selectivity compared to other methods [4].
Liquid-to-liquid extraction, also known as solvent extraction involves separation of the target
product in the leached fluid using a different liquid solution. This incoming solution should
be insoluble to the product and is mostly an organic mixture. The solubility differences in
the leached fluid and the extraction solution creates a two phase system. Depending on the
ions present in the system, extractants such as anionic, cationic or solvating-types are used [4].
Anionic types of extractors are mostly amides or amines to recover vanadium and gold which
already exists in commercial practices [24]. A major advantage to this method is the possibility
of achieving a high purity and selectivity as well as the ability to process large amounts of of
fluid at once [4].
Electrodeposition is used primarily to recover base metals from WEEE. This step typically
precedes the recovery of precious metals such as gold [4]. Electrodeposition can be seen in
many different forms such as with use of ionic liquids and being used in bio-electrochemical
processes [12].
Lead, tin and copper can be recovered from PCBs using this method after
leaching has occurred.
For high concentrations of copper in e-waste, electrodeposition is a
feasible recovery strategy but has also at times been seen to be not acceptably efficient using
conventional electrodeposition [4].
Adsorption recovery processes are commonly characterized by Freundlich and Langmuir isotherms.
Gold complexes have been studied with activated carbon adsorption in cyanide solution. Using
carbon-in-leach and carbon-in-pulp technologies are widely used commercially due to good ef-
ficiency and cost effectiveness [4]. Adsorption can also be used to recover silver, palladium and
copper as well. Tannin has been studied as a biosorbent for precious metals due to its affinity
towards them. Using a tannin resin, tests showed favorable results for reducing gold [4].
2.4
Bioleaching
Bioleaching is a promising technology that is being further developed to use microorganisms or
fungi to aid in the chemical leaching of metals. Bioleaching involves the extraction of metals
from ore or WEEE using living organisms [12]. Recovery of metals using this method have
been increasingly researched in the past decade. A number of metals are being investigated
to further develop bioleaching capabilities. These metals include rare earths, Copper, nickel,
zinc, cobalt, gold and silver [20]. Given the toxicities of many metals found in WEEE as well
as the toxicity of some chemicals used in the leaching process, a more environmentally friendly
approach can be found in using biochemical methods of metal extraction. Biochemical leaching
has several benefits to offer. This leaching technology allows the use of less hazardous biogenic
lixiviants in a cost-effective manner.
It also offers operational flexibility, lower energy con-
sumption, and selectivity towards individual metals which are potential advantages to applying
9
==PAGE:13==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
bioleaching techniques into e-waste recycling [31]. Many different kinds of microbes can be used
for the bioleaching process. In the following paragraphs, different microorganism families will
be discussed on their effectiveness in metal leaching and their operating parameters for leaching.
In the case of bioleaching, the pretreatment stages are similar to all other methods of WEEE
recycling. The waste is manually dismantled then crushed or shredded to the desired size. The
e-waste, in the case of this study will focus on PCBs, is shredded and ground down to sizes
typically between 2mm pieces to less than 0.5mm dust. Brandl [8] studied bioleachinig on dust
at 0.5mm and has also been tested in a comminuted dust of 0.075 to 1mm [27].
Autotrophs, and specifically chemolithoautotrophs are microorganisms that use atmospheric
CO2 as a carbon source and mainly Fe2+ and S0 as energy to grow. These organisms thrive at
a pH below 2 and survive in wide ranges of temperatures [31]. Survivable temperature ranges
are categorized into 3 groups: mesophiles who thrive between 28 to 37 degrees, moderate
thermophiles living in temperatures up to 45 degrees and thermophiles that can survive in
temperatures above 50 degrees [31].
Chemolithoautotrophs approach via direct or indirect
methods to leach the e-waste. This is done through multi-step electron transfer [31]. These
acidophilic bacteria oxidize ferrous iron to generate ferric iron to produce energy. This process
is used to aid in bioleaching e-wastes [33]. The movement of electrons allows for desired metals
such as copper to react with the reactive iron to separate from the e-waste and go into the
aqueous environment. Once this is done, the ferrous iron will react with water and turn back
into ferric iron using the hydrogen atoms in a biological reaction. This creates a cycle until
copper is no longer present in the liquid.
Another method of metals leaching is with organotrophs. Much like autotrophs, chemoorgan-
otrophs use the same CO2 and Fe2+ as energy sources and survive in the same pH ranges and
temperatures. Organotrophs include heterotrophic microorganisms which can produce cyanide
via oxidative decarboxylation of glycine [31]. Cyanide is commonly used for the leaching of
precious metals such as gold. This means that the cyanide created by the microorganisms can
be used in the gold leaching process. As for any residual cyanide left, it can be broken back
down into less toxic forms through oxidative, reductive or hydrolytic reactions [31]. One com-
mon chemical that is created through this break down of cyanide is ammonia as well as carbon
dioxide. This can be seen below in Figure 2.
10
==PAGE:14==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Figure 2: Biological Pathways for oxidative reactions with cyanide [31]
With this technology, the amount of cyanide discharged in wastewater can be controlled and
mitigated. This could save money on treatment costs which can be very expensive [31]. Organ-
otrophic bacteria and fungi can also produce several organic acids such as ascitric acid. This
process is done through several enzymatic steps inside the cells. The acids produced can then
become proton suppliers to solubilize metals into ionic forms [31].
Many types of plants, fungus and algae have the ability to create cyanide as well. Cyanophoric
plants can create cyanide through hydrolysis.
Fungi and archaea, instead, use bio-cyanide
synthesis to create hydrogen cyanide [31]. There have been 31 fungal species that have been
noted to have this ability. Only the algae Chlorella vulgaris has been seen to have the ability of
cyanogenesis but it has not been further investigated on its effects on metal leaching as it does
not produce large concentrations of cyanide [31]. This is a major drawback in considering algae
for WEEE leaching and cannot yet be considered for future industrial development.
As previously stated, autotrophs can be classified based on the temperatures in which they
survive.
Other microorganisms used in bioleaching can be classified the same.
The three
classifications that are important specifically to bio leaching are mesophiles and moderate ther-
mophiles.
Mesophiles (living in temperatures between 28 and 37) are predominantly iron and sulfur ox-
idizers and can, in some cases, oxidize both [31]. Mesophiles studied by Brandl [8] found a
microbial consortia of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and A.thiooxidans which are able to ex-
tract base metals from shredded samples of PCBs. A.ferrooxidans can be found in acid mine
drainage and can oxidise Fe2+ to Fe3+ and leach copper from pyrite [37]. The result after 10
days was that 90% of Copper and Nickel were removed from the pulp. With the addition of
4.5g/L Fe+2 and 10g/L S0, all Copper and Nickel was leached at a 1% pulp density after 42
days of retention [8]. Though these are promising results, having such a low pulp density as
well as retention time for microbes to act makes it difficult to make this strategy economically
viable in large scale operation. Other tests by Priya and Hait [27] supplemented citric acid to
improve leaching yields with 7.5g/L pulp density. After 18 days, 94% Copper and 81% Nickel
were leached which is a much better result than the tests done by Brandl in his previous study
in terms of time and leaching results.
11
==PAGE:15==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, or A.ferrooxidans have been studied to leach copper.
These
microbes are autotrophic mesophiles which oxidize Fe2+ into Fe3+.
This process is what
facilitates copper leaching from e-waste products.
The microbial leaching uses an indirect
process to achieve liberation. This is because the A.ferrooxidans facilitate the creation of Fe3+
which chemically reacts to copper and other metals like gold and zinc. The electrons in the
Fe3+ stabilize and latch onto metals with no charge which causes them to detach from the waste
and enter the leaching fluid. This process is represented by the two equations below showing
the chemical process occurring in copper leaching.
Figure 3: Biochemical creation of Fe3+ with A.ferrooxidans and subsequent Cu leaching [22]
Figure 3 also shows us that the leaching steps can be done continuously by the A.ferrooxidans
since a byproduct of the creation of Cu2+ in the leaching solution is Fe2+. This means that
the chemical reaction that came about due to the creation of Fe3+ by the microbes directly
feeds the A.ferrooxidans which continues the process [22]. A.ferrooxidans are a good option for
copper leaching since they do not require high temperatures to function which reduces energy
costs. The only requirement for bioleaching with A.ferrooxidans is time and a low pH of 2.2.
This is done with sulfuric acid additions to the leaching system.
When leaching metals from WEEE, temperature has a major impact on the rate of reactions
taking place to extract desired metals [31]. Because of this, the use of moderate thermophiles
can be more advantageous in the process of metal leaching as they can survive higher tempera-
tures. Ilyas [31] employed wild and adapted cultures of microbes and moderate thermophiles to
achieve 89% Copper and 81% with pulp densities of 10g/L and a supplement of S0 to act as an
energy source for the microbes. An example given of these moderate thermophiles used was S.
thermosulfidooxidans which is a gram-positive bacteria and is commonly found in Sulfide rich
brines, survives in temperatures of 25-60 degrees and functions in pH ranges between 1 and 5
[19].
In a further study, Ilyas [31] up-scaled the same test from a shake flask to a column level. These
tests showed great promise for bioleaching technology but identified some possible setbacks. The
plastics and resins present in the WEEE can liberate alkalinity during the leaching phase which
can change the pH of the system so that the process is less effective. A way to fix this would
be to add a brine-washing step before leaching which will result in better pH management
and control [31]. Washing electronic scrap before the leaching process can increase recovery
rates as the microorganism cultures will be more acclimated to the incoming concentration of
12
==PAGE:16==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
metal ions in the fluid [21]. Using mixed cultures of acidophilic chemolithoautotrophic and
chemolithoheterotrophic microorganisms exhibited greater bioleaching yields with a correlating
higher tolerance of metal toxicity. The addition of sulfur and pyrite to the system as an energy
source enhanced growth rates of the microbes and increased leaching efficiency with a lower
retention time [31]. This is because sulfur can be used either as energy or to generate sulfuric
acid in-situ to omit any need for a pH stabilization step [21]. L. ferriphilum and A. caldus
with some detected T. archaeon were used in this system [36]. Overall, moderate thermophiles
exhibited the best leaching from waste electronics compared to mesophiles and mixes of both
[31].
Brandl [8] studied the feasibility of using organotrophs such as fungi to leach WEEE. Brandl
used A. Niger and P. Simplicissimum in one and two step modes of bioleaching. It was found
that with one step processes, the microbial growth was restrained at around 10% pulp density.
The two step process resulted in complete Copper dissolution due to the creation of gluconic
acid. Using fungi is difficult as damage to key surfaces of the mycelium occurs when reacting
to metal ions which lowers the efficency of metal extraction [31]. The fungus Hymeniacidon
heliophila showed affinities towards leaching critical metals from WEEE [29].
This marine
sponge secreted substances useful for Copper leaching at 30 degrees. At 40 degrees, metallic
nano-particles were found forming inside the cells. This was seen while in neutral pH ranges
[29].
Bioleaching of precious metals such as gold and silver as well as copper and other metals can
be done with cyanobacteria. This method of bioleaching, however, has yet to compete with the
industrial standards of chemical leaching [31]. Using the bacteria C. violaceum, the bioleaching
of e-waste could only mobilize about 15% of gold [16]. The study done by Faramarzi [16] also
found that the reason for low gold leaching was the amount of copper present that was being
simultaneously leached and took up much of the energy in the leaching process rather than the
gold. It was also found that extraction of platinum and silver was difficult due to the resistances
and toxicity of the metals compared to the microbes resulted in poor liberation results [31]. As
current research stands, the use of cyanobacteria is not worth use in any form of industrial
processing at this time compared to the current chemical leaching practices for these precious
metals.
Recycling WEEE using bioleaching is more challenging overall compared to leaching sulfide
minerals.
This is because e-waste typically has chemical coatings and toxic substances like
brominated flame retardants which have the possibility of harming acidophillic microbes or
cause risk of creating uninhabitable brines for the microorganisms [37]. For this reason, the
above pretreatment steps such as milling and shredding must be done before bioleaching can
occur for WEEE. Despite this, the possibilities are great for future implementation and use of
bioleaching for recycling in the future. As a short summary of this section, the below table
13
==PAGE:17==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
highlights key studied microorganisms which have the promise of use in bioleaching.
Microorganism
Type
Parameters
Leaching Products
Comments
A.ferrooxidans
Mesophile
30C
pH 3.5
Cu, Ni, Au, Zn
Found in acid
mine drainage
A. Thiooxidans
Mesophile
30C
pH 3.5
Cu, Ni, Au, Zn
Found in acid
mine drainage
S. Thermosulfidooxidans
Moderate Thermophile
25C - 60C
pH 1 - 5
Cu, Ni, Fe, As
Extracts metals
from sulfide ores
L. Ferriphilum
Moderate Thermophile
36C
pH 2
Zn, Cu, Al, Co,
Pb, Cr
Found in acid
mine drainage and
used previously in
sulfide bioleaching
Sulfobacillus benefaciens
Moderate Thermophile
36C
pH 2
Zn, Cu, Al, Co,
Pb, Cr
Thrives in acidic
and metal rich
environments
A. Niger
Organotroph
30C
pH 3 - 5
Cu, Zn, Al
Works at slower rates
than other
microorganisms
C. Violaceum
Cyanobacteria
30C
pH 9
Au, Ag, Cu, Cr, Pb
Anaerobic bacteria
which bioaccumulates
metal into the cell
Hymeniacidon Heliophila
Fungus
30 - 40C
pH 7
Cu, Pb, Zn, Ni, Fe,
Pb, Cr, Hg, Al
Marine sponge which
accumulates heavy
metals from seawater
and sediment
Table 2: List of some well studied microorganisms with operation parameters and possible products
[31, 2]
2.5
PCB Recovery Using Pre-Treatment and Bioleaching Methods
With an increasing focus on sustainability and environmental conservation within mineral pro-
cessing, bioleaching is becoming a viable option for resource processing and recycling. Compared
to pyrometallurgy, bioleaching is lower in fuel costs and results in a more pure product from re-
cycled e-waste and lower refining costs in downstream processes. This is achieved with selective
recovery methods which is a great advantage of bioleaching as it will only leach desired prod-
uct. Hydrometallurgy also requires more chemicals which can be expensive and are known to
be harmful to people and the environment if not treated properly. Bioleaching strategies often
require a lower operation cost and initial investment. This is because the required infrastructure
is not as high or advanced compared to hydrometallurgy.
14
==PAGE:18==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Compared to contemporary WEEE recycling methods previously discussed, bioleaching has
many other advantages. Bioleaching practices can selectively recover resources. With certain
microorganisms and techniques, bioleaching can selectively target resources such as copper and
gold from metal alloys and complex waste with minimal contamination to other substances.
Since bioleaching is a relatively new and flexible science, future research and testing has the
possibility of expanding uses and effectiveness of microorganisms. Because of this, bioleaching
will be studied in a life cycle analysis while notable chemical waste will be checked for human
health risk analysis using Monte Carlo simulation.
2.5.1
Preliminary Dismantling
Manual separation of WEEE to retrieve PCB’s is a time and labor intensive process which has
the greatest need for optimization but also recovers the most precious metals. It is generally
standard practice to shred whole devices rather than manual dismantling but it results in con-
siderable losses which cannot be compensated in downstream processes [7]. An industrial study
done by Chancerel found a 7% difference in precious metal concentration between shredded
PCBs and un-shredded PCBs in the pre-treatment metal concentration of the waste [11]. Fur-
thermore, the difference between pre-shredded and shredded PCBs indicate 62% less precious
metals in the shredded PCBs [34]. Due to these findings, it is clear that manual separation
has the most recovery compared to shredding options but in the case of large scale production,
manual dismantling can possibly be too time consuming and labor intensive. Despite the loss
in productivity using manual dismantling, for this study, the printed circuit boards will already
be manually dismantled.
2.5.2
Size Reduction Technique
PCBs consist of about 30% metals with 70% platsics and resins. Depending on manufacturer
and manufacture date, the estimated content of gold is 0.05% and copper content is 16% [32]
as an example.
PCB boards consist of glass fibre, epoxy resins and polyester [32]. FR-4 is the most common
type of board which has carcinogenic chemicals stemming from the epoxies, resins and flame
retardants. Since Most PCBs are built with these glass fibre boards, shear force allows the
boards to break far easier compared to tension forces. For this reason, knife or hammer mills
should be used to grind the PCBs [32].
Rough size reduction must first be completed after manual dismantling. breaking the full PCB
boards into smaller pieces will allow better grinding of the feed in the knife mill.
In their
experiment, Suponik [32] cut the boards into roughly 3cm by 3cm pieces. Rough grinding in a
hammer, knife mill or shear shredder will work for this task.
15
==PAGE:19==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
For this study, a knife mill will be used with a screen size of 750 um which had a 75% passing
rate in sieve tests done by Hubau [2] on PCB waste. It is important to consider heat output
in the system. Heat generated by the milling process can reach temperatures that will begin
to melt the resins and plastics inside the PCBs which have the ability to then form large
conglomerates solid metal, plastic and ceramic compounds [32]. These conglomerates will make
both the physical separation and bioleaching processes less efficient as the metals encased in
these conglomerates may not be reached. To avoid this overheating issue, the mill should not
be allowed to overload and water cooling systems should be added to the mill. Suponik [32]
went further with this and employed cryogenic freezing to the feed PCBs with liquid nitrogen
to stop feed temperatures from being too high. With this information, a shear shredder and
secondary knife mill will be used with low throughput of PCB waste to keep a safe operating
temperature.
2.5.3
Physical Separation Method
Physical separation is typically done through means of density separation such as shaking tables
or suspended brine separators [6]. Separation can also be done through conductivity by means
of electrostatic separation [32]. Using a electrostatic drum separator, Suponik [32] extracted
metal rich dust from the plastic and resin waste which was milled. For this study, however, no
other physical separation is required and will be omitted. The study done by Hubau [2] simply
went from primary and secondary shredding into the leaching step. For other WEEE, however,
physical separation may be required. This is especially true if the WEEE is not go through
primary dismantling as it will have many components which hold little to no valuable resource.
This includes plastic coatings, rubber and fiberglass among other redundant waste.
2.5.4
Bioleaching Technique
The bioleaching technique to be used in this study will be based on the research done by Hubal
et al. [2] on a two stage bioreactor using Leptospirillum ferriphilum, Sulfobacillus benefaciens
and Acidithiobacillus caldus which are all known to be acidophilic moderate thermophiles. The
first stage of the bioreactor is a bubble column reactor which holds the microbial culture which
focuses on reacting with Fe2+ to biologically create Fe3+. The outflow from this reactor is then
added to the secondary stage which is a stirred tank reactor that contains the constantly flowing
PCB conglomerate. The leaching then takes place in the reactor as Fe3+ reacts with exposed
metals such as copper to pull them into the leaching fluid. In the following LCA analysis, full
explaination and flowrates of this system will be provided in section 3.3 as well as required
additives to the system to leach product at the highest rate.
16
==PAGE:20==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
3
Life Cycle Analysis
3.1
LCA Background
LCA, or life cycle analysis, is a compilation of inputs and outputs in a product or service system
to measure potential environmental impacts through its life cycle. Considering the scope of this
research, only waste outputs of the system should be considered in the LCA simulation. This
includes the dust production and waste slurry from the pre-treatment and bioleaching process.
The goal of an LCA assessment is to acknowledge and study environmental impacts of a product
or service throughout its stages of development or use. This is further used to gain insight into
areas of improvement in the studied process when regarding environmental impact.
In many cases currently, the life cycle of WEEE is ”cradle to grave.” This means that after the
production and use stage of it’s life, it is discarded with no further use. WEEE recycling, using
the processes discussed in the sections above, offer a chance to take a ”cradle to grave system,”
and turn it into a ”cradle to cradle,” production. This term refers to the ability to create new
product from waste that was once used for something else. The possibility of recycling and
reusing precious metals and strategic resources will be a major key to achieving a green future
and is possible with the resources stored in these e-waste products.
To study LCA and environmental risk assessment, a hypothetical PCB processing plant will be
built in Northern Sweden using the system studied by Hubau et al. [2]. This style of bioleaching
was chosen since Hubau studied a leaching system using industrial conditions. The study is a
more accurate leaching experiment compared to other studies done only in lab settings. The
plant will be employing bioleaching with Leptospirillum ferriphilum and Sulfobacillus thermo-
sulfidooxidans as the main recovery technique. Pre-concentration will be done through manual
sorting and further grinding and shredding of the e-waste into smaller size fractions with shear
shredders and knife mills. The plant will focus on Copper and other strategic metal recovery
from PCBs such as Zinc, Lead, Cobalt and Platinum.
The LCA process can be broken down into three steps. The first step is to identify the goal
and scope of the process. This includes the definition of what is to be accomplished with the
simulation as well as defining functional units and system boundaries. For this study, the LCA
is defined as a ”gate-to-gate LCA,” meaning it focuses on one process in the production chain.
The second step is performing a life cycle inventory in which data is added to the system such
as energy and product inputs as well as emissions and other environmental considerations. This
step is where all data is input into the system. As the final step, a life cycle impact assessment
is completed which will evaluate the possible environmental impacts produced by the studied
system. An interpretation of the data can then be extracted to identify key areas that pose
significant or notable impact on the environment. This data will then be used to inform decisions
or actions that can remediate or mitigate impacts to the environment.
17
==PAGE:21==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
To create this LCA, HSC Sim will be employed. HSC provides mass balancing and energy
balancing for processing models. This is integral to the LCA and carcinogenic risk analysis
processes. Creating weighted waste flows represents the emissions of the system given in terms
of weight and flow rate of the metals of interest.
With these values, flow concentration is
found. With this balanced process, HSC also performs life cycle assessments aided by GaBi
and OpenLCA software to understand resource efficiency and environmental impact. This data
from HSC is easily exported as weighted outputs into the OpenLCA program used to calculate
environmental impact data. For this reason HSC Sim will be used in this project to explore
PCB bioleaching.
3.2
Goal and Scope
The goal of this LCA is to measure and identify key outputs of the system regarding waste
streams such as leaching wastewater and dust accumulation. For this reason, the study will
not focus on the impact of transportation of PCB waste to the bioleaching site or downstream
processes past the leaching stages regarding further refining. Energy will also not be considered
as electricity in Northern Sweden is procured using hydroelectricity and other green methods
of energy production. With the output rates of slurry waste and dust, the Monte Carlo process
can be completed in which exposure rates and concentrations of Pb and Cr can be derived to
create a human risk analysis of PCB bioleaching. For this reason, as previously stated, the
performed LCA will be a ”gate-to-gate,” study.
As waste streams are the outputs of interest in this PCB recycling process, the pre-treatment
and bioleaching systems will be the main scope.
This includes size reduction steps with a
shear shredder and knife mill as well as the main two-step bioleaching reactors. Because of
this, preliminary dismantling as well as procurement and logistics will not be considered as
well as downstream processing of the bioleaching product. The downstream processing will not
be considered because the processing after bioleaching does not typically deviate from classic
chemical leaching in industrial settings. A visual representation of the scope and boundaries of
the system is shown in Figure 4.
18
==PAGE:22==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Figure 4: Scope of LCA shown in the boundaries of the process flowsheet
Two heavy metals will be focused on when performing the Life Cycle Impact assessment. These
are Chromium(VI) and Lead. These are two very well known and studied heavy metals that
are emitted during the PCB recycling process. Chromium(VI) is a highly mobile and toxic
heavy metal that is often found in industrial waste as well as in or around recycling plants
and other industrial settings. It is a known carcinogen and has high sedimentation rates in
aquatic and terrestrial soil. Lead, on the other hand, is known for its high bioaccumulation
in marine life as well as it’s danger to human development and health. Both of these metals
are persistent in nature meaning they do not naturally break down in the environment without
human intervention or remediation. For this reason, Chromium(VI) and Lead are chosen as the
main focuses in the impact report of the process.
3.3
Process
Pre-treatment begins after manual disassembly of WEEE to recover PCB components. For the
LCA, one tonne of PCB waste will be put through the system to be studied as the deriving flow
to normalize waste output values. The waste will then enter a shear shredder to break down the
boards into 750um pieces [2]. These pieces are then placed into a knife mill to reduce the size
further. with this technique, Hubau completed a sieving test with 290g of ground PCB waste
and reported 80% passing at around 650um with the final mesh being 750um. When shredding
PCB waste, it is found that roughly 3% of the product is lost due to dust emissions [15]. This
will be considered in the LCA as a waste output labeled ”Dust” and will be the main output of
Chromium(VI) as it accounts for roughly 0.15% weight in dust [15] .
19
==PAGE:23==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
The first stage of the flotation process is a bubble reactor which holds and grows the microbial
cultures.
This stage focuses entirely on the biological reactions that occur with these iron
oxidizing micoorganisms. Inside the reactor, 1g/L of Fe2+ is added to the reactor as well as
hydrochloric acid, activated charcoal and constant air flow of 20 to 30 L/h with 1% CO2. CO2
and Oxygen is important to the bio-oxidation system taking place since it is the only source of
Carbon added which facilitates microorganism growth in the bubble reactor. The Oxygen also
gives O2 molecules to aid in the oxidation process [3]. The culture of Leptospirillum ferriphilum
and Sulfobacillus benefaciens microorganisms begin cultivating in the reactor using the Fe2+
provided as FeSO4 and turns it into Fe3+. The reactor is held at 36 degrees Celsius with a
pH of 1.1 for best performance [2]. The effluent of the first reactor is the bio-oxidized solution
containing Fe3+ as well as the microorganism culture which will react with the metals in the
PCB waste to begin leaching metals in sthe stirred tank reactor. Using data from Hubau [3], the
culture media which will be used is a mixture of (NH4)2SO4, H3PO4(85% aqueous solution),
KOH, MgSO4, and ferrous iron in the form of FESO4*7H20.
The second stage is a stirred tank reactor where the PCB waste is leached. The product from
the first reactor containing Fe3+ and microorganism cultures will enter the system along with
PCB concentrate from the pre-treatment steps. The Fe3+ will react with the metals in the
PCB waste to leach the desired product into the solution. This chemical process creates Fe2+,
loose cations as well as the leached metal ions in the fluid. These loose cations from the leaching
reaction as well as the Leptospirillum ferriphilum and Sulfobacillus benefaciens microbes can
then regenerate Fe3+ inside the stirred reactor. Hubau [2] concluded that after some weeks of
operation, it could be possible to bypass the first step bubble reactor and have Fe3+ regenerate
solely in the second reactor as Fe2+. This was possible due to the microorganisms using iron
from the PCB waste instead of FeSO4. For the sake of the study, however, the bubble reactor
will stay operating at continuous rate. This is done to ensure a healthy microorganism culture
is added in the case of emergency as well as keeping continuity in the LCA and Monte Carlo
simulations. A diagram made by Hubau et al. [2] shows a simplified image of the two stage
bioleaching technique used in continuous flow.
20
==PAGE:24==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Figure 5: Two stage bioleaching process in continuous flow [2]
In the study done by Hubau, et al. [2], the stirred reactor had a volume of 2.25L and operated
in industrial conditions. With this size, the retention time was set at 48 hours. The incoming
flow is 47ml/h from the bubble reactor in the first step. Along with this, 0.5 to 0.85 g/h of solid
PCB waste was added to the stirred tank. Sulfuric acid was also added at a rate of 2 to 5 mg/h
to keep pH at 1.5 for optimal leaching conditions.The tank stirred at a rate of 600rpm and was
kept at 36C with 60L/h of air bubbled through containing 1% CO2. With this, the leachate
will leave the system at a constant rate to be further refined back into usable metal product.
21
==PAGE:25==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
3.4
Life Cycle Inventory
With the process details complete in the scope of the gate-to-gate LCA study, the full simulated
model will be as follows:
Figure 6: Bioleaching Process Simulated Flowsheet in HSC 10
The life cycle inventory (LCI) stage of the study is completed with the HSC Sim LCA tool as
stated previously. This is for three main reasons. The first and most important reason is to
derive a mass balance for the process. The mass balance will give the weighted outputs of the
waste streams. The streams of interest are the dust output in the pretreatment which concerns
Chromium(VI) output and the waste slurry from the mixing bioleaching reactor containing
Lead.
As stated, the only streams of interest are the input and output streams in the system. This
means that any material flows inside the study area are not analyzed. The first step in the LCI
is to create the desired flow sheet diagram in HSC as seen in Figure 6.
22
==PAGE:26==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
With the diagram, all the necessary information and variables are placed into the perspective
operations so mass balancing can be simulated. Much of the information placed into the program
was previously discussed in Section 3.3. The results of the outputs can be seen in the appendix
documents.
Using the variable list editor in the sim allows for the identification of material streams. The
editor allows for the inclusion of gas, liquid and solid streams entering the system in order to
create a balanced flow. For the pre-treatment, only solids flows were considered with dust. When
assigning data to the bubble and stirred reactors, chemical balancing and chemical reactions
are taken into account in order to get the most accurate production streams in the simulation
regarding the creation of Fe3+ and precipitants in the waste slurry. Once the system has been
properly balanced, the impact assessment will take place. With the balanced processes, the
LCA tool in HSC Sim is used.
Retrieving the results from the HSC process, an excel file was created as well as a JSON file
to be used in OpenLCA. The excel gives a table of balanced outputs in t/h in both the total
streams and broken down into elements. The most important parts of these outputs are the
outputs of Cr(VI) in dust as well as Pb and PbSO4 in the waste slurry. Cr(VI) output in the
system is taken only from dust output. This is because any Chromium that leaves the system
after the bioleaching process has reduced to Cr(III) which is far less toxic than it’s Cr(VI)
counterpart and outside the scope of the study. For this reason, only Lead output will be taken
into account in waste slurry and chromium from dust. The Chromium output is assuming a
3% loss in the PCB grinding and shredding stage with roughly 0.15% of the dust concentration
being Chromium(VI) [15].
Lead Sulfate is a common solid precipitant that occurs in the bioleaching process. It is im-
portant to understand this precipitation process since it will effect the output of Lead into the
environment as well as the product flow. PbSO4 is a stable compound and presents very little
threat to the environment. Taking into account the input of Lead into the system and the
outputs of PbSO4, a concentration value of Pb can be derived. Basing precipitation rates on
Hubau’s study [2], it is found that in the stirred tank, Pb has an 88% dissolution rate. Despite
this, Lead in the product stream only presents between 8 and 12% yield. This tells us that lead
precipitation is very high in the system.
When basing values into the life cycle impact assessment, it is assumed that of the Lead leaving
the bioleaching tank, the dissolution rate of Pb in the slurry continues and is mostly turned
into PbSO4 while time elapses as there is Fe3+, Pb as well as SO4 in the waste flow. For this
reason, it was chosen that Pb in the outflow reduces to roughly 1% of the original outflow value
gained from HSC. This is done to give a conservative estimate of actual Lead outflow into the
environment. The table below shown the concentration outputs of both Chromium and Lead
which is used in OpenLCA to retrieve environmental impact results.
23
==PAGE:27==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Heavy Metals
Source
Flow Concnetration
Chromium(VI)
Dust
4.5 g/ton
Lead
Waste Slurry
Leachate
0.0258 g/ton
Table 3: Concentration values for Lead and Chromium(VI) used in LCIA
3.5
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
When Performing a Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA), only the input and output streams
are taken into consideration as these are the flows that stem from or are let out into the
environment. For this reason, when simulating LCA, internal flows are not considered. HSC
Sim already has the capability of creating the bioleaching process described above as a ”black
box,” system. A ”black box,” system does not take into account any processes occurring inside
the system and only gives the final weighted flows going in and out of it.
This will help
to bring numerical values to the outputs of waste flows which are important for the LCA.
With these numerical flow values, the calculated emissions in the form of solids will be found.
These calculated weighted emissions will be used in the Monte Carlo simulation in Section 4 to
understand the rate of deposition to the environment and its further effects on human health.
Though the ”black box,” method provided by HSC is useful, further analysis will be done with
the LCA tool which comes pre-downloaded onto HSC Sim and can export data files to the
OpenLCA program. OpenLCA provides datasets which give environmental impact data stem-
ming from compiled studies and company research which are downloaded from the OpenLCA
Nexus website. Using this data, one can create more advanced life cycle analyses with the help
of these in-depth datasets.
The CML-2001 dataset was employed to derive the impact assessment. This dataset was chosen
as the LCA impact database for several reasons. CML-2001 focuses on specific environmental
impacts rather than broad impact categories. This is used to quantify the deposition of Cr(VI)
and Pb on freshwater, marine and terrestrial environments as this is the impact scope of these
heavy metals. CML-2001 also uses a system that calculates environmental toxicology in terms
of 1,4-DCB which is a benchmark chemical which makes impact values easily quantifiable and
helps in comparing environmental concerns between different chemicals or metals. The method
CML-2001 uses is a widely accepted and used LCA method in industry and government due to
its consistency in results, flexible integration and easy repeatability in testing. Using 1,4-DCB
normalizes all environmental impact values into one unit. With the values in 1,4-DCB, it is
possible to roughly convert results into the elements of research. In this case using USEtox,
which is embedded into OpenLCA software, it is estimated that 1kg of DCB is equal to 140kg
of Cr(VI) and 0.014kg of Pb.
24
==PAGE:28==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
With this, actual weights of chromium and lead can be derived and compared with safe values
from the US EPA.
When exporting HSC data to OpenLCA, all flows must be categorized into impact types. This
will effect the outcome of the LCIA in the form of ”impact categories.” Since this LCIA will
focus on environmental impacts, three different categories will be studied. These categories are
freshwater ecotoxicity regarding water and sediment, Marine ecotocicity also regarding water
and sediment, and terrestrial ecotoxicity. Ecotoxicity is the study of harmful effects of metals
or chemicals on ecosystems. Chromium output is categorized as an air emission exposing a high
density population. This is to simulate the dust output from the pre-treatment plant in the
bioleaching process. Lead is classified as a long term emission to groundwater. This represents
long term leaching of Pb into groundwater sources around the bioleaching site. The impact
assessment from OpenLCA will be found in the Appendix ”LCA Final.”
These three impact categories are studied based on the effects of Chromium(VI) and Lead
in the environment. Both Lead and Chromium are persistent in nature. When a metal or
compound is considered ”persistent,” it means that it either cannot be broken down or is very
difficult to break down naturally in the environment. Persistent metals like these accumulate in
water and soil which increases ecotoxicity of an area over time. Both Lead and Chromium also
tend to bioaccumulate in animals and aquatic life with Lead having a greater risk than Cr(VI).
Bioaccumulation can lead to animal sickness or death and poses a threat to humans who eat
fish or animals in the region. Chromium(VI) is considered to be especially toxic and mobile in
dust form which effects terrestrial and aquatic areas.
Impact Category
Unit
Impact (20yr)
Impact (100yr)
Cr(VI) (20yr)
Cr(VI) (100yr)
Pb (20yr)
Pb (100yr)
FW EcoTox (aq.)
1kg, 1,4-DCB
0.2148
0.2499
0.0011
0.0015
0.2136
0.2485
FW EcoTox (sed.)
1kg, 1,4-DCB
0.5468
0.6386
0.0029
0.0037
0.5439
0.6349
Marine Ecotox (aq.)
1kg, 1,4-DCB
0.3828
2.4780
0.3275
1.9022
0.0553
0.5758
Marine Ecotox (sed.)
1kg, 1,4-DCB
0.7513
3.8887
0.5956
2.7724
0.1557
1.1163
Terrestrial Ecotox
1kg, 1,4-DCB
0.0185
0.0922
0.0185
0.0922
1.23E-23
1.23E-23
Table 4: Life Cycle Impact Results from OpenLCA. FW - Freshwater
Table 4 shows the ecotoxicity results from the OpenLCA Impact Assessment. The results shown
are portrayed in units of 1kg 1,4-DCB for the sake of comparison between Cr(VI) and Pb. It
can be seen in overall impact that the effects to freshwater and marine sediments is higher than
in freshwater. This is due to high sedimentation rates of heavy metals in aquatic soils. The
higher ecotoxicity value from Lead in freshwater environments is directly related to the mode
of transportation in which groundwater is considered a freshwater source. This explains both
the higher concentrations for aqueous mediums as well as in sediment compared to Chromium.
Lead impact on terrestrial environments is negligible as this category concerns topsoil and
groundcover which does not involve subterranean soils in or surrounding groundwater.
25
==PAGE:29==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
When looking at Chromium impacts, marine and terrestrial ecotoxicity is noted. Since Chromium
is highly toxic and mobile, it has greater effect on marine wildlife as well as sediment and can
travel quickly into these environments. Terrestrial ecotocicity is dominated by Chromium since
as it is released as dust, it is deposited onto the surface of soils and plants rather than being
introduced via groundwater like Lead. Table 4 also shows the simulated bioaccumulation and
persistent nature of Lead and Chromium. This is seen from the difference in ecotoxicity be-
tween the 20 year impact and 100 year impact. It can be concluded that over an 80 year period,
Freshwater ecotoxicity grew by 14%, Marine ecotocicity by roughly 82% and Terrestrial by 80%.
The persistence of these metals are also shown through the weighted breakdown of ecotoxicity.
The Marine ecotoxicity distribution shown below in Figure 7 shows how impact is broken up
between Chromium and Lead between 100 years and a far future estimate. This shows roughly
a quarter of the total ecotoxicity stemming from Lead. Over time, however, this amount slightly
decreases due to bioaccumulation and persistence of Chromium as well as Cr(VI) having higher
output rates compared to Lead.
Figure 7
Regarding freshwater ecotoxicity, in 20 years, Pb takes into account over 99%. Looking into
the distant future, however Cr(VI) accounts for around 12% as seen in Figure 8. This again
understates the fact that Chromium and Lead persist and accumulate in the environment leading
to worsening impacts over time.
26
==PAGE:30==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Figure 8
Since the impacts of Chromium and Lead are normalized to 1,4-DCB, we can convert these
values back into their true concentrations.
To do this, we must understand the conversion
between 1,4-DCB and our studied heavy metals. To do this, first we must understand that
1,4-DCB is a benchmark chemical which is widely studied and it’s toxicity is well documented.
1,4-DCB is used as a pesticide and is known to be very toxic to plants and animals alike.
Referencing data from ReCiPe 2016, it is known that when converting 1,4-DCB to Cr(VI),
1kg of 1,4-DCB is equal to 140kg of Cr(VI). When comparing lead, 1kg of 1,4-DCB is roughly
0.014kg of Pb. Both of these conversions will be used for Freshwater and Marine values. These
values mean that Chromium is 140 times less toxic than 1,4-DCB and that Lead is far more
toxic. When looking at chromium impact to terrestrial ecotoxicity, 1kg of 1,4-DCB is about
100,000kg of Cr(VI). This is because of the high impact 1,4-DCB has on surface plants and
animals compared to Chromium.
Knowing these values, the derived amounts of Lead and
Chromium can be found.
Impact Category
Unit
Cr(VI) (20yr)
Cr(VI) (100yr)
Cr(VI) (inf. yr)
Unit
Pb (20yr)
Pb (100yr)
Pb (inf. yr)
FW EcoTox (aq.)
mg Cr(VI)
8.1
10.4
247.2
kg Pb
15.3
17.7
17.7
FW EcoTox (sed.)
mg Cr(VI)
20.6
26.7
633.7
kg Pb
38.9
45.3
45.5
Marine Ecotox (aq.)
mg Cr(VI)
2339.6
13587.1
674003.6
kg Pb
3.9
41.1
2048.2
Marine Ecotox (sed.)
mg Cr(VI)
4254.1
19802.9
686185.7
kg Pb
11.1
79.7
2116.3
Terrestrial Ecotox
mg Cr(VI)
0.2
0.9
136.4
kg Pb
1.23365E-23
1.23365E-23
1.234E-23
Table 5: Amounts of Cr(VI) and Pb derived from 1,4-DCB data
With actual output values into the environment seen in Table 5, the results can be compared to
acceptable concentration data. US EPA concentration guidelines [17] as well as Health Canada
[9] will be used for acceptable concentrations of Lead and Chromium. Lead ecotoxicity is mainly
derived from drinking water standards in freshwater and ocean environments.
27
==PAGE:31==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Ocean ecotoxicity for Chromium is derived from the amount of Chromium concentration re-
quired for acute toxicity to be observed in marine wildlife. Soil data is also taken from the US
EPA acceptable concentrations. Government agencies often give different acceptable values for
acceptable Lead and Chromium concentrations depending on the country and region type for
soil. To keep continuity, the US EPA is used for all acceptable concentrations and rates.
Chromium
Category
Accepted
Measured
(100yr)
Freshwater
21 ug/l
582.5 ug
Ocean
10,300 ug/l
0.761 g
Soil
0.29 mg/kg
0.0614 mg
Lead
Category
Accepted
Measured
(100yr)
Freshwater
15 ug/l
17.75 g
Ocean
15 ug/l
41.13 g
Soil
400 mg/kg
8.8E-22 g
Table 6: Measured outputs of Cr(VI) and Pb after 100 years compared with acceptable concentration
rates [17, 9].
It must be noted that the data retrieved from OpenLCA is a weighted impact based off of 1,4-
DCB. For this reason, concentration is difficult to retrieve due to unknown volume data as well
as fate and transport uncertainties. Note that LCA data represents possible impact while the
accepted concentrations given by government agencies define safe values in our environment.
This explains the difference in units used in Table 6. Despite this difference in data, notable
conclusions can still be made to consider possible negative impact over time. One of these
categories that should be highly considered is ocean ecotoxicity risk. This is considering the
acceptable concentration rates given for marine environments.
This has the highest risk of
possible ecological damage from Chromium and Lead over time.
For both Cr(VI) and Pb,
measured amounts into the ocean environment could possibly be in unacceptable levels after
100 years. It is important to make clear as well that at 10,300 ug/l represents acute toxicity
to ocean wildlife [18]. This is the level in which ocean life begins to die due to high chromium
levels. Depending on the dilution rates of Cr(VI) in the water, it is possible that even if the
acute toxicity threshold is not reached, then other adverse effects could occur. Freshwater may
also be jeopardized by Lead concentrations in groundwater for the same reasons for marine
impact. Chromium also presents a risk for freshwater over time as the chromium dust enters
freshwater through leaching into groundwater or into lakes or streams. For both Cr(VI) and
Pb in soil, however, both values do not show any cause for concern even after 100 years.
28
==PAGE:32==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
4
Monte Carlo
4.1
Monte Carlo Background
Monte Carlo analysis is a process of statistical operation used in many different industries and
for a multitude of purposes. In the case of observing environment and health impacts, the
system is used to characterize and quantify the uncertainty and variability of exposure risks
of chemicals and carcinogens [1]. This is done by taking and deriving reference doses (RfD),
reference concentrations (RfC), and Unit risk factors for either oral or inhalation pathways.
RfD is a dose of the studied carcinogen which shows no probable appreciable risk of causing
negative effects to a person in their lifetime. Effectively, the RFD value represents a threshold in
which values equal or below it are considered to have negligible carcinogenic risk to humans. RfC
is the same principle of RfD but instead regards inhalation pathways of the studied chemical or
metal. Unit risk factors are toxicity values to be used within the Monte Carlo process. Unit Risk
is an important value which tells the lifetime incremental carcinogenic risk. Oral or inhalation
slope factors are also taken from the EPA IRIS database [17] to portray lifetime cancer risk
taking chronic daily intake rates into account. With this data, one can create cancer risks,
hazard quotients and chronic daily intake (CDI) for humans. Argo open source Monte Carlo
will be employed to simulate the carcinogenic risk analysis in Excel. The simulation will run
20,000 iterations where the mean values and 90th percentile will be considered.
A hazard quotient is a numerical value which states the likelihood of an individual developing
non-cancer health effects during a lifetime. The hazard quotient is compared to a target value
of 1. If the HQ is below 1, the risk of adverse effects of the chemical is not likely whereas if the
value is above one, there is a reasonable risk of adverse health effects in a lifetime. These hazard
quotients can also be compiled to create a single value for a process when multiple carcinogens
or chemicals are being observed. The hazard quotient also defines a ratio of exposure between
a single studied individual compared with the reference dose provided by government agencies.
Hazard quotient is found with the equation:
HQ = CDI/RD
(4.1)
CDI is defined as chronic daily intake and RD is the RfD or RfC reference doses previously
mentioned. Chronic daily intake (CDI) is found using the average daily amount of chemical
ingested per day multiplied by the years exposed.
This data as well as time and exposure
simulation allow for numerical risk analysis to be completed. Time and exposure data will be
derived from exposure handbooks [25]. The US EPA Exposure Factors Handbook [25] will be
used for these values. The equation for CDI is as follows:
CDI = (C ∗IR ∗EF ∗ED)/(BW ∗AT)
(4.2)
29
==PAGE:33==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
In this equation, C is concentration, IR is the average intake rate, EF is the exposure frequency,
ED is the exposure duration, BW is body weight and AT is average time. Intake rate and body
weight can be seen in Table 7 whereas all other assumptions can be found in the Monte Carlo
appendix labeled ”Assumptions.” Finally, a target cancer risk value is created by multiplying
the CDI by a cancer slope factor. This shows the risk of cancer posed by the studied chemicals
given the exposure frequencies outlined when creating the analysis. The value will tell how
many people out of a pool of 1,000,000 people will get cancer from lifetime exposure. This
equation is as follows where TCR is target cancer risk and SF is the cancer slope factor.
TCR = CDI ∗SF
(4.3)
Monte Carlo software is a simulation tool which simulates thousands of different scenarios to
reflect a population of people who will be subjected to hypothetical exposure to pollutants
or chemicals. Specifically, the Monte Carlo analysis will investigate the impact of some key
chemical emissions expelled through PCB bioleaching treatment and processing as well as a
landfilling leachate as comparison. As previously stated, Chromium(VI) and Lead will be the
carcinogens of interest. The data given will be a more accurate depiction of the actual risk of
exposure compared to basic point-based computation of the same data. These results better
simulate more accurate CDI, HQ and TCR compared to other calculation methods. This is
because Monte Carlo will simulate thousands of different values within statistical ranges to
retrieve data that simulates populations of different subjects rather than a single example.
All reference data and exposure data will be derived from the United States Environmental
Protection Agency [17] which gives several databases and handbooks that have decades of
research behind them.
In the case of end of life PCB processing, two different scenarios will be presented. The first will
be the creation of an e-waste landfill. The second will be a plant to be used for pre-treatment
and bioleaching processes of waste PCBs using data from the LCA in Section 3.4. The goal
of this section is to show which of these options have the greatest possible effect of negative
human health and carcinogenic risk given a current e-waste management practice compared
to a new form of WEEE processing and recycling. It is important that in striving for zero-
waste processes, we also consider health to not only the environment, but to the local human
population as well.
A hypothetical group of 4 will be studied to see the health impacts of these waste treatment
strategies. The group consists of two adults. P1 is between the age of 31 to 41 who works close
to or in the treatment facility and the other, P2, between the ages of 21 and 30. Two children
will also be studied for risk analysis. One child is between the ages of 6 to 11 years labeled P3,
and P4 between the ages of 2 to 3. This will give us the exposures of two adults, a child as well
as a toddler to see the life long effects of the two hypothetical processes on each person. Since
30
==PAGE:34==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
the simulation is run for 20,000 iterations, this means a sample of 80,000 people are simulated in
the study considering each age group is simulated 20,000 times. This population is roughly the
size of Lule˚a municipality. Regarding the study of people under the age of 2, it is statistically
difficult to get solid data on information such as intake rates of water or air consumption [25].
The table below shows values used for intake rates which will be implemented into the Monte
Carlo simulation. This is taken from the EPA Exposure Factors Handbook (EFH) [25].
Subject
P1 (31-41yr.)
P2 (21-30yr.)
P3 (6-11yr.)
P4 (3-6yr)
Ingestion Rates (mL/d)
902
781
294
205
Inhalation Rates (mˆ3/d)
16
15.7
12
8.9
Body Weight (Kg)
70
70
31.8
13.8
Table 7: Exposure Factors from EPA Handbook given for two adults and two children of different ages
[25]
Concerning Cr(VI) IRIS values, data taken from the US EPA [17] is shown in Table 8 showing
reference doses, concentrations, inhalation unit rates and the cancer slope factor. For use in
Bioleaching, the RfC value is used considering the Chromium travels through dust particles
whereas when considering landfill carcinogenic risk, the RfD is used due to chromium leaching
with fluid from the site. Intake unit rate (IUR) also only concerns inhalation of dust whereas
slope factor (SF) is used for ingestion.
Assumption / Data
Value
RfD (Cr(VI)) (mg/kg*d)
9.00E-04
RfC (Cr(VI)) (mg/m3)
3.00E-05
IUR (Cr(VI)) (ug/m3)
1.80E-02
SF (mg/kg*d)
1.60E-01
EF
365
ED
30
Table 8: Cr(VI) Data taken from IRIS [17] Database with Exposure Frequency and Exposure Duration
assumptions
31
==PAGE:35==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
It can be seen that the data in Table 9 regarding Pb values differs from Table 8. This is because
due to the toxic nature of Lead and it’s known side effects, the US EPA does not give RfD values
to Pb concentration. Due to it’s toxic nature, the US EPA does not consider any concentration
of Lead acceptable [17]. Health Canada [9] gives a slope factor value in it’s website. Though
Canada also agrees that no level of lead can be considered safe, they give the SF value below in
Table 9. This value is not used in actual study but is valid to use in academia or for comparison
purposes [9] which is valid for the scope of this project. Instead, Lead concentration in blood
must be used. In the case of performing carcinogenic risk analysis for Lead, reference doses
must be replaced with daily Lead intake (DLI). This is found by the equation:
DLI = C ∗(IR/1000) ∗0.12
(4.4)
The equation takes 12% of the concentration (C) of Lead in water multiplied by the daily intake
of water into the body (IR). The 12% value is the average amount of Lead that is absorbed into
the bloodstream. The DLI value is then used to derive another value: blood Lead level (BLL).
The BLL value is the total Lead concentration in blood. The equation for adults is slightly
different than for children. This value is found with the following:
BLL(Adult) = 2 + (0.4 ∗(DLI/1000))
(4.5)
BLL(Child) = 1.5 + (0.4 ∗(DLI/1000))
(4.6)
This discrepancy stems from the assumption that there is already Lead buildup in a person not
considering the impact from the studied process. This BLL value is compared with the reference
BLL values in Table 9 to get the hazard quotient. The value of 0.4 is a general average of the
uptake of Lead into the body. This is an average value to use in equations as actual Lead uptake
in peoples bodies vary greatly based on the individual. The DLI is also divided by 1000 to get
the correct units compared to concentration.
Assumption / Data
Value
SF (mg/kg*d)
8.50E-02
Adult BLL (ug/dL)
5
Child BLL (ug/dL)
3.5
EF
365
ED
30
Table 9:
Lead Slope Factor taken from Health Canada [9] and Blood Level Limits from US EPA
Guidelines
32
==PAGE:36==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Below in Table 10, a distribution of time spent by P1 through P4 is seen. This is important to get
a time weighted average of carcinogen exposure and will be used in all Monte Carlo simulations.
With these values and assumptions seen in the Monte Carlo appendix, the simulation can be
completed to retrieve carcinogenic and health risk analysis.
This is possible since HQ is a
unitless value that can be compiled to account for several carcinogens. TCR is also able to be
added together since it is a unit representing effected people in a population.
(Exposure) (hours)
People
Home
Work
Outside
total
P1
104
40
24
168
P2
113
35
20
168
P3
117
30
21
168
P4
156
0
12
168
Table 10: Distribution of time spent by P1 - P4 in a week
4.2
Bioleaching Process
The bioleaching process described in the above LCA background as well as Section 2.5 will be
analyzed. The impact from Chromium dust and Lead leachate will be done separately then
combined for a final carcinogenic and health risk assessment.
Dust output from the system contain small amounts of known carcinogens. Known carcinogens
in dust from PCBs include Lead, Chromium (VI) and Nickel. For the study, Chromium(VI)
will be the main carcinogen of interest. Chromium(VI) appears in PCB dust with a rough
weight percent being 0.15% [15]. Chromium(VI) is a known and well studied carcinogen which
is linked with gastrointestinal cancer as well as respiratory cancers [17].
Waste slurry from the bioleaching tank will be the main focus regarding Lead output into the
environment. Lead leaches from the waste stream in small amounts due to the deposition of
PbSO4 and unleached Pb leaving the system. For this reason, only the Pb ions are taken into
account as they are mixed with the leachate. Lead is a known carcinogen and danger to human
health. It is neurotoxic and effects children’s development as well as being cause for blood,
kidney and gastrointestinal cancers [17].
To begin the risk analysis process, all assumptions and information must be compiled.
To
begin, exposure concentrations will be assumed for all studied people. The concentration is
found taking the concentration of dust being released from the processing plant considering a
2000CFM ventilation system releases dust to the air. The total output of dust is then diluted
considering the dust sample is taken 1km from the origin point and then multiplied by 0.15%
to account for the weight fraction of Cr(VI) in the dust. Home values consider that 10% of
33
==PAGE:37==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
dust from outside travels into the building either from open windows or doors as well as dust
shaking off of clothing and shoes. Work is the same principal as with home concentrations but
considers more closed openings in the building and a larger space. P1 is considered in this risk
assessment to work in the plant giving higher rates of exposure concentration as can be seen in
Table 11.
(Exposure) (ug/m3)
Family Member
Home
Work
Outside
Cr(VI) Dust
P1
0.000357
0.005
0.00357
P2
0.000357
0.0001785
0.00357
P3
0.000357
0.0001785
0.00357
P4
0.000357
0.0001785
0.00357
Table 11: Exposure concentration of Cr(VI) in air
Once Exposure concentration is assumed, time weighted averages (TWA), long term concen-
tration exposure and cancer risk is found. Time weighted average is an important unit used
in the Monte Carlo simulation. It is found by adding the summation of concentration from
Table 11 with the exposure time in Table 10 and dividing by total time per week. Exposure
concentration is the TWA multiplied by the average time and exposure duration again divided
by hours per week. Cancer risk is then simply the exposure concentration multiplied by the
unit rate.
Family Member
TWA
Exposure Concentration
Cancer Risk
P1
0.237638
15.48890536
2.79E-01
P2
0.0470135
3.064272768
5.52E-02
P3
0.04757025
3.100560938
5.58E-02
P4
0.055947
3.646545536
6.56E-02
Table 12: Chromium Dust TWA as well as preliminary exposure concentrations and cancer risk
The assumption for lead output in the system is greatly reduced from the output found in the
mass balance in HSC due to high amounts of PbSO4 precipitation and slow leaching from the
waste output into nature. The exposures for Lead are seen below. The concentration is further
reduced for indoor areas as it is assumed that the waste treatment facilities divides the lead
concentration by 750. This is considering a treatment plant that functions in non metropolitan
areas and uses groundwater or local freshwater as the main contribution to the system. This is
chosen to represent Northern communities in Arctic or other cold climate areas.
34
==PAGE:38==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
(Exposure) (ug/L)
Family Member
Home
Work
Outside
Pb Bioleaching
P1
0.00112
0.00112
0.84
P2
0.00112
0.00112
0.84
P3
0.00112
0.00112
0.84
P4
0.00112
0.00112
0.84
Table 13: Lead exposure concentrations
Following the same calculations for Cr(VI) dust, the TWA, exposure concentration and Cancer
risk is found. This is seen in Table 14.
Family Member
TWA
Exposure Concentration
Cancer Risk
P1
0.28128
0.018333429
1.56E-03
P2
0.26576
0.017321857
1.47E-03
P3
0.26964
0.01757475
1.49E-03
P4
0.23472
0.015298714
1.30E-03
Table 14: Pb Data for TWA, exposure concentration and cancer risk
Calculation tables for each person in the Monte Carlo process can be seen in the appendix
documents. These tables will give individual hazard quotients, chronic daily intakes and target
cancer risks broken down by person and by carcinogen. The summation of results regarding
hazard quotient and target cancer risk are also available in table format.
Figure 9 shows results for the bioleaching carcinogenic risk study. What can be taken from
these results is that no mater if it is the average person or someone in the 90th percentile of
exposure, the risk of having negative health effects from a perspective bioleaching plant is within
an acceptable range. This is shown by the HQ values for both adults and children being below
the threshold of 1. The target cancer risk shows that, for the average person, there is a risk
that 5 of every 100,000 people can contract a form of cancer in their lifetimes living near the
perspective operation. If in the 90th percentile, that risk jumps to 4 out of every 10,000 for
adults and 6 of every 10,000 children can get cancer from the process in their lifetimes. This is
rounding up to the nearest whole number from the total TCR results. In the 90th percentile,
The risk for cancer can be considered too high for acceptable rates. According to the US EPA,
a risk of 1 in 10,000 can be cause for concern and may require remediation or more testing.
35
==PAGE:39==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Figure 9: Average HQ and TCR both Median and 90th percentile broken into adult and child values
Overall, using the assumptions and data from the HSC mass balance it can be concluded that a
PCB bioleaching plant poses very little non-cancer risk but in worse cases could be of concern
considering cancer, particularly in children, over a lifetime.
As it stands, HQ in the 90th
percentile is very close to 1 so depending on public concern in the community some remediation
may be considered.
4.3
Landfilling Process
A hypothetical landfill will be created to house the discarded waste of PCBs. The main en-
vironmental concern for WEEE in landfills through leaching processes [28]. According to the
World Health Organization, e-waste is considered a hazardous waste as it can produce or hold
toxic chemicals or metals [26]. Chemicals that can be emitted through WEEE include but are
not limited to lead, mercury, dioxins, furans, cadmium, arsenic and chromium [13].
36
==PAGE:40==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Due to the study regarding the bioleaching process focusing only on pretreatment and recovery,
to make the comparison more fair, only the natural leaching processes in the landfill will be
considered. Since the studied bioleaching process in the LCA was only covering a single part of
the recovery process rather than the whole system, the same will be done for the landfill study.
It will be assumed that Lead and Chromium leach out of the landfill and is deposited into the
water table. The assumed rate of leaching will be 1.5L/m considering Swedish rainfall statistics.
The outflow then becomes 0.214L/d which will be used for concentration output. Chromium
average concentration will be considered as 0.0009ug/L retrieved from e-waste landfill leachate
results [5] that is reduced by 1000 to account for leaching rate and to consider a normal landfill
rather than one specifically for e-waste. Lead concentration derived from Spalvins [14] retrieves
1.85 ug/d after normalization with leaching rates and unit conversion. This daily rate will be
used in the calculations.
(Exposure) (ug/L)
Family Member
Home
Work
Outside
Cr(VI) Landfill
P1
0.00001
0.00001
0.0009
P2
0.00001
0.00001
0.0009
P3
0.00001
0.00001
0.0009
P4
0.00001
0.00001
0.0009
Table 15: Exposure Concentrations for Cr(VI) in landfill Leachate
The home and work concentrations are divided by 10 to represent dilution and cleaning from a
water treatment plant. roughly only 10 to 30% of Cr(VI) can be removed from non specialized
water treatment facilities which is what is considered here. With the exposure and time dis-
tribution from Table 10, the time weighted averages, exposure concentrations and cancer risk
seen below in Table 16.
Family Member
TWA
Exposure Concentration
Cancer Risk
P1
0.001568571
0.000102237
2.76E-05
P2
0.001587143
0.000103448
2.79E-05
P3
0.0015825
0.000103145
2.78E-05
P4
0.001624286
0.000105869
2.86E-05
Table 16: Cr(VI) TWA, exposure concentration and cancer risk
37
==PAGE:41==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Considering Lead exposure, concentrations in home and work environments were calculated
the same as in the bioleaching process with dividing the groundwater concentration by 750 to
simulate a water treatment plant using ground and surface water as the main contribution.
It should be made clear that lead concentration out of a landfill is much higher than in the
bioleaching plant considering the large amount of e-waste in the area as well as landfilling
having a lack of recycling techniques that could reduce concentrations.
(Exposure) (ug/L)
Family Member
Home
Work
Outside
Pb Landfill
P1
0.002466667
0.0024667
1.85
P2
0.002466667
0.0024667
1.85
P3
0.002466667
0.0024667
1.85
P4
0.002466667
0.0024667
1.85
Table 17: Pb exposure concentrations
Below in Table 18 shows all data retrieved from concentrations and time distribution. It can
already be seen before performing the Monte Carlo that the TWA values are far higher compared
to the Lead TWA for bioleaching seen in Table 14.
Family Member
TWA
Exposure Concentration
Cancer Risk
P1
0.619485714
0.040377194
3.43E-03
P2
0.585304762
0.038149328
3.24E-03
P3
0.59385
0.038706295
3.29E-03
P4
0.516942857
0.033693597
2.86E-03
Table 18: Pb Landfill TWA, exposure concentration and cancer risk
After Monte Carlo simulation is performed, hazard quotients and target cancer risks are found
in both the median and 90th percentile for adults and children. The HQ and TCR values are
compiled for both Lead and Cr(VI) to get a cumulative value for the landfill process regarding
the heavy metals. The Monte Carlo calculation tables are seen in the appendix. The graphs in
Figure 10 identify the cumulative HQ and TCR.
The hazard quotient shows a very stark difference between adults and children. This is mainly
due to the increased lead exposure which is far more dangerous for children than adults due
to the developmental issues stemming from Lead which is neurotoxic.
Though the median
hazard quotient for both adults and children are in acceptable ranges, the 90th percentile is
above acceptable risk for children contracting non-cancer health effects from being exposed to
a landfill holding e-waste through their lifetime.
38
==PAGE:42==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
The target cancer risk shows an even more troubling result. With the assumptions made in
this simulation, both the median and 90th percentile of people exposed to Lead and Chromium
from a landfill have concerning or unacceptable cancer risk. In the median, roughly 3 in every
10,000 could contract cancer in their lifetime whereas in the 90th percentile could be up to 1
in every 500 people. This rate is unacceptable and would require immediate intervention for
remediation efforts.
Figure 10: Landfilling HQ and TCR values
The risk analysis results are not surprising considering the known toxicity and risk of not
properly recycling e-waste. E-waste that is not properly recycled has higher concentrations of
carcinogens and heavy metals compared to manually dismantled and processed waste.
39
==PAGE:43==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
4.4
Discussion
The carcinogenic risk differences between bioleachinig and landfilling when considering Cr(VI)
and Pb can be broken down into several factors. The first and most important is the exposure
concentrations. Differences in outputs of Lead and Chromium between bioleaching and land-
filling directly impact the exposure rates to humans. Another factor regards the differences in
effects that Lead and Chromium have on people. Lead is largely considered more harmful and
dangerous to people regarding non-cancerous health effects as well as having carcinogenic risk.
Chromium has a higher transportation and carcinogenic risk meaning lower concentration can
lead to more harmful effects than Lead. The last are differences between adults and children.
Children have longer exposure durations and are more susceptible to developmental issues and,
in some cases, higher exposure rates. This is seen especially with children in the 90th percentile
of exposure. This represents a child that grows up and continues to reside in the exposure
area until their end of life. This equates to longer exposure frequencies compared to adults and
children who move away once grown.
Figure 11: Comparrison of HQ vlues between bioleaching and landfilling
40
==PAGE:44==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
Figure 11 shows compiled hazard quotient values split between each perspective person and
compared between bioleaching and landfilling. Information gathered from this data tells us
that, in both methods, children are at a greater risk of adverse non-cancer effects due in part to
the toxicity of the heavy metals as well as the exposure rates discussed previously. For average
people, however, both methods do not show particularly high risk for negative health effects
that are non-cancerous.
P1 has higher risk compared to others based on the assumption that P1 is a worker at the plant
and breathes more Cr(VI) dust than other people. This explains the higher risk for bioleaching
compared to all other subjects. Bioleaching has a greater risk for this person as the Chromium
dust is highly mobile and can be breathed easily. In a landfill simulation, there is no dust and all
carcinogens are confined to groundwater. There is also an observed 44% increase in HQ values
when going from the median to the 90th percentile of people. This informs us that the hazard
quotient can rise to unacceptable levels quickly which could be a cause for concern. This is
important as many of the values in the 90th percentile are close to or over acceptable risk. For
this reason, for both methods of PCB disposal, further analysis would have to be done. This is
especially true for landfilling as 3 of the 4 people have far higher HQ values than bioleaching.
Target cancer risk results seen in Figure 19 represent the average median and 90th percentile
person. If a value is less than or equal to 1E-6 cancer risk is considered negligible [17]. Values
in the range of 1E-5 is still considered acceptable but not negligible. A value in the range of
1E-4 is considered to be a cause for concern and possible remediation or assessment should be
done. Anything past this value is considered dangerous and unacceptable given the acceptable
carcinogenic risk put in place by environmental and government agencies.
Bioleaching TCR Summation
Subject
Median
90th Percent
Adult AVG
4.51E-05
3.63E-04
Child AVG
4.77E-05
5.25E-04
Landfill TCR Summation
Subject
Median
90th Percent
Adult AVG
2.03E-04
1.01E-03
Child AVG
2.18E-04
1.49E-03
Table 19: Numerical TCR values for bioleaching and landfilling split between children and adults
41
==PAGE:45==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
To put this into perspective, Figure 12 represents the amount of people at risk of cancer com-
paring bioleaching and landfilling. From the results, cancer risk when considering bioleaching
is in ”acceptable” rates on average but could pose an issue for those particularly effected. In
this case, possible remediation or sampling would be necessary for the plant to function with
a social license to operate. Landfilling poses a substantial risk to human health in the region
of operation. On average, the risk is in concerning ranges of roughly 3 people of 10,000 being
effected in their lives while in the worst case 1 to 2 people every 1000 people. This rate of
possible cancer effects from an industrial or operational site is highly destructive to those living
nearby. In total, there is a 77.9% decrease in cancer risk comparing leandfilling to bioleaching
processes.
Figure 12: How many people will statistically get cancer in their lifetimes comparing bioleaching and
landfilling
It is important to understand that this carcinogenic risk analysis only focuses on two well known
carcinogenic heavy metals. For this reason, especially for landfilling, the results only take a
portion of the total carcinogenic risk. For the sake of comparison, however this is sufficient
to show the difference in human impact between these two very different waste processing
methods.
If more strict remediation is taken into account such as dust filters or increased
monitoring programs and in-situ groundwater remediation it is possible to rectify and decrease
risk of this bioleaching operation for both people and the environment alike.
This suggests that bioleaching is a superior strategy for e-waste management in the Arctic when
considering Chromium and Lead output. More research on environmental impact could be done
to broaden the scope of chemical and metal waste from bioleaching. This is important as many
microorganisms used for bioleaching reactors discussed previously are acidophilic. This need
for low pH requires large amounts of acids such as sulfuric acid.
42
==PAGE:46==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
This acidic output has negative impact on local water sources and wildlife. There are microor-
ganisms that have been studied that can function and survive in colder climate environments
such as the Arctic. One such example is Acidithiobacillus ferrivorans. This microorganism
has been seen to perform better at lower temperatures compared to A.ferrooxidans in a study
concerning bioleaching in mine tailings [23]. Though no testing on PCB or e-waste has been
studied with A.ferrivorans, this proves the concept that microorganisms can be used in cold
climates to possibly increase leaching rates while at the same time, reducing energy costs in the
form of heating. Though A.ferrooxidans work best at a temperature of 30 degrees as referenced
in Table 2, they can still function at colder temperatures such as 8 degrees. Though when
temperature is lowered, the leaching rate goes down into possibly uneconomic conditions [23].
In Arctic environments, small townships and communities value the safety of their peers and
local wildlife. Considering heavy metal outputs of Chromium and Lead, the chance of envi-
ronmental conservation using bioleaching methods is a far more preferable option. Some of
these communities procure their food and water from the local environment rather than from
stores or from municipal water sources. For these people, environmental health and safety is
a top priority. As recycling and waste management grows in these areas, it will be important
to consider health risks to the community. In arctic communities in Greenland, for example,
landfilling and waste burning is the only form of waste management, including e-waste. Offering
a more environmentally friendly and healthier alternative to recycling practices can lead to a
higher acceptance from the population when implementing new technology.
5
Conclusion
With the global rise of e-waste, proper recycling and disposal has never been a more impor-
tant area of research. Compared to contemporary methods of WEEE recycling, bioleaching
technology using microorganisms promises a more sustainable option to resource recovery. Mi-
croorganisms can be used to recover precious metals and critical resources from e-waste through
biological and chemical processes to leach desired metals through direct and indirect means. The
use of these microorganisms reduces the amount of additive chemicals required for production
which drops operation cost and environmental impact from wastewater.
When considering people in Arctic or cold climate regions, waste must still be recycled in re-
sponsible ways. Bioleaching gives a more environmentally friendly option for resource extraction
given it’s reduced need for chemical additives and reduced energy costs. Considering the delicate
ecology and wildlife that populates these regions as well as the native and small communities
residing there, environmental conservation and social license to operate is integral to industrial
operations.
43
==PAGE:47==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
There are a multitude of different microorganism cultures that react and function differently
in a bioleaching process. Microorganisms will react differently to pH, temperature and metal
depending on their type and species. Thus, it is important to understand how microorganisms
thrive before creating a functional leaching process. Mircoorganisms take many forms from
bacteria to fungus which all have positive and negative attributes if to be used industrially.
Despite the complexities involved in bioleaching, it is a functional process that carries many
environmental benefits compared to all other recycling methods.
The life cycle analysis, completed with aid from HSC, informs that there is a possibility for future
marine ecological risk due to Cr(VI) and Pb as well as freshwater mainly from Lead. These
results can be more accurate if study areas are created to provide a volume for the measured
impact values to get concentrations. This will allow a more proper comparison with accepted
values from government organizations.
This LCA does, however, compare impact from Pb
and Cr(VI) well when considering environmental categories between the two. This is a major
strength of the CML-2001 system chosen as the LCI method. The Monte Carlo simulation,
after completing 20,000 iterations, resulted in very telling results on the difference in health
impact between landfilling and bioleaching. Overall, regarding non-cancer risk, both systems
are considered acceptable for adults but not for children in the top percent. This is specifically
due to children having a higher risk for developmental issues. When calculating cancer risk,
bioleaching is a far safer option for PCB recycling and end of life processing compared to
landfilling. People impacted by landfilling in the 90th percentile have an unacceptable risk of
contracting cancer in their lifetime with even the median population having concerning rates.
Overall, bioleaching poses an acceptable lifetime cancer risk on average but may need steps for
remediation or waste mitigation but the difference between the two systems is very telling.
The data provided by this study is very important when attempting to get a social license to
operate from communities that will be effected by it’s operation. This is especially true when
considering arctic communities. Informing on environmental and human health effects is very
important to small and tight-knit communities seen in these cold climates. Many of these areas
culturally rely on wildlife and natural resources that may have the risk of being damaged by new
industry or technology. As industry moves to these areas, these people will be most effected by
changes in their surroundings. Based on the LCA and Monte Carlo results, bioleaching is a far
better option compared to contemporary landfilling due to the reduced environmental impact
as well as the recovery of strategic metals from the waste.
44
==PAGE:48==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
6
References
[1] Guiding principles for monte carlo analysis. Technical Report EPA/630/R-97/001, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, March 1997.
[2] A. C. C. J. C. S. A.-G. G. Aganthe Hubau, Michel Mainier.
Recovery of metals in a
double-stage continuous bioreactor for acidic bioleaching of printed circuit boards (pcbs).
238:116481, May 2020.
[3] A. C. C. J. C. P. A.-G. G. Agathe Hubau, Michel Minier. Continuous production of a
biogenic ferric iron lixiviant for the bioleaching of printed circuit boards (pcbs). 180:180–
191, September 2018.
[4] M. V. Ahamed Ashiq, Janhavi Kulkarni.
Hydrometallurgical Recovery of Metals From
E-waste. Elsevier, 2019.
[5] V. K. J. T. S. R. J. S.-K. B. Ankit, Lala Saha. Electronic waste and their leachates impact
on human health and environment: Global ecological threat and management. 24:102049,
November 2021.
[6] M. S. Arshadi M. Enhancement of simultaneous gold and copper extraction from computer
printed circuit boards using i bacillus megaterium i. 175:315–324, January 2015.
[7] V. K. G. M. Batinic, Vaccari. Applied WEEE pre-treatment methods: Opportunities to
maximizing the recovery of critical metals. ResearchGate, 2017.
[8] W. Brandl, Bosshard. Computer-munching microbes: metal leaching from electronic scrap
by bacteria and fungi. 59:319–326, Febuary 2001.
[9] H. Canada. Lead - information sheet, 2020.
[10] E. N. R. Chagnes, Cote. WEEE Recycling: Research, Development, and Policies. Elsevier,
2016.
[11] H. R. Chancerel, Meskers.
Assessment of precious metal flows during preprocessing of
waste electrical and electronic equipment. 13(5):791–810, 2009.
[12] L. J. Delgado Yelitza, Fern´andez-Morales Francisco.
An old technique with a promis-
ing future: Recent advances in the use of electrodeposition for metal recovery. 26:5525,
September 2021.
[13] R. R. Denise Wilson. Weee: Waste electrical and electronic equipment – toxins, 2015.
[14] T. T. Erik Spalvins, Brajesh Dubey. Impact of electronic waste disposal on lead concen-
trations in landfill leachate. 42:7452–7458, November 2008.
==PAGE:49==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
[15] T. Z. C. D. L. W. Fangfang Wang, Yuemin Zhao. Mineralogical analysis of dust collected
from typical recycling line of waste printed circuit boards. Waste Managment, 43:434–441,
September 2015.
[16] P. E. K. W. B. H. Faramarzi Mohammad, Stagers Marion.
Metal solubilization from
metal-containing solid materials by cyanogenic chromobacterium violaceum. 113:321–326,
September 2004.
[17] U. E. N. C. for Environmental Assessment. Iris assessments — iris — us epa.
[18] E. Foulkes. Ambient water quality criteria for chromium. October 1980.
[19] Y. Z. L. H. Z. H. Huang, Li. Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans: an acidophile isolated
from acid hot spring for the biosorption of heavy metal ions. 17:2655–2666, May 2020.
[20] R. F. D. G.-P. S. C. C. Iannicelli-Zubiani Elena Maria, Giani Martina Irene. Environ-
mental impacts of a hydrometallurgical process for electronic waste treatment: A life cycle
assessment case study. 140:1204–1216, January 2017.
[21] N. S. A. G. Ilyas Sadia, Anwar Munir. Bioleaching of metals from electronic scrap by
moderately thermophilic acidophilic bacteria. 88:180–188, August 2007.
[22] J. X. B. L. Jingwei Wang, Jianfeng Bai. Bioleaching of metals from printed wire boards
by acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and acidithiobacillus thiooxidans and their mixture.
172:1100–1105, December 2009.
[23] V. S. A. S. S. I. I. K. H. K. Kuanysh Seitkamal, Nariman Zhappar.
Bioleaching for
the removal of arsenic from mine tailings by psychrotolerant and mesophilic microbes at
markedly continental climate temperatures. 10:972, November 2020.
[24] A. J. K. L. K. J. M Jha, Choubey. Leaching studies for tin recovery from waste e-scrap.
32:1919–1925, October 2012.
[25] U. E. Organization. About the exposure factors handbook, 2017.
[26] W. H. Organization. Electronic waste (e-waste), 2023.
[27] H. S. Priya Anshu. Extraction of metals from high grade waste printed circuit board by
conventional and hybrid bioleaching using acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. 177:132–139, May
2018.
[28] K. B. B. F. Rocchetti Laura, Vegli`o Francesco. Environmental impact assessment of hy-
drometallurgical processes for metal recovery from weee residues using a portable prototype
plant. 47:1581–1588, Febuary 2013.
==PAGE:50==
Thesis Project
Lule˚a University of Technology
[29] N. C. E. D. O. R. O. G. C. M. Rozas Enrique, Mendez Maria. Bioleaching of electronic
waste using bacteria isolated from the marine sponge hymeniacidon heliophila (porifera).
329:120–130, May 2017.
[30] S. P. Shittu Olanrewaju, Williams Ian. Global e-waste management: Can weee make a dif-
ference? a review of e-waste trends, legislation, contemporary issues and future challenges.
120:549–563, Febuary 2021.
[31] K. H. C. S. T. H. B. G. M. A. I. N. Srivastava Rajiv R, Ilyas Sadia. Biotechnological
recycling of critical metals from waste printed circuit boards. 95:2796–2810, 2020.
[32] P. N. P. M. D. K. B. T. Tomasz Sponik, Dawid Franke. Impact of grinding of printed
circuit boards on the efficiency of metal recovery by means of electrostatic separation.
11:281, March 2021.
[33] A. Y. D. Tuncuk, Stazi. Aqueous metal recovery techniques from e-scrap: Hydrometallurgy
in recycling. 25:28–37, January 2012.
[34] Uberschaar. Challenges for critical raw material recovery from weee – the case study of
gallium. 60:534–545, 2017.
[35] E. Union. Waste from electrical and electronic equipment (weee), 2024.
[36] P. T.-J. S. L. Y. R.-L. L. Y.-D. C. M. L. J.-K. W. X.-L. Z. W.-M. Xia Ming-Chen, Wang
Ya-Ping. Recycling of metals from pretreated waste printed circuit boards effectively in
stirred tank reactor by a moderately thermophilic culture. 6:741–721, June 2017.
[37] X. Z. Zhang Lingen. A review of current progress of recycling technologies for metals from
waste electrical and electronic equipment. 127:19–36, July 2016.
