==PAGE:1==
Environmental and economic optimals
for the building envelope in Denmark
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Environmental and economic optimals
for the building envelope in Denmark
Master Thesis
26 June, 2025
By:
Mads Falck Bornæs
Supervisor:
Christian Anker Hviid, Associate Professor, Department of Civil and Me­
chanical Engineering, DTU
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
Website:
www.byg.dtu.dk
Front picture:
Adria Flóra Kerekes
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Energy and Services, De­
partment of Civil and mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The thesis accounts for 30 ECTS and was prepared between the 10th of February and 26th of
June 2025 under direct supervision of Christian Anker Hviid.
Mads Falck Bornæs ­ s203719
Signature
Date
Environmental and economic optimals
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
With the climate changing due to human activities, it is of high importance to limit Greenhouse
Gas Emissions (GHGe). Denmark has for example set the goal of reducing GHGe by 70%
before 2030, and become completely climate neutral by 2050. With a significant amount of
these emissions coming from buildings, both the construction and heating, it is of high interest
to reduce these. Because of this, the Danish Building Regulation 2018 (BR18) is being modified
to include limits to GHGe through the use of a required Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) for all buildings,
which will come into effect in mid 2025. Throughout the next years, these limits will be reduced
every second year, reaching the strictest requirements in 2029.
Optimisation between the embodied and operational emissions is therefore an important part
of this puzzle, which BR18 does not help with. Through a literature study a number of gaps
have been found, which include the optimal insulation thickness in Denmark not being known,
a lack of knowledge in how climate change will impact this optimum, whether the economic cost
incentivizes this optimum, what the impact of missing it is, and whether the current requirements
for windows, a common hole in the building envelope, is and will be worth it environmentally.
As such, this paper aims to answer these questions for a Single Family (SF) and Multi Family
(MF) house.
These optimal values for the climate envelope will be investigated through dynamic building
simulations in the program IDA ICE. Future weather files for three scenarios are used to account
for climate change. Average emissions for insulation types are used and modified to reflect the
expected embodied emissions in the future. Operational emissions from heating are included
through two different Emission Factors (EF). One of these is the official projected EF’s from
BR18, calculated and updated by Cowi in 2020, and the other is a projected EF calculated in
2023 by Artelia.
Using this method, the optimal insulation thicknesses for the building envelope have been found
for both the SF and MF houses. These optimums depend heavily on which EF is used, with the
EF calculated by Cowi often resulting in insulation thicknesses above 500mm. When using a
lower EF, these thicknesses range from 300 −350mm for the exterior walls and roofs, with sim­
ilar thicknesses for both buildings. The optimal insulation thicknesses for the terrain deck have
been found to be both lower and a lot more varied, depending on the building type and time pe­
riod. It is further found that climate change may reduce these thicknesses slightly, although the
difference is less than other literature has found. Levelized Cost of Carbon Abatement (LCCA)
values have also been calculated using the equivalent of 25mm Thermal Conductivity (TC)
0.037 mineral wool insulation, with the baseline set using the minimum heat loss requirements
from BR18. From these, it has been found that while using more than this insulation is often
both economically and environmentally preferable, there is a point where the cost increases
exponentially. Where this point is varies based on the time period, the TC of the insulation and
the building part.
The economic optimums have been found to be much lower than the environmental ones. The
last main finding is that missing this found optimum results in a larger increase, in both GHGe
and cost, when using too little insulation rather than too much. These results are based on
initial prices for the public and, as such, are expected to differ significantly for larger construction
companies.
These results can be used to aid decision makers in deciding both between minimum require­
ments in future building regulations and in wider decisions between policies aiming to reduce
GHGe.
Environmental and economic optimals
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express gratitude and acknowledgement to Christian Anker Hviid, my supervisor
in this project. Thank you for valuable ideas and guidance throughout the project, as well as
aid on the more technical side of the simulations.
I would further like to extend thanks to Adria Flóra Kerekes and Jacob Friland for support and
help throughout the process.
Environmental and economic optimals
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Intro
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature review
2
2.1
The Danish Building regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Emission factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Levelised Cost of Carbon Abatement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Optimisation of insulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Research questions
22
3.1
Research gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Method
24
4.1
Case Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Weather files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Embodied emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Operational emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5
Life Cycle Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Results and analysis
48
5.1
Exterior wall construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Roof construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Terrain deck construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.4
Window to floor ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6
Discussion
78
6.1
Key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.2
Limitations and uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7
Conclusion
81
Bibliography
82
A Appendix
84
A.1 Data sheets for windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.2 Compiled EPDs for insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.3 Material prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.4 SF Insulation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.5 SF missing the optimum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
A.6 SF Window Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.7 SF LCCA Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
 Environmental and economic optimals
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
A.8 MF Insulation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.9 MF missing the optimum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
A.10 MF Window Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
A.11 MF LCCA Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
Environmental and economic optimals
vi
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
AF22
Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet 2022
BR18
The Danish Building Regulation 2018
CCS
Carbon Capture Storage
CDD
Cooling Degree Days
DH
District Heating
DHW
Domestic Hot Water
DRY
Design Reference Year
EF
Emission Factor
EOL
End Of Life
EPD
Environmental Product Declaration
GHGe
Greenhouse Gas emissions
GWP
Global Warming Potential
HDD
Heating Degree Days
HWY
Years containing heatwaves
IPCC
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LCA
Life Cycle Analysis
LCC
Life Cycle Cost
LCCA
Levelized Cost of Carbon Abatement
MF
Multi Family
NPC
Net Present Cost
NPV
Net Present Value
OoB
Out of Bounds
pLCA
prospective Life Cycle Analysis
PV
Photovoltaics
RC
Resource Consumption
RCP
Representative Concentration Pathway
SF
Single Family
TC
Thermal Conductivity
TMY
Typical Meteorological Year
TRY
Typical Reference Year
 Environmental and economic optimals
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Intro
1.1
Background
The climate of the world is undeniably changing due to human activities, with an increase in the
global surface temperature of 1.1oC when comparing the 2011­2020 period with 1850­1900, and
is more likely than not to reach 1.5oC before 2040 even under a very low emission scenario [1].
To combat this change, global action is required, with Denmark setting goals to reduce Green­
house Gas emissions (GHGe) by 70% in 2030 compared to 1990 and becoming completely
climate neutral in 2050 [2].
Large portions of GHGe stem from the energy sector and the construction sector. In 2010 35%
of GHGe were caused by the energy sector and 6.4% directly from the building sector. However,
a large share of the energy is used to heat and cool buildings. If these indirect emissions are
added to the building sector, then they would be responsible for 19% of the total emissions [3].
As such both the operational energy of buildings is a major contributor to global warming.
More local data for Denmark shows that construction is responsible for 27% of the country’s
impact on climate change [4]. To account for this The Danish Building Regulation 2018 (BR18)
made an addendum valid from 2023. Hence, all new buildings above 1000m2 are required to
do a Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) and must not exceed a threshold of 12kg CO2 −eq./m2/year.
This value is expected to be reduced gradually until 2029 along with an additional requirement
for the building process of 1.5kg CO2 −eq./m2/year[5].
This however, is most likely not enough as, according to Tozan et al, Denmark would have to
reduce its total emissions by 97% to comply with the boundary of 0.3kg CO2 −eq./m2/year.
Currently no buildings comply with this limit [6], and even the lowest thresholds expected in
2029 are much higher than this [5]. Tozan further finds that 91% of future emissions will be
related to embodied emissions peaking in 2041 due to an increase in the predicted amount of
construction [6]. This massive influence of embodied emissions also make sense on a more
global scale for construction, as about 50% of extracted materials are currently used in the built
environment [7].
With the expected increases in the built environment it is therefore important to limit both the
emissions from Resource Consumption (RC) and operation of the building. Historically focus
has been on reducing the operational energy of buildings. While this is still a key area it is also
crucial to mitigate the embodied carbon emissions leading to a shift in focus [6]. An emerging
issue when working on this area is the temporal representativeness. Technological develop­
ments are not included in databases, leading to significant issues when using LCA to guide
industries [4]. The same is true for the energy used to heat and cool the buildings where the
emission factors are expected to be lower in the future than they currently are [8]. Due to this
dynamic nature it is necessary to apply prospective Life Cycle Analysis (pLCA) where future
scenarios can be taken into account [4].
1.2
Objectives
This thesis aims to investigate the optimal insulation thicknesses to limit GHGe over the build­
ings full lifetime. The project will look at both Single Family (SF) house’s and Multi Family (MF)
house’s built in 2025, 2050 and 2100. A key result will be whether the optimal thickness for the
years differs both due to expected changes in the climate and therefore temperature over the
years as well as changes to the Danish energy mix.
 Environmental and economic optimals
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature review
2.1
The Danish Building regulation
BR18 contains the rules and regulations that all new and renovated buildings in Denmark must
follow. For this thesis, the most relevant chapter is Chapter 11 ”Energy Consumption and Cli­
mate Impact”, which contains §250 to §298. The crux of the chapter is already mentioned in
§250 which states that ”Buildings must be planned, established, converted and maintained in
order to maintain unnecessary consumption of energy for heating, Domestic Hot Water (DHW),
cooling, ventilation and lighting with due respect of the use of the building and the scope of the
building work.” [9]
The relevant paragraphs have to do with the heating requirements for residential buildings and
limits to the GHGe over their lifetimes. All information in Section 2.1 is from BR18 [9] unless
otherwise specified.
2.1.1
Heating requirements
The paragraphs related to heating occur between §252 and §260. As such the following rules
have to be followed:
§252:
This paragraph states that energy used for heating during the buildings lifetime must weighed
according to the following factors:
1. 1.9 for electricity
2. 0.85 for district heating
3. For other heating sources a factor of 1.0 and the relevant efficiency
§257:
This paragraph deals with the minimum requirements for the building envelope regarding heat
losses. The maximum heat loss coefficients for relevant building components can be seen in
Table 2.1.
Building part
U­Value
W/m2K
External walls and basement walls in contact with the soil.
0.30
Ground slabs, basement floors in contact with the soil and suspended
upper floors above open air or a ventilated crawl space.
0.20
Ceiling and roof structures, including jamb walls, flat roofs and sloping
walls directly adjoining the roof.
0.20
Linear thermal
transmittance
W/mK
Joint between exterior wall and windows or outer doors, gates and
hatches.
0.06
Table 2.1: Minimum U­values from BR18 §257 [9]
 Environmental and economic optimals
2
==PAGE:11==
2.1. The Danish Building regulation
BR18 does provide values for more building components than shown here, but they are deemed
not relevant in this case.
§258:
This paragraph describes the minimum requirements for windows, glass outer walls and glass
roofs. The relevant part of this paragraph states that a reference windows energy balance
cannot be less than 0kWh/m2year. This energy balance is calculated according to the equation:
Eref = 196.4 ∗gw −90.36 ∗Uw
§259:
Residential units, halls of residence, hotels, etc. must have a total energy supply demand lower
than:
30.0kWh/m2/year + 1000kWh/year/heated floor area
The total energy supply demand accounts for heating, ventilation, cooling and DHW.
§279:
BR18 has separate minimum requirements, regarding the climate screen for renovations and
other changes to buildings, which are more strict than the ones shown in §257. These require­
ments are shown in Table 2.2.
Building part
U­Value
W/m2K
External walls and basement walls in contact with the soil.
0.18
Ground slabs, basement floors in contact with the soil and suspended
upper floors above open air or a ventilated crawl space.
0.10
Ceiling and roof structures, including jamb walls, flat roofs and sloping
walls directly adjoining the roof.
0.12
Linear thermal
transmittance
W/mK
Joint between exterior wall and windows or outer doors, gates and
hatches.
0.03
Table 2.2: Minimum U­values for renovated buildings from BR18 §279 [9]
2.1.2
Emission requirements
BR18 contains two paragraphs regarding LCA, both dealing with emissions from buildings.
§297:
A calculation for all building’s climate impact over its lifecycle must be made. The impact of
the calculation should be in the unit kg CO2 −eq./m2/year and done according to DS/EN
15978:2012. with a lifetime of 50 years. The following parts must be included:
A1: Raw material supply
A2: Transport
A3: Manufacturing
B4: Replacement
B6: Operational energy use
C3: Waste processing
Environmental and economic optimals
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1. The Danish Building regulation
C4: Disposal
D: Potential for Reuse, recycle and other recovery of waste
With data being either generic data from BR18 or from an Environmental Product Declaration
(EPD). If an EPD is used it must be relevant, valid and made in accordance to DS/EN 15804.
The EPD can be project specific, product specific, or for the generic type of material.
For B6: Operational energy use: the energy use should be calculated according to the previ­
ously mentioned requirements and use the Emission Factor (EF) shown in Table 2.3.
Year
Energy type
Emission factor (GWP)
kg CO2 −eq./kWh
Electricity
0.187
2023
District heating
0.105
Piped gas
0.225
Electricity
0.135
2025
District heating
0.0878
Piped gas
0.189
Electricity
0.0470
2030
District heating
0.0713
Piped gas
0.105
Electricity
0.0414
2035
District heating
0.0688
Piped gas
0.105
Electricity
0.0403
2040
District heating
0.0680
Piped gas
0.105
Table 2.3: Emission factors from BR18 [9]
§298:
Currently, there is an additional requirement for buildings with a heated floor area above 1000m2,
where the emissions may not exceed 12.0kg CO2−eq./m2/year. This, along with other require­
ments on GHGe, was included as an addendum to BR18 from the 1st of January 2023. This
addendum is applicable until the 30th of June 2025, where more strict regulations for all build­
ings, regardless of size, take effect. These regulations will gradually become stricter until 2029,
after which no further changes have been announced. The limits can be seen in Table 2.4 but
are not included directly in BR18 at the time of writing.
Environmental and economic optimals
4
==PAGE:13==
2.2. Emission factors
Climate requirements for buildings
2025
2027
2029
Holiday homes, camping cabins and similar holiday
accommodation under 150m2
4.0
3.6
3.2
Holiday homes, camping cabins and similar holiday
accommodation over 150m2
6.7
6.0
5.4
Farm houses, detached, semi­detached, and terraced
single family houses
6.7
6.0
5.4
Multi family houses, offices, commercial, storage and
similar
7.5
6.8
6.1
Other new buildings, e.g. schools, kinder gardens and
parking houses
6.0
7.2
6.4
Table 2.4: Future emission limits kg CO2 −eq/m2/year [5]
An additional requirement will be implemented from the 1st of July 2025 where the maximum
emissions for the building process will be limited to 1.5kg CO2−eq./m2/year. This encompasses
transport of materials to and from the construction site, energy and fuel consumption during the
construction and material waste on site. From an LCA perspective this limit covers A4­A5 [5].
As such this is not a part of BR18 at the time of writing either.
2.2
Emission factors
The emissions factors currently used in BR18, as shown in Table 2.3, were originally calculated
by Cowi, an international engineering company based in Denmark [10], in 2016 and updated
in 2020 [8]. The EF for electricity and District Heating (DH) varies greatly depending on the
location, typically at the country level, although variations within a country can easily occur
depending on the grid. An example of a country with a very low EF for electricity is Norway.
This is mainly due to a large ratio of hydropower, responsible for 95% of the country’s electricity.
The Norwegian energy mix has an EF at 0.018 CO2 −eq/kWh [11].
The same paper sets the average European electricity mix at 0.136kg CO2 −eq/kWh, which
according to BR18 fits pretty well with the Danish mix in 2025 [9]. As mentioned, the EF’s used
in BR18 were calculated by Cowi and updated in 2020. Therefore these EF’s will be referred to
as being Cowi’s EF for the rest of the thesis.
While these EF’s are much higher than Norway’s, major reductions are planned via projections
of the energy grid. By 2040 the expected EF for the Danish electricity mix is 0.0403 CO2 −
eq/kWh [8]. According to an earlier study by Gaarder et al, see Section 2.4.2 for more details, an
EF above 0.025−0.030kg CO2 −eq/kWh resulted in GHGe being dominated by the operational
energy in all cases.
The EF’s from Cowi does not quite reach this value, suggesting that the insulation thicknesses
required to optimise the emissions would not be reasonable. Cowi however, is not the only
company who has produced future EF in a Danish context. In 2023 Artelia, a major Danish
consulting engineering firm [12], produced expected EF’s for electricity, DH and pipe gas [13]
which are shown in Table 2.5.
Energy source
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050­2075
Electricity
6.01E­02
3.25E­02
2.91E­02
2.85E­2
2.61E­02
2.48E­02
District heating
4.18E­02
1.81E­02
1.40E­02
1.34E­02
1.32E­02
1.32E­02
Table 2.5: Artelia emission factors [13]
Environmental and economic optimals
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2. Emission factors
The calculated EF’s from Artelia are consistently lower than Cowi’s, and quickly reach below the
0.025 −0.030kg CO2 −eq/kWh found by Gaarder. As such the optimal insulation thicknesses
may not be unreasonable if these EF’s are closer to the actual EF’s in the future. The yearly
EF’s for electricity, DH and pipe gas from Cowi and Artelia can be seen in Figure 2.1. Due to
these differences a closer look into the assumptions behind the calculations has been made in
the following section.
Figure 2.1: Emission factors from Cowi and Artelia
2.2.1
Basis for Cowi EF calculation
The official EF’s made by Cowi were updated in 2020 based on a projection of energy sources
called ”Danmarks Energifremskrivning 2018”. This projection includes Electricity and DH from
2020 to 2040 with changes every 5 years. The projection is building on existing technologies
with no changes to efficiency and the intended use of the calculated EF is to compare the lifetime
emissions of buildings in a Danish context. All information in this section is from Cowi’s updated
emission factors from 2020 [8], unless otherwise specified.
Some general assumptions made by Cowi include:
Historic LCA data have been used, including the database ”GaBi Professional version 6”.
Other databases have also been used, e.g. the EASEWASTE database which was used
for all trash. Other databases are not mentioned by name and it is unclear whether more
have been used or not.
If the data available did not fit the Danish context it was modified to fit better.
EFs are found every 5 years from 2020 to 2040. After the year 2040 the EF is assumed
to be constant.
Emissions are limited to production within Denmark and does not include import or export.
It is stated that the EF produced as such cannot be compared to other factors where this
is included. For the case of this thesis a comparison will still be made with this difference
as a major factor.
Environmental and economic optimals
6
==PAGE:15==
2.2. Emission factors
Figure 2.2: Projected energy sources for electricity used by Cowi [8]
The projection Cowi uses (”Danmarks Energifremskrivning 2018”) for electricity generation is
dominated by wind energy, followed by solar and then co­generation power plants which pro­
duce both electricity and heat using various fuels. Initially a small portion is produced through
fossil fuels in condensation plants which only produce electricity. The use of condensation
plants is projected to diminish to nearly zero by 2030.
Cowi further includes a 7% loss on the consumption side, along with a number of assumptions
for each source which will be presented in a short list.
Solar: Electricity produced from the major types of Photovoltaics (PV) installations is in­
cluded. To attribute the emissions pr. kWh, the efficiency for each type is taken into
consideration along with the solar irradiance in Denmark. Production is included and a
lifetime of 20 years is used.
Wind: Wind energy is produced through both land and ocean based wind turbines. While
the emissions and efficiencies between these vary, it is not specified how much of each is
included. A lifetime of 20 years is used for both types.
Industry: Industrial heat emissions are attributed to the process and the heat is as such
treated as a waste product and therefore carbon neutral.
Co­generation power plants:
Trash: An average emission from incineration of trash in a co­generation power plant
is used. The total emissions depend greatly on the composition of the trash during
incineration. No data exists for this in the future and as such historical values for
household trash are assumed to stay constant. Transport to the plant is not included
in the emissions and it is specified that 42.4% of emissions from trash incineration is
attributed to electricity generation.
Biogas: The average Danish composition of organic material used for biogasification
is used and assumed constant.
Biomass: Included through the GaBi database without modification
Environmental and economic optimals
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2. Emission factors
Fossil fuels: Fuel oil, gas oil and coal are included as fossil fuels. Natural gas is
assumed treated similarly but not mentioned.
Condensation plants:
Biogas: The average Danish composition of organic material used for bio gasification
is used and assumed constant for all years.
Biomass: Included through the GaBi database without modification
Fossil fuels: Fuel oil, gas oil and coal are included as fossil fuels without modification.
Figure 2.3: Projected energy sources for DH used by Cowi [8]
According to the projection Cowi uses, most of the DH is produced through co­generation power
plants followed by boilers. The ratios remain mostly stable throughout the years, which can be
seen in the EF’s found for DH as shown in Table 2.3 and Figure 2.1. While the EF does decrease,
it is not to the same degree as electricity. A large portion of the DH EF decrease can probably be
attributed to a slight electrification from heat pumps and the lowered emissions from electricity.
Cowi includes a 20% energy loss along with a number of assumptions for each source, which
follows:
Solar: Solar heat is based on flat PV with a yearly efficiency of 450kWh/m2 and a lifetime
of 20 years.
Geothermal: A conservative estimation of efficiency is used with a production of 10 times
the energy used in geothermal plants. Efficiencies are assumed constant and plants are
not included in emissions.
Electric immersion heater: Emissions from the electricity use is included and allocated to
the heat generation.
Heat pumps (Excess heat): Heat pumps driven by excess heat are assumed to have a
COP of 5.0. The heat used is treated as a waste product and therefore carbon neutral.
Large scale heat pumps with a lifetime of 20 years is used, and the maximal effect is used
during the heating season from mid September to mid May. It is not clear whether this is
Environmental and economic optimals
8
==PAGE:17==
2.2. Emission factors
treated as carbon neutral as it is only stated that electricity use is included, but no other
emission sources are mentioned.
Heat pumps (Electrical): For electricity driven heat pumps a COP of 3.4 is used and only
the electricity use is included. Large scale heat pumps with a lifetime of 20 years are
used, and the maximal effect is used during the heating season from mid September to
mid May.
Boilers:
Trash: The same assumptions from electricity generation are used but 100% of emis­
sions are attributed to the boiler.
Biomass: It is assumed that wood mass is Carbon neutral due to inherent carbon.
The production, processing and transport of the biomass is included.
Biogas: The average Danish composition of organic material used for biogasification
is used and assumed constant.
Natural gas: Natural gas is never mentioned by Cowi but is a part of the projection.
Due to Cowi’s other assumptions it is assumed that emissions are based on historical
data and kept constant. It is further assumed that the plant is not included.
Oil: Fuel oil and gas oil are used without modification.
Industry: Industrial heat emissions are attributed to the process and the heat is as such
treated as a waste product and therefore carbon neutral.
Co­generation power plant:
Trash: The same assumptions from electricity generation are used with the exception
of 57.6% of the emissions being attributed to DH generation.
Biogas: The average Danish composition of organic material used for bio gasification
is used and assumed constant.
Biomass: It is assumed that wood mass is Carbon neutral due to inherent carbon.
The production, processing and transport of the biomass is included.
Fossil fuels: Fuel oil, gas oil and coal are included as fossil fuels. Natural gas is
assumed treated similarly but not mentioned.
At the end of the document Cowi includes some recommendations for future work. These
include making a projection for the trash composition during the time frame for further precision,
including specific GHGe for the types of biomass used, having a third party verification and
updating the EF’s at least every 5 years.
2.2.2
Basis for Artelia EF calculation
Artelia based their calculations on a projection from The Danish Energy Agency. This projection
accounts for the expected changes in energy sources for electricity, DH and pipe gas from
2022 to 2050 in 5 year intervals. This projection takes efficiency and losses for technologies
into account, as well as political goals, e.g. a 70% reduction in GHGe by 2030 compared to
1990[14]. As there is no available data from 2050­2075, Artelia has calculated that period as
static. They used data from Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet 2022 (AF22) [14], analysis
assumptions for the energy net 2022, supplemented by the ’LCA for Experts’ dataset. Artelia’s
calculations do include the import and export of electricity. All assumptions in this section are
from Artelia’s main document for EF calculation [13] unless otherwise specified.
Environmental and economic optimals
9
==PAGE:18==
2.2. Emission factors
Figure 2.4: Projected energy sources for electricity used by Artelia [13]
The AF22 projection Artelia uses has the electricity production driven primarily by wind energy
followed by solar. They further include a 6% loss in transport, along with a number of assump­
tions relating to the sources that follows:
Wind: Assumed 70% of electricity production in 2050. Primarily ocean based with 75%,
the rest is on land. Emissions from windmills are based on a 2016 study from DTU. See
Figure 2.5 for yearly breakdown
Solar: Artelia uses the same PV technologies as Cowi although the ratio is not exactly
the same. It is stated that the exact ratio for Denmark is not known but the difference
in emissions from major technologies are similar. Roof based PV are excluded to avoid
double counting.
Biomass: Biomass is included via processing, transport, the plant and operation of the
plant.
Straw: Treated as a waste product and therefore carbon neutral. Transport is in­
cluded.
Wood and biomass trash: Treated as a waste product and therefore carbon neutral.
Transport is included using an average national and international freight distance.
Wood chips: Not directly mentioned but assumed carbon neutral due to earlier argu­
ments. International transport and processing included.
Wood pellets: Same as wood chips but different processing and transport distance.
Biogas: Is included through a modification of the ”LCA for Experts” dataset to include
realistic transport losses for a Danish context. The losses are set at 2.5% for biogas and
1.95% for upgraded biogas.
Fossil fuels: Emissions for fuel oil, gas oil, coal and natural gas are included through the
dataset ”LCA for Experts”
Environmental and economic optimals
10
==PAGE:19==
2.2. Emission factors
Hydro: Hydropower is included but treated as carbon neutral but is also an almost non­
existent part of the Danish energy grid.
Trash: Direct emissions are treated as 0. They state that this is to avoid double counting.
To add further detail, import and export of electricity from Germany, Great Britain, the Nether­
lands, Norway and Sweden have been modelled and included. The EF of electricity produced
in Denmark is consistently higher than the production in Norway and Sweden, but is lower than
the production in the other countries included. The ratio imported from each country varies
every 5 years, although exports are generally slightly higher than imports throughout the years.
Figure 2.5: Projected energy sources for DH used by Artelia [13]
The AF22 projection for DH includes a large scale electrification of the production. This is
mainly done through heat pumps, electric kettles and Power to X. Artelia further includes a 20%
distribution loss and a number of assumptions for each energy source as follows:
Electricity: The yearly EF for electricity calculated by Artelia in the same report is used in
the DH emissions. A significant expansion of this sector is included.
Heat pumps (Surrounding heat): Assumed working at full capacity 4500 hours a year,
and at reduced capacity 1500 hours a year with a COP of 3.5­5. Emissions are based
on the electricity use
Heat pumps (Excess heat): The heat transported is treated as a waste product and
therefore climate neutral. Electricity use is included with a COP of 3.5­5. It is as­
sumed that the heat pump is working at full capacity 4500 hours a year, and at re­
duced capacity 1500 hours a year.
Heat pumps (Geothermal): Assumed working at full capacity 4500 hours a year, and
at reduced capacity 1500 hours a year with a COP of 8. Emissions are based on
electricity usage.
Electric boilers: Assumed working 500 hours a year, and otherwise off. As data for an
electric boiler was not available a biomass boiler was used instead. Artelia assumes
Environmental and economic optimals
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2. Emission factors
this is acceptable due to the fact that electric boilers provide only a minor part of the
heat generation.
Power to X: Includes technologies where electricity is converted into fuels, chemicals
and materials. Examples include electrolysis producing excess heat. As such 10%
of the electricity used is converted to excess heat. Going towards 2050 this is a major
contributor to the electrical use in DH production.
Solar: For solar heat a dataset for solar electricity is used. It is stated to be acceptable as
it is a conservative assumption and solar heat is a minor part of the grid.
Biomass: Biomass boilers are used in heat production. Wood is treated as carbon neutral.
Straw: Treated as a waste product and therefore carbon neutral. Transport is in­
cluded.
Wood and biomass waste: Treated as a waste product and therefore carbon neutral.
Transport is included using an average national and international freight distance.
Wood chips: Not directly mentioned but assumed carbon neutral due to earlier argu­
ments. International transport and processing included
Wood pellets: Same as wood chips but different processing and transport distances.
Trash: Same assumptions as electricity
Biogas: Losses during transport included at 2.5%. If upgrading of gas occurs the loss is
reduced slightly and further reductions are expected and included.
Fossil fuels: Expected to be a very minor part of the energy grid by 2030. Uses data
directly from the database ”LCA for Experts” for fuel oil, coal and natural gas.
2.2.3
Comparison of EF calculations
Cowi’s and Artelia’s calculations include a number of different assumptions, most of which are
based on differences in the projections used. Other relevant differences include the difference
in treatment of biological materials and waste, and the inclusion of import and export. As men­
tioned Cowi includes some recommendations for future work at the end of their updated report.
These recommendations include [8]:
A projection of future trash composition
Specific Global Warming Potential (GWP)’s for different types of biomass
Having a third party verification of the calculations
Updating the calculations at least every 5 years
Artelia does include some of these recommendations in their calculations.
Projection of future trash composition: Artelia does not include projection of trash composition
in their calculations. Trash is instead treated as a waste product and therefore carbon neutral
[13].
Differentiating the types of biomass: Artelia does differentiate between different types of biomass
as seen in the presentation of their assumptions. In practice, this is limited to differences in
transport, as both Cowi and Artelia generally treat biomass as carbon neutral [13]. As such,
this recommendation is technically followed. The impact of this on the EF is expected to be
minimal though, due to the mentioned limitations.
Environmental and economic optimals
12
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Emission factors
Third party verification: Artelias EF’s are third party verified by ”Teknologisk Institut” in the fol­
lowing aspects: conformity between purpose, use and target audience; system boundary; rep­
resentativeness of used datasets, LCA methodical assumptions and limitations when modelling
background EF’s. It is stated that this is done as a critical LCA review [13].
Update within 5 years: As Artelia’s calculations came out in 2023 only 3 years passed between
the two reports. As such, this recommendation is followed [13].
Towards the end of Artelia’s report, a number of reflections are made. These include, but are
not limited to:
A need to calculate the difference between roof and field PV’s.
An assessment of the impact of Guarantees of Origin on the EF, as these may lead to
double counting after the sale of electricity and DH.
The assessment is based on already accepted investments and political goals. The po­
litical goals dominate the projection when looking further into the future. As such, if these
goals are not realised, the calculated EF’s will not be correct.
It is recommended that the EF’s are recalculated every 2nd year, or if major changes occur
in the energy projections.
As such, while the recommendations made by Cowi were mostly followed, there is still uncer­
tainties in the calculations that need further work. The time between each recommended report
is also significantly shorter in Artelia’s case. This could signify that changes in the projections,
and therefore future EF’s, may change more rapidly than earlier predictions.
Electricity projections
Both calculations include a major expansion in wind and solar energy. According to ”Danmarks
Energifremskrivning 2018”, used by Cowi, wind is providing 68.5% of the total electricity produc­
tion by 2040 with solar energy providing a 17.4%. The remaining production is mostly through
biomass and trash in co­generation plants. The remaining production types are negligible with
the amount produced each year shown in Figure 2.2.
According to AF22 wind and solar are also by far domineering the electricity production at the
end of its period in 2050. While the exact split is not provided Figure 2.4 shows that it is by far
most of the production, with the last minor contributions being from biomass and trash.
As such the calculations appear to agree on the main producers, although Artelia expects a
quicker and more comprehensive use of wind and solar electricity. The assumptions made for
solar electricity appear very similar with the same types of PV used, although there are minor
differences in the ratio. Artelia does not count roof based PV to avoid double counting and it is
not known whether Cowi does the same.
Regarding wind energy no major differences can be seen between the two calculations, with
the exception being that Artelia appears to have a more detailed split between ocean and land
based wind turbines. Cowi does not include a clear ratio between the two types of wind turbines
contribution.
The main driver between the differences in electricity’s EF is therefore expected to be from the
co­generation plant. This difference is of significant importance as Cowi includes emissions
from the incineration of both trash and biomass, while Artelia treats both as carbon neutral
outside of processing and transport.
The last major difference is the inclusion of import and export of electricity in Artelia’s calcula­
tions. Whether this increases or decreases their EF depends on the year as it differs how much
Environmental and economic optimals
13
==PAGE:22==
2.2. Emission factors
is imported and from where.
Due to these differences it is assumed that Artelia’s calculations result in a more realistic EF for
electricity, with the caveat being that there are many parts assumed carbon neutral. As such the
resulting EF is most likely too low each year, with the actual EF being somewhere in­between
the two calculations, leaning towards Artelia’s due to the higher detail level.
DH
The projected sources for DH vary greatly between the two projections. ”Danmarks Energifrem­
skrivning 2018” includes a major heat generation from co­generation power plants, mostly
biomass and trash, followed by boilers incinerating biomass and trash.
AF22 on the other hand projects a large scale electrification with more minor contributions from
biomass and biogenic trash. As both of these sources are treated as climate neutral, outside of
processing and transport, this contribution is most likely minor. As such the EF for DH is largely
reliant on the electricity’s EF for Artelia, which was discussed above.
These major differences in projected DH production results in the large difference in EF shown
in Figure 2.1. Due to the generally higher detail level in Artelia’s calculations it is assumed that
these are closer to the actual EF, although the significant parts of the production being treated
as climate neutral is artificially lowering the EF. As such the assumption will be kept that the
actual EF is somewhere between the two calculations. Which one is most correct will likely
depend on the degree of electrification in the DH production.
In process recalculation of EF
As of writing Rune Andersen, Assistant Professor at DTU Sustain, is recalculating the EF based
on Artelia’s assumptions. The project is not complete and it has therefore not been possible to
see the exact calculations, but he has shared the EF’s he has currently calculated. These EF’s
are as such subject to change. This is shown along with the official EF’s from Cowi and Artelia
in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: EF calculated by Cowi, Artelia and Rune Andersen
These results agree with the assumption that the EF of DH is between the EF’s from Cowi and
Artelia. The recalculated EF for electricity is much closer, actually exceeding, the EF calculated
by Cowi. As these results are subject to change they will not be officially used in the thesis, but
do support the assumption that the real EF for DH is somewhere between Cowi’s and Artelia’s.
Environmental and economic optimals
14
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Levelised Cost of Carbon Abatement
The recalculated electricity EF being slightly outside the range is deemed of minor importance,
as all buildings simulated are heated through DH. As such the main impact of the electricity’s
EF is in the electrification of DH, which is included in the EF of DH already.
The assumption is that the actual future EF’s are somewhere between Cowi’s and Artelia’s cal­
culations. These are therefore used as an upper and lower limit with the actual results some­
where in between.
2.3
Levelised Cost of Carbon Abatement
An issue that arises when deciding between policy based decisions to limit GHGe is having to
decide between them. Friedmann et al mentions that policies that appear effective often have
little impact or are more costly than alternatives [15]. To help decision makers avoid this issue
they set forward the concept of Levelized Cost of Carbon Abatement (LCCA). The concept aims
to improve the understanding of real climate costs and benefits. To do this it includes specific
and local CO2 emissions for all estimations and applies standard financial metrics to represent
and compare costs consistently.
2.3.1
Methodology
To make use of LCCA any value must be represented as a monetary value, e.g. Euro, USD
or DKK, per unit of realized or estimated carbon abatement [15]. In a Danish context the most
common unit would therefore be:
DKK/kg CO2 −eq.
For a LCCA to be valid Friedmann states that there must be an actual reduction or removal of
GHGe. As such a replacement of a hypothetical cause of emissions would not be valid, but a
real or hypothetical replacement of an existing cause would be. There is also an economic part
of LCCA which should include the basic cost of implementation, operating cost and tear­down
cost, or the cost of implementing a new policy. Another important aspect is that the economic
perspective should be from a socioeconomic perspective. Incentives such as tax exemptions
should therefore not be included as that part will simply be paid by a different institution than
the primary purchaser [15].
If these requirements are followed a simple estimate of the LCCA (L) can be made using the
equation:
L = C/(E0 −E1)
Where C is the cost associated with the change, E0 is the GHGe in tonne from the original
configuration and E1 is the GHGe emissions in tonne of the new configuration [15].
Due to the nature of this equation Friedmann notes a few observations:
1. If E1 = E0 then the denominator is zero leading to an infinite LCCA which means the
transaction fails to achieve climate benefits.
2. If E1 < E0 there will be a fractional reduction in the cost of the transaction.
3. If E1 = 0 there is a 100% reduction in emissions, leading to the cost being divided by the
emissions and LCCA is the cost of the transaction per tonne.
4. If E1 < 0 it is added to E0 leading to a further decrease in LCCA.
5. If C < 0 money is saved in the transaction resulting in a negative L.
6. If E1 > E0 then the new approach results in more emissions than before, resulting in a
climate failure that is not suitable for LCCA.
Environmental and economic optimals
15
==PAGE:24==
2.3. Levelised Cost of Carbon Abatement
As can be seen in point 5 above it is possible for the economic cost to be negative. According
to Friedmann et al this is perfectly acceptable and could for example be caused by efficiency
improvements, switching fuel sources or replacements [15].
2.3.2
Comparison of LCCA results
The method is suited for both static and dynamic aspects of CO2 reductions, and is generally
good to calculate how much CO2 reduction you can get for your money. This is also the primary
appeal of the method. Using LCCA it is possible to make ”apples to apples” comparisons [15]
which is not possible to do using standard LCA as the functional units differ drastically. Like
most tools they do state that this is not an ”end all be all” argument, but simply useful to make
accurate comparisons between various policies [15].
Friedmann et al made some illustrative scenarios and a few other papers have also utilized
LCCA. Some of the results can be seen in Table 2.6.
LCCA [DKK/tonne CO2 −eq.]
Scenario
Average
Lower
Upper
Central California Solar Power 2018 grid [15]
852
367
1337
Central California Solar Power 2030 grid [15]
1192
513
1871
Rooftop PV*, California [15]
200
175
224
Rooftop PV*, Massachusetts [15]
377
327
426
Rooftop PV*, New Jersey [15]
331
292
370
Rooftop PV*, Texas [15]
217
195
240
Decarbonising Primary Iron and Steel Production [15]
1275
­497
3047
Sustainable Aviation Fuels ** [15]
6330
1448
11212
Carbon Capture Storage (CCS), Direct air capture [15]
1556
859
2252
CCS, Direct air capture (Alternative study) [16]
1650
929
2370
CCS, Cement [16]
624
416
832
CCS, Natural gas processing [16]
139
104
173
Power to Ammonia production, Canada *** [17]
25730
534
50925
* Inc. Policy Assessments Renewable Electricity Certificates
** Many types of fuel were investigated resulting in the wide range
*** This study was very time dependant with the highest LCCA in 2030 and the lowest in 2050
Table 2.6: Examples of LCCA values for various scenarios. Prices shown in DKK with conver­
sions using the exchange rates: 1 USD=6.93 DKK, 1 CAD=4.85 DKK
As can be seen the LCCA varies greatly from negative 497 to 50925DKK/tonne CO2 −eq.
These figures are somewhat on the extreme side from the values otherwise found, but does
show how the economic cost can vary greatly for the same result. The best example of this
in Table 2.6 is the 4 CCS technologies shown. Firstly 2 different sources for direct air capture
[15, 16] are showing very similar results in cost at an average of 1556 and 1650 DKK respec­
tively. This implies consistency in their assumptions with the minor differences potentially being
caused by rounding errors, changes in the exchange rates or small variations in the assump­
tions. Furthermore, direct air capture and cement production have relatively low ambient CO2
concentrations. This is reflected in the economic costs as the commentary shows high ambient
CO2 concentration sectors to have a much lower LCCA values [16]. An example of this is ”CCS,
natural gas processing” which is much cheaper despite being essentially the same technology.
Since location has proven to be important in LCCA it is also relevant to include the time. An ex­
ample of this is Skribbe’s study into substituting conventional ammonia production with power­
Environmental and economic optimals
16
==PAGE:25==
2.4. Optimisation of insulation
to­ammonia technologies. The study showed a quick peak in LCCA driven by a high initial
investment cost and demand for ammonia leading to import. This high value then quickly starts
to decrease before stabilising at the lower value at around the year 2045 [17]. As such the
value is not always stable and it is always relevant to consider a broader perspective. This only
reiterates Friedmann et als statement that LCCA is not an end all argument but rather a useful
tool for decision making [15].
Regarding the costs Friedmann et al states that hard­to­abate sectors can be defined as when
more than 75% of CO2 reductions in the sector cost more than 200 USD/tonne under reason­
able assumptions. Using the exchange rate for USD shown in Table 2.6 the equivalent is 1386
DKK. This does not necessarily mean that sectors such as ”power­to­ammonia” are hard to
abate because of its high upper cost. A sector such as ”Sustainable Aviation Fuels” however,
could be considered hard­to­abate as the lower cost is still above the threshold.
2.4
Optimisation of insulation
A number of studies looking into optimal insulation thicknesses around the world have already
been made. They typically focus on limiting lifetime emissions or cost. To find potential gaps in
the literature five of these studies will be presented and looked into. They vary in geographic
location, timeline and have different reasons for the study being made, but are looking into some
kind of optimisation of insulation thickness in buildings.
2.4.1
Optimal insulation in Denmark 2005
The first relevant paper introduced is by Henrik Tommerup and Svend Svendsen. In 2005
they investigated the most cost­effective way of complying with the then new requirements for
insulation. They investigated 3 insulation thicknesses in the exterior walls, being 125, 200 and
250 mm with a Thermal Conductivity (TC) of 0.037W/mK. For the terrain deck EPS with a TC
of 0.038W/mK was used [18]. The resulting thicknesses are illustrated in Table 2.7.
Wall [mm]
Ceiling [mm]
Terrain deck [mm]
Additional cost [DKK]
125
300
400
80000
200
250
250
61000
250
250
300
94 000
Table 2.7: Optimal insulation thicknesses according to cost Denmark 2005 [18]
These thicknesses take details on the ventilation system into account, with some further options
for the costs mentioned. All results are, however, the minimum thicknesses to comply with the
energy requirements of the time, and as such GHGe have no influence on the decision making
in this paper. To include this other studies are needed.
2.4.2
Optimisation of thermal insulation thickness in Norway and Greenland
2023
In 2023 Jørn Emil Gaarder et al studied the optimal insulation thicknesses in the exterior wall in
several locations in both Norway and Greenland. They accounted for both the embodied and
operational emissions, and it was found that the EF of the energy was the main driver of the
optimal thickness [11]. Most of their cases, with exception of case 3, where made by modelling
1 square metre of exterior wall with both a historical context (1961­1990) and a future context
(Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5. 2071­2100). Case 3 was a full theoretical
Environmental and economic optimals
17
==PAGE:26==
2.4. Optimisation of insulation
building modelled to test the validity of their results. The heat losses have been calculated either
based on a critical outdoor temperature or via Heating Degree Days (HDD). Wall constructions
were further made to match a typical wall in the location of the case and as such varies between
wooden framework for Case 1 and 3. and a concrete wall for Case 2 [11]. The resulting optimal
thicknesses are presented in Table 2.8.
Location
Thickness Historical
Thickness Future
Case 1
Ydalir, Elverum, Norway
475
400
Case 2 A­B
Nuuk, Greenland
250
250
Case 2 C­D
Aasiaat, Greenland
Out of Bounds (OoB)
OoB
Case 3
Oslo, Norway
350
300
Table 2.8: Optimal insulation thicknesses from Gaarder et al [11]
As can be seen the optimal thicknesses vary greatly, even within the same country. The main
reason for the largest difference, Greenland, is the highly varied EF used. As Greenland does
not have a centralised electricity grid the available sources vary greatly from location to location.
Nuuk is both located south of the polar circle and has access to hydropower leading to a less
extreme climate and a very low EF. Aasiaat on the other hand is further north and is reliant on
fossil fuels leading to a much higher EF [11].
The differences in the Norwegian cases on the other hand are driven by the more complicated
model in Case 3, The inclusion of a ventilation system, passive heating from electrical equipment
and solar gains resulted in similar behaviour for both cases, but less pronounced in the full model
[11].
The main conclusion was that climate change will reduce the optimal insulation thickness of
buildings, with a significant influence from occupant behaviour. In cold climates the insulation
thickness depends greatly on the EF of energy, with factors above 25 −30g CO2 −eq./kWh
resulting in thicknesses above 500mm (the studies limit)[11].
Another relevant finding was that the consequences of missing this impact varied greatly across
the cases. In the Norwegian cases missing the optimum by 100mm resulted in an emission in­
crease of less than 5%. In Greenland, however, missing the optimum by 50mm resulted in a
significant increase in emissions [11].
2.4.3
The relationship between operational energy demand and embodied
energy in the Netherlands
Another study, by Anastasia Koezjakov et al in 2018, looked into the relationship between op­
erational and embodied energy in Dutch residential buildings. They mention that, due to the
high global energy demand for heating and cooling, the GHGe from the built environment have
been identified to have the highest potential in reductions. Reducing these often leads to an
increase in embodied energy use, which are more complex and time consuming to assess than
the operational energy use [19]. While this thesis does not deal directly with embodied energy
it is still considered a relevant comparison, as its relationship with operational energy is similar
to that of embodied and operational emissions.
As part of the study an assessment was made of the trade­off between operational energy use
and embodied energy use, to allow decision makers to move towards optimisation of perfor­
mance. To do this they created scenario based models for various building archetypes in the
Dutch building typology including when and how they were built. These range from buildings
Environmental and economic optimals
18
==PAGE:27==
2.4. Optimisation of insulation
typically built in 1965­1974, buildings built according to the Dutch 2015 regulations and their
nearly­Zero Energy Building standard. All simulations run up to 2050 and only takes heating
into account, as cooling is hardly necessary in the Netherlands at present, and there are no
insights as to when it will make up a relevant amount of operational energy use [19].
The study found that the operational energy is much higher than the embodied energy, with this
being much more clear for older buildings which use less insulation. For more modern buildings,
and especially the nearly­Zero Energy Buildings, the embodied energy is higher resulting in a
much lower operational energy use. In total the study found that while the embodied energy is
higher, the total energy use had a reduction of 63­66% when compared to standard dwellings.
The exact reduction depends on the building typology, but the general conclusion is that the
embodied energy will become much more important.
2.4.4
Energy demand for heating and cooling in residential housing, Finland
Kirsti Jylhä et al made a paper in 2015 on the operational energy demand in a Finnish context.
Focus was on detached houses with hourly weather data for 2030, 2050 and 2100 and found
that the demand for heating decreased by 20­40% while cooling demand increased by 40­80%
[20].
More than 80% of the total energy consumption in Finland is spent on heating, with common
methods being DH, wood and electricity. To investigate this consumption in the future they
used a dynamic building simulation program, IDA ICE, and climate change projections. Fu­
ture revisions to building regulations or improvements in energy performance were not taken
into account. To account for the changing climate from the projections they modified existing
weather files with expected monthly changes in temperature and the standard deviation of the
temperature. As such the changes were not uniformly distributed but rather most significant
during the peak of the heating season [20].
Besides the energy consumption they also looked at the Net Present Value (NPV) using aver­
age actual prices in 2011­2012 for electricity and DH. A yearly increase in these prices where
included as a 3% increase for DH and a 2% increase for electricity. This resulted in the cost for
DH decreasing by 11­16% by 2100. from an expected NPV of 1300euro/m2 when not including
climate change. The cost of electricity however, will increase, although not by as much [20].
In conclusion the study found that the annual heating demand will decrease at a rate of 2­4% per
decade, while the annual heating demand will increase at a rate of 4­8% per decade. This does
result in savings especially if heat is provided via DH and cooling via electricity. Using dynamic
building simulations over Cooling Degree Days (CDD) gives further value as it provides more
detailed results.
2.4.5
Optimal external wall insulation thicknesses in Turkey 2020
Until now the papers discussed generally were in either temperate or colder climates. Insulation
optimisation is however also relevant in warmer climates. An example of one such paper is by Ö.
Altan Dombayci et al. In 2020 they made a paper determining the optimum insulation thickness
for external walls in Turkey [21].
Turkey is very dependant on imported energy and reducing energy usage is therefore important
to decrease this dependency in the energy sector. Insulating to decrease energy consumption is
one of the most effective solutions, while also reducing temperature fluctuations and increasing
indoor comfort which is also important [21].
To achieve this a degree­day method to measure the annual consumption of natural gas, the
most common heating method in Turkey, was used. They then used a sandwich wall consisting
Environmental and economic optimals
19
==PAGE:28==
2.4. Optimisation of insulation
of plaster, bricks and insulation material. To find the optimal thickness they varied its thickness
and measured the total environmental impact. By equation the derivative of that to zero the
study found the optimal thickness to be 400mm for glass wool and 180mm for stone wool [21].
2.4.6
Comparison
The various papers show a variety of reasons for their studies, such as reducing dependency of
imports, economic costs and minimising GHGe. This can also be seen in the units used, mean­
ing that very few of the studies can be compared directly. This highlights the point mentioned
in Section 2.3 of providing an apples to apples comparison. This would of course require addi­
tional work for the majority of the papers, as most of the studies only deal with either economic
costs or environmental perspectives.
Two of the studies can be directly compared though. Both Gaarder and Dombayci provide direct
optimal thicknesses in their results. These both agree with the trend Gaarder mentioned, being
that thicknesses are highly driven by the EF of the energy source. More specifically, the differ­
ences in thickness between Nuuk, Greenland and Turkey are minimal with 250mm and 180mm
respectively [11, 21]. This is despite stark differences in climates, but the higher emission factor
of natural gas over hydropower offsets the difference. Gaarder’s model of Aasiaat supports this,
as it needs requires a higher insulation thickness than is realistic to reach an optimum, despite
being a similar climate as Nuuk.
While Tommerups paper does conclude on optimal thicknesses it cannot be directly compared
to the prior two papers as the goals are not comparable. While Gaarder and Dombayci found
the optimal thicknesses for the exterior walls of the building taking the environmental impact
into consideration [11, 21] Tommerup focused on the economic side only [18]. He further inves­
tigated both the roof, terrain deck and exterior walls to find the economic optimum for all parts
[18]. This study focused only on new buildings following the energy regulations of the time and
as such does not incorporate the temporal scale. This is included in Jylhäs study which found
that climate change resulted in a lower heating demand [20]. While these results are from a
Finnish context it can still reasonably be assumed that the Danish demand for heating will also
decrease due to climate change. Therefore, including the temporal factor will be very relevant.
These expected changes to the operational energy, and therefore emissions, lead into the re­
lationship between operational and embodied emissions. While it, as mentioned does not deal
directly with emissions Koezjakov’s study found that the operational energy is usually much
higher than the embodied energy [19]. Multiple of the studies [11, 19, 18] deal with the trade­
off between operational and embodied emissions to some extent. And according to Koezjakov
knowledge about this trade­off will allow decision makers to take steps towards optimising the
performance of a building over its lifetime. This is especially important in colder climates due to
the diminishing effect of higher insulation thicknesses [11] that is showcased in Figure 2.7.
Environmental and economic optimals
20
==PAGE:29==
2.4. Optimisation of insulation
Figure 2.7: U­values resulting from insulation material thickness
As can be seen the highest impact on the thermal resistance comes at lower thicknesses leading
to diminishing effects at higher thicknesses. While not directly mentioned it is very likely that it
is this effect that leads to Aasiaat’s results being OoB [11]. This is also true from an economic
perspective where the cost of the first 100mm of insulation is the same as the last 100mm.
The heat loss prevented by the initial insulation, however, is much higher than the last. It is
essentially this relationship Tommerup investigated when doing their analysis on the economic
optimum [18].
Environmental and economic optimals
21
==PAGE:30==
3
Research questions
3.1
Research gaps
Through the literature study in Section 2 a number of research gaps have been found. These
gaps include:
1. The projected EF’s for Denmark vary significantly. As the operational emissions depend
heavily on these, it could lead to wrong results if an incorrect EF is used.
2. The current optimal insulation thickness in Denmark is not known in either an economic
nor environmental capacity, as the only paper found is from an outdated version of the
building regulations.
3. The effect of expected climate changes is often neglected, despite papers frequently ac­
knowledging its potential impact on the results.
While these gaps cannot all be addressed through a single thesis, they are still important to
take into account. Another important point to take into consideration is the fact that direct com­
parisons were rarely possible. While this is not a research gap it was a general issue that was
encountered during the literature study, caused by the various units and goals of the papers.
Utilising a method that allows easier comparisons would enable decision makers to make more
effective choices in the future.
3.2
Hypothesis
With the goal of finding the optimal insulation thicknesses in a Danish context, and based on
the found research gaps, 5 hypotheses were made. These hypotheses were made to widely
cover the found research gaps, and their potential impacts on the results. As such each should
impact the optimal insulation thickness for at least one part of the building envelope for Danish
houses.
1. There is an optimal insulation thickness in the current climate of Denmark.
Currently an optimal insulation thickness for Denmark is not known. Despite that requirements
for LCA for all building projects has recently been included in BR18, along with the existing
energy requirements. These requirements provide minimum requirements for heat loss through
each part of the building envelope, for both new and renovated buildings. As such knowing the
optimum would aid in deciding what these minimum requirements should be in the future.
2. Projected changes to the climate and energy EF will reduce the optimal thickness.
The projected changes in the climate will likely result in a lowered need for heating in Denmark.
Meanwhile the projected EF of energy will make it cheaper, at least environmentally, to heat
resulting in an expected decrease in the optimal insulation thickness for Denmark.
3. The economic and environmental optimal insulation thickness differs significantly.
The economic optimal insulation thickness depends on the cost of insulation and DH rather than
the GHGe. As such the economic and environmental optimums may differ significantly. This
difference will have a high impact on the economic cost or gain associated with limiting GHGe
from Danish buildings, and is as such highly significant when deciding between policies.
4. The impact of missing the optimal thickness lead to minor changes in GHGe.
The impact of missing the optimal thickness by 100mm varies from case to case. With lower
EF’s and Denmark’s temperate climate it is expected that missing this optimum by 100mm in
 Environmental and economic optimals
22
==PAGE:31==
3.2. Hypothesis
either direction will not result in significantly increased emissions. If this is the case there may
be a relevant middle ground between an economic and environmental optimum.
5. Using 3 pane windows is environmentally better than 2 pane windows.
With the current requirements for windows, 3 pane windows are indirectly required in Danish
buildings. While they do typically limit the operational emissions more than a 2 pane window,
they will also result in more embodied emissions. It is expected that the value of the avoided
operational emissions exceed the added embodied emissions regardless of the window area in
the building.
Environmental and economic optimals
23
==PAGE:32==
4
Method
The study is built upon five pillars being the case buildings, the weather, emission factors for
electricity and DH, emissions from mineral wool, and the price of electricity and heating in the
future. These five pillars along with the main variables within each are shown in Figure 4.1
followed by a short description of each pillar. Four of the pillars are further split into three time
periods, being a contemporary period set in 2025, a medium­term future set in 2050 and a long
term future set in 2075.
Figure 4.1: Main variables for for the optimisation
Case buildings: This pillar contains the data for the buildings investigated. Most of this will be
kept constant for each year, e.g. the ventilation system, interior walls and internal gains. The
insulation thickness for each component of the building envelope, exterior walls, roof and terrain
deck, will be varied between 25 −500mm while the other components are kept at a constant
thickness. Lastly the window to floor ratio will be modified by simulating three different ratios
keeping the insulation thickness of all components constant.
Weather files: Future weather files are used in the simulation for a medium­term and long­term
future. For the current optimal a recent historical weather file is used. To ensure consistency
all weather files used are from the same source.
 Environmental and economic optimals
24
==PAGE:33==
4.1. Case Buildings
Embodied emissions: The embodied emissions are limited to the insulation used in the compo­
nent that is investigated. As such only the volume of variable insulation is included. For future
embodied emissions the generic data is modified using predicted changes in GHGe for Danish
materials. Otherwise the same method is used.
Operational emissions: For the exterior walls, roof and terrain deck the operational emissions
cover the heat flux during heating for the building part. This heat flux is assumed to be constant
for the full lifetime.
For the windows the heat flux during heating for the wall, windows and line losses around win­
dows and doors are used. This ensures that larger window areas include a corresponding
reduction in the area of the exterior wall.
Life Cycle Cost (LCC): The LCC is calculated including the cost of insulation, the cost of heating
based on the heat flux during heating, and the End Of Life (EOL) cost for the insulation. It is
calculated using a calculation period covering the full lifetime, 50 years, and a shorter calculation
period of 30 years.
4.1
Case Buildings
The first major decision was determining which building typologies are most relevant. According
to Tozan [6], the highest shares for both RC and GHGe in the future are from MF houses and SF
houses. The study maps the expected construction between 2024 and 2050, and some of their
results can be seen in Table 4.1. Here the expected new construction area for each building
typology is shown along with the average GHGe and RC. Lastly the percentage share for both
RC and GHGe is shown.
Building type
Expected
new con­
struction
[m2]
Average
future
GHGe
[million tons
of CO2]
Average
future RC
[million
tons]
Share
RC [%]
Share
GHGe
[%]
Row house
6.1E + 05
2.2E + 05
4.4E + 05
6.2
7.4
Multi­family house
2.1E + 06
8.7E + 05
2.4E + 06
33.4
29.1
Single family house
1.4E + 06
6.2E + 05
1.2E + 06
16.3
20.8
Daycare institution
3.6E + 04
1.6E + 04
2.9E + 04
0.4
0.5
Office
1.1E + 06
5.6E + 05
1.5E + 06
21.2
18.7
Health facility
1.2E + 05
6.8E + 04
1.3E + 05
1.9
2.3
Education
1.8E + 05
9.7E + 04
2.4E + 05
3.3
3.2
Sport facility
1.0E + 05
4.6E + 04
1.0E + 05
1.4
1.5
Production
6.1E + 05
3.4E + 05
8.5E + 05
11.9
11.5
Cultural
4.6E + 04
2.7E + 04
3.1E + 04
0.4
0.9
Logistics
1.4E + 05
6.7E + 04
1.5E + 05
2.1
2.2
Retail
1.0E + 05
5.2E + 04
9.7E + 04
1.4
1.7
Total (SUM)
6.6E + 06
3.0E + 06
7.1E + 06
100.0
100.0
Table 4.1: Expected emissions and RC for Danish construction between 2024­2050 [6]
SF and MF houses together are responsible for almost 50% of all GHGe and RC in this time
frame. As such, two case buildings will be set up. One for SF houses and one for MF houses.
BR18 provides examples of new construction for both SF [22] and MF [23] houses which are
both directly used as the case buildings for the three time periods. These buildings are made
as realistic as possible and simulated in the dynamic building simulation program IDA ICE.
Environmental and economic optimals
25
==PAGE:34==
4.1. Case Buildings
As cooling is currently not widely utilised in Denmark, and no data exist on the influence and
use in the future, it is not included in this thesis. As such, ideal coolers are used to limit potential
over­temperatures, and the energy used for it is ignored. This also applies to solar heat gains,
which are also ignored, as are potential mitigation methods such as exterior window shading.
4.1.1
Single Family house
The layout used for the SF house is provided by BR18 as ”BR18 basis house” [22]. The lay­
out is provided by the Danish Transport, Construction and Housing Authority, and is stated
to follow the given laws in BR18. Despite this the total energy requirements, assuming that
DH is used for heating, is 51.1kWh/m2/year [22]. This exceeds the limit from BR18 §259 by
14.4kWh/m2/year. Improvements are therefore needed to comply with this requirement. As
the thesis includes simulating variable insulation thicknesses this is not treated as an issue, and
the provided baseline is used without modification.
Layout
The SF house is a one storey construction with a heated floor area of 149.6m2. It has a living
room, a dining area, 4 bedrooms, a kitchen, a utility room and 2 bathrooms. The floor plan is
shown on Figure 4.2 and the facades are shown on Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.2: SF house floor plan
Environmental and economic optimals
26
==PAGE:35==
4.1. Case Buildings
Figure 4.3: SF house facade plan
Building envelope
A main driver of heat loss is the building envelope. The ”BR18 basis house” does provide a
short description of the constructions of the roof, exterior walls, terrain deck, interior walls and
line losses for the building envelope. Only the main components are included in the construction
for the sake of simplicity, as no interior surfaces are mentioned.
Roof: The house has an insulated roof with a U­value of 0.10W/m2K [22]. The construction
used to reach this U­value is shown in Table 4.2.
Material
Width [m]
λ [W/mK]
R (width/λ)
Surface resistance (Exterior)
0.04
Insulation
0.35
0.037
9.46
Concrete
0.15
1.7
0.09
Surface resistance (Interior)
0.10
R, Total thermal resistance ∑R
9.69
U­Value (1/R)
0.10
Table 4.2: Construction of baseline SF roof
According to BR18 the maximum U­value of the roof/roof construction is 0.20W/m2K [9]. This
is reached at about 175mm insulation in the construction, and as such this is used as the mini­
mum thickness. The maximum thickness is set to 500mm. This value is arbitrary but chosen as
thicknesses above this are deemed unrealistic and as shown in Figure 2.7 insulation thickness
for all types have reached highly diminished returns.
Exterior walls: According to the example house the exterior walls has a U­value of 0.14W/m2K.
When using the recommended insulation thickness, assuming TC of 0.037W/mK, the U­value
ends up being 0.13W/m2K. This is shown in Table 4.3.
Environmental and economic optimals
27
==PAGE:36==
4.1. Case Buildings
Material
Width [m]
λ [W/mK]
R (width/λ)
Surface resistance (Exterior)
0.04
Brick
0.1
0.58
0.17
Insulation
0.25
0.037
6.76
Lightweight concrete
0.1
1.7
0.6
Surface resistance (Interior)
0.13
R, Total thermal resistance ∑R
7.70
U­Value (1/R)
0.13
Table 4.3: Construction of baseline SF exterior walls
According to BR18 the maximum U­value allowed for exterior walls is 0.30W/m2K [9]. This
is reached at about 100mm of insulation with the same construction as before, which is set
as the minimum thickness. The maximum thickness is set to 500mm for the same reasons as
explained in the roof description.
Terrain deck: The example house has a terrain deck with a U­value of 0.08W/m2K. The
construction is shown in Table 4.4, assuming EPS insulation with a TC of 0.038W/m2K.
Material
Width [m]
λ [W/mK]
R (width/λ)
Surface resistance (Exterior)
0.04
EPS Insulation
0.08
0.038
9.74
Expanded clay aggregate
0.25
0.095
2.63
Surface resistance (Interior)
0.17
R, Total thermal resistance ∑R
12.58
U­Value (1/R)
0.08
Table 4.4: Construction of baseline SF terrain deck
According to BR18 the maximum U­value allowed for the terrain deck is 0.20W/m2K [9]. With
the same layer of expanded clay aggregate 80mm of insulation is needed to reach this value. To
comply with the increments used in this thesis a thickness of 75mm will be used as the minimum
value, despite resulting in a U­value of 0.21W/m2K. For consistency the maximum thickness
for the terrain deck insulation is also kept at 500mm.
Interior walls: The example house states that interior walls are made using lightweight con­
crete. A thickness is never stated but is kept at 100mm for all interior walls.
Line losses: The example house does contain a little bit of information on line losses. It is stated
that the exterior wall foundation is made using 2 expanded clay blocks with 100mm insulated
cores resulting in a line loss of 0.13W/mK [22]. This is used directly in the IDA ICE simulation.
It is further stated that the exterior wall includes a 50mm thermal bridge interruption for all doors
and windows. As there is no exact description of the interruption it is assumed that the framing
has an overlap of at least 20mm. As such the line losses for doors and windows are assumed
to be 0.01W/mK in accordance to DS418 [24].
Windows
According to the baseline house it is equipped with energy class B windows. This is represented
by a 2 pane window shown in Table 4.5 along with a 3 pane energy class A window. More details
for each window can be seen in Appendix A.1.
Environmental and economic optimals
28
==PAGE:37==
4.1. Case Buildings
2 pane
3 pane
E reference kWh/m2
­10.6
8.6
Frame thickness m
0.085
0.085
U­Value FrameW/m2K
1.83
1.6
Total solar transmittance%
0.71
0.53
Direct solar transmittance%
0.7
0.5
Light transmittance%
0.83
0.74
U­Value of glazingW/m2K
1.12
0.53
Internal emissivity
0.837
0.837
External emissivity
0.837
0.837
Table 4.5: Data for the 2 used windows
Following the provided baseline house a 2 pane window will be used as the baseline. This
does not follow §258 of BR18 [9], but due to the specification and potential for comparison it is
kept as is. The baseline building for SF has 14 windows, with sill height and window height not
specified. Assumptions for these have been made resulting in the windows shown in Table 4.6,
these windows have a window to floor ratio of 17,74%.
Sill height [m]
Width [m]
Height [m]
Area [m2]
Number [­]
Total area[m2]
0
300
2110
0,633
1
0,633
0
1100
2110
2,321
1
2,321
0
1700
2110
3,587
3
10,761
900
800
1210
0,968
2
1,936
900
1360
1210
1,646
4
6,582
900
2500
1210
3,025
1
3,025
1200
700
910
0,637
2
1,274
Table 4.6: SF Baseline window dimensions
A version is also made using half the window area. This results in a window to floor ratio of
8.87%. The windows are shown in Table 4.7.
Sill height [m]
Width [m]
Height [m]
Area [m2]
Number [­]
Total area[m2]
0
150
2110
0,317
1
0,317
0
550
2110
1,161
1
1,161
0
850
2110
1,794
3
5,381
900
400
1210
0,484
2
0,968
900
680
1210
0,823
4
3,291
900
1250
1210
1,513
1
1,513
1200
350
910
0,319
2
0,637
Table 4.7: SF Half window dimensions
Lastly a version is made with double the window area compared to the baseline, resulting in a
window to floor ratio of 35.47%, as shown in Table 4.8.
Environmental and economic optimals
29
==PAGE:38==
4.1. Case Buildings
Sill height [m]
Width [m]
Height [m]
Area [m2]
Number [­]
Total area[m2]
0
600
2110
1,266
1
1,266
0
2200
2110
4,642
1
4,642
0
3400
2110
7,174
3
21,522
900
1600
1210
1,936
2
3,872
900
2720
1210
3,291
4
13,165
0
2500
2420
6,050
1
6,050
1200
1400
910
1,274
2
2,548
Table 4.8: SF Double window dimensions
Equipment gains
The internal gains from equipment are based on the electricity usage in the building. This is
not evenly spread around the building as rooms do not all serve the same function. To give a
realistic equipment usage each room will be assigned a share of the total electricity based on
the room’s function. This split is based on the average distribution for a 4 person home [25].
The total electricity usage for new SF buildings can be approximated based on the formula:
1780kWh + A ∗17kWh [25]
Where A is the floor area. In this case that is 149.6m2 leading to a total electricity usage of
4323.2kWh resulting in a total average equipment heat gain of 493.5W. This is distributed
between 12 categories shown in Figure 4.4
Figure 4.4: Percentage distribution of electricity consumption end use in households of 4 people
from SBi 2005:12 [25]
The total electricity usage is distributed according to these categories in either area based
shares or as individual shares. Area bases shares rely on the floor area of each room and
includes: Lights and Standby. The area share is calculated according to the formula:
Area share = (Lights + Standby) ∗Aroom/Atotal
The individual shares are typically specific pieces of equipment and can as such be placed in the
typical room it is found in. It is assumed that fridges and freezers of all kind, and the dishwasher,
is placed in the kitchen. The washing machine and dryer is placed in the utility room. Lastly
Environmental and economic optimals
30
==PAGE:39==
4.1. Case Buildings
the TV+Video+HiFi is spread evenly across the 4 bedrooms and the living room. In addition it
is assumed that EDB equipment is in the living room.
The category ”Remainder” is a bit more unique as it is split between being an area based share
and an individual share. It is assumed that 20% is the stove/oven, which is placed as an in­
dividual share in the kitchen. The remaining 11% is calculated as an area based share. The
resulting room gains for the SF house can be seen in Table 4.9.
Room
Room area
[m2]
Area based
share
Individual
share
Room gains
[W]
Bathroom 1
4.42
1.2%
0.0%
5.8
Bathroom 2
7.90
2.1%
0.0%
10.3
Bedroom 1
11.45
3.0%
1.2%
20.9
Bedroom 2
11.17
3.0%
1.2%
20.5
Bedroom 2
8.12
2.2%
1.2%
16.6
Master bedroom
12.52
3.3%
1.2%
22.3
Dining room
14.86
3.9%
0.0%
19.5
Entryway
5.76
1.5%
0.0%
7.5
Hallway
7.15
1.9%
0.0%
9.4
Kitchen
8.68
2.3%
46.0%
238.4
Living room
21.21
5.6%
4.2%
48.5
Utility
7.37
2.0%
13.0%
73.8
Table 4.9: SF house equipment gains for each room
The last thing included for realistic gains is temporal variance which will be included by using
a duck profile schedule. This schedule will on average have 100% scaling to ensure the full
equipment gain is used. During the night less electricity will be used as the occupants are
assumed to be sleeping, as such the scaling is set to 70% from midnight to 5 o’clock. To
compensate scaling is set to 130% from 16­21 o’clock, resulting in an average scaling of 100%.
As such the total equipment gains during each day are kept at the calculated values.
Ventilation
The SF basic house specifies a ventilation system with a total supply of 45L/s and an exhaust
volume of 50L/s from the kitchen and bathrooms. The ventilation system has a heat recovery
system with an efficiency of 85%, a SEL of 800J/m3, an electrical heating plate and a supply
temperature of 18 degrees [22]. This barely complies with BR18s minimum requirements for
ventilation which in §443 are specified to be 0.30l/s/m2 [9]. It is, however, not specified how or
where the supply ducts are located and therefore a number of assumptions are made.
Exhaust ducts are placed in the kitchen, bathrooms and the utility room. While the utility room is
not mentioned in the documentation of the basic SF house [22] it is assumed reasonable as the
washer/dryer was placed there in Section 4.1.1. It is further assumed that the supply ducts are
not evenly spaced per square metre, as it is a quite open layout and some rooms have a higher
need. As such focus is on the bedrooms, the dining, and the living room, as these are where the
occupants will spend most of their time. For the bedrooms a ventilation rate of 5L/(s ∗person)
is used. The final supply and exhaust rates for each room can be seen in Table 4.10.
Environmental and economic optimals
31
==PAGE:40==
4.1. Case Buildings
Room
Supply rate [L/s]
Exhaust rate [L/s]
Bathroom 1
0
15
Bathroom 2
0
15
Bedroom 1
5
0
Bedroom 2
5
0
Bedroom 3
5
0
Master bedroom
10
0
Dining room
10
0
Entryway
0
0
Hallway
0
0
Kitchen
0
10
Living room
10
0
Utility
0
10
Table 4.10: SF ventilation rates
In addition to these rates, a kitchen hood is also placed in the kitchen with a ventilation rate
of 60L/s. This system has a SEL value of 1000, does not include heat recovery and is active
every day from 18:00­19:12. Due to technical limitations in IDA ICE only allowing one ventilation
system per room the normal exhaust from the kitchen is instead simulated in the dining room.
The influence of this is expected to be minimal as the two rooms are directly connected with a
large opening as shown in Figure 4.2.
The last thing taken into account related to ventilation is the infiltration. According to the docu­
mentation for the house infiltration is set to 0.5l/s/m2 at 50 Pa [22]. This is included directly in
the simulations for all scenarios.
Occupants and schedules:
Schedules are used to represent the usage of the house. Three schedules are used for the
various doors in the building and four are used for the various zones. The door schedules are
presented first followed by the occupant schedules. All schedules are based on the example
shown in DS/EN 15665:2009 Annex B [26].
Closed between 23­07: This schedule is used for the 4 bedroom doors leading to either the
hallway or the living room. These doors are set to only be closed when the occupants are
expected to be sleeping from 23 in the evening to 07 in the morning.
Never open: The exterior doors are set to never be open to ensure an enclosed envelope.
Always open: The remaining doors, being the ones between the entryway, hallway, and the
one between the living and dining room, are set to always be open.
Sleeping: The 4 bedrooms are expected to be occupied during the night from 23­06 and oth­
erwise empty [26]. The 3 bedrooms have 1 occupant and the master bedroom has 2.
Living room: The example from DS/EN 15665:2009 does not contain a dining room. As such
it is assumed that the living room is used for dining in the example and that this schedule is
therefore used for both the living and dining room. This scenario is slightly more complicated in
its timings and is as such shown in Figure 4.5.
Environmental and economic optimals
32
==PAGE:41==
4.1. Case Buildings
Figure 4.5: Living room schedule [26]
As can be seen the time where the occupation is at 100% does fit with what is considered lunch
and dinner time.
Bathroom: The bathroom schedule is set to have 1 person present from 07­08 in the morning.
With 2 bathrooms this fits the time DS/EN15665:2009 allocates to their bathroom schedule
although exact times are not followed [26].
Kitchen: The kitchen schedule is set to stagger the occupants throughout the morning, have
multiple occupants present during lunch and a single occupant present during dinner prepara­
tion. The schedule is shown in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Kitchen schedule [26]
4.1.2
Multi family home
For the MF house the ”BR18 basis apartment” is used [23]. The layout is provided by the
Danish Transport, Construction and Housing Authority. According to the provided data it has an
energy demand of 56.9kWh/m2year. Similar to the SF house, this is above the allowed energy
demand according to BR18. As modifications to the building envelope are made, this is treated
as acceptable.
Layout
The MF house is a 3 storey building with 6 small apartments of 66m2 and 6 large apartments at
91m2 [23]. It is not mentioned which rooms are in the apartments but it is assumed that the small
apartments have an entryway, a bedroom, a bathroom and a combined kitchen dining room. The
larger apartments are assumed to have an additional bedroom, for a total of 2 bedrooms.
Environmental and economic optimals
33
==PAGE:42==
4.1. Case Buildings
Figure 4.7: MF house floor plan
Figure 4.8: MF house facade plan
Figure 4.7 and 4.8 only show half the building. The layout of the missing half is mirroring the
rooms shown and as such it was chosen to focus only on half the building, as the differences
are minimal, e.g. having an east/west facing bathroom window. Figure 4.7 furthermore only
shows the 2nd storey of the building. The layout of the 1st and 3rd storey is the same, with the
only difference being no balconies on the 1st storey. All storeys are simulated to account for
Environmental and economic optimals
34
==PAGE:43==
4.1. Case Buildings
different heat losses in the roof and floors of each storey.
Building envelope:
Roof: The example MF house has a roof construction with a U­value of 0.12W/m2K which is
shown in Table 4.11.
Material
Width [m]
λ [W/mK]
R (width/λ)
Surface resistance (Exterior)
0.04
Insulation
0.30
0.037
8,11
Concrete
0.15
1.7
0.09
Surface resistance (Interior)
0.10
R, Total thermal resistance ∑R
8.34
U­Value (1/R)
0.12
Table 4.11: Construction of MF roof
The maximum and minimum thicknesses for the insulation is kept the same as in the SF house,
at 175 and 500mm respectively.
Exterior walls: The example house states that the exterior walls have a U­value of 0.23W/m2K.
Following the recommended construction this is reached through 150mm insulation with a TC
of 0.038W/m2K. As this is an uncommon TC for mineral wool a TC of 0.037W/m2K is used,
which results in the construction shown in Table 4.12.
Material
Width [m]
λ [W/mK]
R (width/λ)
Surface resistance (Exterior)
0.04
Brick
0.1
0.58
0.17
Insulation
0.15
0.037
4,05
Lightweight concrete
0.1
1.7
0.6
Surface resistance (Interior)
0.13
R, Total thermal resistance ∑R
4.99
U­Value (1/R)
0.2
Table 4.12: Construction of MF exterior walls
As the resulting construction of the exterior wall is the same as for the SF house, outside of
insulation thickness, the same minimum and maximum is used at 100 and 500mm of insulation
respectively
Terrain deck: The terrain deck is stated to have a U­value of 0.34W/m2K. This is stated to
be reached using 100 mm of insulation [23]. In IDA ICE this can be reached through 100 mm
concrete and the stated insulation thickness with a TC of 0.037W/mK. It is assumed that the
insulation used is EPS insulation that also works as the capillary breaking layer.
Environmental and economic optimals
35
==PAGE:44==
4.1. Case Buildings
Material
Width [m]
λ [W/mK]
R (width/λ)
Surface resistance (Exterior)
0.04
Concrete
0.1
1.7
0.06
EPS Insulation
0.1
0.038
2.63
Surface resistance (Interior)
0.17
R, Total thermal resistance ∑R
2.9
U­Value (1/R)
0.34
Table 4.13: Construction of MF terrain deck
This recommended thickness does not meet the standards of BR18 where the maximum U­
value for a terrain deck must not exceed 0.2W/m2K. As such the baseline thickness used will
be 175mm EPS insulation and 100mm concrete. This results in the maximum allowed U­ value
for the terrain deck. The maximum thickness will be kept at 500mm for consistency.
Interior walls: The example states that interior walls are made with concrete [23]. The thick­
ness of all interior walls is assumed to be 100mm.
Line losses: No line losses are mentioned and are therefore assumed to be similar to the SF
house. As such the same values are used for the MF house.
Windows: Windows are stated to have an energy label B. As such the same windows presented
in Table 4.5 are used. It is mentioned that there are large window areas in the northern stairwells,
although most of the window area is south facing. The total window to floor area ratio should
be 18% [23].
Similar to the SF house 3 window to floor ratios are used, being a baseline of 16.96% as shown
in Table 4.14. This is deemed acceptably close enough to the 18%. Half window sizes with
a resulting window to floor ratio of 8,48% are shown in Table 4.15 and double window sizes
with a window to floor ratio of 33,91% are shown in Table 4.16. While these modifications
are generally obtained via modifying the width and height of each window it was not always
possible. Specifically the large windows placed in the stairwell could not be doubled, and as
such the remaining windows on the northern facade were modified to compensate.
Sill height [m]
Width [mm]
Height [mm]
Area [m2]
Number [­]
Total area[m2]
0
1860
2110
3,92
6
23,55
0
2000
2260
4,52
1
4,52
0
2960
2260
6,69
2
13,38
900
2610
1210
3,16
15
47,37
1200
1010
910
0,92
3
2,76
Table 4.14: MF Baseline window dimensions
Sill height [m]
Width [m]
Height [m]
Area [m2]
Number [­]
Total area[m2]
0
1860
1055
1,96
6
11,77
0
2000
1130
2,26
1
2,26
0
2960
1130
3,34
2
6,69
900
2610
605
1,58
15
23,69
1200
1010
455
0,46
3
1,38
Table 4.15: MF Half window dimensions
Environmental and economic optimals
36
==PAGE:45==
4.1. Case Buildings
Sill height [m]
Width [m]
Height [m]
Area [m2]
Number [­]
Total area[m2]
0
3720
2110
7,849
6
47,10
0
2000
2260
4,520
1
4,52
0
2960
2260
6,690
2
13,38
0
2610
2420
6,316
6
37,90
0
3430
2420
8,301
9
74,71
1200
1010
1820
1,838
3
5,51
Table 4.16: MF Double window dimensions
Equipment gains
The total electricity usage for new apartment buildings can be approximated based on the for­
mula [25]:
560kWh + A ∗16kWh
Where A is the floor area. For the MF house this results in 1616kWh for the small apartments
and 2016kWh for the larger.
For the distribution of internal gains in the apartments a similar method as the SF house is
used. The only difference included is that the share for washer/dryer is not included, with the
remaining shares compensating. The resulting distribution can be seen in Figure 4.9. The
reason for this modification is the apartment layout shown in 4.7 in which there is not enough
space for a washer/dryer in the bathrooms. As such it is assumed that the washing of clothes
is not done in the apartment, but rather at a nearby laundromat. This does not result in lower
internal gains and only modifies the distribution in the apartments slightly.
Figure 4.9: Modified percentage distribution of electricity end use in households of 4 people
from SBi 2005:12 [25]
While it is not expected that 4 people live in each apartment it has been chosen to assume
that the difference in the distribution of the equipment gains is similar. The resulting room gains
due to equipment has been calculated in the same way as the SF house and can be seen in
Table 4.17.
Environmental and economic optimals
37
==PAGE:46==
4.1. Case Buildings
Room
Room area
[m2]
Area based
share
Individual
share
Room gains
[W]
Small Apartment
Bedroom
14,07
9,7%
3,5%
24,4
Bathroom
4,40
3,0%
0.0%
5,6
Entryway
3,80
2,6%
0.0%
4,8
Kitchen/Dining
35,69
24,6%
56,5%
149,7
Large Apartment
Bedroom 1
13,40
6,7%
2,3%
16,7
Bedroom 2
14,07
7,1%
2,3%
17,4
Bathroom
5,40
2,7%
0.0%
5,0
Entryway
11,00
5,5%
0.0%
10.2
Kitchen/Dining
35,69
17,9%
55,3%
135,2
Table 4.17: SF house equipment gains for each room
For temporal variation the same duck profile schedule is used as described in Section 4.1.1.
Ventilation
The MF house is supplied with mechanical ventilation with exhaust ducts in the bedrooms and
kitchens. Supply ducts are placed in the dwelling rooms, e.g. the dining and bedrooms. It has
a heat recovery system with an efficiency of 70% and a SEL of 1800J/m3. The air rate is set at
35l/s for each apartment resulting in 0.38L/m2s for the large apartments and 0.53L/m2s for the
smaller [23]. It is specified that heating is supplied through radiators and as such it is assumed
that there is no heating coil in the system. It is further assumed that the supply temperature is
kept at 18 degrees like the SF house. The supply and exhaust rates for each room in the two
apartment types can be seen in Table 4.18.
Room
Supply rate [L/s]
Exhaust rate [L/s]
Small Apartment
Bedroom
10
0
Bathroom
0
15
Entryway
5
0
Kitchen/Dining
20
20
Large Apartment
Bedroom 1
10
0
Bedroom 2
10
0
Bathroom
0
15
Entryway
5
0
Kitchen/Dining
10
20
Table 4.18: SF ventilation rates
A kitchen hood with a ventilation rate of 60L/s and the same technical specifications as in the
SF house, as shown in Section 4.1.1, is used. In the IDA ICE simulation this is accounted for by
making a smaller section of the kitchen with an opening throughout the entire wall connecting
the two rooms.
Infiltration is not mentioned in the documentation for the apartment building [23] and is as such
assumed to be the same as in the SF house at 0.5L/s/m2 at 50 Pa [22].
Environmental and economic optimals
38
==PAGE:47==
4.2. Weather files
Occupants and schedules
It is assumed that the small apartment has 2 occupants and the large one has 3. Similar sched­
ules to the SF house are used, with the same 3 schedules for the doors and similar schedules
for the occupants.
Closed between 23­07: This schedule is used for the bedroom doors leading to the hallway.
These doors are set to only be closed when the occupants are expected to be sleeping from 23
in the evening to 07 in the morning.
Never open: The exterior doors are set to never be open to ensure an enclosed envelope.
Similarly the bathroom doors are also always kept closed.
Always open: The remaining doors, being between the entryway and the Kitchen/Dining room
for both sizes of apartment are always kept open.
Sleeping: The bedrooms are expected to be occupied during the night from 23­06 and other­
wise empty. The main bedroom in each apartment has 2 occupants with the second bedroom
in the large apartment housing an additional one occupant.
Kitchen/Living room: For the combined Kitchen/Living room the schedules for the Kitchen and
Living rooms shown in the SF house have been combined. As such when someone is present
in at least one of the schedules they will be treated as present in the combined schedule.
Figure 4.10: Kitchen/Living room schedule
Bathroom: The bathrooms in the MF home utilise the same schedule as the SF home, as
shown in Section 4.1.1.
4.2
Weather files
To simulate the impact of climate change on future energy demand weather data is required.
Building simulation programs, such as IDA ICE, typically use EPW files that provide hour by
hour data for a range of variables such as dry bulb temperature, humidity, solar radiation etc.
Typically historical files are used, based on real measured data at an hourly temporal resolution.
Files such as these are typically made by an expert at a meteorological institute or at a dedicated
research centre. In Denmark the most typically used files are either Design Reference Year
(DRY) or Typical Reference Year (TRY) files, based on measurements between 1961­1990 [27].
To properly incorporate the most average year of a time period a full year of measurements are
typically not used. Rather each year in a time period is split into intervals, e.g. a month, and the
mean for each interval is then compared to the other years. The interval with the closest match
is then chosen and inserted into the final file. As such the file consists of average intervals to
ensure short heatwaves or especially cold weeks are not treated as normal [27].
While weather files based on more recent data, such as the commonly used DRY 2001 ­ 2010
dataset, does exist they do not account for future climate change. Creating future weather files
is arguably harder than historic ones. They still need to contain the same hourly data for as
many categories as the historic files, despite having no measurements as a base. The DRY
Environmental and economic optimals
39
==PAGE:48==
4.2. Weather files
2001 ­ 2010 dataset contains data on temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, wind direc­
tion, atmospheric pressure, global radiation, cloud cover, sea temperature, diffuse irradiance,
illuminance, and soil temperature for Denmark [28]. It should be noted that both the temporal
and geographical scope is very relevant as the climate naturally varies around the globe. When
including expected climate change this is further impacted as various climate zones are not
expected to be impacted by climate change in the same ways [1].
This is to say that, despite the very high interest in predicting the effects of future climate change,
future weather files are not readily available in many regions of the world [27]. This includes
Denmark where, despite extended attempts, only one set of future weather files were found.
4.2.1
Annex 80
Annex 80 is an international project on resilient cooling in the future. In their own words ”The
objective of Annex 80 is to develop, assess and communicate solutions for resilient cooling.[29]”
For this thesis the relevant part of the project is their use of dynamic building simulation in their
work. For that they have produced future weather files for 15 different cities around the world.
One of these cities is Copenhagen, which is an example of what they call a cold humid climate
zone. For each of the cities two types of weather files were made, being Typical Meteorological
Year (TMY) and Years containing heatwaves (HWY) [29]. The relevant weather files are in this
case the TMY.
For each city 3 TMY weather files were made, one for the contemporary period (2001­2020),
one for the medium­term future (2041­2060) and one for the long term future (2081­2100). Each
file is made using 12 representative months chosen from the 20 year periods [30]. The future
climate is made based on a regional climate model (CORDEX) and hourly observations of his­
torical weather for bias correction. The climate models are based on the worst case climate
scenario RCP8.5 from the Fifth Assessment Report from The Intergovernmental Panel on Cli­
mate Change (IPCC) [29].
Looking at the EPW file in IDA ICE it can be seen that the weather files contain data for Dry­
bulb­temperature, relative air humidity, direct normal radiance, diffuse radiance, wind speed,
cloudiness, precipitation and albedo for the three futures. As the main driving factor to heat loss
is the outside temperature the Dry­bulb­temperature for the futures are shown in Figure 4.11 ,
4.12 and 4.13.
20 year mean temperature for Copenhagen for the periods 2010s=8.8, 2050 is 9.7 and 2090 is
11.3. [30] Solar irradiance is falling. Stable humidity and wind speed.
Environmental and economic optimals
40
==PAGE:49==
4.2. Weather files
Figure 4.11: Temperature file for 2001­2020 from Annex 80 as shown in IDA ICE
The temperature for the contemporary period rarely exceeds 25oC, with negative temperatures
commonly seen from late December to mid March. The 20 year mean temperature is 8.8oC
[30].
Figure 4.12: Temperature file for 2041­2060 from Annex 80 as shown in IDA ICE
Going to the medium­term future it can be seen that the temperatures vary more in each month.
During the winter the temperature is more often above freezing than before, and spikes reaching
30oC can be seen during the summer. The 20 year mean temperature is 9.7oC, an increase of
0.9oC from before [30].
Environmental and economic optimals
41
==PAGE:50==
4.3. Embodied emissions
Figure 4.13: Temperature file for 2081­2100 from Annex 80 as shown in IDA ICE
In the long­term future weather file the large spikes in the summer are no longer visible. In­
stead there is a consistently higher temperature which is especially visible during the winter
as it no longer have longer periods below freezing, which is now only seen through spikes in
the temperature. The 20 year mean temperature is 11.3oC, an increase of 2.5oC from the con­
temporary file [30]. With the consistently higher temperature it is expected that the difference
in total energy requirements for the building will decrease more significantly here than for the
medium­term weather file.
4.3
Embodied emissions
For this study the preferred source of data is generic data from a Danish context. In 2023 Jesper
Kragh and Harpa Birgisdottir produced generic LCA data for Denmark at Aalborg university [31].
This data includes a large assortment of mineral wool with various thermal transmittances and
uses. The data does have a few limitations however. First and foremost it is not stated which
EPD’s the various material categories are based on. This leads to two issues, being that it is not
known whether it is glass or stone wool insulation, and that it is not known which EPD expires
first. This second part is the biggest issue as a large number of the relevant EPDs expired
in December 2024 [31] and as such are not valid at the point of writing. They do state that
this was known when the data was collected but decided to be kept unless they presented a
significant outlier. For this thesis, however, it was decided to reinvestigate the relevant EPD’s
on the market.
Relevant EPD databases were investigated for relevant EPDs.
First the Danish database
EPDdanmark was used. At the time of writing it contains 50 EPDs within the category ”In­
sulation”. After this the larger Norwegian database epd­norway was used, which at the time
of writing contains 245 EPDs in the category insulation. A majority of these are not relevant
to Denmark, but a good number is specifically within a Danish context or contain conversion
factors for a Danish context. The relevant data from these sites was compiled into the same
categories as was used in the generic LCA data for Denmark [31]. At this point the number
of found EPDs did not match the number found by Kragh. For some categories some were
missing and for some more were found. As such a mail was sent to Jesper Kragh who provided
the data for ”murbatts” (Insulation meant for brick exterior walls), flexible insulation and EPS
insulation used in the study. Comparing this to the found EPDs showed that generally the same
EPDs were found with the main difference being EPDs produced after the study and some new
Environmental and economic optimals
42
==PAGE:51==
4.3. Embodied emissions
ones produced to replace the ones expiring.
To produce the LCA emissions the same method as Kragh [31] will be used. The method is as
follows for each phase:
Phase A1­A3:
1. Emissions based on 5 or less variants will use the maximum value multiplied with 1.1 as
a safety factor.
2. Emissions based on more than 5 variants will use the 75%­fractile multiplied with 1.1 as
a safety factor.
3. Negative emissions stemming from a large fraction of biogenic materials will instead use
the maximum value multiplied by 0.9 as a safety factor.
Phase C3 and C4:
1. Emissions will always be based on the maximum value multiplied by a safety factor of 1.1
no matter the number of EPDs.
Phase D
1. Emissions will be based on the maximum value multiplied by a safety factor of 0.9,
The resulting emissions for each type of insulation can be seen in the following sections. All
used EPD’s can be seen in Appendix A.2 along with the GHGe for each category.
Mineral wool for brick walls
The first relevant category used in the study was ”murbatts”. This insulation is used in brick
walls and is separated based on its TC. As there is no more than 5 EPDs in each category the
maximum value with a safety factor will be used for all phases. This results in the following
emissions shown in Table 4.19:
A1­A3
C3
C4
D
SUM
λ32
1.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.16E­02
0.00E+00
1.04E+00
λ34
7.32E­01
0.00E+00
1.96E­02
0.00E+00
7.52E­01
λ37
5.54E­01
0.00E+00
1.65E­02
0.00E+00
5.70E­01
Table 4.19: GHGe from Murbatts [kg CO2 −eq/m2]
These EF will be used in the wall constructions of all cases.
Flexible insulation The second category used is flexible insulation. This is used in the roof
construction of both the SF and MF house. It is split based on its TC. The resulting emissions
for the flexible insulation is calculated based on the explained method, and the resulting GHGe
are shown in Table 4.20:
A1­A3
C3
C4
D
SUM
λ32
9.13E­01
0.00E+00
2.87E­02
0.00E+00
9.42E­01
λ34
6.66E­01
0.00E+00
1.96E­02
0.00E+00
6.85E­01
λ37
5.37E­01
0.00E+00
1.65E­02
0.00E+00
5.53E­01
Table 4.20: GHGe from flexible insulation [kg CO2 −eq/m2]
Environmental and economic optimals
43
==PAGE:52==
4.3. Embodied emissions
EPS insulation
For EPS insulation there is a lot more variety. Following the categories Kragh used [31] it is split
according to colour and compressive strength. The resulting emissions for grey and white EPS
can be seen in Table 4.21.
A1­A3
C3
C4
D
SUM
Grey, 60kN
1.91E+00
1.51E+00
1.11E­04
­8.42E­02
3.33E+00
Grey, 80kN
3.97E+00
1.74E+00
1.22E­04
­8.10E­02
5.63E+00
Grey, over 80kN
3.58E+00
2.63E+00
2.02E­04
­4.01E­01
5.81E+00
White, 60kN
1.56E+00
1.77E+00
1.28E­04
­9.65E­02
3.23E+00
White, 80kN
1.80E+00
2.02E+00
1.42E­04
­9.18E­02
3.73E+00
White, over 80kN
3.76E+00
6.69E+00
3.14E­04
­1.06E­01
1.03E+01
Table 4.21: GHGe from EPS [kg CO2 −eq/m2]
EPS insulation will be used in the terrain deck for all buildings with an assumed TC of 0.038 for
white EPS and 0.031 for grey EPS. The SF house will use 60kN while the MF will use 80kN.
The emissions from higher compressive strength will not be used as the actual strength varies
between the EPDs and as such is not considered precise enough, nor necessary for the types
of construction needed.
4.3.1
Windows
Window emissions will be based on wood/aluminium windows. For the 3 pane window a generic
LCA from the Danish window industry was used. Unfortunately, this was not available for the
2 pane window and as such a product specific EPD was used. As only one EPD has been
used for both the safety factors for five EPD’s or under is used, resulting in the GHGe shown in
Table 4.22. These values are used for all windows regardless of size and building type.
A1­A3
C3
C4
D
SUM
3 pane
9.06E+01
2.07E+01
1.20E+00
­2.62E+01
8.63E+01
2 pane
4.76E+01
2.22E+01
1.32E+00
­2.54E+01
4.58E+01
Table 4.22: GHGe from 1m2 of window
Modification in the future
Similarly to electricity and DH the emissions from producing insulation is also expected to be
lower in the future. According to Horup the average mitigation potential for stone wool from
2025­2050 is a 16% reduction in emissions [4]. Unfortunately the study does not include data
after 2050 so emission changes in 2075 are not available and as such assumptions must be
made. The normalised changes to GHGe for the different years are shown in Table 4.23.
Stone wool
Glass wool
EPS
3 Pane
Glass
2025
0.9275
0.7424
0.9736
0.8927
0.9745
2030
0.8625
0.5656
0.9552
0.8041
0.9439
2040
0.8097
0.4399
0.9428
0.7427
0.9211
2050
0.7808
0.3921
0.9344
0.7126
0.9061
Change %
15.82
47.18
4.03
20.18
7.02
Table 4.23: Normalised emissions compared to Ecoinvent 3.9.1 from [4]
Environmental and economic optimals
44
==PAGE:53==
4.4. Operational emissions
As can be seen the changes between each year are not even as the differences are largest in
earlier years. For this thesis the changes in emissions for mineral wool will be done conser­
vatively, and the expected emission changes for stone wool will be used. Assuming this trend
continues a power function was the most fitting for all the relevant emissions. This is shown in
Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Extended normalised emissions compared to Ecoinvent 3.9.1
Under these assumptions material emissions for the relevant materials will see the following
reductions in the year 2075:
Stone wool: 20.76%
Glass wool: 58.18%
EPS insulation: 5.49%
3 Pane windows: 26.43%
Glass: 9.28%
4.4
Operational emissions
Two different EF will be used in this study, being the ones calculated by Cowi and Artelia,
as presented in Section 2.2. As these emission factors update yearly up to 2040 and 2050
respectively an average EF for the 50 year lifetime of the buildings is used. This only effects
the time period 2025­2075, as the EF for 2050 and onwards is assumed constant for both
calculations. As such the final EF used are:
Artelia
Cowi
2025­2075
0.01539
0.07045
2050+
0.01320
0.06804
Table 4.24: Used EF for DH from Artelia and Cowi
These are used for all heating requirements for all buildings.
Environmental and economic optimals
45
==PAGE:54==
4.5. Life Cycle Cost
4.5
Life Cycle Cost
To calculate the LCC of the various buildings Net Present Cost (NPC) is used. NPC is used to
represent the NPV of relevant cost categories over the buildings lifetime. The equation used for
this is as follows:
NPC(τ) = Ci +
τ
∑
i=1
Cf,i
(1 + r)i +
∑
j
[
CEOL,τ −Vf,τ(j)
(1 + r)τ
]
Where NPC(τ) is the Net Present Cost [DKK] linked to the duration period τ [years]. Ci is the
initial investment [DKK], Cf,i is the future cost at year i [DKK], r is the real discount rate [%],
CEOL,τ is the waste handling cost of the component at the end of the calculation period [DKK],
and Vf,τ(j) is the final value of the component at the end of the calculation period [32]. Accord­
ing to Moschetti the equation is based off of ISO 15686­5:2008. As of 2017 this standard was
replaced with ISO 15686­5:2017. A final value of components is never mentioned in this stan­
dard and is therefore not included in the final calculation. The remaining parts of the equation
still fit within the standard and is therefore chosen to be included [33]. The final equation used
is as such:
NPC(τ) = Ci +
τ
∑
i=1
Cf,i
(1 + r)i +
∑
j
[
CEOL,τ
(1 + r)τ
]
For this thesis the cost will focus solely on the heating and insulation materials used in a building
with an average expected lifetime. As such the values used in the equation will take the following
into account:
τ For LCC a common calculation time is 50 years. This fits with the expected lifetime of the
building [34]. In addition an analysis using 30 years will be made to see if the results are
significantly different when looking from a more realistic time frame of ownership.
Ci The initial investment will only include the cost of insulation. It is assumed that the cost of
concrete, bricks, installation and similar will remain unchanged regardless of the insulation
thickness. As such it is not included for simplification.
Cf,i The future cost will only include the cost of heating the building. There is no expected
replacements or repairs included as the lifetime of the relevant materials is expected to
be at least 50 years.
r According to DS/ISO 15686­5:2017 discount rates between 0­4% are typically used [33].
As such a discount rate of 3% is chosen as this is recommended for a flat interest rate. It
is also used for DGNB in Denmark and as such considered realistic [34].
CEOL,τ The EOL price is set at 25% of the procurement cost. This is the standard used in LCCbyg
when no replacement of materials are occurring [35].
Material cost
As mentioned the only material included in the LCC is insulation. The current price of insulation
is used, with prices taken from Stark.dk for the relevant types if mineral wool. The calculation
of the prices can be seen in Appendix A.3. The resulting price for one cubic meter of flexible
insulation is:
λ37: 764 DKK/m3
λ34: 1252 DKK/m3
Environmental and economic optimals
46
==PAGE:55==
4.5. Life Cycle Cost
λ32: 1776 DKK/m3
As the mineral wool used differs for the wall constructions a different price is also used. Wall
insulation:
λ37: 1142 DKK/m3
λ34: 1570 DKK/m3
λ32: 1596 DKK/m3
The last insulation material used is EPS. The current price for the relevant types of EPS are:
λ38, 60kN: 458 DKK/m3
λ31, 60kN: 572 DKK/m3
λ38, 80kN: 520 DKK/m3
λ31, 80kN: 638 DKK/m3
These prices are assumed to be stable and will as such also be used for future scenarios.
As the cost of windows depend on the size a flat price cannot be used. Furthermore the price of
windows vary further depending on the type, design, functions, and is not typically readily avail­
able online. As such it was decided to use a simple top guided window. The price depending
on the window area can be seen in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: Cost of top guided window based on area
While this price is very uncertain it has not been possible to obtain more suitable data. As such
it will be used as is, but economic results related to the windows should be considered critically.
Heating cost
As calculations are made using a flat interest rate the prices for heating are also kept stable [34].
As such the price of DH used will be the current data. According to key numbers from LCCbyg,
a LCC calculation tool used in the Danish construction industry, the average price of DH for a
private costumer in the period 2018­2021 was 0.53DKK/kWh [35]. This value is used for the
base cost of heating for all results.
Environmental and economic optimals
47
==PAGE:56==
5
Results and analysis
In this section the resulting optimal thicknesses for all variables will be shown. The result will
be presented split into each building part, and then further into an environmental and economic
analysis, following the structure showcased here:
• Building part
­ Environmental results SF
­ Environmental results MF
­ Comparison of environmental results
­ Economic results SF
­ Economic results MF
­ Comparison of economic results
­ LCCA results SF
­ LCCA results MF
­ Comparison of LCCA results
Each result section shown, e.g. Environmental results SF, contains three types of results.
GHGe resulting from a U­value: These figures show the total emissions from the building
component over the expected lifetime of the building based on the resulting U­value from
the insulation thickness in the building component. This is done to compare whether the
optimum varied between insulation types and time periods. A variation is made based on
the economic cost over the lifetime as well.
Table of optimal thicknesses: The optimal thickness resulting from each combination of
year and insulation type is presented for easy comparison. This is done for both the
environmental and economic optimum.
Impact from missing the optimum: These figures show how much higher the impact is
when missing the optimum. As existing literature has included this, the same thicknesses
will be used at both 50 and 100mm. Due to the method of calculating emissions from other
types of insulation these thicknesses do not work, and as such increases in emissions will
be based on 2 and 4 steps respectively.
If the resulting optimum is either the highest or lowest thickness simulated it will be considered
OoB. This is done as it is not clear whether this is the actual optimum or if it is not reached
yet. For analysis of missing the optimum the resulting NPV and GHGe from 25 and 500mm,
TC 0.037 insulation or equivalent, will be included. Values outside this range have not been
simulated and as such will naturally not be included.
The results from the variable window to floor ratio simulation follow the same method, with the
sole difference being that the shown results are dependent on the window to floor ratio rather
than the U­value.
 Environmental and economic optimals
48
==PAGE:57==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
LCCA
LCCA is presented based on both EF calculations. The baseline chosen for each component
is the thickness resulting in the closest U­value to the requirements in BR18. The baseline
thicknesses used can be seen in Table 5.1.
U­Value BR18
Chosen thickness
Resulting U­value
Exterior wall
0.30
100
0.32
Roof
0.20
175
0.20
Terrain deck
0.20
75
0.21
Table 5.1: LCCA baseline thicknesses assuming TC of 0.037
The x­axis is the additional insulation over the baseline. As such the additional insulation steps
vary in thickness depending on the TC. When calculating the LCCA the following is used as
inputs.
C The cost is calculated using the NPV of the component minus the baseline NPV, using a
calculation period of 50 years.
E0 The GHGe from the baseline insulation thickness of the building component.
E1 The GHGe from the increased insulation thickness of the building component.
The resulting LCCA based on all increases in insulation thicknesses are calculated and plotted.
5.1
Exterior wall construction
5.1.1
Environmental
SF Results
The resulting GHGe from the exterior walls can be seen in Figure 5.1 with the optimal U­values
and insulation thicknesses shown in Table 5.2 following.
Figure 5.1: SF Wall emissions using EF from Cowi (Left) and Artelia (Right)
The total GHGe is always lowest for insulation with a TC of 0.037, followed by 0.034 and lastly
0.032. Using the EF from Cowi results in higher emissions than the one from Artelia.
Environmental and economic optimals
49
==PAGE:58==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
λ = 0.037
λ = 0.034
λ = 0.032
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
Cowi
2025
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
0.076
411
2050
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
2075
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
Artelia
2025
0.118
300
0.128
253
0.154
195
2050
0.109
325
0.128
253
0.140
216
2075
0.118
300
0.128
253
0.154
195
Table 5.2: Optimal insulation thicknesses for SF exterior walls regarding GHGe
The optimal insulation thicknesses for the exterior walls are generally OoB for Cowi’s EF, while
Artelia’s EF show quite stable thicknesses throughout the time periods. The impact of missing
the found optimum is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Increase in emissions from missing the optimum insulation thickness for SF exterior
walls
Using 100mm too much insulation, with a TC of 0.037, results in about a 4­5% increase in
emissions for insulation with a TC 0.037, with increasing impacts of missing with lower TC. The
results do not show any correlation between the various time periods investigated.
MF Results
The resulting GHGe from the MF exterior walls can be seen in Figure 5.3 with the optimal U­
values and corresponding insulation thicknesses shown in Table 5.3.
Environmental and economic optimals
50
==PAGE:59==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
Figure 5.3: MF Wall emissions using EF from Cowi (Left) and Artelia (Right)
The total GHGe vary depending on all variables with the insulation with TC of 0.037 continuing to
be the least emitting at all times. The lower EF from Artelia results in a larger variety, especially
at higher thicknesses, although all results are significantly below the results from the higher EF.
λ = 0.037
λ = 0.034
λ = 0.032
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
Cowi
2025
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
2050
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
2075
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
Artelia
2025
0.109
325
0.128
253
0.140
216
2050
0.109
325
0.128
253
0.140
216
2075
0.118
300
0.128
253
0.154
195
Table 5.3: Optimal insulation thicknesses for MF exterior walls regarding GHGe
The results based on Cowi’s EF have an optimal thickness that is OoB. When looking at the EF
from Artelia the results show a lower optimal thickness for the insulation types with a lower TC.
In addition a lower optimal thickness is found in 2075, although there is an exception where it is
kept stable in the case of TC of 0.034. The impact of missing the found optimums can be seen
in Figure 5.4.
Environmental and economic optimals
51
==PAGE:60==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
Figure 5.4: Increase in GHGe from missing the optimum insulation thickness for MF exterior
wall
The impact of missing the found optimum for the MF Exterior walls is remarkably close to Fig­
ure 5.2 which shows the same results for the SF house. A minor difference is shown for TC
0.032 2025, which aligns more with the other time periods in the MF than the SF.
Comparison
Overall optimal: The insulation type and thickness resulting in the lowest total GHGe, when
using the EF from Artelia, is 300−325mm of TC 0.037 insulation for both the SF and MF house.
Using the EF from Cowi results in results above the set limit, with all but one result being OoB.
The actual optimal thickness is therefore somewhere above 300mm for the exterior wall, with
similar results for both buildings. This is equivalent to a U­value for the exterior wall construction
of 0.118. This value is significantly lower than the minimum requirements from BR18 for both
new and renovated construction.
Variable insulation type: Comparing the different insulation types shows that a lower TC results
in a higher optimal U­value. As shown in the Figures it also results in a higher GHGe for all time
periods, with the difference being driven by the embodied emissions. As such, with the current
production methods it is not worth using insulation with a lower TC than 0.037.
Variable time periods: When comparing the different time periods a variation in optimal insu­
lation thickness is seen for both buildings. For the SF house this is an increase from 300 to
325mm in 2050, before returning to 300mmm in 2075. This is likely caused by the embodied
emissions being reduced further than the operational. For the MF house the only difference be­
tween the time periods is a reduction from 325 to 300mm in 2075, when the mean temperature
sees the most significant increase. As such this is likely caused by the decrease in operational
emissions rather than the embodied.
Impact of missing the optimum: The increase in GHGe caused by using 100mm insulation
more or less than the optimal is very similar for both buildings. Using insulation with a higher
TC generally increases the impact of using too much or little when using Artelia’s EF. For Cowi’s
EF there is no data for using too much insulation, but using less sees a decrease in the impact
for the lower TC insulation types. A general trend shown, is that using too little results in a
higher impact, at around 6­9% for TC 0.037, compared to using too much, at around 4­5% for
the same insulation. This difference is larger when the TC is lower.
Environmental and economic optimals
52
==PAGE:61==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
5.1.2
Economic
SF Results
The NPV of the exterior walls depending on the U­value is shown in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: SF Wall NPV with a period of 50 (Left) and 30 (Right) time periods.
The trend shown in the GHGe generally continue, with later time periods having a lower NPV,
although the difference for each period is lesser for the economic cost than the GHGe for the
same building. Mineral wool with a TC 0.034 and 0.032 however, are much closer with 0.032
being barely cheaper. This is caused by how close the found price for these two types of in­
sulation was making it possible for the slightly lower thickness to result in cheaper materials
overall.
The optimal thicknesses for all insulation types, time periods and calculation periods are shown
in Table 5.4.
λ = 0.037
λ = 0.034
λ = 0.032
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
τ = 50
2025
0.224
150
0.224
138
0.224
130
2050
0.224
150
0.224
138
0.224
130
2075
0.224
150
0.265
115
0.265
108
τ = 30
2025
0.224
150
0.265
115
0.265
108
2050
0.265
125
0.265
115
0.265
108
2075
0.265
125
0.265
115
0.265
108
Table 5.4: Optimal insulation thicknesses for SF exterior wall regarding NPV
Assuming a calculation period of 50 years the optimal U­value is the same for almost all insula­
tion types and time periods, with the exception of one step less for the two insulation types with
the lower TC in 2075. A calculation period of 30 time periods lowers the optimum by generally
one step, with a few exceptions. The impact of missing the optimum is shown in Figure 5.8
Environmental and economic optimals
53
==PAGE:62==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
Figure 5.6: Increase in NPV from missing the optimum insulation thickness for SF exterior walls
Using 100mm too much insulation results in approximately a 10­25% increase in cost regardless
of insulation type, year and EF. When using less insulation than the optimal the changes in
emissions are generally higher, but also vary more depending on especially the calculation
period, where a shorter period results in a higher impact for two of the three insulation types, but
also somewhat depending on the year with later time periods seeing a slightly lesser increase.
MF Results
The NPV of the MF exterior wall with all the U­values can be seen in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: MF Wall NPV with a period of 50 (Left) and 30 (Right) years.
The MF NPV results for the exterior walls once again show very similar trends to the SF house
with the insulation type with a TC of 0.037 being cheapest, followed by 0.032 and lastly 0.034.
The optimal thicknesses for all insulation types, time periods and calculation periods can be
seen in Table 5.5.
Environmental and economic optimals
54
==PAGE:63==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
λ = 0.037
λ = 0.034
λ = 0.032
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
τ = 50
2025
0.195
175
0.224
138
0.224
130
2050
0.224
150
0.224
138
0.224
130
2075
0.224
150
0.265
115
0.265
108
τ = 30
2025
0.224
150
0.265
115
0.265
108
2050
0.224
150
0.265
115
0.265
108
2075
0.265
125
0.322
92
0.265
108
Table 5.5: Optimal insulation thicknesses for MF exterior wall regarding cost
The found optimal thicknesses are generally one step lower in the later time periods. Using
insulation with a lower TC also results in a lower optimal thickness. The impact of missing the
found optimums can be seen in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Increase in cost from missing the optimum insulation thickness for MF exterior wall
The increase in cost is most severe when using too little insulation, reaching 140% at its most
extreme, than when using too much. Furthermore the increase is highest when using a shorter
calculation period, with the highest difference coinciding with when the optimal thickness is lower
than previous time periods.
Comparison
Overall optimal: The found optimal insulation thicknesses from an economic perspective are
quite similar for both buildings at around 150mm, assuming a TC of 0.037. This is also the
cheapest option, with 0.032 being the second cheapest and 0.034 being the most expensive.
This is different from the environmental analysis, where a lower TC led to higher total emissions.
The cause of this is likely how close in cost the two insulation types are, leading to the smaller
amount needed having an impact over the operational cost. Using a shorter calculation period
also leads to the NPV being lower at all points, including pushing the optimal insulation to one
step thinner in most cases. This makes sense as the operational cost is not calculated for as
long, and as such is lower, while the initial cost is the same. The optimal thicknesses corre­
sponds to an U­value of about 0.224­0.265, which fits decently with the minimum requirements
Environmental and economic optimals
55
==PAGE:64==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
for a new building in BR18, but exceeds the requirements for a renovation.
Variable insulation type: The optimal U­value is pretty similar for the two insulation types with
a TC of 0.034 and 0.032, with 0.037 resulting in a slightly lower optimal U­value. This is rep­
resentative of the higher initial cost for the first two leading to a higher operational cost being
acceptable.
Variable time periods: The optimal insulation thickness is impacted less by the time periods
than by the insulation type used. There is still a decrease in the optimal thickness for the later
time periods, but whether it occurs in 2050 or 2075 varies based on the insulation type.
Impact of missing the optimum: While the impact of using the equivalent of 100mm more or
less insulation than the found optimal looks generally similar for the SF and MF house. There
are however notable exceptions with the impact of using too little insulation in the MF house
2075 having a much higher impact than in the SF. Using too little insulation consistently results
in a higher impact than using too much does. This difference is higher for TC 0.034 and 0.032
insulation, although these two generally have similar impacts from missing. A shorter calculation
period results in higher impacts than a longer one, although the year 2075 is an exception to
this.
5.1.3
LCCA
SF Results
Figure 5.9: LCCA results for SF exterior walls
Environmental and economic optimals
56
==PAGE:65==
5.1. Exterior wall construction
As shown in Figure 5.9 the LCCA increases rapidly when using Artelia’s EF’s. This increase
does continue exponentially, and as such it was decided to cut off the y­axis at 100DKK/kg CO2−
eq. to be able to see the resulting LCCA for Cowi’s EF as well. The figure further shows that the
LCCA increases at lower insulation thicknesses in the future.
MF Results
Figure 5.10: LCCA results for MF exterior walls
As shown in Figure 5.10 the LCCA also increases rapidly when using Artelia’s EF for the MF
house. As such the y­axis is also cut off at 100DKK/kg CO2−eq. to be able to see the resulting
LCCA for Cowi’s EF. The LCCA otherwise looks similar to the SF house, albeit with slightly lower
LCCA for each step.
Comparison
Both buildings see similar trends for the LCCA. The increase is less significant when using the
EF by Cowi, but it still sees a steady increase. The first layers of additional insulation will result in
a negative cost for both buildings, reaching zero at about 150mm additional TC 0.037 insulation.
Using insulation with a lower TC results in this point being reached with less additional insulation.
When using Artelia’s EF this point is the same, as it is dependent on the cost, but the increase in
LCCA is much more pronounced. Under these conditions the LCCA quickly shows an exponen­
tial increase resulting in, especially for insulation with a TC of 0.032, a point where the plotted
LCCA is nearly vertical. Additional insulation after, and likely before this point, will therefore be
significantly more expensive than other policies.
Environmental and economic optimals
57
==PAGE:66==
5.2. Roof construction
This point is reached slightly earlier for the SF house, although the difference is at most one step
insulation thickness. Another main takeaway is the variation caused by the time periods. Later
time periods, especially 2075, see a more rapid increase in LCCA at all points. This also includes
when the LCCA reaches zero, which happens with less additional insulation. When this point
is reached does not appear to have any direct correlation with the economic or environmental
optimum as it is between these two thicknesses for all variations.
As such the LCCA for the optimal environmental insulation thickness for the SF house is lower
than the MF house. This is mainly due to this optimal being 25mm lower, at 300mm. The LCCA
for the optimal thickness, of TC 0.037 insulation in the SF house is 4.35DKK/kg CO2 −eq.
For the MF house the optimal thickness under the same conditions is 5.80DKK/kg CO2 −eq.,
when using Artelia’s EF. There are no results of this type for Cowi’s EF, as it does not reach an
optimum.
5.2
Roof construction
5.2.1
Environmental
SF Results
The resulting GHGe from the SF roof can be seen in Figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: SF Roof emissions using EF from Cowi (Left) and Artelia (Right)
The trend shown in the exterior walls continues, with later time periods seeing a lower GHGe and
that insulation types with lower TC results in higher total GHGe, despite their better insulative
properties. The optimal thicknesses for all insulation types, time periods and EF’s are shown in
Table 5.6.
Environmental and economic optimals
58
==PAGE:67==
5.2. Roof construction
λ = 0.037
λ = 0.034
λ = 0.032
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
Cowi
2025
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
2050
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
2075
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
Artelia
2025
0.111
325
0.120
276
0.143
216
2050
0.111
325
0.120
276
0.143
216
2075
0.120
300
0.130
253
0.143
216
Table 5.6: Optimal insulation thicknesses for SF roof regarding GHGe
When using Cowi’s EF the optimal insulation thickness in the roof is OoB for all types and time
periods. Using Artelia’s EF however, results in similar U­values for each time period. A few
decreases are present in 2075, but the main takeaway is that using insulation with a lower
TC results in a higher optimal U­value, as the largest difference is seen here. As shown in
Figure 5.11 however, the total GHGe are higher. As such it is very possible that this increase in
optimum is caused by the embodied emissions being higher. The impact of missing the found
optimums can be seen in Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12: Increase in GHGe from missing the optimum insulation thickness for SF roof
As Cowi’s EF results in the an optimum OoB for all types it is not possible to use too much
insulation. As such an increase has not been calculated and is therefore not shown. Using
Artelia’s EF results in a minor increase when using more insulation and a more prominent one
when using less.
MF Results
The resulting GHGe from the MF roof can be seen in Figure 5.13.
Environmental and economic optimals
59
==PAGE:68==
5.2. Roof construction
Figure 5.13: MF Roof emissions using EF from Cowi (Left) and Artelia (Right)
The GHGe resulting from the MF roof show similar trends to earlier examples shown, with a
rapid decrease which quickly slows as the U­value decreases. The found optimal thicknesses
for all insulation types, time periods and EF’s are shown in Table 5.7
λ = 0.037
λ = 0.034
λ = 0.032
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
Cowi
2025
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
2050
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
2075
OoB
> 500
OoB
> 459
OoB
> 432
Artelia
2025
0.103
350
0.120
276
0.130
238
2050
0.103
350
0.120
276
0.130
238
2075
0.111
325
0.120
276
0.143
216
Table 5.7: Optimal insulation thicknesses for MF roof regarding GHGe
Earlier found trends continue with thicknesses using Cowi’s EF being OoB, while the other
results show thicknesses within the acceptable range. The impact of missing the found optimal
thicknesses for the MF roofs can be seen in Figure 5.14.
Environmental and economic optimals
60
==PAGE:69==
5.2. Roof construction
Figure 5.14: Increase in GHGe from missing the optimum insulation thickness for MF roof
Comparison
Overall optimal: When using the EF by Cowi all optimums are OoB and as such fall under the
category of ”the more the better”. With the lower EF from Artelia however, the optimal thickness
is well within the range at 350mm insulation with a TC of 0.037 for the MF building and 325mm
for the SF house. Insulations with a lower TC results in higher total GHGe at all thicknesses in
both buildings.
Variable insulation type: While the total GHGe is higher for the higher TC insulation types the
optimal thickness is generally one step lower. There are a few exceptions to this but the optimal
insulation thickness is always lower. It is generally also seen that the MF house has slightly
higher optimal insulation thicknesses than the SF house. It is not a major difference but it is of
interest as it may be caused by the different floor to roof area in the two building types.
Variable time periods: The optimal insulation thicknesses is unchanged from 2025 to 2050, but
falls one step in all but one example, which is in the time period 2075.
Impact of missing the optimum: The impact of using 100mm too little or much insulation is
consistently lower for the MF house. Using the EF from Artelia and insulation with a TC of
0.037 the increase in emissions caused by using too little insulation is 6­8%, depending on the
year. The same value for the SF case results in a 10% increase in emissions. This difference
is pretty consistent when using too little insulation, with the TC 0.032 seeing an even larger
decrease using the same EF. This trend continues when using Cowi’s EF, and is likely caused
by the consistently slightly higher optimal thickness in the MF house.
5.2.2
Economic
SF Results
The NPV of the SF roof depending on the U­value is shown in Figure 5.15.
Environmental and economic optimals
61
==PAGE:70==
5.2. Roof construction
Figure 5.15: SF Roof NPV with a period of 50 (Left) and 30 (Right) years.
The NPV of the SF roof depends largely on which type of insulation is used with lower TC’s
resulting in a higher cost. Later time periods do show a minor decrease in cost across the board,
but it is marginal for both the calculation periods. The optimal thicknesses for all insulation types,
time periods and EF’s are shown in Table 5.8.
λ = 0.037
λ = 0.034
λ = 0.032
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
τ = 50
2025
0.177
200
0.200
161
0.232
130
2050
0.177
200
0.200
161
0.232
130
2075
0.177
200
0.200
161
0.275
108
τ = 30
2025
0.200
175
0.232
138
0.275
108
2050
0.200
175
0.232
138
0.275
108
2075
0.200
175
0.232
138
0.275
108
Table 5.8: Optimal insulation thicknesses for SF roof regarding NPV
Within each insulation type the optimal U­value is stable throughout the time periods, with the
sole exception being insulation with a TC 0.032 being slightly thinner in 2075. When using a
shorter calculation period this difference disappears. The impact of missing the found optimums
for the SF roof can be seen in Figure 5.16.
Environmental and economic optimals
62
==PAGE:71==
5.2. Roof construction
Figure 5.16: Increase in NPV from missing the optimum insulation thickness for SF roof
The economic impact of missing the optimal thicknesses vary mostly depending on the insula­
tion type. Following the emerging trend the impact of using too little insulation is higher than
using too much. The time period 2075, using a calculation period of 50 years, further stands
out for TC 0.032 being much larger for the other insulation types. This is also the only optimum
with a lower insulation thickness found for the roof within each insulation type.
MF Results
The NPV of the MF roof, depending on the U­values, can be seen in Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.17: MF Roof NPV with a period of 50 (Left) and 30 (Right) years.
The trends for changes caused by time and insulation types from the SF house continues with
lower TC’s resulting in higher emissions. When lower U­values are used, this difference is
more significant regardless of the year and calculation period. The optimal thicknesses for all
insulation types, time periods and calculation periods are shown in Table 5.9.
Environmental and economic optimals
63
==PAGE:72==
5.2. Roof construction
λ = 0.037
λ = 0.034
λ = 0.032
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
τ = 50
2025
0.177
200
0.200
161
0.232
130
2050
0.177
200
0.200
161
0.232
130
2075
0.177
200
0.200
161
0.232
130
τ = 30
2025
0.200
175
0.232
138
0.275
108
2050
0.200
175
0.232
138
0.275
108
2075
0.200
175
0.232
138
0.275
108
Table 5.9: Optimal insulation thicknesses for MF roof regarding cost
There is no shown changes to the optimal economic thickness for the MF house caused by
differences in time. A longer calculation period results in optimal thicknesses being one step
thicker for all types. The impact of missing the found optimal thicknesses can be seen in Fig­
ure 5.18.
Figure 5.18: Increase in cost from missing the optimum insulation thickness for MF roof
The impact of missing the found optimums are limited, with the main stable being that using too
little insulation is economically worse than using too much. Insulation with a lower TC sees a
further increase in impact when missing in either direction.
Comparison
Overall optimal: The optimal thicknesses for the roof is the same for the SF and MF house at
all points, with the TC 0.037 insulation being the cheapest regardless of the thickness. Using
a calculation period of 50 years the optimal thickness for both buildings is 200mm. A shorter
calculation period of 30 years results in this optimal being one step lower at 175mm
Variable insulation type: Using insulation with a lower TC results in higher optimal U­values,
and therefore thinner optimal insulation. Each type of insulation with a lower TC results in a one
step difference.
Environmental and economic optimals
64
==PAGE:73==
5.2. Roof construction
Variable time periods: For each insulation type the economic optimum is unchanged regardless
of the year. As such this optimum appears to be very stable. The sole exception to this is the
SF house roof being one step thinner in 2075 when using insulation with a TC of 0.032.
Impact of missing the optimum: Missing this optimum using a TC 0.037 insulation with 100mm
too little insulation results in relatively minor increases in NPV of 20­40% for both calculation
periods. This increase is lower at around 10% if 100mm too much insulation is used. For
insulation with a lower TC the impact is higher in both directions, with a shorter calculation
period resulting in a higher increase. The sole exception to this is insulation with a TC 0.032,
and a calculation period of 50 years, in the SF house which has a much higher change in 2075.
This coincides with the optimal thickness being lower. In fact it puts the impact close to its
counterpart using a calculation period of 30 years. The optimal thickness for these 2 calculations
is the same, further reinforcing that this impact is largely dependant on the thickness.
5.2.3
LCCA
SF Results
Figure 5.19: LCCA results for SF roof
As shown in Figure 5.19 the LCCA results for the SF roof show similar tendencies as the exterior
walls. The results using Cowi’s EF show slow increases along with the additional insulation,
while the results based on Artelia’s EF show exponential growth quickly. As such the graphs
are cut off at an LCCA of 200DKK/kg CO2 −eq.. This higher cutoff is caused by a more rapid
increase in LCCA than for the exterior walls.
Environmental and economic optimals
65
==PAGE:74==
5.2. Roof construction
MF Results
Figure 5.20: LCCA results for MF roof
The LCCA results for the MF roof are shown in Figure 5.20. Like the SF roof LCCA results the
graphs are cut off at an LCCA of 200DKK/kg CO2 −eq..
Comparison
The LCCA results for the roof of both buildings show similarities to the results from the exterior
walls, with the MF house consistently having lower values. Using Artelia’s EF also results in an
exponential increase in LCCA results within the investigated area. Due to the higher baseline
insulation thickness it appears that this occurs earlier. Comparing the two building components
it is true that the LCCA is higher for the same insulation thickness.
For the SF house, using Artelia’s EF, the current environmental optimum is 325mm, with a
resulting LCCA of 11.90DKK/kg CO2 −eq. Using the same assumptions the optimum for the
MF house is 300mm with a resulting LCCA of 5.24DKK/kg CO2 −eq.
Another trend that continues is that the LCCA increases in the future. The increase in cost
for the same insulation thickness is particularly large between 2050 and 2075, as the heating
requirements are decreased due to the higher mean temperature, while the cost is kept stable
Environmental and economic optimals
66
==PAGE:75==
5.3. Terrain deck construction
5.3
Terrain deck construction
5.3.1
Environmental
SF Results
The resulting GHGe from the terrain deck can be seen in Figure 5.21.
Figure 5.21: SF Terrain Deck emissions using EF from Cowi (Left) and Artelia (Right)
At lower thicknesses the two insulation types used show very similar GHGe with EPS 31 showing
slightly better results at higher thicknesses. Both Cowi’s and Artelia’s EF’s appear to result in
low optimums, with the optimal insulation thicknesses for all insulation types, time periods and
EF’s shown in Table 5.10.
λ = 0.038
λ = 0.031
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
Cowi
2025
0.183
100
0.163
103
2050
0.183
100
0.163
103
2075
0.208
75
0.183
83
Artelia
2025
OoB
< 25
OoB
< 22
2050
OoB
< 25
OoB
< 22
2075
OoB
< 25
OoB
< 22
Table 5.10: Optimal insulation thicknesses for SF terrain deck regarding GHGe
Utilising the EF from Cowi results in very similar optimal thicknesses for both types during all
the time periods. The optimal U­value is however slightly lower for the better insulation type,
resulting in the lower total emissions shown. All optimums found using Artelia’s EF however,
are at the thinnest insulation thickness simulated and as such considered OoB. Changes in
GHGe’s from missing the optimum is shown in Figure 5.22.
Environmental and economic optimals
67
==PAGE:76==
5.3. Terrain deck construction
Figure 5.22: Increase in GHGe from missing the optimum insulation thickness for SF terrain
deck
Due to the found optimal thicknesses being quite low there are missing results when using less
than the optimal insulation thickness. The results using Cowi’s EF show similar impacts when
using too little and too much insulation, with the results from Artelia’s EF showing a much higher
impact with higher variety between the time periods.
MF Results
The resulting GHGe from the SF terrain deck can be seen in Figure 5.23.
Figure 5.23: MF Terrain Deck emissions using EF from Cowi (Left) and Artelia (Right)
For the MF terrain deck the initial GHGe are also very similar for its type, but diverges much
faster than for the SF house. Another major difference is that EPS with a TC of 0.038 results
in the lowest emissions, likely caused by the difference in embodied emissions. The found
optimums for all insulation types, time periods and EF’s are shown in Table 5.11.
Environmental and economic optimals
68
==PAGE:77==
5.3. Terrain deck construction
λ = 0.038
λ = 0.031
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
Cowi
2025
0.134
175
0.147
124
2050
0.134
175
0.147
124
2075
0.147
150
0.163
103
Artelia
2025
0.208
75
0.241
42
2050
0.241
50
0.241
42
2075
0.241
50
0.241
42
Table 5.11: Optimal insulation thicknesses for MF terrain deck regarding GHGe
Both EF calculations result in optimal thicknesses within the acceptable range, although the
optimal thicknesses are quite different. The impact of missing the found optimums can be seen
in Figure 5.24.
Figure 5.24: Increase in GHGe from missing the optimum insulation thickness for MF terrain
deck
The increase in emissions from missing the optimal thickness varies significantly with Artelia’s
EF being too thin to get result from using too little. The difference between the insulation types
is also notable.
Comparison
Overall optimal: When Cowi’s EF is used, the overall least emitting option for the SF house is
103mm of TC 0.031 EPS insulation. The alternative EF from Artelia results in a too low optimal
to be counted in this thesis. For the MF house the least emitting option is between 75 −175mm
of TC 0.038 EPS insulation, depending on if Artelia’s or Cowi’s EF is used respectively. This
significant difference between the buildings optimal thicknesses is likely caused by the different
strength requirements for the buildings. As shown in Table 4.21 the difference in embodied
emissions for the two types is significant when needing a compressive strength of 80kN, but
much lesser when needing a compressive strength of 60kN. This increase in embodied emis­
sions is too large of a trade off in the MF house, but worth it in the SF where the embodied
Environmental and economic optimals
69
==PAGE:78==
5.3. Terrain deck construction
increase is much lower. The low optimal thickness further reinforce this, as it insinuates that
the operational emissions are lesser compared to the embodied.
Variable insulation type: The trends between the two types of EPS used differs for the buildings.
In the MF house using the EPS with a lower TC decreases the optimal thickness. For the SF
house this change actually results in an increased optimal thickness, which has not been seen
in any of the other results. The increase in thickness is minor due to the differences in thickness
per step, and are as such seen better on the optimal U­values. This is likely caused by the
embodied emissions for the two types being very similar for the SF house, as discussed in the
overall optimal.
Most of the variations between the two types of EPS can be seen in the analysis of the overall
optimal, but the trends differ in the two buildings. For the MF house using a lower optimal
thickness in all cases, while the SF house sees an increase in optimal thickness. It is minor due
to the differences in the insulation thickness steps, and can therefore be seen more clearly in
the lower optimal U­value.
Variable time periods: There is a minor variation in the optimal depending on the year for both
buildings. The SF house sees a consistent one step down in 2075, using Cowi’s EF, while the
differences in the MF house vary depending on the EF and insulation type used.
Impact of missing the optimum: The impact of using the equivalent to 100mm insulation too
much or little depends greatly which building is being investigated. For the SF house there is
only data for too little for the TC 0.031 Cowi EF, resulting in a 20% increase for 2025 and 2050.
There is not data for 2075. If too much insulation is used the impact varies greatly depending
on the EF, with Cowi’s resulting in a 10% increase and Artelia’s 70­105% increase. This large
variety is dependant on the year.
The MF house sees a greater increase when using too little at 30­75%, depending on the year
and insulation type. Using too much with Cowi’s EF results in a similar 10% increase, but
Artelia’s only results in 30­55% increase. This is significantly lower tjan for the SF house.
5.3.2
Economic
SF Results
The NPV of the terrain deck depending on the U­value can be seen in Figure 5.25.
Figure 5.25: SF terrain deck NPV with a period of 50 (Left) and 30 (Right) years.
The NPV for the two insulation types is very similar, with the only outlier being the year 2075,
Environmental and economic optimals
70
==PAGE:79==
5.3. Terrain deck construction
where the cost is lower for both types. The optimal thicknesses for all time periods, insulation
types and EF’s are shown in Table 5.12.
λ = 0.038
λ = 0.031
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
τ = 50
2025
0.208
75
0.208
62
2050
0.208
75
0.241
42
2075
0.241
50
0.241
42
τ = 30
2025
0.241
50
0.241
42
2050
OoB
< 25
OoB
< 22
2075
OoB
< 25
OoB
< 22
Table 5.12: Optimal insulation thicknesses for SF terrain deck regarding cost
The economic optimal thicknesses are quite low for the SF terrain deck. When using a shorter
calculation period all future optimums are too low, and as such considered OoB.The impact of
missing the optimum is shown in Figure 5.28.
Figure 5.26: Increase in cost from missing the optimum insulation thickness for SF terrain deck
Using less insulation than the optimum results in minor increases in cost, although there are
very few data points available due to the low thicknesses. Using more than the optimum results
in varied changes depending on all variables but are typically between 10­30%.
MF Results
The NPV for the MF floor can be seen in 5.27.
Environmental and economic optimals
71
==PAGE:80==
5.3. Terrain deck construction
Figure 5.27: MF Floor NPV with a period of 50 (Left) and 30 (Right) years.
The economic cost for both calculation periods depend solely on the year and calculation pe­
riod. Specifically 2075 see a lower total cost than the other time periods. There appears to
be virtually no differences between the two EPS types for any of the time periods. The optimal
thicknesses for the NPV of all insulation types, time periods and calculation periods can be seen
in Table 5.13.
λ = 0.038
λ = 0.031
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
U­value
[W/m2K]
Thickness
[mm]
τ = 50
2025
0.147
150
0.147
124
2050
0.147
150
0.147
124
2075
0.163
125
0.163
103
τ = 30
2025
0.163
125
0.163
103
2050
0.163
125
0.163
103
2075
0.183
100
0.183
83
Table 5.13: Optimal insulation thicknesses for MF terrain deck regarding cost
As seen in the prior Table and Figure the optimal thickness does not vary depending on the
type of EPS. 2075 sees a one step lower optimal thickness for all calculation periods. A shorter
calculation period also results in a one step lower optimum. The impact from missing the found
optimal thicknesses are shown in 5.28.
Environmental and economic optimals
72
==PAGE:81==
5.3. Terrain deck construction
Figure 5.28: Increase in cost from missing the optimum insulation thickness for MF terrain deck
The impact of missing the optimal insulation thickness is the same for both EPS types. Similar
to previous trends missing by using too little insulation results in a much larger increase than
using too much.
Comparison
Overall optimal: Looking at the difference in NPV the two insulation types result in a very even
cost for both the buildings. The type of insulation is therefore secondary with the optimal U­
value equivalent for the SF house being 0.208, either 75mm TC 0.038 or 62mm TC 0.031 EPS
insulation. For the MF house the current optimal U­value is 0.147, either 150mm TC 0.038 or
124mm TC 0.031 EPS insulation. If a shorter calculation period is used these optimal thick­
nesses each decrease by one step.
These optimal thicknesses are decently close to the minimum U­values for new buildings in
BR18, with especially the 0.208 being close to the limit of 0.20. When comparing to the re­
quired values from §279, which sets the maximum U­value for the terrain deck at 0.10, the
found optimums do not comply with this regulation.
Variable insulation type: The optimal thickness is the same for both types of EPS insulation
used.
Variable time periods: The optimal insulation thicknesses do decrease in later time periods
with all variations optimum being one step lower in 2075. An exception to this is the SF house
when using a calculation period of 30 years, as this results in the insulation thickness being the
thinnest simulated and therefore OoB.
Impact of missing the optimum: The impact of using the equivalent of 100mm insulation too
much or little varies based on the building and calculation period. For the SF house data for
using too little is limited due to the low optimal thickness. Using too much however, results in
an increase of 10­32% with the higher end mostly being from a calculation period of 30 years.
In the MF house using too much results in a 10­20% increase, while using too little results in a
30­60% increase. This follows the found trend that using too little insulation increases the NPV
by more than using too much, although these values are on the lower end when compared to
missing with a similar amount in the other building parts.
Environmental and economic optimals
73
==PAGE:82==
5.3. Terrain deck construction
5.3.3
LCCA
SF Results
The LCCA for some of the insulation thicknesses in the SF terrain deck can be seen in Fig­
ure 5.29.
Figure 5.29: LCCA results for SF terrain decks
As seen in Figure 5.29 using Artelia’s EF results in no valid LCCA values, as the environmental
optimal insulation thickness is below the baseline. Cowi’s EF does result in some valid values,
which are seen in the same figure.
MF Results
Figure 5.30: LCCA results for MF terrain decks
Using Artelia’s EF also results in no valid LCCA results for the MF house, as the optimal is as
little insulation as possible. There is however significantly more valid results when using Cowi’s
EF. These show a slow increase in LCCA before increasing rapidly upon reaching various thick­
nesses.
Comparison
The amount of valid LCCA results for the terrain deck is minimal for both the buildings. This is
mainly caused by the low optimal insulation thicknesses found earlier. The few resulting LCCA
Environmental and economic optimals
74
==PAGE:83==
5.4. Window to floor ratio
values differ drastically for the two buildings, with the SF having a positive value for all data
points. The MF house on the other hands have a decent amount of negative values before
increasing rapidly. This has not been seen in the other building parts. It could therefore be
important to not use too much insulation in the terrain deck, as an overuse will result in a high
cost for the same effect.
Using the optimal thickness, 103mm TC 0.031 EPS insulation, in the SF terrain deck, assuming
Cowi’s EF in 2025, the resulting LCCA is 27.30DKK/kg CO2 −eq.. For the MF house, in 2025
and TC 0.038 EPS insulation, the optimal insulation thickness is 175mm using Cowi’s EF. This
results in a LCCA of −2.22DKK/kg CO2 −eq. While there is an optimal insulation thickness
using Artelia’s EF it is the same as the baseline. As such there is no applicable LCCA value for
this thickness.
5.4
Window to floor ratio
5.4.1
Environmental
SF Results
The resulting GHGe’s for the simulated window to floor ratio’s can be seen in Figure 5.31.
Figure 5.31: SF Window emissions using EF from Cowi (Left) and Artelia (Right)
These results show that a higher window to floor area results in higher GHGe, regardless of the
number of panes or the year. When using the higher EF calculated by Cowi, a 3 pane window
results in lower emissions across the board. The lower EF calculated by Artelia results in more
variety, although the 2 pane window always results in lower emissions. When moving into the
future the difference between the two window types lessen, resulting in almost the exact same
emissions by 2075.
MF Results
The resulting GHGe for the simulated window to floor ratio’s can be seen in Figure 5.32.
Environmental and economic optimals
75
==PAGE:84==
5.4. Window to floor ratio
Figure 5.32: MF Window emissions using EF from Cowi (Left) and Artelia (Right)
The trends for the MF house are very similar to the SF house, with lower ratios resulting in lower
total emissions.
Comparison
The Figures showing the environmental emissions for various window to floor ratios show very
similar results for both the SF and MF house. Having a higher window to floor ratio always
results in a higher GHGe, regardless of the window type and year. This is not surprising as the
windows serve multiple purposes, such as allowing occupants to see outside the building, let
light in and cool the building, which has not been taken into consideration for this thesis. Of
more interest is the difference between using the EF calculated by Cowi or Artelia.
When using the higher EF from Cowi a 3 pane window results in significantly lower GHGe for
all time periods and ratios. This fits well with the window requirements from BR18 §258, which
indirectly states that windows must be Energy label A. When using the EF from Artelia the
results look very different though. In the first time periods a 2 pane window results in lower total
GHGe for all ratios. Moving into the future the two window types results in closer and closer
total emissions, being almost the same values by 2075.
As such, while larger window areas always results in higher emissions, the better window type
depend solely on the DH EF.
5.4.2
Economic
SF Results
The NPV of the window to floor ratios are shown in Figure 5.33.
Environmental and economic optimals
76
==PAGE:85==
5.4. Window to floor ratio
Figure 5.33: SF Window NPV with a period of 50 (Left) and 30 (Right) years.
The NPV for each window to floor ratio is pretty similar for all time periods and window types.
There is slight variation depending on the time periods, mostly in 2025 where the 3 pane window
is slightly cheaper when the window to floor ratio is higher.
MF Results
The NPV of the various window to floor ratios are shown in Figure 5.34.
Figure 5.34: MF Window NPV with a period of 50 (Left) and 30 (Right) years.
The NPV is pretty similar for all the variables. Using different calculation periods results in a
lower NPV when the window to floor ratios are higher, with a less significant difference with
lower window areas.
Comparison
The economic trends are very similar for the SF and MF house. Lower window to floor ratios
results in very similar NPV’s for both buildings, with slight variations in the later time periods.
5.4.3
LCCA
The same is true for all windows in the SF house, as the results showed an increase in GHGe
along with the window to floor ratio. As such it is not possible to calculate an LCCA for any of
these.
Environmental and economic optimals
77
==PAGE:86==
6
Discussion
The main goal of this thesis was investigating the environmentally optimal insulation thicknesses
in the Danish building envelope, now and in the future. In this chapter the key findings from this
will be presented, along with the limitations and uncertainties that were found during the project,
and what future work can be inspired by the findings here. A further aim was to produce these
results in a way that allows future policy makers to compare the feasibility of policies regarding
heat losses in buildings against other technologies.
6.1
Key findings
One of the main findings in this thesis is the optimal insulation thicknesses found for both a
SF and MF house. These optimal thicknesses vary based on the EF of the DH supplying the
buildings with heat, what the TC of the insulation is and the time period that is being simulated.
Probably the most impactful finding was how big of an impact the EF of the DH has on the
optimal thicknesses. These findings fit existing literature that was found and presented during
the literature review of this thesis. Here it was stated that EF’s above 25 −30g CO2 −eq.
resulted in optimal thicknesses above 500mm. In this thesis two different EF’s were used, one
by Cowi and one by Artelia. Cowi’s EF ranged from 68.04 −70.45g CO2 −eq., for the different
time periods, and is as such above the stated limit. The alternative EF by Artelia ranged from
13.20 −15.39g CO2 −eq., which is well below the limit.
Using the higher EF by Cowi resulted in the optimal thicknesses exceeding 500mm of TC 0.037
insulation, for the exterior walls and the roof. When using the lower EF by Artelia these optimal
insulation thicknesses, using the same assumptions, were found the be in the range of 300 −
350mm.
The terrain deck differed from these results, and also showed significant differences between
the two buildings, likely caused by the different requirements set for the insulation here. For the
MF house both EF’s found an optimal insulation thickness, albeit with a significant difference
between them, while the lower EF resulted in too low thicknesses to be considered valid. As
such optimal insulation thicknesses have been found for all building parts, although they are
highly dependant on the future projections of the heating grid.
Looking at one of the most common holes in the building envelope, windows, the different EF’s
also had a large impact. While a higher window to floor ratio was never found to result in a
lower total GHGe, there was a difference in the optimal amount panes in the window. Assuming
a lower EF 2 pane windows resulted in less emissions for both buildings, while a higher EF
resulted in 3 pane windows being less emitting. Economically the two window types resulted in
very similar NPV for all ratios.
6.1.1
Variations between the building types
The found optimal thicknesses for each building part are quite similar for the two buildings.
Generally speaking it has been found that the MF house has a slightly higher optimum, with
about 25mm more TC 0.037 insulation. This is true for all investigated time periods for the roof.
The optimal thickness in the exterior wall instead converge for the buildings, resulting in the
same optimal thicknesses from 2050 and onwards for both buildings.
The optimal thicknesses for the terrain deck vary significantly between the two buildings, likely
caused by the differences in the EPS insulation used.
 Environmental and economic optimals
78
==PAGE:87==
6.1. Key findings
6.1.2
Variations in insulation types
A trend found when comparing the GHGe of the different mineral wool types was that the mineral
wool with a TC of 0.037, the highest investigated, always resulted in the lowest total emissions
and cost. The single outlier to this was the NPV for the exterior walls, where the insulation with
a TC of 0.032 was the second cheapest. This is also the only example where the material cost
was very close to the nearest one. As such from an economic perspective insulation with a
lower TC is not worth the cost, unless the cost per cubic meter is similar. It is not possible to
know how close this price would have to be from the results in this thesis.
The same is true when referring to GHGe, where the option with the lowest embodied emissions
almost always resulted in the lowest total GHGe. This is particularly noticeable on the results
using a low EF for heating, where the differences in total GHGe became apparent. Using a
higher EF, such as the one from Cowi, the tendency is still in effect, but the curves are closer to
each other, making a potential trade off worth it. This however has not been the case in these
simulations.
If reducing the thickness of the building part is of high importance then using insulation with a
lower TC might be worth it, but it depends heavily on how much thickness needs to be saved.
That said, according to the findings in this thesis it is environmentally better to use too much
insulation rather than too little. While it does depend on the calculation period, using 100mm
insulation more than the optimum generally resulted in an increase in emissions of about 5% for
insulation with a TC of 0.037. When using insulation with a lower TC, and therefore embodied
emissions, this saw a slight increase. Using the same amount of insulation too little varied a
lot more, especially depending on the calculation period, but was consistently higher. From an
economic context the same tendency is shown, with a lot higher increases.
6.1.3
Economic and environmental optimum
When comparing the economic and environmental optimums a clear trend emerges. In almost
all cases the economic optimum is significantly lower than the environmental one, often being
only half the thickness. The main driver of this is the high cost of insulation when compared to
the cost of DH.
By including the NPV as the LCC of the component it was possible to calculate LCCA values for
all the building parts. These have shown that by limiting the heat loss, further than the minimum
requirements set in BR18, often leads to both an economic and environmental benefit. This
economic benefit is always the case for the exterior wall, where the LCCA is negative at lower
values for all TC’s. This is not true for all building parts, with the roof only having a negative
LCCA for the TC 0.037 insulation. This value further increases when more insulation is added.
The LCCA is not necessarily negative for the terrain deck either, but in this case it depends on
whether it is for the SF or the MF house. Due to the low optimum for the SF terrain deck the
LCCA values that were found increased rapidly. While this is eventually true for all the insulation
types, it is especially visible in the terrain deck. The MF terrain deck LCCA is negative for most
of the time, before exponentially increasing. This eventual rapid increase is seen in all the
building parts, although not at the same thicknesses and rate. Generally the later time periods,
2050 and especially 2075, see these earlier and with faster increases. This is likely caused
by the expected lower need for heating which decreases the need for thicker insulation. This
is further reinforced by the insulation types with a lower TC also seeing this trend at lower
additional insulation over the baseline. This leads to the conclusion that it is absolutely possible
to minimise the cost of conserving carbon through proper insulation of buildings. It is however
necessary to not insulate too much, as the LCCA see very fast increases in cost once this line
is crossed. And where this line is depends on the time period, building part and insulation type.
Environmental and economic optimals
79
==PAGE:88==
6.2. Limitations and uncertainties
6.2
Limitations and uncertainties
6.2.1
Material prices
A major uncertainty in this thesis is the material prices. These prices are aimed at the private
population, and as such are not applicable to the building industry at whole, as prices here are
significantly lower. Unfortunately it was not possible to obtain a comprehensive list of insulation
prices from the industry, as this type of data is kept confidential. It was however possible to
obtain a small sample of Stark’s insulation prices at a corporate scale. From this the price of
flexible insulation with a TC of 0.037 was set at a price of about 335DKK/m3, while 0.034 was
about 435DKK/m3. These prices are significantly lower, and closer to each other, than the
ones found on Stark’s website. This leads to a significant difference in the economic analysis,
and therefore likely a higher optimal insulation thickness. These results are therefore likely
different when larger companies are in charge of construction.
Another uncertainty regarding this is whether the costs will stay stable throughout the years.
Potential large scale changes to the production, e.g. electrification, will be costly for the produc­
ers. This could therefore lead to increases in material prices. A similar trend could be possible
for DH and electricity, where major changes to the grid would need to be funded.
6.2.2
Insulation types
The investigation in this thesis is limited to mineral wool insulation in the roof and the exterior
walls, and roof, and EPS insulation in the terrain deck. While these are common insulation
materials in Denmark they are not the only ones. Using more environmentally friendly insulation
materials, such as wood or paper based insulation, might result in significantly different optimal
thicknesses. A further limitation is that the generic data used is for mineral wool, which could be
split into glass and stone wool. As these materials would result in different embodied emissions
this could also lead to different optimal thicknesses.
6.2.3
Future material emissions
The background data for the changes in embodied emissions for the various materials are not
known. It is known that they are based on the PREMISE program, which does not include large
scale changes to the production line. As such changes such as large scale electrification is not
included despite this potentially reducing emissions by a large degree. In case of these kinds
of changes a new calculation would be necessary.
6.3
Future work
6.3.1
Different walls constructions
This project has only used a wall construction using concrete, insulation and bricks. While this is
a common construction in Denmark it is not the only one. As such making similar optimisations
for other construction methods, e.g. a timber frame structure, and seeing whether the results
are similar would be very relevant. It would further be relevant to see whether the found optimal
thicknesses are similar for other types of buildings, e.g. offices and schools.
6.3.2
Future legislation
Results like the ones found in this thesis are a potential basis for future building legislation. It has
been shown that the optimal U­values for each part does not correspond to the requirements set
in BR18. When future building regulations are made taking results such as these into account
would be very relevant.
Another relevant part is the inclusion of LCCA values. These allows better comparison between
different policies. As such they could aid i deciding whether emissions should be saved from
the heating of buildings or alternative policies, ensuring the most efficient use of capital.
Environmental and economic optimals
80
==PAGE:89==
7
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to find and investigate the optimal insulation thicknesses in the build­
ing envelope of two different Danish houses. A SF and a MF house. This has been done for
a contemporary period, a medium­term future and a long­term future using dynamic building
simulations with variable insulation thicknesses. It has been found that the optimal insulation
thicknesses depend mostly on three factors. The embodied emissions, the operational emis­
sions, and the weather.
The operational emissions: have been limited to heating the buildings, using two different EF’s
for DH. The official EF’s from BR18, calculated and updated by Cowi in 2020, and EF’s calcu­
lated by Artelia in 2023.
The embodied emissions: have been included using generic data for Denmark. This generic
data has further been updated to account for all valid EPD’s on the market at the time of writ­
ing. To account for expected changes and reduction in these emissions a projection has been
applied, reducing the materials embodied emissions for each future.
Changes to the climate: have been included through three different weather files for different
time periods. The used files include projections of the worst case scenario climate change.
Using these assumptions it has been found that the optimal insulation thicknesses depend
mostly on the EF of the DH with the lower EF by Artelia resulting in optimal thicknesses ranging
from 300 to 350mm mineral wool insulation with a TC of 0.037 for the exterior walls and the
roof of both the SF and MF house. The expected climate change has not been found to have a
major impact on these thicknesses, although minor decreases have been found. Investigating
mineral wool with a lower TC have been found to not result in lower total GHGe at any thick­
ness, nor resulting in a lower NPV. When assuming a higher EF for the district heating these
findings look very different though, with the optimal insulation thickness exceeding 500mm for
both buildings. It can therefore not be said that there is a definite optimum for the insulation
thickness until more knowledge on the DH grid is known.
The economic optimal insulation thickness has been found to be significantly lower than the
environmental thicknesses, ranging from 150­200mm for the exterior wall and roof. The main
driver of this has been found to be the high initial cost from purchasing mineral wool, compared
to the lower cost of DH.
By combining the GHGe and NPV a LCCA value has been calculated based on a baseline of
the minimum requirements from BR18. This has resulted in a figure for each building part and
three mineral wool types being produced, showing that using more insulation than the minimum
will both conserve carbon and be economically beneficial. The LCCA does see an exponential
increase, especially when using a low EF for the DH. This increase is further found to happen
at lower insulation thicknesses in the future.
Regarding the use of 3 pane windows the simulations have shown that this depends on the
EF of DH. Simulations using Artelia’s found that using 3 pane windows resulted in higher total
emissions and cost when compared to a 2 pane window. Cowi’s EF found the opposite with 3
pane windows being both cheaper and lower emitting. As such it is not possible to conclude
anything here until more knowledge of the actual EF is known.
 Environmental and economic optimals
81
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
[1]
IPCC 2023. Climate change 2023 : synthesis report. Contribution of Working Groups
I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J. Romero (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland,
151 pp, DOI: doi:10.59327/IPCC/AR6-9789291691647..
[2]
Energi­ og Forsyningsministeriet Klima­. LBK nr 2580 af 13/12/2021 ­ Bekendtgørelse af
lov om klima. 2021. URL: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2021/2580.
[3]
IPCC 2014. Climate change 2014 : synthesis report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II
and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
[Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland,
151 pp.
[4]
Lise Horup et al. “Absolute sustainability assessment of the Danish building sector through
prospective LCA”. In: Science of the Total Environment 966 (Feb. 2025). ISSN: 18791026.
DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2025.178780.
[5]
Social­ og Boligstyrelsen. FAQ, Grænseværdeir, Hvilke grænseværdier gælder? Retrieved
20/03/2025. URL: https://www.sbst.dk/byggeri/baeredygtigt- byggeri/videncenter- for-
bygningers-klimapaavirkning/faq.
[6]
Buket Tozan et al. “Resource consumption and GHGe of future new construction: Hotspots
for mitigation efforts in Denmark”. In: Sustainable Production and Consumption 54 (Mar.
2025), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 23525509. DOI: 10.1016/j.spc.2024.12.014.
[7]
M. J. Ritzen et al. “Environmental impact evaluation of energy saving and energy gener­
ation: Case study for two Dutch dwelling types”. In: Building and Environment 108 (Nov.
2016), pp. 73–84. ISSN: 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.07.020.
[8]
Cowi. Opdaterede emissionsfaktorer for el of fjernvame. Tech. rep. COWI, 2020.
[9]
Bygningsreglementet 2018. 2018. URL: https://www.bygningsreglementet.dk/.
[10]
COWI. COWI main page. Retrieved 22/06/2025. URL: https://www.cowi.com/.
[11]
Jørn Emil Gaarder et al. “Optimization of thermal insulation thickness pertaining to em­
bodied and operational GHG emissions in cold climates – Future and present cases”. In:
Building and Environment 234 (2023), p. 110187. ISSN: 0360­1323. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.buildenv.2023.110187. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360132323002147.
[12]
Artelia. Artelia main page. Retrieved 22/06/2025. URL: https://arteliagroup.dk/.
[13]
Matilde Sørensen Nilsson, Linda Høibye, and Steffen Enersen Maagaard. “Emissionsfak­
torer for el fjernvarme og ledningsgas for 2025­2075”. In: (2023).
[14]
2022 Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet. Tech. rep. The Danish Energy Agency, 2022.
[15]
S Julio Friedmann et al. Levelized Cost of Carbon Abatement: An improved cost­assessment
methodology for a net­zero emissions world. Tech. rep. Columbia University, Oct. 2020.
URL: www.sipa.columbia.edu.
[16]
Adam Baylin­Stern and Niels Berghout. Is carbon capture too expensive. 2021. URL:
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/is-carbon-capture-too-expensive.
[17]
Soukaina Skribbe et al. “The levelized cost of carbon abatement (LCCA) in substituting
conventional ammonia production with power­to­ammonia for fertilizer, hydrogen and ex­
port”. In: Applied Energy 373 (2024), p. 123859. ISSN: 0306­2619. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.123859. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S030626192401242X.
[18]
Henrik Tommerup and Svend Svendsen. Optimal isolering af klimaskaermen i relation til
nye skaerpede energibestemmelser. Tech. rep. DTU, 2005.
 Environmental and economic optimals
82
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[19]
A. Koezjakov et al. “The relationship between operational energy demand and embodied
energy in Dutch residential buildings”. In: Energy and Buildings 165 (Apr. 2018), pp. 233–
245. ISSN: 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.01.036.
[20]
Kirsti Jylhä et al. “Energy demand for the heating and cooling of residential houses in
Finland in a changing climate”. In: Energy and Buildings 99 (July 2015), pp. 104–116.
ISSN: 03787788. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.04.001.
[21]
O. Altan Dombayci et al. “Determination Of Optimum Insulation Thickness For Building
External Walls With Different Insulation Materials Using Environmental Impact Assess­
ment”. In: Thermal Science 24 (1 Part A 2020), pp. 303–311. ISSN: 03549836. DOI:
10.2298/TSCI180903010D.
[22]
Nyt enfamiliehus (eksempel). Retrieved 31/03/2025. URL: https://eksempelsamling.bygningsreglementet.
dk/enfamhus_eksempel.
[23]
Nyt etagehus (eksempel). Retrieved 31/03/2025. URL: https://eksempelsamling.bygningsreglementet.
dk/etagehus_eksempel.
[24]
Dansk Standard. DS418:2011 + Till.1:2020 Calculation of heat loss from buildings. Tech.
rep. 2020.
[25]
Kirsten Gram­Hansen. “Husholdningens elforbrug ­ sammenligning og reference”. In: SBi
2005:12 (2005).
[26]
DS/EN 15665:2009. Tech. rep. Dansk Standard, 2009.
[27]
Rimante A. Cox et al. “Simple future weather files for estimating heating and cooling de­
mand”. In: Building and Environment 83 (Jan. 2015), pp. 104–114. ISSN: 03601323. DOI:
10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.04.006.
[28]
Peter Grunnet Wang et al. 2001 ­ 2010 Danish Design Reference Year. Tech. rep. Danish
Meteorological Institute, 2013.
[29]
Chen Zhang et al. IEA EBC Annex 80­Dynamic simulation guideline for the performance
testing of resilient cooling strategies­Version 2. Tech. rep. Aalborg Universitet, 2023.
[30]
Anaïs Machard et al. “Typical and extreme weather datasets for studying the resilience of
buildings to climate change and heatwaves”. In: Scientific Data 11 (1 Dec. 2024). ISSN:
20524463. DOI: 10.1038/s41597-024-03319-8.
[31]
Jesper ; Kragh and Harpa Birgisdottir. Udvikling af dansk generisk LCA­data. Tech. rep.
Aalborg University, 2023, p. 21.
[32]
Roberta Moschetti and Helge Brattebø. “Combining Life Cycle Environmental and Eco­
nomic Assessments in Building Energy Renovation Projects”. In: Energies 10.11 (2017).
ISSN: 1996­1073. DOI: 10.3390/en10111851. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/
10/11/1851.
[33]
DS/ISO 15686­5:2017. Tech. rep. Dansk Standard, 2017. URL: www.ds.dk.
[34]
Værdibyg and Realdania. “Totaløkonomiske metoder”. In: (2019).
[35]
Kathrine Laursen, Godsvig, and Kim Haugbølle. Beregningsforudsaetninger og nøgletal
i LCCbyg. Tech. rep. Aalborg Universitet, 2023.
Environmental and economic optimals
83
==PAGE:92==
Energimærkningscertifikat for facadevinduer 
Reg.nr. 508-7.2 
For yderligere oplysninger: se www.energivinduer.dk 
© Certifikatet må ikke anvendes i andre offentlige tilgængelige registreringer uden skriftlig tilladelse fra virksomheden. 
 
 
Virksomhed 
 
Produktsystem 
Kastrup A/S (Træ/Alu) 
Mosebyvej 40, 7500 Holstebro  
CVR nr.: 2547 3434 
Kastrup Træ/Alu 24  
Materialegruppe 
Træ/Alu 
 
 
 
Energiklasser for produktsystem 
 
Beregningen af energitilskuddet sker for et referencehus 
med danske klimadata i henhold til den formel, som findes i 
BR18 (§258).  
Produktsystemets Eref -værdi afrundes til heltal inden 
klassificering. 
 
* Referencevinduet klassificeret i energiklasse A er 
mindstekravet til helårsbeboelse, både ved nybyggeri og 
vinduesudskiftning. Energiklasse B eller dårligere kan som 
hovedregel kun anvendes til sommerhuse m.v., hvor kravet 
er Uw ≤ 1,8 W/m²K for det specifikke vindue. 
 
Energiklasse 
Mærkning 
0 ≤Eref 
 
- 17 ≤Eref < 0 
 
- 33 ≤Eref < - 17  
 
- 55 ≤Eref < - 33      * 
- 60 ≤Eref < - 55      * 
Eref < - 60      * 
 
Energidata for produktsystem 
 Standardrude for produktsystem 
Referencevindue - definition: 
1-fløjet vindue med oplukkelig ramme i den 
europæiske standardstørrelse 1,23 x 1,48 m. 
Standardrude – definition: Ruden som anvendes som 
produktionssystemets primære rude. 
2-lags rude: 4-16-4 ECLAZ 
Eref 
= 196,40 · gw – 90,36 · Uw 
-10,6 kWh/m2 
Ug : Center U-værdi (rude) 
1,12 W/m²·K 
Uw 
: U-værdi (vindue) 
1,29 W/m²·K 
gg : Solenergitransmittans (rude) 
0,71 
gw   
: Solenergitransmittans (vindue) 
0,54 
LTg : Lystransmittans (rude) 
0,83 
Ff 
: Glasandel (Ag / Aw) 
0,76 
λeq : ækv. varmeledningsevne (spacer) 0,40/0,29 W/m·K 
 
Standardsprosse 
 
For vinduer med mange sprosser (palævinduer) er det 
vigtigt at vælge en energimæssig god sprosse (dvs. tynde 
sprosser med et lille linietab). 
 
Gennemgående sprosser må ikke anvendes i et 
energimærket produktsystem, men er dog tilladt, hvis de er 
nødvendige for bæreevnen eller som nødvendig adskillelse 
mellem 2 rudetyper, typisk ved større vinduesrammer med 
store rudefelter. 
Kategori 
Linietab 
Mærkning 
Lavenergisprosse 
≤ 0,010 W/m·K 
 
Energisprosse 
> 0,010 W/m·K 
 
Bredde på standardsprosse 
24 mm 
Psi-værdi = linjetab ved sprosse (pr. side) 
0,026 W/m·K 
 
 
 
Er vinduessystemet underlagt kontrol i henhold til gældende udgave af de Tekniske Bestemmelser for DVV 
Ja 
Nej 
 
 
 
Det attesteres herved at: 
 Dette certifikat er gyldigt til 1. marts 2026 
• 
Virksomheden kan beregne produkternes aktuelle energidata. 
• 
Virksomhedens dokumentation kontrolleres årligt af et uvildigt 
organ. 
• 
Energidata er dokumenteret med testrapporter fra et EU-
notificeret eller et af Energimærkningsordningen anerkendt 
organ. 
• 
Poste er udført i samme materialer som karm og ramme i 
produktsystemet. 
01.03.2024                             
 
Dato                                     For Energimærkningsordningen 
 
A
Appendix
A.1
Data sheets for windows
 Environmental and economic optimals
84
==PAGE:93==
Energimærkningscertifikat for facadevinduer 
Reg.nr. 503-12.2 
For yderligere oplysninger: se www.energivinduer.dk 
 Certifikatet må ikke anvendes i andre offentlige tilgængelige registreringer uden skriftlig tilladelse fra virksomheden. 
 
 
Virksomhed 
 
Produktsystem 
KPK Døre og Vinduer A/S 
Rogalandsvej 3, 7900 Nykøbing Mors 
CVR nr.: 1564 6101 
3-lags Træ/Alu A-01  
Materialegruppe 
Træ/Alu  
 
 
 
Energiklasser for produktsystem 
Beregningen af energitilskuddet sker for et referencehus 
med danske klimadata i henhold til den formel, som findes i 
BR18 (§258).  
Produktsystemets Eref -værdi afrundes til heltal inden 
klassificering. 
 
* Referencevinduet klassificeret i energiklasse A er 
mindstekravet til helårsbeboelse, både ved nybyggeri og 
vinduesudskiftning. Energiklasse B eller dårligere kan som 
hovedregel kun anvendes til sommerhuse m.v., hvor kravet 
er Uw ≤ 1,8 W/m²K for det specifikke vindue.  
 
Energiklasse 
Mærkning 
0 ≤ Eref 
 
 
- 17 ≤ Eref < 0 
 
- 33 ≤ Eref < - 17  
 
- 55 ≤ Eref < - 33      * 
- 60 ≤ Eref < - 55      * 
 Eref < - 60      * 
 
Energidata for produktsystem 
 Standardrude for produktsystem 
Referencevindue - definition: 
1-fløjet vindue med oplukkelig ramme i den 
europæiske standardstørrelse 1,23 x 1,48 m. 
Standardrude – definition: Ruden som anvendes som 
produktionssystemets primære rude. 
3-lags rude: 4-18-3-18-4 
Eref 
= 196,40 · gw – 90,36 · Uw 
+ 8,6 kWh/m2 
Ug 
: Center U-værdi (rude) 
 0,53 W/m²·K 
Uw 
: U-værdi (vindue) 
0,78 W/m²·K 
gg 
: Solenergitransmittans (rude) 
 0,53 
gw   
: Solenergitransmittans (vindue) 
0,40 
LTg : Lystransmittans (rude) 
 0,74 
Ff 
: Glasandel (Ag / Aw) 
0,76 
λeq : ækv. varmeledningsevne (spacer)  0,40/0,28 W/m·K 
 
Standardsprosse 
 
For vinduer med mange sprosser (palævinduer) er det 
vigtigt at vælge en energimæssig god sprosse (dvs. tynde 
sprosser med et lille linietab). 
 
Gennemgående sprosser må ikke anvendes i et 
energimærket produktsystem, men er dog tilladt, hvis de er 
nødvendige for bæreevnen eller som nødvendig adskillelse 
mellem 2 rudetyper, typisk ved større vinduesrammer med 
store rudefelter. 
Kategori 
Linietab 
Mærkning 
Lavenergisprosse 
≤ 0,010 W/m·K 
 
Energisprosse 
> 0,010 W/m·K 
 
Bredde på standardsprosse 
 25 mm 
Psi-værdi = linjetab ved sprosse (pr. side) 
 0,007 W/m·K 
 
 
 
Er vinduessystemet underlagt kontrol i henhold til gældende udgave af de Tekniske Bestemmelser for DVV 
Ja 
Nej 
 
 
 
 
Det attesteres herved at: 
 
Dette certifikat er gyldigt til 1. marts 2027 
• 
Virksomheden kan beregne produkternes aktuelle energidata. 
• 
Virksomhedens dokumentation kontrolleres årligt af et uvildigt 
organ. 
• 
Energidata er dokumenteret med testrapporter fra et EU-
notificeret eller et af Energimærkningsordningen anerkendt 
organ. 
• 
Poste er udført i samme materialer som karm og ramme i 
produktsystemet. 
01.03.2025                            
 
Dato                                     For Energimærkningsordningen 
 
A.1. Data sheets for windows
Environmental and economic optimals
85
==PAGE:94==
A.2. Compiled EPDs for insulation
A.2
Compiled EPDs for insulation
Declaration number
Type
Valid to
A1­A3
C3
C4
D
Mineral wool, murbatts, λ30
NEPD­2613­1324­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
1,42E+00
0,00E+00
2,82E­02
0,00E+00
Mineral wool, murbatts, λ32
NEPD­2602­1326­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
6,91E­01
0,00E+00
1,35E­02
0,00E+00
S­P­10766
Glass
20/10/2028
9,13E­01
0,00E+00
1,58E­02
­6,03E­02
NEPD­3381­2002­EN
Stone
07/03/2027
7,41E­01
0,00E+00
2,87E­02
­4,94E­02
Mineral wool, murbatts, λ34
NEPD­2603­1326­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
5,41E­01
0,00E+00
1,05E­02
0,00E+00
S­P­10779
Glass
23/10/2028
6,66E­01
0,00E+00
1,18E­02
­4,29E­02
NEPD­3381­2002
(65422)
Stone
15/06/2028
4,60E­01
0,00E+00
1,78E­02
­3,05E­02
Mineral wool, murbatts, λ37
NEPD­2604­1326­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
5,01E­01
0,00E+00
9,84E­03
0,00E+00
S­P­10777
Glass
23/10/2028
5,03E­01
0,00E+00
8,92E­03
­2,33E­02
NEPD­3381­2002 (RW
54983)
Stone
18/11/2027
3,90E­01
0,00E+00
1,50E­02
­2,58E­02
Table A.1: Compiled EPD data for mineral wool insulation for brick walls.
Declaration number
Type
Valid to
A1­A3
C3
C4
D
Mineral wool, flexible insulation, λ30
NEPD­2609­1324­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
1,41E+00
0,00E+00
2,82E­02
0,00E+00
Mineral wool, flexible insulation, λ32
NEPD­2610­1324­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
6,88E­01
0,00E+00
1,35E­02
0,00E+00
S­P­10766
Glass
20/10/2028
9,13E­01
0,00E+00
1,58E­02
­6,03E­02
NEPD­3381­2002­EN
Stone
07/03/2027
7,41E­01
0,00E+00
2,87E­02
­4,94E­02
Mineral wool, flexible insulation, λ34
NEPD­2606­1326­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
5,12E­01
0,00E+00
1,05E­02
0,00E+00
NEPD­2611­1324­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
5,32E­01
0,00E+00
1,05E­02
0,00E+00
S­P­10779
Glass
23/10/2028
6,66E­01
0,00E+00
1,18E­02
­4,29E­02
NEPD­3381­2002­EN
Stone
07/03/2027
5,07E­01
0,00E+00
1,96E­02
­3,38E­02
Mineral wool, flexible insulation, λ37
NEPD­2608­1324­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
4,73E­01
0,00E+00
9,49E­03
0,00E+00
NEPD­2612­1324­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
4,41E­01
0,00E+00
8,68E­03
0,00E+00
NEPD­2607­1326­EN
Glass
04/01/2026
4,30E­01
0,00E+00
8,68E­03
0,00E+00
S­P­10777
Glass
23/10/2028
5,03E­01
0,00E+00
8,92E­03
­2,33E­02
NEPD­4340­3565­EN
Stone
05/04/2028
1,37E+00
0,00E+00
1,50E­02
­5,42E­02
NEPD­3381­2002
(57088)
Stone
26/01/2028
3,90E­01
0,00E+00
1,50E­02
­2,58E­02
NEPD­3381­2002­EN
(RW 56270)
Stone
30/12/2027
4,24E­01
0,00E+00
1,64E­02
­2,81E­02
Table A.2: Flexible insulation emissions
Environmental and economic optimals
86
==PAGE:95==
A.2. Compiled EPDs for insulation
Declaration number
Type
Valid to
A1­A3
C3
C4
D
EPS Insulation, white, 60kN
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
1,10E+00
1,61E+00
0,00E+00
­5,68E­01
NEPD­6786­6105­EN
(375517)
EPS
06/06/2029
1,02E+00
1,49E+00
1,16E­04
­3,04E­01
NEPD­3209­1848­DK
EPS
05/11/2026
1,42E+00
1,45E+00
2,81E­05
­1,07E­01
NEPD­3078­1741­EN
EPS
10/09/2026
7,61E­01
1,45E+00
2,82E­05
­1,07E­01
EPS Insulation, white, 80kN
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
1,22E+00
1,79E+00
0,00E+00
­6,31E­01
NEPD­4127­3339­EN
(55551)
EPS
05/01/2028
2,17E+00
1,84E+00
8,95E­05
­1,02E­01
NEPD­6786­6105­EN
(338949)
EPS
06/06/2029
1,09E+00
1,60E+00
1,25E­04
­3,27E­01
NEPD­6787­6103­EN
EPS
06/06/2029
3,73E­01
1,65E+00
1,29E­04
­3,38E­01
NEPD­3209­1848­DK
EPS
05/11/2026
1,77E+00
1,81E+00
3,51E­05
­1,34E­01
NEPD­3078­1741­EN
EPS
10/09/2026
9,51E­01
1,81E+00
3,53E­05
­1,34E­01
EPS Insulation, white, over 80kN
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
1,95E+00
2,86E+00
0,00E+00
­1,01E+00
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
2,81E+00
4,12E+00
0,00E+00
­1,45E+00
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
3,42E+00
5,01E+00
0,00E+00
­1,77E+00
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
4,15E+00
6,09E+00
0,00E+00
­2,15E+00
NEPD­6786­6105­EN
(375518)
EPS
06/06/2029
1,56E+00
2,31E+00
1,80E­04
­4,72E­01
NEPD­6786­6105­EN
(375519)
EPS
06/06/2029
2,12E+00
3,15E+00
2,46E­04
­6,44E­01
NEPD­6786­6105­EN
(375524)
EPS
06/06/2029
2,45E+00
3,66E+00
2,85E­04
­7,48E­01
NEPD­4127­3339­EN
(55643)
EPS
05/01/2028
2,46E+00
2,06E+00
1,01E­04
­1,18E­01
NEPD­4127­3339­EN
(55645)
EPS
05/01/2028
3,66E+00
3,09E+00
1,51E­04
­1,76E­01
NEPD­3209­1848­DK
EPS
05/11/2026
3,01E+00
3,08E+00
5,97E­05
­2,28E­01
NEPD­3209­1848­DK
EPS
05/11/2026
4,07E+00
4,16E+00
8,07E­05
­3,08E­01
NEPD­3078­1741­EN
EPS
10/09/2026
1,62E+00
3,08E+00
6,00E­05
­2,28E­01
NEPD­3078­1741­EN
EPS
10/09/2026
2,19E+00
4,16E+00
8,12E­05
­3,08E­01
Table A.3: White EPS insulation emissions
Environmental and economic optimals
87
==PAGE:96==
A.2. Compiled EPDs for insulation
Declaration number
Type
Valid to
A1­A3
C3
C4
D
EPS Insulation, Grey, 60kN
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
1,74E+00
3,65E­02
0,00E+00
­7,03E+00
NEPD­7033­6431­EN
(432445)
EPS
02/07/2029
8,58E­01
1,30E+00
1,01E­04
­2,65E­01
NEPD­3210­1848­DK
EPS
05/11/2026
1,06E+00
1,26E+00
2,46E­05
­9,36E­02
MD­23060­EN
EPS
10/03/2028
1,38E+00
1,37E+00
0,00E+00
­4,62E­01
EPS Insulation, Grey, 80kN
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
2,17E+00
4,56E­02
0,00E+00
­8,79E+00
NEPD­7033­6431­EN
(339042)
EPS
02/07/2024
9,35E­01
1,42E+00
1,11E­04
­2,90E­01
NEPD­4126­3343­EN
EPS
05/01/2028
1,89E+00
1,58E+00
7,71E­05
­9,00E­02
NEPD­3210­1848­DK
EPS
05/11/2026
1,32E+00
1,57E+00
3,08E­05
­1,17E­01
MD­23060­EN
EPS
10/03/2028
3,61E+00
3,78E­02
0,00E+00
­7,19E+00
EPS Insulation, Grey, Over 80kN
MD­22132­EN
EPS
03/02/2028
3,26E+00
6,84E­02
0,00E+00
­1,32E+01
NEPD­7033­6431­EN
(432446)
EPS
02/07/2024
1,42E+00
2,17E+00
1,70E­04
­4,45E­01
MD­23060­EN
EPS
10/03/2028
2,05E+00
2,39E+00
0,00E+00
­8,15E­01
NEPD­7308­6697­EN
EPS
21/08/2029
5,19E­01
2,36E+00
1,84E­04
­4,82E­01
Table A.4: Grey EPS insulation emissions
Environmental and economic optimals
88
==PAGE:97==
Flexible insulation 37
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
44,05
0,045
978,89
36,84
0,045
818,67
62,95
0,095
662,63
63,85
0,07
912,14
77,34
0,095
814,11
79,15
0,12
659,58
86,35
0,095
908,95
117
0,145
806,90
95,35
0,145
657,59
108,85
0,12
907,08
Avg
813,22
111,55
0,17
656,18
131,4
0,145
906,21
127,8
0,195
655,38
174,6
0,195
895,38
144,9
0,22
658,64
Avg
918,11
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
161,1
0,245
657,55
31,45
0,045
698,89
161,1
0,245
657,55
31,45
0,045
698,89
Avg
658,14
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
31,45
0,045
698,89
75,55
0,095
795,26
47,65
0,07
680,71
75,55
0,095
795,26
47,65
0,07
680,71
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
95,35
0,12
794,58
64,75
0,095
681,58
43,15
0,045
958,89
95,35
0,12
794,58
64,75
0,095
681,58
66,55
0,07
950,71
115,2
0,145
794,48
81,85
0,12
682,08
89,95
0,095
946,84
115,2
0,145
794,48
98,95
0,145
682,41
113,4
0,12
945,00
135
0,17
794,12
98,95
0,145
682,41
137,7
0,145
949,66
135
0,17
794,12
133,2
0,195
683,08
184,5
0,195
946,15
154,8
0,195
793,85
166,5
0,245
679,59
199,8
0,22
908,18
154,8
0,195
793,85
Avg
685,90
231,3
0,245
944,08
194,4
0,245
793,47
Avg
943,69
Avg
794,37
Average
688
DKK/m3
Flexible insulation 34
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
288
0,245
1175,51
48,55
0,045
1078,89
48,55
0,045
1078,89
230,4
0,195
1181,54
74,65
0,07
1066,43
48,55
0,045
1078,89
201,6
0,17
1185,88
101,65
0,095
1070,00
74,65
0,07
1066,43
171
0,145
1179,31
101,65
0,095
1070,00
101,65
0,095
1070,00
142,2
0,12
1185,00
127,8
0,12
1065,00
101,65
0,095
1070,00
112,45
0,095
1183,68
154,8
0,145
1067,59
127,8
0,12
1065,00
83,65
0,07
1195,00
154,8
0,145
1067,59
154,8
0,145
1067,59
55,85
0,045
1241,11
207,9
0,195
1066,15
154,8
0,145
1067,59
Avg
1190,88
207,9
0,195
1066,15
180,9
0,17
1064,12
207,9
0,195
1066,15
207,9
0,195
1066,15
Avg
1068,40
Avg
1069,47
ROCKWOOL Flexibatts 34
ISOVER 34 Basic Formstykker 
ISOVER 34 Ruller
ROCKWOOL Flexibatts 37
Rockwool A-Batts
ISOVER 37 Basic Formstykker 
ISOVER 37 Flex
KNAUF Insulation Ecobatt 37 
ISOVER 37 Ruller
A.3. Material prices
A.3
Material prices
Environmental and economic optimals
89
==PAGE:98==
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
38,65
0,045
858,89
144,85
0,17
852,06
60,25
0,07
860,71
Avg
852,06
80,95
0,095
852,11
102,55
0,12
854,58
Average
1021
DKK/m3
123,25
0,125
986,00
124,15
0,145
856,21
147,55
0,15
983,67
186,25
0,19
980,26
186,25
0,19
980,26
166,45
0,195
853,59
245,65
0,24
1023,54
245,65
0,24
1023,54
Avg
926,11
Flexible insulation 32
Price DKK/mThickn [m] Price DKK/m3
Price DKK/mThickn [m] Price DKK/m3
65,65
0,045
1458,89
244,8
0,145
1688,28
102,55
0,07
1465,00
80,95
0,045
1798,89
137,7
0,095
1449,47
Avg
1743,58
173,7
0,12
1447,50
210,6
0,145
1452,41
Average
1599
DKK/m3
210,6
0,145
1452,41
282,6
0,195
1449,23
Avg
1453,56
Murbatts 37
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
76,45
0,075
1019,33
213,25
0,19
1122,37
152,1
0,125
1216,80
105,25
0,1
1052,50
213,25
0,19
1122,37
152,1
0,125
1216,80
124,2
0,125
993,60
255,55
0,24
1064,79
111,55
0,15
743,67
128,7
0,125
1029,60
Avg
1103,18
177,3
0,19
933,16
146,7
0,15
978,00
177,3
0,19
933,16
188,1
0,19
990,00
Average
1028
DKK/m3
211,5
0,24
881,25
195,3
0,19
1027,89
211,5
0,24
881,25
233,1
0,24
971,25
Avg
972,30
Avg
1007,77
KNAUF Insulation Ecobatt 34 
Formstykker 
KNAUF Formstykker 34
ISOVER Formstykke 32
ROCKWOOL Flexibatts 32
ROCKWOOL Murbatts 37
Knauf insulation 37 Murisolering
Isover 37 filt
A.3. Material prices
Environmental and economic optimals
90
==PAGE:99==
Murbatts 34
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
97,15
0,1
971,50
288,9
0,175
1650,86
152,1
0,125
1216,80
312,3
0,19
1643,68
152,1
0,125
1216,80
312,3
0,19
1643,68
182,7
0,15
1218,00
312,3
0,19
1643,68
212,4
0,175
1213,71
340,2
0,22
1546,36
212,4
0,175
1213,71
393,3
0,24
1638,75
230,4
0,19
1212,63
393,3
0,24
1638,75
230,4
0,19
1212,63
Avg
1629,40
230,4
0,19
1212,63
273,6
0,225
1216,00
Average
1413
DKK/m3
273,6
0,225
1216,00
291,6
0,24
1215,00
291,6
0,24
1215,00
Avg
1196,19
Murbatts 32
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
180
0,125
1440,00
327,6
0,2
1638,00
180
0,125
1440,00
327,6
0,267
1226,97
216
0,15
1440,00
Avg
1432,48
216
0,15
1440,00
252
0,175
1440,00
Average
1436
DKK/m3
273,6
0,19
1440,00
273,6
0,19
1440,00
345,6
0,24
1440,00
Avg
1440,00
Isover 32 Murfilt
Knauf insulation EcoBatt 32 M 
Murfilt
Isover 34 Murbatts
ROCKWOOL Murbatts 34
A.3. Material prices
Environmental and economic optimals
91
==PAGE:100==
EPS White 60kN
EPS Grey 60kN
EPS Grey 80kN
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
45,83
0,1
458,30
56,94
0,1
569,40
31,53
0,05
630,60
68,52
0,15
456,80
79,86
0,14
570,43
47,22
0,075
629,60
80,09
0,175
457,66
85,65
0,15
571,00
63,89
0,1
638,90
90,97
0,2
454,85
91,9
0,16
574,38
95,83
0,15
638,87
100
0,22
454,55
102,78
0,18
571,00
101,85
0,16
636,56
116,32
0,25
465,28
114,58
0,2
572,90
115,97
0,18
644,28
Avg
457,91
131,94
0,23
573,65
128,47
0,2
642,35
160,42
0,28
572,93
147,92
0,23
643,13
Avg
571,96
169,79
0,265
640,72
178,82
0,28
638,64
Avg
638,36
EPS White 80kN
Price 
DKK/m2
Thickn [m]
Price 
DKK/m3
25,97
0,05
519,40
39,09
0,075
521,20
51,94
0,1
519,40
77,78
0,15
518,53
102,78
0,2
513,90
115,63
0,22
525,59
Avg
519,67
Windows
Width
Height
Area 2 pane
3 pane
39
39
0,15
1913,59
2238,9
50
50
0,25
2060,89
2411,24
75
75
0,56
2423,3
2835,26
100
100
1
2824,1
3304,19
125
125
1,56
3961,53
4634,99
150
150
2,25
4746,34
5553,22
Gulvisolering S60 Sundolitt
Gulvisolering S60 Sundolitt
Gulvisolering S60 Climate 
Sundolitt
Gulvisolering S60 Climate 
Sundolitt
y = 1375,5x + 1663,9
y = 1609,4x + 1946,7
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
Price [DKK]
Window area [m2]
2 pane
3 pane
Linear (2 pane)
Linear (3 pane)
A.3. Material prices
Environmental and economic optimals
92
==PAGE:101==
Mineral wool 
37 Wall
Mineral wool 
34 Wall
Mineral wool 
32 Wall
Mineral wool 
37 Flexible
Mineral wool 
34 Flexible
Mineral wool 
32 Flexible
EPS White 38
EPS Grey 31
Artelia EF
COWI EF
SF
2025
15,41
22,12
32,50
14,95
20,15
29,44
85,09
94,87
kg CO2-eq./m3
2025-2075
0,01539
0,07045
kg CO2-eq./kWh Wall area
112,31
m3
2050
12,97
18,62
27,36
12,58
16,96
24,78
81,66
91,05
kg CO2-eq./m3
2050 +
0,01320
0,06804
kg CO2-eq./kWh Roof area
149,6
m3
2075
12,21
17,53
25,75
11,84
15,96
23,33
80,42
89,66
kg CO2-eq./m3
Price
DKK/kWh
Floor area
149,6
m3
Price
1027,75
1412,79
1436,24
687,63
1021,38
1598,57
457,91
571,96
DKK/m3
Single family
Exterior walls
Resulting U-
Value
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
0,929
0,025
43,25
36,41
34,27
2885,67
0,023
57,07
48,04
45,22
3645,13
0,022
78,92
66,44
62,54
3487,66
0,571
0,050
86,51
72,82
68,55
5771,33
0,046
114,13
96,08
90,44
7290,26
0,043
157,84
132,87
125,07
6975,31
0,412
0,075
129,76
109,23
102,82
8657,00
0,069
171,20
144,11
135,66
10935,40
0,065
236,76
199,31
187,61
10462,97
0,322
0,100
173,02
145,65
137,10
11542,66
0,092
228,26
192,15
180,88
14580,53
0,086
315,68
265,74
250,15
13950,63
0,265
0,125
216,27
182,06
171,37
14428,33
0,115
285,33
240,19
226,09
18225,66
0,108
394,60
332,18
312,68
17438,28
0,224
0,150
259,53
218,47
205,65
17313,99
0,138
342,39
288,23
271,31
21870,79
0,130
473,52
398,61
375,22
20925,94
0,195
0,175
302,78
254,88
239,92
20199,66
0,161
399,46
336,26
316,53
25515,92
0,151
552,44
465,05
437,76
24413,60
0,172
0,200
346,04
291,29
274,20
23085,32
0,184
456,52
384,30
361,75
29161,05
0,173
631,36
531,48
500,29
27901,25
0,154
0,225
389,29
327,70
308,47
25970,99
0,207
513,59
432,34
406,97
32806,19
0,195
710,28
597,92
562,83
31388,91
0,140
0,250
432,55
364,12
342,75
28856,65
0,230
570,66
480,38
452,19
36451,32
0,216
789,21
664,35
625,37
34876,57
0,128
0,275
475,80
400,53
377,02
31742,32
0,253
627,72
528,42
497,41
40096,45
0,238
868,13
730,79
687,90
38364,22
0,118
0,300
519,05
436,94
411,30
34627,98
0,276
684,79
576,45
542,63
43741,58
0,259
947,05
797,22
750,44
41851,88
0,109
0,325
562,31
473,35
445,57
37513,65
0,299
741,85
624,49
587,84
47386,71
0,281
1025,97
863,66
812,98
45339,53
0,101
0,350
605,56
509,76
479,85
40399,31
0,322
798,92
672,53
633,06
51031,85
0,303
1104,89
930,09
875,51
48827,19
0,095
0,375
648,82
546,17
514,12
43284,98
0,345
855,98
720,57
678,28
54676,98
0,324
1183,81
996,53
938,05
52314,85
0,089
0,400
692,07
582,59
548,40
46170,64
0,368
913,05
768,61
723,50
58322,11
0,346
1262,73
1062,96
1000,59
55802,50
0,084
0,425
735,33
619,00
582,67
49056,31
0,391
970,12
816,64
768,72
61967,24
0,368
1341,65
1129,40
1063,12
59290,16
0,080
0,450
778,58
655,41
616,95
51941,97
0,414
1027,18
864,68
813,94
65612,37
0,389
1420,57
1195,84
1125,66
62777,82
0,076
0,475
821,84
691,82
651,22
54827,64
0,436
1084,25
912,72
859,16
69257,51
0,411
1499,49
1262,27
1188,20
66265,47
0,072
0,500
865,09
728,23
685,50
57713,30
0,459
1141,31
960,76
904,38
72902,64
0,432
1578,41
1328,71
1250,73
69753,13
2025
Artelia
Cowi
2050
Artelia
Cowi
2075
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 
2075+2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075-
2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
7398,1
5692,84
26059,81
100886
76853
98,93%
7318,9
4830,47
24898,90
99806
76030
85%
6281,1
4145,53
21368,30
85654
65250
4213,7
3242,44
14842,76
57461
43773
99,37%
4187,3
2763,62
14245,19
57101
43499
85%
3595
2372,70
12230,19
49024
37346
2873,7
2211,31
10122,61
39188
29853
99,70%
2865
1890,90
9746,73
39069
29762
85%
2444,9
1613,63
8317,55
33341
25398
2140
1646,73
7538,15
29183
22231
100,69%
2154,7
1422,10
7330,29
29383
22384
84%
1801,4
1188,92
6128,36
24565
18713
1680,4
1293,07
5919,21
22915
17456
102,02%
1714,3
1131,44
5832,05
23378
17809
84%
1410,8
931,13
4799,54
19239
14656
1370,3
1054,45
4826,88
18686
14235
103,25%
1414,8
933,77
4813,15
19293
14697
84%
1157,5
763,95
3937,82
15785
12024
1152,2
886,62
4058,62
15712
11969
104,16%
1200,1
792,07
4082,74
16365
12467
85%
977,4
645,08
3325,11
13329
10153
990,8
762,42
3490,09
13511
10293
104,79%
1038,3
685,28
3532,30
14159
10786
85%
843
556,38
2867,89
11496
8757
864,5
665,23
3045,20
11789
8981
105,52%
912,2
602,05
3103,30
12439
9476
85%
737,7
486,88
2509,66
10060
7663
763,9
587,82
2690,84
10417
7936
106,23%
811,5
535,59
2760,72
11066
8430
86%
654,5
431,97
2226,61
8925
6799
682,4
525,11
2403,75
9306
7089
106,54%
727
479,82
2473,25
9914
7552
86%
585,7
386,56
1992,55
7987
6084
614,4
472,78
2164,22
8378
6383
107,08%
657,9
434,21
2238,18
8972
6834
86%
527,8
348,35
1795,58
7197
5483
558,3
429,61
1966,61
7613
5800
107,31%
599,1
395,41
2038,14
8170
6224
86%
479,4
316,40
1630,92
6537
4980
510,4
392,75
1797,88
6960
5302
107,50%
548,7
362,14
1866,68
7482
5700
86%
438,1
289,15
1490,42
5974
4551
468,8
360,74
1651,35
6393
4870
107,64%
504,6
333,04
1716,65
6881
5242
86%
402,5
265,65
1369,31
5489
4181
432,6
332,89
1523,83
5899
4494
107,86%
466,6
307,96
1587,37
6363
4847
86%
371,5
245,19
1263,84
5066
3859
400,8
308,42
1411,82
5466
4164
108,01%
432,9
285,71
1472,73
5903
4497
86%
344,4
227,30
1171,65
4697
3578
372,4
286,56
1311,78
5078
3869
108,16%
402,8
265,85
1370,33
5493
4184
86%
320,2
211,33
1089,32
4366
3326
347,1
267,09
1222,66
4733
3606
108,41%
376,3
248,36
1280,17
5132
3909
86%
299,1
197,41
1017,54
4079
3107
325
250,09
1144,81
4432
3376
108,46%
352,5
232,65
1199,21
4807
3662
86%
280,1
184,87
952,90
3820
2910
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,929
103936
102856
88704
104739
103659
89507
104573
103493
89340
0,571
63562
63202
55125
65167
64807
56730
64834
64474
56397
0,412
48339
48220
42491
50747
50628
44900
50248
50129
44400
0,322
41384
41584
36766
44595
44795
39977
43929
44129
39311
0,265
38166
38629
34490
42180
42643
38504
41348
41810
37671
0,224
36988
37595
34086
41804
42411
38903
40806
41413
37904
0,195
37064
37717
34680
42683
43337
40300
41518
42171
39134
0,172
37913
38561
35898
44335
44983
42320
43004
43651
40988
0,154
39241
39891
37512
46466
47116
44737
44968
45618
43239
0,140
40919
41568
39428
48947
49596
47455
47283
47932
45791
0,128
42858
43466
41540
51689
52297
50370
49858
50466
48539
0,118
44981
45574
43800
54614
55208
53434
52617
53210
51436
0,109
47266
47823
46190
57702
58259
56626
55539
56095
54463
0,101
49663
50186
48677
60902
61425
59916
58572
59094
57586
0,095
52146
52634
51242
64188
64676
63284
61691
62179
60787
0,089
54703
55167
53870
67547
68011
66714
64884
65348
64051
0,084
57319
57757
56550
70967
71404
70198
68137
68575
67368
0,080
59982
60397
59271
74432
74847
73721
71436
71851
70724
0,076
62688
63086
62033
77940
78339
77286
74778
75176
74123
0,072
65436
65811
64824
81492
81867
80880
78163
78538
77551
Mineral wool 32
DH
0,53
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
tau=50
Resulting U-
Value
Mineral wool 37
Insulation
Mineral wool 34
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
A.4. SF Insulation Results
A.4
SF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
93
==PAGE:102==
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,929
80036
79213
68432
80874
80051
69270
80700
79877
69096
0,571
50139
49864
43711
51814
51540
45387
51467
51192
45039
0,412
39401
39311
34947
41914
41824
37460
41393
41303
36939
0,322
34962
35115
31445
38313
38466
34796
37618
37771
34101
0,265
33371
33723
30570
37559
37911
34759
36691
37043
33890
0,224
33332
33795
31122
38358
38821
36148
37316
37779
35106
0,195
34249
34747
32434
40113
40611
38297
38897
39395
37082
0,172
35756
36249
34220
42457
42951
40922
41068
41561
39532
0,154
37627
38122
36309
45166
45661
43849
43602
44098
42285
0,140
39764
40259
38628
48141
48636
47005
46404
46899
45268
0,128
42101
42564
41096
51315
51778
50311
49405
49868
48400
0,118
44577
45029
43677
54629
55081
53730
52545
52997
51645
0,109
47177
47601
46358
58067
58491
57248
55809
56233
54989
0,101
49862
50260
49111
61590
61988
60839
59158
59556
58407
0,095
52613
52985
51924
65179
65550
64490
62573
62945
61884
0,089
55420
55773
54785
68823
69176
68188
66044
66397
65409
0,084
58273
58606
57687
72513
72847
71927
69560
69894
68975
0,080
61160
61476
60618
76239
76555
75697
73112
73428
72570
0,076
64080
64384
63582
79997
80300
79498
76696
77000
76198
0,072
67034
67319
66567
83788
84073
83321
80314
80599
79847
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,929
5736
4867
4180
5750
4879
4191
5772
4897
4208
0,571
3329
2836
2441
3357
2860
2463
3400
2896
2498
0,412
2341
2000
1716
2383
2035
1749
2448
2090
1801
0,322
1820
1568
1326
1875
1614
1370
1962
1688
1439
0,265
1509
1313
1103
1578
1372
1157
1688
1464
1244
0,224
1314
1152
970
1397
1222
1035
1528
1332
1139
0,195
1189
1047
885
1286
1128
962
1439
1257
1083
0,172
1108
977
831
1219
1070
918
1394
1217
1057
0,154
1055
930
795
1179
1034
894
1376
1200
1050
0,140
1020
900
775
1158
1016
884
1377
1200
1057
0,128
1001
880
764
1153
1008
884
1393
1211
1074
0,118
992
871
760
1158
1011
891
1420
1231
1099
0,109
992
869
762
1171
1020
904
1456
1259
1129
0,101
998
872
769
1192
1035
922
1498
1292
1165
0,095
1010
879
780
1217
1054
944
1545
1330
1204
0,089
1025
891
794
1246
1077
969
1596
1371
1246
0,084
1044
905
810
1279
1102
996
1650
1415
1290
0,080
1065
921
828
1314
1131
1025
1707
1462
1337
0,076
1089
940
849
1351
1161
1057
1767
1511
1386
0,072
1115
961
870
1391
1193
1089
1828
1561
1436
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,929
26103
24935
21403
26117
24947
21414
26139
24965
21431
0,571
14929
14318
12299
14957
14341
12321
15001
14378
12355
0,412
10252
9856
8420
10294
9891
8453
10359
9946
8505
0,322
7711
7476
6265
7766
7522
6309
7854
7596
6379
0,265
6135
6014
4971
6205
6072
5026
6314
6164
5112
0,224
5086
5032
4143
5169
5101
4209
5300
5212
4313
0,195
4361
4338
3565
4458
4419
3642
4611
4548
3763
0,172
3836
3824
3142
3947
3917
3230
4121
4064
3368
0,154
3434
3431
2818
3559
3536
2917
3755
3701
3072
0,140
3123
3125
2569
3261
3241
2679
3480
3425
2852
0,128
2880
2874
2370
3031
3002
2490
3272
3204
2680
0,118
2683
2675
2207
2849
2815
2338
3111
3035
2546
0,109
2529
2511
2076
2708
2663
2219
2993
2902
2444
0,101
2403
2376
1970
2597
2539
2123
2903
2797
2366
0,095
2300
2263
1883
2507
2437
2048
2835
2713
2307
0,089
2216
2170
1812
2437
2356
1987
2787
2650
2264
0,084
2147
2092
1754
2382
2289
1940
2753
2602
2235
0,080
2090
2026
1706
2339
2235
1903
2732
2566
2215
0,076
2044
1972
1669
2307
2193
1877
2722
2542
2206
0,072
2010
1927
1638
2286
2160
1857
2723
2528
2204
tau=30
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Resulting U-
Value
Resulting U-
Value
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Emissions Artelia
Emissions Cowi
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Resulting U-
Value
Mineral wool 32:
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
A.4. SF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
94
==PAGE:103==
Roof
Resulting U-
Value
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
1,071
0,025
55,90
47,05
44,29
2571,74
0,023
69,24
58,29
54,87
3510,23
0,022
95,22
80,15
75,45
5170,73
0,621
0,050
111,80
94,11
88,59
5143,47
0,046
138,48
116,57
109,73
7020,47
0,043
190,44
160,31
150,90
10341,45
0,438
0,075
167,69
141,16
132,88
7715,21
0,069
207,72
174,86
164,60
10530,70
0,065
285,66
240,46
226,35
15512,18
0,338
0,100
223,59
188,22
177,17
10286,94
0,092
276,96
233,15
219,46
14040,94
0,086
380,87
320,62
301,80
20682,90
0,275
0,125
279,49
235,27
221,47
12858,68
0,115
346,20
291,43
274,33
17551,17
0,108
476,09
400,77
377,26
25853,63
0,232
0,150
335,39
282,33
265,76
15430,42
0,138
415,44
349,72
329,20
21061,41
0,130
571,31
480,93
452,71
31024,36
0,200
0,175
391,28
329,38
310,05
18002,15
0,161
484,68
408,01
384,06
24571,64
0,151
666,53
561,08
528,16
36195,08
0,177
0,200
447,18
376,44
354,35
20573,89
0,184
553,92
466,29
438,93
28081,88
0,173
761,75
641,24
603,61
41365,81
0,158
0,225
503,08
423,49
398,64
23145,63
0,207
623,16
524,58
493,80
31592,11
0,195
856,97
721,39
679,06
46536,53
0,143
0,250
558,98
470,55
442,93
25717,36
0,230
692,41
582,87
548,66
35102,35
0,216
952,18
801,55
754,51
51707,26
0,130
0,275
614,88
517,60
487,23
28289,10
0,253
761,65
641,15
603,53
38612,58
0,238
1047,40
881,70
829,96
56877,98
0,120
0,300
670,77
564,66
531,52
30860,83
0,276
830,89
699,44
658,39
42122,82
0,259
1142,62
961,86
905,41
62048,71
0,111
0,325
726,67
611,71
575,81
33432,57
0,299
900,13
757,73
713,26
45633,05
0,281
1237,84
1042,01
980,86
67219,44
0,103
0,350
782,57
658,77
620,11
36004,31
0,322
969,37
816,01
768,13
49143,28
0,303
1333,06
1122,17
1056,31
72390,16
0,096
0,375
838,47
705,82
664,40
38576,04
0,345
1038,61
874,30
822,99
52653,52
0,324
1428,28
1202,32
1131,77
77560,89
0,090
0,400
894,37
752,88
708,70
41147,78
0,368
1107,85
932,59
877,86
56163,75
0,346
1523,49
1282,48
1207,22
82731,61
0,085
0,425
950,26
799,93
752,99
43719,52
0,391
1177,09
990,87
932,73
59673,99
0,368
1618,71
1362,63
1282,67
87902,34
0,081
0,450
1006,16
846,99
797,28
46291,25
0,414
1246,33
1049,16
987,59
63184,22
0,389
1713,93
1442,79
1358,12
93073,07
0,076
0,475
1062,06
894,04
841,58
48862,99
0,436
1315,57
1107,45
1042,46
66694,46
0,411
1809,15
1522,94
1433,57
98243,79
0,073
0,500
1117,96
941,10
885,87
51434,72
0,459
1384,81
1165,73
1097,32
70204,69
0,432
1904,37
1603,10
1509,02
103414,52
2025
Artelia
Cowi
2050
Artelia
Cowi
2075
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 
2075+2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075-
2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
12426,10
9561,88
43770,94
169452
129085
98,61%
12253,6
8087,38
41686,75
167100
127293
85,66%
10643,7
7024,84
36209,87
145146
110569
6531,30
5025,84
23006,50
89066
67849
97,77%
6385,8
4214,63
21724,49
87082
66337
84,76%
5536
3653,76
18833,47
75493
57509
4281,90
3294,92
15082,99
58391
44481
97,45%
4172,8
2754,05
14195,87
56904
43348
83,44%
3572,8
2358,05
12154,67
48721
37115
3119,00
2400,07
10986,68
42533
32401
97,72%
3047,9
2011,61
10368,96
41564
31662
82,52%
2573,7
1698,64
8755,73
35097
26736
2413,70
1857,34
8502,26
32915
25074
98,16%
2369,4
1563,80
8060,70
32311
24614
81,75%
1973,2
1302,31
6712,83
26908
20498
1942,90
1495,06
6843,87
26495
20183
98,68%
1917,3
1265,42
6522,65
26146
19917
80,97%
1573,1
1038,25
5351,69
21452
16342
1608,60
1237,82
5666,29
21936
16711
99,31%
1597,5
1054,35
5434,70
21785
16595
80,59%
1296,3
855,56
4410,01
17677
13466
1361,40
1047,60
4795,53
18565
14143
99,84%
1359,2
897,07
4624,00
18535
14120
80,52%
1096,2
723,49
3729,27
14949
11388
1170,50
900,70
4123,09
15962
12159
100,48%
1176,1
776,23
4001,09
16038
12218
80,67%
944,2
623,17
3212,17
12876
9809
1021,10
785,74
3596,82
13925
10607
101,04%
1031,7
680,92
3509,84
14069
10718
80,90%
826,1
545,23
2810,39
11265
8582
900,40
692,86
3171,66
12279
9354
101,63%
915,1
603,97
3113,17
12479
9506
81,08%
730
481,80
2483,46
9955
7583
800,90
616,29
2821,17
10922
8320
101,97%
816,7
539,02
2778,41
11137
8484
81,15%
649,9
428,93
2210,96
8863
6751
718,00
552,50
2529,16
9791
7459
102,41%
735,3
485,30
2501,49
10027
7638
81,30%
583,7
385,24
1985,75
7960
6064
647,10
497,94
2279,41
8824
6722
102,86%
665,6
439,30
2264,37
9077
6914
81,72%
528,8
349,01
1798,98
7211
5493
586,70
451,47
2066,65
8001
6095
103,10%
604,9
399,23
2057,87
8249
6284
81,98%
481
317,46
1636,36
6559
4997
534,00
410,91
1881,02
7282
5547
103,39%
552,1
364,39
1878,24
7529
5735
81,95%
437,6
288,82
1488,72
5967
4546
487,90
375,44
1718,63
6653
5068
103,67%
505,8
333,83
1720,73
6897
5254
82,27%
401,4
264,92
1365,56
5474
4170
446,50
343,58
1572,80
6089
4638
104,30%
465,7
307,36
1584,31
6351
4838
82,46%
368,2
243,01
1252,62
5021
3825
410,80
316,11
1447,04
5602
4267
104,36%
428,7
282,94
1458,44
5846
4453
82,42%
338,6
223,48
1151,92
4617
3517
377,90
290,79
1331,15
5153
3926
104,84%
396,2
261,49
1347,87
5403
4116
82,72%
312,6
206,32
1063,47
4263
3247
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
1,071
172170
169818
147864
173162
170810
148856
174918
172565
150611
0,621
94503
92519
80930
96487
94503
82914
99997
98013
86424
0,438
66546
65059
56877
69523
68035
59853
74788
73300
65118
0,338
53407
52437
45971
57375
56405
49939
64395
63426
56959
0,275
46507
45903
40500
51467
50863
45460
60243
59639
54236
0,232
42805
42456
37762
48757
48408
43714
59288
58939
54246
0,200
40965
40814
36706
47909
47758
43650
60195
60044
55937
0,177
40312
40282
36696
48248
48218
44632
62290
62260
58673
0,158
40427
40504
37341
49356
49432
46270
65152
65229
62066
0,143
41108
41253
38449
51029
51173
48369
68580
68725
65921
0,130
42181
42381
39857
53093
53294
50769
72400
72601
70076
0,120
43542
43758
41483
55447
55662
53387
76509
76724
74450
0,111
45130
45366
43299
58027
58262
56195
80844
81080
79013
0,103
46882
47134
45269
60770
61022
59157
85343
85595
83729
0,096
48777
49025
47335
63657
63905
62215
89985
90233
88543
0,090
50776
51023
49462
66649
66895
65334
94732
94978
93417
0,085
52866
53110
51686
69730
69974
68551
99569
99813
98389
0,081
55020
55282
53952
72876
73138
71808
104470
104731
103402
0,076
57251
57496
56267
76100
76344
75115
109448
109692
108464
0,073
59521
59771
58631
79362
79611
78471
114465
114715
113575
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
1,071
131922
130130
113406
132957
131165
114441
134789
132997
116273
0,621
73522
72010
63182
75592
74081
65253
79255
77744
68916
0,438
52991
51858
45625
56097
54963
48730
61591
60458
54225
0,338
43747
43009
38083
47888
47149
42223
55214
54475
49549
0,275
39257
38797
34681
44433
43973
39857
53591
53130
49015
0,232
37203
36937
33361
43414
43148
39572
54403
54137
50561
0,200
36567
36452
33323
43813
43698
40569
56634
56518
53389
0,177
36835
36813
34081
45117
45094
42362
59769
59746
57014
0,158
37689
37747
35338
47005
47064
44655
63489
63547
61138
0,143
38974
39084
36948
49325
49435
47299
67640
67750
65615
0,130
40556
40709
38786
51943
52096
50173
72090
72243
70320
0,120
42359
42523
40791
54781
54945
53213
76759
76924
75191
0,111
44335
44514
42940
57792
57972
56397
81602
81781
80206
0,103
46435
46627
45206
60927
61119
59698
86568
86761
85339
0,096
48644
48833
47546
64171
64361
63073
91644
91833
90546
0,090
50933
51121
49932
67496
67684
66494
96800
96988
95799
0,085
53291
53477
52392
70889
71075
69990
102024
102210
101126
0,081
55697
55897
54884
74330
74530
73517
107298
107497
106484
0,076
58163
58349
57413
77831
78017
77081
112630
112816
111880
0,073
60658
60848
59980
81361
81551
80683
117992
118182
117313
Mineral wool 37
Mineral wool 34
tau=50
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
tau=30
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Resulting U-
Value
Resulting U-
Value
Mineral wool 32
Lifetime cost
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
A.4. SF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
95
==PAGE:104==
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
1,071
9618
8134
7069
9631
8146
7080
9657
8168
7100
0,621
5138
4309
3742
5164
4331
3763
5216
4375
3805
0,438
3463
2895
2491
3503
2929
2523
3581
2995
2584
0,338
2624
2200
1876
2677
2245
1918
2781
2332
2000
0,275
2137
1799
1524
2204
1855
1577
2333
1965
1680
0,232
1830
1548
1304
1911
1615
1367
2066
1746
1491
0,200
1629
1384
1166
1723
1462
1240
1904
1615
1384
0,177
1495
1274
1078
1602
1363
1162
1809
1538
1327
0,158
1404
1200
1022
1524
1301
1117
1758
1498
1302
0,143
1345
1151
988
1478
1264
1094
1738
1482
1300
0,130
1308
1122
969
1455
1245
1085
1740
1486
1312
0,120
1287
1104
960
1447
1238
1087
1759
1501
1334
0,111
1279
1097
961
1453
1243
1099
1790
1527
1366
0,103
1281
1098
969
1467
1255
1117
1831
1561
1405
0,096
1290
1105
982
1490
1274
1140
1880
1602
1449
0,090
1305
1117
998
1519
1297
1167
1934
1647
1496
0,085
1326
1134
1018
1553
1325
1198
1994
1696
1548
0,081
1350
1154
1040
1590
1357
1231
2058
1750
1601
0,076
1378
1177
1065
1632
1390
1266
2125
1806
1657
0,073
1409
1203
1092
1676
1427
1304
2195
1865
1715
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
1,071
43827
41734
36254
43840
41745
36265
43866
41767
36285
0,621
23118
21819
18922
23145
21841
18943
23197
21885
18984
0,438
15251
14337
12288
15291
14371
12319
15369
14436
12381
0,338
11210
10557
8933
11264
10602
8975
11368
10690
9058
0,275
8782
8296
6934
8848
8352
6987
8978
8461
7090
0,232
7179
6805
5617
7259
6872
5681
7415
7004
5804
0,200
6058
5764
4720
6151
5843
4794
6333
5996
4938
0,177
5243
5000
4084
5349
5090
4168
5557
5265
4333
0,158
4626
4425
3611
4746
4526
3706
4980
4722
3891
0,143
4156
3980
3253
4289
4093
3359
4549
4311
3565
0,130
3787
3631
2971
3933
3754
3087
4219
3995
3313
0,120
3492
3343
2742
3652
3478
2869
3964
3740
3116
0,111
3256
3113
2562
3429
3259
2699
3767
3544
2967
0,103
3062
2923
2419
3249
3080
2567
3612
3387
2855
0,096
2905
2764
2301
3105
2932
2459
3495
3260
2768
0,090
2775
2631
2197
2989
2811
2367
3405
3161
2696
0,085
2669
2521
2119
2896
2712
2298
3337
3083
2648
0,081
2579
2431
2050
2819
2633
2240
3287
3027
2611
0,076
2509
2352
1993
2763
2566
2194
3256
2981
2585
0,073
2449
2289
1949
2716
2514
2161
3236
2951
2572
Floor
Resulting U-
Value
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
0,286
0,025
318,24
305,41
300,77
1712,58
0,022
307,05
294,68
290,19
1851,18
0,241
0,050
636,47
610,82
601,53
3425,17
0,042
596,51
572,47
563,76
3596,26
0,208
0,075
954,71
916,23
902,30
5137,75
0,062
885,96
850,25
837,32
5341,34
0,183
0,100
1272,95
1221,65
1203,06
6850,33
0,083
1175,41
1128,04
1110,88
7086,42
0,163
0,125
1591,18
1527,06
1503,83
8562,92
0,103
1464,87
1405,83
1384,44
8831,50
0,147
0,150
1909,42
1832,47
1804,59
10275,50
0,124
1754,32
1683,62
1658,01
10576,58
0,134
0,175
2227,66
2137,88
2105,36
11988,08
0,144
2043,77
1961,41
1931,57
12321,66
0,123
0,200
2545,89
2443,29
2406,12
13700,67
0,164
2333,23
2239,20
2205,13
14066,74
0,114
0,225
2864,13
2748,70
2706,89
15413,25
0,185
2622,68
2516,99
2478,69
15811,82
0,106
0,250
3182,37
3054,12
3007,65
17125,83
0,205
2912,13
2794,77
2752,26
17556,90
0,099
0,275
3500,60
3359,53
3308,42
18838,42
0,226
3201,59
3072,56
3025,82
19301,98
0,093
0,300
3818,84
3664,94
3609,18
20551,00
0,246
3491,04
3350,35
3299,38
21047,06
0,088
0,325
4137,08
3970,35
3909,95
22263,58
0,266
3780,49
3628,14
3572,94
22792,14
0,083
0,350
4455,31
4275,76
4210,72
23976,17
0,287
4069,95
3905,93
3846,51
24537,22
0,079
0,375
4773,55
4581,17
4511,48
25688,75
0,307
4359,40
4183,72
4120,07
26282,30
0,075
0,400
5091,79
4886,59
4812,25
27401,33
0,328
4648,85
4461,50
4393,63
28027,38
0,071
0,425
5410,02
5192,00
5113,01
29113,92
0,348
4938,31
4739,29
4667,19
29772,46
0,068
0,450
5728,26
5497,41
5413,78
30826,50
0,368
5227,76
5017,08
4940,76
31517,54
0,065
0,475
6046,50
5802,82
5714,54
32539,08
0,389
5517,21
5294,87
5214,32
33262,62
0,063
0,500
6364,73
6108,23
6015,31
34251,67
0,409
5806,67
5572,66
5487,88
35007,70
2025
Artelia
Cowi
2050
Artelia
Cowi
2075
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 
2075+2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075-
2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
1205,9
927,94
4247,78
16445
12527
1153,3
761,18
3923,53
15727
11981
885,1
584,17
3011,11
12070
9195
1012,2
778,89
3565,47
13803
10515
971,9
641,45
3306,40
13254
10096
740,7
488,86
2519,86
10101
7695
867,8
667,77
3056,83
11834
9015
836,9
552,35
2847,13
11413
8694
632,6
417,52
2152,11
8627
6572
758
583,28
2670,06
10337
7874
732,5
483,45
2491,97
9989
7609
550,1
363,07
1871,44
7502
5715
671,4
516,64
2365,01
9156
6975
650,1
429,07
2211,64
8865
6753
485,5
320,43
1651,67
6621
5043
601,5
462,85
2118,78
8203
6249
583,4
385,04
1984,73
7956
6060
434
286,44
1476,47
5918
4508
542,5
417,45
1910,96
7398
5636
527,8
348,35
1795,58
7197
5483
390,8
257,93
1329,50
5329
4060
493,7
379,90
1739,06
6732
5129
481,7
317,92
1638,74
6569
5004
354,4
233,90
1205,67
4833
3682
452,4
348,12
1593,58
6169
4700
441,6
291,46
1502,32
6022
4587
323,6
213,58
1100,89
4413
3362
417,3
321,11
1469,94
5691
4335
407,1
268,69
1384,95
5552
4229
297,5
196,35
1012,10
4057
3090
387,2
297,95
1363,91
5280
4022
377,3
249,02
1283,57
5145
3919
275,2
181,63
936,23
3753
2859
360,5
277,40
1269,86
4916
3745
351,5
231,99
1195,80
4793
3651
255,5
168,63
869,21
3484
2654
336,9
259,24
1186,73
4594
3500
328,1
216,55
1116,20
4474
3408
237,9
157,01
809,34
3244
2471
316,1
243,24
1113,46
4311
3284
307,7
203,08
1046,80
4196
3196
222,4
146,78
756,60
3033
2310
297,3
228,77
1047,24
4054
3088
289,5
191,07
984,88
3948
3007
208,5
137,61
709,32
2843
2166
280,6
215,92
988,41
3826
2915
272,9
180,11
928,41
3721
2835
196,1
129,43
667,13
2674
2037
265,4
204,23
934,87
3619
2757
258,2
170,41
878,40
3521
2682
184,8
121,97
628,69
2520
1920
251,9
193,84
887,32
3435
2617
244,7
161,50
832,47
3337
2542
175
115,50
595,35
2386
1818
239,6
184,37
843,99
3267
2489
232,5
153,45
790,97
3171
2415
165,8
109,43
564,05
2261
1722
228
175,45
803,13
3109
2369
221,4
146,12
753,20
3019
2300
157,5
103,95
535,82
2148
1636
Emissions Artelia
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Resulting U-
Value
Resulting U-
Value
Emissions Cowi
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
White EPS 38
Grey EPS 31
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
A.4. SF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
96
==PAGE:105==
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,286
18255
17538
13880
18401
17684
14027
0,241
17424
16874
13721
17604
17055
13902
0,208
17265
16843
14057
17480
17059
14273
0,183
17578
17230
14743
17827
17479
14992
0,163
18207
17916
15672
18491
18200
15956
0,147
19064
18817
16780
19382
19135
17098
0,134
20070
19869
18001
20422
20222
18354
0,123
21214
21051
19315
21601
21438
19702
0,114
22461
22314
20705
22883
22736
21126
0,106
23793
23654
22159
24249
24110
22615
0,099
25193
25058
23666
25683
25548
24156
0,093
26639
26516
25207
27163
27041
25732
0,088
28127
28007
26777
28686
28566
27336
0,083
29654
29539
28376
30247
30133
28969
0,079
31208
31102
29997
31835
31729
30624
0,075
32790
32685
31638
33452
33347
32300
0,071
34393
34295
33294
35089
34991
33990
0,068
36020
35921
34971
36750
36652
35701
0,065
37662
37565
36656
38427
38330
37420
0,063
39314
39224
38353
40113
40023
39152
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,286
14416
13870
11084
14569
14023
11236
0,241
14293
13874
11473
14482
14063
11661
0,208
14682
14361
12239
14906
14585
12463
0,183
15430
15165
13270
15691
15426
13531
0,163
16420
16198
14488
16716
16495
14785
0,147
17582
17394
15842
17914
17726
16174
0,134
18858
18706
17283
19226
19074
17650
0,123
20240
20116
18793
20644
20520
19197
0,114
21700
21588
20362
22140
22028
20802
0,106
23225
23119
21980
23700
23594
22456
0,099
24801
24698
23638
25312
25210
24149
0,093
26413
26319
25322
26960
26866
25869
0,088
28056
27965
27028
28639
28548
27611
0,083
29729
29642
28756
30348
30261
29375
0,079
31423
31342
30501
32078
31997
31155
0,075
33139
33059
32261
33829
33749
32951
0,071
34870
34795
34032
35596
35521
34759
0,068
36618
36544
35819
37381
37306
36582
0,065
38380
38306
37613
39178
39104
38411
0,063
40148
40079
39416
40982
40913
40250
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,286
1246
1067
885
1235
1056
874
0,241
1415
1252
1090
1375
1214
1053
0,208
1622
1469
1320
1554
1403
1255
0,183
1856
1705
1566
1759
1611
1474
0,163
2108
1956
1824
1982
1835
1705
0,147
2372
2218
2091
2217
2069
1944
0,134
2645
2486
2363
2461
2310
2189
0,123
2926
2761
2640
2713
2557
2439
0,114
3212
3040
2920
2971
2808
2692
0,106
3503
3323
3204
3233
3063
2949
0,099
3799
3609
3490
3500
3322
3207
0,093
4096
3897
3778
3768
3582
3468
0,088
4396
4187
4067
4040
3845
3730
0,083
4699
4479
4357
4313
4109
3993
0,079
5002
4772
4649
4588
4375
4258
0,075
5308
5067
4942
4865
4642
4523
0,071
5614
5362
5235
5143
4910
4789
0,068
5922
5659
5529
5422
5179
5056
0,065
6231
5956
5824
5702
5448
5324
0,063
6540
6254
6119
5982
5719
5592
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,286
4566
4229
3312
4555
4218
3301
0,241
4202
3917
3121
4162
3879
3084
0,208
4012
3763
3054
3943
3697
2989
0,183
3943
3714
3075
3845
3620
2982
0,163
3956
3739
3155
3830
3617
3036
0,147
4028
3817
3281
3873
3668
3134
0,134
4139
3933
3435
3955
3757
3261
0,123
4285
4082
3612
4072
3878
3411
0,114
4458
4251
3808
4216
4019
3580
0,106
4652
4439
4020
4382
4180
3764
0,099
4865
4643
4245
4565
4356
3962
0,093
5089
4861
4478
4761
4546
4169
0,088
5324
5087
4719
4967
4744
4382
0,083
5569
5323
4967
5183
4953
4603
0,079
5821
5566
5221
5407
5169
4829
0,075
6080
5815
5479
5637
5390
5061
0,071
6345
6070
5742
5873
5618
5296
0,068
6616
6330
6009
6115
5850
5536
0,065
6890
6594
6279
6361
6086
5778
0,063
7168
6861
6551
6610
6326
6024
Resulting U-
Value
White EPS 38:
Grey EPS 31:
Emissions Artelia
Emissions Cowi
Resulting U-
Value
tau=30
tau=50
White EPS 38:
Grey EPS 31:
Resulting U-
Value
White EPS 38:
Grey EPS 31:
Resulting U-
Value
White EPS 38:
Grey EPS 31:
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
White EPS 38: 2025
White EPS 38: 2050
White EPS 38: 2075
Grey EPS 31: 2025
Grey EPS 31: 2050
Grey EPS 31: 2075
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
White EPS 38: 2025
White EPS 38: 2050
White EPS 38: 2075
Grey EPS 31: 2025
Grey EPS 31: 2050
Grey EPS 31: 2075
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
White EPS 38: 2025
White EPS 38: 2050
White EPS 38: 2075
Grey EPS 31: 2025
Grey EPS 31: 2050
Grey EPS 31: 2075
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
White EPS 38: 2025
White EPS 38: 2050
White EPS 38: 2075
Grey EPS 31: 2025
Grey EPS 31: 2050
Grey EPS 31: 2075
A.4. SF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
97
==PAGE:106==
Exterior wall
Tau = 50
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
63562
41384
36988
37913
40919
65167
44595
41804
44335
48947
64834
43929
40806
43004
47283
63202
41584
37595
38561
41568
64807
44795
42411
44983
49596
64474
44129
41413
43651
47932
55125
36766
34086
35898
39428
56730
39977
38903
42320
47455
56397
39311
37904
40988
45791
Tau = 30
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
50139
34962
33332
35756
39764
80874
41914
37559
40113
45166
80700
41393
33890
37082
42285
2050
49864
35115
33795
36249
40259
80051
41824
37911
40611
45661
79877
41303
37043
39395
44098
2075
68432
34947
30570
32434
36309
69270
37460
34759
38297
43849
69096
36939
33890
37082
42285
Artelia
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
1055
1001
992
1010
1044
1286
1179
1153
1171
1217
1528
1394
1377
1420
1498
2050
930
880
869
879
905
1128
1034
1008
1020
1054
1332
1217
1200
1231
1292
2075
831
775
760
769
794
962
894
884
904
944
1244
1083
1050
1074
1129
Cowi
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
2216
2090
2010
#N/A
#N/A
2437
2339
2286
#N/A
#N/A
2835
2753
2722
#N/A
#N/A
2050
2170
2026
1927
#N/A
#N/A
2356
2235
2160
#N/A
#N/A
2650
2566
2528
#N/A
#N/A
2075
1812
1706
1638
#N/A
#N/A
1987
1903
1857
#N/A
#N/A
2264
2215
2204
#N/A
#N/A
 - 100 mm  - 50 mm
Optimal Th  + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal Th  + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal Th  + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
2025
72%
12%
0%
3%
11%
56%
7%
0%
6%
17%
59%
8%
0%
5%
16%
2050
68%
11%
0%
3%
11%
53%
6%
0%
6%
17%
56%
7%
0%
5%
16%
2075
62%
8%
0%
5%
16%
46%
3%
0%
9%
22%
49%
4%
0%
8%
21%
2025
50%
5%
0%
7%
19%
115%
12%
0%
7%
20%
138%
22%
0%
9%
25%
2050
48%
4%
0%
7%
19%
111%
10%
0%
7%
20%
116%
12%
0%
6%
19%
2075
124%
14%
0%
6%
19%
99%
8%
0%
10%
26%
104%
9%
0%
9%
25%
2025
6%
1%
0%
2%
5%
12%
2%
0%
2%
6%
11%
1%
0%
3%
9%
2050
7%
1%
0%
1%
4%
12%
3%
0%
1%
4%
11%
1%
0%
3%
8%
2075
9%
2%
0%
1%
4%
9%
1%
0%
2%
7%
18%
3%
0%
2%
8%
2025
10%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
7%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
4%
1%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
2050
13%
5%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
9%
3%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
5%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
2075
11%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
7%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
3%
1%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
Roof
Tau = 50
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
53407
42805
40312
41108
43542
69523
51467
47909
49356
53093
99997
64395
59288
62290
68580
2050
52437
42456
40282
41253
43758
68035
50863
47758
49432
53294
98013
63426
58939
62260
68725
2075
45971
37762
36696
38449
41483
59853
45460
43650
46270
53387
150611
65118
54236
55937
62066
Tau = 30
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
52991
39257
36567
37689
40556
75592
47888
43414
45117
49325
134789
61591
53591
56634
63489
2050
51858
38797
36452
37747
40709
74081
47149
43148
45094
49435
132997
60458
53130
56518
63547
2075
45625
34681
33323
35338
38786
65253
42223
39572
42362
47299
116273
54225
49015
53389
61138
Artelia
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
1404
1308
1279
1290
1326
1602
1478
1447
1467
1519
2066
1809
1738
1759
1831
2050
1200
1122
1097
1105
1134
1363
1264
1238
1255
1297
1746
1538
1482
1501
1561
2075
1078
988
960
969
998
1240
1117
1085
1099
1140
1491
1327
1300
1334
1405
Cowi:
τ = 50:
τ = 30:
2025
Artelia:
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 37
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 34
Artelia: 2025
Artelia: 2050
Artelia: 2075
Cowi: 2025
Cowi: 2050
Cowi: 2075
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
λ = 32
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 37
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 34
τ = 50: 2025
τ = 50: 2050
τ = 50: 2075
τ = 30: 2025
τ = 30: 2050
τ = 30: 2075
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
λ = 32
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 37
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 34
τ = 50: 2025
τ = 50: 2050
τ = 50: 2075
τ = 30: 2025
τ = 30: 2050
τ = 30: 2075
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
λ = 32
A.5. SF missing the optimum
A.5
SF missing the optimum
Environmental and economic optimals
98
==PAGE:107==
Cowi
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
2775
2579
2449
#N/A
#N/A
2989
2819
2716
#N/A
#N/A
3405
3287
3236
#N/A
#N/A
2050
2631
2431
2289
#N/A
#N/A
2811
2633
2514
#N/A
#N/A
3161
3027
2951
#N/A
#N/A
2075
2197
2050
1949
#N/A
#N/A
2367
2240
2161
#N/A
#N/A
2696
2611
2572
#N/A
#N/A
 - 100 mm  - 50 mm
Optimal Th  + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal Th  + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal Th  + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
2025
32%
6%
0%
2%
8%
45%
7%
0%
3%
11%
69%
9%
0%
5%
16%
2050
30%
5%
0%
2%
9%
42%
7%
0%
4%
12%
66%
8%
0%
6%
17%
2075
25%
3%
0%
5%
13%
37%
4%
0%
6%
22%
178%
20%
0%
3%
14%
2025
45%
7%
0%
3%
11%
74%
10%
0%
4%
14%
152%
15%
0%
6%
18%
2050
42%
6%
0%
4%
12%
72%
9%
0%
5%
15%
150%
14%
0%
6%
20%
2075
37%
4%
0%
6%
16%
65%
7%
0%
7%
20%
137%
11%
0%
9%
25%
2025
10%
2%
0%
1%
4%
11%
2%
0%
1%
5%
19%
4%
0%
1%
5%
2050
9%
2%
0%
1%
3%
10%
2%
0%
1%
5%
18%
4%
0%
1%
5%
2075
12%
3%
0%
1%
4%
14%
3%
0%
1%
5%
15%
2%
0%
3%
8%
2025
13%
5%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
10%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
5%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
2050
15%
6%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
12%
5%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
7%
3%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
2075
13%
5%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
10%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
5%
1%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
Terrain deck
Tau = 50
Insulation 38
Insulation 31
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -83mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 83mm
2025
#N/A
18255
17265
18207
20070
#N/A
18401
17480
18491
20422
2050
#N/A
17538
16843
17916
19869
#N/A
#N/A
17055
17479
19135
2075
#N/A
#N/A
13721
14743
16780
#N/A
#N/A
13902
14992
17098
Tau = 30
Insulation 38
Insulation 31
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -83mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 83mm
2025
#N/A
#N/A
14293
15430
17582
#N/A
#N/A
14482
15691
17914
2050
#N/A
#N/A
13870
14361
16198
#N/A
#N/A
14023
14585
16495
2075
#N/A
#N/A
11084
12239
14488
#N/A
#N/A
11236
12463
14785
Artelia
Insulation 38
Insulation 31
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -83mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 83mm
2025
#N/A
#N/A
1246
1622
2108
#N/A
#N/A
1235
1554
1982
2050
#N/A
#N/A
1067
1469
1956
#N/A
#N/A
1056
1403
1835
2075
#N/A
#N/A
885
1320
1824
#N/A
#N/A
874
1255
1705
Cowi
Insulation 38
Insulation 31
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -83mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 83mm
2025
#N/A
4202
3943
4028
4285
4555
3943
3830
3955
4216
2050
#N/A
3917
3714
3817
4082
4218
3697
3617
3757
4019
2075
#N/A
3312
3054
3155
3435
#N/A
3084
2982
3134
3411
 - 100 mm  - 50 mm
Optimal Th  + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal Th  + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
2025
#N/A
6%
0%
5%
16%
#N/A
5%
0%
6%
17%
2050
#N/A
4%
0%
6%
18%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
2%
12%
2075
#N/A
#N/A
0%
7%
22%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
8%
23%
2025
#N/A
#N/A
0%
8%
23%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
8%
24%
2050
#N/A
#N/A
0%
4%
17%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
4%
18%
2075
#N/A
#N/A
0%
10%
31%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
11%
32%
2025
#N/A
#N/A
0%
30%
69%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
26%
60%
2050
#N/A
#N/A
0%
38%
83%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
33%
74%
2075
#N/A
#N/A
0%
49%
106%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
44%
95%
2025
#N/A
7%
0%
2%
9%
19%
3%
0%
3%
10%
2050
#N/A
5%
0%
3%
10%
17%
2%
0%
4%
11%
2075
#N/A
8%
0%
3%
12%
#N/A
3%
0%
5%
14%
τ = 50:
τ = 30:
Artelia:
Cowi:
τ = 50:
τ = 30:
Artelia:
Cowi:
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 37
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 34
Artelia: 2025
Artelia: 2050
Artelia: 2075
Cowi: 2025
Cowi: 2050
Cowi: 2075
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
λ = 32
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 31
τ = 50: 2025
τ = 50: 2050
τ = 50: 2075
τ = 30: 2025
τ = 30: 2050
τ = 30: 2075
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 38
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 31
Artelia: 2025
Artelia: 2050
Artelia: 2075
Cowi: 2025
Cowi: 2050
Cowi: 2075
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 38
A.5. SF missing the optimum
Environmental and economic optimals
99
==PAGE:108==
Windows
3 pane
2 pane
Floatglass 
1mm
Artelia EF
COWI EF
SF
2025
86,27
45,80
2,79
kg CO2-eq./m2
2025-2075
0,01539
0,07045
kg CO2-eq./kWh
Wall area
138,84
m3
2050
68,86
36,56
2,59
kg CO2-eq./m2
2050 +
0,01320
0,06804
kg CO2-eq./kWh
Floor area
149,6
m3
2075
50,66
26,90
2,35
kg CO2-eq./m2
Price
DKK/kWh
Area [m]
Number [-]
Price 2 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Price 3 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Glass/floor 
ratio [%]
0,32
1
2100
21,59
18,17
14,49
2457
37,96
28,41
22,03
8,87%
1,16
1
3261
79,09
66,54
53,08
3815
139,03
104,05
80,68
1,79
3
12395
366,63
308,45
246,08
14502
644,52
482,32
374,00
Emissions
0,48
2
4659
65,94
55,48
44,26
5451
115,92
86,75
67,27
2025
15,41
483,61 kg CO2-eq.
0,82
4
11184
224,25
188,67
150,52
13085
394,23
295,02
228,76
2050
12,97
407,10 kg CO2-eq.
1,51
1
3745
103,07
86,71
69,18
4382
181,19
135,59
105,14
2075
12,21
383,21 kg CO2-eq.
0,32
2
4205
43,46
36,56
29,17
4920
76,40
57,18
44,33
Price
1027,75
32263,38 DKK
41549
904,03
760,58
606,79
48612
1589,26
1189,31
922,21
Area [m]
Number [-]
Price 2 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Price 3 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Glass/floor 
ratio [%]
0,63
1
2535
43,12
36,28
28,94
2965
75,80
56,73
43,99
17,74%
2,32
1
4856
158,11
133,02
106,12
5682
277,95
208,00
161,29
3,59
3
19793
733,05
616,73
492,03
23159
1288,67
964,37
747,79
Emissions
0,97
2
5991
131,88
110,96
88,52
7009
231,84
173,50
134,53
2025
15,41
432,53 kg CO2-eq.
1,65
4
15712
448,51
377,34
301,04
18383
788,46
590,04
457,52
2050
12,97
364,10 kg CO2-eq.
3,03
1
5825
206,07
173,37
138,31
6815
362,26
271,09
210,21
2075
12,21
342,74 kg CO2-eq.
0,64
2
5080
86,79
73,01
58,25
5944
152,57
114,17
88,53
Price
1027,75
28855,62 DKK
59792
1807,52
1520,70
1213,22
69958
3177,55
2377,90
1843,86
Area [m]
Number [-]
Price 2 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Price 3 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Glass/floor 
ratio [%]
1,27
1
3405
86,24
72,56
57,89
3984
151,61
113,46
87,97
35,47%
4,64
1
8049
316,22
266,04
212,25
9418
555,90
416,00
322,57
7,17
3
34595
1466,10
1233,46
984,06
40478
2577,35
1928,74
1495,57
Emissions
1,94
2
8654
263,76
221,91
177,04
10125
463,69
347,00
269,07
2025
15,41
330,35 kg CO2-eq.
3,29
4
24763
896,74
754,45
601,90
28973
1576,44
1179,72
914,77
2050
12,97
278,09 kg CO2-eq.
6,05
1
9986
412,13
346,73
276,63
11684
724,51
542,18
420,42
2075
12,21
261,77 kg CO2-eq.
1,27
2
6833
173,57
146,03
116,50
7994
305,13
228,34
177,06
Price
1027,75
22039,07 DKK
96284
3614,77
3041,18
2426,26
112655
6354,63
4755,44
3687,44
2 pane
3 pane
Artelia
Cowi
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly 
heat flux 
wall [kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat flux 
thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat 
flux [kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-
eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
1038
1257
54
1807,79
8275,41
32037
24405
1063,10
833,10
54,00
1500,68
6869,58
26594
20259
753
2103,3
58
2242,71
10266,33
39744
30277
771,20
1241,90
56,00
1592,17
7288,40
28216
21494
453
3940,3
74,8
3438,28
15739,23
60932
46417
475,90
2028,60
66,60
1978,46
9056,70
35062
26709
Artelia
Cowi
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly 
heat flux 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat flux 
thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat 
flux [kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-
eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
1016
1215,8
52
1757,15
8043,63
31140
23722
1039,30
809,70
52,90
1463,51
6699,44
25936
19757
757
2097,3
57,5
2240,32
10255,41
39702
30244
772,40
1246,40
55,80
1596,40
7307,78
28291
21551
463
3908,1
74,1
3420,27
15656,81
60613
46174
478,10
2038,70
66,60
1987,93
9100,03
35229
26837
Artelia
Cowi
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly 
heat flux 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat flux 
thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat 
flux [kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-
eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
823
975,3
41,8
1415,88
6481,40
25092
19114
840,90
649,50
41,90
1179,10
5397,53
20896
15918
609
1657
45,2
1778,70
8142,26
31521
24012
612,70
965,20
42,70
1247,05
5708,56
22100
16835
379
3189,6
59,3
2791,36
12777,87
49467
37683
389,00
1616,80
52,40
1583,78
7250,01
28067
21381
Glass/floo
DH
Mineral wool 37
Mineral wool 37
2 pane glass
3 pane glass
2 pane glass
3 pane glass
0,53
2075
2050
2025
13,27
2 pane glass
3 pane glass
26,53
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
2025
2050
Lifetime cost
2075
Lifetime cost
Mineral wool 37
53,06
tau=50
180000
A.6. SF Window Results
A.6
SF Window Results
Environmental and economic optimals
100
==PAGE:109==
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
8,87%
73586
72688
66641
75207
74548
69508
17,74%
99536
99494
91314
98173
98248
92057
35,47%
157216
156897
145752
147717
147884
140722
Glass/floo
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
8,87%
65954
65270
60663
68871
68370
64530
17,74%
90069
90036
83805
91452
91509
86793
35,47%
142701
142458
133967
139364
139492
134036
Glass/floo
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
8,87%
2712
2518
2023
3090
2653
2101
17,74%
4050
3761
2992
4770
3974
3091
35,47%
7053
6461
5218
8333
6743
5271
Glass/floo
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
8,87%
9179
8804
7088
8459
7889
6320
17,74%
12074
11776
9355
10466
9686
7552
35,47%
19354
18698
15204
15411
13855
10937
Emissions Cowi
2 pane:
3 pane:
tau=30
2 pane:
3 pane:
Emissions Artelia
2 pane:
3 pane:
2 pane:
3 pane:
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
Net Present Value [DKK]
Window to floor ratio [%]
2 pane: 2025
2 pane: 2050
2 pane: 2075
3 pane: 2025
3 pane: 2050
3 pane: 2075
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
Net Present Value [DKK]
Window to floor ratio [%]
2 pane: 2025
2 pane: 2050
2 pane: 2075
3 pane: 2025
3 pane: 2050
3 pane: 2075
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
GHG emissions [kg CO2-eq.]
Window to floor ratio [%]
2 pane: 2025
2 pane: 2050
2 pane: 2075
3 pane: 2025
3 pane: 2050
3 pane: 2075
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
GHG emissions [kg CO2-eq.]
Window to floor ratio [%]
2 pane: 2025
2 pane: 2050
2 pane: 2075
3 pane: 2025
3 pane: 2050
3 pane: 2075
A.6. SF Window Results
Environmental and economic optimals
101
==PAGE:110==
Wall
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,32
0,10
41383,6
41584,1
36766,2
1820
1568
1326
7711
7476
6265
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,26
0,125
-3217,2
-2955,4
-2276,3
310
254
224
1576
1462
1295
25
-10,36
-11,62
-10,18
-2,04
-2,02
-1,76
0,22
0,150
-4395,8
-3989,4
-2680,3
506
416
356
2625
2444
2122
50
-8,69
-9,60
-7,52
-1,67
-1,63
-1,26
0,19
0,175
-4319,7
-3867,0
-2086,0
630
521
441
3350
3138
2700
75
-6,85
-7,43
-4,73
-1,29
-1,23
-0,77
0,17
0,200
-3470,5
-3023,2
-868,6
711
591
495
3875
3652
3123
100
-4,88
-5,11
-1,75
-0,90
-0,83
-0,28
0,15
0,225
-2142,6
-1692,6
745,7
765
638
531
4277
4045
3447
125
-2,80
-2,65
1,41
-0,50
-0,42
0,22
0,14
0,250
-464,2
-15,6
2661,3
799
668
551
4588
4351
3696
150
-0,58
-0,02
4,83
-0,10
0,00
0,72
0,13
0,275
1474,6
1882,4
4773,3
819
687
562
4832
4602
3896
175
1,80
2,74
8,49
0,31
0,41
1,23
0,12
0,300
3597,5
3990,3
7034,0
828
697
566
5028
4801
4059
200
4,35
5,73
12,42
0,72
0,83
1,73
0,11
0,325
5882,7
6238,7
9424,2
828
699
564
5182
4964
4189
225
7,11
8,93
16,71
1,14
1,26
2,25
0,10
0,350
8279,8
8601,6
11911,2
821
696
557
5308
5099
4295
250
10,08
12,36
21,38
1,56
1,69
2,77
0,09
0,375
10762,7
11050,4
14476,0
810
689
546
5411
5213
4382
275
13,28
16,05
26,50
1,99
2,12
3,30
0,09
0,400
13319,3
13582,5
17103,5
795
677
532
5495
5306
4453
300
16,76
20,06
32,12
2,42
2,56
3,84
0,08
0,425
15935,8
16173,1
19784,1
776
663
516
5564
5384
4511
325
20,54
24,39
38,34
2,86
3,00
4,39
0,08
0,450
18598,8
18812,9
22504,4
755
646
498
5621
5450
4559
350
24,65
29,10
45,21
3,31
3,45
4,94
0,08
0,475
21304,0
21501,7
25266,9
731
628
477
5667
5504
4597
375
29,15
34,26
52,93
3,76
3,91
5,50
0,07
0,500
24052,9
24227,4
28058,0
705
607
456
5701
5548
4627
400
34,14
39,92
61,58
4,22
4,37
6,06
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,32
0,092
44594,7
44795,2
39977,3
1875
1614
1370
7766
7522
6309
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,26
0,115
-2414,5
-2152,6
-1473,5
297
243
213
1562
1450
1284
23
-8,14
-8,87
-6,93
-1,55
-1,48
-1,15
0,22
0,138
-2790,2
-2383,8
-1074,7
478
392
335
2597
2421
2100
46
-5,84
-6,08
-3,21
-1,07
-0,98
-0,51
0,19
0,161
-1911,4
-1458,7
322,3
589
486
408
3308
3103
2668
69
-3,25
-3,00
0,79
-0,58
-0,47
0,12
0,17
0,184
-259,4
187,9
2342,5
656
545
452
3820
3606
3080
92
-0,40
0,35
5,19
-0,07
0,05
0,76
0,15
0,207
1871,3
2321,3
4759,6
696
580
476
4208
3987
3393
115
2,69
4,00
10,00
0,44
0,58
1,40
0,14
0,230
4352,4
4801,1
7478,0
717
598
486
4505
4281
3630
138
6,07
8,02
15,40
0,97
1,12
2,06
0,13
0,253
7094,1
7501,8
10392,8
722
606
486
4735
4521
3819
161
9,82
12,38
21,39
1,50
1,66
2,72
0,12
0,276
10019,8
10412,5
13456,2
717
604
479
4917
4708
3971
184
13,97
17,25
28,10
2,04
2,21
3,39
0,11
0,299
13107,7
13463,7
16649,2
704
594
466
5058
4860
4090
207
18,63
22,65
35,76
2,59
2,77
4,07
0,10
0,322
16307,5
16629,4
19939,0
683
580
448
5170
4983
4186
230
23,87
28,69
44,55
3,15
3,34
4,76
0,09
0,345
19593,2
19881,0
23306,5
658
561
426
5259
5085
4262
253
29,76
35,46
54,73
3,73
3,91
5,47
0,09
0,368
22952,6
23215,8
26736,8
629
538
401
5330
5166
4322
276
36,49
43,18
66,66
4,31
4,49
6,19
0,08
0,391
26371,9
26609,2
30220,2
596
512
374
5384
5233
4369
299
44,21
51,98
80,85
4,90
5,08
6,92
0,08
0,414
29837,7
30051,8
33743,2
561
484
345
5427
5287
4406
322
53,16
62,13
97,94
5,50
5,68
7,66
0,08
0,436
33345,7
33543,4
37308,5
524
453
313
5460
5330
4433
345
63,68
74,02
119,11
6,11
6,29
8,42
0,07
0,459
36897,3
37071,8
40902,4
484
421
281
5480
5362
4452
368
76,30
88,09
145,79
6,73
6,91
9,19
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,32
0,086
43928,9
44129,3
39311,5
1962
1688
1439
7854
7596
6379
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,26
0,108
-2580,9
-2319,1
-1640,0
275
224
195
1540
1432
1266
22
-9,39
-10,34
-8,40
-1,68
-1,62
-1,30
0,22
0,130
-3123,1
-2716,8
-1407,6
434
355
300
2553
2384
2065
43
-7,19
-7,64
-4,69
-1,22
-1,14
-0,68
0,19
0,151
-2410,8
-1958,0
-177,1
523
431
356
3243
3048
2616
65
-4,61
-4,55
-0,50
-0,74
-0,64
-0,07
0,17
0,173
-925,2
-477,9
1676,7
569
471
382
3732
3532
3010
86
-1,63
-1,01
4,38
-0,25
-0,14
0,56
0,15
0,195
1039,0
1489,0
3927,3
587
488
389
4098
3895
3306
108
1,77
3,05
10,09
0,25
0,38
1,19
0,14
0,216
3353,7
3802,4
6479,3
585
488
382
4374
4171
3527
130
5,73
7,79
16,97
0,77
0,91
1,84
0,13
0,238
5928,9
6336,6
9227,6
569
477
365
4582
4392
3698
151
10,42
13,28
25,31
1,29
1,44
2,50
0,12
0,259
8688,1
9080,8
12124,6
543
456
340
4743
4561
3832
173
16,01
19,90
35,63
1,83
1,99
3,16
0,11
0,281
11609,6
11965,5
15151,1
507
429
310
4861
4694
3935
195
22,91
27,91
48,92
2,39
2,55
3,85
0,10
0,303
14643,0
14964,8
18274,4
465
396
274
4951
4799
4013
216
31,51
37,83
66,60
2,96
3,12
4,55
0,09
0,324
17762,2
18050,0
21475,5
418
358
235
5019
4883
4071
238
42,51
50,38
91,24
3,54
3,70
5,28
0,09
0,346
20955,1
21218,3
24739,3
367
317
193
5067
4946
4114
259
57,13
66,95
127,99
4,14
4,29
6,01
0,08
0,368
24208,0
24445,3
28056,3
312
273
149
5100
4994
4144
281
77,50
89,63
188,75
4,75
4,90
6,77
0,08
0,389
27507,3
27721,4
31412,9
255
226
102
5121
5030
4164
303
107,75
122,57
307,73
5,37
5,51
7,54
0,08
0,411
30848,8
31046,6
34811,7
196
177
53
5132
5054
4173
324
157,53
175,19
651,07
6,01
6,14
8,34
0,07
0,432
34234,0
34408,5
38239,1
134
126
3
5131
5068
4175
346
255,64
272,03
11014,14
6,67
6,79
9,16
Artelia
Cowi
Artelia: Mineral wool 37:
Artelia: Mineral wool 34:
Artelia: Mineral wool 32:
Cowi: Mineral wool 37:
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Cowi: Mineral wool 34:
Cowi: Mineral wool 32:
Artelia
Cowi
-50,00
0,00
50,00
100,00
150,00
200,00
22
43
65
86
108
130
151
173
195
216
238
259
281
303
324
346
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 86mm [mm]
Mineral wool 32
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
-20,00
0,00
20,00
40,00
60,00
80,00
100,00
120,00
140,00
160,00
23
46
69
92
115
138
161
184
207
230
253
276
299
322
345
368
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 92mm [mm]
Mineral wool 34
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
-20,00
-10,00
0,00
10,00
20,00
30,00
40,00
50,00
60,00
70,00
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
400
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 100mm [mm]
Mineral wool 37
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
A.7. SF LCCA Results
A.7
SF LCCA Results
Environmental and economic optimals
102
==PAGE:111==
Roof
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,200
0,175
40964,9
40813,5
36706,1
1629
1384
1166
6058
5764
4720
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,177
0,200
-652,6
-531,2
-10,3
134
110
88
815
764
636
25
-4,86
-4,82
-0,12
-0,80
-0,70
-0,02
0,158
0,225
-537,5
-309,7
635,3
225
184
144
1431
1339
1109
50
-2,39
-1,68
4,42
-0,38
-0,23
0,57
0,143
0,250
143,6
439,5
1743,2
284
232
177
1902
1784
1467
75
0,50
1,89
9,82
0,08
0,25
1,19
0,130
0,275
1216,0
1567,8
3151,1
321
262
197
2271
2133
1749
100
3,78
5,98
16,03
0,54
0,73
1,80
0,120
0,300
2577,5
2944,4
4777,2
342
280
205
2566
2421
1978
125
7,54
10,51
23,29
1,00
1,22
2,42
0,111
0,325
4165,5
4552,7
6592,8
350
287
205
2802
2651
2159
150
11,90
15,88
32,23
1,49
1,72
3,05
0,103
0,350
5917,0
6320,6
8562,5
349
286
196
2996
2841
2301
175
16,97
22,13
43,58
1,98
2,22
3,72
0,096
0,375
7811,7
8211,3
10629,1
339
279
184
3152
3000
2419
200
23,03
29,47
57,85
2,48
2,74
4,39
0,090
0,400
9811,5
10209,7
12755,6
324
266
168
3282
3133
2523
225
30,30
38,31
75,88
2,99
3,26
5,06
0,085
0,425
11901,2
12296,7
14980,4
303
250
148
3389
3243
2602
250
39,23
49,19
101,42
3,51
3,79
5,76
0,081
0,450
14055,0
14468,2
17246,0
279
229
125
3479
3333
2670
275
50,31
63,07
137,62
4,04
4,34
6,46
0,076
0,475
16286,6
16682,1
19560,8
251
207
101
3548
3412
2727
300
64,90
80,69
194,52
4,59
4,89
7,17
0,073
0,500
18556,3
18957,3
21924,6
220
181
73
3608
3475
2771
325
84,21
104,65
298,59
5,14
5,46
7,91
Roof
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,200
0,161
47909,0
47757,6
43650,2
1723
1462
1240
6151
5843
4794
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,177
0,184
339,4
460,8
981,7
121
99
77
802
752
626
23
2,81
4,65
12,72
0,42
0,61
1,57
0,158
0,207
1446,6
1674,3
2619,3
199
162
123
1405
1317
1088
46
7,28
10,36
21,36
1,03
1,27
2,41
0,143
0,230
3119,6
3415,5
4719,2
244
199
146
1862
1750
1435
69
12,77
17,20
32,38
1,68
1,95
3,29
0,130
0,253
5184,1
5535,9
7119,1
268
217
154
2218
2088
1707
92
19,34
25,48
46,14
2,34
2,65
4,17
0,120
0,276
7537,6
7904,5
9737,2
275
224
152
2499
2365
1925
115
27,38
35,30
63,94
3,02
3,34
5,06
0,111
0,299
10117,6
10504,8
12544,9
270
219
141
2722
2583
2095
138
37,49
47,89
88,90
3,72
4,07
5,99
0,103
0,322
12861,1
13264,8
15506,7
255
207
122
2902
2762
2227
161
50,40
64,07
126,60
4,43
4,80
6,96
0,096
0,345
15747,9
16147,4
18565,2
232
189
99
3046
2911
2335
184
67,75
85,52
187,21
5,17
5,55
7,95
0,090
0,368
18739,6
19137,8
21683,8
204
165
73
3162
3032
2428
207
91,98
115,72
297,26
5,93
6,31
8,93
0,085
0,391
21821,4
22216,9
24900,6
170
138
42
3255
3131
2496
230
128,38
161,40
593,27
6,70
7,10
9,98
0,081
0,414
24967,2
25380,4
28158,2
133
106
9
3332
3209
2554
253
188,30
239,81
3122,53
7,49
7,91
11,03
0,076
0,436
28190,8
28586,3
31465,0
91
72
-26
3388
3277
2600
276
310,40
397,21
#N/A
8,32
8,72
12,10
0,073
0,459
31452,6
31853,5
34820,9
47
35
-64
3435
3329
2633
299
670,68
906,70
#N/A
9,16
9,57
13,22
Roof
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,200
0,151
60195,3
60043,9
55936,5
1904
1615
1384
6333
5996
4938
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,177
0,173
2094,6
2216,0
2736,9
95
77
57
776
731
605
22
22,05
28,73
48,34
2,70
3,03
4,52
0,158
0,195
4956,9
5184,7
6129,7
147
118
81
1353
1273
1047
43
33,79
44,01
75,23
3,66
4,07
5,85
0,143
0,216
8385,2
8681,1
9984,8
166
133
84
1784
1684
1373
65
50,38
65,29
118,90
4,70
5,15
7,27
0,130
0,238
12204,8
12556,6
14139,9
164
130
72
2114
2001
1625
86
74,38
96,76
196,51
5,77
6,28
8,70
0,120
0,259
16313,6
16680,4
18513,2
145
115
49
2369
2256
1822
108
112,17
145,61
375,00
6,89
7,40
10,16
0,111
0,281
20648,7
21035,9
23076,0
114
88
18
2566
2452
1972
130
181,12
238,71
1310,41
8,05
8,58
11,70
0,103
0,303
25147,4
25551,1
27792,9
73
54
-22
2720
2609
2083
151
342,86
473,43
#N/A
9,24
9,79
13,34
0,096
0,324
29789,3
30188,9
32606,7
25
14
-66
2838
2736
2170
173
1210,70
2175,41
#N/A
10,50
11,04
15,03
0,090
0,346
34536,3
34934,5
37480,5
-30
-31
-112
2928
2835
2242
195
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
11,79
12,32
16,72
0,085
0,368
39373,2
39768,7
42452,4
-90
-81
-164
2995
2912
2290
216
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
13,14
13,65
18,54
0,081
0,389
44274,3
44687,5
47465,3
-153
-135
-217
3046
2969
2327
238
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
14,53
15,05
20,39
0,076
0,411
49253,0
49648,5
52527,2
-221
-190
-273
3077
3014
2353
259
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
16,01
16,47
22,33
0,073
0,432
54270,0
54670,9
57638,2
-291
-249
-332
3097
3045
2366
281
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
17,52
17,96
24,36
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 37:
Artelia: Mineral wool 37:
Cowi: Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 32:
Artelia: Mineral wool 32:
Cowi: Mineral wool 32:
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 34:
Artelia: Mineral wool 34:
Cowi: Mineral wool 34:
Artelia
Cowi
-20,00
0,00
20,00
40,00
60,00
80,00
100,00
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 175mm [mm]
Mineral wool 37
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
0,00
50,00
100,00
150,00
200,00
250,00
23
46
69
92
115
138
161
184
207
230
253
276
299
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 161mm [mm]
Mineral wool 34
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
0,00
50,00
100,00
150,00
200,00
250,00
300,00
350,00
400,00
450,00
500,00
22
43
65
86
108
130
151
173
195
216
238
259
281
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 151mm [mm]
Mineral wool 32
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
A.7. SF LCCA Results
Environmental and economic optimals
103
==PAGE:112==
Floor
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,21
0,075
17264,7
16843,4
14057,4
1622
1469
1320
4012
3763
3054
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,18
0,100
312,9
386,6
685,2
-234
-237
-246
69
50
-20
25
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
4,57
7,77
#N/A
0,16
0,125
942,2
1073,1
1614,5
-485
-488
-504
55
25
-101
50
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
17,02
43,50
#N/A
0,15
0,150
1799,3
1973,8
2722,5
-750
-749
-771
-17
-54
-227
75
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,13
0,175
2804,9
3025,9
3943,6
-1023
-1018
-1043
-127
-170
-380
100
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,12
0,200
3949,7
4207,5
5257,5
-1303
-1293
-1320
-273
-319
-557
125
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,11
0,225
5196,8
5470,9
6647,7
-1590
-1572
-1601
-446
-488
-753
150
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,11
0,250
6528,4
6810,6
8102,0
-1881
-1854
-1884
-641
-676
-965
175
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,10
0,275
7928,1
8214,5
9608,2
-2176
-2140
-2170
-853
-880
-1190
200
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,09
0,300
9374,3
9672,9
11149,8
-2474
-2428
-2458
-1077
-1097
-1424
225
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,09
0,325
10862,7
11164,1
12720,0
-2774
-2718
-2747
-1312
-1323
-1665
250
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,08
0,350
12389,3
12696,1
14318,9
-3076
-3010
-3038
-1557
-1559
-1913
275
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,08
0,375
13943,2
14258,2
15939,6
-3380
-3304
-3329
-1809
-1803
-2166
300
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,400
15525,7
15842,1
17580,8
-3685
-3598
-3622
-2069
-2052
-2425
325
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,425
17128,7
17451,8
19236,9
-3992
-3894
-3915
-2333
-2307
-2687
350
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,450
18754,8
19078,0
20913,5
-4300
-4190
-4209
-2604
-2567
-2955
375
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,475
20397,3
20721,9
22598,3
-4608
-4488
-4504
-2879
-2830
-3224
400
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,06
0,500
22049,4
22380,8
24295,4
-4918
-4786
-4799
-3156
-3098
-3497
425
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,21
0,062
17479,9
17058,6
14272,6
1554
1403
1255
3943
3697
2989
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,18
0,083
347,3
420,9
719,6
-205
-209
-219
97
77
7
20
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
3,57
5,44
101,31
0,16
0,103
1010,9
1141,8
1683,2
-428
-432
-450
113
80
-47
41
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
8,95
14,29
#N/A
0,15
0,124
1902,3
2076,9
2825,5
-663
-666
-690
70
29
-145
61
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
27,30
71,51
#N/A
0,13
0,144
2942,3
3163,3
4081,0
-907
-907
-935
-12
-60
-272
82
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,12
0,164
4121,5
4379,2
5429,2
-1159
-1155
-1184
-129
-181
-421
102
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,11
0,185
5402,9
5677,0
6853,8
-1417
-1406
-1437
-273
-322
-590
122
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,11
0,205
6768,8
7051,1
8342,5
-1680
-1661
-1694
-439
-482
-775
143
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,10
0,226
8202,9
8489,3
9883,0
-1946
-1919
-1953
-623
-659
-973
163
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,09
0,246
9683,4
9982,1
11458,9
-2215
-2180
-2213
-818
-849
-1179
184
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,09
0,266
11206,2
11507,6
13063,5
-2486
-2442
-2475
-1024
-1047
-1393
204
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,08
0,287
12767,2
13074,0
14696,8
-2759
-2706
-2738
-1241
-1255
-1614
224
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,08
0,307
14355,4
14670,4
16351,8
-3034
-2972
-3003
-1464
-1471
-1840
245
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,328
15972,2
16288,6
18027,3
-3311
-3239
-3268
-1694
-1693
-2071
265
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,348
17609,6
17932,7
19717,8
-3589
-3507
-3534
-1930
-1920
-2306
286
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,368
19270,1
19593,2
21428,8
-3868
-3776
-3801
-2172
-2152
-2547
306
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,389
20946,9
21271,5
23147,9
-4148
-4046
-4069
-2418
-2388
-2789
326
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,06
0,409
22633,3
22964,7
24879,3
-4428
-4316
-4337
-2667
-2628
-3034
347
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
White EPS 38
Artelia: White EPS 38:
Cowi: White EPS 38:
Artelia
Cowi
Grey EPS 31
Artelia: Grey EPS 31:
Cowi: Grey EPS 31:
Artelia
Cowi
0,00
5,00
10,00
15,00
20,00
25,00
30,00
35,00
40,00
45,00
50,00
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 350 375 400 425
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 75mm [mm]
White EPS 38
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
0,00
20,00
40,00
60,00
80,00
100,00
120,00
20
41
61
82
102 122 143 163 184 204 224 245 265 286 306 326 347
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 62mm [mm]
Grey EPS 31
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
A.7. SF LCCA Results
Environmental and economic optimals
104
==PAGE:113==
Mineral wool 
37 Wall
Mineral wool 
34 Wall
Mineral wool 
32 Wall
Mineral wool 
37 Flexible
Mineral wool 
34 Flexible
Mineral wool 
32 Flexible
EPS White 38
EPS Grey 31
Artelia EF
COWI EF
MF
2025
15,41
22,12
32,50
14,95
20,15
29,44
85,09
94,87
kg CO2-eq./m3
2025-2075
0,01539
0,07045
kg CO2-
eq./kWh
Wall area
249,92
m3
2050
12,97
18,62
27,36
12,58
16,96
24,78
81,66
91,05
kg CO2-eq./m3
2050 +
0,01320
0,06804
kg CO2-
eq./kWh
Roof area
180,405
m3
2075
12,21
17,53
25,75
11,84
15,96
23,33
80,42
89,66
kg CO2-eq./m3
Price
DKK/kWh
Floor area
180,405
m3
Price
1027,75
1412,79
1436,24
687,63
1021,38
1598,57
457,91
571,96
DKK/m3
Multi family
Exterior walls
Resulting U-
Value
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
0,929
0,025
96,25
81,03
76,27
6421,38
0,023
126,99
106,90
100,62
8111,40
0,022
175,62
147,84
139,16
7760,98
0,571
0,050
192,51
162,05
152,54
12842,76
0,046
253,97
213,79
201,25
16222,80
0,043
351,24
295,67
278,32
15521,95
0,412
0,075
288,76
243,08
228,81
19264,15
0,069
380,96
320,69
301,87
24334,20
0,065
526,86
443,51
417,48
23282,93
0,322
0,100
385,01
324,10
305,08
25685,53
0,092
507,95
427,59
402,50
32445,60
0,086
702,48
591,35
556,64
31043,90
0,265
0,125
481,26
405,13
381,35
32106,91
0,115
634,93
534,49
503,12
40557,00
0,108
878,10
739,18
695,80
38804,88
0,224
0,150
577,52
486,15
457,63
38528,29
0,138
761,92
641,38
603,74
48668,40
0,130
1053,72
887,02
834,97
46565,85
0,195
0,175
673,77
567,18
533,90
44949,67
0,161
888,90
748,28
704,37
56779,80
0,151
1229,34
1034,86
974,13
54326,83
0,172
0,200
770,02
648,21
610,17
51371,06
0,184
1015,89
855,18
804,99
64891,20
0,173
1404,96
1182,69
1113,29
62087,80
0,154
0,225
866,28
729,23
686,44
57792,44
0,207
1142,88
962,07
905,62
73002,60
0,195
1580,58
1330,53
1252,45
69848,78
0,140
0,250
962,53
810,26
762,71
64213,82
0,230
1269,86
1068,97
1006,24
81114,00
0,216
1756,19
1478,36
1391,61
77609,75
0,128
0,275
1058,78
891,28
838,98
70635,20
0,253
1396,85
1175,87
1106,86
89225,40
0,238
1931,81
1626,20
1530,77
85370,73
0,118
0,300
1155,04
972,31
915,25
77056,58
0,276
1523,84
1282,77
1207,49
97336,80
0,259
2107,43
1774,04
1669,93
93131,70
0,109
0,325
1251,29
1053,33
991,52
83477,97
0,299
1650,82
1389,66
1308,11
105448,20
0,281
2283,05
1921,87
1809,09
100892,68
0,101
0,350
1347,54
1134,36
1067,79
89899,35
0,322
1777,81
1496,56
1408,74
113559,60
0,303
2458,67
2069,71
1948,25
108653,65
0,095
0,375
1443,79
1215,39
1144,06
96320,73
0,345
1904,80
1603,46
1509,36
121671,00
0,324
2634,29
2217,55
2087,41
116414,63
0,089
0,400
1540,05
1296,41
1220,33
102742,11
0,368
2031,78
1710,35
1609,98
129782,40
0,346
2809,91
2365,38
2226,57
124175,60
0,084
0,425
1636,30
1377,44
1296,60
109163,49
0,391
2158,77
1817,25
1710,61
137893,80
0,368
2985,53
2513,22
2365,73
131936,58
0,080
0,450
1732,55
1458,46
1372,88
115584,88
0,414
2285,75
1924,15
1811,23
146005,20
0,389
3161,15
2661,06
2504,90
139697,55
0,076
0,475
1828,81
1539,49
1449,15
122006,26
0,436
2412,74
2031,05
1911,86
154116,60
0,411
3336,77
2808,89
2644,06
147458,53
0,072
0,500
1925,06
1620,52
1525,42
128427,64
0,459
2539,73
2137,94
2012,48
162228,00
0,432
3512,39
2956,73
2783,22
155219,50
2025
Artelia
Cowi
2050
Artelia
Cowi
2075
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 
2075+2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075-
2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
17402,2
13390,99
61299,25
237310
180778
16817,9
11099,81
57214,50
229342
174708
14625,5
9652,83
49755,95
199445
151933
9853,6
7582,35
34709,31
134371
102362
9643,3
6364,58
32806,51
131504
100177
8102,6
5347,72
27565,05
110493
84172
6746,1
5191,12
23763,14
91995
70080
6644,1
4385,11
22603,23
90604
69020
5458,2
3602,41
18568,80
74432
56701
5070,3
3901,60
17860,13
69143
52671
4995,6
3297,10
16995,03
68124
51895
4074,5
2689,17
13861,45
55563
42327
4039,6
3108,47
14229,49
55087
41964
3977,3
2625,02
13530,77
54238
41317
3227,3
2130,02
10979,27
44010
33526
3336,9
2567,74
11754,23
45505
34664
3281,6
2165,86
11164,00
44750
34090
2660,9
1756,19
9052,38
36286
27642
2832,7
2179,76
9978,19
38629
29427
2783,9
1837,37
9470,83
37963
28920
2253,4
1487,24
7666,07
30729
23409
2445,7
1881,97
8614,98
33351
25407
2411,4
1591,52
8203,58
32884
25050
1948,5
1286,01
6628,80
26571
20241
2145,4
1650,89
7557,17
29256
22287
2122,1
1400,59
7219,38
28939
22045
1708,6
1127,68
5812,66
23300
17749
1906,3
1466,90
6714,94
25996
19803
1892,2
1248,85
6437,26
25804
19657
1519,3
1002,74
5168,66
20718
15783
1712,3
1317,61
6031,58
23350
17788
1704,1
1124,71
5797,35
23238
17703
1365,3
901,10
4644,75
18618
14183
1553,3
1195,26
5471,50
21182
16136
1546,1
1020,43
5259,83
21084
16061
1237,5
816,75
4209,98
16876
12855
1417,6
1090,84
4993,50
19331
14726
1416,9
935,15
4820,29
19322
14719
1129,1
745,21
3841,20
15397
11729
1302,2
1002,04
4587,00
17758
13528
1304,4
860,90
4437,57
17788
13550
1038,3
685,28
3532,30
14159
10786
1201,7
924,71
4232,99
16387
12484
1206,5
796,29
4104,51
16453
12533
961,3
634,46
3270,34
13109
9986
1114,8
857,84
3926,88
15202
11581
1121,2
739,99
3814,32
15290
11647
892,1
588,79
3034,92
12165
9267
1038,2
798,89
3657,06
14158
10785
1045,7
690,16
3557,47
14260
10863
833,1
549,85
2834,21
11361
8654
970,4
746,72
3418,23
13233
10081
978,3
645,68
3328,18
13341
10163
780,7
515,26
2655,94
10646
8110
911
701,01
3209,00
12423
9464
919
606,54
3126,44
12532
9547
732,6
483,52
2492,31
9990
7610
856,5
659,08
3017,02
11680
8898
864,4
570,50
2940,69
11788
8980
689,8
455,27
2346,70
9407
7166
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,929
244097
236129
206232
245884
237916
208019
245513
237545
207648
0,571
147946
145079
124068
151519
148651
127641
150778
147911
126900
0,412
112358
110967
94795
117717
116326
100154
116606
115215
99043
0,322
96293
95274
82713
103438
102420
89859
101957
100938
88377
0,265
89025
88175
77948
97957
97107
86880
96105
95255
85028
0,224
86230
85476
77012
96948
96194
87730
94726
93972
85507
0,195
86142
85476
78242
98647
97981
90747
96054
95388
88154
0,172
87652
87184
80872
101943
101475
95163
98980
98512
92200
0,154
90344
90027
84388
106422
106104
100465
103088
102771
97132
0,140
93872
93679
88594
111735
111543
106458
108031
107839
102754
0,128
98014
97902
93282
117664
117552
112932
113589
113478
108857
0,118
102633
102535
98326
124070
123971
119763
119625
119527
115318
0,109
107570
107560
103636
130793
130784
126859
125978
125968
122044
0,101
112784
112814
109185
137793
137823
134195
132608
132638
129009
0,095
118201
118266
114923
144997
145062
141719
139441
139506
136162
0,089
123803
123891
120767
152386
152473
149349
146459
146546
143422
0,084
129546
129649
126750
159915
160017
157118
153618
153720
150821
0,080
135409
135517
132823
167565
167672
164978
160897
161005
158310
0,076
141387
141496
138954
175328
175438
172896
168291
168400
165858
0,072
147431
147539
145158
183159
183267
180886
175751
175859
173478
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Resulting U-
Value
tau=50
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Insulation
DH
0,53
Mineral wool 37
Mineral wool 34
Mineral wool 32
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
A.8. MF Insulation Results
A.8
MF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
105
==PAGE:114==
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,929
187861
181791
159016
189725
183655
160880
189338
183269
160493
0,571
116527
114342
98337
120255
118071
102065
119482
117298
101292
0,412
91328
90269
77949
96921
95861
83542
95761
94701
82382
0,322
81003
80227
70658
88459
87683
78114
86913
86137
76568
0,265
77378
76731
68940
86699
86051
78260
84766
84119
76328
0,224
77161
76587
70139
88346
87771
81323
86026
85452
79004
0,195
79006
78499
72988
92055
91548
86037
89349
88842
83331
0,172
82069
81712
76904
96981
96625
91816
93889
93533
88724
0,154
86032
85790
81494
102809
102566
98271
99330
99088
94792
0,140
90631
90484
86610
109272
109125
105251
105406
105260
101386
0,128
95698
95613
92093
116203
116118
112598
111951
111866
108347
0,118
101129
101054
97849
123498
123423
120218
118860
118785
115579
0,109
106802
106795
103805
131035
131028
128038
126011
126003
123014
0,101
112686
112709
109945
138783
138806
136042
133372
133395
130631
0,095
118725
118775
116228
146686
146736
144189
140888
140938
138391
0,089
124905
124971
122592
154730
154797
152417
148546
148613
146233
0,084
131192
131270
129061
162881
162959
160751
156311
156389
154180
0,080
137570
137653
135600
171124
171206
169153
164167
164249
162196
0,076
144036
144119
142183
179454
179537
177601
172110
172193
170257
0,072
150553
150635
148821
187834
187917
186103
180104
180186
178372
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,929
13487
11181
9729
13518
11207
9753
13567
11248
9792
0,571
7775
6527
5500
7836
6578
5549
7934
6660
5626
0,412
5480
4628
3831
5572
4706
3904
5718
4829
4020
0,322
4287
3621
2994
4410
3725
3092
4604
3888
3246
0,265
3590
3030
2511
3743
3160
2633
3987
3364
2826
0,224
3145
2652
2214
3330
2807
2360
3621
3053
2591
0,195
2854
2405
2021
3069
2586
2192
3409
2872
2461
0,172
2652
2240
1896
2898
2447
2091
3287
2774
2399
0,154
2517
2130
1814
2794
2363
2033
3231
2731
2380
0,140
2429
2059
1765
2737
2318
2009
3223
2727
2394
0,128
2376
2016
1740
2714
2301
2008
3249
2751
2432
0,118
2350
1993
1732
2719
2303
2024
3303
2794
2487
0,109
2342
1988
1737
2742
2325
2053
3374
2857
2554
0,101
2350
1995
1753
2780
2357
2094
3461
2931
2634
0,095
2369
2012
1779
2830
2400
2144
3559
3014
2722
0,089
2398
2036
1809
2890
2450
2199
3668
3105
2815
0,084
2435
2068
1846
2958
2507
2260
3784
3203
2916
0,080
2479
2104
1888
3032
2570
2326
3908
3307
3020
0,076
2530
2146
1933
3114
2638
2395
4038
3415
3128
0,072
2584
2191
1981
3199
2708
2468
4171
3527
3238
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,929
61396
57296
49832
61426
57321
49857
61475
57362
49895
0,571
34902
32969
27718
34963
33020
27766
35061
33102
27843
0,412
24052
22846
18798
24144
22924
18871
24290
23047
18986
0,322
18245
17319
14167
18368
17423
14264
18563
17586
14418
0,265
14711
13936
11361
14864
14065
11482
15108
14270
11675
0,224
12332
11650
9510
12516
11805
9656
12808
12051
9887
0,195
10652
10038
8200
10867
10219
8370
11208
10506
8640
0,172
9385
8852
7239
9631
9059
7434
10020
9386
7742
0,154
8423
7949
6499
8700
8181
6718
9138
8550
7065
0,140
7677
7248
5931
7985
7506
6175
8471
7916
6560
0,128
7090
6689
5484
7428
6973
5752
7963
7424
6176
0,118
6627
6232
5125
6995
6543
5417
7579
7034
5880
0,109
6245
5874
4833
6644
6210
5149
7277
6742
5650
0,101
5935
5572
4600
6365
5934
4941
7046
6507
5481
0,095
5677
5320
4414
6138
5708
4780
6867
6322
5358
0,089
5467
5111
4255
5959
5525
4645
6737
6180
5261
0,084
5293
4935
4131
5816
5375
4545
6643
6071
5200
0,080
5151
4787
4029
5704
5252
4467
6579
5989
5161
0,076
5038
4666
3941
5622
5157
4404
6546
5935
5136
0,072
4942
4561
3872
5557
5079
4359
6529
5897
5130
Resulting U-
Value
Emissions Artelia
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Resulting U-
Value
Emissions Cowi
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Resulting U-
Value
tau=30
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
A.8. MF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
106
==PAGE:115==
Roof
Resulting U-
Value
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
1,071
0,025
67,41
56,74
53,41
3101,30
0,023
83,50
70,29
66,16
4233,05
0,022
114,83
96,66
90,99
6235,46
0,621
0,050
134,82
113,49
106,83
6202,59
0,046
167,00
140,58
132,33
8466,09
0,043
229,65
193,32
181,98
12470,92
0,438
0,075
202,22
170,23
160,24
9303,89
0,069
250,49
210,87
198,49
12699,14
0,065
344,48
289,98
272,96
18706,38
0,338
0,100
269,63
226,98
213,66
12405,19
0,092
333,99
281,16
264,66
16932,19
0,086
459,30
386,64
363,95
24941,84
0,275
0,125
337,04
283,72
267,07
15506,49
0,115
417,49
351,44
330,82
21165,24
0,108
574,13
483,30
454,94
31177,30
0,232
0,150
404,45
340,46
320,48
18607,78
0,138
500,99
421,73
396,98
25398,28
0,130
688,95
579,96
545,93
37412,76
0,200
0,175
471,86
397,21
373,90
21709,08
0,161
584,49
492,02
463,15
29631,33
0,151
803,78
676,62
636,91
43648,22
0,177
0,200
539,26
453,95
427,31
24810,38
0,184
667,99
562,31
529,31
33864,38
0,173
918,60
773,28
727,90
49883,68
0,158
0,225
606,67
510,70
480,73
27911,68
0,207
751,48
632,60
595,48
38097,43
0,195
1033,43
869,94
818,89
56119,14
0,143
0,250
674,08
567,44
534,14
31012,97
0,230
834,98
702,89
661,64
42330,47
0,216
1148,25
966,60
909,88
62354,60
0,130
0,275
741,49
624,19
587,56
34114,27
0,253
918,48
773,18
727,80
46563,52
0,238
1263,08
1063,26
1000,86
68590,06
0,120
0,300
808,90
680,93
640,97
37215,57
0,276
1001,98
843,47
793,97
50796,57
0,259
1377,90
1159,92
1091,85
74825,52
0,111
0,325
876,31
737,67
694,38
40316,86
0,299
1085,48
913,75
860,13
55029,61
0,281
1492,73
1256,58
1182,84
81060,98
0,103
0,350
943,71
794,42
747,80
43418,16
0,322
1168,98
984,04
926,30
59262,66
0,303
1607,55
1353,24
1273,83
87296,44
0,096
0,375
1011,12
851,16
801,21
46519,46
0,345
1252,47
1054,33
992,46
63495,71
0,324
1722,38
1449,90
1364,81
93531,90
0,090
0,400
1078,53
907,91
854,63
49620,76
0,368
1335,97
1124,62
1058,62
67728,76
0,346
1837,21
1546,56
1455,80
99767,36
0,085
0,425
1145,94
964,65
908,04
52722,05
0,391
1419,47
1194,91
1124,79
71961,80
0,368
1952,03
1643,22
1546,79
106002,82
0,081
0,450
1213,35
1021,39
961,45
55823,35
0,414
1502,97
1265,20
1190,95
76194,85
0,389
2066,86
1739,88
1637,78
112238,28
0,076
0,475
1280,75
1078,14
1014,87
58924,65
0,436
1586,47
1335,49
1257,12
80427,90
0,411
2181,68
1836,54
1728,76
118473,74
0,073
0,500
1348,16
1134,88
1068,28
62025,95
0,459
1669,97
1405,78
1323,28
84660,95
0,432
2296,51
1933,20
1819,75
124709,20
2025
Artelia
Cowi
2050
Artelia
Cowi
2075
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 
2075+2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075-
2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
16134,8
12415,73
56834,83
220027
167612
97,19%
15681,1
10349,53
53347,10
213840
162899
86%
13908,6
9179,68
47317,06
189668
144486
8474,5
6521,13
29851,43
115565
88035
97,35%
8249,9
5444,93
28066,16
112502
85702
84%
7112,6
4694,32
24197,07
96993
73887
5640
4339,98
19866,90
76911
58590
97,47%
5497,5
3628,35
18702,50
74968
57109
82%
4601,4
3036,92
15653,96
62748
47800
4163,1
3203,51
14664,52
56771
43247
97,87%
4074,5
2689,17
13861,45
55563
42327
81%
3376,8
2228,69
11487,87
46049
35079
3270
2516,27
11518,58
44592
33970
97,99%
3204,3
2114,84
10901,03
43696
33287
81%
2641,2
1743,19
8985,36
36017
27437
2680,2
2062,41
9441,00
36549
27843
97,96%
2625,5
1732,83
8931,95
35803
27274
80%
2151,6
1420,06
7319,74
29341
22351
2262
1740,61
7967,90
30846
23498
97,76%
2211,4
1459,52
7523,18
30156
22973
80%
1810,3
1194,80
6158,64
24687
18806
1947,2
1498,37
6859,01
26554
20228
97,96%
1907,4
1258,88
6488,97
26011
19815
80%
1559,8
1029,47
5306,44
21271
16204
1708,9
1315,00
6019,60
23304
17752
97,93%
1673,6
1104,58
5693,59
22823
17386
80%
1364,9
900,83
4643,39
18613
14179
1520,1
1169,72
5354,55
20729
15791
97,88%
1487,9
982,01
5061,84
20290
15457
80%
1209,4
798,20
4114,38
16492
12564
1363
1048,83
4801,17
18587
14159
98,08%
1336,8
882,29
4547,79
18230
13887
79%
1083,5
715,11
3686,07
14775
11256
1234,4
949,87
4348,17
16833
12823
98,15%
1211,6
799,66
4121,86
16522
12586
79%
981,3
647,66
3338,38
13382
10194
1126,2
866,61
3967,04
15358
11699
98,28%
1106,8
730,49
3765,33
15093
11498
80%
895,4
590,96
3046,15
12210
9302
1035,3
796,66
3646,84
14118
10755
98,23%
1017
671,22
3459,83
13869
10565
79%
822
542,52
2796,44
11209
8539
954,3
734,33
3361,52
13014
9913
98,52%
940,2
620,53
3198,56
12821
9767
80%
759
500,94
2582,12
10350
7885
884,7
680,78
3116,36
12064
9190
98,67%
872,9
576,11
2969,61
11904
9068
80%
704,5
464,97
2396,71
9607
7319
822,2
632,68
2896,20
11212
8541
99,01%
814,1
537,31
2769,57
11102
8457
80%
656,4
433,22
2233,07
8951
6819
768,4
591,28
2706,69
10478
7982
99,17%
762
502,92
2592,32
10391
7916
80%
613,4
404,84
2086,79
8365
6372
720
554,04
2536,20
9818
7480
99,35%
715,3
472,10
2433,45
9754
7431
80%
575,4
379,76
1957,51
7847
5977
676,3
520,41
2382,27
9223
7026
99,69%
674,2
444,97
2293,63
9194
7004
80%
541,2
357,19
1841,16
7380
5622
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
1,071
223305
217118
192947
224501
218314
194143
226618
220431
196259
0,621
122121
119058
103549
124514
121451
105942
128747
125684
110175
0,438
86746
84803
72583
90335
88392
76172
96685
94741
82521
0,338
69884
68676
59161
74669
73461
63946
83135
81927
72413
0,275
60983
60087
52408
66964
66069
58390
77547
76652
68973
0,232
56218
55472
49010
63396
62650
56188
76096
75350
68887
0,200
53793
53103
47634
62167
61477
56008
76984
76294
70824
0,177
52779
52236
47496
62349
61806
57066
79282
78739
73999
0,158
52807
52326
48116
63574
63093
58883
82623
82142
77932
0,143
53511
53072
49274
65474
65035
61237
86640
86201
82403
0,130
54647
54289
50835
67806
67449
63994
91088
90731
87277
0,120
56171
55860
52720
70527
70216
67075
95926
95615
92474
0,111
57974
57709
54826
73526
73261
70378
101041
100777
97894
0,103
60012
59763
57104
76760
76511
73852
106393
106143
103484
0,096
62186
61994
59523
80130
79938
77467
111879
111687
109216
0,090
64515
64354
62058
83656
83495
81198
117521
117360
115064
0,085
66941
66830
64680
87278
87167
85017
123260
123150
120999
0,081
69485
69398
67372
91018
90931
88905
129117
129030
127004
0,076
72103
72039
70132
94833
94769
92861
135048
134984
133077
0,073
74786
74757
72943
98711
98683
96869
141044
141015
139201
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
1,071
171033
166320
147907
172281
167568
149155
174490
169777
151363
0,621
94877
92543
80729
97373
95040
83225
101790
99457
87643
0,438
68852
67371
58063
72597
71116
61808
79223
77742
68433
0,338
56930
56010
48762
61923
61003
53755
70758
69838
62590
0,275
51073
50391
44541
57315
56632
50783
68358
67675
61826
0,232
48367
47799
42876
55857
55289
50366
69109
68540
63617
0,200
47443
46918
42751
56181
55656
51489
71642
71116
66950
0,177
47594
47180
43569
57580
57167
53556
75250
74836
71225
0,158
48539
48172
44965
59774
59407
56200
79652
79285
76078
0,143
49998
49664
46771
62482
62147
59254
84568
84234
81340
0,130
51787
51515
48884
65519
65246
62615
89814
89542
86910
0,120
53872
53635
51243
68852
68615
66222
95356
95119
92726
0,111
56169
55967
53771
72397
72195
69999
101109
100908
98712
0,103
58645
58455
56429
76121
75931
73906
107043
106853
104827
0,096
61224
61078
59195
79949
79803
77920
113079
112932
111050
0,090
63922
63799
62050
83895
83772
82023
119234
119111
117362
0,085
66693
66609
64971
87915
87831
86192
125462
125378
123740
0,081
69555
69489
67945
92025
91959
90415
131781
131714
130171
0,076
72473
72424
70971
96191
96142
94689
138156
138107
136654
0,073
75440
75418
74037
100406
100384
99003
144579
144558
143176
Resulting U-
Value
tau=50
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Resulting U-
Value
tau=30
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Mineral wool 37
Mineral wool 34
Mineral wool 32
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
A.8. MF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
107
==PAGE:116==
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
1,071
12483
10406
9233
12499
10420
9246
12531
10446
9271
0,621
6656
5558
4801
6688
5586
4827
6751
5638
4876
0,438
4542
3799
3197
4590
3839
3235
4684
3918
3310
0,338
3473
2916
2442
3537
2970
2493
3663
3076
2593
0,275
2853
2399
2010
2934
2466
2074
3090
2598
2198
0,232
2467
2073
1741
2563
2155
1817
2751
2313
1966
0,200
2212
1857
1569
2325
1952
1658
2544
2136
1832
0,177
2038
1713
1457
2166
1821
1559
2417
2032
1757
0,158
1922
1615
1382
2066
1737
1496
2348
1975
1720
0,143
1844
1549
1332
2005
1685
1460
2318
1949
1708
0,130
1790
1506
1303
1967
1655
1443
2312
1946
1716
0,120
1759
1481
1289
1952
1643
1442
2328
1960
1740
0,111
1743
1468
1285
1952
1644
1451
2359
1987
1774
0,103
1740
1466
1290
1966
1655
1469
2404
2024
1816
0,096
1745
1472
1302
1987
1675
1493
2457
2070
1866
0,090
1759
1484
1320
2017
1701
1524
2518
2123
1921
0,085
1779
1502
1341
2052
1732
1558
2585
2181
1980
0,081
1805
1524
1366
2094
1768
1596
2658
2243
2043
0,076
1835
1550
1395
2141
1808
1637
2736
2309
2109
0,073
1869
1580
1425
2190
1851
1680
2817
2378
2177
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
1,071
56902
53404
47370
56918
53417
47383
56950
53444
47408
0,621
29986
28180
24304
30018
28207
24329
30081
28259
24379
0,438
20069
18873
15814
20117
18913
15852
20211
18992
15927
0,338
14934
14088
11702
14999
14143
11753
15124
14248
11852
0,275
11856
11185
9252
11936
11252
9316
12093
11384
9440
0,232
9845
9272
7640
9942
9354
7717
10130
9512
7866
0,200
8440
7920
6533
8552
8015
6622
8772
8200
6796
0,177
7398
6943
5734
7527
7051
5836
7778
7262
6034
0,158
6626
6204
5124
6771
6326
5239
7053
6564
5462
0,143
6029
5629
4649
6190
5765
4776
6503
6028
5024
0,130
5543
5172
4274
5720
5321
4414
6064
5611
4687
0,120
5157
4803
3979
5350
4965
4132
5726
5282
4430
0,111
4843
4503
3741
5053
4679
3906
5460
5022
4229
0,103
4591
4254
3544
4816
4444
3723
5254
4813
4070
0,096
4373
4050
3383
4614
4253
3575
5084
4648
3947
0,090
4195
3878
3251
4452
4094
3455
4954
4516
3853
0,085
4042
3734
3141
4316
3964
3358
4848
4413
3780
0,081
3920
3614
3048
4210
3858
3278
4774
4332
3725
0,076
3817
3512
2972
4123
3769
3215
4718
4270
3686
0,073
3730
3429
2909
4052
3699
3164
4679
4227
3661
Floor
Resulting U-
Value
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
Thickness [m]
Emissions 2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost [DKK]
0,286
0,025
383,77
368,30
362,70
2065,23
0,022
370,28
355,36
349,95
2232,37
0,241
0,050
767,53
736,60
725,40
4130,46
0,042
719,34
690,35
679,84
4336,79
0,208
0,075
1151,30
1104,90
1088,09
6195,69
0,062
1068,39
1025,34
1009,74
6441,21
0,183
0,100
1535,07
1473,20
1450,79
8260,93
0,083
1417,45
1360,32
1339,63
8545,63
0,163
0,125
1918,83
1841,50
1813,49
10326,16
0,103
1766,50
1695,31
1669,52
10650,05
0,147
0,150
2302,60
2209,80
2176,19
12391,39
0,124
2115,56
2030,30
1999,42
12754,47
0,134
0,175
2686,37
2578,11
2538,88
14456,62
0,144
2464,62
2365,29
2329,31
14858,89
0,123
0,200
3070,13
2946,41
2901,58
16521,85
0,164
2813,67
2700,28
2659,20
16963,31
0,114
0,225
3453,90
3314,71
3264,28
18587,08
0,185
3162,73
3035,27
2989,10
19067,72
0,106
0,250
3837,67
3683,01
3626,98
20652,31
0,205
3511,79
3370,26
3318,99
21172,14
0,099
0,275
4221,43
4051,31
3989,68
22717,54
0,226
3860,84
3705,25
3648,88
23276,56
0,093
0,300
4605,20
4419,61
4352,37
24782,78
0,246
4209,90
4040,24
3978,78
25380,98
0,088
0,325
4988,96
4787,91
4715,07
26848,01
0,266
4558,96
4375,23
4308,67
27485,40
0,083
0,350
5372,73
5156,21
5077,77
28913,24
0,287
4908,01
4710,22
4638,56
29589,82
0,079
0,375
5756,50
5524,51
5440,47
30978,47
0,307
5257,07
5045,21
4968,46
31694,24
0,075
0,400
6140,26
5892,81
5803,16
33043,70
0,328
5606,12
5380,20
5298,35
33798,66
0,071
0,425
6524,03
6261,11
6165,86
35108,93
0,348
5955,18
5715,19
5628,24
35903,08
0,068
0,450
6907,80
6629,41
6528,56
37174,16
0,368
6304,24
6050,18
5958,13
38007,50
0,065
0,475
7291,56
6997,71
6891,26
39239,40
0,389
6653,29
6385,17
6288,03
40111,92
0,063
0,500
7675,33
7366,01
7253,96
41304,63
0,409
7002,35
6720,16
6617,92
42216,34
2025
Artelia
Cowi
2050
Artelia
Cowi
2075
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2025-
2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2050-
2100
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat flux 
[kWh]
Emissions 
2075+2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075-
2125
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
3865,5
2974,50
13616,22
52713
40156
88,47%
3419,7
2257,00
11633,82
46634
35525
76%
2955,8
1950,83
10055,63
40308
30706
2710,5
2085,73
9547,74
36962
28157
94,85%
2571
1696,86
8746,54
35060
26708
73%
1988,6
1312,48
6765,22
27118
20658
2086,1
1605,25
7348,29
28448
21671
95,52%
1992,7
1315,18
6779,17
27174
20701
73%
1517,9
1001,81
5163,90
20699
15768
1678,3
1291,45
5911,81
22887
17435
95,89%
1609,4
1062,20
5475,18
21947
16719
73%
1223,2
807,31
4161,33
16681
12707
1393,9
1072,61
4910,01
19008
14480
96,00%
1338,2
883,21
4552,56
18249
13902
73%
1017
671,22
3459,83
13869
10565
1200,9
924,09
4230,17
16376
12475
95,79%
1150,4
759,26
3913,66
15688
11951
73%
876,1
578,23
2980,49
11947
9101
1057,9
814,05
3726,45
14426
10990
95,58%
1011,1
667,33
3439,76
13788
10504
73%
770,6
508,60
2621,58
10508
8005
944,4
726,72
3326,65
12879
9811
95,40%
901
594,66
3065,20
12287
9360
73%
686,8
453,29
2336,49
9366
7135
851,9
655,54
3000,82
11617
8850
95,49%
813,5
536,91
2767,53
11094
8451
73%
618,1
407,95
2102,78
8429
6421
775,5
596,75
2731,70
10575
8056
95,47%
740,4
488,66
2518,84
10097
7691
72%
562,2
371,05
1912,60
7667
5840
710,9
547,04
2504,15
9694
7385
95,40%
678,2
447,61
2307,24
9248
7045
72%
514,7
339,70
1751,01
7019
5347
655,5
504,41
2309,00
8939
6809
95,38%
625,2
412,63
2126,93
8526
6495
72%
474,5
313,17
1614,25
6471
4929
607,8
467,70
2140,98
8288
6314
95,29%
579,2
382,27
1970,44
7898
6017
72%
439,3
289,94
1494,50
5991
4564
565,9
435,46
1993,38
7717
5879
95,33%
539,5
356,07
1835,38
7357
5604
72%
408,7
269,74
1390,40
5573
4246
529,3
407,30
1864,46
7218
5498
95,35%
504,7
333,10
1716,99
6882
5243
72%
381,5
251,79
1297,86
5202
3963
497,2
382,60
1751,39
6780
5165
95,19%
473,3
312,38
1610,17
6454
4917
72%
357,7
236,08
1216,90
4878
3716
468,3
360,36
1649,59
6386
4865
95,13%
445,5
294,03
1515,59
6075
4628
72%
336,1
221,83
1143,41
4583
3491
442
340,12
1556,95
6027
4592
95,16%
420,6
277,60
1430,88
5736
4369
72%
316,9
209,15
1078,09
4321
3292
418,9
322,34
1475,58
5712
4352
94,99%
397,9
262,61
1353,66
5426
4133
71%
299,2
197,47
1017,88
4080
3108
397,8
306,11
1401,25
5425
4132
94,90%
377,5
249,15
1284,26
5148
3922
71%
283,5
187,11
964,47
3866
2945
Lifetime cost
Lifetime cost
White EPS 38
Grey EPS 31
Lifetime cost
Resulting U-
Value
Emissions Artelia
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
Resulting U-
Value
Emissions Cowi
Mineral wool 37:
Mineral wool 34:
Mineral wool 32:
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
Mineral wool 37: 2025
Mineral wool 37: 2050
Mineral wool 37: 2075
Mineral wool 34: 2025
Mineral wool 34: 2050
Mineral wool 34: 2075
Mineral wool 32: 2025
Mineral wool 32: 2050
Mineral wool 32: 2075
A.8. MF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
108
==PAGE:117==
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,286
54896
48817
42491
55073
48993
42667
0,241
41328
39426
31484
41547
39644
31702
0,208
34997
33723
27248
35256
33983
27508
0,183
31619
30679
25413
31920
30980
25713
0,163
29923
29164
24784
30266
29506
25126
0,147
29474
28786
25045
29858
29170
25429
0,134
29707
29069
25790
30133
29494
26215
0,123
30343
29751
26830
30809
30217
27296
0,114
31264
30741
28076
31772
31249
28584
0,106
32405
31927
29497
32955
32476
30046
0,099
33707
33262
31032
34298
33852
31623
0,093
35135
34722
32667
35767
35354
33299
0,088
36667
36277
34370
37341
36951
35043
0,083
38279
37919
36135
38994
38634
36851
0,079
39963
39628
37948
40720
40384
38704
0,075
41708
41382
39806
42506
42180
40604
0,071
43497
43186
41694
44337
44026
42534
0,068
45322
45030
43616
46202
45911
44496
0,065
47190
46903
45557
48112
47825
46479
0,063
49085
48808
47526
50049
49772
48490
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,286
42434
37803
32983
42618
37987
33168
0,241
32713
31264
25214
32941
31492
25442
0,208
28505
27534
22602
28776
27805
22873
0,183
26546
25831
21819
26860
26145
22133
0,163
25870
25291
21955
26227
25649
22312
0,147
26143
25618
22769
26543
26019
23169
0,134
26935
26449
23951
27379
26893
24394
0,123
28034
27583
25358
28521
28070
25845
0,114
29351
28952
26922
29881
29482
27453
0,106
30836
30471
28620
31409
31044
29193
0,099
32442
32103
30404
33059
32719
31021
0,093
34145
33830
32265
34805
34490
32924
0,088
35927
35630
34177
36630
36333
34880
0,083
37770
37496
36137
38516
38242
36883
0,079
39668
39412
38132
40457
40202
38922
0,075
41612
41364
40163
42445
42197
40996
0,071
43590
43353
42217
44466
44229
43092
0,068
45595
45372
44295
46514
46291
45214
0,065
47633
47414
46389
48595
48377
47351
0,063
49691
49480
48504
50697
50486
49510
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,286
3358
2625
2314
3345
2612
2301
0,241
2853
2433
2038
2805
2387
1992
0,208
2757
2420
2090
2674
2341
2012
0,183
2827
2535
2258
2709
2423
2147
0,163
2991
2725
2485
2839
2579
2341
0,147
3227
2969
2754
3040
2790
2578
0,134
3500
3245
3047
3279
3033
2838
0,123
3797
3541
3355
3540
3295
3112
0,114
4109
3852
3672
3818
3572
3397
0,106
4434
4172
3998
4109
3859
3690
0,099
4768
4499
4329
4408
4153
3989
0,093
5110
4832
4666
4714
4453
4292
0,088
5457
5170
5005
5027
4758
4599
0,083
5808
5512
5348
5343
5066
4908
0,079
6164
5858
5692
5664
5378
5220
0,075
6523
6205
6039
5989
5693
5534
0,071
6884
6555
6388
6316
6009
5850
0,068
7248
6907
6738
6644
6328
6167
0,065
7614
7260
7089
6976
6648
6485
0,063
7981
7615
7441
7308
6969
6805
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,286
14000
12002
10418
13987
11989
10406
0,241
10315
9483
7491
10267
9437
7445
0,208
8500
7884
6252
8417
7805
6174
0,183
7447
6948
5612
7329
6836
5501
0,163
6829
6394
5273
6677
6248
5129
0,147
6533
6123
5157
6346
5944
4980
0,134
6413
6018
5160
6191
5805
4951
0,123
6397
6012
5238
6140
5765
4996
0,114
6455
6082
5367
6164
5803
5092
0,106
6569
6202
5540
6243
5889
5232
0,099
6726
6359
5741
6365
6012
5400
0,093
6914
6547
5967
6519
6167
5593
0,088
7130
6758
6210
6700
6346
5803
0,083
7366
6992
6468
6901
6546
6029
0,079
7621
7242
6738
7122
6762
6266
0,075
7892
7503
7020
7358
6990
6515
0,071
8174
7777
7309
7605
7231
6772
0,068
8465
8060
7607
7861
7481
7036
0,065
8767
8351
7909
8129
7739
7306
0,063
9077
8650
8218
8404
8004
7582
Resulting U-
Value
Emissions Cowi
White EPS 38:
Grey EPS 31:
Resulting U-
Value
tau=30
White EPS 38:
Grey EPS 31:
Resulting U-
Value
Emissions Artelia
White EPS 38:
Grey EPS 31:
Resulting U-
Value
tau=50
White EPS 38:
Grey EPS 31:
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
White EPS 38: 2025
White EPS 38: 2050
White EPS 38: 2075
Grey EPS 31: 2025
Grey EPS 31: 2050
Grey EPS 31: 2075
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Net Present Value [DKK]
Total U-Value
White EPS 38: 2025
White EPS 38: 2050
White EPS 38: 2075
Grey EPS 31: 2025
Grey EPS 31: 2050
Grey EPS 31: 2075
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
White EPS 38: 2025
White EPS 38: 2050
White EPS 38: 2075
Grey EPS 31: 2025
Grey EPS 31: 2050
Grey EPS 31: 2075
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
GHG emissions [CO2-eq.]
Total U-Value
White EPS 38: 2025
White EPS 38: 2050
White EPS 38: 2075
Grey EPS 31: 2025
Grey EPS 31: 2050
Grey EPS 31: 2075
A.8. MF Insulation Results
Environmental and economic optimals
109
==PAGE:118==
Exterior wall
Tau = 50
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
112358
89025
86142
90344
98014
151519
103438
96948
101943
111735
150778
101957
94726
98980
108031
2050
110967
88175
85476
90027
97902
148651
102420
96194
101475
111543
147911
100938
93972
98512
107839
2075
124068
82713
77012
80872
88594
208019
100154
86880
90747
100465
207648
99043
85028
88154
97132
Tau = 30
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
116527
81003
77161
82069
90631
189725
96921
86699
92055
102809
189338
95761
84119
88842
99088
2050
114342
80227
76587
81712
90484
183655
95861
86051
91548
98271
183269
94701
84119
88842
99088
2075
159016
77949
68940
72988
81494
#N/A
102065
78114
81323
91816
160493
82382
76328
83331
94792
Artelia
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
2517
2376
2342
2369
2435
3069
2794
2714
2742
2830
3621
3287
3223
3303
3461
2050
2130
2016
1988
2012
2068
2586
2363
2301
2325
2400
3053
2774
2727
2794
2931
2075
1896
1765
1732
1753
1809
2192
2033
2008
2053
2144
2826
2461
2380
2432
2554
Cowi
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
5467
5151
4942
#N/A
#N/A
5959
5704
5557
#N/A
#N/A
6737
6579
6529
#N/A
#N/A
2050
5111
4787
4561
#N/A
#N/A
5525
5252
5079
#N/A
#N/A
6180
5989
5897
#N/A
#N/A
2075
4255
4029
3872
#N/A
#N/A
4645
4467
4359
#N/A
#N/A
5261
5161
5130
#N/A
#N/A
 - 100 mm  - 50 mm
Optimal Th  + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal Th  + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal Th  + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
2025
30%
3%
0%
5%
14%
56%
7%
0%
5%
15%
59%
8%
0%
4%
14%
2050
30%
3%
0%
5%
15%
55%
6%
0%
5%
16%
57%
7%
0%
5%
15%
2075
61%
7%
0%
5%
15%
139%
15%
0%
4%
16%
144%
16%
0%
4%
14%
2025
51%
5%
0%
6%
17%
119%
12%
0%
6%
19%
125%
14%
0%
6%
18%
2050
49%
5%
0%
7%
18%
113%
11%
0%
6%
14%
118%
13%
0%
6%
18%
2075
131%
13%
0%
6%
18%
#N/A
31%
0%
4%
18%
110%
8%
0%
9%
24%
2025
7%
1%
0%
1%
4%
13%
3%
0%
1%
4%
12%
2%
0%
2%
7%
2050
7%
1%
0%
1%
4%
12%
3%
0%
1%
4%
12%
2%
0%
2%
7%
2075
9%
2%
0%
1%
4%
9%
1%
0%
2%
7%
19%
3%
0%
2%
7%
2025
11%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
7%
3%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
3%
1%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
2050
12%
5%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
9%
3%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
5%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
2075
10%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
7%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
3%
1%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
Roof
Tau = 50
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
69884
56218
52779
53511
56171
90335
66964
62167
63574
67806
128747
83135
76096
79282
86640
2050
68676
55472
52236
53072
55860
88392
66069
61477
63093
67449
125684
81927
75350
78739
86201
2075
59161
49010
47496
49274
52720
76172
58390
56008
58883
63994
110175
72413
68887
73999
82403
Tau = 30
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
68852
51073
47443
48539
51787
97373
61923
55857
57580
62482
174490
79223
68358
71642
79652
2050
67371
50391
46918
48172
51515
95040
61003
55289
57167
62147
169777
77742
67675
71116
79285
2075
58063
44541
42751
44965
48884
83225
53755
50366
53556
59254
151363
68433
61826
66950
76078
Artelia
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
1844
1759
1740
1759
1805
2166
2005
1952
1966
2017
2544
2348
2312
2359
2457
2050
1549
1481
1466
1484
1524
1821
1685
1643
1655
1701
2136
1975
1946
1987
2070
2075
1382
1303
1285
1302
1341
1559
1460
1442
1469
1524
1966
1757
1708
1740
1816
Cowi
Insulation 37
Insulation 34
Insulation 32
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -92mm
 -46mm
Optimal Th  + 46mm
 + 92mm
 -86mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 86mm
2025
4195
3920
3730
#N/A
#N/A
4452
4210
4052
#N/A
#N/A
4954
4774
4679
#N/A
#N/A
2050
3878
3614
3429
#N/A
#N/A
4094
3858
3699
#N/A
#N/A
4516
4332
4227
#N/A
#N/A
2075
3251
3048
2909
#N/A
#N/A
3455
3278
3164
#N/A
#N/A
3853
3725
3661
#N/A
#N/A
τ = 50:
τ = 30:
Artelia:
Cowi:
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 37
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 34
Artelia: 2025
Artelia: 2050
Artelia: 2075
Cowi: 2025
Cowi: 2050
Cowi: 2075
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
λ = 32
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 37
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 34
τ = 50: 2025
τ = 50: 2050
τ = 50: 2075
τ = 30: 2025
τ = 30: 2050
τ = 30: 2075
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
λ = 32
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 37
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 34
τ = 50: 2025
τ = 50: 2050
τ = 50: 2075
τ = 30: 2025
τ = 30: 2050
τ = 30: 2075
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
λ = 32
A.9. MF missing the optimum
A.9
MF missing the optimum
Environmental and economic optimals
110
==PAGE:119==
 - 100 mm  - 50 mm
Optimal Th  + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal Th  + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal Th  + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
2025
32%
7%
0%
1%
6%
45%
8%
0%
2%
9%
69%
9%
0%
4%
14%
2050
31%
6%
0%
2%
7%
44%
7%
0%
3%
10%
67%
9%
0%
4%
14%
2075
25%
3%
0%
4%
11%
36%
4%
0%
5%
14%
60%
5%
0%
7%
20%
2025
45%
8%
0%
2%
9%
74%
11%
0%
3%
12%
155%
16%
0%
5%
17%
2050
44%
7%
0%
3%
10%
72%
10%
0%
3%
12%
151%
15%
0%
5%
17%
2075
36%
4%
0%
5%
14%
65%
7%
0%
6%
18%
145%
11%
0%
8%
23%
2025
6%
1%
0%
1%
4%
11%
3%
0%
1%
3%
10%
2%
0%
2%
6%
2050
6%
1%
0%
1%
4%
11%
3%
0%
1%
4%
10%
1%
0%
2%
6%
2075
7%
1%
0%
1%
4%
8%
1%
0%
2%
6%
15%
3%
0%
2%
6%
2025
12%
5%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
10%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
6%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
2050
13%
5%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
11%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
7%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
2075
12%
5%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
9%
4%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
5%
2%
0%
#N/A
#N/A
Terrain deck
Tau = 50
Insulation 38
Insulation 31
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -83mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 83mm
2025
41917
32796
31241
32698
35350
42079
32968
31423
32891
35553
2050
40015
31857
30552
32106
34871
40176
32029
30735
32299
35074
2075
42785
28132
26256
27851
30726
42941
28298
26433
28038
30924
Tau = 30
Insulation 38
Insulation 31
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -83mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 83mm
2025
42741
29426
27406
29086
32116
42904
29600
27591
29282
32323
2050
38110
28456
26827
28600
31717
38273
28630
27012
28796
30242
2075
#N/A
25828
23048
24612
27816
#N/A
25997
23227
24802
28017
Artelia
Insulation 38
Insulation 31
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -83mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 83mm
2025
#N/A
3417
2933
3286
3913
#N/A
#N/A
3209
3505
4228
2050
#N/A
#N/A
2547
2762
3308
#N/A
#N/A
2775
3187
3930
2075
#N/A
#N/A
2149
2481
3089
#N/A
#N/A
2374
2899
3701
Cowi
Insulation 38
Insulation 31
 -100mm
 -50mm
Optimal Th  + 50mm
 + 100mm
 -83mm
 -42mm
Optimal Th  + 42mm
 + 83mm
2025
8676
7124
6825
6985
7374
10671
8125
7534
7721
8216
2050
8054
6677
6414
6591
6981
9825
7600
7084
7282
7782
2075
7602
5835
5491
5684
6097
10602
6741
6067
6259
6771
 - 100 mm  - 50 mm
Optimal Th  + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal Th  + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
2025
34%
5%
0%
5%
13%
34%
5%
0%
5%
13%
2050
31%
4%
0%
5%
14%
31%
4%
0%
5%
14%
2075
63%
7%
0%
6%
17%
62%
7%
0%
6%
17%
2025
56%
7%
0%
6%
17%
56%
7%
0%
6%
17%
2050
42%
6%
0%
7%
18%
42%
6%
0%
7%
12%
2075
#N/A
12%
0%
7%
21%
#N/A
12%
0%
7%
21%
2025
#N/A
16%
0%
12%
33%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
9%
32%
2050
#N/A
#N/A
0%
8%
30%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
15%
42%
2075
#N/A
#N/A
0%
15%
44%
#N/A
#N/A
0%
22%
56%
2025
27%
4%
0%
2%
8%
42%
8%
0%
2%
9%
2050
26%
4%
0%
3%
9%
39%
7%
0%
3%
10%
2075
38%
6%
0%
4%
11%
75%
11%
0%
3%
12%
Cowi.
τ = 30:
Artelia:
Cowi:
τ = 50:
τ = 30.
Artelia.
τ = 50:
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 37
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 34
Artelia: 2025
Artelia: 2050
Artelia: 2075
Cowi: 2025
Cowi: 2050
Cowi: 2075
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
 - 86 mm
 - 42 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 42 mm
 + 86 mm
λ = 32
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 31
τ = 50: 2025
τ = 50: 2050
τ = 50: 2075
τ = 30. 2025
τ = 30. 2050
τ = 30. 2075
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 38
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
110%
 - 92 mm
 - 46 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 46 mm
 + 92 mm
λ = 31
Artelia. 2025
Artelia. 2050
Artelia. 2075
Cowi. 2025
Cowi. 2050
Cowi. 2075
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
110%
 - 100 mm
 - 50 mm
Optimal
Thickness
 + 50 mm
 + 100 mm
λ = 38
A.9. MF missing the optimum
Environmental and economic optimals
111
==PAGE:120==
Windows
3 pane
2 pane
Floatglass 
1mm
Artelia EF
COWI EF
MF
2025
86,27
45,80
2,79
kg CO2-eq./m2
2025-2075
0,01539
0,07045
kg CO2-eq./kWh
Wall area
349,908
m3
2050
68,86
36,56
2,59
kg CO2-eq./m2
2050 +
0,01320
0,06804
kg CO2-eq./kWh
Floor area
541,215
m3
2075
50,66
26,90
2,35
kg CO2-eq./m2
Price
DKK/kWh
Area [m]
Number [-]
Price 2 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Price 3 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Glass / floor 
ratio [%]
1,96
6
26159
801,10
673,98
537,71
30607
1408,31
1053,90
817,21
8,46%
2,26
1
4773
153,95
129,52
103,33
5584
270,64
202,53
157,05
3,34
2
12516
455,05
382,84
305,43
14644
799,96
598,64
464,20
Emissions
1,58
15
57558
1614,47
1358,28
1083,64
67343
2838,17
2123,92
1646,92
2025
15,41
1171,30 kg CO2-eq.
0,46
3
6890
94,01
79,09
63,10
8061
165,26
123,67
95,90
2050
12,97
986,00 kg CO2-eq.
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
2075
12,21
928,14 kg CO2-eq.
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
Price
1027,75
78141,89 DKK
107896
3118,58
2623,72
2093,21
126239
5482,34
4102,67
3181,27
Area [m]
Number [-]
Price 2 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Price 3 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Glass / floor 
ratio [%]
3,92
6
42335
1602,21
1347,97
1075,41
49533
2816,61
2107,79
1634,41
16,92%
4,52
1
7881
307,91
259,05
206,67
9221
541,29
405,07
314,10
6,69
2
21732
911,46
766,83
611,78
25427
1602,31
1199,08
929,78
Emissions
3,16
15
90157
3228,94
2716,56
2167,28
105486
5676,34
4247,85
3293,85
2025
15,41
994,91 kg CO2-eq.
0,92
3
8788
188,01
158,18
126,20
10282
330,52
247,34
191,79
2050
12,97
837,52 kg CO2-eq.
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
2075
12,21
788,37 kg CO2-eq.
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
Price
1027,75
66374,15 DKK
170894
6238,52
5248,59
4187,33
199950
10967,07
8207,13
6363,93
Area [m]
Number [-]
Price 2 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Price 3 panes 
(4mm) [DKK]
Emissions 
2025 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2050
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2075 
[kg CO2-eq.]
Glass / floor 
ratio [%]
7,85
6
74761
3208,09
2699,03
2153,29
87473
5639,69
4220,43
3272,58
33,72%
4,52
1
7881
307,91
259,05
206,67
9221
541,29
405,07
314,10
6,69
2
21732
911,46
766,83
611,78
25427
1602,31
1199,08
929,78
Emissions
6,22
6
61284
2540,64
2137,49
1705,29
71704
4466,35
3342,36
2591,71
2025
15,41
644,70 kg CO2-eq.
8,30
9
117737
5089,25
4281,68
3415,94
137757
8946,70
6695,20
5191,56
2050
12,97
542,71 kg CO2-eq.
1,84
3
12576
375,62
316,02
252,12
14714
660,32
494,15
383,17
2075
12,21
510,86 kg CO2-eq.
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
0
0,00
0,00
0,00
Price
1027,75
43010,05 DKK
295972
12432,97
10460,09
8345,08
346297
21856,66
16356,28
12682,91
2 pane
3 pane
Artelia
Cowi
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly 
heat flux 
wall [kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat flux 
thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat 
flux [kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-
eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
4525,4
4485,6
145,1
7045,6
32252,4
124859,7
95115,7
4681,9
2950,3
149,7
5988,17
27411,74
106120
80840
3199,7
7316,4
148,0
8206,0
37564,3
145423,9
110781,2
3215,1
4241,4
146,4
5850,43
26781,22
103679
78981
1575,2
13066,3
177,4
11403,1
52199,6
202082,0
153942,2
1496,1
6560,9
160,3
6323,21
28945,44
112057
85363
Artelia
Cowi
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly 
heat flux 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat flux 
thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat 
flux [kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-
eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
4454,7
4382,5
141,8
6909,3
31628,5
122444,6
93276,0
4532,2
2844,6
144,2
5787,41
26492,72
102562
78130
3145,1
7190,9
146,1
8066,0
36923,2
142942,0
108890,5
3157,1
4137,3
143,6
5723,54
26200,36
101430
77268
1584,1
13008,5
177,2
11365,4
52026,6
201412,4
153432,1
1522,1
6591,1
161,2
6367,15
29146,57
112836
85956
Artelia
Cowi
Artelia
Cowi
Yearly 
heat flux 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat flux 
thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
Yearly heat 
flux [kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux window 
[kWh]
Yearly heat 
flux thermal 
bridges [kWh]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-eq.]
Emissions 
2025-2075
[kg CO2-
eq.]
Cost NPV(50) 
[DKK]
Cost NPV(30) 
[DKK]
3606,7
3569,1
114,3
5609,7
25679,4
99413,5
75731,3
3700,2
2334,8
117,1
4734,04
21670,77
83895
63909
2574,4
5819,8
116,8
6549,2
29980,0
116062,6
88414,3
2549,3
3314,0
113,3
4598,99
21052,57
81502
62086
1310,0
10427,5
140,5
9140,1
41840,3
161977,6
123391,4
1232,5
5183,0
125,9
5033,61
23042,08
89204
67954
2050,0
Lifetime cost
2050
Lifetime cost
2075,0
Lifetime cost
2075
Lifetime cost
45,78
91,58
2 pane glass
3 pane glass
Mineral wool 37
Lifetime cost
2 pane glass
3 pane glass
Mineral wool 37
2025
Lifetime cost
2025
182,51
DH
0,53
2 pane glass
3 pane glass
Mineral wool 37
A.10. MF Window Results
A.10
MF Window Results
Environmental and economic optimals
112
==PAGE:121==
2025,0
2050,0
2075,0
2025,0
2050,0
2075,0
8,46%
232755,4
230340,3
207309,1
232359,3
228801,4
210134,0
16,92%
316317,5
313835,6
286956,2
303628,8
301380,1
281451,3
33,72%
498053,9
497384,4
457949,5
458354,8
459133,5
435500,9
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
8,46%
203011
201172
183627
207079
204369
190149
16,92%
281675
279784
259308
278930
277217
262036
33,72%
449914
449404
419363
431661
432254
414251
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
8,46%
10164
9533
7703
11471
9890
7915
16,92%
14445
13315
10737
16818
13931
10963
33,72%
23836
21825
17485
28180
22723
17717
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
8,46%
35371
34252
27773
32894
30595
24852
16,92%
43803
42172
34167
37748
34407
27417
33,72%
64633
62487
50185
50802
45503
35725
Glass / 
floor ratio 
[%]
Glass / 
floor ratio 
[%]
Glass / 
floor ratio 
[%]
Glass / 
floor ratio 
[%]
Emissions Artelia
2 pane:
3 pane:
Emissions Cowi
2 pane:
3 pane:
tau=50
2 pane:
3 pane:
tau=30
2 pane:
3 pane:
0,0
100000,0
200000,0
300000,0
400000,0
500000,0
600000,0
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
Net Present Value [DKK]
Window to floor ratio [%]
2 pane: 2025,0
2 pane: 2050,0
2 pane: 2075,0
3 pane: 2025,0
3 pane: 2050,0
3 pane: 2075,0
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
Net Present Value [DKK]
Window to floor ratio [%]
2 pane: 2025
2 pane: 2050
2 pane: 2075
3 pane: 2025
3 pane: 2050
3 pane: 2075
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
GHG emissions [kg CO2-eq.]
Window to floor ratio [%]
2 pane: 2025
2 pane: 2050
2 pane: 2075
3 pane: 2025
3 pane: 2050
3 pane: 2075
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
GHG emissions [kg CO2-eq.]
Window to floor ratio [%]
2 pane: 2025
2 pane: 2050
2 pane: 2075
3 pane: 2025
3 pane: 2050
3 pane: 2075
A.10. MF Window Results
Environmental and economic optimals
113
==PAGE:122==
Wall
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,32
0,100
96292,8
95274,2
82713,3
4287
3621
2994
18245
17319
14167
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,26
0,125
-7267,9
-7098,8
-4765,5
697
591
483
3534
3383
2806
25
-10,43
-12,01
-9,87
-2,06
-2,10
-1,70
0,22
0,150
-10062,8
-9798,3
-5701,8
1141
969
780
5913
5669
4657
50
-8,82
-10,11
-7,31
-1,70
-1,73
-1,22
0,19
0,175
-10150,9
-9797,7
-4471,2
1433
1217
973
7593
7281
5967
75
-7,08
-8,05
-4,59
-1,34
-1,35
-0,75
0,17
0,200
-8640,8
-8089,9
-1841,5
1635
1381
1098
8860
8467
6928
100
-5,29
-5,86
-1,68
-0,98
-0,96
-0,27
0,15
0,225
-5948,3
-5247,4
1674,6
1769
1491
1180
9822
9371
7667
125
-3,36
-3,52
1,42
-0,61
-0,56
0,22
0,14
0,250
-2421,3
-1594,9
5880,7
1857
1562
1229
10568
10072
8235
150
-1,30
-1,02
4,79
-0,23
-0,16
0,71
0,13
0,275
1720,7
2627,6
10568,3
1910
1605
1254
11155
10631
8683
175
0,90
1,64
8,43
0,15
0,25
1,22
0,12
0,300
6340,0
7260,5
15613,1
1936
1628
1262
11619
11087
9041
200
3,27
4,46
12,37
0,55
0,65
1,73
0,11
0,325
11277,1
12286,2
20922,4
1944
1633
1258
12000
11446
9334
225
5,80
7,53
16,64
0,94
1,07
2,24
0,10
0,350
16491,0
17539,7
26471,8
1937
1626
1241
12311
11747
9566
250
8,51
10,79
21,33
1,34
1,49
2,77
0,09
0,375
21908,1
22992,2
32209,3
1918
1610
1216
12568
11999
9752
275
11,42
14,29
26,49
1,74
1,92
3,30
0,09
0,400
27510,6
28616,6
38053,2
1889
1585
1185
12778
12208
9911
300
14,57
18,06
32,11
2,15
2,34
3,84
0,08
0,425
33253,6
34374,5
44036,2
1851
1554
1148
12952
12384
10036
325
17,96
22,13
38,37
2,57
2,78
4,39
0,08
0,450
39116,6
40243,0
50109,2
1807
1517
1106
13094
12532
10138
350
21,64
26,53
45,30
2,99
3,21
4,94
0,08
0,475
45094,2
46221,9
56240,9
1757
1475
1062
13207
12653
10225
375
25,67
31,33
52,98
3,41
3,65
5,50
0,07
0,500
51138,5
52264,9
62444,8
1702
1430
1014
13303
12758
10294
400
30,04
36,54
61,61
3,84
4,10
6,07
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,32
0,092
103438,4
102419,7
89858,9
4410
3725
3092
18368
17423
14264
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,26
0,115
-5481,5
-5312,4
-2979,1
666
565
459
3504
3357
2782
23
-8,23
-9,40
-6,50
-1,56
-1,58
-1,07
0,22
0,138
-6490,1
-6225,5
-2129,0
1080
917
732
5852
5617
4608
46
-6,01
-6,79
-2,91
-1,11
-1,11
-0,46
0,19
0,161
-4791,7
-4438,6
888,0
1341
1139
900
7501
7204
5894
69
-3,57
-3,90
0,99
-0,64
-0,62
0,15
0,17
0,184
-1495,2
-944,3
5304,1
1512
1278
1001
8737
8364
6830
92
-0,99
-0,74
5,30
-0,17
-0,11
0,78
0,15
0,207
2983,6
3684,6
10606,6
1616
1362
1058
9668
9241
7546
115
1,85
2,71
10,02
0,31
0,40
1,41
0,14
0,230
8297,0
9123,4
16599,1
1673
1407
1083
10383
9916
8089
138
4,96
6,48
15,33
0,80
0,92
2,05
0,13
0,253
14225,5
15132,3
23073,0
1695
1424
1084
10940
10449
8512
161
8,39
10,63
21,29
1,30
1,45
2,71
0,12
0,276
20631,2
21551,7
29904,2
1690
1421
1067
11373
10880
8846
184
12,20
15,16
28,02
1,81
1,98
3,38
0,11
0,299
27354,7
28363,8
36999,9
1668
1400
1038
11724
11213
9115
207
16,40
20,26
35,63
2,33
2,53
4,06
0,10
0,322
34354,9
35403,6
44335,7
1630
1367
998
12003
11488
9323
230
21,08
25,89
44,44
2,86
3,08
4,76
0,09
0,345
41558,4
42642,5
51859,6
1580
1325
948
12230
11715
9484
253
26,30
32,18
54,71
3,40
3,64
5,47
0,09
0,368
48947,3
50053,3
59489,9
1520
1274
893
12409
11898
9619
276
32,20
39,28
66,63
3,94
4,21
6,18
0,08
0,391
56476,7
57597,7
67259,3
1452
1217
831
12552
12048
9719
299
38,90
47,32
80,92
4,50
4,78
6,92
0,08
0,414
64126,1
65252,5
75118,7
1377
1155
765
12664
12170
9797
322
46,57
56,50
98,17
5,06
5,36
7,67
0,08
0,436
71890,1
73017,8
83036,8
1296
1087
696
12746
12265
9860
345
55,48
67,17
119,26
5,64
5,95
8,42
0,07
0,459
79720,8
80847,2
91027,1
1211
1016
624
12811
12344
9905
368
65,84
79,56
145,90
6,22
6,55
9,19
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,32
0,086
101956,8
100938,1
88377,3
4604
3888
3246
18563
17586
14418
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,26
0,108
-5851,9
-5682,8
-3349,5
618
524
420
3455
3316
2743
22
-9,48
-10,84
-7,98
-1,69
-1,71
-1,22
0,22
0,130
-7230,9
-6966,3
-2869,8
983
836
655
5755
5535
4531
43
-7,36
-8,34
-4,38
-1,26
-1,26
-0,63
0,19
0,151
-5903,0
-5549,8
-223,3
1195
1016
784
7355
7081
5778
65
-4,94
-5,46
-0,28
-0,80
-0,78
-0,04
0,17
0,173
-2976,8
-2425,9
3822,5
1317
1114
847
8543
8200
6676
86
-2,26
-2,18
4,52
-0,35
-0,30
0,57
0,15
0,195
1131,6
1832,5
8754,5
1373
1157
866
9425
9036
7353
108
0,82
1,58
10,11
0,12
0,20
1,19
0,14
0,216
6074,6
6901,0
14376,7
1381
1161
851
10091
9671
7858
130
4,40
5,94
16,88
0,60
0,71
1,83
0,13
0,238
11632,6
12539,5
20480,2
1355
1138
814
10599
10163
8243
151
8,59
11,02
25,16
1,10
1,23
2,48
0,12
0,259
17667,9
18588,4
26940,9
1301
1094
759
10984
10553
8538
173
13,58
16,99
35,49
1,61
1,76
3,16
0,11
0,281
24021,0
25030,1
33666,3
1230
1031
692
11286
10844
8768
195
19,53
24,27
48,68
2,13
2,31
3,84
0,10
0,303
30650,9
31699,5
40631,6
1143
958
612
11517
11079
8938
216
26,81
33,10
66,36
2,66
2,86
4,55
0,09
0,324
37483,9
38568,0
47785,1
1045
875
524
11695
11264
9060
238
35,87
44,10
91,20
3,21
3,42
5,27
0,09
0,346
44502,4
45608,4
55045,0
936
783
430
11826
11407
9157
259
47,53
58,24
127,88
3,76
4,00
6,01
0,08
0,368
51661,4
52782,4
62444,0
820
685
330
11920
11516
9218
281
63,03
77,05
189,09
4,33
4,58
6,77
0,08
0,389
58940,4
60066,8
69933,0
696
582
226
11983
11597
9257
303
84,66
103,26
309,91
4,92
5,18
7,55
0,08
0,411
66333,9
67461,7
77480,6
566
473
118
12017
11651
9282
324
117,14
142,62
655,28
5,52
5,79
8,35
0,07
0,432
73794,3
74920,7
85100,5
433
361
7
12033
11689
9288
346
170,58
207,42
11612,68
6,13
6,41
9,16
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 37:
Artelia: Mineral wool 37:
Cowi: Mineral wool 37:
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 34:
Artelia: Mineral wool 34:
Cowi: Mineral wool 34:
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 32:
Artelia: Mineral wool 32:
Cowi: Mineral wool 32:
-50,00
0,00
50,00
100,00
150,00
200,00
250,00
22
43
65
86
108
130
151
173
195
216
238
259
281
303
324
346
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 86mm [mm]
Mineral wool 32
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
-20,00
0,00
20,00
40,00
60,00
80,00
100,00
120,00
140,00
160,00
23
46
69
92
115
138
161
184
207
230
253
276
299
322
345
368
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 92mm [mm]
Mineral wool 34
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
-20,00
-10,00
0,00
10,00
20,00
30,00
40,00
50,00
60,00
70,00
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
400
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 100mm [mm]
Mineral wool 37
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
A.11. MF LCCA Results
A.11
MF LCCA Results
Environmental and economic optimals
114
==PAGE:123==
Roof
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,200
0,175
53793,5
53103,4
47633,7
2212
1857
1569
8440
7920
6533
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,177
0,200
-1014,7
-867,4
-137,9
175
144
112
1041
977
799
25
-5,80
-6,03
-1,23
-0,97
-0,89
-0,17
0,158
0,225
-986,2
-777,5
482,5
291
241
187
1813
1716
1408
50
-3,39
-3,22
2,58
-0,54
-0,45
0,34
0,143
0,250
-282,7
-31,7
1640,1
369
307
236
2411
2291
1884
75
-0,77
-0,10
6,94
-0,12
-0,01
0,87
0,130
0,275
853,2
1185,9
3201,4
422
350
266
2897
2748
2259
100
2,02
3,39
12,03
0,29
0,43
1,42
0,120
0,300
2377,6
2756,7
5085,9
454
376
280
3283
3118
2553
125
5,24
7,33
18,16
0,72
0,88
1,99
0,111
0,325
4180,3
4605,7
7192,6
470
389
283
3596
3417
2792
150
8,90
11,85
25,38
1,16
1,35
2,58
0,103
0,350
6218,8
6659,3
9469,9
472
391
278
3849
3666
2988
175
13,17
17,03
34,02
1,62
1,82
3,17
0,096
0,375
8392,4
8890,2
11888,9
467
385
267
4067
3871
3149
200
17,97
23,09
44,60
2,06
2,30
3,78
0,090
0,400
10721,5
11250,6
14423,8
453
373
249
4245
4043
3281
225
23,66
30,19
57,90
2,53
2,78
4,40
0,085
0,425
13147,3
13726,9
17046,1
434
355
227
4398
4186
3391
250
30,30
38,69
74,95
2,99
3,28
5,03
0,081
0,450
15691,8
16294,6
19737,8
408
332
202
4520
4307
3484
275
38,48
49,02
97,52
3,47
3,78
5,66
0,076
0,475
18309,9
18935,9
22497,8
378
306
174
4623
4409
3560
300
48,48
61,78
129,25
3,96
4,30
6,32
0,073
0,500
20992,2
21653,6
25309,6
344
277
143
4709
4492
3623
325
61,04
78,21
176,72
4,46
4,82
6,99
Roof
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,200
0,161
62167,5
61477,5
56007,8
2325
1952
1658
8552
8015
6622
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,177
0,184
181,6
328,9
1058,4
159
130
99
1025
964
786
23
1,14
2,52
10,67
0,18
0,34
1,35
0,158
0,207
1406,4
1615,0
2875,1
259
214
162
1781
1689
1383
46
5,44
7,53
17,79
0,79
0,96
2,08
0,143
0,230
3306,2
3557,1
5229,0
320
267
198
2363
2250
1846
69
10,32
13,34
26,40
1,40
1,58
2,83
0,130
0,253
5638,3
5971,1
7986,6
358
296
215
2833
2694
2208
92
15,76
20,17
37,14
1,99
2,22
3,62
0,120
0,276
8359,1
8738,2
11067,3
373
308
216
3202
3050
2489
115
22,40
28,33
51,16
2,61
2,87
4,45
0,111
0,299
11358,0
11783,5
14370,4
373
307
207
3500
3336
2716
138
30,45
38,34
69,47
3,25
3,53
5,29
0,103
0,322
14592,9
15033,3
17843,9
359
296
189
3737
3571
2899
161
40,60
50,74
94,35
3,91
4,21
6,16
0,096
0,345
17962,7
18460,5
21459,2
338
277
165
3938
3762
3047
184
53,10
66,72
130,41
4,56
4,91
7,04
0,090
0,368
21488,1
22017,2
25190,5
308
251
134
4100
3921
3166
207
69,69
87,78
187,50
5,24
5,62
7,96
0,085
0,391
25110,2
25689,8
29009,0
273
219
100
4237
4051
3264
230
92,00
117,13
290,28
5,93
6,34
8,89
0,081
0,414
28851,0
29453,7
32897,0
231
183
62
4343
4158
3344
253
124,98
160,57
529,32
6,64
7,08
9,84
0,076
0,436
32665,4
33291,4
36853,3
185
144
21
4430
4246
3407
276
176,96
231,25
1749,44
7,37
7,84
10,82
0,073
0,459
36543,9
37205,3
40861,3
135
101
-23
4500
4316
3457
299
271,26
369,11
#N/A
8,12
8,62
11,82
Roof
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,200
0,151
76983,7
76293,7
70824,0
2544
2136
1832
8772
8200
6796
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,177
0,173
2298,2
2445,5
3175,0
127
104
74
994
938
761
22
18,04
23,52
42,71
2,31
2,61
4,17
0,158
0,195
5639,6
5848,2
7108,3
196
162
112
1719
1636
1333
43
28,78
36,18
63,47
3,28
3,57
5,33
0,143
0,216
9656,0
9906,9
11578,8
226
188
124
2269
2171
1771
65
42,65
52,83
93,66
4,26
4,56
6,54
0,130
0,238
14104,7
14437,5
16453,0
232
191
116
2707
2589
2109
86
60,67
75,75
142,16
5,21
5,58
7,80
0,120
0,259
18942,1
19321,2
21650,4
217
177
92
3046
2918
2365
108
87,45
109,43
234,81
6,22
6,62
9,15
0,111
0,281
24057,6
24483,1
27070,0
185
149
58
3312
3178
2567
130
130,01
164,23
467,46
7,26
7,70
10,55
0,103
0,303
29409,1
29849,6
32660,1
140
112
15
3517
3387
2725
151
209,81
267,27
2125,65
8,36
8,81
11,98
0,096
0,324
34895,6
35393,3
38392,0
88
66
-34
3688
3551
2849
173
398,02
538,61
#N/A
9,46
9,97
13,48
0,090
0,346
40537,5
41066,6
44239,9
26
13
-89
3818
3684
2943
195
1535,26
3048,70
#N/A
10,62
11,15
15,03
0,085
0,368
46276,3
46855,8
50175,0
-40
-44
-148
3923
3787
3016
216
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
11,79
12,37
16,64
0,081
0,389
52133,6
52736,4
56179,7
-114
-107
-211
3998
3868
3071
238
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
13,04
13,64
18,29
0,076
0,411
58064,7
58690,6
62252,5
-191
-172
-277
4054
3930
3109
259
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
14,32
14,93
20,02
0,073
0,432
64059,8
64721,2
68377,2
-273
-242
-345
4093
3973
3135
281
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
15,65
16,29
21,81
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 37:
Artelia: Mineral wool 37:
Cowi: Mineral wool 37:
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 34:
Artelia: Mineral wool 34:
Cowi: Mineral wool 34:
Artelia
Cowi
Mineral wool 32:
Artelia: Mineral wool 32:
Cowi: Mineral wool 32:
-50,00
0,00
50,00
100,00
150,00
200,00
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 175mm [mm]
Mineral wool 37
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
0,00
50,00
100,00
150,00
200,00
250,00
23
46
69
92
115
138
161
184
207
230
253
276
299
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 161mm [mm]
Mineral wool 34
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
0,00
50,00
100,00
150,00
200,00
250,00
22
43
65
86
108
130
151
173
195
216
238
259
281
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 151mm [mm]
Mineral wool 32
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
A.11. MF LCCA Results
Environmental and economic optimals
115
==PAGE:124==
Floor
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,21
0,075
35880,0
34606,3
28131,6
2933
2590
2257
8676
8054
6419
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,18
0,100
-3083,6
-2749,5
-1541,3
-129
-172
-224
994
879
584
25
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-3,10
-3,13
-2,64
0,16
0,125
-4484,5
-3970,4
-1875,8
-353
-418
-506
1553
1377
867
50
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-2,89
-2,88
-2,16
0,15
0,150
-4639,0
-4054,0
-1319,8
-647
-719
-832
1790
1591
928
75
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-2,59
-2,55
-1,42
0,13
0,175
-4111,6
-3476,1
-281,0
-980
-1052
-1180
1851
1640
869
100
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-2,22
-2,12
-0,32
0,12
0,200
-3181,9
-2500,1
1053,6
-1335
-1404
-1543
1808
1590
735
125
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-1,76
-1,57
1,43
0,11
0,225
-1965,9
-1215,9
2594,2
-1707
-1771
-1917
1691
1462
551
150
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-1,16
-0,83
4,71
0,11
0,250
-530,3
264,7
4309,4
-2090
-2148
-2298
1518
1286
322
175
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-0,35
0,21
13,36
0,10
0,275
1066,2
1893,9
6139,1
-2483
-2531
-2685
1303
1073
66
200
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,82
1,77
93,46
0,09
0,300
2788,1
3648,6
8068,3
-2883
-2921
-3077
1055
828
-216
225
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
2,64
4,40
#N/A
0,09
0,325
4615,1
5498,8
10065,7
-3289
-3316
-3472
780
560
-515
250
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
5,91
9,82
#N/A
0,08
0,350
6521,2
7434,8
12125,9
-3700
-3714
-3870
485
270
-829
275
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
13,44
27,51
#N/A
0,08
0,375
8499,5
9437,7
14232,4
-4114
-4116
-4271
171
-36
-1155
300
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
49,60
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,400
10539,2
11486,9
16385,3
-4532
-4520
-4673
-158
-354
-1492
325
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,425
12622,5
13585,3
18568,1
-4953
-4927
-5078
-499
-685
-1837
350
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,450
14741,3
15723,1
20783,8
-5375
-5335
-5483
-849
-1025
-2190
375
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,475
16903,7
17891,0
23019,8
-5800
-5745
-5890
-1211
-1372
-2548
400
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,06
0,500
19093,4
20090,3
25283,2
-6227
-6157
-6298
-1579
-1728
-2913
425
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
U-Value
Thickness
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,21
0,062
36046,6
34772,9
28298,2
3274
2916
2579
9017
8380
6741
2025
2050
2075
2025
2050
2075
0,18
0,083
-3078,4
-2744,3
-1536,1
-231
-270
-321
891
781
487
20
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-3,45
-3,51
-3,15
0,16
0,103
-4474,0
-3959,9
-1865,3
-558
-614
-700
1348
1180
674
41
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-3,32
-3,36
-2,77
0,15
0,124
-4623,3
-4038,3
-1304,1
-954
-1014
-1122
1483
1296
638
61
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-3,12
-3,12
-2,04
0,13
0,144
-4090,7
-3455,2
-260,1
-1389
-1445
-1568
1441
1247
482
82
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-2,84
-2,77
-0,54
0,12
0,164
-3155,8
-2473,9
1079,8
-1847
-1895
-2027
1296
1098
251
102
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-2,43
-2,25
4,29
0,11
0,185
-1934,5
-1184,5
2625,6
-2321
-2361
-2497
1077
873
-30
122
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-1,80
-1,36
#N/A
0,11
0,205
-493,7
301,3
4346,0
-2807
-2836
-2976
801
598
-355
143
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
-0,62
0,50
#N/A
0,10
0,226
1108,0
1935,8
6180,9
-3303
-3318
-3459
483
287
-709
163
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
2,29
6,75
#N/A
0,09
0,246
2835,2
3695,7
8115,4
-3805
-3806
-3948
133
-56
-1087
184
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
21,28
#N/A
#N/A
0,09
0,266
4667,4
5551,1
10118,0
-4314
-4299
-4440
-244
-423
-1483
204
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,08
0,287
6578,7
7492,4
12183,4
-4827
-4796
-4935
-641
-811
-1894
224
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,08
0,307
8562,3
9500,5
14295,2
-5343
-5296
-5432
-1058
-1216
-2316
245
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,328
10607,2
11554,9
16453,3
-5864
-5798
-5932
-1490
-1632
-2750
265
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,348
12695,8
13658,5
18641,4
-6387
-6303
-6433
-1933
-2061
-3192
286
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,368
14819,8
15801,6
20862,2
-6912
-6810
-6935
-2385
-2499
-3642
306
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,07
0,389
16987,4
17974,7
23103,5
-7439
-7318
-7439
-2849
-2945
-4097
326
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
0,06
0,409
19182,4
20179,2
25372,1
-7968
-7828
-7944
-3320
-3399
-4559
347
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
#N/A
Artelia
Cowi
White EPS 38
Artelia: White EPS 38:
Cowi: White EPS 38:
Artelia
Cowi
Grey EPS 31
Artelia: Grey EPS 31:
Cowi: Grey EPS 31:
-20,00
0,00
20,00
40,00
60,00
80,00
100,00
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 350 375 400 425
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 75mm [mm]
White EPS 38
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
-5,00
0,00
5,00
10,00
15,00
20,00
25,00
20
41
61
82
102 122 143 163 184 204 224 245 265 286 306 326 347
LCCA [DKK/kg CO2-eq.]
Additional insulation over 75mm [mm]
Grey EPS 31
Artelia 2025
Artelia 2050
Artelia 2075
Cowi 2025
Cowi 2050
Cowi 2075
A.11. MF LCCA Results
Environmental and economic optimals
116
==PAGE:125==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 127
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
