==PAGE:1==
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules
at Ölgerðin
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Agla Jóna Sigurðardóttir and Jón Gunnarsson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Management, Depart­
ment of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of Den­
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Operations Research.
Agla Jóna Sigurðardóttir ­ s232727
Signature
Date
Jón Gunnarsson ­ s232728
Signature
Date
ii
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis examines how reducing the number of production halls and expanding one ex­
isting hall affects production scheduling at Ölgerðin, using optimization models to improve
production efficiency. The company operates multiple production halls with different ca­
pacities, packaging capabilities, and operating hours, all of which contribute to a complex
scheduling environment. As Ölgerðin grows its product range and upgrades its halls, ef­
ficient production planning becomes more important to keep productivity high, minimize
downtime, and stay flexible in response to changing demand.
Currently, Ölgerðin relies on manual scheduling practices based on the experience of its
planners. While this method has served the company well in the past, it is becoming
increasingly difficult to maintain efficiency and consistency as production volumes grow
and product variety increases. This thesis addresses these challenges by introducing
two mathematical models for production scheduling. The first model is based on a well­
established structure known as the Traveling Salesman Problem. It is applied to halls
that operate independently by sequencing production in a way that minimizes the total
downtime between different products. The second model is a more complex MILP formu­
lation, developed for flexible halls that share capacity and require a coordinated schedule.
This model assigns products to halls and determines the production sequence with the
objective of minimizing the makespan.
In addition to these optimization models, a heuristic method is developed to solve larger in­
stances of the flexible model. The heuristic uses a greedy sequential assignment strategy
with a lookahead mechanism that evaluates the impact of upcoming scheduling decisions.
This approach allows the model to produce high­quality schedules within a reasonable
amount of time, even when the number of products makes the model difficult to solve.
The models are used to evaluate four different production setups. These include the
current setup with four independent halls, a proposed setup that reduces the number of
halls to three while keeping them independent, a partially flexible setup where two halls
are flexible, and a fully flexible setup of three halls that explores the theoretical potential of
a fully flexible system. The goal is to analyze how this proposed structural change in the
number of production halls impacts production scheduling and overall system efficiency.
The results of this thesis provide valuable insights for Ölgerðin as it evaluates its plan on
investing in new production infrastructure and restructuring its operations. The models
developed are designed to be adaptable for future use and can help support more sys­
tematic planning decisions. The findings are validated in collaboration with the company’s
planning team to ensure that the proposed solutions align with real­world constraints and
provide practical results. Overall, this thesis demonstrates how mathematical optimization
can be applied in practice to enhance production scheduling in a complex manufacturing
environment.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank everyone who supported us throughout the work on this thesis.
First and foremost, we are very grateful to our supervisor, Dario Pacino, for his continuous
guidance, helpful feedback, and support during the entire project. His insights challenged
us to think critically and helped improve both the technical quality and overall structure of
the thesis. Working with him provided clarity and direction when we needed it most.
We also want to sincerely thank Ölgerðin for allowing us to take on this project and for
providing access to their data, facilities, and expertise. It was an invaluable opportunity
to apply our knowledge to a real­world production environment. In particular, we would
like to thank Júlía Eyfjörð Jónsdóttir, Chief Technology Officer, and Sandra Heimisdóttir,
production planner, for their time and collaboration. They met with us on several occasions
to walk us through the production processes in detail, answered all our questions, and
provided clear direction on what they hoped to gain from the results. Their involvement
was key to shaping a solution that had practical value and relevance for the company.
Lastly, we want to thank our family and friends for their ongoing support and encourage­
ment throughout this journey. Whether it was helping us keep perspective, offering words
of motivation, or simply being patient while we focused on this project, we truly appreciate
everything.
Agla Jóna Sigurðardóttir and Jón Gunnarsson,
MSc Industrial Engineering and Management, DTU
iv
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Outline of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Scheduling Problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Job Shop Scheduling Problem (JSP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Heuristic Approaches to Flexible Scheduling Problems . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Extensions to Flexible Scheduling Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Similar Problems from the Beverage Manufacturing Industry . . . . . . . . . 10
2.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
12
3.1
Problem definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
KPI’s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Mathematical Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Production Setups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Results
21
4.1
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Current Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Optimization of current setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4
Proposed Non­Flexible Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.5
Proposed Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.6
Flexible Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.7
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.8
Validation with Stakeholder Company
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.9
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5
Discussion
38
5.1
Interpretation of Key Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.2
Impact of Flexibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Model Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.4
Alternative Approach Considered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.5
Managerial Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.6
Research Question and Subquestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Conclusion
49
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
55
A.1 Demand Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 Current Setup ­ Week Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.3 Optimization of current model ­ Week Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A.4 Proposed non ­ flexible ­ Week Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.5 Proposed Setup ­ Week Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.6 Flexible Setup ­ Week Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
vi
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
HORECA
Hotels, Restaurants and Cafes
MLP
Mixed Linear Program
MILP
Mixed­Integer Linear Programming
TSP
Traveling Salesman Problem
CIP
Clean­in­Place, automated cleaning process for production equipment be­
tween production rounds.
JSP
Job­Shop Scheduling Problem
FJSP
Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling Problem
UPMSP
Unrelated Parallel Machines Scheduling Problem
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
MTZ
Miller­Tucker­Zemlin
Key terms
Makespan
The total time from the beginning of the first production task to the
completion of the last one across all halls.
Operation time
The total time from the beginning of the first production task to the
completion of the last one for each independent hall.
Downtime
The time during which a production hall is not producing due to clean­
ing or equipment changeovers.
Flexibility
Attribute of a hall that allows any of its products to be produced in at
least one other hall, enabling product sharing across halls.
Production setup
A specific configuration of the hall environment and parameters based
on the same two mathematical models, either partially or fully.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
vii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Effective production planning is essential for manufacturing companies, especially those
dealing with frequent changes in demand, a wide variety of products, and complex op­
erations. Good planning enables businesses to use resources wisely, control costs, and
respond quickly to customer needs, which are all crucial factors in maintaining compet­
itiveness [1]. Ölgerðin Egill Skallagrímsson hf. (Ölgerðin), Iceland’s largest beverage
producing company, provides a clear example of such operational complexity. The com­
pany produces and manages a broad range of products, including soft drinks, alcoholic
beverages, and other functional drinks, each with unique production requirements. In re­
cent years, Ölgerðin has experienced rapid growth and is now exploring ways to scale its
operations [2]. The company aims to increase production efficiency without significantly
raising costs or resource use. This goal is also driven by external pressure, as customer
demands have become more diverse, requiring production processes that can quickly
adapt to different products and packaging formats. This need for flexibility adds complex­
ity to scheduling, especially due to frequent product transitions and necessary equipment
adjustments.[3].
This thesis develops optimization­based scheduling tools for Ölgerðin’s production sys­
tem, designed to improve efficiency across both independent and flexible production halls.
The approach explores different production setups and enables the company to assess
the effects of increased flexibility and planned structural changes in the production hall en­
vironment. By reducing unnecessary downtime and streamlining scheduling processes,
this research seeks to provide practical insights and actionable recommendations.
1.1
Background
Ölgerðin Egill Skallagrímsson hf., founded in 1913, is one of Iceland’s leading consumer­
goods companies. With around 400 employees, Ölgerðin currently serves more than
3,000 customers across various sectors, including retail stores, hotels, restaurants, cater­
ing (HORECA), and duty­free outlets [4]. The company’s extensive distribution network
allows it to effectively meet diverse customer needs throughout Iceland, making its prod­
ucts an everyday choice in the daily lives of many Icelanders. A key strength of Ölgerðin
lies in its partnerships with globally recognized beverage companies, such as Carlsberg
and PepsiCo. These partnerships allow Ölgerðin to offer internationally popular products
while making use of Iceland’s clean natural resources, especially its high­quality water
and low energy costs, to produce beverages locally. This helps ensure product quality
and gives the company a clear competitive advantage in the Icelandic market [4].
Between 2017 and 2024, Ölgerðin has increased it’s production significantly, increasing
from approximately 58 million liters annually to around 85 million liters, a rise of about
47%. During this time, Ölgerðin also expanded its product portfolio by introducing new
beverage products, aiming to meet changing customer demands. This adaptability is
clearly reflected in the company’s focus on launching wellness­focused and innovative
products such as COLLAB, a popular caffeinated drink infused with marine collagen, and
BARA, a successful low­carbohydrate alcoholic beverage. [5].
From an operational perspective, Ölgerðin manages several specialized production halls,
each designed to handle different product types and packaging formats.
Each facil­
ity comes with its unique operational challenges, especially regarding scheduling. The
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
1
==PAGE:11==
largest of these halls, Brák, illustrates this complexity well, producing up to 45,000 units
per hour and dealing with numerous product transitions that require significant schedul­
ing precision. Another important hall is the Glass & Cans (G&D) hall, which currently
faces operational difficulties due to outdated equipment, leading to frequent unintended
production stops. [4]. In response to these operational challenges, Ölgerðin is planning
extensive changes to its production hall setup. These changes include two main parts:
upgrading the existing G&D hall, aiming to nearly double its current production capacity,
and removing the BOB hall, which is better detailed in Section 1.1.2. These changes are
expected to improve both flexibility and output in production. They are designed to help
Ölgerðin handle the expected increase in demand and support a stronger, more adapt­
able production system that can keep up with the market and continue to meet customer
needs reliably [4].
Currently, Ölgerðin relies on manual scheduling based on the experience of its produc­
tion scheduling employees to manage its complex production operations. However, as
the company continues to grow, these traditional scheduling methods are becoming in­
creasingly insufficient, creating a clear need for a more systematic scheduling approach.
Developing an optimized production scheduling model therefore presents an important
strategic opportunity. Using improved scheduling techniques, Ölgerðin can reduce down­
time and makespan, which leads to improved productivity. Ultimately, these improve­
ments will help support Ölgerðin’s ongoing operational excellence and future growth.
1.1.1
Production process
To illustrate the production process, the typical flow within a single production hall is de­
scribed as follows. Each hall at Ölgerðin operates its own independent line, meaning that
the production process occurs separately in each hall. The process begins by placing
pallets of empty cans in front of a depalletizer, which feeds cans to the production line.
The cans first pass through a vision inspection machine that photographs the inside of
each can to check for foreign objects. If contamination is detected, the affected can is
automatically removed from the line and discarded. The cans are then rinsed and filled
with a pre­blended beverage. A dedicated blending team prepares the beverage mix­
ture in advance and stores it in containers ready for bottling. After filling, the cans pass
through a fill­level detector that checks for underfilled cans. Any can that does not meet
the required fill level is removed from the line automatically. Then, a can seamer seals
the cans with lids. The sealed cans are then dried in a container dryer to prepare them
for packaging.
Although this process involves multiple steps and appears complex, each step is com­
pleted in a fraction of a second. On average, less than one second is needed to process
a single can from inspection to filling and sealing, enabling the line to handle thousands
of units per hour. Depending on the product, the cans are sent either to a Multipacker,
which groups them into 4­ or 6­packs, or to a Variopacker, which packs them into 12­ or
24­packs. Each can is labeled with a best­before date and lot number. The completed
packages are then placed onto pallets by a palletizer and wrapped for transport to the
warehouse. At the end of each production run, a cleaning or changeover process is per­
formed. The type and duration of this process depend on the next product scheduled for
production [3].
1.1.2
Production halls
At Ölgerðin, production is distributed in six specialized halls, handling more than 100 dif­
ferent products and employing nearly 40 staff members. Each hall is designed for specific
product types and packaging formats. This thesis focuses on four main halls, Brák, G&D,
2
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:12==
PET and BOB. The following describes the capabilities, structures, and product special­
izations of each production hall.
Brák is the largest production hall, opened in February 2022, marking a significant ad­
vance for Ölgerðin. It can produce up to 45,000 units per hour, a substantial increase
from the previous capacity in G&D of 15,000 units per hour. Brák has both cans in 0,33L
and 0,5L sizes. Operations run from 7:30 to 23:30 in two 8­hour shifts on weekdays, each
staffed by four employees. The hall primarily produces high­demand products, such as
popular sodas like Pepsi Max and 7­Up, other Icelandic sodas, beers and energy drinks,
totaling approximately 60 different products. The production line is highly automated,
requiring minimal manual intervention except in cases of machine faults or unexpected
stops. Effective scheduling is crucial in this hall, as switching between products requires
cleaning processes (CIP) that can take up to three hours. This is especially the case when
switching to products such as Collab, which contains fish collagen and therefore requires
more thorough cleaning to avoid any mixing of that with other productions.
Before the opening of Brák, G&D or Glass & and Cans was Ölgerðin’s largest production
facility. Currently, it requires frequent maintenance due to aging equipment leading to
operational disruptions. The production capacity of G&D is up to 15,000 units per hour,
handling 0,33L and 0,5L cans, as well as glass bottles. It produces around 40 different
products, including nonalcoholic beers, Icelandic malt, less popular batches of beer, and
other alcoholic ciders. The hall operates on an 8 hour shift daily on weekdays between
07:30­15:30, with four employees per shift. Despite its smaller size compared to Brák,
G&D requires more manual labour, which leads to higher staffing needs. This includes
not only production staff but also engineers who are often needed to repair or maintain
the older equipment. There are plans to renovate and upgrade G&D in the near future to
enhance operational efficiency, which this thesis aims to analyze.
The PET hall exclusively produces soda beverages in plastic bottles made from 50% and
now 100% recycled PET (rPET). It manufactures products in both 0.5L and 2L bottle sizes,
with about 40 different products in total. Production operates continuously, running 24
hours from Monday to Friday, divided into three shifts daily, each staffed by six employees.
Cleaning and downtime periods in PET vary depending on product and size changes.
The BOB (Beer and Bottling) hall is dedicated to producing beer in glass bottles. It is a
small­scale production hall with a low capacity of 3,000 units per hour and is operated by
two staff members. The hall runs a single daily shift from 7:30 to 15:30 on weekdays. It
typically produces only one batch per day, and some days may have no production at all.
Ölgerðin is planning to shut down the BOB hall, relocate its production to the G&D hall,
and repurpose the space for other uses.
Additionally, Ölgerðin operates two other specialized production halls: Sól, dedicated to
producing various juices in plastic bottles, and the keg hall, producing beer in kegs pri­
marily for restaurants and bars. These halls typically run simpler operational structures,
each with a single daily shift, focused on minimal product transitions to limit downtime.
Due to that, these two production halls are not included in the optimization models devel­
oped within this thesis, as their operations involve fewer complexities in scheduling and
product transitions compared to the main halls discussed above [3].
New production hall G&D
Due to increased demand and aging equipment of the current G&D hall, a new and im­
proved G&D production hall is scheduled for construction. The outdated equipment caus­
ing operational disruptions in the existing hall will be replaced with better machines. This
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
3
==PAGE:13==
upgrade will enable Ölgerðin to produce the full range of products currently made in Brák
in G&D as well, introducing the possibility of flexible production halls. The new hall ca­
pacity will reach 25,000 cans per hour nearly doubling the previous capacity, and glass
production will increase to 12,000 bottles per hour. Like in the current G&D hall, opera­
tions will consist of a single 8­hour shift on weekdays, staffed by four employees per shift.
This new hall also provides an opportunity to shut down the BOB hall, as the production
of bottled beer can be moved to G&D. [6].
Summary of production halls
Table 1.1 provides a summary of the product types, capacities, and operating hours of
each hall. These parameters will be used when obtaining the results of this thesis. All
halls operate only on weekdays, and products can only be produced within each hall’s
operating hours. However, the CIP times can extend beyond these hours, as the cleaning
process is automated [6].
Table 1.1: Summary of Production Halls, Capacities, and Operating Hours
Hall
Product Type
Capacity (units/hr)
Operating Hours (weekdays)
Brák
0,33L cans
45.000
07:30–23:30
0,5L cans
36.000
G&D
0,33L cans
15.360
07:30–15:30
0,5L cans
12.000
0,33L glass
6.500
New G&D
0,33L cans
25.000
07:30–15:30
0,5L cans
18.000
0,33L glass
12.000
PET
0,5L PET
11.200
24 hrs
2L PET
9.600
BOB
0,33L glass
3.000
07:30–15:30
1.2
Problem Statement and Motivation
In large production facilities like Ölgerðin’s, even small improvements in the production
process can lead to significant gains in revenue. Optimizing the production schedules
presents a valuable opportunity in this sense. Schedules are based on projected sales
demand and need to make sure that all demand is met within a specific period, usually
a week. Given the large number of products and the complexity involved in switching
between them, scheduling becomes a challenging task. As mentioned, Ölgerðin relies
on manual scheduling for weekly production plans in all halls. While human expertise is
valuable, this approach does not always ensure efficient schedules. Poorly managed tran­
sitions and scheduling inefficiencies can reduce production output and waste resources.
Optimizing these processes will help the company meet demand more effectively by in­
creasing output.
The planned changes to the production halls, improving the G&D hall and removing the
BOB hall, are expected to strengthen the production line and increase output. But since
the changes involve a significant financial investment and commitment from Ölgerðin, it
is important to understand how they might affect scheduling. While the increased outputs
4
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:14==
present opportunities, reducing the number of production halls may reduce scheduling
flexibility, potentially leading to increased downtimes due to more traffic on the G&D hall.
This project aims to analyze the effects of these proposed changes, with a particular
focus on their impact on production scheduling. Optimization models for scheduling will
be developed to support this analysis. First, the current setup will be modeled, followed
by a model that accounts for the proposed changes that introduce flexibility in some halls.
Depending on the setup, the objective is either to minimize total downtime, or to minimize
the makespan. Each product transition has a predefined downtime relationship that is
stored in an m×m sized matrix, where m is the total number of products, as the example
in Figure 1.1 shows.
Figure 1.1: Downtime Relationships Between Products, Where Colours Indicate the Re­
quired Duration for Transitions
The model for the current setup will determine the optimal sequencing of products in
production based on these relationships to minimize the total downtime while still meet­
ing demand and other operational constraints. The model for the proposed setups simi­
larly either minimizes downtime or makespan, depending on the level of flexibility of each
setup. Both models will generate production schedules based on input demand, simpli­
fying scheduling and improving efficiency. The solution method is developed to remain
adaptable for future use without major adjustments.
To assess how changes in production structure affect scheduling efficiency, the thesis
compares four production setups: the current layout with four independent halls, a non­
flexible proposed setup with three halls, a partially flexible setup where Brák and G&D
are flexible and share capacity, and a fully flexible setup that enables all products to be
produced anywhere. These are evaluated using KPIs to enable direct comparison of the
different production setups.
After both mathematical models are developed, they will be implemented in the optimiza­
tion programming language Julia. The final deliverable of this project will be the completed
versions of these models, alongside this thesis. Once developed, the programming mod­
els will be validated with the stakeholders, Ölgerðin, to ensure they meet their standards.
After validation with the stakeholder, further analysis will be conducted, and managerial
recommendations will be developed based on the results.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
5
==PAGE:15==
1.3
Research Question
Given the context of the problem, the study seeks to answer the following research ques­
tion:
What impact does reducing the number of production halls have on production at
Ölgerðin?
To further explore the effects of the proposed production facility changes, the following
sub­questions are also considered:
How will the change impact production scheduling?
What operational opportunities and challenges could arise from the change?
1.4
Outline of the thesis
This thesis is structured as follows:
Chapter 2: Literature Review introduces key concepts and existing research related to
production scheduling, including the TSP, and variants of the JSP. The chapter also high­
lights heuristic approaches and real­world extensions relevant to flexible scheduling, as
well as similar cases from the beverage industry.
Chapter 3: Methodology, describes how the production scheduling problem at Ölgerðin
is formulated and modeled. Two core mathematical models are introduced: one for non­
flexible halls (based on a TSP­like structure) and another for flexible hall setups (using a
MILP formulation). The chapter also defines KPI’s, outlines the production setups being
compared, and presents a heuristic method used to solve larger flexible instances.
Chapter 4: Presents the outcomes of applying the optimization models to each production
setup. The results are compared using the KPI’s downtime, makespan, and output per
operating hour. The chapter briefly introduces the data processing of the project, model
verification, validation with Ölgerðin, and sensitivity analyses.
Chapter 5: Discussion interprets the results, discusses the practical implications of in­
creased scheduling flexibility, and highlights the advantages and disadvantages of the
different setups. It also reflects on model limitations, alternative approaches considered,
and recommendations for implementation.
Chapter 6: Conclusion, summarizes the main findings in relation to the research ques­
tion, outlines key takeaways for Ölgerðin, and suggests areas for future research and
development in production scheduling.
6
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:16==
2
Literature Review
This literature review was carried out by examining research articles, technical reports,
and studies on scheduling problems, heuristic approaches, and related cases from the
beverage manufacturing industry, among other sources. The goal was to assess the
relevance and validity of the methods and materials used in this thesis and to support
the selection of an appropriate optimization approach. In addition, the review aimed to
identify existing research related to the subject of this thesis and to explore methods that
could inform or strengthen the development of the proposed models.
2.1
Scheduling Problems
Effective scheduling is essential in modern production environments, particularly in indus­
tries with high variability, resource constraints, and complex setup requirements. Several
studies in recent years have addressed these challenges through mathematical model­
ing, with an emphasis on optimization techniques that can reflect real­world operational
details. In a study of brewery production, a MILP model was developed that coordinates
brewing, fermentation, and bottling using a mixed discrete and continuous time framework
[7]. The model in the study minimizes production costs while improving schedule feasi­
bility, achieving substantial performance gains in both test scenarios and implementation
within a Greek brewery. This study demonstrates how structured mathematical modeling
can streamline resource usage and reduce downtime, which are central objectives in this
thesis.
A broader perspective is offered by a systematic literature review of production planning
across multi­factory systems [8]. The findings show a growing trend toward more flexible
and integrated scheduling frameworks driven by market volatility and advances in indus­
trial digitalization. The review highlights practical constraints such as uneven capacity,
labor cost variations, and coordination issues across distributed sites. A key insight is the
increasing reliance on both mixed­integer programming and heuristic methods to address
computational complexity in large­scale scheduling. This aligns closely with the schedul­
ing context at Ölgerðin, where coordination across several production halls presents sim­
ilar computational and practical challenges.
Industry­specific case studies further underline the importance of tailoring optimization
models to account for setup complexity and operational constraints. A study focused on
the glass container industry develops a model that maximizes demand fulfillment while
minimizing unserved orders [9]. The approach in the study accounts for minimum run
lengths and weekly changeover limits, demonstrating how scheduling can be adapted to
dynamic demand and warehouse constraints. Similarly, another study that applies MILP
techniques to a food manufacturing setting was reviewed, emphasizing the critical impact
of sequence­dependent setups [10]. That study shows how incorporating real operational
data into the scheduling logic can lead to significantly improved outcomes in efficiency and
resource allocation.
Additional insights come from a study performed in the molded pulp packaging sector,
where a model that jointly handles lot sizing, scheduling, and process configuration is
proposed [11]. The model introduces multiple setup types based on production realities
such as mold changes and equipment reconfiguration. This approach not only reduces
setup times and costs but also reveals previously overlooked scheduling patterns that
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
7
==PAGE:17==
improve performance. The practical relevance of modeling different setup types is di­
rectly applicable to beverage production settings with diverse product lines and frequent
changeovers.
2.2
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)
The TSP is one of the most widely studied problems in combinatorial optimization. It
involves finding the shortest possible closed tour that visits each node exactly once and
returns to the starting point. Although the problem is easy to describe, it is NP­hard,
meaning that solving it optimally becomes computationally expensive as the size of the
problem grows. Exact methods and heuristics have therefore been developed to make it
tractable in practice [12].
In production scheduling, the TSP is often used to model problems where the order of op­
erations significantly affects performance, such as minimizing setup or changeover times.
A typical TSP formulation includes an objective function that minimizes total edge costs,
subject to constraints ensuring exactly one incoming and outgoing connection per node.
To prevent invalid solutions with disconnected subtours, additional constraints—known
as subtour elimination constraints—are introduced. Among the most widely known is the
Miller­Tucker­Zemlin (MTZ) formulation, which introduces ordering variables to ensure a
valid tour. While it is simpler to implement, it is often weaker in relaxation quality com­
pared to alternatives like the DFJ formulation [13]. This structure is directly applied in this
thesis to model independently operated halls at Ölgerðin. Each product is treated as a
node, and the downtime needed to switch between products is modeled as edge cost.
The goal is to find the sequence with the lowest total downtime, a formulation that aligns
exactly with the TSP objective of minimizing tour cost.
The flexibility of the TSP model makes it suitable for a wide range of industrial applications.
A reviewed study describes how the TSP can model problems in areas such as warehouse
routing and circuit board drilling, highlighting its relevance in tasks where transition costs
must be minimized while visiting all tasks exactly once [14]. This study’s work highlights
how this logic can be transferred to production environments, reinforcing its suitability for
the setup in this thesis.
Finally, another study offers detailed insights into how polyhedral studies and cutting­plane
techniques have improved exact TSP solving methods [15]. These techniques form the
backbone of solvers used in industry today and support the modeling choices made in
this thesis by showing how even relatively simple TSP’s benefit from careful formulation
and solver design.
2.3
Job Shop Scheduling Problem (JSP)
The Job Shop Scheduling Problem models a system where each job consists of a se­
quence of operations that must be processed on specific machines in a given order. It is
widely used as a benchmark in scheduling research due to its complexity and generality.
While this structure does not fully match the production setup at Ölgerðin, where halls op­
erate more independently and in parallel rather than as sequential machines, it still offers
useful insights. Many of the constraints and decision variables, such as sequencing, setup
times, and capacity limitations, are shared across both contexts. A recent review surveys
developments in the field, highlighting trends such as AI­based heuristics, energy­aware
scheduling, and increased flexibility [16]. These approaches help frame how similar mod­
els can be adapted to more dynamic production environments like Ölgerðin’s evolving
setup.
8
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:18==
2.3.1
The Flexible Job Shop Scheduling Problem (FJSP)
The FJSP extends the classic JSP by allowing each operation to be processed on more
than one machine. This introduces routing flexibility, which is useful in manufacturing
environments with overlapping capabilities and high product variation. The objective is
typically to minimize makespan while respecting capacity and sequencing constraints [17].
Recent reviews outline the practical demands placed on flexible scheduling systems. One
study defines the FJSP formally and identifies key requirements for modern solutions,
including the ability to handle large product ranges, manage overlapping machine ca­
pabilities, and respond to unexpected events through adaptive scheduling approaches
[18]. Another review synthesizes research from the past three decades and categorizes
common problem configurations, solution strategies, and industry applications [19]. It
also emphasizes the growing role of multi­objective optimization and dynamic scheduling
under uncertainty, supported by methods such as reinforcement learning and predictive
analytics. These characteristics are relevant to the flexible production models in this the­
sis, where certain products can be scheduled in more than one hall. However, the match
is not exact. The flexible hall models do not involve traditional jobs composed of mul­
tiple operations across machines. Instead, each product is a single task that must be
assigned to a feasible hall and scheduled accordingly. The FJSP therefore serves more
as a conceptual reference for modeling flexibility in assignment and sequencing, rather
than a direct analogue.
2.3.2
The Unrelated Parallel Machines Scheduling Problem (UPMSP)
The UPMSP considers a set of jobs that can be processed on multiple machines with
differing processing times. Unlike identical or uniform machine models, each machine
may have a unique speed or setup for each job, and the objective is often to minimize
makespan or total completion time under resource constraints. A recent review cate­
gorizes a wide range of solution methods, including exact models, heuristics, and meta­
heuristics, and emphasizes the importance of selecting techniques based on the structure
and complexity of the production system [20].
This framework is relevant for the current production model at Ölgerðin, where each hall
operates independently and processes different products based on machine­specific con­
straints and setup requirements. Although the halls are not identical and the products
are not predefined jobs in the classical sense, the logic of assigning products to inde­
pendent resources with different performance profiles aligns closely with the structure of
the UPMSP. Insights from this literature support the modeling of scheduling decisions in
systems with multiple unrelated processing units and help guide the use of appropriate
optimization methods for real­world production environments.
2.4
Heuristic Approaches to Flexible Scheduling Problems
Heuristic methods are often applied to flexible scheduling problems to reduce computa­
tional effort and produce high­quality results within practical time limits [21, 22]. While var­
ious metaheuristics such as Genetic Algorithms and swarm­based methods have shown
promise in complex production environments, they are not directly aligned with the struc­
ture of the problem in this thesis. In the case of Ölgerðin, where products are scheduled
as single operations and routing flexibility is the main challenge, search­based heuristics
are less relevant than strategies that guide decisions using partial knowledge of future
states.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
9
==PAGE:19==
2.4.1
Lookahead Heuristics
This thesis adopts a lookahead­based heuristic to solve for production setups that include
flexible halls. In this approach, product­to­hall assignments are made one at a time, but
each decision is guided by evaluating a sequence of possible upcoming decisions. Rather
than selecting the immediately best local move based on current state alone, the heuris­
tic simulates a number of forward steps, allowing the algorithm to anticipate the effects
of different orderings and identify sequences that lead to lower overall makespan. This
is particularly useful when the order of products affects performance and the downtime
when switching between products varies, which are key characteristics of the scheduling
problem at Ölgerðin.
The concept draws support from a study that presents GBFS­RSL, a planning method that
improves greedy search by using relaxed subgoal­based simulations to look a few steps
ahead [23]. Although developed in the context of AI planning, the strategy of bounded
foresight is directly relevant to production scheduling under flexibility and constraints. A
similar idea is used in a study, that implements a rolling­horizon heuristic for energy­
efficient job shop scheduling [24]. The method sequentially evaluates possible future
assignments to make more informed present decisions, leading to substantial improve­
ments without solving the full problem globally. Another study also shows how simulating
relaxed future states improves planning performance, especially in structured and com­
binatorial environments [25].
Together, these studies support the decision made in this thesis to use a lookahead­based
heuristic for the flexible hall models. As the number of possible product sequences grows
quickly with flexibility, full optimization becomes computationally challenging. The looka­
head method provides a lightweight yet effective alternative that balances performance
with feasibility by incorporating foresight into the sequencing logic without requiring an
exact solution.
2.5
Extensions to Flexible Scheduling Problems
Recent extensions of the flexible job shop scheduling problem focus on integrating real­
world complexities such as sequence dependencies and resource constraints. A study
that was reviewd presents a constraint programming formulation of the FJSP that intro­
duces sequence­dependent changeover priorities, rather than fixed setup times, and op­
timizes for schedule robustness and operational stability [26]. The approach reflects in­
dustrial priorities such as avoiding disruptive transitions and maintaining predictable pro­
duction, which are particularly useful in environments with high variability and tight coor­
dination demands. This aligns well with the goals of the flexible hall scheduling model
at Ölgerðin, where changeover behavior influences product sequencing and downtime.
Another extension includes modeling dual­resource constraints, where both machines
and workers are scheduled jointly [27]. While this is not directly addressed in this thesis,
it illustrates how real­world operational factors can shape scheduling strategy in flexible
manufacturing contexts, and could provide a basis for future explorations at Ölgerðin.
2.6
Similar Problems from the Beverage Manufacturing
Industry
A recent case study, examines production scheduling challenges in a small, family­run
alcoholic beverage company [28]. The business struggled with inefficiencies caused by
manual planning, outdated equipment, and demand variability, which led to issues such as
unnecessary overtime and ineffective warehouse usage. To address this, the authors de­
veloped a mathematical optimization model focused on minimizing production time, over­
10
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:20==
time, and storage­related costs. The model incorporates real­world constraints, including
buffer capacities, setup times, and production bottlenecks, and applies multi­objective op­
timization methods to balance competing scheduling goals. The study demonstrates how
incorporating operational constraints into a structured scheduling framework can lead to
more efficient production planning and better resource utilization. Additionally, it highlights
how modeling insights can guide investment decisions, such as upgrading machinery.
These findings are directly relevant to this thesis, as they emphasize how mathematical
optimization can be adapted to improve production scheduling performance under prac­
tical constraints, similar to those faced at Ölgerðin.
2.7
Conclusion
The literature reviewed in this chapter supports the modeling choices and heuristic ap­
proach developed in this thesis. Studies on production scheduling show that mathemati­
cal models can effectively capture real­world complexities, such as setup times, resource
constraints and sequencing. The TSP has proven useful in modeling similar problems to
the one Ölgerðin faces when scheduling the production in independent halls, where the
goal is to minimize downtime by sequencing products efficiently. The MTZ formulation
and similar constraints offer a structured and solvable framework for this type of hall­level
scheduling.
Flexible and unrelated machine scheduling problems offer a broader context for modeling
flexibility across production halls. Although the FJSP typically involves multi­step jobs,
its focus on routing flexibility and assignment constraints is still relevant. The UPMSP is
even more aligned, as it deals with independent resources that differ in capability. These
models inform how scheduling can be approached when products must be assigned to
different halls with varying properties.
Heuristic methods, particularly lookahead­based approaches, are well supported in the
literature as practical tools for complex scheduling problems. Several studies show how
simulating a few steps into the future can improve decision making without requiring full
optimization. This aligns closely with the flexible hall model in this thesis, where the se­
quence of decisions affects overall performance.
Compared to global metaheuristics
such as genetic algorithms, which are better suited to multi­step job structures, looka­
head heuristics offer a simpler and more focused alternative that matches the structure
of single­operation assignments.
Flow shop scheduling was considered as an option to include in this review, but was
ultimately not included as it was difficult to find studies that matched the specific charac­
teristics of the problem addressed in this thesis. Most existing work assumes that each
product must go through multiple machines in a fixed sequence, often within the same
unit. This does not align with the setup at Ölgerðin, where a product only moves to the
next machine if the task is not completed in the previous one. In addition, many articles
focus on flow­shops solved with algorithms or metaheuristics that are not relevant to this
case. For these reasons, flow shop models were not integrated into the analysis.
Lastly, extensions to classic models and case studies from beverage production underline
the importance of reflecting real­world factors in scheduling models. Changeover times
and demand fluctuations are shown to affect production efficiency. While not all of these
extensions are included in this thesis, they point to future directions and confirm that the
challenges at Ölgerðin are common in the industry. Altogether, the literature confirms the
relevance of the chosen methods and strengthens the case for using structured optimiza­
tion and lookahead­based heuristics in flexible production scheduling.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
11
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
The methodology presented in this chapter explains how the production scheduling prob­
lem in this thesis is formulated, modeled, and solved. The goal is to explore the strengths
and weaknesses of different production setups, and compare them in a way that provides
insight for both academic purposes and Ölgerðin. The chapter begins by defining the
problem in formal optimization terms and classifying it within the broader field of combina­
torial scheduling. Then, it introduces the KPI’s that are used to evaluate the performance
of production setups, selected in collaboration with Ölgerðin. After the problem is formally
introduced, the two main models used in the thesis are presented. Next, a few production
setups based on different configurations of the two models are presented. The chapter
concludes by introducing a heuristic method to solve setups that involve flexible produc­
tion halls, as the model they are based on is computationally difficult to solve once the
problem size increases.
3.1
Problem definition
An optimization problem is defined as the task of identifying the best, or optimal, solu­
tion from a set of feasible solutions that satisfy all problem constraints [29]. Optimization
problems are diverse in nature and can be categorised into various types based on the
characteristics of their decision variables, objective functions, and constraints. Figure 3.1
outlines a common classification framework for different types of optimization problems
[30].
Figure 3.1: Classification of optimization problem types [30]
The optimization problem addressed in this thesis is a combinatorial scheduling problem
with discrete decision variables and complex structural constraints. Because of the use of
binary variables, assignment rules, and sequencing dependencies, the problem is non­
convex and falls within the class of mixed­integer programming (MIP). In some cases,
time­indexing and nonlinear relationships add a small degree of nonlinearity, but the final
implementation mainly relies on a MILP formulation.
12
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:22==
Although the problem shares similarities with classical scheduling problems such as the
JSP, FJSP, and UPMSP, it does not fully align with these due to the absence of jobs
within the operations of each hall. The operations within each hall are already highly
optimized and structured, and each product follows a fixed sequence of jobs that cannot be
altered. Therefore, unlike a classical job shop problem, this case focuses on scheduling
decisions for entire production halls, where each hall acts as a single resource responsible
for producing one product at a time. The problem combines elements from sequencing
problems, like the TSP, and assignment­based scheduling approaches.
In particular, one core aspect of the problem is the sequencing of products in independent
production halls, which closely resembles the structure of the TSP. As mentioned in the
literature review, in the classical TSP the objective is to determine the shortest possible
route that visits each city exactly once and returns to the starting point. In the context of
this thesis, each product represents a node, and the downtime required to switch from one
product to another acts as the distance between nodes. The goal is to find the product
sequence that minimizes the total downtime, much like finding the shortest tour in the
TSP. This formulation ensures an efficient ordering of production tasks without repetition or
disconnected cycles. The TSP is an NP­hard combinatorial problem that is difficult to solve
for large instances, so heuristics are often used to obtain quicker solutions [12].For the
results of this thesis and most expected uses of the solution method within the stakeholder
company, the instance sizes are not large enough to require a heuristic, which is why no
heuristic was designed for the TSP.
In summary, the production scheduling problem studied in this thesis is a discrete, non­
convex, combinatorial optimization problem that is modeled using MIP techniques, with
elements of both sequencing and assignment under operational constraints.
3.1.1
Scope and Limitations
The scope includes developing mathematical models that reflect the company’s opera­
tional structure and constraints. Model parameters are based on data provided by Öl­
gerðin, such as operating hours and fixed production capacities for each hall. It is as­
sumed that each hall runs at full capacity without any disruptions that can sometimes
happen in practice. The current manual schedules use the same assumption, so direct
comparison remains possible. Ten weekly schedules will be run through the models to
obtain results. All production must occur within each hall’s operating hours, although CIP
times may extend beyond closing, which is encouraged in flexible halls since those extra
hours do not add on to the makespan.
Four production setups are evaluated to assess the effects of different scheduling strate­
gies and structural changes: the current setup with four independent halls, a non­flexible
proposed setup with three halls, a partially flexible setup where Brák and G&D share pro­
duction, and a fully flexible setup where all products can be produced in any hall. The
models are based on fixed demand, processing times, and known downtime between
products. They do not take into account possible changes in demand, machine failures,
staff availability, or other unexpected disruptions. Each product is scheduled to be pro­
duced once per week in a single continuous run, without being split into smaller batches.
In the setups involving flexible halls, if the same product appears in multiple halls, their
demand is combined and produced all at once rather than in two separate instances.
While exact optimization methods are used for the smaller, independent hall models, solv­
ing the flexible setups optimally becomes more difficult as the problem size increases.
To manage this, a greedy heuristic with a lookahead strategy is used to generate near­
optimal schedules within a reasonable time, further described in Section 3.4.5. The effects
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
13
==PAGE:23==
of changes in the production setup are examined by adjusting one key parameter at a time
between setups. This structured approach makes it easier to compare scheduling per­
formance across different configurations, and identify what parameter changes have the
biggest influence.
3.2
KPI’s
In order to measure the performance of the different production setups explored in this
thesis, it is important to define KPI’s prior to gathering the results. The selected KPI’s
were defined in cooperation with the stakeholder company, Ölgerðin, to ensure that the
results would align with their operational goals and provide a realistic picture of what they
might expect to learn from the results of this thesis.
The KPI’s used in this thesis are the following:
Downtime: A straightforward but important metric that is used throughout the thesis. For
independent production halls, the objective is to minimize downtime, which refers to the
cleaning or changeover time between product runs. This KPI gives a direct view of how
efficient the production schedule is in setups where halls operate independently.
Makespan: The makespan reflects how long it takes to complete the entire production
schedule and is a main objective in the flexible model. It shows how much time is required
and makes it easier to compare the efficiency of different production setups, especially of
those that include flexible halls.
Output per operating hour: This KPI measures how productive each hall is relative to
its available operating hours. It is calculated as:
Output per operating hour =
Total number of units produced
Operating hours used for production
It provides a practical way to measure efficiency and allows for direct comparisons be­
tween production setups. It shows how improvements in makespan or downtime can lead
to noticeable increases in output. One important feature of this KPI is that it encourages
the scheduling of CIP times outside regular operating hours, since those times are not
counted in the total production time. Among the three KPIs, this one is perhaps the clear­
est, as it directly reflects how changes in the production setup affect overall output. The
KPI is calculated for each individual hall as well as for the entire system under each setup.
3.3
Mathematical Models
This section outlines the two main mathematical models used to represent the production
setups at Ölgerðin. The first is designed for non­flexible halls, where products are preas­
signed, and each hall operates independently, while the second applies to setups where
multiple halls are flexible and share production responsibilities.
3.3.1
Current Model
The current model is applied to all halls that operate independently. In some of the produc­
tion setups explored in this thesis, multiple halls operate independently within the same
setup, in which case this model is essentially applied individually to each hall. The model
is based on a standard formulation of the TSP, adapted to a production scheduling con­
text where the objective is to minimize the total accumulated downtime. In practice, this
involves finding a product sequence that minimizes the total downtime across all transi­
tions.
14
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:24==
This model was also tested using an alternative objective function that minimized the
makespan, which gave identical results to minimizing the sum of downtime sequences.
This is because the processing times of the products are constant and unaffected by se­
quencing, so the only factor influencing makespan is the accumulated downtime. Nonethe­
less, using makespan as an objective in the context of a single hall is not standard practice,
as makespan is typically used as a system­wide performance metric across multiple halls.
For this reason, the original TSP­style objective, which minimizes downtime, is adopted
in the model formulation.
The formulation is as follows:
Variable and parameter definitions:
• I: Set of products with demand greater than zero.
• xij ∈{0, 1}: Equals 1 if product j is scheduled immediately after product i; 0 other­
wise.
• pj: Processing time of product j.
• dij: Downtime between production of product i and j.
• n: Total number of products.
• ui: MTZ ordering variable used to eliminate subtours.
Objective
min
∑
i∈I
∑
j∈I
j̸=i
dij · xij
(1)
Subject to:
∑
j∈I
j̸=i
xij = 1
∀i ∈I
(2)
∑
j∈I
j̸=i
xji = 1
∀i ∈I
(3)
ui −uj + n · xij ≤n −1
∀i, j ∈I \ {1}, i ̸= j
(4)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈I
(5)
ui ∈Z,
2 ≤ui ≤n
∀i ∈I \ {1}
(6)
Objective (1) minimizes the total accumulated downtime between successive products
in the production sequence by reducing the sum of all downtime transitions dij where
product j follows product i.
Constraint (2) ensures that each product i has exactly one immediate successor in the
sequence, preventing any product from being omitted or repeated.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
15
==PAGE:25==
Constraint (3) guarantees that each product j has exactly one immediate predecessor,
which together with the successor constraint forms a single continuous tour.
Constraint (4) employs MTZ order variables ui and uj to eliminate subtours by enforcing
that if j follows i, then uj > ui, thus preventing disconnected cycles.
Constraint (5) declares the sequencing variables xij as binary, ensuring a clear decision
for each possible transition.
Constraint (6) defines the MTZ order variables ui as integers bounded between 2 and n,
providing the necessary indexing for subtour elimination.
3.3.2
Flexible Model
Unlike in the current model, the flexible model is applicable to multiple halls at once. In
this model, it is assumed that every product can be produced in any hall. This introduces
a new objective function as the halls all work together towards minimizing the makespan.
The model shares some characteristics with the FJSP, but differs slightly since the halls in
the problem at hand are not identical and it doesn’t really include any jobs, since the only
job is producing the product. The halls have different production capacities and operating
hours. This adds a layer of complexity when solving, as the model favours halls that have
higher production capacities since they can finish producing the demand quicker. It is
worth noting that this model decides both which hall each product should be produced
in and in what order the products are produced in each hall. This makes the problem
much harder to solve than the current model, but also means it can find better overall
schedules that distribute the demand across halls since it can adjust both assignment
and sequencing at the same time.
The general formulation is as follows:
Variable and parameter definitions
• I: Set of products with demand greater than zero.
• H: Set of flexible production halls.
• xijh ∈{0, 1}: Equals 1 if product j is scheduled immediately after i in hall h; 0
otherwise.
• yih ∈{0, 1}: Equals 1 if product i is assigned to hall h; 0 otherwise.
• tih ∈R≥0: Start time of product i in hall h.
• Cmax ∈R≥0: Makespan.
• pih: Processing time of product i in hall h.
• dijh: Downtime required to switch from i to j in hall h.
• n: Total number of products.
Objective
min Cmax
(7)
Subject to:
tih + pih ≤Cmax
∀i ∈I, h ∈H
(8)
tjh ≥tih + pih + dijh −M(1 −xijh)
∀i ̸= j ∈I, h ∈H
(9)
16
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:26==
tih ≥0
∀i ∈I, h ∈H
(10)
∑
j∈I
xijh ≤yih
∀i ∈I, h ∈H
(11)
∑
h∈H
yih = 1
∀i ∈I
(12)
xiih = 0
∀i ∈I, h ∈H
(13)
xijh ∈{0, 1}, yih ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈I, h ∈H
(14)
This objective (7) minimizes the overall makespan Cmax.
Constraint (8) ensures that every product’s completion time in any hall does not exceed
the overall makespan Cmax.
Constraint (9) is a standard big­M timing­precedence. If product j follows product i in hall
h (xijh = 1), then j’s start time must be at least i’s start plus its processing and downtimes,
otherwise the right­hand side is relaxed by M.
Constraint (10) simply enforces non­negativity on all start times in every hall.
Constraint (11) links the sequencing and assignment variables. It ensures that product
i can only have a successor in hall h if it is actually assigned there (yih = 1), thereby
preventing sequences in halls where i does not belong.
Constraint (12) enforces that each product is assigned to exactly one of the flexible halls
Brák or G&D, ensuring a unique hall choice per product.
Constraint (13) forbids self­loops by setting xiih = 0, so no product can follow itself.
Finally, constraint (14) declares the binary nature of the sequencing variables xijh and the
assignment variables yih.
3.4
Production Setups
In the following subsections, various setups for arranging the production are examined.
All of the setups build upon the mathematical models listed in Section 3.3. Each setup
consists of a distinct variation of parameters such as halls and production capacities. One
setup, the Flexible Setup, does not take into account the company’s existing operational
constraints regarding machinery or other process­related limitations. This is intended to
highlight the potential benefits of removing inner constraints purely from a scheduling
standpoint and to see the full potential of the production setup. One of the proposed
scenarios, detailed in 3.4.3, is modeled with full consideration of the company’s internal
constraints and operational restrictions. This scenario provides the most realistic repre­
sentation of how the new and improved G&D hall would perform in practice. By reflecting
the real limitations and conditions of the production halls, it provides useful insight into
how the proposed system is likely to function and perform in practice.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
17
==PAGE:27==
3.4.1
Current Production Setup
As previously mentioned, the current setup consists of four separate and independent pro­
duction halls, each responsible for producing a specific set of products. This configuration
represents a problem that shares some characteristics with the UPMSP, where each hall
is modeled separately due to its operational independence. The setup itself is based on
the current model described in Section 3.3.1. Because the halls operate independently
and products are preassigned to specific halls where they can only be produced, the
model is applied to each hall. The following apply each hall in this setup:
Variable and parameter definitions
Same as in 3.3.1.
Objective
(1)
Subject to:
(2), (3), (4), (5), (6)
3.4.2
Proposed Non­Flexible Setup
This setup serves as a key component in answering the main research question of this
thesis, which is to evaluate the impact of reducing the number of production halls on pro­
duction. This setup is based on the exact same model as detailed in Section 3.4.1, with
the only difference being that the BOB hall is removed and as a result all demand from
that hall is moved to the G&D hall. In order to get a direct comparison with the current
production setup, all of the halls still operate independently for this setup, i.e. all products
are preassigned to a specific hall where they can only be produced. In the results, this
scenario is divided into two sub­scenarios, one in which the G&D hall’s production capac­
ities remain unchanged and another in which those capacities are increased as planned.
This setup serves as a bridge comparison between the current setup and the proposed
setup, and makes it easier to compare the two. Similar to the current production setup,
the following apply:
Variable and parameter definitions
Same as in 3.3.1.
Objective
(1)
Subject to:
(2), (3), (4), (5), (6)
3.4.3
Proposed Setup
This setup models the new proposed production setup at Ölgerðin most accurately. Just
as in the proposed non­flexible setup, the available production halls are now three, being
Brák, PET, and G&D, which now has increased production capacities. The difference
between the two is that in this setup, Brák and G&D become flexible. Products previously
manufactured exclusively in Brák or G&D can now be scheduled in either hall. In contrast,
PET products remain exclusively produced in the PET hall, with no cross­assignment
permitted. Since the PET hall operates differently than the Brák and G&D halls, it has to
be modeled separately for this setup. Since it uses the same model as the current and
non­flexible proposed setups, the following apply to the PET hall:
18
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:28==
Variable and parameter definitions
Same as in 3.3.1.
Objective
(1)
Subject to:
(2), (3), (4), (5), (6)
Since Brák and G&D now depend on each other, the model changes to the flexible model
described in Section 3.3.2. They can support each other and share the demand between
them, working toward the common objective of minimizing the makespan. The following
apply to the Brák and G&D halls in the proposed setup:
Variable and parameter definitions
Same as in 3.3.2.
Objective
(7)
Subject to:
(8), (9), (10), (11), (12) , (13), (14)
3.4.4
Flexible Setup
The flexible setup closely follows the proposed setup. This setup represents a fully flexible
production hall environment, in which all product types can, in theory, be produced in any
hall. While such flexibility is not currently feasible due to equipment­specific limitations
in the PET hall that can only produce beverages in plastic containers, these constraints
are intentionally excluded in this model. The aim is to explore the theoretical potential
of scheduling flexibility and evaluate how the removal of these limitations could improve
overall production efficiency and adaptability.
Variable and parameter definitions
Same as in 3.3.2.
Objective
(7)
Subject to:
(8), (9), (10), (11), (12) , (13), (14)
3.4.5
Heuristic Approach for Flexible Production Scheduling
In a flexible production environment, used partially in the proposed setup and fully in the
flexible setup, the model has to both assign products to a hall and determine their pro­
duction sequence. Exploring every possible assignment and sequence becomes quickly
unsolvable as the number of products grows because the number of combinations ex­
plodes, as is further explored in sections 4.7.2 and 4.9.1. To overcome this problem, a
heuristic method is used that combines greedy assignment with a lookahead of several
steps, noted as k, to guide each decision.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
19
==PAGE:29==
The heuristic builds the schedule one product assignment at a time. At each iteration,
every unscheduled product and every hall are paired as a candidate move. Each can­
didate is scored by simulating that move plus a fixed number k of further assignments
chosen by a simple greedy rule. The greedy rule always picks the pair that leads to the
earliest possible completion given the current simulated process times and required down­
time. By projecting the overall finish time across all halls after those lookahead steps, the
method obtains a makespan estimate for each candidate. The move with the smallest
projected makespan is then committed and the corresponding product is removed from
the unscheduled products pool. The finish time for the chosen hall is updated to reflect
both production and any downtime that follows.
Looking ahead a few steps helps the heuristic avoid choices that may seem good at first
but lead to longer downtimes later or uneven use of the production halls. The number of
candidates evaluated grows with the number of unscheduled products times the number
of halls and the depth of lookahead k. Increasing k generally yields better schedules at
the cost of longer run time. By increasing k, users can balance the quality of the schedule
with the computational effort, making it possible to find a good solution within a reasonable
timeframe. The impact of k on the overall makespan is further explored in the results in
Section 4.9.3.
Algorithm 1 presents a pseudocode that shows the simplified functionality of the heuristic.
The programme itself treats the product set, the hall set and the lookahead horizon as
inputs in order to remain adaptable if the hall or product configurations change in the
future. For this thesis, the hall set remains fixed to Brák, PET and G&D and the lookahead
horizon k has been chosen as 32 based on the findings presented in Section 4.9.3.
Algorithm 1 K­step Lookahead Heuristic Algorithm
1: Input: Set of products I, set of halls H, lookahead horizon k
2: Initialize empty schedule for each hall in H
3: while I is not empty do
4:
bestScore ←∞
5:
bestMove ←null
6:
for all p ∈I do
7:
for all h ∈H do
8:
Simulate assigning p to h
9:
for step = 2 to k do
10:
Greedily assign the next product to the hall that finishes earliest
11:
Simulate the assignment and update simulated schedule
12:
end for
13:
Record projected makespan after k steps
14:
if projected makespan < bestScore then
15:
bestScore ←projected makespan
16:
bestMove ←(p, h)
17:
end if
18:
end for
19:
end for
20:
Commit bestMove to actual schedule
21:
Remove p from I
22: end while
23: Output: Final schedule for each hall
20
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:30==
4
Results
This chapter presents the outcomes of the work carried out in this thesis, based on the
methods introduced in the previous chapter. It begins by explaining how the data was
collected and prepared. The chapter then moves on to show how the models were ap­
plied to the different production setups. The results are evaluated using the KPI’s. After
presenting the results, the models are verified and validated to ensure they produce cor­
rect and practical outcomes that align with Ölgerðin’s expectations and needs. In the last
part of the chapter, sensitivity analyses are performed to test the reliability of the solution
methods that were implemented. This helps to evaluate how stable and robust the meth­
ods are. Together, these steps provide a good picture of how the models perform and
what benefits they can offer.
Figure 4.1 shows the color theme used for each production setup throughout this chapter
to ensure consistency and transparency.
Figure 4.1: Colour code
4.1
Data processing
Data collection and processing was a key part of this thesis project and deserves a brief
mention so the reader can understand how the results were obtained. The original input
was provided by Ölgerðin in large Excel files containing all product information, such as
downtime relationships, product types, and product sizes. This data was then sorted and
incorporated into an adapted Excel template that stores all fixed production parameters,
which are the downtime relationships, product types and sizes, and production halls. The
template was designed to be flexible so that adding new halls or updating product vari­
eties, which happens regularly at Ölgerðin, can be done easily. The only input needed
from the user is the product demand, which can be adjusted depending on whether the
goal is to optimize a day, a week, or even a longer period. In most cases, the input
represents a weekly schedule, and the structure was created with that in mind.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
21
==PAGE:31==
A Python script was developed to read the Excel template and extract the relevant data
for the optimization models. The script identifies product names, demand, product types
(e.g., PET or glass), and setup times. Downtime values are extracted from color­coded
matrices, like the one displayed in Figure 1.1, where each color corresponds to a specific
CIP cycle, depending on which hall the product goes in. It then saves the data as text
files grouped into folders by category, including demand, size, product type, and down­
time. These files follow a format that the models can read directly, using simple structures
like dictionaries and lists. Once the script has been run, the data is ready for use in all
production setups, with no need for manual formatting.
The optimization models were written in Julia and are built to generate detailed sched­
ules. Once a model finishes solving, it prints a complete plan for each hall. This includes
the start and end times for all products, any cleaning or changeover required, and how
production is distributed across days if a product cannot be completed in one shift. The
output follows the operating hours and limits of each hall and includes summaries such as
total production time, total downtime, total operation time, and total units produced. The
process was developed to be as simple as possible so that once the demand is entered,
all steps from reading the data to printing the results can be run with very little effort from
the user.
4.2
Current Setup
This section shows how production is currently organized at Ölgerðin based on the man­
ually calculated weekly schedules, with the corresponding demand shown in Table A.1 in
the Appendix. These demand tables are based on ten actual weekly production sched­
ules from Ölgerðin and form the basis for all results in this thesis. In Table 4.1 is the total
downtime for each hall in each week in the manual schedules. Additionally, an example
of one week’s production plan for each hall provided by the company is included in the
Appendix in Tables A.2, A.3, A.4, & A.5 to give further insight into the structure of the
weekly schedules.
Table 4.1: Downtime in Current Setup (in Minutes)
Week
Brák
G&D
PET
BOB
6
1300
240
900
150
7
720
270
570
60
8
1410
300
630
60
9
1200
210
810
120
10
1320
330
660
60
11
870
180
390
60
12
1230
270
420
30
13
1470
300
780
150
14
1350
270
540
150
15
1740
180
630
120
Average
1261
255
633
96
Brák has the highest downtime, averaging around 21 hours or 1261 minutes per week.
This high downtime is mainly because Brák produces a wide range of products, causing
frequent stops for cleaning and setup changes between products, and it produces the
most demand. Then the G&D hall has the average downtime of 255 minutes and PET
633 minutes. The BOB hall has a simpler product range, resulting in a much lower average
22
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:32==
downtime of only 96 minutes per week because it usually only has one production per day,
which leads to low downtimes.
Calculations for the total operation time were also made for the manual weekly sched­
ules, which can be seen in Table 4.2. It is important to note that the operation time for
independent halls is measured from the start of each hall’s operating hours until the com­
pletion of its production. The differences between the halls are clear, Brák usually runs
continuously throughout the week, with an average operation time of about 6702 minutes.
This means the Brák hall is nearly always operating and rarely has any idle time during
the week due to its high demand. The other halls, G&D and PET sometimes finish their
weekly production earlier because of lower demand, with average operation times of 5730
and 4173 minutes, respectively. The BOB hall has the smallest demand, but its operation
time remains relatively high because it only runs one production per day and typically has
about two to four productions each week. This means that these halls often have unused
time during the week, providing flexibility in case the production schedule needs to be
adjusted.
Table 4.2: Operation Time Current Setup
Week
Brák
G&D
PET
BOB
6
7680
3300
5700
3600
7
7680
4620
3690
4320
8
6210
6150
2970
2880
9
6420
6240
4890
5760
10
6660
6240
4770
2880
11
7620
6180
3450
5760
12
6000
6210
3090
480
13
6510
6210
5250
5760
14
5850
6240
3930
5760
15
6390
5910
3990
5760
Average
6702
5730
4173
4296
Table 4.3 shows the average output per operating hour for each hall and for the overall
system using the manual scheduling method across the ten weeks analyzed, resulting in
an average of 43.124 units produced per hour.
Table 4.3: Average Output per Operating Hour for Each Hall in the Manual Scheduling
Hall
Brák
G&D
PET
BOB
Output of system
Output (units/hour)
29.013
8.301
4.750
1.060
43.124
Considering that the maximum combined output across all halls, when producing the most
efficient product type, is ≈75.000 cans per hour, the output per operating hour results,
combined with the other results, suggest that there is some room for improvement. By
taking the same production demand from these 10 weeks and applying the mathematical
models developed, it can be determined if downtime and total production time can be
reduced.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
23
==PAGE:33==
4.3
Optimization of current setup
This section presents the results produced by applying the mathematical scheduling model
introduced in Section 3.4.1. The model was used to optimize production schedules for
the same 10 weeks as in the manual scheduling. Table 4.4 shows the weekly downtime
for each of the four production halls (Brák, G&D, PET, and BOB) based on the model’s
output.
Table 4.4: Downtime in the Optimization of the Current Setup (in Minutes)
Week
Brák
G&D
PET
BOB
6
510
150
690
45
7
540
240
510
30
8
870
240
510
42
9
840
180
660
45
10
960
300
570
15
11
450
150
270
30
12
750
210
360
15
13
810
270
570
75
14
780
240
510
75
15
930
150
480
30
Average
744
213
513
40
Downtime was reduced across all four production halls when switching from manual to
optimized scheduling. For example, Brák’s average weekly downtime dropped from 1261
to 744 minutes, a reduction of roughly 41%. PET decreased from 633 to 513 minutes,
about a 19% improvement. G&D’s downtime fell from 255 to 213 minutes, a 16% re­
duction. The BOB hall had a reduction of 56 minutes, which is a significant proportional
decrease. This drop is mainly due to the model producing all items in sequence, rather
than limiting production to one run per day as is done currently. Figure 4.2 visualizes this
improvement in downtime.
Figure 4.2: Average Downtime per Eeek for Each Hall in the Current Setup and the Opti­
mization of Current Setup
24
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:34==
Table 4.5 presents the total weekly operation time for each hall over the ten week span.
Table 4.5: Operation Time for the Optimization of the Current Setup (in Minutes)
Week
Brák
G&D
PET
BOB
6
4761
1679
3524
1726
7
5811
3057
2053
345
8
4946
4610
1720
326
9
5237
4748
2881
1553
10
6086
4678
2834
347
11
6036
4657
1463
1798
12
5001
4479
1594
274
13
5868
5779
2786
1553
14
4926
4724
2533
1869
15
5036
4415
2244
1711
Average
5371
4283
2363
1150
The optimization also resulted in major reductions in operation time, meaning that weekly
production could be completed more quickly and efficiently. PET showed great improve­
ments, with its average operation time dropping from 4173 to 2363 minutes, a 43% re­
duction. BOB dropped from 4296 to 1150 minutes (73%), reflecting the shift from a one
run per day manual schedule to an optimized one. Brák also improved, decreasing from
6702 to 5371 minutes (around 20%), and G&D as well, from 5730 to 4283 minutes (25%).
These improvements allow for greater flexibility and more efficient use of resources. The
improvements are shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Average Operation Time per Week for Each Hall in the Current Setup and the
Optimization of the Current Setup
Table 4.6 shows that the average output per operating hour for the total system of the
optimized current setup is 57.998 units/hour. This represents a significant improvement
compared to the manually scheduled output in Table 4.3, which was 43.124 units/hour.
The increase corresponds to 14.874 additional units/hour, or approximately a 34% im­
provement in output per hour.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
25
==PAGE:35==
Table 4.6: Average Output per Operating Hour for Each Hall in the Optimization of the
Current Setup
Hall
Brák
G&D
PET
BOB
Output of system
Output (units/hour)
35.540
11.091
8.559
2.808
57.998
Overall, these results indicate the clear advantage of using optimization models, even
without changing the structure or flexibility of the production setup. By simply optimizing
the sequencing of products within each hall, Ölgerðin is able to achieve much higher
production efficiency across the entire system. Tables A.6, A.7, A.8, & A.9 in the Appendix
show an example of one week’s optimized schedule, using the same week as shown for
the current setup in the Appendix. They illustrate what the schedule would look like if the
company adopted this model.
4.4
Proposed Non­Flexible Setup
This section evaluates the impact of removing the BOB hall from the set of production
halls, in line with the structural change that Ölgerðin is planning to implement. To assess
the impact, two scenarios were created. In the first, the BOB hall is removed while the
G&D hall keeps its original production capacity. In the second, the capacity of G&D is
increased, as proposed by the company. In both cases, all products previously produced
in BOB, which was dedicated to glass production, are reassigned to G&D, which is also
capable of handling glass packaging. As a result, G&D must now cover both its original
demand and the demand that previously went through BOB. Since the production halls
continue to operate independently in this setup, Brák and PET remain unaffected. For
that reason, the results in this section only focus on the performance of the G&D hall.
Table 4.7: Downtime and Operation Time for the Proposed Non­Flexible Setup (in Min­
utes)
Week
Downtime
Operation Time
Same Capacity
Operation Time
Increased Capacity
6
240
3004
1711
7
330
3277
1936
8
300
4799
3204
9
330
6270
4530
10
420
6083
4404
11
240
6061
3329
12
270
4646
3082
13
420
7259
4499
14
390
6226
4350
15
240
5792
3176
Average
318
5342
3422
Figure 4.4 shows the average downtime for the G&D and BOB halls for the proposed
non­flexible setup and the optimization of the current setup. BOB was included in the
results to display how its demand shifts over to the G&D hall. As expected, the downtime
increases due to the increased number of products being produced on the line.
26
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.4: Average Downtime per Week for G&D and BOB in the Proposed Non­Flexible
Setup
Figure 4.5 here below displays the average operation time. The results show that even
though the downtime in the proposed non­flexible setup increases by over 45%, the op­
eration time still decreases by more than 25%. This is because the increase in capacity
outweighs the increased traffic in the G&D hall. Table A.10 in the Appendix shows how
one week in G&D of this setup looks like, using the same example week as before.
Figure 4.5: Average Operation Time per Week for G&D and BOB in the Proposed Non­
Flexible Setup
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
27
==PAGE:37==
Tables 4.8 and 4.9 present the average output per operating hour in the proposed non­
flexible setups. With unchanged capacity, the system output is lower than that of the
system shown in Table 4.6 . This indicates that simply shifting production from BOB to
G&D without expanding capacity would reduce overall efficiency. However, when the
capacity of G&D is increased, the system output rises to 59.239 units/hour, which is more
than in the optimized current setup. This suggests that removing BOB and expanding
G&D would lead to better performance than the optimization of the current setup.
Table 4.8: Average Output per Operating Hour for Each Hall in the Proposed Non­Flexible
Setup (Same Capacity)
Hall
Brák
G&D
PET
Output of system
Output (units/hour)
35.540
9.884
8.559
53.983
Table 4.9: Average Output per Operating Hour for Each Hall in the Proposed Non­Flexible
Setup (Increased Capacity)
Hall
Brák
G&D
PET
Output of system
Output (units/hour)
35.540
15.140
8.559
59.239
4.5
Proposed Setup
This section shows the results for the proposed setup where flexibility is introduced in the
Brák and G&D halls, using the model in Section 3.4.3. The PET hall remains independent
in this setup, so its results are the same as in the current setup. For that reason, it is not
included in these results. To solve the flexible halls of this system, the k­step lookahead
heuristic described in Section 3.4.5 was used. Table 4.10 presents the average downtime
and the average operation time for this setup.
Table 4.10: Weekly Downtime and Operation Time for Brák and G&D (in Minutes)
Week
Brák DT
G&D DT
Brák OT
G&D OT
6
420
240
3966
3769
7
390
480
5495
5158
8
1230
300
5151
5113
9
1230
330
6324
6259
10
1350
480
6405
6395
11
750
240
6314
6304
12
1110
270
5667
5142
13
1140
480
6448
6312
14
1020
450
5307
5206
15
1080
300
5174
5127
Average
972
357
5625
5479
It is important to note that when the halls are flexible, the definition of operation time
changes slightly compared to the independent halls. Since the halls now operate from a
common timeline, the operation time is defined as the time from the start of day 1 at 00:00
until the last product in either hall is completed. On average, the Brák hall experienced
28
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:38==
972 minutes of downtime per week, while G&D experienced 357 minutes. The average
operation time was 5.625 minutes for Brák and 5.479 minutes for G&D.
As shown in Figure 4.6, the introduction of flexibility in the proposed setup leads to an
increase in downtime. For the Brák hall, downtime increased from 744 minutes in the
non­flexible setup to 972 minutes in the flexible setup. The G&D hall had a small increase
in downtime, from 318 to 357 minutes, while the PET hall maintained the same downtime
level of 513 minutes in both setups since that hasn’t changed since the current model
setup.
Figure 4.6: Average Downtime per Week for Each Hall in the Proposed Non­Flexible
Setup and Proposed Setup
In Figure 4.7 the average operation time per week is shown for each hall in the proposed
setup compared to the proposed non­flexible setup. In Brák, the flexible setup slightly
reduced the operation time from 5.821 to 5.625 minutes. For G&D the time increases
from 3.422 to 5.479 minutes, as G&D took over a larger share of the production previously
handled by Brák.
Figure 4.7: Average Operation Time per Week for Each Hall in the Proposed Non­Flexible
Setup and Proposed Setup
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
29
==PAGE:39==
Even though Brák experienced an increase in downtime, the makespan of the system was
reduced, which shows that the objective function is working as intended. This suggests
that introducing flexibility helped distribute the workload more effectively between the halls
and improved the efficiency of the setup. Tables A.11 and A.12 in the Appendix show how
the schedules would look like with this setup, still using the same week example as before.
Table 4.11 shows the average output per operating hour for the proposed setup, where
production from BOB has been fully moved to G&D and both Brák and G&D can produce
any product assigned to them. The total system output in this setup is 57.616 units/hour.
This is slightly lower than the result in Table 4.9 from the non­flexible setup, where the
system output reaches 59.239 units/hour. The difference of 1.623 units/hour corresponds
to a decrease of approximately 2,74%. The drop is mainly due to reduced output from
Brák, which falls from 35.540 to 31.942 units/hour, while G&D increases its output from
15.140 to 17.115 units/hour, helping to make up for some of the reduction. Overall, the
results suggest a more balanced use of Brák and G&D in the proposed setup, with slightly
lower total output but more flexibility and even distribution of production.
Table 4.11: Average Output per Operating Hour for Each Hall in the Proposed Setup
Hall
Brák
G&D
PET
Output of system
Output (units/hour)
31.942
17.115
8.559
57.616
4.6
Flexible Setup
In this section, the results of the flexible model, detailed in Section 3.4.4, are shown.
The results of this setup can be directly compared to the results of the proposed setup
to showcase the benefits of adding a fully flexible system between the three production
halls, instead of having only two. Just like the flexible part of the proposed setup, this fully
flexible setup had to rely on the k­step lookahead heuristic, detailed in Section 3.4.5, to
be solved efficiently. In Section 4.9.1, a sensitivity analysis on the runtime of the flexible
model is performed, which highlights the importance of using a heuristic approach when
trying to solve this model. Table 4.12 shows the downtime for each hall over ten weeks.
Table 4.12: Weekly Downtime for Each Hall in the Flexible Production Setup (in Minutes)
Week
Brák
G&D
PET
6
870
360
210
7
630
0
1140
8
1230
450
660
9
1020
530
630
10
1560
420
510
11
510
150
450
12
690
390
660
13
1350
510
930
14
750
210
570
15
1140
180
1020
Average
975
321
678
Figure 4.8 presents the average downtime per week. In the fully flexible setup, downtime
increases slightly in Brák, from 972 to 975 minutes, while G&D experiences a small re­
30
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:40==
duction from 357 to 321 minutes. PET, however, shows a more noticeable increase in
downtime, rising from 513 to 678 minutes. This suggests that PET takes on more pro­
duction tasks in the fully flexible setup, which leads to more CIP cycles and therefore
increased downtimes. The operation time for each hall is shown in Figure 4.9. As seen
in the figure, the operation time is distributed fairly evenly, suggesting that the model allo­
cates production across the halls effectively. This indicates that even with added cleaning
requirements, the scheduling improvements from full flexibility lead to more efficient use
of production time and decrease the makespan.
Figure 4.8: Average Downtime per Week for Each Hall in the Flexible and Proposed
Flexible Setups
Table 4.13 shows the total operation time over ten weeks. Just as for the proposed setup,
operation time is defined as the time from the start of day 1 at 00:00 until the last product
in either hall is completed. The table shows evenly distributed operating times across all
halls, indicating that the flexible model works as intended.
Table 4.13: Weekly Operation Time for the Flexible Setup (in Minutes)
Week
Brák
G&D
PET
6
4289
3800
4507
7
4808
4811
4718
8
4241
3804
4222
9
5100
5115
5120
10
5532
5234
5286
11
3425
3795
4756
12
4139
3766
4132
13
5244
5238
5182
14
4204
3786
4582
15
4886
4891
4883
Average
4587
4424
4739
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
31
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.9: Average makespan per week for each hall in the flexible and proposed flexible
setups
Overall, these results show that while full flexibility does not reduce downtime in all halls, it
still leads to a noticeable improvement in overall production efficiency. In Brák and G&D,
downtime remains similar or increases slightly, while PET sees a more significant rise as
it takes on a larger share of the production load. Despite this, the makespan is reduced
across the system. These results suggest that a fully flexible setup can improve time
efficiency even if it requires more frequent cleaning or setup adjustments in some halls.
Tables A.13, A.14 & A.15 show how the schedules would look for this setup, using the
same week as before.
Table 4.14 shows the output per operating hour for the flexible setup. This setup achieves
the highest total output per operating hour across all setups. It clearly shows that adding
flexibility between halls can lead to the most efficient use of resources and deliver the best
overall results in terms of production performance.
Table 4.14: Average Output per Operating Hour for Each Hall in the Flexible Setup
Hall
Brák
G&D
PET
Output of system
Output (units/hour)
30.460
19.614
9.461
59.535
4.7
Verification
To ensure that the solution methods developed and used in this thesis are correctly im­
plemented, it is important to verify their outcome. This section focuses on verifying the
two main solution methods used in the thesis, which are the optimization of independent
halls based on the TSP model, and the heuristic approach used for solving flexible halls.
4.7.1
Verification of Optimization of Current Model
To verify the solution method for independent halls, based on the model in Section 3.3.1,
the most straightforward approach is to manually determine the optimal sequence for a
small set of products. The timeline shown in Figure 4.10 illustrates one of several cases
that were calculated by hand. These results were initially obtained manually and then
validated using the solution method, which produced the same outcome as can be seen
32
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:42==
in the example code output in Listing 4.1. A few similar cases were tested, and in each
instance, the outcome of the solution method matched the manual calculation.
Soda 1
No cleaning
Soda 2
CIP Cold water
(60 min)
Beer 1
CIP Hot water
(120 min)
Functional Drink 1 CIP Cold water
(60 min)
Functional Drink 2
Figure 4.10: Example of Manually Calculated Optimal Sequence for Five Randomly Se­
lected Products (Blue = Production, Gold = Cleaning).
1
========== Hall: BRAK ==========
2
3
Total accumulated downtime (minutes): 240
4
Total production running time (minutes):
667
5
Total production time (minutes):
907
6
Total number of units produced: 500000
7
8
--- Day 1 ---
9
07:30-08:00
Startup
10
08:00-10:13
Production: Soda 1 - 100000 units produced
11
10:13-10:13
No cleaning required
12
10:13-12:27
Production: Soda 2 - 100000 units produced
13
12:27-13:27
CIP Cold water
14
13:27-15:40
Production: Beer 1 - 100000 units produced
15
15:40-17:40
CIP Hot water
16
17:40-19:53
Production: Functional Drink 1 - 100000 units produced
17
19:53-20:53
CIP Cold water
18
20:53-23:07
Production: Functional Drink 2 - 100000 units produced
19
20
============================================
Listing 4.1: Example of Code Output for the Same Products
4.7.2
Verification of Heuristic Approach
To evaluate the performance of the k­step lookahead heuristic approach used for all of the
setups that included flexible halls, a comparison of the heuristic and a flexible model was
performed. The comparison involved ten runs of ten random products and the makespan
was recorded. By doing so, the performance of the heuristic approach could be at least
somewhat verified, despite being only able to run for only ten products. The solution
space is quite large which is why solving this model takes such a long time for n > 10
products. There are
(12
2
)
= 66 distributions of ten products among three halls and for each
distribution, there are 10! sequences, so the total number of feasible schedules for n = 10
is 66 × 10! = 239.500.800.
To enable a direct and fair comparison between the heuristic method and the optimization
model, the operating hours were removed from all halls. This allowed the makespan
and production distribution to be evaluated under identical conditions, without any bias
introduced by differing schedules. The comparison involved three halls, G&D, Brák, and
PET. The halls were assumed to operate continuously, starting at 00:00 on day 1 and
running until all products were completed. This adjustment was necessary to ensure a
fair comparison. If operating hours were included, the PET hall, which runs around the
clock, would have an advantage over the other two halls that begin production later in
the day. By removing operating hour constraints, the performance of each method could
be compared more accurately on equal terms. The results of all ten runs are shown in
Table 4.15.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
33
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.15: Comparison of Makespan for k­Step Lookahead Heuristic vs. Flexible Model
Run
Heuristic (min)
Flexible model (min)
1
560
550
2
530
530
3
578
566
4
578
548
5
530
530
6
548
548
7
578
578
8
548
517
9
548
471
10
596
566
Average
559.4
540.4
The results indicate that although the heuristic does not produce the optimal solution, its
performance remains strong and reasonably close to the optimal given the complexity and
large solution space of the problem.
4.8
Validation with Stakeholder Company
Once the solution methods had been fully implemented in Julia, a validation was carried
out to confirm both their correctness and practical applicability. The validation was in close
collaboration with Ölgerðin’s production planning team and CTO, who reviewed the model­
generated schedules. The company’s planning experts confirmed that the outputs from
the model matched their internal calculations and actual operational practice, including
correct downtime sequences between products and the capacities of each production hall
[31]. This validation provided assurance that the models accurately represent Ölgerðin’s
production environment and that they are capable of generating realistic schedules.
4.9
Sensitivity analysis
This section includes a few different sensitivity analyses performed on the solution meth­
ods used for the flexible halls. To begin with, the run time of a fully flexible model is
explored, showing why running a fully flexible model is not practical for weekly schedule
planning as it handles a very limited product range. Then, the solutions of a fully flexible
model when given a 30­minute solve time are obtained. Finally, a sensitivity analysis on
the number of steps k in the k­step lookahead heuristic is performed to evaluate how the
choice of k affects the makespan and overall scheduling performance.
4.9.1
Run time of flexible model
To evaluate whether the fully flexible production scheduling model, detailed in Section
3.3.2, can be solved within a reasonable time, a runtime analysis was performed by grad­
ually increasing the number of input products, denoted as n. The model was internally
run multiple times to ensure the consistency of the solution. From these repeated runs,
the median solve time was recorded, providing a stable estimate of typical performance
while reducing the influence of outliers or random fluctuations. A series of instances were
constructed for n ∈{5, 6, 7, . . . , 11}, and the model was solved for each. The observed
runtimes in seconds are reported in Table 4.16.
These results clearly show that once the number of products grows beyond this point,
solving the full optimization model becomes impractical. This is due to the complexity
34
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:44==
n (Number of products)
Run time [sec]
5
2.46×10−3
6
0.02
7
0.08
8
0.30
9
2.25
10
40.69
11
2739.83
Table 4.16: Median Solve Time in Seconds as the Number of Products n Increases
of the problem increasing with n, as the number of binary decision variables, possible
product sequences, and feasible hall assignments grows rapidly. Solving such models
to optimality with exact methods becomes exponentially more difficult. These findings
emphasize the importance of heuristic methods when solving the production setups that
have flexible halls. The k­step lookahead heuristic, detailed in Section 3.4.5, generates
good solutions in a fraction of the time. Moreover, it allow planners to explore multiple
scenarios in a short amount of time, which is essential for day­to­day decision­making in
an operational context.
4.9.2
Heuristic vs. Flexible Model under Time Limits
As just discussed, one of the main strengths of the heuristic approach used for the flexible
hall setup is its ability to generate good solutions within seconds. Despite its simplicity
and speed, the heuristic produces consistent results that are comfortably within 5% of
the optimal solution, at least according to the results shown in Table 4.15, which can
be considered a good outcome given the complexity of the problem, even though those
results are based on instances with a relatively small number of products.
In contrast, solving the MILP­based flexible model becomes increasingly difficult in terms
of computation time as the number of products grows, as shown in the previous sensitivity
analysis. However, it is important to recognize that even if the flexible model runs for a
long time without reaching an optimal solution, it may still produce a good solution that is
close to optimality within that time frame.
This analysis aimed to evaluate the quality of solutions obtained by the flexible model
when run with a fixed time limit of 30 minutes. A series of problem instances with varying
numbers of products were tested, and the best feasible solutions found within the time limit
were compared to the results of the heuristic. The goal is to understand how closely the
heuristic approaches the best known solutions under realistic computational constraints.
As in the verification of the heuristic model, operating hours are disregarded intentionally
in this sensitivity analysis to provide equal conditions across all halls. Table 4.17 shows
the comparison of average makespan.
These results clearly indicate the value of the heuristic approach used for the flexible halls
and support the previous findings of lengthy run times when n exceeds 10. Even just when
n = 15, the heuristic already outperforms the model when given a 30­minute time limit to
solve. That gap just continues to grow once n enlarges.
What stands out in particular is how quickly the makespan of the flexible model increases
with problem size, while the heuristic remains relatively stable and scalable. For instance,
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
35
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.17: Comparison of Average Makespan for the Model (30­Minute Time Limit) and
Lookahead Heuristic Based on 5 Runs per n Products
Number of products
Model 30 min time limit (min)
Heuristic (min)
12
282
302
15
367
357
20
680
490
25
831
537
30
1175
676
at n = 30, the heuristic solution is nearly 500 minutes faster than the model solution, which
failed to get close to optimality within the time limit. While the model is more precise in
smaller instances, its usefulness is severely limited in larger, realistic scenarios due to its
high computational cost.
4.9.3
Impact of Lookahead steps k on Makespan
When using the k­step lookahead heuristic, it is important to choose an appropriate value
of steps k to look ahead into. A lower value of k performs worse as it has less insight
into the future than a larger value of k. However, choosing a large value of k comes at a
computational cost, as it has to process more product assignments into the future.
To determine an appropriate value of k for the results, a sensitivity analysis was performed
to assess its impact on the makespan across several weekly schedules. Figure 4.11
presents the outcome of this analysis on a normalized scale, where the highest observed
makespan is set to 100 and the lowest to 0. Normalization was used because the weekly
schedules tested resulted in different makespan values, which made direct comparison
less accurate. This approach provides a clearer view of how increasing the number of
lookahead steps k affects performance.
Figure 4.11: Normalized makespan of the k­step lookahead heuristic as k increases. The
makespan is scaled such that the maximum observed value is set to 100 and the minimum
to 0. Lower values indicate better performance.
Based on these results, a value of k ≈20 was found to be effective for input sizes compa­
rable to a typical weekly schedule. For all experiments in this thesis, a value of k = 32 was
chosen, as it kept computational cost low while ensuring the best makespan achievable
36
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:46==
by the heuristic was found. This choice is supported by the observation that the makespan
remains unchanged for k ≥20.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
37
==PAGE:47==
5
Discussion
This chapter aims to analyze and evaluate the results presented in the previous chapter.
It begins with interpreting key results, with an emphasis on comparing the different pro­
duction setups based on the KPIs. After that, the impact of flexibility, model limitations,
and an alternative approach explored will be discussed. Then, managerial recommenda­
tions based on the results are provided. Finally, the chapter concludes by addressing the
research question and its sub­questions.
5.1
Interpretation of Key Results
In the current setup the total downtime, shown in Figure 4.2, was relatively high. This
setup shows how Ölgerðin currently operates. When the product order was optimized
within each hall, the total downtime decreased significantly, as shown on the same figure,
indicating that using an optimization based approach to scheduling leads to a much more
efficient production environment. The proposed non­flexible setup, shown in Section 4.4,
led to increased downtimes and operation time since the G&D hall has to handle more
products than before. However, once the increased capacity of the new G&D hall was
included, the operation time and output per operating hour improved. This shows that
the increased capacity of the new G&D hall makes up for the absence of the BOB hall in
terms of output and operation time.
The most noticeable improvements came from the setups that allowed for flexibility. When
Brák and G&D were allowed to share production, the makespan decreased and produc­
tion was distributed more evenly across the halls. This led to better use of available hours
and higher efficiency. The fully flexible setup, which removes all hall restrictions, gave the
best results in terms of both makespan and output per hour. Although this setup is not
realistic due to current technical limitations, it shows how much can be gained from more
flexibility.
In all scenarios, the output per operating hour was a useful measure of how efficiently
each setup used the available production time. Setups with less downtime and better
distribution of production between halls consistently performed better on this metric. It
also became clear that scheduling CIP processes outside of operating hours helped im­
prove this value. Overall, the results show that better scheduling, either through product
reordering, structural changes, or added flexibility, can lead to clear improvements in per­
formance. The size of the improvement depends on both the setup and how well the
model takes advantage of the options available.
5.1.1
KPI’s
The following section examines each KPI independently and how the different production
setups perform in each one.
Downtime
Figure 5.1 shows the total downtime across all production halls for each scenario. As can
be seen, especially in Brák, there is a significant improvement in downtimes across the
system. Also, it is interesting to see the effects of removing the BOB hall on the three
setups that do not include it. The downtimes not only shift to the other halls but also
increase, as G&D and Brák have longer CIP cycles than BOB. In addition, BOB products
consist exclusively of glass, which leads to more frequent changeovers when mixed with
other product types in the same hall.
38
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:48==
Another interesting finding is that the production setups with flexible halls experience
higher downtimes compared to the independent hall models. There are several reasons
for this. First, when products are mixed between halls, some product sequences may not
have known downtime values becuase they have never been performed before, and no
data is available on them. In such cases, the model assumes the longest cleaning cycle,
CIP caustic, which lasts three hours in Brák and two hours in G&D. Second, the added
flexibility leads to a more balanced distribution of production across the halls. This con­
tributes to the increase in PET downtime, as more products are scheduled there due to
its ability to operate throughout the night, unlike the other halls.
Figure 5.1: Downtime for Each Setup
Makespan
Figure 5.2 shows the average makespan for each production setup. While it doesn’t show
how each hall performs individually, it gives a clear overall view of how the system is
working. It was included as a KPI because all models with some level of flexibility depend
on it, and it helps highlight the improvements that come from adding flexibility.
Figure 5.2: Makespan for Each Setup
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
39
==PAGE:49==
There are two key improvements when comparing the different production setups. First,
moving from manual scheduling to the optimized current setup shows a clear improvement
and once again demonstrates the value of using optimization methods in production plan­
ning. Second, the results from the next three production setups are quite similar. These
include the optimized current setup and the two non­flexible proposed setups. This sim­
ilarity is due to Brák being the largest hall with the widest product range, which means it
usually carries the highest demand and most often finishes last when the halls operate
independently. In the non­flexible proposed, Brák is still the last hall to finish production,
so the makespan stays the same as in the optimized current setup.
These average makespan results clearly show one of the strongest arguments for why
flexibility is so valuable. In the proposed flexible setup, where there are two flexible halls
and one fixed hall, there is already a slight improvement in the makespan compared to the
previous production setups. But when all three halls are flexible, the makespan decreases
significantly. That is mainly because PET is open all day round, and demand that in all
other scenarios is assigned to Brák and G&D can now be produced in PET while the other
halls are closed. This not only shortens the schedule but also improves the overall load
balancing across halls, something the individual hall models cannot achieve.
Output per operating hour
Table 5.1 shows a summary of all the output per operating hour results. This KPI is
one of the clearest indicators of performance and reveals several noteworthy differences
between the setups. The most significant difference is seen when comparing the manual
scheduling of the current setup to its optimized setup, once again highlighting the potential
for improvement through the use of optimization. The result of minimizing the downtime
sequences in between production rounds increased output by over 14.000 cans per hour.
These results are also displayed in Figure 5.3.
Table 5.1: Average Output per Operating Hour (units/hour) for Each Hall and the Entire
System Across Different Scheduling Setups
Hall
Manual
Optimization of
Current Setup
Non­flexible
Proposed
Non­flexible
Proposed
(increased capacity)
Proposed
Flexible
Brák
29.013
35.540
35.540
35.540
31.942
30.460
G&D
8.301
11.091
9.884
15.140
17.115
19.614
PET
4.750
8.559
8.559
8.559
8.559
9.461
BOB
1.060
2.808
–
–
–
–
System
43.124
57.998
53.983
59.239
57.616
60.554
When moving from the optimization of the current setup to the non­flexible proposed setup
with the same capacity, the impact of removing the BOB hall and shifting its demand to
the G&D hall becomes clear. Output decreases by approximately 1.200 cans per hour,
primarily due to increased traffic on the line, which results in more frequent downtimes.
However, as shown consistently in other results, the planned capacity increase for G&D
effectively offsets the added downtimes. In fact, output per hour in G&D increases by
nearly 5.000 units in the non­flexible proposed setup with the upgraded capacities.
Another interesting finding is that the non­flexible proposed setup actually performs slightly
better than the flexible proposed setup in terms of this KPI. This suggests that introducing
flexibility between Brák and G&D may lead to a decrease in output per operating hour,
contrary to what was anticipated. This small difference is potentially due to the use of
heuristic methods to solve the flexible halls in the proposed setup. Since the only change
40
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:50==
between these two setups is the introduction of flexibility between two halls, the flexible
proposed setup should theoretically perform better. As such, this result likely reflects
the limitations of the heuristic approach, which finds good, but not necessarily optimal,
solutions.
Finally, the flexible setup achieves the highest performance, with an output around 60.000
cans per hour. An interesting aspect of this setup is that allowing PET to operate flexibly
increases its output, as more products are scheduled there during the night.
Figure 5.3: Output per Hour for Each Production Setup
5.2
Impact of Flexibility
Introducing flexibility between production halls had a strong effect on scheduling perfor­
mance. In the proposed setup, where Brák and G&D could both produce the same prod­
ucts, the makespan became slightly shorter compared to the current and non­flexible
setups. This shows that giving the model more options when assigning products can lead
to better use of available capacity. One of the main advantages of flexibility was the abil­
ity to balance the workload across halls. Instead of one hall becoming overloaded while
another was not operating the whole time, the model is able to spread production more
evenly. This helped reduce makespan and made it easier to fit all the required production
into the available hours.
The fully flexible setup showed how much more efficient production could become if all
halls could support all product types. In this setup, both the makespan and output per
hour improved the most. Flexibility also helped in situations where one hall had longer
changeover times or limited capacity. By giving the model the option to choose another
hall, these issues became easier to avoid. As a result, less time was spent on cleaning
and changeovers, and more time was used for actual production. As shown in Figure 5.2,
the makespan is lowest in the two halls that include flexible halls. The fully flexible setup
achieves the lowest makespan by far.
However, it is important to note that increased flexibility also makes the scheduling prob­
lem harder to solve. The model must make more decisions, and the number of com­
binations grows quickly. But still, the heuristic method allowed the model to find good
schedules without using too much computing time. In summary, adding flexibility be­
tween production halls led to clear improvements in performance. It allows for better use
of capacity, shorter makespan, and higher output per hour. Although some technical limits
still exist, the results show that even limited flexibility can make a noticeable difference.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
41
==PAGE:51==
5.3
Model Limitations
The optimization models developed in this project provide valuable insights and clear
improvements across the different production setups. Still, they are based on simplified
assumptions and do not fully reflect the day­to­day complexity of operations.
A major limitation is the assumption that all production halls operate without interrup­
tions. In reality, unexpected issues often arise, such as equipment failures or mainte­
nance needs. For instance, the G&D hall experiences around 200 minutes of unplanned
stops each week due to technical challenges. Brák has even more, with an average of
1024 minutes per week, largely because of its size and range of products. PET is more
reliable but still faces about 499 minutes of unexpected downtime weekly [6]. These dis­
ruptions are not included in the models, which assume that each hall is available for the full
duration of its scheduled hours. However, since these disruptions are also not accounted
for in the manual schedules, the setups can still be compared to the current setup, and
the differences should still largely translate to real­life conditions.
The models also use fixed weekly demand and do not allow for splitting production across
multiple days or making changes mid­week. In practice, planners often need to react to
updated forecasts, new orders, or changes in product availability. The models do not
include these adjustments. In addition, staffing constraints, shift preferences, and labor
availability are not considered. Some of the schedules generated may look efficient but
could be difficult to follow if they require more personnel than are on hand.
During a validation session with Ölgerðin’s team, several additional needs and practical
constraints were identified. These included the ability to block out specific days for hol­
idays or maintenance, and the need to prioritize products that are urgently needed in
stores. These suggestions were noted for future development.
The heuristic used for assigning products in flexible setups helped reduce runtime and
produced good results, but it does not guarantee optimality. There may be better solutions
that were missed due to the limited search process. The models also do not include
cost calculations, energy consumption, or checks for material availability, which are all
important when planning for the full production system.
Even with these simplifications, the models still provide a strong starting point for improv­
ing production planning at Ölgerðin. Future versions can build on this work by including
more real­world conditions and refining the logic to better match how production actually
operates.
5.4
Alternative Approach Considered
This setup extends the flexible production scheduling approach by allowing products to
be processed in multiple halls. A product can begin in one hall and continue in another if
the first hall does not have enough time to complete it. This reflects real situations where
a hall is close to the end of its working hours, and another hall with available time can
finish the job.
The model formulation shares several characteristics with the Flexible Model but intro­
duces a relaxation on product­hall exclusivity. The key addition is the continuous variable
zih, which allows partial production of a product i in hall h, and constraint (17), which
ensures total demand Di is met across all halls. By allowing production flow between
halls, the model improves responsiveness to hall­specific operating hour constraints and
enables tighter makespan minimization.
42
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:52==
However, implementing this in practice would be extremely difficult. It requires precise
synchronization of production equipment across halls, product compatibility with different
machines, and well defined transitions between halls. Ölgerðin’s current operational struc­
ture does not support such transitions due to machine­specific requirements and transfer
logistics. Therefore, this setup is used purely as a theoretical benchmark to explore the
upper limits of scheduling flexibility and performance. Additionally, implementing a solu­
tion method for this model presents significant challenges. Even the flexible model, which
assumes each product is produced entirely within a single hall, is already computationally
demanding due to the joint assignment and sequencing decisions involved. The flowshop
model increases the complexity further by expanding the solution space since products
can now be split across multiple halls, creating many more possible combinations of pro­
duction assignments and timings. For this reason, the model is only explored in theory
in this thesis and is not solved directly. Instead, it serves as a conceptual benchmark to
illustrate the theoretical potential of scheduling flexibility under operational constraints.
Variable and parameter definitions
• I: Set of products with positive demand.
• H: Set of available production halls.
• xijh ∈0, 1: Equals 1 if product j is produced immediately after i in hall h.
• yih ∈0, 1: Equals 1 if any part of product i is produced in hall h.
• zih ∈R≥0: Quantity of product i produced in hall h (units).
• tih ∈R≥0: Start time of product i in hall h.
• Cmax ∈R≥0: Makespan, the latest product finish time across all halls.
• Di: Demand of product i (units).
• Cih: Production capacity (units/hour) for product i in hall h.
• dij: Downtime between switching from product i to j (hours).
• ah, bh: Opening and closing time of hall h on each production day.
• M: A large constant used for sequencing constraints.
Objective
(7)
Subject to:
∑
j∈I
xijh ≤yih
∀i ∈I, ; h ∈H
(15)
∑
h∈H
zih = Di
∀i ∈I
(16)
zih ≤Di · yih
∀i ∈I, ; h ∈H
(17)
tjh ≥tih + zih
Cih
+ dij −M(1 −xijh)
∀i ̸= j ∈I, ; h ∈H
(18)
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
43
==PAGE:53==
tih ≥0
∀i ∈I, ; h ∈H
(19)
xiih = 0
∀i ∈I, ; h ∈H
(20)
tih + zih
Cih
≤Cmax
∀i ∈I, ; h ∈H
(21)
tih ≥24 · dih + ah
∀i ∈I, ; h ∈H
(22)
tih + zih
Cih
≤24 · dih + bh
∀i ∈I, ; h ∈H
(23)
Constraint (15) links sequencing and assignment variables, allowing sequencing only if a
product is (at least partially) produced in a hall.
Constraint (16) enforces that total production across all halls equals demand for each
product.
Constraint (17) ensures that production in any hall is only possible if that hall is assigned
to the product.
Constraint (18) ensures sequencing precedence: product j in hall h cannot start before
product i finishes and downtime passes, unless they are not adjacent.
Constraint (19) enforces non­negative start times.
Constraint (20) prevents self­loops in scheduling.
Constraint (21) ties the makespan to the completion time of any product in any hall.
Constraints (22) and (23) enforce hall operating hour compliance, ensuring no production
starts before opening or finishes after closing.
5.5
Managerial Recommendations
This section lists a few recommendations that Ölgerðin’s management should consider
regarding production scheduling or the impacts of the proposed changes to the production
halls. These recommendations are all based on the findings of this thesis, and could prove
impactful as Ölgerðin continues it’s steady growth and success in recent years.
5.5.1
Selection of Production Setup
Based on the outcome of the KPIs across all production setups, the proposed non­
flexible setup stands out as the most sensible option when balancing performance with
practicality. The proposed setup performs slightly better than the proposed non­flexible
setup, but not enough to compensate for the added complexities in operations. Allowing
products to move freely between halls would require the necessary equipment and com­
ponents such as specific machines, labeling units, or packaging tools to be available in
each hall. This means Ölgerðin would need to either have the same equipment installed
in multiple halls or move it between them regularly. Managing this setup would add signif­
icant complexity to daily operations and is likely not worth the effort, especially given the
small performance difference between the proposed setup and the proposed non­flexible
44
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:54==
setup. The non­flexible proposed setup avoids these complications while still delivering
strong improvements compared to the current setup.
However, the difference in performance between the optimized current setup and the
proposed non­flexible setup is relatively small based on the results. This is an interesting
finding, as it suggests that simply applying optimization techniques to the existing structure
might lead to similar improvements to investing in a new production hall. In terms of
scheduling alone, this is actually true. Still, it is important to consider that the current
G&D hall is outdated, and while the declared production capacities are used in the models,
actual output often falls closer to 50­60% of those values due to frequent breakdowns and
unintended production stoppages [31]. This makes it hard to rely on the current setup and
serves as a strong justification for investing in the new G&D hall.
Recommendations for Future Changes
Although it is not currently possible due to machine­related constraints in the PET hall
as mentioned, it would be worthwhile to consider including the PET hall as a flexible hall
in any future upgrades to the production system. The flexible setup consistently delivers
the best performance out of all the configurations explored, and extending flexibility to
include PET would significantly strengthen overall productivity. As shown in Figure 5.2,
the time savings from the flexible setup are substantial compared to the other setups.
While implementing this change would be costly, since all halls would need to be equipped
to handle PET products, the added flexibility of having three instead of two flexible halls
results in much more efficient scheduling in terms of makespan. This is because the
scheduling algorithm has more freedom to allocate demand in a way that balances load
across halls, reduces idle time, and limits bottlenecks. In practice, this could lead not only
to reduced production time, but also to better responsiveness when managing fluctuations
in demand or sudden changes in production requirements. Also, the PET hall has the
advantage of being able to produce all day and night, which enables it to take on extra
load from the other halls when needed. Given the strong performance of the flexible
setup in this study, such an investment could be justified by capacity utilization, planning
reliability, and the added flexibility it would bring to the system.
Utilizing Optimization Methods for Production Scheduling
Regardless of the changes to the production hall setup, it is imperative that Ölgerðin place
greater focus on utilizing optimization methods when creating their production schedules.
This statement is not intended to undermine the value of current planning approaches or
personnel. The importance of skilled and experienced planners in production scheduling
cannot be understated, as they can never be fully replaced. Unlike the optimization mod­
els used in this thesis, which focus solely on minimizing downtime or makespan, planners
offer essential flexibility, adapting schedules based on internal needs such as resource
availability, in­week changes to demand, and other operational considerations. However,
the results of the models cannot be replicated through manual scheduling based solely
on prior experience. The possible outcomes run on the tens or hundreds of thousands,
and finding the optimal one for e.g. a whole production week is close to impossible for an
individual to do by hand.
Just by looking at the difference of the manual scheduling and the optimization of the
current setup, shown e.g. in Figure 4.3, it is clear why Ölgerðin should utilize optimization
methods when scheduling production. The output per operating hour of the system as a
whole increased by 14.874 cans per hour, an increase of roughly ≈34%.
Additionally, the manual scheduling process can take quite a while. The production plan­
ner follows a CIP table matrix, similar to the one in Figure 1.1, and manually assigns prod­
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
45
==PAGE:55==
uct sequences to each hall. Each week, a new plan is created by entering the production
times and quantities for each product into a new Excel sheet. This process typically takes
one to two full working days to complete for a single week of production. There is no algo­
rithmic logic behind the sequencing, only basic manual rules and experience are applied.
As a result, the process is both time­consuming and prone to inefficiencies.
Digitalizing the Weekly Production Plan Distribution
In addition to adopting optimization methods for production scheduling, it is highly recom­
mended that Ölgerðin modernize how weekly production plans are distributed internally.
The current approach relies on manually updated Excel files that are shared repeatedly
by email with more than 50 employees. Any change in the plan, such as a maintenance
delay, an urgent demand, or an updated forecast, requires the planner to create and send
a new version. This often results in several updates to the same weekly schedule within
a single week. The process is time­consuming, increases the risk of miscommunication,
and puts a heavy workload on one individual. By using the optimization model developed
in this thesis, Ölgerðin can generate a complete weekly plan within minutes and easily
adjust it whenever needed. This ensures the plan is always up to date, minimizes errors,
and significantly improves the efficiency of internal communication.
To address this, Ölgerðin should consider replacing the outdated workflow with a digital,
centralized, and automatically updated system. Instead of distributing Excel sheets by
email, the production plan could be published to a shared online platform, where any
changes are updated in real time. Relevant employees would be notified of updates and
prompted to view the latest version, without needing a new email or file each time.
By transitioning to this approach, the weekly production plan would always be available
in one place, and everyone would see the most up­to­date version. This would reduce
the risk of people using old versions by mistake or missing updates in their inbox. Instead
of sending emails every time the plan changes, employees could get a quick message or
notification reminding them to check the latest version online.
Production Capacity Challenges for Collab
As mentioned earlier, implementing the new G&D hall requires substantial investment and
long­term commitment from Ölgerðin. Naturally, this raises the question of whether the
increased production capacities can be matched by corresponding demand. Ölgerðin is
expanding into international markets and has committed over 50 million DKK to marketing
Collab, its main international product [32]. This investment alone provides strong justifi­
cation for increasing production capacity, to avoid disruptions and ensure that other core
products do not have to be sidelined to accommodate the growing production of Collab.
At present, it is difficult to predict exactly how much demand for Collab will grow. How­
ever, considering that Ölgerðin is entering significantly larger markets such as Denmark,
Germany, and potentially Austria, some tens or even hundreds of times the size of the
Icelandic market, it is evident that if the drink gains popularity abroad, current capacities
may quickly become insufficient. This could either limit Collab’s growth or disrupt the
production of other key products.
An additional challenge with Collab is its scheduling complexity. The drink is currently
produced exclusively in Brák, the company’s largest production hall. Since it contains fish
collagen and other unique ingredients not found in other products, a full 3­hour Caustic
CIP cycle is required before and after each Collab production run. This thorough cleaning
is essential to remove all traces of fish­derived ingredients, as even small residues could
trigger allergic reactions in consumers with fish allergies. Between consecutive batches
46
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:56==
of Collab, however, the cleaning requirements are less intensive and typically take about
30 minutes.
Given the expected rise in demand, Ölgerðin may want to consider investing in a dedi­
cated production hall for Collab. This would reduce scheduling conflicts, help preserve the
production of other core drinks in Brák, and ensure that Collab can be produced reliably
to meet growing international demand.
Future developments could also open even more possibilities, Ölgerðin recently acquired
full ownership of Ankra ehf., the company that developed the unique fish collagen used in
Collab. As a result, Ölgerðin now holds the exclusive patent for this collagen, meaning that
no other company can use or replicate it [33]. This gives Ölgerðin a unique competitive
advantage and opens the door to developing entirely new products that use this specific
collagen, both within the Collab brand and in other product lines. Since the company
has full control over the ingredient, it can continue to innovate and explore new markets
without external limitations. If a dedicated production hall for Collab were established, it
could also be used to make other products that include the same collagen. This setup
would reduce the need for extensive cleaning between production types and give Ölgerðin
the freedom to grow its collagen­based range without affecting other operations.
5.6
Research Question and Subquestions
To conclude the discussion chapter, the main research question and its sub­questions are
answered. The main research question of this thesis was:
What impact does reducing the number of production halls have on production at
Ölgerðin?
Reducing the number of production halls at Ölgerðin affects both how the production is
planned and how the space and staff are used. The major change is the planned shutdown
of the BOB hall. The hall has very low capacity and is staffed by two employees. Because
of its low output, it is not an efficient use of space or labor. By shutting down BOB and
moving its production to the G&D hall, Ölgerðin can shift the load to a hall that is already
equipped to handle bottled products and operates at a higher capacity. This change allows
the company to free up the area previously used by BOB for other purposes. Ölgerðin
plans to use the space to install a beer cellar with additional BT tanks for storing beer
after brewing. This will make it possible to increase beer production, store larger batches,
and create better connections between storage and the production lines through new
pipelines. These improvements are expected to support smoother and more efficient beer
production in general. Another important change is related to staffing. Since the BOB hall
will no longer be in use, the two employees who worked there will not be needed. This
can either reduce labor costs for the company or allow those employees to be reassigned
to other areas of production where they are needed.
The following sub­questions are also intended to support and strengthen the answer to
the main research question:
How will the change impact production scheduling?
The change in the production halls will lead to increased traffic in the Brák and G&D halls,
resulting in higher downtimes due to more frequent product switches and tighter schedul­
ing. Despite this, the substantial capacity increase in G&D outweighs the increased down­
times. As a result, the overall output across the system is expected to increase signifi­
cantly.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
47
==PAGE:57==
Introducing flexible halls, as outlined in Section 3.4.3, brings a valuable opportunity to Öl­
gerðin’s scheduling options. Allowing products to be dynamically assigned between Brák
and G&D helps make better use of available capacity and can reduce the risk of bottle­
necks during production. Within the scope of this thesis, three different flexible setups
are either analyzed through modeling or discussed on a theoretical level, each offering
unique advantages depending on the production environment. These examples reflect
just a small part of the flexibility options available. Depending on Ölgerðin’s future needs,
priorities, and resources, there is potential to explore many other setup variations that
could further improve production efficiency.
The change will hopefully encourage Ölgerðin to place greater emphasis on utilizing the
many opportunities that Operations Research offers in the context of scheduling.
As
shown by the findings in this study, there is clear room for improvement, and a stronger
focus on efficiency within production planning could increase output by tens, or even hun­
dreds of thousands of units per week. This, of course, translates directly into opportunities
for substantial revenue gains for Ölgerðin. Further investment and research into schedul­
ing methods tailored to Ölgerðin’s operations could present more benefits and is definitely
something worth pursuing.
What operational opportunities and challenges could arise from the change?
Closing the old BOB hall opens up a range of new opportunities for Ölgerðin. The freed­
up space will be used for additional BT tanks as mentioned, enabling even more beer
production than before.
The introduction of new machinery is also a very valuable opportunity that arises from this
change. Switching out old equipment and testing out new machinery could prove useful
for any future changes to the production environment. The addition of a flexible hall itself
is incredibly valuable from a scheduling standpoint. Seeing how flexible halls operate in
practice can be valuable, especially if Ölgerðin decides to explore the recommendations
for future changes proposed in Section 5.5. The available scheduling options are far
greater than in the current setup with independent production halls.
The challenges mainly consist of the previously discussed increased traffic in the two main
production halls, Brák and G&D. In addition, all glass products now rely on a single hall,
which means they must be mixed in with other product types during scheduling. This has
already been the case to some extent, as G&D has previously produced glass products,
but now a significantly larger share is being shifted to the G&D line. This could introduce
operational difficulties, as switching between different product materials on the same line
may require more frequent changeovers, slow down production, and extend the overall
time needed to complete the weekly schedule.
When production is concentrated in fewer halls with higher capacities, it can become
harder to test new products. The main production lines still need to run consistently and
produce core products, and adding new items increases the load on already busy equip­
ment, leading to more downtime and interruptions. It’s difficult to justify using time and
resources in the larger halls for products that haven’t yet proven their value. This puts one
of Ölgerðin’s biggest strengths at risk, its ability to consistently launch new and innovative
products that drive growth and maintain market relevance. That ability should not be put
at risk due to limited planning flexibility.
48
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:58==
6
Conclusion
This thesis set out to explore the effects of reducing the number of production halls at Öl­
gerðin on production efficiency and focused on improving production scheduling through
optimization models. As Ölgerðin considers a structural shift in its production layout by
shutting down the BOB hall and expanding the G&D hall, this research aimed to eval­
uate how these changes would affect scheduling, downtime, and overall system perfor­
mance. To address this, the study developed two main mathematical models designed
to reflect Ölgerðin’s operations. The first model was a variation of the TSP, adjusted to
minimize sequence­dependent downtime in production halls that operate independently.
This model was applied to both the current production setup and a non­flexible version
of the proposed setup, where the halls continue to operate independently but the number
of active halls is reduced from four to three. The second model, developed for flexible
production scenarios, was built as a MILP model. It determines both the order of pro­
duction and the assignment of products to available halls, aiming to minimize the total
makespan. To address the complexity of solving this model for larger cases, a heuristic
using a lookahead strategy was introduced. This approach made it possible to produce
high­quality solutions within a practical timeframe by evaluating the effects of short­term
scheduling decisions before finalizing them.
Four different production setups were analyzed in this thesis. The first is the current setup,
where four independent halls Brák, PET, G&D, and BOB are each responsible for pro­
ducing their own pre­assigned products. The second is the non­flexible proposed setup,
which assumes the proposed production setup with three halls, where BOB is closed and
its products are reassigned to an improved G&D hall, without introducing any production
flexibility between halls. The third is the proposed setup, a partially flexible setup in which
Brák and the upgraded G&D hall share production responsibilities, while PET continues
to operate independently. Lastly, the flexible setup explores a fully flexible system where
any product can, in theory, be scheduled in any hall. While this setup disregards equip­
ment limitations, it was included to evaluate the potential of full flexibility from a theoretical
perspective. Each setup was evaluated using three KPI’s: total downtime, makespan, and
output per operating hour. These KPIs were chosen in close collaboration with Ölgerðin
to reflect operational priorities and to enable a fair comparison between setups.
The results highlighted a clear need to incorporate optimization into the scheduling pro­
cess to improve efficiency and reduce downtime. While the non­flexible proposed setup
experienced a slight increase in downtimes due to the closure of one hall, the added ca­
pacities of the new G&D hall outweighed that increase. The proposed setup delivered
notable improvements in makespan, demonstrating the clear benefits of adopting flexible
production halls. The fully flexible setup showed the highest overall performance. One
of the key takeaways is that flexibility has a greater impact on makespan than simply
increasing capacity. Allowing halls to share production made it easier to manage peak
demand and reduce idle time, even when not all halls were fully compatible. However, the
results show that to fully benefit from flexibility, it must be applied across all three halls.
Limiting it to only Brák and G&D does not lead to the same improvements, since PET
continues to operate separately and cannot help balance the overall load. Introducing
full flexibility also creates practical challenges, including the need for certain equipment
and components to be available in more than one hall. These added complexities make
full flexibility difficult to implement in, which is why the non­flexible proposed version with
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
49
==PAGE:59==
increased capacity was ultimately recommended as the most practical option.
From a managerial perspective, the findings of this thesis support the decision to invest in
upgrading the G&D hall. The models developed in this thesis can be directly used as de­
cision support tools for weekly production planning, providing systematic schedules that
reduce reliance on manual planning. This has the potential to save time, reduce errors,
and increase efficiency. The validation phase was carried out in close collaboration with
Ölgerðin’s planning team and confirmed that the scheduling models reflect the realities
of day­to­day operations. This cooperation helped ensure that the assumptions and sim­
plifications in the models, including operating hours, cleaning times, and product­specific
constraints, were in accordance to actual production parameters. At the same time, the
validation revealed several important limitations. The models are based on a stable plan­
ning environment and do not account for unexpected changes in demand, equipment
breakdowns, or other disruptions. Cleaning and setup times were treated as constant
values, although these can vary depending on the situation. The models also require
each product to be produced once during the week, without options for splitting produc­
tion into multiple days or combining batches. Future work could address these limitations
by integrating them into the models or by developing methods that adapt to changing
conditions during the production week. Another possible direction would be to incorpo­
rate additional production parameters, such as energy consumption, staffing costs, or
resource utilization.
Integrating the optimization models into the scheduling process offers a valuable oppor­
tunity to save time and increase efficiency. By automating schedule generation based
on demand and constraints, the models can support faster, more informed planning de­
cisions and improve overall production performance. This thesis has demonstrated that
optimization methods can be successfully applied to real­world production scheduling in
the beverage industry. Using a structured approach, the project has delivered Ölgerðin a
range of practical insights and tested tools that support its move toward a more efficient
production setup. The models developed are adaptable and can be expanded further,
offering a solid foundation for future improvements as the company continues to evolve.
50
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[1]
NetSuite. What Is Production Planning? Accessed: Jan. 31, 2025. 2023. url: https:
//www.netsuite.com/portal/resource/articles/inventory- management/production-
planning.shtml.
[2]
Ölgerðin Egill Skallagrímsson. Um Ölgerðina. Accessed: Jan. 7, 2025. 2025. url:
https://www.olgerdin.is/um-olgerdina.
[3]
Ölgerðin production planning team and CTO. Information meeting. Personal com­
munication. Jan. 2025.
[4]
Ölgerðin Egill Skallagrímsson hf. Annual Report 2023­2024. Available from Ölgerðin’s
official documents. 2024.
[5]
Ölgerðin Egill Skallagrímsson hf. Sustainability Report 2023. Available from Öl­
gerðin’s official sustainability disclosures. 2023.
[6]
Ölgerðin production planning team and CTO. New Production Hall Discussion. Per­
sonal communication. Feb. 2025.
[7]
Georgios P. Georgiadis, Apostolos P. Elekidis, and Michael C. Georgiadis. “Opti­
mal production planning and scheduling in breweries”. In: Food and Bioproducts
Processing 125 (2021), pp. 204–221. doi: 10.1016/j.fbp.2020.11.008. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.fbp.2020.11.008.
[8]
J Lohmer and R Lasch. “Production planning and scheduling in multi­factory produc­
tion networks: a systematic literature review”. In: International Journal of Production
Research 59.7 (2021), pp. 2028–2054.
[9]
L Hervert­Escobar and JF Lopez­Perez. “Production planning and scheduling opti­
mization model: a case study for a glass container company”. In: Annals of Opera­
tions Research 286 (2020), pp. 529–543.
[10]
Telma Dögg Pálsdóttir. Optimization of production schedules for a food production
company. Master’s thesis, Reykjavík University. Feb. 2020.
[11]
KYP Martinez, EAV Toso, and R Morabito. “Production planning in the molded pulp
packaging industry”. In: Computers & Industrial Engineering 98 (2016), pp. 554–
566.
[12]
Alexandre Bergel. “The Traveling Salesman Problem”. In: Agile Artificial Intelligence
in Pharo: Implementing Neural Networks, Genetic Algorithms, and Neuroevolution.
Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2020, pp. 209–225. isbn: 978­1­4842­5384­7. doi: 10.1007/
978-1-4842-5384-7_10. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-5384-7_10.
[13]
Soufia Benhida and Ahmed Mir. “Generating subtour elimination constraints for the
Traveling Salesman Problem”. In: IOSR Journal of Engineering 8.7 (2018), pp. 17–
21.
[14]
Rhett Wilfahrt and Sangho Kim. “Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)”. In: Encyclo­
pedia of GIS. Ed. by Shashi Shekhar and Hui Xiong. Springer International Publish­
ing, 2016, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-23519-6_1406-2. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-23519-6_1406-2.
[15]
Karla L Hoffman, Manfred Padberg, Giovanni Rinaldi, et al. “Traveling salesman
problem”. In: Encyclopedia of operations research and management science 1 (2013),
pp. 1573–1578.
[16]
Hegan Xiong et al. “A survey of job shop scheduling problem: The types and mod­
els”. In: Computers & Operations Research 142 (2022), p. 105731. doi: 10.1016/j.
cor.2022.105731. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2022.105731.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
51
==PAGE:61==
[17]
Stéphane Dauzère­Pérès et al. “The flexible job shop scheduling problem: A re­
view”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 314.2 (2024), pp. 409–432.
issn: 0377­2217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2023.05.017. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S037722172300382X.
[18]
Tobias Bär, Marco J. Land, and J. C. Wortmann. Requirements for Production Schedul­
ing in Flexible Manufacturing. IFAC­PapersOnLine, Volume 55, Issue 10, Pages
2042–2047. 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2022.10.083.
[19]
Stéphane Dauzère­Pérès et al. “The Flexible Job Shop Scheduling Problem: A Re­
view”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 314 (2024), pp. 409–432. doi:
10.1016/j.ejor.2023.05.017.
[20]
Munther H. Abed and Mohd Nizam Mohmad Kahar. “Review on Unrelated Parallel
Machine Scheduling Problem with Additional Resources”. In: Iraqi Journal for Com­
puter Science and Mathematics 4.2 (2023), pp. 224–237. doi: 10.52866/ijcsm.2023.
02.02.020. url: https://ijcsm.researchcommons.org/ijcsm/vol4/iss2/20.
[21]
Eman Azab et al. Employing Genetic Algorithm and Discrete Event Simulation for
Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling Problem. 2021 International Conference on Com­
putational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI). 2021. doi: 10 . 1109 /
CSCI54926.2021.00165.
[22]
M. Vigneshwaran et al. “Multi Objective Flexible Jobshop Scheduling Problem us­
ing Heuristic Algorithm”. In: International Journal of Innovative Technology and Ex­
ploring Engineering (IJITEE) 9.4 (2020), pp. 595–598. doi: 10.35940/ijitee.D9061.
029420.
[23]
Maximilian Fickert. “A Novel Lookahead Strategy for Delete Relaxation Heuristics
in Greedy Best­First Search”. In: Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS). Accessed: May 15, 2025. AAAI
Press, 2020, pp. 119–123. url: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICAPS/article/view/
6652.
[24]
Wojciech Bożejko, Stanisław Gnatowski, and Jacek Pempera. “Lookahead Based
Approach for Energy­Efficient Job Shop Scheduling Problem”. In: Computer Sci­
ence and its Applications. Ed. by Jong Hyun Kim and Wen Yu Fang. Berlin, Hei­
delberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 189–197. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
38577-3_19. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-38577-3_19.
[25]
Vincent Vidal. “A Lookahead Strategy for Heuristic Search Planning”. In: Proceed­
ings of the 14th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling
(ICAPS). Accessed: May 15, 2025. AAAI Press, 2004, pp. 150–159. url: https://
cdn.aaai.org/ICAPS/2004/ICAPS04-020.pdf.
[26]
Holden Milne et al. Flexible Job­Shop Scheduling with Changeover Priorities. Ma­
chine Learning, Optimization, and Data Science, LOD 2021, Lecture Notes in Com­
puter Science, vol 13163. 2021. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-95467-3_44.
[27]
Juan L. Andrade­Pineda, Juan Marín­Gómez, and William J. Guerrero. Scheduling
a dual­resource flexible job shop with makespan and due date­related criteria. Com­
puters Industrial Engineering, Volume 149, 106811. 2020. doi: 10.1007/s10479-019-
03196-0.
[28]
Leonardo Maschio. “Production Scheduling Optimization: A Case Study from the
Alcohol Industry”. Master’s Thesis. MA thesis. Venice, Italy: University of Venice,
2023.
[29]
ScienceDirect. Optimization Problem ­ an overview | ScienceDirect Topics. Accessed:
Jan. 24, 2025. 2025. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/
optimization-problem.
52
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:62==
[30]
NEOS Guide. Types of Optimization Problems. Accessed: Jan. 24, 2025. 2025. url:
https://neos-guide.org/guide/types/.
[31]
Ölgerðin production planning team and CTO. Validation meeting notes. Personal
communication. May 2025.
[32]
MBL.is. Verja einum milljarði í markaðssetningu Collab. Accessed: May 31, 2025.
2025. url: https://www.mbl.is/vidskipti/frettir/2025/05/20/verja_1_milljardi_i_
markadssetningu_collab/.
[33]
Viðskiptablaðið. Ölgerðin kaupir allt hlutafé Ankra ehf. Accessed: May 20, 2025.
2024. url: https://vb.is/frettir/olgerdin-kaupir-allt-hlutafe-ankra-ehf/.
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
53
==PAGE:63==
54
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:64==
A
Appendix
A.1
Demand Tables
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
55
==PAGE:65==
Table A.1: Weekly Demand per BRAK
Product
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
BRAK 1
144000
96000
192000
161280
149868
149868
176508
BRAK 2
617112
192000
576000
BRAK 3
310872
157764
104112
208224
120000
268560
125328
269520
204000
120000
BRAK 4
108000
624000
360000
192000
BRAK 5
100008
BRAK 6
100008
204096
BRAK 7
BRAK 8
100008
156000
BRAK 9
617112
360000
BRAK 10
120000
BRAK 11
120000
BRAK 12
123840
123840
154800
123840
BRAK 13
495360
154800
309600
371520
371520
650160
185760
185760
340560
BRAK 14
BRAK 15
154800
154800
BRAK 16
BRAK 17
92880
371520
154800
123840
123840
BRAK 18
185760
92880
92880
BRAK 19
BRAK 20
BRAK 21
58920
58920
BRAK 22
BRAK 23
58920
117840
58920
58920
BRAK 24
117840
BRAK 25
235680
176760
BRAK 26
58920
117840
BRAK 27
117840
58920
58920
58920
58920
117840
56
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:66==
Product
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
BRAK 28
58920
58920
117840
58920
BRAK 29
BRAK 30
BRAK 31
117840
58920
176760
176760
117840
BRAK 32
BRAK 33
58920
BRAK 34
BRAK 35
48000
BRAK 36
36000
BRAK 37
120000
120000
BRAK 38
60000
BRAK 39
BRAK 40
60000
BRAK 41
120000
144000
192000
142800
BRAK 42
BRAK 43
120000
148008
148008
102000
142800
168000
BRAK 44
BRAK 45
BRAK 46
BRAK 47
168000
144000
BRAK 48
202104
BRAK 49
84000
63648
63648
BRAK 50
105000
BRAK 51
BRAK 52
69396
66672
100008
52224
BRAK 53
26274
77496
77496
97524
BRAK 54
84744
BRAK 55
108000
207204
BRAK 56
53952
53952
53592
64260
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
57
==PAGE:67==
Product
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
BRAK 57
71184
88980
71184
BRAK 58
127248
63624
BRAK 59
42000
BRAK 60
219192
210000
BRAK 61
151536
151536
151536
189420
194400
BRAK 62
149976
174972
24996
124980
167676
BRAK 63
BRAK 64
BRAK 65
BRAK 66
BRAK 67
86400
72000
BRAK 68
BRAK 69
61920
G&C 1
24000
46008
50400
58560
G&C 2
36000
79200
G&C 3
30300
30300
G&C 4
30960
30960
30960
G&C 5
20448
20448
40896
G&C 6
30960
61920
61920
G&C 7
20448
20448
G&C 8
16344
G&C 9
G&C 10
30960
G&C 11
24000
48000
24000
48000
G&C 12
48000
48000
G&C 13
G&C 14
36000
45600
G&C 15
35760
35760
G&C 16
15960
36000
28800
58
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:68==
Product
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
G&C 17
G&C 18
58200
G&C 19
58200
142800
79992
G&C 20
23000
45460
45460
27264
27264
G&C 21
19200
23000
45460
45460
G&C 22
5000
20000
5000
14780
23640
G&C 23
42000
9300
38712
32256
28000
G&C 24
28800
15000
28800
G&C 25
G&C 26
G&C 27
G&C 28
G&C 29
48490
143700
22950
G&C 30
45460
63648
G&C 31
G&C 32
30000
18648
G&C 33
8400
9600
14400
30000
G&C 34
9600
12600
12600
G&C 35
G&C 36
G&C 37
G&C 38
G&C 39
20400
12000
24000
61992
61992
24000
61992
G&C 40
23328
24000
108000
PET 1
14976
7488
7488
PET 2
51192
34128
51192
34128
51192
66000
PET 3
17064
24000
34128
PET 4
16782
19584
PET 5
42000
42000
42000
48000
48000
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
59
==PAGE:69==
Product
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
PET 6
22000
14000
14000
18000
PET 7
19980
19980
39960
PET 8
48000
40800
52800
45600
PET 9
18000
9920
16000
16000
PET 10
33600
30000
30000
36000
30000
PET 11
14000
12000
18000
PET 12
26400
19200
PET 13
31200
21600
24000
21600
21600
PET 14
36000
33600
36000
21600
PET 15
12800
16000
11200
PET 16
14400
PET 17
62400
42000
36000
30000
PET 18
20000
16000
12000
PET 19
21600
21600
19200
PET 20
6400
5600
PET 21
25080
25080
PET 22
20436
40872
40872
PET 23
10220
10220
20440
20440
PET 24
61308
61308
81744
81744
61308
40896
40872
81744
81744
PET 25
51100
30660
30660
30660
30660
30660
56212
40880
30664
PET 26
40872
20436
PET 27
20436
40872
40872
40872
PET 28
10220
10220
10220
14060
15332
10220
10220
PET 29
20436
20436
PET 30
BOB 1
9720
8640
BOB 2
4320
4320
8640
5400
8640
6048
9720
9720
9720
BOB 3
BOB 4
5400
5400
5400
10800
5400
5400
5400
60
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:70==
Product
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
BOB 5
BOB 6
BOB 7
BOB 8
5400
5400
5400
10800
BOB 9
15120
9720
9720
19440
9720
9720
19440
BOB 10
BOB 11
BOB 12
BOB 13
4356
BOB 14
4536
4536
BOB 15
BOB 16
BOB 17
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
61
==PAGE:71==
A.2
Current Setup ­ Week Plan
Table A.2: BOB ­ Current Schedule
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Product BOB 2
9.720
00:00
00:00
00:00
Day 2
Product BOB 4
5.400
00:00
00:00
00:00
Product BOB 1
8.640
00:00
00:00
00:00
Day 3
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Product BOB 9
9.720
00:00
00:00
00:00
Day 4
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Product BOB 14
4.536
00:00
00:00
00:00
Table A.3: Brák – Current Schedule
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 3
269.520
08:00
15:00
07:00
CIP Cold water – Appr. 1 hr
15:00
16:00
01:00
Product BRAK 43
102.000
16:00
19:00
03:00
CIP Hot water – Appr. 2 hrs (with paster, +1 hr)
19:00
21:00
02:00
Product BRAK 17
123.840
21:00
00:30
03:30
CIP Cold water – Appr. 1 hr
00:30
01:30
01:00
Day 2
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 60
210.000
08:00
18:00
10:00
Cold water rinse – Appr. 0.5 hr
18:00
18:30
00:30
Product BRAK 62
124.980
18:30
22:30
04:00
Changeover – Appr. 0.5 hr
22:30
23:00
00:30
Product BRAK 61
189.420
23:00
01:30
02:30
CIP Caustic – Appr. 3 hrs (with paster, +1 hr)
01:30
04:30
03:00
Day 3
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 13
185.760
08:00
18:00
10:00
CIP Cold water – Appr. 1 hr
18:00
19:00
01:00
Product BRAK 28
117.840
19:00
21:00
02:00
Changeover – Appr. 1 hr (12 pk / 6 pk)
21:00
22:00
01:00
Product BRAK 27
58.920
22:00
00:00
02:00
CIP Caustic – Appr. 3 hrs (with paster, +1 hr)
00:00
03:00
03:00
Day 4
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 47
168.000
08:00
12:30
04:30
Continued on next page
62
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:72==
Table A.3 – Continued from previous page
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
CIP Hot water – Appr. 2 hrs (with paster, +1 hr)
12:30
14:30
02:00
Product BRAK 26
117.840
14:30
17:30
03:00
CIP Cold water – Appr. 1 hr
17:30
18:30
01:00
Product BRAK 31
176.760
18:30
21:30
03:00
CIP Caustic – Appr. 3 hrs (with paster, +1 hr)
21:30
00:30
03:00
Product BRAK 15
154.800
00:30
01:30
01:00
Day 5
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 15
—
08:00
11:00
03:00
CIP Hot water – Appr. 2 hrs (with paster, +1 hr)
—
11:00
13:00
02:00
Product BRAK 55
207.204
13:00
20:00
07:00
Table A.4: G&D – Current Schedule
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Startup time
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 29
22.950
07:30
10:00
02:30
Hot/Cold water rinse
10:00
10:30
00:30
Product G&D 6
61.920
10:30
14:30
04:00
Hot/Cold water rinse
14:30
15:00
00:30
Product G&D 33
30.000
15:00
15:30
00:30
Day 2
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product G&D 33
–
07:30
10:00
02:30
Hot/Cold water rinse
10:00
10:30
00:30
Product G&D 34
12.600
10:30
12:00
01:30
Hot/Cold water rinse
12:00
12:30
00:30
Product G&D 19
79.992
12:30
15:30
03:00
Day 3
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product G&D 19
–
07:30
11:30
04:00
Hot/Cold water rinse
11:30
12:00
00:30
Product G&D 16
28.800
12:00
14:00
02:00
Hot/Cold water rinse
14:00
14:30
00:30
Product G&D 39
24.000
14:30
15:30
01:00
Day 4
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product G&D 39
–
07:30
08:30
01:00
Hot/Cold water rinse
08:30
09:00
00:30
Product G&D 40
108.000
09:00
15:30
06:30
Day 5
Startup time
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product G&D 40
–
07:30
10:00
02:30
Hot/Cold water rinse
10:00
10:30
00:30
Product G&D 20
27.264
10:30
13:00
02:30
Hot/Cold water rinse
13:00
13:30
00:30
Continued on next page
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
63
==PAGE:73==
Table A.4 – Continued from previous page
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Product G&D 32
18.648
13:30
15:00
01:30
Table A.5: PET ­ Current Schedule
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
CIP
23:30
04:00
04:30
Product PET 2
51.192
09:00
15:30
06:30
Changeover
15:30
16:30
01:00
Product PET 3
34.128
16:30
21:00
04:30
Changeover
21:00
22:00
01:00
Product PET 12
19.200
22:00
00:00
02:00
Day 2
Product PET 12
00:00
00:30
00:30
CIP
00:30
03:30
03:00
Product PET 25
56.212
03:30
17:00
13:30
Hot water rinse
17:00
17:30
00:30
Product PET 28
15.332
17:30
21:00
03:30
Hot water rinse
21:00
21:30
00:30
Product PET 27
40.872
21:30
00:00
02:30
Day 3
Product PET 27
00:00
03:00
03:00
CIP
03:00
06:00
03:00
Product PET 24
40.872
06:00
11:30
05:30
Hot water rinse
11:30
12:30
01:00
Product PET 10
36.000
12:30
17:00
04:30
Cold water rinse
17:00
17:30
00:30
Product PET 13
21.600
17:30
20:30
03:00
Cold water rinse
20:30
21:30
01:00
Product PET 22
40.872
21:30
00:00
02:30
Day 4
Product PET 22
00:00
03:00
03:00
Hot water rinse
03:00
03:30
00:30
Product PET 26
20.436
03:30
06:30
03:00
Hot water rinse
06:30
07:00
00:30
Product PET 20
5.600
07:00
08:30
01:30
CIP
08:30
11:30
03:00
Product PET 11
18.000
11:30
15:30
04:00
64
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:74==
A.3
Optimization of current model ­ Week Plan
Table A.6: Weeks Plan in BOB ­ Optimization of current setup
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Startup time
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product BOB 4
5 400
07:30
09:18
01:48
Blow buffer
09:18
09:33
00:15
Product BOB 9
9 720
09:33
12:47
03:14
Hot water rinsing (prestart)
12:47
13:17
00:30
Product BOB 2
6 630
13:17
15:30
02:13
Day 2
Startup time
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product BOB 2
3 090
07:30
08:32
01:02
Blow buffer
08:32
08:47
00:15
Product BOB 1
8 640
08:47
11:40
02:53
Blow buffer
11:40
11:55
00:15
Product BOB 14
4 536
11:55
13:25
01:30
Table A.7: Weeks Plan in Brák ­ optimization of current setup
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Startup time
Startup
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 13
185 760
08:00
12:08
04:08
No cleaning required
12:08
12:08
00:00
Product BRAK 17
123 840
12:08
14:53
02:45
CIP Cold water
14:53
15:53
01:00
Product BRAK 43
102 000
15:53
18:09
02:16
CIP Cold water
18:09
19:09
01:00
Product BRAK 15
154 800
19:09
22:35
03:26
CIP Hot water
22:35
00:35
02:00
Day 2
Startup time
Startup
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 3
269 520
08:00
13:59
05:59
CIP Cold water
13:59
14:59
01:00
Product BRAK 60
210 000
14:59
19:39
04:40
Cold water rinse
19:39
20:09
00:30
Product BRAK 55
120 384
20:09
23:30
03:21
Day 3
Startup time
Startup
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 55
86 820
08:00
10:25
02:25
Cold water rinse
10:25
10:55
00:30
Product BRAK 62
124 980
10:55
14:23
03:28
Cold water rinse
14:23
14:53
00:30
Product BRAK 61
189 420
14:53
19:06
04:13
Continued on next page
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
65
==PAGE:75==
Table A.7 – Continued from previous page
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
CIP Hot water
19:06
21:06
02:00
Product BRAK 47
108 330
21:06
23:30
02:24
Day 4
Startup time
Startup
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 47
59 670
08:00
09:20
01:20
CIP Hot water
09:20
11:20
02:00
Product BRAK 26
117 840
11:20
13:57
02:37
CIP Cold water
13:57
14:57
01:00
Product BRAK 27
58 920
14:57
16:15
01:18
CIP Cold water
16:15
17:15
01:00
Product BRAK 28
117 840
17:15
19:52
02:37
CIP Cold water
19:52
20:52
01:00
Product BRAK 31
118 230
20:52
23:30
02:38
Day 5
Startup time
Startup
07:30
08:00
00:30
Product BRAK 31
58 530
08:00
09:18
01:18
Table A.8: Weeks Plan in G&D ­ optimization of current setup
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Startup time
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 16
28 800
07:30
09:22
01:52
hot/cold water rinse
09:22
09:52
00:30
Product G&D 29
22 950
09:52
11:22
01:30
hot/cold water rinse
11:22
11:52
00:30
Product G&D 39
24 000
11:52
13:26
01:34
hot/cold water rinse
13:26
13:56
00:30
Product G&D 40
24 090
13:56
15:30
01:34
Day 2
Startup time
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 40
83 910
07:30
12:58
05:28
hot/cold water rinse
12:58
13:28
00:30
Product G&D 20
27 264
13:28
15:14
01:46
hot/cold water rinse
15:14
15:44
00:30
Day 3
Startup time
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 19
79 992
07:30
12:42
05:12
hot/cold water rinse
12:42
13:12
00:30
Product G&D 33
30 000
13:12
15:10
01:58
hot/cold water rinse
15:10
15:40
00:30
Day 4
Startup time
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 34
12 600
07:30
09:26
01:56
hot/cold water rinse
09:26
09:56
00:30
Product G&D 32
18 648
09:56
11:09
01:13
hot/cold water rinse
11:09
11:39
00:30
Continued on next page
66
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:76==
Table A.8 – Continued from previous page
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Product G&D 6
59 051
11:39
15:30
03:51
Day 5
Startup time
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 6
2 869
07:30
07:41
00:11
Table A.9: Weeks Plan in PET ­ Optimization of current setup
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Startup time
Startup
00:00
00:30
00:30
Product PET 2
51 192
00:30
05:04
04:34
hot water rinse
05:04
06:04
01:00
Product PET 3
34 128
06:04
09:07
03:03
no cleaning required
09:07
09:07
00:00
Product PET 10
36 000
09:07
12:20
03:13
cold water rinse
12:20
12:50
00:30
Product PET 13
21 600
12:50
14:46
01:56
cold water rinse
14:46
15:16
00:30
Product PET 28
15 332
15:16
16:38
01:22
cold water rinse
16:38
17:08
00:30
Product PET 26
20 436
17:08
18:57
01:49
hot water rinse
18:57
19:57
01:00
Product PET 25
43 639
19:57
24:00
04:03
Day 2
Startup time
Startup
00:00
00:30
00:30
Product PET 25
12 573
00:30
01:49
01:19
changeover
01:49
02:49
01:00
Product PET 27
40 872
02:49
06:28
03:39
hot water rinse
06:28
07:28
01:00
Product PET 24
40 872
07:28
11:06
03:38
changeover
11:06
12:06
01:00
Product PET 20
5 600
12:06
12:41
00:35
hot water rinse
12:41
13:41
01:00
Product PET 22
40 872
13:41
17:20
03:39
hot water rinse
17:20
18:20
01:00
Product PET 11
18 000
18:20
20:13
01:53
changeover
20:13
21:13
01:00
Product PET 12
19 200
21:13
22:56
01:43
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
67
==PAGE:77==
A.4
Proposed non ­ flexible ­ Week Plan
Table A.10: A weeks plan in G&D ­ Proposed ­ nonflexible setup
Product name
Units
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 34
12 600
07:30
08:12
00:42
hot/cold water rinse
08:12
08:42
00:30
Product BOB 4
5 400
08:42
09:09
00:27
hot/cold water rinse
09:09
09:39
00:30
Product BOB 9
9 720
09:39
10:28
00:49
hot/cold water rinse
10:28
10:58
00:30
Product BOB 14
4 536
10:58
11:20
00:22
hot/cold water rinse
11:20
11:50
00:30
Product G&D 39
24 000
11:50
12:48
00:58
hot/cold water rinse
12:48
13:18
00:30
Product G&D 40
55 050
13:18
15:30
02:12
Day 2
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 40
52 950
07:30
09:37
02:07
hot/cold water rinse
09:37
10:07
00:30
Product BOB 1
8 640
10:07
10:50
00:43
hot/cold water rinse
10:50
11:20
00:30
Product BOB 2
9 720
11:20
12:09
00:49
hot/cold water rinse
12:09
12:39
00:30
Product G&D 33
30 000
12:39
13:51
01:12
hot/cold water rinse
13:51
14:21
00:30
Product G&D 19
28 800
14:21
15:30
01:09
Day 3
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 19
51 192
07:30
09:33
02:03
hot/cold water rinse
09:33
10:03
00:30
Product G&D 20
27 264
10:03
11:08
01:05
hot/cold water rinse
11:08
11:38
00:30
Product G&D 32
18 648
11:38
12:23
00:45
hot/cold water rinse
12:23
12:53
00:30
Product G&D 29
22 950
12:53
13:48
00:55
hot/cold water rinse
13:48
14:18
00:30
Product G&D 16
28 800
14:18
15:27
01:09
hot/cold water rinse
15:27
15:57
00:30
Day 4
Startup
07:00
07:30
00:30
Product G&D 6
61 920
07:30
09:59
02:29
68
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:78==
A.5
Proposed Setup ­ Week Plan
Table A.11: A week’s schedule in Brák ­ Proposed setup
Product / Step
Units
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Product BRAK 3
269 520
08:00
13:59
05:59
CIP Cold water
13:59
14:59
01:00
Product BRAK 60
210 000
14:59
19:39
04:40
Cold water rinse
19:39
20:09
00:30
Product G&D 20
27 264
20:09
20:45
00:36
CIP Hot water
20:45
22:45
02:00
Product BRAK 31
33 750
22:45
23:30
00:45
Day 2
Product BRAK 31
143 010
08:00
11:11
03:11
CIP Hot water
11:11
13:11
02:00
Product BRAK 26
117 840
13:11
15:48
02:37
CIP Cold water
15:48
16:48
01:00
Product BRAK 27
58 920
16:48
18:07
01:19
CIP Cold water
18:07
19:07
01:00
Product BRAK 28
117 840
19:07
21:44
02:37
CIP Caustic
21:44
00:44
03:00
Day 3
Product BRAK 43
102 000
08:00
10:16
02:16
CIP Cold water
10:16
11:16
01:00
Product G&D 39
108 000
11:16
13:40
02:24
CIP Hot water
13:40
15:40
02:00
Product BRAK 61
189 420
15:40
19:53
04:13
Size changeover
19:53
20:23
00:30
Product BRAK 62
112 200
20:23
23:30
03:07
Day 4
Product BRAK 62
12 780
08:00
08:21
00:21
CIP Hot water
08:21
10:21
02:00
Product BRAK 47
168 000
10:21
14:05
03:44
CIP Hot water
14:05
16:05
02:00
Product BRAK 13
185 760
16:05
20:13
04:08
CIP Cold water
20:13
21:13
01:00
Product BRAK 55
82 200
21:13
23:30
02:17
Day 5
Product BRAK 55
125 004
08:00
11:28
03:28
Table A.12: A week’s plan in G&D ­ Proposed setup
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Product BRAK 42
28 800
07:30
09:06
01:36
CIP Hot water
09:06
09:36
00:30
Product G&D 19
79 992
09:36
12:48
03:12
CIP Hot water
12:48
13:18
00:30
Product G&D 29
22 950
13:18
14:13
00:55
Continued on next page
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
69
==PAGE:79==
Table A.12 – Continued from previous page
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
CIP Hot water
14:13
14:43
00:30
Product G&D 33
19 583
14:43
15:30
00:47
Day 2
Product G&D 33
10 417
07:30
07:55
00:25
CIP Hot water
07:55
08:25
00:30
Product G&D 32
18 648
08:25
09:10
00:45
CIP Hot water
09:10
09:40
00:30
Product G&D 34
12 600
09:40
10:22
00:42
CIP Caustic
10:22
12:22
02:00
Product BRAK 17
78 333
12:22
15:30
03:08
Day 3
Product BRAK 17
45 507
07:30
09:19
01:49
CIP Hot water
09:19
09:49
00:30
Product BRAK 15
142 083
09:49
15:30
05:41
Day 4
Product BRAK 15
74 637
07:30
10:29
02:59
CIP Hot water
10:29
10:59
00:30
Product G&D 39
24 000
10:59
11:57
00:58
CIP Hot water
11:57
12:27
00:30
Product BOB 1
8 640
12:27
13:10
00:43
Cold water rinse
13:10
13:40
00:30
Product BOB 2
9 720
13:40
14:29
00:49
Cold water rinse
14:29
14:59
00:30
Product BOB 4
5 400
14:59
15:26
00:27
Cold water rinse
15:26
15:56
00:30
Day 5
Product BOB 9
9 720
07:30
08:19
00:49
Cold water rinse
08:19
08:49
00:30
Product BOB 14
4 536
08:49
09:12
00:23
70
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:80==
A.6
Flexible Setup ­ Week Plan
Table A.13: A week’s plan in Brák ­ Flexible setup
Product / Step
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Product BRAK 43
102000
08:00
10:16
02:16
CIP Hot water
10:16
12:16
02:00
Product PET 26
20436
12:16
12:43
00:27
CIP Caustic
12:43
15:43
03:00
Product PET 2
51192
15:43
16:51
01:08
Changeover
16:51
17:21
00:30
Product BRAK 3
269520
17:21
23:20
05:59
CIP Hot water
23:20
01:20
02:00
Day 2
Product BRAK 13
185760
08:00
12:08
04:08
CIP Cold water
12:08
13:08
01:00
Product BRAK 55
207204
13:08
18:53
05:45
CIP Hot water
18:53
20:53
02:00
Product BRAK 26
117840
20:53
23:30
02:37
CIP Caustic
23:30
02:30
03:00
Day 3
Product G&D 40
108000
08:00
10:24
02:24
CIP Hot water
10:24
12:24
02:00
Product BRAK 15
216720
12:24
17:13
04:49
CIP Hot water
17:13
19:13
02:00
Product BRAK 31
176760
19:13
23:09
03:56
CIP Caustic
23:09
02:09
03:00
Day 4
Product BRAK 47
168000
08:00
11:44
03:44
CIP Hot water
11:44
13:44
02:00
Product PET 25
56212
13:44
15:18
01:34
Table A.14: A week’s plan in G&D ­ Flexible setup
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Product PET 27
40872
07:30
09:08
01:38
CIP Hot water
09:08
09:38
00:30
Product PET 12
19200
09:38
10:24
00:46
CIP Caustic
10:24
12:24
02:00
Product G&D 33
30000
12:24
13:36
01:12
CIP Hot water
13:36
14:06
00:30
Product G&D 32
22950
14:06
15:01
00:55
CIP Hot water
15:01
15:31
00:30
Day 2
Product BRAK 27
58920
07:30
09:51
02:21
CIP Cold water
09:51
10:21
00:30
Product BRAK 28
117840
10:21
15:04
04:43
Continued on next page
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
71
==PAGE:81==
Table A.14 – Continued from previous page
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
CIP Caustic
15:04
17:04
02:00
Day 3
Product BRAK 42
28800
07:30
09:06
01:36
CIP Hot water
09:06
09:36
00:30
Product G&D 34
18648
09:36
10:21
00:45
CIP Hot water
10:21
10:51
00:30
Product PET 13
21600
10:51
11:43
00:52
CIP Hot water
11:43
12:13
00:30
Product BRAK 61
82083
12:13
15:30
03:17
Day 4
Product BRAK 61
107337
07:30
11:48
04:18
CIP Hot water
11:48
12:18
00:30
Product G&D 39
24000
12:18
13:16
00:58
CIP Hot water
13:16
13:46
00:30
Product PET 24
40872
13:46
15:24
01:38
Table A.15: A week’s plan in PET ­ Flexible setup
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Day 1
Product PET 22
40872
00:00
03:39
03:39
CIP Cold water
03:39
04:09
00:30
Product G&D 19
79992
04:09
11:18
07:09
CIP Caustic
11:18
14:18
03:00
Product BRAK 17
108640
14:18
00:00
09:42
Day 2
Product BRAK 17
15200
00:00
01:21
01:21
CIP Cold water
01:21
01:51
00:30
Product BRAK 60
210000
01:51
20:36
18:45
Cold water rinse
20:36
21:06
00:30
Product G&D 20
27264
21:06
23:32
02:26
CIP Hot water
23:32
00:32
01:00
Day 3
Product PET 28
15332
00:32
02:08
01:36
CIP Cold water
02:08
02:38
00:30
Product PET 20
5600
02:38
03:13
00:35
CIP Hot water
03:13
04:13
01:00
Product BOB 1
8640
04:13
04:56
00:43
Cold water rinse
04:56
05:26
00:30
Product BOB 4
5400
05:26
05:53
00:27
CIP Hot water
05:53
06:53
01:00
Product G&D 34
12600
06:53
08:12
01:19
CIP Hot water
08:12
09:12
01:00
Product BRAK 62
124980
09:12
22:13
13:01
CIP Caustic
22:13
01:13
03:00
Day 4
Continued on next page
72
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
==PAGE:82==
Table A.15 – Continued from previous page
Product name
Pieces
Start
End
Time
Product PET 3
34128
01:13
04:16
03:03
Cold water rinse
04:16
04:46
00:30
Product PET 10
36000
04:46
07:59
03:13
Cold water rinse
07:59
08:29
00:30
Product PET 11
18000
08:29
10:21
01:52
CIP Hot water
10:21
11:21
01:00
Product BOB 2
9720
11:21
12:10
00:49
Cold water rinse
12:10
12:40
00:30
Product BOB 9
9720
12:40
13:29
00:49
Cold water rinse
13:29
13:59
00:30
Product BOB 14
4536
13:59
14:22
00:23
Optimized Planning of Production Schedules at Ölgerðin
73
==PAGE:83==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
