==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Design and Innovation
Improving and Innovating a User Experience-
Focused Self-Tracking System for Mental Health
Therapy
Yue Liu(s232190)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Mental health disorders such as anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress disor-
der (PTSD), to name a few, affect a large number of patients worldwide. Symptom
tracking is widely used in psychotherapy to help patients improve self-awareness and
as an important basis for communication between patients and therapists. However,
traditional tracking methods usually rely on recall, which is susceptible to subjective
bias and diﬀicult to truly reflect the individual’s mood fluctuation process. In recent
years, wearable self-tracking devices represented by One Button Tracker (OBT) have
provided new ideas for immediate recording in psychotherapy, eliminating recall bias.
However, the existing products still have deficiencies in emotional connection, aes-
thetics and user experience, which make it diﬀicult to meet the diverse needs of users
in different emotional states and life scenarios.
This project aims to “improve the user experience of self-tracking system in psy-
chotherapy”, and combines the human-centered design methodology to explore and
enhance the design around the user’s way of use, the use of the scene and the emotional
relationship. The project proposes a modular system consisting of a unified core mod-
ule and an interchangeable shell, which allows users to choose the appropriate form
and carrier according to their individual emotional and usage needs, and provides the
possibility of emotional connection between the user and the device. Through user
and therapeutic process research and analysis, interaction analysis, prototype testing
and design, the project finally constructed three representative series for display: the
Seed Series, which emphasizes natural soothing and the symbol of “new life”; the
Card Series, which is suitable for social environments; and the Body Extension Se-
ries, which incorporates body perception and continuous companionship. The design
meets the needs of the mental health and therapy community.
The design meets the needs of individualized experiences in the field of mental health
and therapy, and also provides a possible systematic thinking for the design of emo-
tional wearable devices in the future.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark to fulfill the requirements for acquir-
ing a Master’s Degree in engineering for the Design and Innovation. The project
consists of 30 ECTS and started on January 31rd, 2025, and was handed in on June
30th, 2025.
Kongens Lyngby, June 30, 2025
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor most of all for the encouragement and
very timely guidance and feedback he gave me during the course of the project. His
enthusiasm and professionalism for the project infected me and greatly helped me to
be firm in my beliefs and utilize my strengths in the design process. Then, I would like
to thank all the professors in the Design and Innovation program for teaching me many
practical design concepts as well as innovative design methods during my two years
of study, which enabled me to apply all kinds of design knowledge and complete this
graduation project independently. Finally, I would like to thank Technical University
of Denmark for providing me with excellent research conditions, a strong learning
environment and a relaxed living atmosphere, which allowed me to be exposed to
leading international research and to understand design from a broader academic and
social perspective.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Current product deficiencies and issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Motivations and challenges of project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Design goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Report structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.6
Use of AI tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Self-tracking research review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Applications of wearable design in psychotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Analysis of wearable devices related to psychological and emotional
accompaniment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Nuna mood tracking pendant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Friend AI necklace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.3
Mooda app for recording moods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.4
Squeeze the moment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
OBT device and related design research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Research on emotional design and human-machine emotional connection
9
3
Research and Analysis
11
3.1
User research and demand analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Online research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Literature research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
OBT usage experience and subjective feeling records . . . . . .
14
3.2
Research on the needs of different mental illnesses
. . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
The use process of interaction with psychotherapists . . . . . . . . . .
15
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.4
User persona
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Problem analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5.1
Problem expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5.2
Opportunity analysis and evaluation matrix . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5.3
Problem definition and design direction
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Design Approach and Conceptual Framework
19
4.1
Design process and approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Design requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Brainstorming and sketches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.1
Concept sketches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.2
Requirements and clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.3
Criteria and top 3 ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Core concept system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Serialization design logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.6
Design presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6.1
Seed series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6.2
Card series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6.3
Body extension series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Prototyping, Prototype Exploration and Modeling
31
5.1
Clay modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
3D printed modeling and structural experimentation . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Arduino function modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Evaluation
39
6.1
Assessment methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Test results and findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Preliminary assessment findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Limitations and follow-up plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Discussion
45
7.1
The role of serialized design in solving users’ differentiated needs . . .
45
7.2
Diﬀiculties and compromises in design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.3
Whether emotional connection can really be established by form and
usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.4
Is user participation in choice more important than strong settings?
.
47
8
Future Work
49
8.1
Research on user feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.2
Series extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.3
Optimization of structure and modular replacement parts, exploration
of ways to meet different user needs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9
Conclusion
53
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
A Appendix A: Visualization of My Data from OBT for a Week
55
B Appendix B: Arduino Functional Prototype Code
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Research background
In recent years, mental health disorders have affected a growing number of patients
worldwide and have been gaining wider attention. In psychological disorders such
as anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), people often face
chronic symptom fluctuations and diﬀiculties with self-awareness. A common problem
in current psychotherapeutic procedures is that symptom detection between sessions
often relies on the patient’s subjective recollections. This can produce recall bias,
i.e., inaccurate information recalled, resulting in an inability to accurately reflect
symptom patterns and hindering the psychotherapist’s understanding of the patient’s
symptoms and the development of a treatment plan. In order to help patients better
understand their state and establish a closer feedback loop with the psychotherapist
during the treatment process, as well as to conveniently and quickly record symptoms
in daily life between treatment sessions, wearable self-tracking devices have been
proposed as an adjunct to treatment. In this context, devices in the One Button
Tracker (OBT) category have emerged to record a user’s subjective state at a given
moment in time through the simple and convenient push of a button, allowing the
data to be reviewed and analyzed in subsequent therapy sessions, thus facilitating the
understanding of and intervention in disease patterns. In contrast to other methods
of subjective recording, such as traditional diaries and electronic diaries on mobile
apps, the OBT is characterized by simplicity, accuracy, and rapid recording, allowing
real-time symptom detection to be seamlessly integrated into a patient’s daily life.
1.2
Current product deficiencies and issues
Current products that assist psychotherapy include passive monitoring devices, ac-
tive recording mobile apps, and traditional diaries, among others.
Among them,
passive monitoring devices can only track themselves through physiological data, and
often cannot record the subjective psychological feelings of patients. Traditional psy-
chotherapy uses paper questionnaires, diaries, and emerging mobile applications such
as electronic diaries to help record patients’ symptoms and subjective feelings in daily
life, but there are problems such as recall bias and more complex records, which do
not allow for fast and real-time recording of symptoms. OBT devices have greatly
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
improved these problems by allowing users to record symptoms in their daily lives
at any time in an instant and without the need to view them. However, according
to the tracking of the use of OBT products and related research on user experience,
there are still many shortcomings in the existing products. First, OBTs are designed
to be functional-oriented and are designed as a tool for recording, lacking appearance
and emotional considerations. And studies have found that patients may have differ-
ent emotional connections with OBT products when using them, such as a trusted
companion in their daily lives, a friend to confide in, or seeing them as the help of
a psychotherapist. Secondly, the current devices are in a single form, which makes
it diﬀicult to meet the wearable needs of different users in different scenarios. Some
users want to wear the device covertly in social situations, while others prefer to use
it at night or when they are alone, and some users have personalized needs, such
as wanting to be seen by family members.
Finally, although users demonstrated
emotional connection and interaction during the use of the OBT device, the design
considerations of the device in terms of the way it establishes a connection with the
user’s emotions are still insuﬀicient, and the weak emotional feedback mechanism
during use may limit the establishment of intimacy and connection.
1.3
Motivations and challenges of project
The central motivation of this project is to rethink the role of OBT-like devices in
person-object relationships in order to improve the user experience of self-tracking
during psychotherapy.
Explore whether it is possible to make OBT devices have
the potential to have emotional containers added to their recording tools? Can the
usability of the system be improved by redesigning the appearance, interaction, and
form of wearing the device into the patient’s life?
In the course of studying the
literature on relevant user interviews, I found that users’ needs for using the device
and their emotional connection relationships are diverse and personalized, with some
people using it as a tool for self-confirmation, others viewing it as an outlet for
emotional catharsis, and even some people establishing a very strong dependency
relationship with the device. These phenomena suggest to me that OBT is not only
an interactive device, but also a kind of psychological companion, which helps patients
to better connect with the society, and thus deeply assists psychotherapy. However,
the challenge of the design is - emotional connection is diﬀicult to be standardized
and user needs are highly individualized, how to create an open space for emotional
projection with limited hardware functions becomes the key challenge of this study.
1.4
Design goals
The aim of this project is to investigate the user needs and design gaps of OBT
devices and design a wearable self-tracking system that meets the need for active
recording in psychotherapy and also has the potential for emotional connection. The
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Report structure
3
system needs to achieve: (1) Provide a concise and clear active input method so
that users can quickly complete the recording in different emotional states without
verbal or operational burdens; (2) Support a variety of wearing and carrying methods,
such as hand-holding, pendant, and card holder, in order to adapt to diversified life
scenarios; (3) Explore its possible structure so that it meets the functionality as well
as personalized needs of the users; (4) Through the design of the shell’s touch, weight,
material and form, it evokes the user’s physical perception and emotional resonance,
thus establishing a symbolic emotional connection. Finally, through prototyping and
design evaluation, I will iterate on the results of the design to understand its usability,
engagement, and integration into daily self-tracking habits, and to provide inspiration
for future designs.
1.5
Report structure
This report is divided into nine chapters: Chapter 1 introduces the research back-
ground and project objectives; Chapter 2 presents literature and product examples
related to this project; Chapter 3 presents user requirements analysis and problem
analysis; Chapter 4 demonstrates the design process and the core design framework;
Chapter 5 presents the prototype exploration and modeling; Chapter 6 presents the
evaluation of the existing models and design alternatives; and Chapter 7 analyzes and
discusses the project results and limitations; Chapter 8 presents possible directions
for future work; and Chapter 9 concludes.
1.6
Use of AI tools
In order to improve the eﬀiciency and quality of the report, I used artificial intelligence
tools in the writing part of the report. Specifically, ChatGPT was used to assist
in translating and embellishing the English academic language, helping to improve
the clarity and consistency of written content based on original ideas. In addition,
DeepL Translator was used to initially translate Chinese research notes and project
documents into English, laying the groundwork for further touch-ups. Additionally,
artificial intelligence assistance played an important role in the development of the
Arduino’s functional prototypes. Basic logic and code structures (e.g., button input
detection, vibration feedback, and serial outputs) were generated and reviewed using
ChatGPT, which helped me quickly verify the feasibility of the hardware. While all
key design decisions, concept development, and evaluation were done by the authors,
the tools still functioned as productivity and language-support aids, in line with
responsible and transparent AI-assisted academic practices.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
2.1
Self-tracking research review
Personal Informatics (PI), as a form of personal health management, is dedicated
to helping users improve self-awareness and decision-making by collecting, recording,
and analyzing their own data.The five-stage model (Preparation, Collection, Integra-
tion, Reflection, Action) proposed by Li et al. has been widely used to evaluate the
completeness and user experience of self-tracking systems [LDF10]. In the field of
emotional health, the role of self-tracking is no longer limited to recording behavioral
data, but is also an important tool for users to understand their own emotional fluc-
tuations. Studies have shown that instantaneous recording can significantly reduce
recall bias, improve the subjective accuracy of data, and assist individuals in identi-
fying triggers in psychotherapy[Cho+14a]. However, unlike physical health, tracking
emotional and psychological states is often more ambiguous and involves complex
human-computer-emotional interaction processes.
Figure 2.1: The five-stage model of self-tracking[LDF10].
2.2
Applications of wearable design in psychotherapy
With the popularity of wearable devices, the field of psychotherapy has seen an in-
creasing number of attempts to utilize physiological sensors and interactive devices
for emotion recognition and management. For example, data such as heart rate vari-
ability (HRV) and galvanic skin response (GSR) are used to predict a user’s stress
level or anxiety state[LEC17]. These devices are usually combined with an app to pro-
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Related Work
vide feedback, such as breathing guidance, positive thinking exercises, audio calming,
etc., and commonly come in the form of bracelets, pins, and head-mounted devices.
Although there has been some progress in objective data recording, most of the cur-
rent products emphasize function but not experience, and lack empathetic design for
patients’ emotional state, making it diﬀicult to be truly integrated into daily life as
a companion.
2.3
Analysis of wearable devices related to
psychological and emotional accompaniment
2.3.1
Nuna mood tracking pendant
Nuna is a pendant device that tracks mood changes through AI algorithms that
analyze data such as the wearer’s voice, breathing, and facial expressions[Nun24]. It
focuses on 24/7 recording, non-invasive wearability, and daily aggregation of mood
trends with image visualizations. Although it offers the technological possibility of
24/7 coexistence, its feedback is abstract and the emotional interaction with the user
is weak, making it diﬀicult to establish an emotional projection relationship.
Figure 2.2: Nuna mood tracking pendant.
2.3.2
Friend AI necklace
The Friend AI Necklace is a device that attempts to socialize emotions, allowing users
to communicate with the device through an app, and the device will respond with
vibrations or voice prompts[Ber24]. The device has some room for personalization,
such as choosing a pattern or name to represent an emotion, but the core interaction
is still based on the phone, and the entity itself lacks suﬀicient emotional carrying
capacity and tactile design.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Analysis of wearable devices related to psychological and emotional accompaniment
7
Figure 2.3: Friend AI necklace.
2.3.3
Mooda app for recording moods
Mooda is a minimalist mobile mood recording app that allows users to record their
daily emotional state by selecting mood icons (e.g.
sad, calm, joyful) and short
texts[Ana25]. Its gentle interface, delicate animations, and simple information greatly
reduces the cognitive burden on users when they are in a low mood, and it is widely
recognized as one of the mood recording tools closest to the essence of emotional
expression. Compared to traditional typing or questionnaire-based records, Mooda’s
design emphasizes the symbolic expression of subjective emotions, evoking users’ in-
ternal state perception through emoticons and visual language. In the process of using
Mooda, users gradually bind the interface, record track and even a certain smiley face
to their own emotional track, forming a lightweight but stable emotional connection.
However, its disadvantage is that as a pure App form, it lacks physical presence,
cannot be used independently from the cell phone, and cannot provide real-time ac-
companiment or passive reminder in a non-visualized state. Users need to actively
enter the App to record, which weakens its ability to provide immediate intervention
in psychotherapeutic scenarios. The App provides an important reference for this
project, i.e., emotions and psychological states do not require complex interactions,
but can be expressed using a simple emotional design.
2.3.4
Squeeze the moment
Squeeze the Moment[Cho+14b], a prototype system presented by Chong et al. at Ubi-
Comp 2014, explores the possibility of quickly recording everyday events through the
natural action of squeezing. The project combines a pressure-sensitive silicone shell
with emotion recording, giving users a device that can be carried around and actively
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Related Work
Figure 2.4: Mooda app.
input at specific moments, avoiding high cognitive load behaviors such as text and
screen manipulation. Compared to traditional App recording methods, the system
emphasizes physical input and non-verbalized emotional expression, and introduces
a more subjective approach to human-computer interaction at the recording level by
using the intensity of movement as a metaphor for the significance of an event or
the intensity of an emotion. At the same time, the device is simple in form and has
some room for emotional projection. The system’s emphasis on an immediate record-
ing approach with a non-digital interface presents an important inspiration for this
project. It suggests that emotion recording does not necessarily rely on semantically
explicit input actions, but rather that subjective meaning can be established through
embodied physical interaction.
The above competitors have demonstrated different attempts of emotion tracking and
emotional accompaniment, but most of the products either emphasize technology but
not emotion, or emphasize form but lack interaction. They lack a modular experience
structure that truly establishes human-machine emotional connection.
2.4
OBT device and related design research
The One Button Tracker (OBT)[LEC17] is a device for labeling subjective experiences
through a single button click, commonly used in psychotherapeutic scenarios such as
PTSD. Its advantage lies in the minimalist interaction mechanism and visual data
analysis process, which allows patients to identify emotions without inputting complex
information, and facilitates real-time tracking and subsequent analysis.
However,
most of the existing OBT devices are made of neutral plastic shells, uniform size and
style, and lack of emotional symbols and personalized appearance. Users often fail to
establish a sense of belonging or ritual when using them, limiting the potential of the
devices at the level of emotional support and companionship. Therefore, it is of great
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Research on emotional design and human-machine emotional connection
9
Figure 2.5: Squeeze the moment.
significance to explore the redesign direction of OBTs, especially their integration
with emotional perception and usage scenarios.
Figure 2.6: OBT device[LEC17].
2.5
Research on emotional design and
human-machine emotional connection
Emotional Design emphasizes the need to consider the user’s emotional experience
and psychological perception in addition to functionality[Nor04]. Products can evoke
emotional resonance through shape, material, weight, and interaction to create a
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Related Work
deeper psychological connection. Affective Interaction further focuses on how to give
devices an emotional role through interactive behaviors (e.g., touching, responding,
naming) to transform them from tools to partners or containers. This connection
is particularly important in the field of mental health. If the device can act as an
emotional intermediary to carry the user’s emotional projections (e.g., anger, attach-
ment, security), it not only enhances the willingness to use it, but also serves as an
internal emotional regulation mechanism outside of therapy. The construction of pro-
jectable, perceivable and deformable emotional containers in design is one of the core
innovations of this project.
Figure 2.7: Desk research-market for relevant wearable products and preference
maps.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Research and Analysis
Through observation, literature research, and empathy with users, combined with
existing research results in the field of mental health, the user needs and usage sce-
narios of self-tracking devices are sorted out and analyzed, and problem definitions
and subsequent design directions are proposed.
3.1
User research and demand analysis
Due to the high degree of privacy and sensitivity of mental health-related user groups
and the diﬀiculty of conducting large-scale field interviews under the time constraints
and resource and ethical conditions of this project, the research method of online
research, literature research and user experience empathy was adopted to gradually
explore and analyze the user needs from three parts.
3.1.1
Online research
This project collects a large number of users’ needs, common pain points and feedback
preferences for using mental state recording tools in real life through observation and
content analysis of emotion recording-related mobile applications and social platforms.
The research targets are mainly ordinary users who are in mild emotional distress or in
need of daily emotional management, rather than patients with severe psychological
disorders in the clinical sense.
Currently, the most widely used emotion tracking methods are still mainly cell phone
applications, such as recording daily mood fluctuations, mood trend charts, keyword
labeling and other functions are more common.
Some other users choose to use
electronic diary tools to record major emotional events, or as a form of psychological
catharsis to release stress. In the survey, most users said that “recording itself is a
healing process”, especially when they can express their internal state through words
and then get external feedback, which is a positive significance for relieving anxiety.
This also proves that the subjective value of emotion recording is not only limited to
the data itself, but also provides an outlet for emotions.
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Research and Analysis
However, a number of users expressed discomfort or resistance to mood recording.
Some users mentioned that “the device is too obvious and makes me feel nervous”
and “I don’t want people to see me recording my emotions”. These feedbacks reflect
the lack of covertness of current device use in public scenarios and users’ need for
self-protection against negative emotions. Even in private environments, some users
still feel uncomfortable about facing exposed emotions head-on.
Some users also
mentioned that the recording process itself may exacerbate the perception of anxiety,
which in turn affects emotion regulation.
Therefore, through online user research and desktop research, the project came up
with two important user requirements: first, the recording method should be as covert
as possible and free of social pressure; and second, the device itself should be soothing
and less intrusive, helping users to complete the recording naturally without triggering
additional tension. The design should not only consider the functional realization, but
also satisfy the user’s psychological comfort and social boundaries in a fluctuating
emotional state.
3.1.2
Literature research
In the user research phase of this project, literature research is the most important
research method. Through systematic reading and analysis of four qualitative case
studies focusing on OBT, the project extracted users’ real long-term use behaviors,
interaction motivations, and emotional responses, laying a solid foundation for the
subsequent design direction.
These studies cover a wide range of typical mental
illnesses such as PTSD, Complex Trauma Disorder, and Post-War Stress Symptoms,
and the interviewees include refugees, veterans, and patients in long-term treatment.
These studies are representative of the progress of research on the interactions between
OBT devices and users, and they provide a very relevant background and basis for
the user research in this project.
Research first began with Christiansen et al. (2017)[LEC17], who presented a case
study of a Danish veteran with PTSD using an OBT to track his “precursors to
hypervigilance” in treatment. The case study shows that when a tracking protocol is
set up between the user and the therapist, the data recorded by the device provides
valuable input directly into the clinical conversation, helping to identify details of
symptoms that are not visible in the routine interview and avoiding recall bias. This
study was the first to validate the functional role of the OBT in the therapeutic
process, and inspired this project to view the OBT as a “therapeutic collaborative
interface” rather than a single recording tool.
Subsequently, Arendt et al.
(2021) further expanded the role of the OBT in the
identification of multidimensional psychological phenomena[Are+21]. In a two-week
mixed-methods study, they compared the ability of two PTSD patients to recognize
and record “rumination” and “intrusive symptoms” before and after psychoeduca-
==PAGE:25==
3.1 User research and demand analysis
13
tional training.
The results of the study showed that the button device not only
helped users to differentiate between the two types of symptoms on a subjective level,
but also improved their ability to detect and discriminate emotions, which could
further assist in psychotherapy. This finding demonstrates that simple interaction
structures can perform complex psychomodulatory functions and enhance patients’
perceptions of actions, providing a theoretical basis for subsequent design directions
that emphasize lightweight interactions and high levels of empowerment.
In a 2024 case study, researchers observed how a refugee diagnosed with complex
PTSD used OBT for personalized tracking [Rii+24]. Unlike traditional health tech-
nologies that rely on system presets, the study emphasized that OBT supports users
in choosing the phenomena they wish to track (e.g., anger, flashbacks, grounded
states). Users not only demonstrated a high degree of compliance, but also gradually
developed a subjective connection with the device over the course of the treatment-
viewing the OBT as a connecting point between everyday life and psychotherapy. The
study points to the neutrality and empowerment of the device, i.e., the device not
only functions as a data collector but also as a therapeutic partner. This facilitates
a deeper collaboration between therapist and patient, which supports the program’s
focus on ”user emotional engagement”.
Finally, in a recent participatory action study by Riisager et al.
(2025)[Rii+25],
in which nine patients with complex PTSD used an OBT over the course of a full
treatment cycle, the study explicitly introduced the concept of “multi-stability,” which
suggests that the device may be viewed as a “faithful companion,” “loyal companion,”
‘companion’ or “companion” by different patients in different contexts. The concept of
“multi-stability” is clearly defined in the study, suggesting that the device may be seen
as a “faithful companion,” “psychological switch,” or “emergency lifeline” in different
patients and situations. The study further suggests that the shape, tactility, weight
and feedback mechanisms of a device influence the degree to which it is emotionally
recognized by the user. In addition, OBTs also trigger new dynamics in users’ social
lives through their visibility, such as the situational contradiction between “needing to
cover up” and “actively displaying”, which reflects the diversity of users’ needs and
the necessity of personalized design, and reveals the complex relationship between
the device and the user’s identity and social context. It also reveals the complex
relationship between devices and users’ identity and social contexts.
Together, these four papers show the evolution of OBT devices from data collection
tools to emotional anchors, to therapeutic bridges and emotional mapping objects.
Users are no longer just information providers, but have developed a deep relation-
ship with the device. The device becomes a companion, a friend, and an extension of
themselves in their daily lives, and builds a bridge between daily life and psychother-
apy, helping psychotherapy in a proactive sense. For this project, the results of this
research clearly suggest that the design of the device should not be based on function-
ality and aesthetics alone, but should be modularized around the “establishment and
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Research and Analysis
evolution of emotional connections” and the setting of usage scenarios. Therefore,
this project takes “modular interaction system supporting user empowerment” as the
core improvement direction, and tries to build a wearable psychological support tool
that is more acceptable, trustworthy, and emotionally invested by users from the
physical structure, interactive feedback, to the symbolic meaning, so as to assist the
psychotherapy process in daily life.
3.1.3
OBT usage experience and subjective feeling records
In addition to the user perspective research, I used and experienced the OBT device
myself at the beginning of the project, conducting empathy experiments through a
“role-play” approach, wearing the device 24/7 for a week. The protocols and content
recorded were: 1.
Pressing once when I felt like going to bed to relieve anxiety
and stress, and 2. Pressing twice when I opened my cell phone to browse without
meaning rather than for functional use. In use, my experience of wearing the device
was that I did feel the bulk of the device as well as the presence, but surprisingly,
it was somewhat reassuring to feel the presence instead. When pressed in a quiet
environment, the vibrations were loud, but effective at interrupting thoughts and
interrupting rumination. There is also the possibility of occasionally forgetting to
record when very immersed in the pressure of one’s own world.
This experience
has shown me first hand how emotionally supportive and helpful the OBT product
is to the user, as I would press it during times of anxiety and stress to alleviate
uncomfortable mental pressure, so focusing on emotional feedback and re-improving
the design is crucial. The experiment also shows that different users may have different
needs for the presence of the device. The “presence” of the device is a constant but
not oppressive quality, too heavy will cause rejection, too light will be easily ignored,
and it is also related to the different usage scenarios and psychological states. In
addition, I still subconsciously wanted to press the button at the end of use and
after removing the device, which confirms the conclusion of the previous two studies
that self-tracking devices can support psychotherapy, but also suggests that more in-
depth research could be conducted in the future to investigate whether users become
dependent on OBT devices.
3.2
Research on the needs of different mental illnesses
In the process of psychotherapy and supportive interventions, patients with different
types of psychological disorders show significant differences in their preferences for
self-tracking devices, which are not only reflected in the mode of interaction, but
also in their understanding and need for the relationship between the device and the
self[Wor22]. For example, people with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), whose
symptoms are characterized by strong triggering mechanisms and high emotional
volatility, prefer devices that provide fast and clear recording of specific moments,
as well as a certain degree of covertness to avoid social discomfort.
People with
==PAGE:27==
3.3 The use process of interaction with psychotherapists
15
anxiety disorders, on the other hand, tend to view the device as a soothing medium,
expecting it to provide stability and familiarity in form and touch, with an emphasis
on holdability, low existential stress, and the possibility of daily habituation.
For people with depressive disorders, willingness to use devices is often affected by low
mood and lack of motivation, so they prefer devices to have ritualistic and summoned
qualities in form, such as weight, visibility, and symbolism. Users in mild psycholog-
ical distress or self-growth stage pay more attention to the aesthetic expression and
social integration of the device, and prefer products that can be shared, look good on
the wrist, and are suitable for daily display.
In summary, these user characteristics show that it is diﬀicult for a single form of
self-tracking product to satisfy the emotional needs and usage scenarios of all people
at the same time. In contrast, an open, modular, and affective multipath system has
the potential to be adapted to different individuals and to support them in choosing
the appropriate recording method and device form according to their status during
the treatment cycle.
3.3
The use process of interaction with
psychotherapists
From the existing data and process reduction analysis, it can be seen that OBT
usually plays the role of “record node prompter” in the treatment[LEC17]. The basic
process is as follows:
Pre-treatment agreement: The therapist and the patient agree on the recording cri-
teria (e.g., clicking the button every time a rumination, anxiety outburst, or sadness
occurs).
Use in therapy: the patient wears the device and actively clicks on it in the agreed
scenario.
Review at return: The therapist visualizes the data to understand the frequency, time
period, and emotional cycle, and reviews the change in state with the patient.
This process emphasizes “clarity of intent” in therapy, and implies that the device
should be consistent, reminiscent, and reviewable.
3.4
User persona
Combining research and interviews, two representative user profiles were summarized:
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Research and Analysis
Figure 3.1: The process of using OBT-assisted psychotherapy[Rii+25].
Main user needs:
• Record emotions and mental states instantly to help users reflect on emotional
changes in real-life scenarios.
• Enhance the continuity of psychotherapy and allow users to maintain a sense of
participation in therapy in their daily lives.
• Provide non-invasive input methods to lower the threshold for use, avoid complex
operations, and increase user compliance.
• Ensure privacy and reduce embarrassment or stigma of mental health in social
environments.
• Provide feedback or interaction so that users can feel the response of the instrument
after input, thereby strengthening their motivation to use it.
• Emotional sustenance, as an extension of me or friend, plays a role in companion-
ship and relieving emotional stress.
Figure 3.2: Persona: Present the user community of this program in a quick and
visual way.
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Problem analysis
17
3.5
Problem analysis
3.5.1
Problem expansion
By integrating users, scenarios, treatment processes, and types of psychological dis-
orders, I expanded on possible problems and opportunity points, as shown in the
figure:
Figure 3.3: Problem Expansion: The first stage of the double-diamond model -
expansion of the research question.
3.5.2
Opportunity analysis and evaluation matrix
With a deep understanding of user needs and existing product issues, this project
identified a number of potential design opportunities. These opportunities cover the
dimensions of emotional connection establishment, usage scenario diversity, wearabil-
ity, interaction concealment and personality expression. In order to filter and focus
the design direction more scientifically, the project adopted an opportunity assess-
ment matrix to evaluate each opportunity point in terms of value and complexity.
The analysis results show that the opportunity of “facilitating autonomous user input”
is more prominent and is the most promising design direction. In addition, I found
that the opportunity points were scattered and the user needs and problems varied
greatly, which provided a clear direction for subsequent design development.
3.5.3
Problem definition and design direction
In the early stages of this project, the design goals focused on encouraging users to
be more proactive in their mental state recording. To this end, the project attempted
to stimulate motivation by lowering the interaction threshold and simplifying input
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Research and Analysis
Figure 3.4: Opportunity evaluation matrix.
methods. However, in the subsequent literature research, user empathy simulation
and conceptualization process, it was found that different users have highly different
psychological states, usage habits, social preferences and emotional expressions, and
it is diﬀicult for a single input mechanism to satisfy a wide range of adaptability
needs.
Therefore, the project gradually shifted its focus from single interaction optimiza-
tion to systematic structural design, and finally defined the problem as: the current
instant self-tracking devices used in psychotherapy suffer from weakened emotional
connection, single form adaptation, and limited wearing styles, which limit the estab-
lishment of emotions between people and objects, and compress the potential space
for the devices to serve as intermediary objects in the therapeutic process.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Design Approach and
Conceptual
Framework
4.1
Design process and approach
This project adopts the Double Diamond design process[Maj24], emphasizing the
exploration of the whole process from problem discovery to solution implementation.
First Diamond: Problem Space
Through literature research, user behavioral observation, and empathy, the project
has developed a diffuse understanding of the multiple needs and emotional depen-
dence of users on self-tracking devices, and converged on the core problem of “lack of
emotional connectivity and adaptability of existing OBTs”.
The Second Diamond: Solution Space
After sketching, conceptualization, structural research and prototype iteration, a sys-
tematic solution of “modular core + diversified shells + optional accessories” is pro-
posed, and three representative series are shown as solution paths.
4.2
Design requirements
To address the pain points and opportunity points identified in the preliminary anal-
ysis, the project established the following design requirements.
Requirements
• No psychological stimulation
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Design Approach and Conceptual Framework
Figure 4.1: Double diamond: Main Design Process.
• Seamless in Daily Life
• Can be used at night
• Requires a certain volume to install the battery
• Low cognitive load
• Non-intrusive
• Meet the needs of different genders
4.3
Brainstorming and sketches
4.3.1
Concept sketches
Based on the preliminary design research and thinking, I recorded the brainstorming
in the form of sketches to try to expand my design ideas and find a better design
solution. I mainly brainstormed and sketched from five aspects: Everyday behavior,
Natural semantics, Expression, Connection, and Sensory.
4.3.2
Requirements and clustering
After a lot of brainstorming and conceptualization in the early stage, I filtered and
summarized the initial ideas according to the key design requirements of the project.
By comprehensively evaluating each idea in terms of user experience, manufacturing
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Brainstorming and sketches
21
Figure 4.2: Sketch 1: Includes initial concepts such as skin patches.
Figure 4.3: Sketch 2: Includes early concepts like thin id cards.
Figure 4.4: Sketch 3: Flexible buttons integrated into clothing.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Design Approach and Conceptual Framework
Figure 4.5: Sketch 4: Elastic rope and other items used in psychotherapy.
Figure 4.6: Sketch 5: Conceptual design utilizing shoe input, etc..
feasibility and scenario suitability, I finally narrowed down the design direction to
eight representative conceptual proposals.
Cluster the ideas:
• Portable card
• Skin sticker
• Data visualization on paper
• Touch the edges and tips
• Focus on the moment (Rubber band, level)
• Daily actions (foot stepping, looking in the mirror)
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Core concept system
23
• Positive hint (smile face, Positive words)
• Soft fabric (pull the corner of the clothes)
4.3.3
Criteria and top 3 ideas
In order to shrink and filter the preliminary ideas I used a template for evaluating
and selecting the best 3 ideas[Uni25] and set the following criteria:
·Feasible: Are there sensors and materials that can achieve this?
·Sustainability: Can it be used for a long time? Maintenance and energy consump-
tion
·Viability: Is the cost too high?
·Responsibility: Will it have a negative impact on users and society?
·Desirability: Does it really meet the needs of users? Easy to record?
·Accessibility
·Customization
·User emotional connection
By scoring the initial proposals I selected the 3 ideas that best met the criteria,
namely cards, Skin silicone patches and Flexible materials.As the latter two ideas
were relatively similar I combined them and eventually added the natural object
designs that were mentioned and explored at the beginning, resulting in 3 expandable
collections.
4.4
Core concept system
In order to meet the differentiated needs of different users in terms of emotional
expression and usage scenarios, this project builds a modular structure system with
adaptability and combination possibilities. The whole system consists of three parts:
first, the core component, which contains the main control chip, battery, buttons and
electronic modules such as vibration or optical feedback, as a unified “functional hub”
to maintain consistency in various types of shells; second, the shell part, which is
responsible for providing different appearance, hand touch and symbolic significance,
and through the replacement of the shell, the user can choose a more suitable shell
according to their emotional state or use scenarios; and finally, there is the wearable
accessory module, which includes brooches, necklace pendants, magnetic connectors,
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Design Approach and Conceptual Framework
Figure 4.7: Criteria for voting and filtering the best 3 ideas[Uni25].
bracelets, etc., which allows users to match the wearable way freely according to the
scenario, and improves the adaptability and concealability of the device in the daily
life. The advantage of this structural system is that users can actively participate in
the choice of usage and meaning giving in the multi-dimensional combination of “form
- wearing style - interactive feedback”, transforming the device from a single-function
tool to an emotional medium that can project emotions and personality expression.
The device is transformed from a single functional tool to an emotional medium for
projecting emotions and personality expression.
4.5
Serialization design logic
Based on the preliminary user research and analysis of emotional role construction,
this project summarizes the possible emotional connection paths between people and
devices into three typical types, corresponding to three groups of design series, which
constitute the emotional path triangle of the whole system. Firstly, “Seed Series”
emphasizes the symbolic meaning of comfort and growth, through the form of natural
objects as a metaphor for the psychological process of “planting - accompanying -
newborn”, using organic contours, The design language of organic contours, natural
textures and replaceable shells reinforces the sense of ritual and emotional transition.
Secondly, the “Card Series” pays attention to the user’s need for concealment in
social environments, disguising the device as familiar objects such as business cards,
ID cards, and jewelry, providing miniature shelter without drawing attention to itself,
and designing it with a thick sense of solidity, local textures, and tactile details as an
emotional outlet. Finally, the “Body Extension Series” focuses on self-confirmation
==PAGE:37==
4.5 Serialization design logic
25
Figure 4.8: Modularization attempt sketch1, Explore combinations such as mag-
netic suction and the positional relationship between the core and the
shell.
and the construction of a sense of existence, where the device is more like a part
of the body or a portable sensory organ, evoking a sense of security and emotional
attachment through the palm-friendly shape, soft center of gravity layout, and a sense
of life design. These three series not only represent three different types of emotional
projection, but also constitute an important design direction for the system’s future
product expansion and customized adaptation.
However, these three series cannot satisfy the needs of all users. Through the previous
user research and problem study, we know that the users targeted by this project are
very different in terms of usage scenarios, psychological projection needs and wearing
needs, so personalized and modular design is a better way to solve the problem in
the future. Therefore, we only take these three series as cases to try to explore the
modular design and try to provide emotional containers for users to connect with the
devices, so as to provide design references for more personalized series of this kind of
products in the future.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Design Approach and Conceptual Framework
Figure 4.9: Modularization attempt sketch2, Explore the location and size of but-
tons and the possibility of the entire top cover as a button.
Figure 4.10: Core concept Map.
==PAGE:39==
4.6 Design presentation
27
4.6
Design presentation
The project culminates in the presentation of three sets of typical prototypes that
demonstrate the design expression of emotional objects combined with functional
structures.
4.6.1
Seed series
Using plant seeds in nature as a metaphor, the design of the shell has a grippy weight
and a warm touch. Users can choose different shapes according to different stages or
needs to experience the symbolic process of growth, change and planting emotions.
With the interchangeable shells, the planting symbolizes closure and renewal at the
end of the treatment.
Figure 4.11: Seed Series Exploration Process 1.
Figure 4.12: Seed Series Exploration Process 2.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Design Approach and Conceptual Framework
Figure 4.13: Seed Series Exploration Process 3.
4.6.2
Card series
The credit/business card format is designed with a flat case that has a localized
texture.
Ideal for badge holders, work badges, wallets, etc., it can be used as a
record-keeping tool as well as a social personality symbol. Suitable for both work and
social occasions. It contains interchangeable parts with different tactile sensations,
allowing users to relieve stress during socialization.
Figure 4.14: The process of exploring the card series.
4.6.3
Body extension series
The collection includes designs that fit between the fingers and can be attached to
the chest or wrist. The use of silicone-like flexible materials makes the device feel
more like a part of the body or an extension of the heartbeat. In terms of interaction,
==PAGE:41==
4.6 Design presentation
29
Figure 4.15: Modeling of the final scheme of the card series.
it can be set to produce a slight response when gripped tightly, thus creating a sense
of anthropomorphism and life to the device, which may be suitable for users with a
high level of emotional attachment. And I would like to explore and demonstrate the
possibility of combining a unified core module with a flexible shell through the design
and research of this series.
These three solutions not only have system consistency (unified core module + re-
placement shell + accessory adaptation), but also demonstrate the emotional differ-
ences and the diversity of use scenarios, reflecting the product system framework of
emotional device design.
During the design process, not all ideas could be carried through to prototyping due
to structural feasibility, emotional expression limitations, and time constraints. For
instance, while the Body Extension series proposed compelling emotional possibilities,
its integration with modular structure posed significant challenges. Therefore, this
thesis presents three series as representative explorations, with the aim of showcasing
different emotional paths rather than producing finalized products.
This decision
reflects the core value of the project—to open up emotional design possibilities rather
than close them down with rigid solutions.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Design Approach and Conceptual Framework
Figure 4.16: Body extension series.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Prototyping, Prototype
Exploration and
Modeling
In order to realize the concept of “Modular Emotion Tracking System”, this chapter
focuses on modeling and structural prototyping. Through several rounds of modeling
experiments, material attempts and structural combination tests, this project has
initially established a three-layer modular system prototype of “core components +
shell + accessories”, and has completed part of the functional prototyping.
5.1
Clay modeling
In the early stages of the project, in order to explore the potential relationship be-
tween emotional connection and product form, I used lightweight air-drying clay for
extensive physical modeling attempts. The material’s ease of plasticity and rapid pro-
totyping make it suitable for responding sensitively to intuitive judgments of shape,
size, and grip by hand without the need for molds and tools. Through this low-cost,
low-threshold prototyping format, I was able to generate a large number of different
types of shapes in a short period of time, which I used to observe and experience
their effects on “presence,” “comfort,” “willingness to interact,” and ”the ability of a
person to feel the presence of an object. ”and willingness to interact.
The modeling exploration in this phase focuses on three main directions, correspond-
ing to the three typical emotional path series constructed in this project:
First, in the exploration of the natural object series, I modeled forms including seeds,
stones, shells, fruits and other elements inspired by real existing natural objects.
Most of these forms have certain irregularities and organic curves, emphasizing the
characteristics of “asymmetry,” “changeability,” and ”mechanic-lessness. The aim is
to test whether it can inspire a sense of comfort and life association when played
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Prototyping, Prototype Exploration and Modeling
with in the hand. I paid particular attention to fingertip fit - whether the shape
naturally guides the flow of the fingers when touched unconsciously, leading to a
sense of reassurance or a stabilization of breathing rhythms.
In some of the test
models, I also tried to incorporate analog textures (e.g., grooves, veins, particles) to
further examine the possibility of emotional interaction between material texture and
touch.
Secondly, in the direction of exploring card modeling, I created models with different
thicknesses, edge treatments, and texture variations around familiar social objects
such as business cards and ID cards to test the balance between “social friendliness”
and “tactile feedback”.
Some of the models try to retain the flat appearance to
maintain concealment, while others introduce micro-models such as curled edges and
small concave modules, aiming to provide users with subtle tactile interactions (e.g.,
touching, sliding, rubbing, etc.) during use, so that the cards are no longer “just to
be gripped” surface tools but “mini-shelters” that can alleviate social anxieties. ”The
third direction is the exploration of body extension forms.
The third direction is the exploration of body extension forms. In this section, I try to
design models with “grip guidance” and “body fit”, such as a curved grip block that
can be embedded in the palm of the hand, and a brooch-shaped model with a concave
surface for chest fit. These models emphasize the physical connection between the
device and the body, and test whether the user can develop a sense of “being a part
of him/herself” when wearing the device close to the body or holding it for a long
period of time. For example, one model was found to have a strong sense of presence
and companionship, as it automatically filled the center of the palm when held, and
fingers naturally formed a stable structure around its contours.
Throughout the exploration of the clay models, I simultaneously recorded the “sensory
impressions” of each model, including but not limited to the following aspects: Is it
easy to hold naturally? Does it lead to a pressing action? Does it provide a sense of
stability or security? Is there a risk of “putting it down and forgetting it” or “carrying
it around”? These impressions serve as the raw material for the user’s experience and
form the basis for the selection of prototypes and the refinement of the structure of
the subsequent series. The modeling stage does not aim at the final appearance, but
rather serves as a sensory and emotional experimentation process to bring the design
closer to the texture of real psychological interaction.
5.2
3D printed modeling and structural
experimentation
After completing the exploration of basic morphology and emotional direction in the
preliminary clay modeling, this phase of work further focuses on the verification of
==PAGE:45==
5.2 3D printed modeling and structural experimentation
33
Figure 5.1: Exploring the process of modeling with clay.
structural feasibility and physical construction. I selected representative forms from
the completed clay prototypes and used Rhino to perform 3D digital modeling to try
to visualize the emotional experience into a product structure that can be assembled,
worn, and functionally integrated.
Once the digital model was completed, it was exported to an STL format file and
imported into PrusaSlicer for slicing the print path. The final model was output us-
ing FDM printing technology and a Prusa MK3.5 3D printer using environmentally
friendly PLA. The focus at this stage of the production was not on detailed visualiza-
tion, but on prototyping key issues in the construction of the system, mainly focusing
on the following areas:
Modular plug-and-play structure: connection and mounting of the upper and lower
housings. Uniform slot interfaces, such as clips in different positions, were designed
to support multiple housing combinations.
Also tried the way of combining core
components with cards;
Reservation of internal space: Try the appropriate size to reserve enough chambers
for the subsequent embedding of Arduino modules, batteries, vibration motors, and
other functional components, and not too large to be inconvenient for the subsequent
design for wearable;
Wearable Structure Adaptation: Print the pluggable wearable accessories (e.g. con-
necting parts for watches, necklaces, bracelets, etc.)
and test their stability and
aesthetics in different scenarios;
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Prototyping, Prototype Exploration and Modeling
Feedback System Occupancy Test: Judge the user’s operation feeling through the
model, confirm the reasonableness of the “pressing point”, including the position,
shape and size of the buttons, as well as the adaptation method of the buttons and
the replaceable shell.
In the actual operation process, due to the precision limitations of the FDM printing
equipment and the roughness of the material edge processing and other factors, some
of the structural details could not be fully reflected. Although the model at this stage
is not yet fully functional, we have explored possible structural solutions, as well as the
dimensions of the core components and the size of the buttons, etc., and have gained
a more in-depth and grounded understanding of the structure and appearance of the
model, which has provided a key physical foundation for the subsequent systematic
integration.
Figure 5.2: Rhino for 3D digital modeling.
Figure 5.3: STL format files for slicing and subsequent printing.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Arduino function modeling
35
Figure 5.4: 3D printed model objects for structural attempts.
5.3
Arduino function modeling
In order to verify the interaction response capability and emotional feedback mech-
anism of the device in real use situations, and to prepare for subsequent functional
modeling experiments, this project builds a preliminary functional prototype system
based on the Arduino Nano 33 BLE microcontroller platform.
The prototype is
mainly used to test the basic interaction logic of one-button input and instant feed-
back, and to observe the effect of different shell forms on feedback perception. The
prototype system integrates the following key hardware modules:
· A miniature pushbutton switch: used as the primary user input, which triggers a
recording event when pressed by the user;
· Miniature vibration motor: used to simulate immediate “recording complete” feed-
back to provide emotional confirmation or calming signals;
· Battery module + power switch: for portable power supply, easily embedded in
various cases for field testing, and computer-powered in the model;
· GPS module (not included in the model yet): for future integration of time or
location recording.
At the program implementation level, the prototype system completes the basic inter-
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Prototyping, Prototype Exploration and Modeling
action logic, i.e., pressing the button is recorded, and vibration feedback is triggered
at the same time. If the button is pressed continuously, the vibration will continue
and the duration of each button press will be recorded, and the data recording will
be simulated through the serial monitor to simulate the user’s perception of being
responded to.
This functional model will be used in the future to complete the testing of shell inter-
ference. The core components are embedded in different materials and structures of
the housing to test their effect on the vibration feedback conduction. It is predicted
that different housings will indeed have different effects on feedback perception, for
example, thicker housings will reduce the intensity of the vibration perception, while
certain cavities will increase the resonance. This will inform the design of interchange-
able housings.
Although the current prototype is still at an early stage and does not include a
complete data storage and wireless communication module, it effectively verifies the
feasibility of “emotional feedback + one-button tracking + shell perception differ-
ence”, providing basic support for subsequent experience iterations.
At the same
time, the regulation of feedback perception by different shells will also provide the
physical foundation and experience dimension support for subsequent product series
design. The construction of this prototype is the starting point for subsequent user
testing, function expansion and system integration.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Arduino function modeling
37
Figure 5.5: Simple Arduino functional model, attempts at two different sized but-
tons.
Figure 5.6: Make additional attempts using the joystick button.
==PAGE:50==
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
In order to validate the usability and experiential value of the modular emotion track-
ing system proposed in this project, the authors conducted preliminary user testing
and interview feedback on the Seed Series through low-fidelity prototypes (mainly clay
models). Although the technical functionality is not yet fully realized, this round of
evaluation focuses on users’ perceptual responses and emotional projection tendencies
to key design elements such as form, grip, wearing style, and symbolism.
6.1
Assessment methodology
The test was administered to a total of five participants, divided into two groups.
These included anxiety-prone individuals, those undergoing counseling, and students.
The test material was a prototype model of a seed series made using lightweight
clay to simulate size, weight and shape. Firstly, 3 volunteers from the first group
described and labeled the clay models in the workshop scenario, and analyzed and
voted on them according to their size, holding comfort, modularity feasibility, and
presence. Six of the models that better met the design requirements and criteria were
selected for the next step of user testing[Uni25].
Two participants from the second group then experienced the six models in their
daily lives and provided feedback on how they felt about using them.
The test
was conducted over a one-week period, and users could choose their favorite model
and carry it with them in their daily lives. The test required participants to track
and report on the natural responses of the different prototypes in behaviors such as
holding, touching, wearing, and naming. At the beginning of the test, I described the
project to each of the two participants and informed them that the mental state could
be tracked by pressing buttons, i.e., the user understood how the OBT was used. At
the end of the week, I asked the participants about their associations and feelings
about each shape in terms of emotional projection, social use, and scene adaptation,
and led a discussion about how they felt about holding it. User feedback consisted of
scoring and subjective ratings.
==PAGE:52==
40
6 Evaluation
6.2
Test results and findings
In a week-long user test, two participants (U1, U2) rated each of the six clay pro-
totypes on a multidimensional scale with subjective feedback on the following di-
mensions: Comfortable grip, Keep holding, Intimacy, and Strength of presence.In
addition, the participants’ free feedback on each shape was recorded in order to cap-
ture their subjective experience in use. In addition, participants’ free feedback was
recorded for each shape, aiming to capture their subjective experience in use. The
voting form and user test feedback are shown in the figure.
In terms of ratings, the highest scoring models were numbers 03, 06, and 11, with
model 03 (rounded and chunky shape) receiving an overall rating of 4.75 from U2,
and a higher rating (3.75) from U1. The model was described as “natural, heavy and
easy to hold” and as “conveying a sense of security”, suggesting strengths in body
perception and emotional projection. Model 06 (six-petal flower structure) performed
better in the intimacy dimension, but had feedback such as “unclear grip points” and
“fear of breaking”, which reflected the conflict between form and function. Model
11 (heart-shaped seed-like) was rated consistently high (4.5) by both users, with
subjective feedback frequently mentioning “I like it a lot”, “it looks like my own little
thing” and “I dare to hold it hard”, suggesting that the shape inspires a sense of
humor. The frequent references to “like it”, “like my own little thing”, and “dare to
hold it hard” in subjective feedback suggest that the modeling inspires a strong sense
of personal belonging and emotional projection. The main reasons for the low ratings
of Models 07, 05, and 12 include “light”, “lack of presence”, and “unnatural holding
position”, which indicates that without a clear holding logic or tactile presence, it
is diﬀicult to stimulate a sense of personal belonging and emotional projection. The
main reasons include “lightness”, “lack of presence” and “unnatural holding position”.
Based on the subjective feedback, users preferred models with the following charac-
teristics:
· A structure with a weighty feel and a stable grip point;
· Possess some symbolic or anthropomorphic characteristics in terms of vision or
silhouette;
· The ability to stimulate spontaneous naming, touching, and carrying behaviors to
establish emotional connections.
In addition, participants were also sensitive to details such as whether it is easy to
get dirty and whether it is afraid of being crushed, suggesting that the design needs
to strike a balance between texture, durability and emotional touch. These findings
not only validate the potential of some of the shapes in the Seed Series for emotional
interaction, but also provide a clear basis for the direction of modular optimization
and the selection of subsequent forms.
==PAGE:53==
6.2 Test results and findings
41
Figure 6.1: Seed series voting result.
Figure 6.2: User 1 feedback form.
Figure 6.3: User 2 feedback form.
==PAGE:54==
42
6 Evaluation
6.3
Preliminary assessment findings
Even though the prototype is still a low-fidelity model, the following key values were
observed during testing:
· The path of emotional connection is established: different forms trigger different
associations and emotional channels are formed;
· The modular system has acceptability: users are willing to understand and try to
change the shell;
· The need for diversity is recognized: different users have clear preferences for form
and feedback in different states;
· Expandability of the design potential: some users took the initiative to propose
more series and hope for customization, which verified the openness of the system
structure.
6.4
Limitations and follow-up plans
The focus of this test is on styling and emotional experience, and does not yet cover the
specific technical implementation of the device or long-term usage feedback. There-
fore, the test results mainly reflect users’ initial subjective impression of the relation-
ship between styling and emotion, rather than a comprehensive wearable product
experience. In addition, due to the limited number of test subjects, only some indi-
viduals with anxiety tendency or counseling background were covered, the diversity of
the sample still needs to be expanded, and more different groups of people should be
introduced into the subsequent study to improve the breadth and representativeness
of the conclusions.
The feedback mechanism of the current prototype is still in the preliminary explo-
ration stage and has not yet been effectively integrated with the specific modeling,
which may affect the user’s true judgment of the strength of emotional connection
to a certain extent. At the same time, because the project still has more diﬀiculties
in the modularization of the structure, the subsequent functional prototypes do not
directly follow the three models with the highest ratings in the test for iteration, but
rather reconstruct a more achievable modular structural design based on the core
dimensions extracted from the test.
Nonetheless, this round of testing has provided a clear direction for future designs:
users are more willing to carry and project emotions to objects that are symbolic, log-
ical to hold, and soft to the touch. In the future, we will focus on building functional
prototypes with a medium level of realism, and further validate the correspondence
between “shape-feedback-emotion” in real interaction situations. It is also suggested
==PAGE:55==
6.4 Limitations and follow-up plans
43
to introduce psychological consultants to participate in the collaborative evaluation,
so as to observe the eﬀicacy and value of use from a professional perspective; we
can also try to carry out longer-term situation simulation and behavioral tracking
through the forms of “role-playing” and “usage logs”, so as to enhance the depth and
breadth of the design validation. We can also try to carry out longer-term situational
simulation and behavioral tracking in the form of “role play” and “use log” to enhance
the depth and breadth of design verification.
==PAGE:56==
44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this project, I propose a self-tracking system based on “Unified Core + Interchange-
able Shells + Scenario-Adapted Accessories”, and explore its feasibility and potential
value in psychotherapeutic support through a series of three prototypes. This chapter
will focus on the dimensions of user differentiation, design paradox, emotional con-
nection and user engagement in order to respond to the key questions of this project
in terms of theory, practice and meaning.
7.1
The role of serialized design in solving users’
differentiated needs
A clear conclusion from early research is that users with different psychological states,
personality types, and life situations have significantly different preferences for emo-
tion tracking devices. Some people attach more importance to the sense of comfort,
some people value social covertness, and some people expect sustainable companion-
ship. If a product tries to solve all the problems in one go, there will be an imbalance
between individuality and eﬀiciency.
Therefore, this project responds to the diverse needs of users through series design,
allowing users to choose the appropriate series according to their emotional stage,
usage scenario, and individual identity during the treatment process, such as:
· Choose the Seed series during the emotionally sensitive period to obtain natural
soothing;
· Selecting the Card Series for low intrusiveness in daily socialization;
· Long-term wear of the body extension series to maintain psychological stability.
This strategy effectively avoids the dilemma of “a single design can’t fit everyone”,
and leaves space and logical basis for systematic iteration.
==PAGE:58==
46
7 Discussion
7.2
Diﬀiculties and compromises in design
Although the modularity and serialization direction has increased the flexibility of the
system, there are still many contradictions and technical compromises in the actual
modeling and evaluation, especially focusing on the following aspects:
· Wearability vs. Grip comfort Some shapes are very comforting to hold (e.g., oval
shapes, chunky seeds), but seem abrupt or even bulky when worn (e.g., as a brooch
or necklace). On the other hand, thin and light shapes are easy to carry, but reduce
the presence and psychological support.
· Uniformity of structure and interface vs. diversity of form languages In order to
realize the interchangeability of the shell, the volume of the core module and the in-
terface must be the same, which limits the creative expression of certain appearances,
such as irregular natural objects, overly anthropomorphic shapes, and so on, which
are diﬀicult to match with the standard structure.
· Emotional Details vs. Process Feasibility Some emotional design techniques (e.g.,
“the device squirms slightly when held”) are effective in evoking user interest in the
model, but are diﬀicult to be realized in a low-cost way, and may be beyond the
project’s ability to produce and validate in practice.
Therefore, on the premise of system unity, this project chose to keep the three typical
styling combinations as a collection of “expandable but not exhaustive” examples,
rather than attempting to solve all user scenarios at once.
7.3
Whether emotional connection can really be
established by form and usage
One of the core assumptions of this project is that emotional connections can be
established through the design of specific forms, tactile sensations, wearing styles,
etc..
Initial feedback from the user evaluation suggests that this assumption has
some validity:
Certain users actively name and give emotional meaning to devices;
Certain shapes (e.g., warm seeds, snug curved shells) were indeed described as “like
a friend” and “like a talisman.”
The act of holding itself is considered a calming action in anxious states;
However, the creation of emotional connections is always subjective and unenforceable,
and the meanings that different users attribute to a product are derived from their
==PAGE:59==
7.4 Is user participation in choice more important than strong settings?
47
personal experiences, psychological needs and contextual associations.
In other words, design can create a field of emotional connection possibilities, but it
cannot control whether users will really get emotionally involved. Therefore, a truly
effective emotional product is open, projectable and reinterpretable.
Through the modularized shell and the emotional symbol system, this project provides
users with multiple empowering entrances, so that the device has the opportunity to
gradually become an emotional container - a kind of existence that has the functions of
a tool and an emotional companion at the same time. The project provides users with
multiple meaning-empowering entrances through the modular housing and emotional
symbolization system, so that the device has the opportunity to gradually become an
emotional container - a kind of existence that has both the functions of a tool and an
emotional companion.
7.4
Is user participation in choice more important than
strong settings?
While traditional self-tracking devices rely on preset functions and standardized pro-
cesses, this project attempts to open up the variability of the device’s form, interac-
tion, and symbolic meaning, allowing users to choose the appropriate module accord-
ing to their own feelings during the treatment process.
Although this strategy is technically more complex, the feedback from users shows
that “being allowed to choose” is a positive experience in itself, which reflects the
respect for personal rhythm, emotional changes and expression.
Especially in psychotherapy scenarios, users are often in a state of loss of control,
being regulated, being treated, and if they can get a sense of control, selectivity, and
ritual behavior in the device, it can enhance their aﬀinity for the therapeutic tool.
Therefore, the modular system is not only a functional structure, but also a design
philosophy:
Rather than deciding for the user how to record, This prject create spaces that support
them to record themselves in their own way.
==PAGE:60==
48
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
This project, as an exploration of wearable devices to enhance user experience and
emotional connection in psychotherapeutic support, has initially established a mod-
ular structure with three series of prototype systems, and has received some user
feedback. However, due to the limitations of testing time, resources and implementa-
tion levels, many potential design directions and deeper issues remain to be further
developed. In the following, we propose possible future work paths from three dimen-
sions: user research, series expansion, and structure optimization.
8.1
Research on user feedback
Although this project has obtained certain user perception feedback through low-
fidelity prototyping, the establishment of emotional connection is essentially a long-
term and dynamic process, which cannot be fully verified by one-time testing for its
real effect. Therefore, the following in-depth research should be carried out:
Longer-term usage tracking: Let users continue to use the device in real daily life,
record the frequency of use, mood fluctuations and the interactive content of the
device, and observe the evolution of the “emotional relationship”;
Embedded research in therapy sessions: Introduce the device into the actual psy-
chotherapy process, observe its real role in the three phases of “Record-Repeat-
Assign”, and conduct feedback evaluation of therapeutic effects jointly with psy-
chotherapists;
User Co-creation Participation Mechanism: Invite patients, counselors and family
members to participate in design workshops and co-creation discussions to collaborate
on the design of a series of shells, interaction logic and data feedback methods that
are closer to the needs;
Emotional connection visualization and data interface development: collaborate with
mental health researchers and data visualization experts to develop a data presenta-
tion that matches the OBT device, so that therapists and patients can work together
to understand the significance of emotional recording.
==PAGE:62==
50
8 Future Work
These mechanisms of deeper engagement will not only complement the temporal and
clinical limitations of current research, but also advance the device’s transformation
from a “physical prototype” to a “therapeutic tool”.
8.2
Series extensions
The current three-group series presented in this project are primarily oriented towards
daily use scenarios for adult users. However, the audience for mental health issues
goes far beyond that, and future work could be expanded in the following ways:
Adolescent and child users: they are more likely to establish an emotional connection
with figurative and anthropomorphic objects, and the shell design can incorporate
pets, small dolls, and sticker decorations to lower the threshold of use;
Elderly users: they are more suitable for devices with simple feedback, easy operation
and clear wearing styles, and at the same time, they have higher requirements for
material touch and safety;
Cross-cultural scenarios: some cultures have traditional backgrounds for “portable
talismans” and “emotional objects”, such as Tibetan Buddhist hand beads, East
Asian amulets, and Western commemorative pendants, etc., all of which can be used
as sources of inspiration for the development of culturally adapted series;
Scenario-oriented expansion: e.g., designing lightweight/stationary devices for users
who are “traveling”, ‘hospitalized’, “bedridden”, and realizing the ability of devices
to adapt to the pace of life.
By expanding the sample of users and cultural understanding, the emotional container-
type self-tracking device will have a wider scope of application and social value.
8.3
Optimization of structure and modular
replacement parts, exploration of ways to meet
different user needs
The project has built a basic modular system of “core components + shell + acces-
sories”, but in practice there are still certain limitations and challenges, the follow-up
work can be optimized in the following directions:
Optimization of interface standardization: Explore more universal, stable and com-
fortable structural connection methods such as magnetic suction, screw buckle, soft
==PAGE:63==
8.3 Optimization of structure and modular replacement parts, exploration of ways to meet different user
needs
51
card slot, etc., to ensure that the “replacement of the shell” is easy to operate for
different users;
Improved component compatibility: geometric algorithms or a library of 3D modeling
rules allow users to customize their preferred shells while still being compatible with
the core structure;
Functional layer structure: Clearly define the functional modules of “Press Input”,
“Feedback Output”, “Status Display” and “Data Synchronization”.
”The physical
layering of each functional module makes the functional logic and user interaction
clearer;
Exploration of material and sensor fusion: Use of new materials (e.g., flexible elec-
tronics, deformable materials) to explore the fusion of form and technology, such as
“grippable sensing area”, “emotional thermal feedback skin” and appearance integra-
tion design.
The sustainability of the modular system is an important foundation of this project,
and the goal of future work should be to make the logic of the structure simpler, the
user more free to use it, and the space for expression more abundant.
Future work should not be limited to the realization of functions, but should also
focus on the role and meaning of the device in the real emotional relationship. The
core value of this project lies in the establishment of an emotion tracking system that
can be empowered, selected, and co-created, which requires the synergy of multiple
disciplines such as design, engineering, psychology, and user experience. The follow-
up work will help to upgrade the “self-tracking device” from a tool to a real role
as an “emotional partner”, providing a more humanized and gentle technological
intervention in the field of mental health.
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This project is centered on self-tracking experience in psychotherapy, and tries to
reconstruct the functional role and emotional value of the One Button Tracker (OBT)
device through the emotional design method. Using modular structure as the system
foundation and emotional connection as the design core, we propose and construct
a tracking system prototype that allows users to freely choose, combine and project
emotions.
Through indirect research and role empathy analysis of users in the mental health
field, the project recognizes that people need not only instrumental support, but
also emotional empathy and companionship in the process of recording their own
status. Therefore, the project proposed a design strategy based on the architecture
of Unified Core + Interchangeable Shells + Various Wearing Styles, and centered on
the three typical emotional connections - newborn/soothing, social invisibility, and
sense of existence/self-aﬀirmation, the project developed the following products Three
conceptual prototypes were developed: Seed Series, Card Series and Body Extension
Series.
In the modeling and user feedback stage, although the functional product has not
yet been completed, there is preliminary evidence that users can establish different
degrees of emotional connection with the device through the elements of form, touch,
weight, etc., and tend to choose the appropriate emotional container in different
scenarios.
The freedom of choice brought about by the modular system has also
been evaluated as a trustworthy design strategy that meets differentiated needs and
provides room for future product expansion.
The significance of this project lies not only in the design of several device prototypes,
but also in the idea of transforming from functional tools to emotional objects. In
mental health support devices, focusing on how people live with the device, how to
give it meaning, and how to get comfort and control from it is a warmer technology
design orientation.
Although there are still many limitations in this project, such as insuﬀicient func-
tional validation, limited sample size, and a short life cycle, it has initially depicted a
prototype of a future device system that is perceivable, meaningful, and sustainable.
==PAGE:66==
54
9 Conclusion
Future work will further integrate the clinical environment, co-creation mechanism
and long-term tracking to promote the system into practice.
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A:
Visualization of My
Data from OBT for a
Week
Figure A.1: Fraction of observations per hour of the day.
==PAGE:68==
56
A Appendix A: Visualization of My Data from OBT for a Week
Figure A.2: Number of observations per hour of the day.
Figure A.3: Average number of observations per weekday.
==PAGE:69==
A Appendix A: Visualization of My Data from OBT for a Week
57
Figure A.4: Phenomena.
==PAGE:70==
58
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B: Arduino
Functional Prototype
Code
const int buttonPin = 2; // Pushbutton connected to D2
const int vibrationMotorPin = 9; // Vibration motor connected to D9
bool isPressed = false; // State of the button
unsigned long pressStartTime = 0; // Time when the button was pressed
void setup()
pinMode(buttonPin, INPUTP ULLUP); //Enableinternalpull −upforthebutton
pinMode(vibrationMotorPin, OUTPUT); // Set motor pin as output
Serial.begin(9600); // Initialize serial communication
void loop()
int buttonState = digitalRead(buttonPin); // Read current button state
if (buttonState == LOW) // Button is currently pressed
if (!isPressed) // First time detecting the press
isPressed = true;
pressStartTime = millis(); // Record the start time
digitalWrite(vibrationMotorPin, HIGH); // Keep vibrating while pressed
==PAGE:72==
60
B Appendix B: Arduino Functional Prototype Code
else // Button is released
if (isPressed)
isPressed = false;
unsigned long pressDuration = millis() - pressStartTime; // Calculate how long it
was held
Serial.print(”Button held for ”);
Serial.print(pressDuration);
Serial.println(” ms”);
digitalWrite(vibrationMotorPin, LOW); // Stop vibration
delay(10); // Small delay for signal stability
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[Ana25]
AnalogLab. AnalogLab – Exploring emotional technology and sensorial
interaction. Accessed: 1-July-2025. 2025. url: https://www.analoglab.
io/.
[Are+21]
Ida-Marie T. P. Arendt et al. “Distinguishing between rumination and
intrusive memories in PTSD using a wearable self-tracking instrument:
a proof-of-concept case study.” In: The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist
14 (2021), e15. doi: 10.1017/S1754470X2100012X.
[Ber24]
Nate Berg. This always-listening AI necklace wants to be your new best
friend. Fast Company, Accessed: 1-July-2025. 2024. url: https://www.
fastcompany.com/91163068/this-always-listening-ai-necklace-
wants-to-be-your-new-best-friend.
[Cho+14a]
Eun Kyoung Choe et al. “Understanding quantified-selfers’ practices in
collecting and exploring personal data.” In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’14. ACM,
April 2014, pages 1143–1152. doi: 10.1145/2556288.2557372. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372.
[Cho+14b]
Ming Ki Chong et al. “Squeeze the moment: denoting diary events by
squeezing.” In: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Con-
ference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct Publication.
UbiComp ’14. ACM, September 2014, pages 219–222. doi: 10.1145/
2638728 . 2638734. url: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2638728 .
2638734.
[LDF10]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A stage-based model of per-
sonal informatics systems.” In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’10. ACM, April 2010,
pages 557–566. doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753409. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/1753326.1753409.
[LEC17]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen.
“Active Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wear-
able: A Case Study in Military PTSD.” In: CoRR abs/1703.03437 (2017).
arXiv: 1703.03437. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03437.
==PAGE:74==
62
Bibliography
[Maj24]
Marcin Majka. Mastering Product Development with the Double Dia-
mond Framework. 2024.
[Nor04]
Donald A Norman. Emotional design. Perché amiamo (o odiamo) gli
oggetti della vita quotidiana. Apogeo Editore, 2004.
[Nun24]
Nuna Technology. Nuna Technology. Accessed: 1-July-2025. 2024. url:
https://www.nunatechnology.com/.
[Rii+24]
Lisa Groenberg Riisager et al. “Snapping Out of It: How a Wearable for
Self-Tracking Assisted Psychotherapy Bridges the Gap Between Thoughts
and the World.” In: Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’24. ACM, May 2024, pages 1–
7. doi: 10.1145/3613905.3637112. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1145/3613905.3637112.
[Rii+25]
Lisa Groenberg Riisager et al. “Use of a Wearable Self-Tracking In-
strument by Refugees with Complex PTSD: Qualitative Study on Psy-
chotherapeutic Mediation and Engagement.” Manuscript in review. 2025.
[Uni25]
Universal Design Guide. Universal Design Guide – Inclusive and Human-
Centered Design Principles. Accessed: 1-July-2025. 2025. url: https:
//universaldesignguide.com/.
[Wor22]
World Health Organization. Mental Disorders — Fact Sheet. Accessed:
1-July-2025. 2022. url: https://www.who.int/news- room/fact-
sheets/detail/mental-disorders.
