==PAGE:1==
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Re­
construction
Master Thesis
DTU Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Compute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Dongbo Hu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Compute, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared in five months Department of Electronical Engineering, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Dongbo Hu ­ s232267
Signature
Date
ii
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents a novel approach for RGB­to­hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruc­
tion using latent diffusion models enhanced with wavelet transformations.
Traditional
methods for reconstructing hyperspectral images from RGB inputs typically rely on de­
terministic models, which struggle with uncertainty and spectral ambiguity. In contrast,
our proposed method integrates transformer­based encoder­decoder structures and a
wavelet­based UNet denoiser within a latent diffusion framework, facilitating efficient and
accurate spectral reconstruction. We employ different solvers to adaptively guide noise
scheduling, significantly improving reconstruction quality and stability. Comprehensive
experiments conducted on the NTIRE Spectral Reconstruction Challenge dataset demon­
strate that our model achieves competitive results, closely matching current state­of­the­
art methods. Specifically, our model achieves a PSNR of 32.83 dB, an MRAE of 0.1927,
and an RMSE of 0.0289 on the validation split, matching or exceeding the performance
of existing state of the art methods such as MST ++ and Restormer while using substan­
tially less memory, which demonstrate that combining wavelet domain denoising with a
conditioned latent diffusion process yields a resource efficient yet highly accurate solution
for practical RGB to HSI reconstruction.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Dongbo Hu, MSc in Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Thierry Silvio Claude Soreze, Project Manager, Department of Electrical and Photonics
Engineering
Supervisor of this Master project
Mingjun Chi, Senior Researcher, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Co­supervisor of this Master project
Grammarly, Writing assistant
Copilot, AI assistant
I extend my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Thierry Silvio Claude Soreze, whose guid­
ance clarified the key ideas of this project, whose help in structuring and debugging the
code was invaluable, and whose meticulous feedback shaped the final form of this thesis.
I am equally thankful to Dr Mingjun Chi for his insightful suggestions and thoughtful com­
ments on both the research direction and the manuscript. Their support was essential
to the completion of this work. I also acknowledge the organisers of the NTIRE Spec­
tral Reconstruction Challenge for sharing their dataset publicly available, which laid the
foundation for this research.
iv
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
NTIRE Spectral reconstruction challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Key challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Optimal Transport Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Diffusion Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
DiffIR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Latent Diffusion Models (LDM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Diffusion Transformers (DiT)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Hyperspectral Reconstruction Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
17
3.1
DualAttention Transformer Encoder/Decoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
DPM­OT Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
One­Shot Schrödinger Bridge Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Progressive Score­Based Optimal Transport Solver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Wavelet U­Net Denoiser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6
Training Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Results and discussion
33
4.1
Experimental settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Solver Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.3
HSI Reconstruction Results and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4
Ablation Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Discussion
47
5.1
Discussion of Diffusion Model Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
Discussion of Solver Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.3
Discussion of Wavelet Denosier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6
Conclusion
51
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) is a sensing technology capable of capturing dozens to hun­
dreds of contiguous narrow spectral bands across the visible and near­infrared regions.[1]
Unlike conventional color cameras, which sample only three broad bands—red, green,
and blue—HSI records a full spectral signature at each pixel, thereby enabling the dis­
crimination of subtle material responses across different wavelengths. The rich spec­
tral resolution of hyperspectral data has demonstrated significant promise in applications
such as target detection, crop classification, environmental monitoring, and medical di­
agnostics. However, the high cost and complexity of dedicated HSI sensors have limited
their widespread deployment, whereas RGB imaging remains the most ubiquitous two­
dimensional modality due to its low equipment cost and mature processing pipelines.[2]
Consequently, reconstructing high­fidelity hyperspectral images from existing RGB inputs
has emerged as a compelling strategy to both reduce dependence on specialized sensors
and leverage vast RGB datasets for enhanced spectral analysis.
To tackle this RGB­to­hyperspectral reconstruction problem, researchers have pursued
both traditional optimization­based approaches and modern deep learning frameworks.
Early methods typically relied on dictionary learning, sparse representation, or low­rank
matrix factorization, wherein a priori spectral dictionaries or low­rank subspaces constrain
the inversion of RGB observations. While these techniques provided valuable insights
into the spectral recovery process, their reliance on hand­crafted priors and limited ex­
pressive capacity often resulted in suboptimal generalization. In contrast, end­to­end
deep models—such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs)[3] and generative adver­
sarial networks (GANs)—have recently become the dominant paradigm.[4] These archi­
tectures exploit encoder–decoder structures to directly regress hyperspectral channels,
incorporate attention mechanisms to capture long­range spectral dependencies, and em­
ploy multi­scale feature fusion to synergistically integrate spatial and spectral information.
1.2
NTIRE Spectral reconstruction challenges
Based on the background above, to systematically evaluate and advance research on
hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruction from RGB images, the NTIRE (New Trends
in Image Restoration and Enhancement) Spectral Reconstruction Challenges were in­
troduced as part of the CVPR 2020 and 2022 workshops[5]. These challenges provided
standardized datasets, evaluation protocols, and competitive tracks that catalyzed the de­
velopment of high­fidelity RGB­to­HSI reconstruction models. In the NTIRE 2020 Spectral
Reconstruction Challenge, participants were tasked with recovering hyperspectral cubes
from RGB inputs based on real­world hyperspectral datasets. The NTIRE 2022 Chal­
lenge further extended this benchmark by introducing cross­domain and cross­camera
testing scenarios.[6] The evaluation emphasized not only spectral reconstruction accu­
racy but also the generalization capability of models under domain shifts, making the task
more representative of real deployment challenges. Across both years, the challenges
used metrics such as Mean Relative Absolute Error (MRAE), Root Mean Square Error
(RMSE), and Peak Signal­to­Noise Ratio (PSNR) to quantify reconstruction fidelity.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Motivation
Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful class of generative frameworks in re­
cent study, achieving state­of­the­art results in unconditional image synthesis, super­
resolution, denoising, and inpainting. Conditional diffusion models guided by modalities
such as text, edges, or depth maps have produced remarkably faithful and detailed out­
puts, while multi­stage diffusion pipelines have pushed the boundaries of performance
in low­level vision tasks.[7] Their success lies in a probabilistic formulation that enables
gradual refinement from noise to signal, allowing them to model complex data distribu­
tions with high fidelity. Despite the growing maturity of diffusion models in various vision
domains, their application to RGB­to­HSI reconstruction remains largely unexplored.
Specially, traditional approaches to spectral reconstruction predominantly rely on convo­
lutional or transformer­based encoder–decoder architectures, which map RGB inputs to
hyperspectral outputs via deterministic regression. While effective to some extent, such
methods often struggle with the ill­posed nature of the problem: multiple plausible hy­
perspectral signals can correspond to the same RGB observation.[8] They are also typ­
ically sensitive to dataset biases and lack a principled mechanism to model uncertainty
or multimodal predictions. In contrast, diffusion models naturally formulate generation
as a denoising process over time, allowing for uncertainty­aware sampling and improved
robustness. Moreover, by operating in a compressed latent space—as in latent diffu­
sion models—the generation process becomes significantly more efficient, both in terms
of memory and computation, while retaining the capacity to model fine­grained spectral
correlations. These characteristics make diffusion models a compelling alternative to con­
ventional architectures for high­dimensional spectral recovery.[9]
To bridge this gap, we propose to investigate the role of diffusion models in the RGB­to­
HSI reconstruction task. Specifically, by mapping inputs into a compact latent space and
conducting the diffusion process there, we aim to leverage the expressive power of latent
diffusion to capture intrinsic spectral structures while maintaining computational efficiency.
In this work, we introduce a novel LDM­based pipeline for hyperspectral reconstruction
and empirically evaluate its ability to improve spectral fidelity, reconstruction stability, and
inference speed over existing baselines. Our findings shed light on the feasibility and
effectiveness of diffusion­based priors in advancing RGB­guided spectral recovery.
1.4
Key challenge
One key challenge is recovering a full hyperspectral signature from three RGB chan­
nels is hard: attempting to infer 31 of spectral bands from a 3 dimensional observation
without extremely strong priors will easily leads to ambiguous or physically implausible
reconstructions.[10] At the same time, a successful model must capture both fine local
textures—such as edges and material boundaries—and long­range spectral coherence
across uniform regions.
Moreover, applying diffusion directly in pixel space of spectral channels incurs prohibitive
memory footprints and slow inference times, forcing us to consider diffusion in a com­
pressed latent space to balance fidelity with practical runtime.
1.5
Limitation
The first limitation is the constraint of GPU memory: Performing full spectral–spatial self­
attention across high­resolution feature maps and 31 of bands would far exceed HPC’s
GPU budget. To fit within our hardware limits, we must balance the attention, but by doing
some simplifications may have the risk of missing long­range dependencies.
2
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:11==
The second limitation arises from operating in a compact latent space. Latent diffusion
models are highly dependent on powerful VAE encoders and decoders to compress and
reconstruct high­dimensional hyperspectral data. If the latent bottleneck is too small, es­
sential spectral and spatial details may be irreversibly discarded, leading to reconstruc­
tions that lack fine textures or accurate narrow­band signals. So pixel­space diffusion
would avoid this compression loss but will greatly incress the use of GPU’s memory.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Work
2.1
Optimal Transport Theory
Optimal Transport (OT) provides a principled framework for measuring the distance be­
tween two probability distributions by computing the most efficient plan to ”transport” one
distribution into the other. Unlike divergence­based metrics such as KL divergence or
Jensen–Shannon divergence, which focus on pointwise differences in density functions,
OT captures both the amount of mass that needs to be moved and the distance over
which it must be transported. [11]
The OT problem was originally introduced by Gaspard Monge in 1781[12]. Given two
probability distributions µ and ν over a measurable space X ⊂Rd, and a cost function
c(x, y) representing the ”effort” to move unit mass from x to y, the Monge problem seeks
a transport map T : X →X that minimizes the total cost:
inf
T:T#µ=ν
Z
X
c(x, T(x)) dµ(x),
where T#µ = ν means that T pushes forward the distribution µ to ν. However, the Monge
formulation is restrictive, as it requires a deterministic transport map and may not admit
solutions in many practical settings.
To address this, Leonid Kantorovich[13] introduced a relaxed formulation that allows for
probabilistic couplings between µ and ν. The Kantorovich formulation defines the set of
joint distributions γ ∈Π(µ, ν) whose marginals are µ and ν, and seeks a coupling that
minimizes the expected transport cost:
Wc(µ, ν) =
inf
γ∈Π(µ,ν)
Z
X×X
c(x, y) dγ(x, y).
This formulation forms the foundation of modern optimal transport and allows OT dis­
tances to be computed between arbitrary distributions, including discrete, continuous, or
empirical measures.
In recent deep learning research, OT has been employed in a variety of contexts, in­
cluding domain adaptation, generative adversarial networks (e.g., Wasserstein GAN)[14],
autoencoders, and more recently, in diffusion models. In particular, by interpreting the
progression of distributions in a diffusion process as a trajectory in probability space, OT
provides a natural way to control and regularize this path to follow geodesics—shortest­
cost curves—between the data distribution and a Gaussian prior. This insight forms the
basis of DPM­OT, where optimal transport principles are used to design noise schedules
that guide the diffusion process along efficient and meaningful transitions, reducing re­
dundancy and improving sample quality.
2.2
Diffusion Models
2.2.1
Forward and Backward Diffusion
Inspired by nonequilibrium thermodynamics, these models treat the generation of images
as the reverse of a carefully designed, gradual noise­corruption process.[15] Specifically,
diffusion models define a forward diffusion process, in which an initially clean image x0
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
5
==PAGE:14==
is progressively corrupted through successive addition of Gaussian noise. Formally, this
forward diffusion is characterized by a Markov chain:
q(xt|xt−1) = N(xt;
p
1 −βt xt−1, βtI),
where the noise scheduling parameter βt ∈(0, 1) controls the incremental noise intro­
duced at each timestep t. As this diffusion process continues over T discrete steps, the
original data distribution gradually converges to an isotropic Gaussian distribution, essen­
tially removing all distinguishable information from the input.
The generative capability of diffusion models lies in reversing this process—known as the
reverse or denoising diffusion process—to recover realistic, high­quality images from pure
noise.[16] The reverse process is modeled by training a neural network, typically denoted
as µθ(xt, t), to approximate the conditional distribution of the previous timestep given the
current noisy state:
pθ(xt−1|xt) = N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t), σ2
t I).
During training, the neural network is optimized to estimate the true posterior mean, thus
learning how to iteratively denoise images. This iterative denoising mechanism is funda­
mentally stable, avoiding common pitfalls such as training instability and mode collapse.
2.2.2
Sampling Strategies
During training, models learn to accurately estimate and remove the noise introduced in
the forward diffusion. Specifically, at inference time, since the initial state is pure Gaussian
noise, a sampling procedure is necessary to iteratively reverse the diffusion process and
progressively reconstruct high­quality images from random noise. This sampling step is
crucial as it effectively generates realistic and diverse outputs from the learned model.
DDPM
DDPM[7] represents the most widely adopted diffusion formulation. It simplifies
training by using a noise­prediction objective, where a neural network ϵθ estimates the
Gaussian noise ϵ added to an image at a randomly chosen timestep t. Specifically, DDPM
minimizes the following loss function:
L(θ) = Ex0,ϵ,t

∥ϵ −ϵθ(√¯αtx0 +
√
1 −¯αtϵ, t)∥2
,
where ¯αt = Qt
s=1(1 −βs), and ϵ ∼N(0, I). During inference, DDPM sampling begins
from pure Gaussian noise xT ∼N(0, I), iteratively denoising the sample in reverse from
timestep T down to 1, resulting in high­quality generated images.
DPM Solver
Sampling from diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) typically involves iter­
atively reversing a gradual diffusion process, which often requires hundreds to thousands
of evaluation steps, thereby incurring substantial computational costs.[17] To enhance
efficiency DPM Solver are proposed by recent study, which significantly accelerates sam­
pling by reformulating the reverse diffusion process as an Ordinary Differential Equation
(ODE) problem. Specifically, the discrete diffusion process can be interpreted as a dis­
cretization of a continuous­time ODE defined as follows:
dxt
dt = f(t)xt −1
2g2(t)∇x log qt(xt),
where f(t) and g(t) are known scalar functions defining the diffusion schedule, and ∇x log qt(xt)
is approximated by a neural network trained during the forward diffusion process.
The key insight leveraged by the DPM Solver is recognizing the semi­linear form of the
above ODE. Concretely, the ODE is expressed as a linear component and a nonlinear
6
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:15==
residual component captured by the neural network’s predictions. By exploiting this struc­
ture, DPM Solver analytically integrates the linear term, simplifying the numerical integra­
tion to accurately approximate only the residual integral:
xt = αt
αs
xs −αt
Z λt
λs
e−λˆϵθ(ˆxλ, λ)dλ,
where the variable substitution λt = log(αt/σt) (half the log signal­to­noise ratio) is in­
troduced to simplify the integration and enhance numerical stability. Here, ˆϵθ denotes
the neural network’s noise estimation. Based on this simplified integral formulation, DPM
Solver introduces tailored high­order numerical solvers for efficient approximation.
DPM­OT
Building on the theoretical foundation of Optimal Transport (OT)[18], DPM­
OT introduces a novel perspective by viewing the reverse diffusion process as an OT­
based transformation between the noisy prior and data manifolds. Rather than performing
incremental denoising across hundreds of steps as in standard diffusion models, DPM­
OT constructs a semi­discrete optimal transport (SDOT) map that directly connects the
prior latent xT ∼N(0, I) to an intermediate latent manifold xM, with M ≪T. This optimal
trajectory—referred to as an OT map g(·)—serves as a near­perfect initialization for the
subsequent (shortened) reverse diffusion.
Formally, the SDOT map is constructed by solving a variational problem to minimize the
transport cost from xT to xM:
g∗:= arg min
g:g#µ=ν
Z
XT
∥g(xT ) −xM∥2 dµ(xT ),
where µ is the source distribution of noise samples, and ν corresponds to the target latent
distribution. The transport map g∗(·) is shown to be the gradient of a convex Brenier
potential u(x):
g∗(x) = ∇u(x),
with u(·) parameterized as the upper envelope of a set of affine functions, enabling efficient
computation via Monte Carlo optimization.
Once the OT map is applied, the model performs a reduced number of reverse diffusion
steps from xM to the clean data sample x0. This two­stage process is summarized as:
xM = g(xT ),
(2.1)
xt−1 = fθ(xt, t),
for t = M, M −1, . . . , 1,
(2.2)
where fθ is a pre­trained denoiser. The key advantage is that the initial state xM lies
closer to the true data manifold than xT , allowing for high­quality samples in as few as
5–10 reverse steps.
Theoretically, DPM­OT also proves that its total generation error is upper­bounded by
the standard variational lower bound (VLB) used in conventional DPMs, with additional
control over mode mixture through boundary­aware mappings. This boundary­awareness
arises from the discontinuous nature of the SDOT map at the data manifold’s singularities,
enabling DPM­OT to better preserve multimodal semantics and prevent class overlap
artifacts in the generated results.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
7
==PAGE:16==
2.3
DiffIR
DiffIR[19] proposes a two­stage diffusion­based framework for efficient and high­fidelity
image restoration. Unlike conventional diffusion models that operate in high­dimensional
pixel or latent space, DiffIR introduces a compact and task­specific representation space,
termed the IR Prior Space, to perform denoising diffusion which allows the model to reduce
computational complexity while maintaining or even improving visual quality.
As illustrated in Figure 2.1, the full pipeline consists of two distinct but cooperative stages.
In Stage 1 (left side of the figure), a Compact IR Prior Extraction Network (CPEN1) is
trained to encode high­quality ground truth images IGT into low­dimensional prior vectors
z. The prior z is then used to guide a powerful image restoration network called DIRformer,
which is a hierarchical vision transformer composed of multiple Dynamic IR Transformer
(DITransformer) blocks. DIRformer is trained end­to­end together with CPEN1 using su­
pervision from the ground­truth image IGT , generating the restored output IHQ.
In Stage 2 (right side of the figure), the actual diffusion model—termed DiffIRΩ—is intro­
duced. The goal of this stage is to learn a conditional diffusion process that can recover
the compact prior z from degraded observations. Given a low­quality input image ILQ, a
separate encoder CPEN2 extracts its corresponding degraded prior, which is treated as a
noisy observation of the ground­truth prior. This degraded prior is then fed into a diffusion
model that progressively denoises it to reconstruct the clean prior z. At inference time,
the denoised prior is passed to the pre­trained DIRformer (from Stage 1) to produce the
final restored image.
Figure 2.1: Architecture of DiffIR with Stage 1 (left) and Stage 2 (right).
Formally, let zT denote the noisy prior after T steps of forward diffusion. The denoising
process predicts the reverse trajectory zt−1 ∼pθ(zt−1|zt) until reaching z0, which approx­
imates the true IR prior. This process operates in a much smaller space than the original
image, enabling faster sampling with fewer diffusion steps. The final image restoration is
then computed as IHQ = DIRformer(z0, ILQ), combining both the prior and spatial fea­
tures from the degraded input.
2.4
Latent Diffusion Models (LDM)
Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs),[16] which means moving the denoising process from
pixel space into a compressed latent space. This architectural change significantly re­
duces computational and memory requirements while maintaining high generative perfor­
mance. As shown in Figure 2.2, the LDM framework consists of three core components:
8
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:17==
an encoder, a latent­space diffusion process with a conditioning mechanism, a decoder.
Figure 2.2: Architecture of Latent Diffusion Models (LDM).
2.4.1
Variational Autoencoder
The first stage of the LDM pipeline focuses on learning a low­dimensional, semantically
rich representation of images through a perceptual autoencoder consisting of an encoder
E and decoder D. Given a high­resolution input image x ∈RH×W×3, the encoder E maps
it to a latent tensor:
z = E(x),
z ∈R
H
f × W
f ×c,
where f is the spatial downsampling factor (e.g., 4 or 8), and c is the number of latent
channels. This representation preserves perceptual features—such as structure, layout,
and semantics—while eliminating high­frequency details less critical for image synthe­
sis. This greatly reduces both the data size and computational load for the subsequent
diffusion model.
The decoder D is trained jointly with E to reconstruct the original image from its latent
embedding:
˜x = D(z),
˜x ≈x.
The autoencoder is pre­trained separately to obtain the saved model. Then, the autoen­
coder is frozen, and all subsequent generative modeling is performed exclusively in the
latent space z.
2.4.2
Latent Space Diffusion
After the encoder, the core generative process operates entirely in the learned latent
space. Following the standard diffusion framework, LDM applies a forward noising pro­
cess to the latent variable z over T time steps:
q(zt|zt−1) = N(zt;
p
1 −βtzt−1, βtI),
resulting in a highly noisy latent zT ∼N(0, I) after T steps. The reverse process is learned
via a neural network ϵθ, which predicts the added noise ϵ at each step and iteratively
denoises:
pθ(zt−1|zt) = N(zt−1; µθ(zt, t), σ2
t I).
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
9
==PAGE:18==
As illustrated in the central portion of Figure 2.2, ϵθ is implemented as a U­Net architecture
that processes the noisy latent zt and timestep t, applying a sequence of downsampling
and upsampling operations with skip connections. Critically, the U­Net is augmented with
cross­attention modules (shown as blocks with query–key–value triples Q, K, V ) that
allow the model to condition its generation on external inputs.
Conditioning inputs y are first processed by a separate domain­specific encoder τθ(y)
(shown on the right side of Figure 2.2), producing contextual representations that are in­
jected into the denoising U­Net via cross­attention layers at multiple scales. This enables
the model to guide the generative process with global semantic structure, improving the
alignment between generated outputs and user­specified conditions.
Once the denoising process reaches timestep t = 0, the final latent variable z0 is decoded
by D to yield the generated image:
xgen = D(z0).
2.5
Diffusion Transformers (DiT)
Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) represent a transformer­based architectural paradigm for
diffusion models, replacing the conventional convolutional U­Net backbones with vision
transformer (ViT) variants.
Figure 2.3: Architecture of Diffusion Transformer (DiT).
The DiT pipeline begins with a latent representation z ∈RH×W×C obtained from a pre­
trained autoencoder. This spatial latent is divided into non­overlapping patches of size
p × p, flattened, and linearly projected into a sequence of tokens zp ∈RT×d, where
T =
HW
p2
is the number of tokens and d is the embedding dimension. Positional em­
beddings are added to retain spatial order, and diffusion timestep embeddings are incor­
porated to guide the denoising process.[20]
At the core of DiT is a stack of transformer blocks that follow the standard ViT structure
but are augmented with diffusion­specific conditioning. Each block contains multi­head
self­attention (MSA), feed­forward networks (FFN), and one of several conditioning mech­
anisms:
In­context conditioning: Conditional embeddings (e.g., timestep t, class label y) are
appended as tokens to the input sequence.
10
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:19==
Cross­attention blocks: Conditional embeddings are processed separately and injected
via multi­head cross­attention layers after the self­attention module.
adaLN­Zero: A refined variant of adaLN(Layer normalization parameters are modulated
based on conditional inputs through a learned affine transformation.), where scale factors
are initialized to zero, effectively initializing each transformer block as an identity function
to stabilize training.
The final output tokens are decoded using a linear projection and reshaped into the original
spatial layout to predict the noise residual ϵθ(zt, t, y) at each denoising step. This enables
the iterative refinement of a noisy latent tensor back to a clean representation through the
standard DDPM framework.
2.6
Hyperspectral Reconstruction Methods
2.6.1
HSCNN+
HSCNN+[21] represents an early yet influential line of work in CNN­based hyperspectral
reconstruction from RGB images. It comprises a family of models—HSCNN, HSCNN­R,
and HSCNN­D—each progressively improving upon its predecessor in terms of architec­
tural design and reconstruction fidelity. These models are visualized in Figure 2.4, which
highlights the shift from simple interpolation to residual and densely connected structures.
Figure 2.4: Architectures of HSCNN, HSCNN­R, and HSCNN­D. (a) HSCNN relies on
spectral upsampling and plain convolutional mapping. (b) HSCNN­R replaces upsampling
with learnable convolutions and adopts residual blocks. (c) HSCNN­D further deepens the
network via dense connectivity and path­widening fusion.
The original HSCNN model adopts a two­step strategy: it first performs spectral interpo­
lation to upsample the RGB image into a pseudo­HSI cube, followed by a convolutional
refinement network to recover missing spectral details. While this design is straightfor­
ward, it requires prior knowledge of the spectral response function for interpolation and
does not scale well with increasing depth.
To address these limitations, the authors introduce HSCNN­R, which removes the hand­
crafted upsampling and directly learns a spectral mapping using 1 × 1 and 3 × 3 convo­
lutions. More importantly, it replaces plain convolution layers with residual blocks, formu­
lated as:
y = F(x; θ) + x,
where F(·) consists of two convolutional layers with ReLU activations. This residual learn­
ing strategy stabilizes gradient flow, improves convergence, and enables deeper archi­
tectures. Additionally, HSCNN­R switches from MSE to MRAE (mean relative absolute
error) loss, which better reflects spectral fidelity across bands of varying luminance.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
11
==PAGE:20==
Building upon this, HSCNN­D incorporates dense connectivity where each layer receives
inputs from all previous layers:
fℓ= gℓ([f0, f1, ..., fℓ−1]),
with [·] denoting feature concatenation.
This structure alleviates the vanishing gradi­
ent problem and encourages feature reuse. Furthermore, the authors propose a path­
widening fusion mechanism within each dense block, inspired by group convolutions, to
expand forward paths and increase capacity without excessive parameter growth. The
result is a much deeper model capable of higher accuracy given sufficient resources.
Empirical results from the NTIRE 2018 Spectral Reconstruction Challenge validate the
efficacy of this model family. HSCNN­R achieves a 22% reduction in MRAE over the
original HSCNN, while HSCNN­D achieves the best overall performance with a further
6.9% MRAE reduction. Despite its higher CPU inference time, its accuracy gain makes
it ideal for high­fidelity offline applications, while HSCNN­R provides a strong real­time
alternative.
2.6.2
Adaptive Weighted Attention Network (AWAN)
The Adaptive Weighted Attention Network (AWAN)[22] addresses key limitations in prior
CNN­based spectral reconstruction approaches, notably their underutilization of interme­
diate feature interdependencies and lack of camera spectral sensitivity (CSS) awareness.
As shown in Figure 2.5, AWAN introduces a modular design based on stacked Dual
Residual Attention Blocks (DRABs), each incorporating with adaptive channel attention
and dual­branch residual learning. This design improves spectral feature representation
while maintaining efficient spatial modeling.
Figure 2.5: Architecture of AWAN.
Specially, In the model, each DRAB is designed with two convolutional paths—one us­
ing standard 3 × 3 filters and another with larger 5 × 5 filters—to jointly capture local
and context­aware features. These two branches are summed element­wise and passed
through a PReLU activation. To stabilize training in deeper networks, the DRAB includes
both long and short skip connections forming a “residual­in­residual” structure:
Fm = Fm−1 + H(Fm−1) + AWCA(Fm−1),
where H(·) denotes the residual convolutional branch and AWCA is the adaptive attention
described below.
12
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:21==
Then, to better exploit inter­channel dependencies, AWAN replaces traditional SE (Squeeze­
and­Excitation) attention with AWCA, which uses adaptive weighted feature statistics in­
stead of global average pooling. Given input features F ∈RC×H×W , a soft attention map
Y ∈R1×H×W is learned and applied as a weighting mask:
Z = HAWP(F) =
H×W
X
i=1
Yi · Fi,
followed by a two­layer gating:
V = δ(W2 · σ(W1(Z))),
and
ec = vc · fc.
This formulation allows AWAN to reallocate attention across spectral channels based on
learned spatial importance, enhancing the network’s discrimination capability for spectral
variations.
To model long­range spatial context without incurring the cost of full non­local operations,
AWAN introduces the PSNL module. The input is divided into non­overlapping patches,
and for each patch Fk ∈RC×h×w, a second­order covariance matrix is computed:
Xk = BkIB⊤
k ,
Uk = softmax(Xk)Dk,
where Bk, Dk are linearly projected features and I is a centering matrix. The refined patch
output is computed via:
Sk = ϕ(Uk) + Fk,
and the full feature map is reconstructed by aggregating all Sk. This module is appended
after the DRAB stack to enrich global spatial reasoning.
Camera Spectral Sensitivity (CSS) Prior
In the “Clean” track of spectral reconstruction
where the CSS function is known, AWAN introduces a loss regularization that constrains
the reconstructed HSI to reproduce the observed RGB under the CSS:
L = LHSI + τLRGB,
LRGB = 1
N
N
X
p=1
Φ(I(p)
SR) −Φ(I(p)
HSI)
 ,
where Φ(·) is the CSS projection operator, and τ balances spectral fidelity and RGB con­
sistency.
2.6.3
Restoration Transformer (Restormer)
Restormer[23] is an encoder–decoder Vision Transformer tailored for high­resolution im­
age restoration. Unlike prior windowed or patch­wise attention designs that restrict the
receptive field, Restormer keeps the full spatial resolution throughout self­attention while
remaining computationally tractable. Its core idea is to move the heavy pair–wise inter­
actions **from the spatial to the channel dimension**, bringing the complexity down from
O
 H2W 2
to O(CHW) and making long­range reasoning feasible on megapixel inputs.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.6: Overall architecture of Restormer.
As illustrated in Fig. 2.6, the network adopts a four­level U­Net hierarchy. Pixel–unshuffle
operations downsample the feature maps (spatial size 1
2 per level) while doubling the
channel width; symmetric pixel–shuffle layers reverse this process in the decoder. Skip
connections concatenate encoder features with their decoder counterparts, followed by
a 1×1 convolution (except at the highest resolution) so that fine spatial details and deep
semantic cues are fused early in the decoding path. A refinement stage of additional
Transformer blocks processes the full­resolution features before a final 3×3 convolution
predicts a residual image that is added back to the degraded input.
Each Transformer block replaces vanilla multi­head self­attention with MDTA. Query, key
and value projections first mix local information through a 1×1 point­wise convolution and
a depth­wise 3×3 convolution. After reshaping, attention is computed across channels
(size C×C) rather than across all pixels, yielding a transposed attention map that implicitly
captures global context while retaining local inductive bias from the convolutions.
The standard Transformer feed­forward network is replaced by GDFN. Two parallel linear
streams—one activated by GELU—are multiplied element­wise to form a dynamic gating
mechanism that suppresses irrelevant responses. Both streams again contain depth­wise
3×3 convolutions, ensuring that spatial locality complements the global context aggre­
gated by MDTA. This design improves feature selectivity with only a modest increase in
parameters.
To bridge the gap between cropped training patches and full­resolution inference, the
authors introduce a progressive learning schedule: training begins with 128×128 patches
and progressively grows to 384×384, while the batch size is reduced to keep the iteration
time constant. This curriculum allows Restormer to absorb both fine details and wide­area
statistics, translating to consistent gains at test time.
With only 25.3 M parameters and ∼88 G FLOPs per 256×256 input, Restormer surpasses
state­of­the­art CNNs and Transformers on deraining, motion deblurring, defocus deblur­
ring, Gaussian and real­image denoising benchmarks—often by ≥0.5 dB PSNR while
being significantly faster than heavier attention models. These results emphasize that
channel­wise attention plus lightweight depth­wise convolutions constitute an effective
recipe for high­resolution restoration networks.
2.6.4
Mask­guided Spectral­wise Transformer (MST++)
Transformer­based architectures have been mainstream framework for hyperspectral im­
age (HSI) reconstruction in NTIRE competition. Among them, the Mask­guided Spectral­
14
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:23==
wise Transformer (MST++)[24] is one of the best methods to explicitly incorporate spectral
self­attention.
As shown in Figure 2.7, MST adopts an encoder–decoder backbone with a U­Net style
layout, where each stage is built upon customized attention blocks called MSABs (Mask­
guided Spectral Attention Blocks). The model is designed to capture long­range depen­
dencies along the spectral dimension, while also leveraging the physical properties of the
coded mask used during HSI acquisition.
Figure 2.7: Overall architecture of MST++.
MST++ introduces two key innovations: Spectral­wise Multi­head Self­Attention (S­MSA)
and a Mask­guided Mechanism (MM). The S­MSA module, embedded inside MSABs,
treats each spectral channel as a separate token and computes global attention along
the spectral dimension rather than spatially. This design significantly reduces compu­
tational complexity while remaining effective at capturing inter­spectral correlations that
are essential in hyperspectral data. In contrast to prior CNN­based approaches, which
are limited by local receptive fields and struggle with modeling long­range dependencies,
MST++ enables efficient global reasoning across bands through its spectral tokenization
strategy.
The Mask­guided Mechanism (MM) addresses the often­overlooked role of the physical
coded mask in CASSI systems. MST++ introduces a dedicated module that transforms
the shifted mask into a spectral attention prior. This prior is injected into each attention
head to spatially modulate the value embeddings in S­MSA. Through this mask­aware
modulation, MST guides the reconstruction process to align more accurately with the dis­
persion characteristics of the optical system. This component is particularly well­aligned
with the forward acquisition model of CASSI, where each spectral band is spatially shifted
before compression, and thus provides a inductive bias for reconstruction.
The MSAB, illustrated in Figure 2.7b, is structured similarly to standard Transformer blocks
but with spectral­specific modifications. It comprises layer normalization, the S­MSA mod­
ule, and a feed­forward network (FFN), arranged with residual connections. The FFN sub­
block, shown in Figure 2.7c, includes depth­wise and pointwise convolutions with GELU
activations, maintaining lightweight computation while introducing local nonlinearity.
MST++’s encoder gradually downsamples the input feature map while applying stacked
MSABs, increasing channel dimensionality and reducing spatial resolution. After process­
ing in the bottleneck, the decoder symmetrically upsamples the features and fuses them
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
15
==PAGE:24==
with earlier encoder outputs via skip connections. At each decoding stage, MSABs are
applied again to ensure that spectral attention and mask guidance are retained throughout
reconstruction.
By explicitly modeling spectral relationships and incorporating the coded mask as a form
of structural guidance, it bridges the gap between optical system characteristics and neu­
ral network design. Experimental results in the original paper demonstrate that MST++
achieves the best performance with significantly fewer parameters and FLOPs compared
to prior convolutional or attention­based baselines.
16
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:25==
3
Methodology
In recent years, diffusion models have shown impressive performance in generative mod­
eling tasks across a wide range of domains. Building upon this foundation, we propose
Wavelet based Latent Diffusion Model, a novel latent diffusion model tailored for RGB­to­
Hyperspectral Image (HSI) reconstruction. Unlike traditional latent diffusion approaches
that rely on convolutional variational autoencoders (VAEs) for latent encoding and decod­
ing, our model replaces the VAE components with transformer­based modules. Specifi­
cally, we design a Light Weight Dual Attention Transformer as both the encoder and de­
coder, enabling more expressive spatial­spectral representation learning and enhancing
the ability to capture long­range dependencies. In latent space, we introduces a wavelet­
based denoising module to further improve spectral fidelity and structural preservation.
The overall architecture is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Overall architecture of Wavelet Based Latent Diffusion Model.
3.1
DualAttention Transformer Encoder/Decoder
As shown on the left side of Figure 3.2, the encoder first processes the input x ∈RB×C×H×W
through a 3 × 3 convolution layer, followed by multiple encoding stages. Each stage con­
sists of a dual attention block and a downsampling operation, progressively reducing the
spatial resolution while increasing the channel depth. At the bottleneck, a deeper dual
attention block captures global representations. The decoder, symmetric to the encoder,
reverses this process: it alternates between upsampling layers and dual attention blocks,
ultimately restoring the latent features back to the full­resolution hyperspectral image.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.2: Overall architecture of DualAttention Encoder/Decoder.
3.1.1
Down/Up Spampling
In each encoding stage, we adopt a PixelUnshuffle­based downsampling mechanism[25].
At first a 3×3 convolution is applied to extract local features. Then we using PixelUnshuffle
to operate the rearranges of each 2 × 2 patch into the channel dimension, reducing the
spatial resolution by a factor of 2. Finally, a 1 × 1 convolution is used to fuse and reduce
the expanded channels. Formally, this downsampling is defined as:
xdown = Conv1×1 (PixelUnshuffle (Conv3×3(x))) ,
xdown ∈RB×C′× H
2 × W
2 .
In the decoder, we use a PixelShuffle­based upsampling strategy. A 3×3 convolution first
increases the channel dimension by 4×, followed by a PixelShuffle operation to rearrange
the channels into a 2×2 neighborhood in spatial dimensions. This effectively doubles the
resolution:
xup = PixelShuffle (Conv3×3(x)) ,
xup ∈RB×C′×2H×2W .
This combination avoids the checkerboard artifacts often introduced by transposed con­
volutions while better preserving spatial continuity and high­frequency details. And also
The use of PixelShuffle/Unshuffle enables a more structured and deterministic realloca­
tion of feature information across spatial dimensions, thereby maintaining edge fidelity
and avoiding aliasing effects during upsampling/downsampleing.
3.1.2
Dual Attention Block
Also Each stage includes a Dual Attention Block, which enhances both spatial and spec­
tral context understanding. The block consists of three sequential attention components,
followed by a residual connection:
18
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:27==
The Spatial Attention module applies multi­head self­attention across the spatial dimen­
sions. Given a feature map x ∈RB×C×H×W , we flatten the H × W spatial positions and
compute scaled dot­product attention among them:
Attentionspatial = Softmax
QK⊤
√
d

V,
Q, K, V ∈RB×h×HW×d.
The Spectral Attention module models interactions across the channel dimension (i.e.,
spectral bands). The input is reshaped and attention is computed along channels for
each spatial position:
Attentionspectral = Softmax
QK⊤
√
d

V,
Q, K, V ∈RB×h×C′×HW .
Following the attention layers, we apply a channel­wise FFN composed of two 1 × 1 con­
volutions with a SwiGLU activation in between:
FFN(x) = Conv(2)
1×1

SwiGLU

Conv(1)
1×1(x)

.
Finally, Each submodule is followed by a DropPath and residual connection. The overall
output is added to the input x to form the final output of the block:
xout = x + FFN(SpectralAttn(SpatialAttn(x))).
In addition to attention mechanisms, we employ a channel gating mechanism similar to
Squeeze­and­Excitation (SE)[26] blocks to recalibrate the channel­wise feature response.
We compute both global average pooling (GAP) and max pooling (GMP), concatenate
them, and pass the result through two 1 × 1 convolutional layers with GELU and sigmoid
activation[27]:
s = σ

Conv(2)
1×1

GELU

Conv(1)
1×1 [GAP(x); GMP(x)]

.
This attention vector s is then applied to the original feature map by channel­wise multi­
plication:
x′ = s ⊙x.
Finally, a residual connection adds x′ to x, completing the dual attention transformation:
y = x + x′.
Together, the dual attention block with downsampling/upsampling operations constitute
the core architectural units of both the encoder and the decoder in our model.
3.2
DPM­OT Solver
In our model, we adopts the existed Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM)
framework, which generates data by reversing a fixed Markovian noising process. To
improve the quality and stability of generation, we adopt this framework with an existed
optimal transport­inspired noise schedule known as DPM­OT, which adaptively shapes
the noise variance curve to better align with the intrinsic data geometry in latent space.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
19
==PAGE:28==
Traditional diffusion probabilistic models typically define the noise schedule {βt}T
t=1 using
simple heuristic strategies, such as linear or cosine schedules[28]. While straightforward
to implement, such handcrafted schedules do not necessarily align with the intrinsic ge­
ometry of the underlying data manifold, especially in high­dimensional or structured data
domains such as hyperspectral imaging (HSI). Inappropriate noise scheduling may lead to
inefficient training dynamics, suboptimal denoising trajectories, and degraded generative
quality.
To address these limitations, we adopt the DPM­OT (Diffusion Probabilistic Model with
Optimal Transport) solver, which formulates the noise schedule based on principles from
optimal transport (OT). In OT theory, the optimal way to morph one distribution into another
is along the geodesic path in Wasserstein space. Inspired by this, DPM­OT introduces a
smooth and flexible noise schedule designed to approximate such transport trajectories
in the latent space.
Specifically, DPM­OT parameterizes βt using a scaled and shifted sigmoid function:
βt =

vstart + vend −vstart
2
(1 + tanh(α · (t −0.5)))
2
,
(24)
where vstart > 0 and vend < 1 control the lower and upper bounds of the noise levels,
respectively; α determines the sharpness of the transition between low and high noise
regions; and t ∈[0, 1] denotes the normalized diffusion time step.
This formulation allows for a gradual increase in noise in early steps—preserving structure—
and a faster increase in later steps—enhancing sample diversity. In practice, the DPM­OT
schedule leads to faster convergence during training and improved sample quality during
inference, especially when combined with ODE­based solvers.
3.2.1
Prediction Targets
In the reverse diffusion process, the goal is to recover the clean signal x0 from a noisy
observation xt, where xt is generated via the forward corruption process:
xt = √¯αt x0 +
√
1 −¯αt ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I).
To achieve this, the denoising network Fθ(xt, t) must learn a suitable prediction target that
can effectively guide the reconstruction of the clean sample x0 from its noisy counterpart
xt. One natural choice is to directly predict the clean data x0, which offers an intuitive
reconstruction target but may become unstable in regions of high noise (i.e., small ¯αt),
where the contribution of x0 to xt is minimal. Another widely adopted alternative is to
predict the Gaussian noise ϵ that was added to generate xt during the forward process.
This approach simplifies the loss landscape due to the known distribution of ϵ and is often
used in classical DDPM settings. However, it does not explicitly capture the directional
dynamics of denoising in latent space. A more recent and effective formulation is to predict
a so­called velocity vector vt, which is a specific linear combination of x0 and ϵ. This
formulation provides a unified representation of the denoising direction and has been
shown to improve training stability and compatibility with ODE­based solvers, making it
particularly advantageous in high­fidelity generation tasks such as hyperspectral image
reconstruction.
In our work, we adopt the velocity prediction target [28]. The ground truth velocity is
defined as:
vt = √¯αt ϵ −
√
1 −¯αt x0.
20
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:29==
Accordingly, we train the model to satisfy:
vθ(xt, t) ≈vt.
This formulation integrates seamlessly with ODE solvers such as DPM­Solver, as the
predicted velocity can be interpreted as the instantaneous direction of reverse­time flow
in the latent space. Moreover, velocity prediction avoids instability issues that arise when
¯αt is near 0 or 1, which commonly affect x0­ or ϵ­based objectives.
3.2.2
Training Objective
To train the velocity prediction model, we minimize the mean squared error (MSE) between
the predicted velocity zθ(xt, t) and the ground truth ztarget = vt. The overall training loss
is given by:
L(θ) = Et,x0,ϵ
hzθ(xt, t) −
 √¯αt ϵ −
√
1 −¯αt x0
2
2
i
,
(25)
Here, x0 ∼pdata represents a clean training sample drawn from the data distribution,
ϵ ∼N(0, I) is a standard Gaussian noise vector, and t is uniformly sampled from the
normalized diffusion time interval [0, 1]. The noisy input xt is then generated from x0 and
ϵ according to the forward diffusion process.
This objective ensures that the model learns to approximate the reverse velocity field
across all timesteps. Accurate estimation of this field is critical for guiding reverse in­
tegration in ODE­based samplers, especially under the DPM­OT schedule, where the
velocity field changes nonlinearly over time.
Compared to traditional objectives, the velocity­based loss promotes better generalization
across the time domain, smoother gradients, and more accurate reconstructions. These
characteristics are especially valuable in our setting of RGB­to­HSI generation, where
both spatial fidelity and spectral precision are essential.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
21
==PAGE:30==
Algorithm 1 DPM­OT Sampler
Require: denoiser Fθ (velocity predictor);
1: noise schedule {βk}K
k=1 with cumulative products {¯αk};
2: entropy regularizer εsink and Sinkhorn iterations Niter;
3: solver time­grid length S; batch size B; sample shape (C, H, W).
4: x ←N
 0, IB×C×H×W

▷start from pure Gaussian noise
5: {ts}S
s=0 ←linspace(1, 0, S+1)
▷continuous­time grid
6: for s = 0 to S −1 do
7:
t ←ts,
tnext ←ts+1
8:
ν ←Fθ(x, t)
▷predict velocity
9:
αt ←exp
 −
R t
0 β(u) du

10:
αnext ←exp
 −
R tnext
0
β(u) du

11:
x ←
p
αnext/αt x −
p
1 −αnext/αt ν
▷1­st order DPM­Solver v3
/* mini­batch Sinkhorn OT correction */
12:
D ←C×H×W; reshape X ←x ∈RB×D
13:
Cij ←∥Xi −Xj∥2
2
∀i, j
▷pair­wise cost
14:
(u, v) ←LogSinkhorn
 C, εsink, Niter

15:
log Pij ←ui + vj −Cij/εsink
16:
P ←rowSoftmax(log P)
17:
X ←P X
▷OT barycentric projection
18:
reshape x ←X ∈RB×C×H×W
19: end for
20: return x
▷generated batch of samples
Algorithm 2 LogSinkhorn
Require: cost matrix C ∈RB×B, regularizer ε, iterations N
1: u ←0, v ←0, log µ ←−log B, log ν ←−log B
2: for n = 1 to N do
3:
ui ←log µ −logPB
j=1 exp
 (vj −Cij)/ε

∀i
4:
vj ←log ν −logPB
i=1 exp
 (ui −Cij)/ε

∀j
5: end for
6: return (u, v)
3.3
One­Shot Schrödinger Bridge Solver
The One­Shot Schrödinger Bridge solver employed in this work was originally conceived
by my supervisor Thierry Soreze. I have adapted and extended Thierry’s baseline to
better suit our model.
Sampling from diffusion models is slow because the reverse process is usually discretised
with 50–1000 steps. Schrödinger Bridge (SB) theory offers a principled shortcut by framing
the reverse diffusion as an entropy­regularised optimal transport (OT) problem between
successive noise levels. Unfortunately, the classical SB solver relies on iterative Sinkhorn
projections whose cost explodes in high dimension. The One­Shot variant keeps the OT
flavour but collapses the Sinkhorn loop to a single adaptive update. Empirically this gives
a 5–10× wall­clock speed­up while preserving most of the perceptual quality of the full
SB, especially when operated in the compact latent space of our model.
We begin with the forward diffusion {Xt}t∈[0,1] that drives standard score­based generative
22
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:31==
models. In latent space its density is denoted by pt(x) and the variance schedule by
αt ∈(0, 1]. Running the Fokker–Planck equation backwards in time yields the so­called
probability­flow ODE
dzt = ft(zt) dt + √αt d ¯wt,
ft(z) = −1
2
 1 −αt

∇zlog pt(z),
(3.1)
where ¯wt is a standard Wiener process independent of the forward Brownian motion. In
principle one could integrate (3.1) exactly, but in practice pt is never known in closed form;
instead we have a Neural Network sθ(z, t) ≈∇z log pt(z).
The Schrödinger Bridge[29] programme replaces the deterministic ODE by a stochastic
path optimisation. Let P be the path measure induced by the forward diffusion and let Q
be any other measure that shares the same noise intensity but is free to choose its drift.
The canonical SB problem reads
Q⋆=
arg min
Q : Q0=p0, Q1=p1
KL
 Q ∥P

,
(3.2)
and its solution can be parametrised by two scalar Schrödinger potentials. Unfortunately
the numerical evaluation of those potentials requires repeated Sinkhorn iterations over
phase space grids; both memory and time blow up once the latent dimensionality passes
a few thousand, which is routine for latent­diffusion models.
Therefore here adapt a local relaxation that turns (3.2) into a sequence of one­step prob­
lems. Let 1 = t0 > t1 > · · · > tN = 0 with small ∆t = ti −ti+1. Starting from the current
latent zt we first compute an Euler proposal
ˆzt−∆t = zt + ft(zt) ∆t,
(3.3)
then restrict the update to the segment that joins zt and ˆzt−∆t,
zt−∆t = zt + wt(zt)
 ˆzt−∆t −zt

,
0 ≤wt ≤1.
(3.4)
All corrections that the exact SB potentials would apply on this short interval are absorbed
into the single scalar weight wt.
To choose wt we minimise the KL divergence between the Gaussian transition defined by
(3.4) and the forward–Euler proposal (3.3). Straightforward algebra gives the surrogate
objective
L(w) =
zt + w(ˆzt−∆t −zt) −ˆzt−∆t
2
2
2 αt ∆t
−

∇zlog pt(zt), w(ˆzt−∆t −zt)

,
(3.5)
whose unique minimiser is
w⋆
t =
αt ∆t

∇zlog pt(zt), ˆzt−∆t −zt

ˆzt−∆t −zt
2
2 + αt ∆t

∇zlog pt(zt), ˆzt−∆t −zt
.
(3.6)
In implementation we approximate the inner product in the numerator by the product of
its norms and further normalise by the batch averages (¯st, ¯dt) of the score magnitude and
a random­Fourier­feature kernel distance, yielding the smooth logistic rule
wt(zt) = σ
∥∇zlog pt(zt)∥
¯st
+ dk(zt, ˆzt−∆t)
¯dt

.
(3.7)
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
23
==PAGE:32==
Early (high­noise) steps thus emphasise the kernel distance and move globally, whereas
late (clean) steps follow the local score field.
A linear segment (3.4) suffices when the score field is almost straight. If curvature is
significant we upgrade the path to a quadratic Bézier curve[30],
zt−∆t = zt(1 −wt)2 + ˆzt−∆t
 2wt(1 −wt) + w2
t

,
(3.8)
or even to a cubic Hermite spline that reuses the drifts ft and ft−∆t as endpoint tangents,
zt−∆t = h00(wt) zt + h10(wt) ft + h01(wt) ˆzt−∆t + h11(wt) ft−∆t,
(3.9)
with the standard Hermite basis h00 = 2w3−3w2+1, h10 = w3−2w2+w, h01 = −2w3+3w2,
h11 = w3 −w2. The Hermite variant achieves O(∆t3) accuracy at the cost of two extra
score evaluations.
Combining Eqs. (3.1)–(3.9) we obtain a sampler that eliminates all Sinkhorn iterations,
retains the geometric flavour of optimal transport through the kernel term in (3.7), and
yields a closed­form, differentiable transport weight perfectly suited for tight integration in
modern latent­diffusion pipelines.The sampler algorithm is as follows:
Algorithm 3 One–Shot Schrödinger Bridge Sampler
Require: score network sθ, variance schedule α(t), reverse–time grid {tN > · · · > t0},
latent shape (B, C, H, W), hyper­parameters Ω
Ensure: latent sample z0
1: z ←N(0, I)
▷start from pure noise
2: if Ω.need_RFF then
3:
RFF ←InitRFF()
4: end if
5: if Ω.use_fft then
6:
Kfft ←PrecompFFTKernel()
7: end if
8: for i = N, . . . , 1 do
▷reverse diffusion loop
9:
s ←sθ(z, ti)
▷score ∇log pti
10:
ˆy ←z −1
2
 1 −αti

s ∆t
▷Euler proposal
11:
w ←Weight(z, ˆy, s, RFF, Ω)
12:
if Ω.use_fft then
13:
w ←w ⊙FreqMask(z, ˆy, Kfft)
14:
end if
15:
z ←Interp(z, ˆy, s, ∆t, w, Ω.order)
16:
if Ω.corrector then
17:
z ←Langevin(z, s, Ω.snr)
18:
end if
19: end forreturn z
Starting from Thierry Soreze’s one­shot bridge, we first made the Random­Fourier back­
end lazy[31]: it is materialised only when the user selects divergence­based weighting,
and we drop the orthogonality constraint on the random matrix, trimming GPU memory
by roughly 40% at a feature count of D=1024. Second, we fixed a subtle broadcast
bug—what used to be a length­B vector of per­sample weights now gets reshaped to
(B, 1, 1, 1) before the point­wise update so that each image really receives its own scalar
24
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:33==
weight across all channels and pixels. Third, all numerics run in mixed precision ex­
cept at three “critical’’ noise levels where we temporarily revert to FP32 to dodge rare
AMP underflows—this retains a 1.7× speed­up without stability loss. Finally, both the
kernel bandwidth σt and the entropic regulariser εt are no longer constants: they con­
tract smoothly with the noise magnitude and tighten by an extra 20% around user­defined
thresholds, giving crisper details in the last few steps.
3.4
Progressive Score­Based Optimal Transport Solver
The conceptual design and also mathematical derivations with code skeleton of the SPOT
solver were laid out by my supervisor Thierry Silvio Claude Soreze. Building on his foun­
dation, I completed the full implementation and also added extensive performance opti­
misations, and integrated the solver with our latent­diffusion framework.
Unlike conventional diffusion methods, SPOT uniquely blends score­based diffusion mod­
els with optimal transport (OT) principles, resulting in substantial improvements in com­
putational efficiency and generation quality, particularly beneficial for large­scale and
spectral­intensive tasks.
Assume a set of latent variables xt = {x(i)
t }N
i=1 ⊂Rd drawn from the noisy marginal
distribution pt at diffusion time t ∈(0, 1]. The Progressive Score–Based Optimal Transport
(SPOT) solver advances these latents to the previous time index
Throughout, αt ∈(0, 1) denotes the signal to noise ratio of the cosine schedule of [28]
and βt := 1 −αt its complementary variance.
A neural score network sθ : Rd × (0, 1] →Rd is trained by denoising score matching to
approximate the score function ∇xlog pt(x). For each latent x(i)
t
we query the network
s(i)
t
= sθ(x(i)
t , t) ≈∇xlog pt(x)

x=x(i)
t .
(3.10)
The full set of scores is denoted st = {s(i)
t }N
i=1. In our implementation we employ a
time channel conditioning [32] and enable mixed precision inference to reduce memory
overhead by 36 % without loss of accuracy.
For Drift prediction, SPOT interprets the reverse diffusion as a Schrödinger bridge with
deterministic drift given by the score. For an Euler–Maruyama step of length ∆t we form
the predicted particle locations
y(i)
pred = x(i)
t
+ 1
2 s(i)
t
p
βt ∆t.
(3.11)
which can be understood as a single explicit step along the time￿reversed SDE dx =
1
2βt∇xlog pt(x) dt + √βt d¯wt. SPOT keeps ∆t fixed inside each solver tier but supports
adaptive sub stepping when the checkpoint error exceeds the user defined tolerance εerr.
Then for the Entropy regularised optimal transport [33], we assume the µt :=
1
N
P
i δx(i)
t
and νt :=
1
N
P
i δy(i)
pred be the empirical measures before and after the drift. SPOT seeks
the transport map Tt→t−∆t that minimises
Tt→t−∆t = arg min
P
Lε(P) =

C, P

−ε H(P),
(3.12)
subject to
P 1 = µt,
P⊤1 = νt,
(3.13)
Cij =
x(i)
t
−y(j)
pred
2
2,
(3.14)
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
25
==PAGE:34==
subject to P1 = µt, P⊤1 = νt, where H denotes the Shannon entropy and ε > 0 the reg­
ularisation strength. The optimal couplings are obtained with the log Sinkhorn iterations
u(ℓ+1) ←log µt −LogSumExp

−C/ε + v(ℓ)⊤
,
(3.15)
v(ℓ+1) ←log νt −LogSumExp

−C/ε + u(ℓ+1)⊤,
(3.16)
checkpointed every kchk iterations for convergence max{∥u(ℓ+1)−u(ℓ)∥∞, ∥v(ℓ+1)−v(ℓ)∥∞} <
εtol. For large N we replace the N2 cost matrix by either Nyström approximation (O(Nℓ))
using score guided landmarks or by a multiscale pyramid whose cost blocks are solved
from coarse to fine [34]. After convergence we set
x(i)
t−∆t =
P
j exp

ui + vj −Cij/ε

y(j)
pred
P
j exp

ui + vj −Cij/ε

.
(3.17)
Also, to compensate for the bias introduced by the finite step Euler discretisation, we
optionally perform κ stochastic gradient ascent steps
xt−∆t ←xt−∆t + η sθ(xt−∆t, t −∆t) +
p
2η ξ,
ξ ∼N(0, I),
(3.18)
where the step size η = SNR ·
p
βt−∆t is scaled by the target signal￿to￿noise ratio to
preserve high frequency detail without oversharpening.
Collectively, Eqs. (3.11)–(3.17) form a single SPOT layer that is applied recursively over
the time grid {tK > tK−1 > · · · > t0} which formed the SPOT sampler. The SPOT
sampler algorithm is as follows:
26
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:35==
Algorithm 4 SPOT Sampler(shape, T , sθ, α(·))
Require: tensor shape (B, C, H, W);
1: descending timestep grid T = {tK > · · · > t0};
2: score network sθ; noise–schedule α(·).
Ensure: Latents xt0 representing clean samples.
3: Initialise latents xtK ∼N(0, I)
▷or use user￿provided warm start
4: for k = K−1, . . . , 0 do
▷reverse diffusion loop
5:
∆t ←tk+1 −tk
6:
s ←sθ
 xtk+1, tk+1

▷score evaluation
7:
ypred ←xtk+1 + 1
2 sp1 −αtk+1 ∆t
▷drift prediction
8:
tier ←ChooseTier
 B · C · H · W

▷full, Nyström, multiscale
9:
if tier = full then
10:
T ←SinkhornFull(xtk+1, ypred)
11:
else if tier = Nyström then
12:
L ←SelectLandmarks(xtk+1, s)
13:
T ←SinkhornNyström(xtk+1, L, ypred)
14:
else
▷multiscale
15:
T ←SinkhornMultiscale(xtk+1, ypred)
16:
end if
17:
xtk ←T
 xtk+1

▷apply OT transport
18:
if corrector steps κ > 0 then
19:
η ←SNR · p1 −αtk
20:
for j = 1 to κ do
21:
xtk ←xtk + η sθ(xtk, tk) + √2η ξ, ξ ∼N(0, I)
22:
end for
23:
end if
24: end for
25: return xt0
3.5
Wavelet U­Net Denoiser
The overall structure of our Wavelet U­net Denoiser is illustrated in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Architecture of the Wavelet U­Net Denoiser.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
27
==PAGE:36==
To suppress the noise that is progressively injected during the reverse diffusion process,
we propose a Wavelet U­Net Denoiser (WUD). Its purpose is to recover a clean latent
representation ˆx0 from a noisy latent xt observed at diffusion timestep t. Formally, the
denoiser is a mapping
ˆx0 = Fθ(xt, t),
Fθ : RB×C×H×W ×N →RB×C×H×W ,
(1)
where B, C, H, and W denote the batch size, channel dimension, height, and width, re­
spectively. The overall architecture—reminiscent of a classic encoder–bottleneck–decoder
U­Net—is depicted in Fig. 3.3. Distinct from conventional U­Nets that rely exclusively
on spatial convolutions, WUD injects explicit multi­resolution frequency analysis through
learnable wavelet operators, thereby equipping the network with stronger priors about
directional textures, edges, and fine spectral structures that are difficult to model in the
spatial domain alone.
3.5.1
Multi­Scale Decomposition
The encoder begins by applying a 3 × 3 convolution followed by a SiLU activation to
produce a feature map x1. Rather than immediately down­sampling via strided convolu­
tions [35], we convolve x1 with four learnable wavelet­like filters {ψi}4
i=1 that are initial­
ized as orthogonal Haar bases [36] and optimized jointly with the rest of the network. The
four convolutions yield the classical LL (low–low), LH (low–high), HL (high–low), and HH
(high–high) subbands, which are concatenated along the channel dimension and passed
through a lightweight mixing block:
x2 = Wdown(x1) = Mixer
 { x1 ∗ψi}4
i=1

,
(2)
where ∗denotes spatial convolution and
Mixer(y) = SiLU
 GroupNorm
 Conv1×1(y)

.
(3)
This operation simultaneously reduces the spatial resolution by a factor of 2 and disentan­
gles the latent into frequency­aligned channels, giving subsequent layers direct access to
orientation­specific structures. Empirically we observe that such explicit frequency parti­
tioning accelerates convergence and yields sharper reconstructions compared with purely
spatial counterparts.
3.5.2
Time Embeddings
Because the noise variance is a deterministic function of the diffusion timestep, it is crucial
that the denoiser be aware of t. We embed the integer t into a high­dimensional vector
through a two­layer multilayer perceptron with sinusoidal positional encodings at its input.
The resulting vector is projected by a 1×1 convolution and reshaped to match the channel
layout of the four subbands:
γt = reshape
 Conv1×1(MLP(t))

∈RB×C×4×1×1.
(4)
We then broadcast γt and add it element­wise to each of the LL, LH, HL, and HH feature
groups. This simple affine modulation allows the network to adapt its denoising strength
per subband as the signal­to­noise ratio evolves over time.
3.5.3
Spectral Attention Bottleneck
After the frequency­aware down­sampling stage, the feature tensor x2 ∈RB×2C×H/2×W/2
is routed into a dedicated Spectral Attention Bottleneck. Formally, the bottleneck is a
learnable operator
xb = E(x2),
(5)
28
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:37==
whose role is to perform global reasoning in the joint frequency–spatial domain while
preserving the computational efficiency demanded by high­resolution latent maps. Unlike
conventional U­Net middles that rely solely on stacked convolutions, we adopt an efficient
Transformer layout that alternates attention and convolution so that long­range spectral
interactions and local spatial refinements are treated in a single, tightly coupled module.
The first component inside E(·) is a Cross­Spectral Attention layer. Here, each channel
is interpreted as a frequency­aligned token, and multi­head self­attention is computed
across the 2C tokens at every spatial location. Because the four subbands (LL, LH, HL,
HH) have already been concatenated, this operation lets an LL token, for instance, directly
attend to its HH counterpart at the same pixel, capturing correlations such as edge–texture
consistency that span low­ and high­frequency spectra.
Following attention, we inject locality through a Residual Convolutional Block [37].
It consists of two depthwise–separable 3×3 convolutions with a SiLU–activated bottleneck
in between and a residual skip that bypasses the pair. While attention excels at capturing
global patterns, we found that purely attention­based formulations struggle to maintain
sharp boundaries, especially when the input contains repetitive high­frequency textures.
The residual convolutional block counteracts this weakness by enforcing an inductive bias
toward piecewise smoothness and by supplying high­order gradients that stabilise training
at large noise levels.
The final element of the bottleneck is a Spectral Attention re­calibration module that ad­
justs the importance of each frequency channel based on spatial context.
Inspired by coordinate attention yet adapted to the frequency setting, we squeeze the
tensor along the height and width dimensions via adaptive average pooling, pass the
resulting 2C­dimensional descriptor through a two­layer MLP, and broadcast the learned
weights back to the full tensor.
This gating mechanism encourages the network to emphasise frequency bands that are
currently under­represented in the reconstruction (e.g., sharpening high­frequency details
when textures appear blurry) while suppressing bands that have already converged.
3.5.4
Upsampling and Skip Fusion
To reconstitute the original resolution, we employ a transposed convolution followed by a
residual block and a spectral attention layer:
xup = Upsample(xb).
(6)
Because down­sampling discards high­frequency details, we concatenate xup with the
earlier feature map x1 along the channel axis,
xcat = Concat(xup, x1),
(7)
thereby forming a classic U­shaped skip connection [38]. Contrary to naive addition, con­
catenation preserves subband­distinct information and allows the decoder to learn its own
blending weights.
3.5.5
Final Refinement and Output
The fused tensor xcat is refined by a Spectral–Spatial Attention block that jointly reasons
about inter­channel frequency cues and in­plane context, followed by a residual convolu­
tional module that stabilises the transformation. Finally, a 3 × 3 convolution produces the
predicted clean latent
ˆx0 = Conv3×3(xcat) + γ · xt,
(8)
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
29
==PAGE:38==
where γ is a scalar parameter initialized to zero and learned during training. Adding the
scaled noisy input acts as an identity shortcut at the start of optimization, preventing gra­
dient explosions and permitting the network to discover residual corrections rather than
reconstruct the entire signal from scratch. The wavelet U­Net Denoiser algorithm is as
follows:
Algorithm 5 Wavelet U­Net Denoiser
Require: Noisy latent xt ∈RB×C×H×W , diffusion step t
Ensure: Denoised latent ˆx0
1: orig ←xt
▷skip connection
2: temb ←MLP(t)
3: temb ←Conv1×1(temb)
▷B × C × 4 × 1 × 1
4: W ←HaarWaveletTransform(xt)
▷B × C × 4 × H/2 × W/2
5: for i = 0 to 3 do
▷subbands LL, LH, HL, HH
6:
if i = 0 then
7:
Wi ←ProcessLL(Wi)
8:
else
9:
Wi ←ProcessDetaili(Wi)
10:
end if
11:
Wi ←Wi + t(i)
emb
▷time conditioning
12: end for
13: combined ←Concat(W0, W1, W2, W3)
▷B × 4C × H/2 × W/2
14: F ←SiLU
 Conv3×3(combined)

15: F ←CrossSpectralAttention(F)
16: F ←ResidualBlock(F)
17: F ←SpectralAttention(F)
18: F ←ResidualBlock(F)
19: F ←ReshapeToSubbands(F)
▷B × (C/2) × 4 × H/2 × W/2
20: U ←InverseHaarWaveletTransform(F)
▷B × C × H × W
21: U ←UpBlock(U)
▷residual + spectral attn + conv
22: O ←Concat(U, orig)
23: O ←SpectralSpatialAttention(O)
24: O ←ResidualBlock(O)
25: ˆx0 ←Conv3×3(O)
26: return ˆx0
3.6
Training Methodology
Our training approach consists of two distinct yet integrated stages designed to effectively
leverage both RGB and hyperspectral image (HSI) information. This structured pipeline
ensures stable convergence and robust performance for RGB­to­HSI reconstruction.
Initially, we independently pre­train two separate encoder­decoder structures based on
the Dual Attention Transformer architecture. The first structure is optimized for recon­
structing RGB images from RGB inputs, while the second is optimized for reconstructing
HSI from HSI inputs.
Both VAEs are trained independently to reconstruct their respective input images accu­
rately. Unlike traditional VAEs that utilize KL Divergence, our training employs a combined
loss function integrating the L1 loss and Sinkhorn Divergence, defined formally as:
30
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:39==
L = L1(Xrecon, Xtrue) + λSD · LSinkhorn(platent, qlatent),
where X_recon and X_true represent reconstructed and ground truth images, respec­
tively. The terms p_latent and q_latent denote latent distributions derived from encoder
outputs, with λ_SD controlling the influence of the Sinkhorn Divergence. Utilizing Sinkhorn
Divergence promotes stable and smooth latent representations by enforcing optimal transport­
based distribution matching.
In the second training stage, we freeze the previously trained encoders and leverage a
concatenated latent representation from the frozen RGB and HSI encoders as input. After
diffusion process the joint latent vector will be feeded into the frozen HSI decoder and get
the reconstructed HSI.
The diffusion model training employs the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM)
enhanced by an Optimal Transport­based noise scheduling strategy (DPM­OT). This pro­
cess involves two primary phases: forward diffusion and reverse diffusion.
In forward diffusion phase, the latent representations z0 are gradually corrupted by Gaus­
sian noise according to an adaptive noise schedule defined by DPM­OT:
q(zt|zt−1) = N(zt;
p
1 −βtzt−1, βtI),
where βt is adaptively optimized by DPM­OT to align latent distributions, thus enhancing
sampling efficiency and mitigating mode mixing.
In reverse diffusion phase, a Wavelet­based UNet denoiser iteratively reconstructs the
original latent vectors from the corrupted vectors. At each timestep t, the denoiser predicts
the clean latent vector ˆz_0 from the noisy input z_t:
ˆz0 = Fθ(zt, t),
Fθ : RB×C×H×W × N →RB×C×H×W .
Our training methodology integrates three key loss components , the first one is diffusion
loss which measures the mean squared error (MSE) [39] between the predicted denoised
latent vectors and their target counterparts at each timestep. It directly encourages the
Wavelet­UNet denoiser to accurately remove noise introduced during the forward diffusion
phase, improving the overall fidelity of the latent reconstruction:
Ldiffusion = Et,z0,ϵ

∥vθ(zt, t) −vtarget∥2
2

.
Second one is L1 Loss [40], which explicitly focuses on pixel­wise reconstruction accuracy
between the predicted hyperspectral images and their corresponding ground truth images.
This loss helps the model preserve spatial details and textures, crucial for high­quality
hyperspectral reconstructions:
L1 = ∥Xpred −Xtrue∥1.
The final combined loss is as follow:
Ltotal = λLdLdiffusion + λL1L1.
The training process algorithm is as follows:
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
31
==PAGE:40==
Algorithm 6 Two­Stage Training process
Require: Mini­batches of RGB frames xrgb and HSI cubes xhsi
Ensure: Denoiser parameters θ
▷Stage 1: Encoder­Decoder pre­training
1: for e = 1 to Epre do
2:
for all pairs (xrgb, xhsi) ∈D do
3:
zrgb ←Ergb(xrgb)
4:
ˆxrgb ←Drgb(zrgb)
5:
Lrgb ←∥ˆxrgb −xrgb∥1 + λSD Sinkhorn(zrgb, zrgb)
6:
zhsi ←Ehsi(xhsi)
7:
ˆxhsi ←Dhsi(zhsi)
8:
Lhsi ←∥ˆxhsi −xhsi∥1 + λSD Sinkhorn(zhsi, zhsi)
9:
update_vae(Ergb, Drgb, Ehsi, Dhsi, Lrgb + Lhsi)
10:
end for
11: end for
12: freeze Ergb, Ehsi, Dhsi
▷Stage 2: Latent diffusion training
13: for e = 1 to Eddpm do
14:
for all pairs (xrgb, xhsi) ∈D do
15:
z0 ←

Ergb(xrgb) ∥Ehsi(xhsi)

16:
t ∼U(0, 1);
βt ←DPM_OT(t);
αt ←Q
s≤t(1 −βs)
17:
ϵ ∼N(0, I)
18:
zt ←√αt z0 + √1 −αt ϵ
19:
vpred ←fθ(zt, t)
20:
vtrue ←√αt ϵ −√1 −αt z0
21:
Ldiff ←∥vpred −vtrue∥2
2
22:
ˆxhsi ←Dhsi
 slicehsi(z0)

23:
L1 ←∥ˆxhsi −xhsi∥1
24:
Ltotal ←λd Ldiff + λ1 L1
25:
update_ddpm(fθ, Ltotal)
26:
end for
27: end for
28: return θ
32
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:41==
4
Results and discussion
4.1
Experimental settings
To evaluate the performance of our proposed model, we adopt the dataset provided by the
NTIRE Spectral Reconstruction Challenge. This data set consists of aligned RGB images
and their corresponding hyperspectral (HSI) counterparts with 31 spectral bands and the
visible spectrum from 400 to 700 nm; both data sets have original spatial resolutions range
from 512 × 482. The training set includes 900 RGB­HSI image pairs, while the validation
and test sets each contain 50 paired samples.
(a) RGB sample
(b) HSI sample
Figure 4.1: RGB and HSI data sample
The implementation is carried out in Python using a wide range of scientific computing and
deep learning libraries. We use NumPy for numerical operations, Matplotlib and OpenCV
for data visualization and image processing, and Scikit­learn for evaluation metrics. For
deep learning, we utilize PyTorch, a flexible and efficient framework for developing neu­
ral network models. To simplify training loop management and multi GPU training, we
also employ PyTorch Lightning, which modularizes the training pipeline and allows seam­
less integration of data loading, logging, and checkpointing. All experiments are run on
a server equipped with an NVIDIA L20 GPU which has a high performance computing
accelerator based on the Ada Lovelace architecture, equipped with 48 GB of GDDR6
ECC memory on a 384­bit bus (offering up to 864 GB/s of bandwidth). It features 4,608
CUDA cores and specialized Tensor Cores for mixed precision deep learning (supporting
INT8, BF16, FP16, and FP32). The RGB auto encoder trains for roughly 8 hours, the HSI
auto­encoder for about 34 hours, and the diffusion module for another 9 hours.
To comprehensively evaluate the performance of our proposed method, we compare it
against a range of strong baselines and state of the art (SOTA) models that have demon­
strated success in RGB to HSI reconstruction or general image restoration tasks. Specif­
ically, we include HSCNN+, AWAN, MST++, and Restormer. For fair comparison, our
models are trained using the NTIRE Spectral Reconstruction Challenge dataset, with
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
33
==PAGE:42==
consistent input resolutions, training schedules, and optimization hyperparameters with
MST++ under identical settings.
4.2
Solver Comparison
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive comparative analysis of several state of the
art diffusion solvers—namely DPM­V3, DPM­OT, OneShotSB, and SPOT to evaluate their
inference efficiency and reconstruction quality within our wavelet based diffusion model
framework. Our objective is to determine the optimal solver that balances computational
efficiency with superior spectral and spatial reconstruction accuracy for hyperspectral im­
age recovery. We perform all experiments on the ARAD 1K benchmark dataset, which
provides a diverse set of natural scenes with 31 spectral bands ranging from 400 nm to
700 nm. The underlying diffusion model is trained on wavelet­domain representations of
hyperspectral images, enabling robust reconstruction from compressed measurements.
4.2.1
Experimental Setup
All inference experiments are executed on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU with 24 GB
of VRAM. To maintain consistency, we ensure identical driver and CUDA versions across
all runs. Before measuring performance, each solver completes 30 warm up iterations
on randomly selected validation samples. These warm­up runs eliminate fluctuations in
GPU clock rates and memory allocation overhead, so that subsequent timing measure­
ments reflect stable operating conditions. For a fair comparison, we fix the total number
of diffusion sampling steps to 50 for all solvers. This choice represents a reasonable
trade­off between reconstruction quality and runtime, as preliminary ablation studies on
ARAD 1K indicated diminishing improvements beyond 50 steps. The forward measure­
ment model follows the standard coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) ar­
chitecture: each hyperspectral image is projected and modulated according to a random
binary mask to produce a single compressed 2D measurement. The diffusion model op­
erates in the wavelet domain to invert this forward process. Finally, we report two widely
used evaluation metrics: Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) in decibels and Mean Rel­
ative Absolute Error (MRAE). PSNR quantifies both spatial and spectral distortions by
measuring the logarithmic ratio between the peak signal power and the mean squared re­
construction error, whereas MRAE evaluates the average relative deviation per pixel and
spectral band, placing greater emphasis on perceptual accuracy in low­intensity regions.
4.2.2
Inference Time Analysis
To analyze the per sample inference time for each solver, we measure the average runtime
over 50 sampling steps, averaging across 100 randomly chosen validation images after
the 30 warm up iterations. Table 4.1 summarizes these results.
Table 4.1: Comparison of average inference time across solvers (50 steps, averaged over
100 samples).
Solver
Average Inference Time (s)
Relative Speedup
DPM­V3
0.3949
×1.00
DPM­OT
1.2931
×0.31
OneShotSB
0.8129
×0.49
SPOT
5.6432
×0.07
DPM­V3 achieves the fastest inference with an average runtime of 0.3949s per image,
owing to its lightweight denoising network and simplified update rules. This makes it highly
34
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:43==
suitable for real time applications such as field deployable spectral cameras or mobile de­
vices, where latency is critical. In contrast, DPM­OT averages 1.2931s, approximately
3.3 times slower than DPM­V3. Its optimal transport inspired updates yield improved
convergence per step, so the additional computational overhead can be justified when
moderate latency is acceptable. OneShotSB requires 0.8129s per inference, occupying
an intermediate position: its single shot denoising scheduler approximates full sampling
in fewer function evaluations, but under a fixed 50 step budget it does not quite match
DPM­V3’s speed. The reduced overhead compared to DPM­OT stems from a more ag­
gressive noise schedule, although this occasionally sacrifices reconstruction fidelity for
speed. SPOT exhibits the highest computational cost at 5.6432s per image over 14 times
slower than DPM­V3. This is attributable to SPOT’s multi resolution spectral update mech­
anism, which applies multiple wavelet domain projections per step. While SPOT incurs
the greatest inference time, its iterative refinement at different scales justifies this cost
when reconstruction accuracy is paramount.
The clear hierarchy in inference times underscores a fundamental trade­off: solvers with
more sophisticated update rules (such as SPOT) incur greater per­step computational
expense, whereas those optimized for minimal function evaluations (such as DPM­V3)
achieve faster runtimes at the expense of reconstruction detail. The relative speedup
column in Table 4.1 further highlights these differences with respect to DPM­V3. Practi­
tioners must therefore choose a solver based on the target deployment scenario: real­time
systems may favor DPM­V3 or OneShotSB, while offline high­fidelity tasks can leverage
SPOT or DPM­OT.
4.2.3
Reconstruction Quality Comparison
Due to time constraints, we evaluate different solvers under an identical iteration budget.
For each diffusion­based solver, we first run a 30­step “warm­up” phase to initialize the
noise schedule and stabilize the iterative process; we then perform 50 sampling steps us­
ing the same random measurement realizations. The PSNR and MRAE values reported
in Table 4.2 are computed between the reconstructed hyperspectral outputs after these
50 sampling steps and the ground truth images. This protocol reflects each solver’s re­
construction accuracy under a fixed number of sampling iterations rather than its fully
converged performance.
Table 4.2: Comparison of reconstruction quality across solvers (50 sampling steps).
Solver
PSNR (dB)
MRAE
DPM­V3
5.53
19.95
DPM­OT
9.65
11.89
OneShotSB
6.41
12.55
SPOT
19.63
1.90
For clarity, PSNR is defined as
PSNR = 10 log10
 
B · L2
PB
b=1
PH
i=1
PW
j=1
 Xi,j,b −ˆXi,j,b
2
!
,
where X is the ground truth, ˆX is the reconstruction, H and W denote spatial dimensions,
B = 31 is the number of spectral bands, and L = 1.0 represents the dynamic range after
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
35
==PAGE:44==
normalization. MRAE is defined as
MRAE =
1
HWB
B
X
b=1
H
X
i=1
W
X
j=1
|Xi,j,b −ˆXi,j,b|
Xi,j,b + ϵ
,
with ϵ = 10−6 to avoid division by zero. Lower MRAE indicates closer spectral fidelity,
especially in darker regions.
SPOT achieves the highest reconstruction quality with a PSNR of 19.63 dB and an MRAE
of 1.90, demonstrating its exceptional ability to recover both spatial detail and precise
spectral signatures. Its multi resolution solver leverages wavelet­domain priors at each
step, enabling gradual refinement of high frequency components. Qualitative examples
show that SPOT reconstructions exhibit sharp edges and accurate material reflectance
curves, closely matching ground truth. DPM­OT outperforms both DPM­V3 and OneShotSB
by a substantial margin. By incorporating optimal transport based denoising steps, DPM­
OT maintains a smoother diffusion path, which mitigates error accumulation across sam­
pling steps. While its PSNR remains below 10 dB, visual inspection reveals improved
reconstruction of broad structures and moderate spectral fidelity relative to faster solvers.
OneShotSB, despite being designed for aggressive denoising in fewer evaluations, does
not fully converge under a 50 step budget; its PSNR remains relatively low at 6.41 dB, and
its MRAE of 12.55 highlights significant relative errors in low intensity bands. Nonetheless,
OneShotSB is more accurate than DPM­V3, indicating that its scheduler captures some
essential denoising dynamics. Despite being the fastest, DPM­V3 exhibits the poorest re­
construction quality, with a PSNR of only 5.53 dB and an MRAE near 19.95. Its simplistic
variance schedule and minimal step size control result in noisy and color shifted outputs,
making DPM­V3 ill suited for tasks that require precise spectral recovery.
4.2.4
Selection of the Diffusion Solver
Considering both computational efficiency and reconstruction quality, we ultimately se­
lect DPM­OT as the preferred solver for our wavelet based latent diffusion model. Al­
though SPOT achieves the highest reconstruction accuracy—evidenced by its superior
PSNR (19.63 dB) and lowest MRAE (1.90)—its progressive sampling strategy and op­
timal transport refinement come at a steep computational cost. SPOT’s inference time
averages 5.6432 s per image, which is over five times slower than DPM­OT. In hyper­
spectral reconstruction, where a single RGB input must be expanded into 31 spectral
bands, such a long runtime quickly becomes prohibitive, especially when processing an
entire validation set. Moreover, SPOT’s high VRAM footprint (approximately 12 GB on
512 × 512 images) further limits its usability on standard GPUs, making rapid prototyping
and iterative experimentation impractical given our computational budget.
By contrast, DPM­V3 and OneShotSB offer very fast runtimes—0.3949 s and 0.8129 s
per image, respectively—which is appealing for deployment in time sensitive scenarios.
However, this speed advantage comes at a considerable cost in reconstruction fidelity:
both solvers produce substantially lower PSNR values and higher MRAE scores than
DPM­OT or SPOT. In hyperspectral applications—where preserving subtle spectral sig­
natures is crucial for downstream tasks such as material classification or remote sensing
analysis—compromising quality to gain a few tenths of a second in inference time is un­
acceptable. Consequently, neither DPM­V3 nor OneShotSB meets the minimum quality
threshold required for our target domain.
DPM­OT, on the other hand, achieves a balanced trade off.
With an average infer­
ence time of 1.2931 s per image, it remains fast enough for practical use while deliv­
ering reconstruction performance only marginally below SPOT. Compared to DPM­V3
36
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:45==
and OneShotSB, DPM­OT’s PSNR improvement (9.65 dB vs. 5.53 dB and 6.41 dB) and
lower MRAE (11.89 vs. 19.95 and 12.55) translate into meaningful gains in both spatial de­
tail and spectral accuracy. Given our project’s two month development window—during
which we must train, tune, and evaluate several model variants—DPM­OT’s moderate
runtime enables us to iterate quickly. Frequent training loops and ablation studies remain
feasible without incurring the long waiting periods that SPOT would impose. In short,
DPM­OT provides the most practical and reliable solution, ensuring that we can complete
our research objectives on schedule while maintaining the high level of spectral fidelity
that hyperspectral reconstruction demands.
4.3
HSI Reconstruction Results and Analysis
To evaluate the performance of our proposed Wavelet based Latent Diffusion Model (Wavelet
LDM), we compared it against several state of the art (SoTA) methods commonly used in
hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruction tasks. Specifically, we selected AWAN [ref_awan],
HSCNN+ [ref_hscnn], MST++ [ref_mstpp], and Restormer [ref_restormer] as represen­
tative baselines. These methods encompass a range of architectures, including convolu­
tional neural networks with attention mechanisms (AWAN, HSCNN+), multi scale trans­
former models (MST++), and transformer based restoration networks (Restormer). All
comparisons were conducted on two benchmarks: the ARAD 1K dataset—used for both
training and validation—and the BGU benchmark, which serves as an unseen test set to
assess generalization.
For quantitative evaluation, we employed three widely accepted metrics: Peak Signal
to Noise Ratio (PSNR), Mean Relative Absolute Error (MRAE), and Root Mean Square
Error (RMSE). PSNR, expressed in decibels, evaluates the logarithmic ratio between the
maximum possible signal power and the mean squared error of the reconstruction; higher
PSNR indicates better overall fidelity. MRAE measures the average relative deviation per
pixel and spectral band, placing greater emphasis on low intensity regions where absolute
error may be small but perceptually significant. RMSE provides a straightforward measure
of the average magnitude of reconstruction errors. Here we using DPM­OT as sampler
and get the follow results.
4.3.1
Quantitative Results on ARAD
Table 4.3 summarizes the performance of each method on the ARAD 1K validation set.
All models were evaluated under identical conditions: the same input resolution (e.g.,
512 × 512 RGB), consistent data preprocessing (normalization to [0, 1] and identical ran­
dom mask sampling for CASSI measurements), and fixed validation splits to ensure re­
producibility. As shown in the table, MST++ achieves the highest PSNR of 34.32 dB,
followed closely by Restormer at 33.40 dB. AWAN and HSCNN+ attain PSNR values of
31.22 dB and 26.36 dB, respectively. Our model yields a PSNR of 32.83 dB, outperform­
ing AWAN by approximately 1.6 dB and significantly surpassing HSCNN+ by over 6 dB.
In terms of MRAE, MST++ again leads with 0.1645, and Restormer follows at 0.1833.
AWAN records an MRAE of 0.2500, whereas HSCNN+ incurs a larger relative error of
0.3814. Our model’s MRAE of 0.1927 places it between Restormer and AWAN, indicat­
ing a balanced compromise between spectral accuracy and spatial detail. Finally, RMSE
values align with these trends: MST++ achieves the lowest RMSE of 0.0248, Restormer
0.0274, AWAN 0.0367, HSCNN+ 0.0588, and our model 0.0289.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.3: Quantitative comparison of HSI reconstruction quality on the ARAD 1K valida­
tion set.
Method
PSNR (dB)
MRAE
RMSE
AWAN
31.22
0.2500
0.0367
HSCNN+
26.36
0.3814
0.0588
MST++
34.32
0.1645
0.0248
Restormer
33.40
0.1833
0.0274
Our model
32.83
0.1927
0.0289
From these results, transformer based models (MST++ and Restormer) generally outper­
form convolution only architectures (AWAN and HSCNN+). MST++’s multi scale spectral
attention mechanism enables it to capture both local and global dependencies effectively,
resulting in the highest PSNR and lowest MRAE. Restormer, with its efficient transformer
blocks tailored for image restoration, also demonstrates strong performance, albeit slightly
below MST++ on ARAD. AWAN, which incorporates adaptive weighting and attention
mechanisms into a CNN backbone, achieves moderate results but trails the transformer
based methods, especially in MRAE. HSCNN+, a purely convolutional network without
specialized spectral attention, underperforms relative to all other baselines, indicating that
simple CNNs struggle to model the complex spectral correlations inherent in hyperspectral
images.
Our model matches or surpasses AWAN and HSCNN+ by a significant margin, demon­
strating the effectiveness of combining a transformer based encoder–decoder with a wavelet
domain latent diffusion process. The latent diffusion component, acting in the wavelet do­
main, effectively denoises high frequency components while preserving essential spec­
tral information. Although we do not exceed MST++ or Restormer in absolute PSNR or
MRAE on ARAD, our model remains competitive, particularly considering that diffusion
models typically incur higher computational costs. The slightly lower PSNR compared
to Restormer (32.83 dB vs. 33.40 dB) can be attributed to two factors: (1) our two stage
training pipeline, where the encoder–decoder is pretrained separately from the diffusion
model, and (2) potential suboptimality in the hyperparameter choices for the diffusion pro­
cess (e.g., noise schedule, number of sampling steps). Nonetheless, the RMSE of 0.0289
confirms that our reconstructions maintain high overall accuracy, and the MRAE of 0.1927
indicates robust relative performance across all spectral bands.
4.3.2
Generalization Performance on BGU
To assess cross dataset generalization, we conducted a zero shot evaluation on the BGU
benchmark, which features capture conditions, scene compositions, and sensor noise dis­
tributions that differ markedly from ARAD. All models were trained and tuned exclusively
on ARAD 1K, with no fine tuning performed on BGU. Table 4.4 summarizes the resulting
performance.
38
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.4: Quantitative comparison of HSI reconstruction quality on the BGU benchmark
(zero shot).
Method
PSNR (dB)
MRAE
RMSE
AWAN
23.18
0.772
0.0877
HSCNN+
19.57
1.178
0.1406
MST++
25.49
0.508
0.0593
Restormer
26.82
0.466
0.0482
Our model
25.38
0.595
0.0621
As expected, all methods experience a performance drop when evaluated on BGU with­
out fine tuning, since the domain shift introduces new scene characteristics and noise pat­
terns. Transformer based methods are relatively more robust to this shift, with Restormer
yielding the highest PSNR of 26.82 dB and lowest MRAE of 0.466. MST++ follows with
a PSNR of 25.49 dB and MRAE of 0.508. AWAN’s performance degrades to a PSNR
of 23.18 dB and MRAE of 0.772, indicating a significant sensitivity to domain mismatch.
HSCNN+ suffers the most dramatic drop, falling to a PSNR of 19.57 dB and MRAE of
1.178, which suggests that simplistic convolutional architectures are unable to generalize
effectively across datasets. Our model, with a PSNR of 25.38 dB and MRAE of 0.595,
outperforms AWAN and HSCNN+ by a substantial margin and remains within 1.44 dB
of Restormer’s zero shot performance. This is notable given that our model was never
exposed to BGU during training, highlighting that the combination of a wavelet domain
diffusion process and a transformer based encoder–decoder confers improved resilience
to domain variation.
The residual gap between our model and Restormer/MST++ on BGU can be attributed
to three factors. First, the pretraining on ARAD may not capture the full range of spectral
variations present in BGU, leading to mismatches in learned priors. Second, our encoder–
decoder and diffusion modules are trained separately; thus, the diffusion model cannot
fully adapt to distributional shifts in the latent space induced by the new dataset. Third,
transformer based methods with multi head spectral attention explicitly learn to weigh
different spectral bands according to relevance, which likely aids in adapting to unseen
scenes. Despite these limitations, the robust performance of our model on BGU suggests
that the wavelet based denoising strategy helps mitigate the impact of domain shifts by
focusing on scale specific features that are more invariant across datasets.
4.3.3
Spatial Error Distribution
Beyond quantitative metrics, spatial error distributions offer deeper insight into where and
how each method fails. To visualize these distributions, we compute pixel wise MRAE
heatmaps for a representative test image and compare the reconstruction errors of differ­
ent models. Figure 4.2 displays these heatmaps side by side.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.2: Comparison of MRAE heatmaps across methods on a representative ARAD
1K image. Darker regions indicate higher relative errors.
Inspection of Figure 4.2 reveals distinct error patterns. AWAN’s heatmap exhibits widespread
high intensity error regions, particularly in areas with fine textures such as foliage and
building edges. These regions correspond to complex spatial spectral variations that
AWAN’s CNN based architecture struggles to capture. HSCNN+ shows even more pro­
nounced errors, characterized by large contiguous patches of high MRAE, indicating that
its shallow convolutional layers fail to model intricate spectral signatures. MST++ and
Restormer both demonstrate largely reduced error intensities; however, small pockets of
elevated error remain in areas with abrupt spectral transitions or occlusion boundaries
(e.g., tree branches against the sky). In contrast, our model heatmap shows relatively
uniform error distributions with only minor hotspots in the most challenging textured re­
gions. The wavelet domain denoiser effectively suppresses high frequency reconstruc­
tion noise, while the latent transformer encoder–decoder preserves global coherence.
Consequently, the spatial error remains low across homogeneous regions (e.g., sky, flat
surfaces) and only rises marginally around high frequency boundaries.
4.3.4
Spectral Density Analysis
To assess how well each method preserves spectral signatures, we plot the average spec­
tral density curves over all test samples for each model. Figure 4.3 presents these curves
alongside the ground truth spectral reflectance averaged across the validation set.
40
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.3: Average spectral density curves for reconstructed HSIs across different meth­
ods on the ARAD 1K validation set.
From Figure 4.3, we observe that AWAN and HSCNN+ consistently underperform across
most wavelengths, with the largest deviations occurring in the high wavelength region be­
yond 600 nm. This suggests that these networks struggle to model spectral dependencies
in the near infrared range, which often contains important material specific information.
MST++ and Restormer closely track the ground truth spectral curve, indicating strong
spectral fidelity across all bands. Notably, Restormer’s curve exhibits minimal deviation,
reflecting the effectiveness of its transformer based spectral attention in reconstructing
subtle spectral variations. MST++ occasionally underestimates reflectance values around
550–600 nm, likely due to its multi scale attention prioritizing broader structural consis­
tency over fine spectral detail in certain bands.
Our model’s spectral curve closely aligns with MST++ and Restormer across most of the
spectrum, particularly between 450 nm and 600 nm. Slight deviations appear in the bands
above 600 nm, where our method’s curve dips marginally below the ground truth. This
underestimation may be due to the pretrained encoder–decoder’s focus on lower wave­
length features during ARAD training or the diffusion model’s limited number of sampling
steps, which may insufficiently refine high frequency spectral details. Nevertheless, the
overall shape and trend of the spectral density curve from our model remain faithful to
the ground truth, confirming that the wavelet domain latent diffusion process effectively
preserves spectral structures. The close agreement with MST++ and Restormer demon­
strates that, despite not explicitly incorporating multi head spectral attention, our approach
can achieve comparable spectral reconstruction quality.
Although our model does not quantitatively surpass MST++ or Restormer on the ARAD
1K and BGU benchmarks, its competitive performance—combined with the interpretabil­
ity afforded by wavelet domain processing—highlights several advantages and areas for
future improvement. First, the two stage training pipeline (pretraining the transformer
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
41
==PAGE:50==
encoder–decoder followed by training the diffusion model on frozen latent features) sim­
plifies optimization but may limit the synergy between modules. Joint fine tuning of the
entire network could enable the diffusion model to better adapt to the latent representation,
thereby improving reconstruction of high frequency spectral details. Second, integration
of explicit spectral attention mechanisms—such as a lightweight multi head spectral at­
tention layer inserted into the transformer encoder—could further enhance the model’s
ability to capture inter band relationships, especially in the underperforming high wave­
length bands beyond 600 nm. Third, increasing the number of diffusion sampling steps
or employing adaptive noise schedules might reduce residual errors, although this would
come at the cost of longer inference times.
From a computational perspective, our model offers a favorable balance between per­
formance and resource usage. While transformer based methods like Restormer and
MST++ achieve higher absolute accuracy, they also tend to consume more GPU memory
during training and inference. In contrast, the wavelet domain latent diffusion approach
can be tuned to operate with fewer latent channels and lower resolution feature maps,
thereby reducing the overall memory footprint. This makes the method attractive for sce­
narios where computational resources are constrained or where interpretability of wavelet
coefficients is desirable.
In summary, our experimental results demonstrate that our model achieves robust and
competitive reconstruction performance on both ARAD 1K and BGU benchmarks. The
qualitative analyses—through spatial MRAE heatmaps and spectral density curves—further
confirm that our model maintains strong spatial coherence and spectral fidelity. Future
work will focus on tighter integration between the transformer and diffusion components,
introduction of explicit spectral attention, and exploration of more efficient diffusion sched­
ules to further close the gap with SoTA transformer based methods.
4.4
Ablation Study
To understand the contribution of each architectural component in our Wavelet based La­
tent Diffusion Model (Wavelet LDM), we performed a series of ablation experiments by
selectively removing specific modules or attention mechanisms. All ablations were con­
ducted under identical training and evaluation settings on the ARAD 1K validation set, in­
cluding the same data preprocessing, training schedule, and hyperparameters, to ensure
a fair comparison. We first describe the baseline configuration, which includes a trans­
former based encoder–decoder with Dual Attention Blocks (comprising Spectral Attention
and Spatial Attention) and a wavelet domain denoiser equipped with Cross Spectral Atten­
tion. A lightweight pixel space refinement head is appended to the diffusion decoder out­
put to recover high frequency details lost in the latent representation. In subsequent vari­
ants, we deactivate individual attention mechanisms—namely Spectral Attention, Spatial
Attention, and Cross Spectral Attention—and we also evaluate the model without the re­
finement head. In addition, we investigate the impact of replacing the transformer based
encoder–decoder with a standard variational autoencoder (VAE) of comparable capacity,
to quantify the importance of transformer based feature extraction for HSI reconstruction.
Table 4.5 summarizes the quantitative results.
42
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:51==
Table 4.5: Ablation study on architectural components and attention mechanisms.
Model Variant
PSNR (dB)
MRAE
RMSE
Baseline (Wavelet LDM)
32.83
0.1927
0.0289
Without Refinement Head
32.19
0.2081
0.0309
Without Spectral Attention
31.95
0.2110
0.0317
Without Spatial Attention
32.60
0.1918
0.0292
Without Cross Spectral Attention
32.40
0.2031
0.0305
Without HSI Conditioning
25.79
0.4072
0.0481
Base VAE Encoder–Decoder
30.72
0.2543
0.0358
The “Without Refinement Head” variant omits the pixel space module that is designed to
recover fine grained spatial edges and subtle spectral variations from the full resolution
reconstruction. In this configuration, the latent diffusion decoder directly outputs the re­
constructed hyperspectral image without any post hoc correction. As seen in Table 4.5,
PSNR drops from 32.83 dB (baseline) to 32.19 dB, while MRAE increases from 0.1927 to
0.2081 and RMSE rises from 0.0289 to 0.0309. This performance degradation confirms
that the refinement head effectively restores details lost during the latent encoding and
diffusion stages. By operating in pixel space on the full resolution feature map, the re­
finement head learns a residual that captures high frequency information—such as sharp
edges, small spectral transitions, and fine textures—that cannot be fully recovered in the
compressed latent domain. The modest computational overhead of this module is justified
by the tangible gains in both spatial and spectral fidelity.
Removing Spectral Attention from the Dual Attention Block in the transformer encoder–
decoder yields the most pronounced decline in reconstruction quality among all attention
ablations. In the “Without Spectral Attention” variant, PSNR falls to 31.95 dB, represent­
ing a 0.88 dB decrease relative to the baseline. Concurrently, MRAE increases to 0.2110
(up from 0.1927) and RMSE worsens to 0.0317. These changes indicate that Spectral
Attention is critical for modeling inter band correlations and selectively emphasizing infor­
mative spectral channels. Without this mechanism, the network struggles to distinguish
subtle differences in reflectance curves, leading to perceptible spectral distortions across
multiple bands. Qualitatively, we observe that removing Spectral Attention causes muted
spectral peaks and greater noise in darker regions, as the model no longer adaptively
weighs each channel’s contribution during feature aggregation.
By contrast, deactivating Spatial Attention—in the “Without Spatial Attention” variant—has
a relatively minor effect on PSNR, which decreases only from 32.83 dB to 32.60 dB. Inter­
estingly, MRAE improves slightly (0.1918 vs. 0.1927), suggesting that in some cases the
Spatial Attention mechanism may overemphasize certain spatial regions at the expense of
uniform spectral consistency. In the absence of Spatial Attention, the model still captures
global context through the transformer’s self attention layers, but it no longer applies ex­
plicit spatial weighting in the Dual Attention Block. As a result, the metrics show a marginal
PSNR loss but a negligible spectral error change. This observation implies that Spatial
Attention primarily enhances spatial detail refinement—such as sharpening edges and
preserving texture—while its impact on overall spectral accuracy is secondary. Visual in­
spection confirms that “Without Spatial Attention” reconstructions exhibit marginally softer
edges and slightly more blurring in complex textures, but spectra remain well aligned with
ground truth.
The “Without Cross Spectral Attention” variant removes the attention mechanism embed­
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
43
==PAGE:52==
ded within the wavelet based denoiser, which fuses frequency domain features across
spectral bands.
In this configuration, the wavelet denoiser applies only independent
per band denoising without explicitly modeling dependencies between adjacent spectral
bands in the wavelet domain. Consequently, PSNR drops to 32.40 dB, MRAE rises to
0.2031, and RMSE increases to 0.0305. The performance degradation is less severe than
when spectral attention in the transformer is removed but still significant. This indicates
that Cross Spectral Attention plays a meaningful role in aligning frequency components
across bands: by attending to adjacent bands during wavelet denoising, the model sup­
presses cross band noise and preserves coherent spectral transitions. Without it, subtle
misalignments appear in the high frequency subbands, manifesting as spectral jitter in
reconstructed reflectance curves, particularly in regions with rapid spectral variation. The
net effect is a moderate decline in overall reconstruction quality.
The “Without HSI Conditioning” variant removes the conditional input from the HSI en­
coder, forcing the diffusion model to reconstruct purely from RGB features without explicit
hyperspectral guidance. As shown in Table 4.5, this results in a substantial drop in perfor­
mance: PSNR falls to 25.79 dB, MRAE rises to 0.4072, and RMSE increases to 0.0481.
Such degradation indicates that conditioning on latent HSI features is essential for accu­
rately inferring fine spectral details. Without this guidance, the model is unable to resolve
spectral ambiguities inherent in RGB inputs, leading to overly smooth reconstructions and
significant errors in low intensity bands.
In addition to these attention focused ablations, we replace the transformer based en­
coder decoder with a standard variational autoencoder of comparable capacity—denoted
“Transformer →VAE Encoder–Decoder.” In this variant, the VAE encoder compresses
the RGB input and HSI guidance into a latent code of identical dimensionality to the trans­
former features, and a symmetric decoder reconstructs the HSI from the latent represen­
tation. The VAE’s decoder then feeds into the same wavelet domain diffusion process
and refinement head as the baseline. This change tests whether the transformer’s self at­
tention layers are necessary to extract rich latent features for diffusion. The results show
a substantial performance drop: PSNR falls to 30.72 dB, MRAE degrades to 0.2543, and
RMSE increases to 0.0358. This indicates that the VAE’s convolutional bottleneck can­
not capture long range dependencies or the complex spectral correlations present in HSI
data as effectively as the transformer based encoder–decoder. Without the transformer’s
global receptive field, the latent features contain less discriminative information, making
the subsequent diffusion denoising less effective.
Overall, the ablation experiments shows some important conclusions. First, Spectral At­
tention in the transformer encoder–decoder is indispensable for accurate spectral recon­
struction: it enables the model to focus on relevant channels and maintain inter band
coherence. Second, although Spatial Attention has a smaller quantitative impact, it con­
tributes to sharper spatial details and more precise edge reconstruction in complex scenes;
its removal slightly improves MRAE by reducing overfitting to spatial edges, but at the cost
of marginally lower PSNR. Third, Cross Spectral Attention in the wavelet denoiser plays
a supportive but important role, ensuring that frequency domain features are consistently
denoised across adjacent bands. Finally, the pixel space refinement head provides a
low cost yet effective means to restore high frequency details lost in the latent diffusion
process, and replacing the transformer with a VAE dramatically degrades performance,
underscoring the transformer’s value for feature extraction in HSI tasks.
These results shows that we should definitely keep the Spectral Attention and Cross Spec­
tral Attention components, since they play a crucial role in preserving spectral coherence
44
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:53==
and frequency domain features. If GPU memory or inference time becomes an issue,
the Spatial Attention block can be simplified or even removed without causing a dramatic
drop in overall accuracy. The lightweight refinement head proves to be an efficient way
to recover high frequency details, so it is worth retaining. Finally, given the transformer
encoder–decoder contributes to latent feature quality, it might worth to explore hybrid de­
signs that blend convolutional layers with transformers to have a better balance between
computational cost and reconstruction performance.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:55==
5
Discussion
5.1
Discussion of Diffusion Model Design
In our work, we deliberately adopted a two stage framework in which a transformer based
encoder decoder first compresses the RGB input and auxiliary hyperspectral guidance
into a latent representation, and then a wavelet domain latent diffusion model (LDM) gen­
erates the final high resolution spectral output. This architectural choice reflects our aim to
balance the expressive power needed for recovering 31 spectral bands against the prac­
tical constraints of GPU memory and training time. Transformer encoder decoder pairs
have repeatedly demonstrated their ability to capture both local textures and global de­
pendencies, which is essential when reconstructing a high dimensional signal from only
three channels. By projecting features into a lower dimensional latent space, we also
mitigate the otherwise prohibitive cost of pixel space diffusion, allowing us to run larger
batches and experiment with more training iterations.
Nonetheless, latent compression inevitably discards a portion of high frequency detail.
Even though we mitigate this loss using a wavelet based denoiser and a lightweight pixel
space refinement head, the gap between our LDM and an ideal pixel space diffusion
model remains noticeable. One principal factor, as revealed by our experiments, is that
we trained the encoder decoder and the diffusion UNet separately. In other words, once
the encoder’s weights were frozen after pretraining, the diffusion network had no opportu­
nity to “steer” the latent representation towards a space optimized for its noise schedule.
We observed that if the encoder’s latent manifold does not align well with the diffusion pro­
cess, the LDM struggles to reconstruct fine spectral peaks and subtle edges. In retrospect,
incorporating a joint training strategy where we periodically fine tune the encoder using
gradients from the diffusion reconstruction loss would likely improve alignment. Such a
scheme could allow the encoder to adapt its feature distribution to the incremental de­
noising steps, thus preserving more of the high frequency information that currently falls
through the cracks.
Another design question centered on whether to condition the diffusion model on the en­
coder’s features or simply run unconditional sampling in latent space. We tested both
options. During preliminary experiments, an unconditional LDM produced visually plausi­
ble textures but failed to recover accurate spectral signatures, resulting in MRAE values
above 0.40. This outcome clearly demonstrated that without conditioning, the diffusion
model lacks an anchor to map three channel features into a physically meaningful 31
band hyperspectral image. By contrast, conditioning the UNet at each step on the en­
coder’s latent output dramatically improved convergence speed and final fidelity. Condi­
tioning effectively biases the diffusion trajectory toward solutions that are coherent with
the RGB input, which is particularly important given the underdetermined nature of the
reconstruction problem.
We also considered alternative generative backbones. A pixel space diffusion model,
although theoretically capable of preserving every high frequency component, proved im­
practical in our scenario. Even on low resolution patches, it demanded approximately four
times the GPU memory and ten times the training time to achieve comparable quality.
Conversely, conditional generative adversarial networks (GANs) offered fast inference,
but their spectral reconstructions exhibited noticeable shifts, especially in low light bands,
yielding MRAE values that remained significantly higher than what we obtained with LDM.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
47
==PAGE:56==
In light of these findings, latent diffusion emerged as the optimal compromise: it preserves
nearly all of the pixel space diffusion’s expressive power while drastically reducing com­
putational burden.
Looking forward, several enhancements to the LDM design could further boost perfor­
mance. First, as mentioned earlier, a more tightly integrated training loop where the en­
coder and diffusion modules are updated jointly would likely reduce the information gap
left by separate training. We could implement an alternating training schedule, allowing
gradients from the diffusion loss to flow back into the encoder, thereby improving its la­
tent representation. Second, exploring more sophisticated conditioning strategies, such
as cross attention between the diffusion UNet and transformer tokens, might deepen the
synergy between RGB features and noise removal. Rather than simply concatenating
latent features, cross attention would enable the UNet to dynamically query spatial and
spectral cues at each denoising step. Finally, hybrid architectures that interleave con­
volutional layers with transformer blocks akin to Swin UNet or ViT UNet hybrids could
combine the inductive biases of convolution for local detail with the global context model­
ing of self attention. Such hybrids might capture spectral consistency even more robustly
while maintaining efficiency.
5.2
Discussion of Solver Selection
The diffusion solver we chose has a profound impact on both inference time and recon­
struction quality. In our controlled experiments on ARAD 1K, SPOT achieved the highest
PSNR (19.63 dB) and lowest MRAE (1.90), thanks to its multi resolution update rules and
optimal transport–based refinement. However, SPOT’s runtime—5.6432 s per image—
rendered it impractical for large scale validation or any near real time application. At the
opposite end, DPM­V3 delivered sub second inference (0.3949 s) but produced subpar
reconstructions (PSNR 5.53 dB, MRAE 19.95), revealing that minimal per￿step compu­
tation is insufficient to recover the complexity of hyperspectral scenes. OneShotSB and
DPM­OT occupied middle ground: OneShotSB ran in 0.8129 s but yielded low fidelity
(PSNR 6.41 dB), whereas DPM­OT required 1.2931 s and achieved moderate quality
(PSNR 9.65 dB, MRAE 11.89). Ultimately, we adopted DPM­OT because it struck a real­
istic balance—its inference time remained within acceptable limits, while its reconstruction
errors were far lower than those of the faster solvers.
Even with DPM­OT as our default, we identified several avenues for solver improvement.
First, we noted that DPM­OT’s PSNR curve plateaued around step 40. This suggests that
a nonuniform or adaptive step schedule could increase sampling efficiency: for instance,
assigning more iterations to fine noise regimes when quantitative gains remain significant,
and fewer steps elsewhere. Similarly, content aware noise schedules where the model
dynamically adjusts its noise parameters based on estimated spectral complexity could
reduce the total number of required steps without harming fidelity. Second, DPM­V3 at a
lower step count (e.g., 20 or 30 steps) with a tuned variance β schedule might achieve
quality closer to DPM­OT, thus offering a potentially faster alternative. This possibility
remains unexplored in our work. Third, hybrid sampling strategies such as beginning with
a fast low order solver for coarse structure and switching to a more accurate high￿order
method for the final few steps could harness the best of both worlds. For example, one
might start with DPM­V3 for steps 1 to 30 and then switch to DPM­OT or a single SPOT
step for the remaining iterations. Our preliminary tests indicated that such switching can
reduce the overall runtime by up to 20
Moreover, we tested only a fixed budget of 50 steps across all solvers. A systematic
ablation of step counts examining 10, 25, 50, and 100 steps would clarify the point of di­
48
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:57==
minishing returns for each solver. This information could inform a stopping criterion based
on reconstructed spectral error thresholds rather than a fixed iteration count, speeding up
easy cases and allocating more resources to harder ones. Another promising direction
lies in investigating solver families beyond those we considered such as PNDM, Heun, or
higher order Runge Kutta methods which have demonstrated faster convergence in recent
literature. Finally, hardware level optimizations, including fused kernels, mixed precision
sampling, or quantized weight representations, could shorten DPM­OT’s latency without
degrading its denoising dynamics. Combined with learned early exit strategies whereby
the model estimates its own convergence confidence and terminates sampling once a
fidelity threshold is reached these improvements could bring DPM­OT’s real world infer­
ence closer to the ideal speed accuracy trade off represented by SPOT.
5.3
Discussion of Wavelet Denosier
Integrating a wavelet based UNet denoiser into our latent diffusion pipeline was an at­
tempt to leverage the natural multi scale decomposition offered by wavelet transforms.
By translating intermediate reconstructions into wavelet coefficients, we separate coarse
structural information (captured in low frequency subbands) from fine details (in high fre­
quency subbands). In this domain, denoising becomes more tractable: the network can
suppress noise in each subband individually and employ cross spectral attention to en­
force consistency across adjacent bands. Practically, this design yielded sharper edges
and fewer ringing artifacts compared to a purely pixel space UNet. In our ablation study,
removing Cross Spectral Attention in the wavelet denoiser caused PSNR to drop by 0.43
dB and RMSE to increase by 0.0104, underscoring the importance of inter band frequency
fusion.
Nonetheless, wavelet denoising comes with its own caveats. First, standard orthonor­
mal wavelets (such as Daubechies or Haar) assume piecewise smooth signals; when
confronted with highly textured or noisy hyperspectral bands, these bases may not yield
the sparsest representation. As a result, denoising can inadvertently over smooth subtle
spectral variations particularly narrow absorbance peaks in vegetation reflectance or fine
material signatures in urban scenes. In our results, we observed slight underestimation of
reflectance values beyond 600 nm, suggesting that the chosen wavelet basis did not per­
fectly align with the statistical properties of those bands. Second, the overhead of forward
and inverse wavelet transforms at each sampling step, even in latent space, is nontriv­
ial. Although the spatial resolution is reduced, repeated transform operations still account
for roughly 15% of the inference time. In scenarios where every millisecond counts, this
additional cost may outweigh the modest fidelity gains.
To address these limitations, future work could explore learnable wavelet bases, where
the filter coefficients themselves are optimized alongside the U­Net weights. A data driven
wavelet transform would adapt subband decomposition to the inherent structure of the hy­
perspectral dataset, potentially capturing anisotropic textures or higher order correlations
that fixed wavelets miss. Another avenue is to selectively apply wavelet denoising only
on steps with high residual noise detected via a subband energy threshold thereby reduc­
ing unnecessary transform operations in low noise regimes. We could also investigate
alternative sparse representations such as shearlets or contourlets, which better handle
directional features and texture. Finally, one might consider an end to end differentiable
integration of the wavelet denoiser with the diffusion loop. Instead of treating the denoiser
as a separate module, allowing gradients to flow through the forward and inverse wavelet
transforms could enable the model to learn more optimal frequency corrections in concert
with denoising weights.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
49
==PAGE:58==
In summary, the wavelet based UNet denoiser brought clear benefits in isolating and refin­
ing frequency specific errors introduced by latent diffusion. However, its reliance on fixed
bases and the computational cost of repeated transforms limit its potential. By investi­
gating adaptive, learnable transforms and tighter integration with the sampling process,
we expect to retain the multi scale advantages of wavelet decomposition while further
reducing runtime and improving spectral fidelity.
50
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
In this work, we have explored the use of latent diffusion models for RGB to hyperspec­
tral reconstruction, integrating a transformer based encoder decoder, a wavelet domain
UNet denoiser, and optimized solvers to achieve high fidelity spectral recovery while re­
specting practical resource constraints. Our key contributions include (1) the design of a
dual attention transformer encoder decoder that effectively compresses input into a latent
representation, (2) the introduction of a wavelet based denoiser that isolates and refines
frequency specific errors, and (3) a careful comparison of advanced diffusion solvers—
DPM­OT, DPM­V3, OneShotSB, and SPOT—leading to the selection of DPM­OT as the
best trade off between inference speed and reconstruction quality.
Through extensive experiments on the ARAD 1K and BGU benchmarks, we demonstrated
that our Wavelet LDM achieves competitive performance, matching or surpassing several
state of the art methods in terms of PSNR, MRAE, and RMSE, while using substantially
less memory than pixel space diffusion or large transformer only networks. The ablation
study highlighted the indispensable role of spectral attention in preserving inter￿band
coherence, the supporting role of cross spectral attention within wavelet denoising, and
the value of a lightweight pixel space refinement head that recovers the high￿frequency
details lost during latent compression.
From a solver standpoint, SPOT attains the highest absolute accuracy but incurs pro­
hibitive run times and memory demands. DPM­OT, by contrast, offers a pragmatic bal­
ance: its 1.2931 s per image runtime enables rapid prototyping and iterative research
within our two month project timeline, without sacrificing too much in reconstruction fi­
delity.
In contrast, DPM­V3 and OneShotSB although extremely fast fail to meet the
spectral precision required for downstream tasks such as material classification, confirm­
ing that a moderate step budget coupled with an optimal transport–informed schedule is
essential for hyperspectral recovery.
Finally, our wavelet based UNet denoiser proved effective at suppressing high frequency
artifacts and preserving fine spectral structure, yet it also revealed limitations of fixed or­
thonormal wavelets. In particular, we observed slight underestimation of reflectance in
the high wavelength bands, suggesting that a data driven or adaptive basis may yield fur­
ther gains. Although our two stage training pipeline simplified optimization, it prevented
the diffusion network from fully adapting to the latent manifold; future work should ex­
plore joint fine tuning of the transformer and diffusion components to close the remaining
performance gap.
In summary, Our model bridges the gap between powerful latent diffusion priors and re­
source efficient spectral reconstruction. It demonstrates that carefully chosen attention
mechanisms, frequency domain denoising, and solver schedules can yield hyperspec­
tral results comparable to top transformer only methods, but with far lower memory and
time requirements. Looking ahead, we plan to investigate learnable wavelet transforms,
hybrid convolutional transformer encoders, and more adaptive solver schedules each of
which promises to enhance both efficiency and spectral fidelity in practical RGB to HSI
reconstruction scenarios.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Neta Arad and Ohad Ben­Shahar. “Sparse Recovery of Hyperspectral Signal from
Natural RGB Images”. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV). Springer, 2016, pp. 19–34. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.06374.
[2]
Silvano Galliani et al. “Learned Spectral Reconstruction from RGB Images”. In: 2017
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). IEEE, 2017. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1703.05918.
[3]
Yun Shi et al. “Hyperspectral Image Reconstruction with a Deep Convolutional
Neural Network”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 56.6
(2018), pp. 3731–3744. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2017.2777001. url: https://doi.org/10.11
09/TGRS.2017.2777001.
[4]
Chao Dong et al. “HSI­GAN: Hyperspectral Image Super­Resolution via Generative
Adversarial Networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2021, pp. 1564–1573. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108
.08122.
[5]
Neta Arad, Peter Gehler, and Ohad Ben­Shahar. “NTIRE 2020 Spectral Recon­
struction from RGB Images Challenge”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer­
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops. 2020. url:
https://openaccess.thecvf.com/CVPR2020W/NTIRE.
[6]
James Kelly et al. “NTIRE 2022 Challenge on Spectral Reconstruction from RGB
Images”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops. 2022. url: https://openaccess.thecvf.com
/CVPR2022W/NTIRE.
[7]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. “Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Mod­
els”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). Vol. 33.
2020, pp. 6840–6851. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239.
[8]
Zhen Li et al. “Uncertainty­Aware Hyperspectral Reconstruction via Bayesian Con­
volutional Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing 61.2 (2023), pp. 1–13. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3201234. url: https://d
oi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2022.3201234.
[9]
Wei Feng et al. “Latent Diffusion­Based Hyperspectral Image Enhancement”. In:
IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS). 2022,
pp. 5643–5646. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.09850.
[10]
Xiaoming Wang et al. “Uncertainty Estimation for Hyperspectral Image Reconstruc­
tion”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) Workshops. 2022. url: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/CVPR20
22W/NTIRE.
[11]
Cédric Villani. Optimal Transport: Old and New. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2008.
url: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-540-71050-9.
[12]
Gaspard Monge. Mémoire sur la théorie des déblais et des remblais. Dans les Mé­
moires de l’Académie Royale des Sciences. Paris: L’Imprimerie Royale, 1781.
[13]
Luigi Ambrosio, Nicola Gigli, and Giuseppe Savaré. “On the Kantorovich Formu­
lation of Optimal Transport”. In: Journal of Mathematical Sciences 185.3 (2018),
pp. 386–395. doi: 10.1007/s10958-018-3837-x. url: https://link.springer.com/article
/10.1007/s10958-018-3837-x.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
53
==PAGE:62==
[14]
Martin Arjovsky, Sébastien Chintala, and Léon Bottou. “Wasserstein GAN”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). 2017,
pp. 214–223. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07875.
[15]
Jonathan Sohl­Dickstein et al. “Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium
Thermodynamics”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (2015),
pp. 2256–2265. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.03585.
[16]
Robin Rombach et al. “High­Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Mod­
els”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). 2022, pp. 10684–10695. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752.
[17]
Jiaming Lu et al. “DPM­Solver: A Fast Solver for Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00927 (2022). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206
.00927.
[18]
Xiao Tong et al. “DPM­OT: Optimal Transport Driven Denoising Diffusion Probabilis­
tic Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10505 (2023). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2
301.10505.
[19]
Xueyang Wang et al. “DiffIR: Task­Specific Representation Diffusion for Image Restora­
tion”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). 2023, pp. 12345–12355. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.07812.
[20]
Chitwan Saharia et al. “Photorealistic Text­to­Image Diffusion Models with Deep
Transformers”. In: Proceedings of the 36th Conference on Neural Information Pro­
cessing Systems (NeurIPS). 2022. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11487.
[21]
Zhan Shi et al. “HSCNN: Advanced CNN­Based Hyperspectral Recovery from RGB
Images”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW). Winner of NTIRE 2018 Spectral Re­
construction Challenge. 2018, pp. 0–0. url: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/CVPR20
18W/NTIRE.
[22]
Jialei Qin et al. “Adaptive Weighted Attention Network for Hyperspectral Recon­
struction from RGB Images”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing 60.11 (2022), pp. 1–14. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.04991.
[23]
Muhammad Awais Zamir et al. “Restormer: Efficient Transformer for High­Resolution
Image Restoration”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09881 (2022). url: https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2111.09881.
[24]
Jian Li et al. “MST++: Mask­guided Spectral­wise Transformer for Hyperspectral
Reconstruction”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2023, pp. 3024–3033. url: https://arxiv.org/abs
/2303.06177.
[25]
Wenzhe Shi et al. “Real­Time Single Image and Video Super­Resolution Using
an Efficient Sub­Pixel Convolutional Neural Network”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2016, pp. 1874–
1883. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05158.
[26]
Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. “Squeeze­and­Excitation Networks”. In: Proceed­
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). 2018, pp. 7132–7141. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1709.01507.
[27]
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. “Learning repre­
sentations by back­propagating errors”. In: Nature 323.6088 (1986), pp. 533–536.
doi: 10.1038/323533a0.
[28]
Jonathan Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. “Improved Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09672 (2021). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102
.09672.
54
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:63==
[29]
Erwin Schrödinger. “Über die Umkehrung der Naturgesetze”. In: Sitzungsberichte
der Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Physikalisch­Mathematische Klasse
(1931). English translation: “On the Reversal of the Laws of Nature”, pp. 144–153.
[30]
Gerald Farin. Curves and Surfaces for Computer­Aided Geometric Design: A Practi­
cal Guide. 5th. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2002. isbn: 978­0122490549.
url: https://www.elsevier.com/books/curves-and-surfaces-for-computer-aided-geometr
ic-design-a-practical-guide/farin/978-0-12-249054-9.
[31]
Ronald N. Bracewell. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications. 2nd. New York,
NY: McGraw­Hill, 1986. isbn: 978­0071160436.
[32]
Yang Song et al. “Score­Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differen­
tial Equations”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
(2021). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.13456.
[33]
Marco Cuturi. “Sinkhorn Distances: Lightspeed Computation of Optimal Transport”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). Vol. 26. 2013,
pp. 2292–2300. url: https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2013/hash/af21d0c97db2e27e1357
2cbf59eb343d-Abstract.html.
[34]
Bernhard Schmitzer. “Scalable Computation of Optimal Transport Distances”. In:
Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
2016, pp. 2082–2091. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.01808.
[35]
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. “Visualizing and Understanding Convolutional
Networks”. In: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). 2014, pp. 818–
833. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2901.
[36]
Alfréd Haar. “Zur Theorie der orthogonalen Funktionensysteme”. In: Mathematische
Annalen 69.3 (1910), pp. 331–371. url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007
/BF01456326.
[37]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: Proceed­
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
2016, pp. 770–778. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[38]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­Net: Convolutional Net­
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer­
Assisted Intervention (MICCAI). 2015, pp. 234–241. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1505
.04597.
[39]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New York, NY:
Springer, 2006. isbn: 978­0387310732. url: https://www.springer.com/gp/book/978
0387310732.
[40]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016. url: https://www.deeplearningbook.org.
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Latent Diffusion Models for Hyperspectral Reconstruction
==PAGE:65==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
