==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
ii
==PAGE:3==
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to
Behavior
Supervisor: Carmelo Bellardita, Co-supervisor: Silvia Tolu
Master’s thesis in Biomedical Engineering
June, 2025
By
ChangHui Simone Lin
Project period:
2025-01 - 2025-06
ECTS:
32.5
Field:
Biomedical Engineering
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Carmelo Bellardita, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, DTU, Ørst-
eds Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Neural Circuitries and Motor Re-
pair Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, at the University of Copenhagen, KU, in
collaboration with the NRT Lab, Department of Electronics and Photonics Engineering, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of maths, mechanics,
statistics and biology.
ChangHui Simone Lin - s232963
Signature
Date
ii
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Statement of Individual Contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction and Background
1
1.1
Behavioral neuroscience and its needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The neural architecture of locomotion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Injury, compensation, and the limits of conventional assessments . . . . . .
2
1.4
Multi-scale quantification of locomotion: from limb trajectories to whole-
body coordination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
From pose tracking to behavioral insight: the role of machine learning . . .
3
1.6
Aims of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.7
Outline of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Design and methods
5
2.1
Animal model and experimental data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Segmentation module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Feature extraction module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Results
15
3.1
Segmentation module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Discussion
31
4.1
Validation against literature: physiologically plausible, yet incongruent . . . 31
4.2
Impact of SCI on gait: the Limits of local analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Linking multidimensional movement analysis to neural control: toward a
neuroscience-informed framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
Retraining to generalize the DL model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5
Conclusion
35
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Bibliography
37
A Segmentation UI
41
B DL model training losses
43
C Testing against SCI
45
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Accurate quantification of motor behavior is essential for interpreting neural circuit function
and dysfunction in preclinical neuroscience. This thesis presents KineMatrix, a compu-
tational tool designed to extract detailed kinematic features from rodent movement data
and relate them to underlying neural activity. The platform offers a transparent and user-
guided approach to behavioral segmentation and feature extraction, with an emphasis on
flexibility, reproducibility, and biological interpretability.
KineMatrix integrates parametric and deep learning–based methods for step segmenta-
tion, combining signal derivatives, temporal constraints, and neural networks to detect
gait phases with high temporal accuracy. A range of kinematic features, including joint
angles, center of mass trajectories, limb coordination, and phase-specific metrics, are
extracted across multiple scales to capture both local and global aspects of movement.
A key contribution of this thesis is the development and validation of machine learning
models for automated gait event classification, incorporating deep learning architecture
designs and signal processing methods for behavioral phase encoding. Extensive atten-
tion is given to training procedures, post-processing via finite state machines, and model
evaluation using metrics like precision, recall, and temporal error.
While the current thesis focuses on the computational and methodological design of the
segmentation and feature analysis pipeline, additional software engineering aspects, in-
cluding batch processing, graphical user interface design, and feature export functional-
ity, are described in greater detail in the joint thesis of Walid Outtaleb, who co-developed
the KineMatrix platform. Together, the two theses provide a comprehensive framework
for transparent, scalable, and biologically informed analysis of motor behavior in neuro-
science research. The software will be made publicly available at:
https://github.com/Bellardita-Laboratory/KineMatrix.
iv
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:7==
Statement of individual contributions
This thesis forms part of a joint MSc research project conducted collaboratively by Walid
Outtaleb and ChangHui Simone Lin in the Bellardita Laboratory at the University of Copen-
hagen. The project aimed to develop and validate KineMatrix, a Python-based software
platform for the kinematic analysis of rodent locomotor behavior. While both students
contributed to overlapping aspects of the project and worked in close collaboration, each
independently led distinct and complementary components of the work, which are pre-
sented in their respective theses.
ChangHui Simone Lin was the main responsible for the development, training, and eval-
uation of the machine learning models used for automated gait phase classification. He
implemented a framework for developing and training deep learning models in a stan-
dardized and modular way. In addition, he performed the feature extraction, along with
the experimental validation of model predictions across diverse datasets and conditions,
ensuring the robustness and biological interpretability of the features extracted from Kine-
Matrix.
Walid Outtaleb led the software engineering and user interface design of KineMatrix. He
developed the architecture of the platform, as well as the framework to facilitate the devel-
opment of the software, and was in charge of optimization and cross platform compatibility.
In addition, he implemented interactive tools for manual and automated gait annotation,
designed modules for prediction correction, batch processing, and feature export. His
contributions ensured that the platform was accessible, modular, scalable and adaptable
to different experimental workflows.
The two collaborators worked closely together on the software, with each actively con-
tributing to the other’s sections. At various points, they jointly addressed shared chal-
lenges, coordinating their efforts on tasks such as data loading, the parametric segmenta-
tion module, angle calculations, feature export, etc. Together, these contributions resulted
in a reproducible, scalable, and biologically grounded framework for behavioral quantifi-
cation in preclinical neuroscience. Each thesis reflects the independent leadership and
technical focus of its author, while highlighting the value of their collaboration in advancing
open and integrated solutions for motor behavior analysis.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
v
==PAGE:8==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Professor Carmelo Bellardita
of the Department of Neuroscience, Neural Circuitries and Motor Repair Laboratory at the
University of Copenhagen, for his unwavering support, scientific guidance, and critical
insight throughout every stage of this thesis.
I am also grateful to my co-supervisor, Professor Silvia Tolu of the Department of Electrical
and Photonics Engineering, NRT Lab at the Technical University of Denmark, for her
valuable input and expertise in the development of the deep learning module.
This work was conducted as part of a joint thesis with Walid Outtaleb, with whom I col-
laborated closely on the development of the KineMatrix software. His contributions were
essential to the successful realization of the project.
I would also like to thank the members of the Neural Circuitries and Motor Repair Labora-
tory, Elisa, Emma, and Nuria, for their assistance with the physiological validation of my
results. In particular, to Elisa and Brais, who carried out the experiments on which much
of my analysis is based.
Lastly, I would like to express my gratitude towards my partner, friends, and family for their
patience, encouragement, and support during this thesis. Their presence was essential
in keeping me grounded and making sure I didn’t lose myself in the process.
vi
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction and Background
1.1
Behavioral neuroscience and its needs
Motor impairments are a common and debilitating consequence of many neurological con-
ditions, including neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s disease, Amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS), Spinal Cord Injury (SCI), and stroke. These disorders disrupt neu-
ral circuits responsible for movement, leading to deficits in motor control and altered be-
havior [1, 2]. Despite major advances in recording and manipulating neural circuits, our
understanding of motor impairment remains constrained by outdated tools for behavioral
analysis. Traditional clinical assessments like the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating
Scale or the Basso-Beattie-Bresnahan (BBB) scale are qualitative and subjective, failing
to capture subtle movement deviations [3, 4]. Even quantitative kinematic approaches
encounter difficulties in capturing the full complexity of movement dynamics, particularly
in the context of pathological changes, hindering precise diagnostics and targeted reha-
bilitation [5].
The modern view in neuroscience treats behavior not as a simple output of the brain but as
a multidimensional process emerging from the interaction of neural circuits, body biome-
chanics, and environmental context [6, 7]. Behavior serves as an integrative readout of
brain function, offering a window through which dissect the inner workings of the nervous
system. To fully exploit this perspective, there is an urgent need for high-resolution tools
that can capture the complexity of behavior with temporal and spatial precision.
1.2
The neural architecture of locomotion
Locomotor control emerges from continuous integration across multiple neural systems
(spinal circuits, brainstem pathways, subcortical nuclei, and cortical networks) dynami-
cally combining descending commands, sensory feedback, and internal predictions [8, 9,
10].
At the spinal level, motor neurons in the ventral horn receive converging inputs from
supraspinal systems, spinal interneurons, and proprioceptive afferents (muscle spindles,
Golgi tendon organs, cutaneous receptors) [9, 8, 11]. Intrinsic spinal networks, known as
central pattern generators (CPGs), autonomously generate rhythmic locomotor patterns
even in absence of descending input [12, 13].
Descending control includes both lateral (corticospinal, rubrospinal) and ventromedial
(reticulospinal, vestibulospinal, tectospinal) pathways, which coordinate skilled voluntary
movement and posture respectively [14, 15]. These descending commands are dynami-
cally adjusted according to internal states and behavioral context.
At the cortical level, voluntary movements engage primary motor cortex (M1), supple-
mentary motor area (SMA), and premotor area (PMA), integrating parietal and prefrontal
information to form motor plans (Figure 1.1). These plans are refined through cortico-
basal ganglia-thalamic loops that regulate action selection, timing, and sequencing [16].
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Neocortical regions involved in voluntary movement planning and execution. Adapted
from [14].
The cerebellum contributes predictive control through internal forward models that antici-
pate sensory consequences of motor output and enable rapid error correction [14]. Alto-
gether, motor control reflects distributed, adaptive processes interacting across levels to
achieve fluid movement [17, 7, 18].
1.3
Injury, compensation, and the limits of conventional
assessments
Spinal cord injury (SCI) disrupts descending pathways, spinal circuits, and sensory feed-
back, resulting in profound impairments [19, 20]. While intrinsic CPGs remain capable
of generating rhythmic patterns [9, 13], full recovery requires descending input and intact
sensory integration [21, 22, 23, 24].
In both clinical and preclinical settings, motor impairment is typically assessed via ordinal
scales. The ASIA scale evaluates human SCI [25], while BBB and BMS scales are used
in rodent models [26, 27]. However, these scales are coarse, subjective, and often fail
to capture subtle kinematic deviations or compensatory strategies, especially near scale
thresholds.
Importantly, even when movement appears restored, compensatory adjustments may
mask true functional recovery.
For example, basal ganglia circuits can encode fine-
grained kinematic sequences even in the absence of cortical input, suggesting deep
circuit-level adaptations post-injury [16]. This highlights the need for detailed behavioral
quantification to capture underlying circuit reorganization.
1.4
Multi-scale quantification of locomotion: from limb
trajectories to whole-body coordination
Locomotion reflects coordinated control across multiple levels. At the limb level, joint tra-
jectories (hip, knee, ankle angles, stride length, foot clearance) reveal muscle recruitment
2
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:11==
and proprioceptive control [28, 29]. Interlimb coordination engages commissural and pro-
priospinal circuits to synchronize gait patterns [30, 31].
Whole-body balance requires dynamic adjustments of trunk, tail, and head position [32],
while variability in gait timing and stability reflects circuit robustness or compensation [33,
34]. Quantifying locomotion at multiple scales enables distinction between functional re-
covery and compensatory adaptation.
1.5
From pose tracking to behavioral insight: the role of
machine learning
Recent advances in machine learning (ML) have enabled scalable extraction of structure
from high-dimensional movement data [35]. In neuroscience, ML has been applied to
cluster behavioral states, identify recovery trajectories, and relate movement dynamics to
underlying circuit changes [18].
Dimensionality reduction techniques like PCA can reveal latent structure in movement
data, highlighting phenotypic differences across experimental groups [36, 26]. These
insights can be further refined using clustering methods that classify behavioral subtypes.
Tools such as DeepLabCut (DLC) incorporate Semi-supervised learning (SSL) strategies
to improve the efficiency of labeling pose trajectories and behavioral events [37, 38],
enabling more scalable annotation of motor behaviors in freely moving animals. How-
ever, the baseline model in DLC is still pre-trained using a classical supervised learning
paradigm; SSL techniques are applied primarily at the level of user interaction and data
labeling workflows.
1.6
Aims of the thesis
The primary aim of this thesis is to develop and validate a robust computational framework:
KineMatrix, with the scope of analyzing gait features in rodent models of SCI. Specifically,
the work seeks to automate the extraction of biologically meaningful locomotor features
from pose estimation data, ensuring that both healthy and impaired movement patterns
are captured with high fidelity and relevance.
This goal is addressed through three core objectives:
• Automated Feature Extraction: To design a modular and flexible system capable
of extracting joint angles, step-phase metrics, and spatiotemporal parameters from
markerless motion tracking data in rodents.
• Validation Across Conditions: To evaluate the reliability and physiological plausi-
bility of extracted features in healthy mice and in mice with varying degrees of SCI,
identifying deviations, compensation strategies, and latent impairments.
• Identification of Analytical Limitations: To explore the boundary conditions of
step-based gait analysis, particularly in cases of disrupted locomotion where step
detection becomes unreliable, and to propose complementary strategies, such as
analyzing forelimb-gated hindlimb motion, quantifying dragging behavior, and incor-
porating sequence-aware models.
1.7
Outline of the thesis
The remainder of this thesis is structured as follows:
• Chapter 2 describes the design choices and methodologies applied, including the
experimental settings, input data, and the math behind the results.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
3
==PAGE:12==
• Chapter 3 presents the resulting KineMatrix platform, including its segmentation
pipeline, feature extraction, validation against published literature, and evaluation
on pathological locomotor data.
• Chapter 4 discusses the findings, limitations, and possible improvements of the
project.
• Chapter 5 concludes the thesis and outlines broader implications for neuroscience
research.
4
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:13==
2
Design and methods
2.1
Animal model and experimental data
Understanding the effects of injury and inflammation on locomotion requires a sensitive
and consistent behavioral assay. To this end, we employed a corridor walking test, which
allows for the quantitative capture of spatiotemporal gait dynamics under different physi-
ological and pathological conditions.
Four experimental cohorts were tested: healthy controls, mice with SCI in both acute (2
weeks post-lesion) and chronic (8 weeks post-lesion) stages. Each experimental run was
recorded using a dual-camera setup (Basler CA640-90uc) sampled at 200 Hz, providing
synchronized top and side views. These video recordings were processed in KineMatrix,
yielding paired .mp4 files and pose estimations in .csv format from DLC.
Rodents were chosen for their tractability in genetic manipulations, allowing for causal
studies through gene knockouts. The healthy cohort consisted of 8–12-week-old female
mice, while the pathological cohorts consisted of the same mice but after perturbation. Fe-
male physiology was preferred due to anatomical advantages in post-injury care: bladder
management is more straightforward following SCI, reducing the risk of infection. SCIs
were induced using a standardized contusion model (Figure 2.1A), which applies a consis-
tent force to the exposed thoracic spinal segment. This technique ensures reproducibility
across animals and facilitates comparisons across recovery stages.
Figure 2.1: Experimental setup. A) Contusion model for SCI. The operator positions the spinal cord under-
neath a machine that will activate and perform a lesion with a set amount of force on the area. Taken from
[39]. B-C) Visualization of the corridor with a mouse in it. The length is marked by tape at the edges and it
is known to be 40 cm and from the video it is 650 px. Then, it is immediate to calculate the pixel-to-meter
ratio to be 40 cm ÷ 650 px =0.0615 cm/px. B) Experimental run where the mouse is in the healthy state. C)
Experimental run where the mouse in the acute state (2 weeks after SCI). D) Labeled mouse using DLC with
a total of 19 body parts.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Preprocessing
Raw pose data from each behavioral session extracted from DLC are shown in Table 2.1.
These pose files are linked to experimental metadata (dataset, group, animal, and trial)
through a structured filename convention: <dataset>_<group>_<mouse>_<run>.
This
naming structure follows a hierarchical organization: run ∈mouse ∈group ∈dataset.
The filename-based linkage enables automatic parsing and sorting of the data during
preprocessing. Inside KineMatrix, each experimental run will be saved inside a nested
dictionary as a TrackingData object, which keeps pose data inside other nested dictio-
naries to have maximum data retrieval performance. A quick representation of how the
data is stored in the software can be seen in Figure 2.2.
bodyparts
head
head
head
spine 1
spine 1
spine 1
...
coords
x
y
likelihood
x
y
likelihood
...
0
1
...
N
Table 2.1: Structure of a .csv file returned by DLC. Each tracked point is tracked with x, y, and likelihood
of the tracking. On the first column, the time in frames is displayed as frame∈[0, N], where N is the total
number of frames.
all .csv data
batch[group][mouse][run]
TrackingData object
data[bodypart]
BodyPart object
x
y
likelihood
name
Figure 2.2: Hierarchical organization of experimental data. The batch represents all the loaded run
data divided by group (experimental block) and mouse (experimental sub-block). Each run is stored as a
TrackingData object containing pose data for each tracked body part, represented by BodyPart objects with
spatial and quality attributes.
Directionality normalization. Due to variations in recording setup, such as mice entering
the corridor from different directions, or camera mirroring due to changes of settings, run
directionality must be standardized. To ensure consistency across sessions, we arbitrarily
reorient each trajectory to a left-to-right direction by comparing the start and end positions
6
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:15==
of a reference body point. Specifically, if (x[start] > x[end]), the run is mirrored horizontally.
For vertical reorientation, the default reference points are the spine and paw, which are
known to be y[finger] < y[spine].
To achieve directional correction, we reverse the relevant axis using:
preversed = max(p) −p
(2.1)
This transformation is applied to each coordinate series (x and/or y) across all tracked
body points within the .csv file.
Coordinate scaling. Pose coordinates extracted from video frames are initially in pixel
units. To convert them to metric units, a calibration step is performed: the user selects
two points in one representative frame that span a known physical distance. The software
computes a scaling factor from this reference and applies it uniformly:
m = px × measure (m)
measure (px)
(2.2)
This ensures all kinematic quantities can be reported in SI units, enabling quantitative
comparisons across animals and conditions. One example of application can be seen in
Figure 2.1B-C.
2.3
Segmentation module
Each experimental run comprises a discrete sequence of locomotor steps. To facilitate
quantitative analysis, each step is divided into four key temporal events:
1. Stance: the moment the paw first makes contact with the ground.
2. Swing: the beginning of the paw’s lifting movement.
3. Peak: the highest vertical position reached by the finger during swing.
4. Touchdown: re-contact of the paw with the ground at the end of swing.
In theory, the stance and touchdown events should coincide. However, due to occasional
behavioral interruptions, such as stopping or exploratory sniffing, these phases may de-
couple. Accordingly, the software treats them as distinct. An example spatial trajectory
illustrating this segmentation is shown in Figure 2.3.
Several segmentation modes are implemented in the software to accommodate diverse
experimental contexts and accuracy needs. These include: parametric, manual segmen-
tation, and deep learning approaches.
2.3.1
Parametric
This fully deterministic method segments step events based on kinematic patterns. It first
detects vertical peaks in the paw trace to locate swing maxima. Then, using derivatives of
the horizontal trajectory, it identifies candidate frames for swing initiation and touchdown
based on local acceleration profiles (“propulsional drive”). A strict temporal ordering con-
straint is then applied to ensure physiologically plausible cycles (Figure 2.4).
The pipeline first performs forelimb segmentation. If desired, hindlimb events can be
inferred via temporal correlation with forelimb cycles.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Different visualizations of gait and steps in healthy mice. Purple means stance phase while
cyan means swing phase. A-B) Gait dynamics of a healthy experimental run. A) Forelimb kinematics, which
has as tracked points the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and paw. B) Hindlimb kinematics, which has as tracked
points the hip, knee, ankle, paw, and finger. C-D-E) The average segmented step seen from different points
of view following the pose trace of the hindlimb’s finger. C) Horizontal component against the normalized
time. The stance phase shows no movement while the swing phase displays a propulsion on the horizontal
plane with a mean length of 5 cm. D) Vertical component against the normalized time, showing a mean step
height off 4 mm. Stance phase has movement artifacts due to DLC’s tracking. E) Step cycle visualization in
space. Horizontal displacement is on the x-axis and vertical displacement is on the y-axis.
Stance
Swing
Peak
Touchdown
Figure 2.4: Step cycle phases of a gait. The paw transitions through stance, swing, vertical peak, and
touchdown before entering stance again. This loop continues cyclically during gait.
8
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:17==
2.3.2
Manual
In manual mode, users annotate events directly through an interactive interface. The
pose trace is displayed alongside the synchronized video, allowing precise labeling of
step events. Just like in the parametric mode, a temporal constraint is applied to ensure
the quality of the labeling. This method also serves as a validation tool to assess or correct
the output of automated segmentation.
2.3.3
Deep learning
To improve the temporal accuracy of gait event segmentation beyond rule-based methods,
we developed supervised deep learning models for frame-wise classification. Several ar-
chitectures were evaluated, including Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP), Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (CNN), Recurrent Networks (RNN), Transformer-based models, and Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN). All models were trained to classify each frame into one
of five categories: No-event, Stance, Swing, Peak, or Touchdown.
Model inputs and outputs
Each model receives a normalized tensor of shape (B, F, T),
where B is the batch size, T the number of frames per window, and F the feature dimen-
sionality. The exception is ST-GCN, which uses graph-structured input shaped (B, F, T, V )
with V = 19 body-part nodes. All models produce an output of shape (B, C, T) where
C = 5, later reduced to (B, T) via a class-wise argmax operation.
Feature set
Input features are computed from pose traces tracked by DeepLabCut and
include:
• 2D positions (x, y) and tracking likelihoods
• Temporal derivatives: velocity, acceleration, jerk
• Euclidean distances between keypoints
• Hilbert transform phase components (see Equation 2.3)
All features are z-scored before model input. A summary is provided in Table 2.2.
Feature
Formula
Poses
(csvpose −mean)/std
Likelihoods
From csv
Velocities
dx/dt
Accelerations
d2x/dt2
Jerks
d3x/dt3
Hilbert
See Eq. 2.3
Distances
p
(x2 −x1)2 + (y2 −y1)2
Table 2.2: Features used as input for the deep learning models.
Behavioral phase via Hilbert transform
To extract phase information, the Hilbert trans-
form was applied to each signal dimension (pose coordinate):
Let X ∈RT×D be the pose traces, with D dimensions. For each d ∈{1, ..., D}:
zd(t) = xd(t) + i H[xd(t)]
ϕd(t) = arg(zd(t)) ∈[−π, π]
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
9
==PAGE:18==
cos(ϕd(t)) = ℜ
 zd(t)
|zd(t)|

,
sin(ϕd(t)) = ℑ
 zd(t)
|zd(t)|

(2.3)
This circular encoding preserves cyclical motion relationships in a continuous form that
proved to help model learning. A visual example applied on one paw can be seen in
Figure 2.5A-B.
Post-processing via Finite State Machine (FSM)
Because the model’s frame-wise
predictions do not guarantee sequential consistency, we apply a deterministic FSM to
enforce the correct order of gait phases like shown below:
TRANSITIONS = {START →{Stance},
Stance →{Swing},
Swing →{Peak},
Peak →{Touchdown},
Touchdown →{Stance}}
Given a 1D array of discrete predictions ˆy ∈[0, 1, 2, 3, 4] over T time steps, we iterate over
contiguous sequences of nonzero predictions. Each sequence corresponds to one of the
predefined events.
For each detected event:
• If the event is a valid transition from the current FSM state, we register the event’s
timestamp.
• If the event is a Stance with no valid transition, we assume it marks the start of a
new step and reset the FSM.
• A complete step is only saved once all four events are observed in order.
The FSM collects valid sequences of events and writes them into a cleaned output label
trace. Invalid or out-of-order predictions are discarded or reset.
Labeling
Training labels are initially derived using the parametric segmentation method.
Manual correction is then applied to adjust timing inaccuracies or recover missing events,
ensuring high-quality supervision. Bias is addressed by having different operators perform
the labeling.
Testing and validation
Deep learning models were trained on a dataset of 808 ex-
perimental runs obtained from 100 healthy mice. Each run was segmented into smaller
centered windows (defaulted to 30 frames) to promote model generalization. The dataset
was split 70–30 into training and validation sets. Final evaluation was conducted on a
held-out set of 32 runs, completely excluded from all model development processes. Ini-
tially, the dataset consisted of only 160 runs. At that stage, 32 runs (20%) were reserved
as a strict hold-out test set. After acquiring an additional 648 runs, all the 808 runs were
used in full for model development. Importantly, the original 32 held-out runs were never
used during this process and were retained exclusively for final evaluation. A parametric
10
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:19==
baseline model was also benchmarked on the same held-out set to enable direct perfor-
mance comparison.
Training used the Binary Cross-Entropy loss with logits, and early stopping with minimum
loss improvement per epoch set to 0.0001 and 500 epochs of patience was implemented
to prevent overfitting. Layer freezing in order to perform transfer learning and retraining
with semi-supervised methods are supported.
Evaluation metrics to infer model performance are defined as shown in Table 2.3. The
parameters are thought to assess both classification performance and temporal precision.
Metric
Description
Formula
True Positives (TP)
Predicted events within ±100 ms of
the ground truth event.
–
False Positives (FP)
Predicted events that do not cor-
respond to any ground truth event
within ±100 ms.
–
False Negatives (FN)
Ground truth events not predicted
by the model within ±100 ms.
–
Precision
Proportion of predicted events that
are correct.
TP
TP + FP
Recall
Proportion of ground truth events
that are correctly predicted.
TP
TP + FN
F1 Score
Harmonic mean of precision and re-
call.
2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
MATE
Average absolute time difference
between predicted and ground truth
events.
1
N
N
X
i=1
tGT
i
−tpred
i

Table 2.3: Evaluation metrics used to assess model performance. MATE stands for Mean Absolute
Timing Error.
2.4
Feature extraction module
2.4.1
Kinematic analysis
Kinematic analysis involves extracting biomechanical features from tracked points. These
features provide a low-level representation of movement dynamics and form the basis for
downstream extraction of physiologically relevant features, dimensionality reduction, or
phenotype comparison.
Angles
To capture limb relationships, joint angles were computed between adjacent body seg-
ments to capture local relationships, while angular phases relative to the ground plane
were calculated to assess global limb orientation. Let ⃗vi(t) ∈R2 represent the 2D vector
of segment i at frame t ∈[0, T], where T is the total number of frames, and L be the num-
ber of vectors inside the limb. Then, the inter-segment angles θ(t) and ground-relative
phases φ(t) are calculated as shown in Equations 2.4-2.5.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
11
==PAGE:20==
θi(t) =
∠(⃗vi(t),⃗vi+1(t)) ,
i = 1, . . . , L −1
θL(t) =
∠(⃗vL(t),⃗g) ,
⃗g =
1
0

(2.4)
φi(t) = ∠(⃗vi(t),⃗g) ,
i = 1, . . . , L
(2.5)
With, the angle function ∠(⃗v1,⃗v2) defined as shown in Equation 2.6.
∠(⃗v1,⃗v2) = arctan2 (det[⃗v1(t),⃗v2(t)], ⃗v1(t) · ⃗v2(t))
(2.6)
Angles are post-processed to fall within [0, 2π], and phases are interpreted as counter-
clockwise deviations from the ground vector ⃗g to the segment vector ⃗vi(t). Non derivative
values are reported in degrees for readability, while derivative quantities derived from
angles are expressed in radians. An example can be seen in Figure 2.5D.
Derivatives
We extract first, second, and third-order derivatives of bodypoint positions to represent
velocity, acceleration, and jerk. Let x be the function corresponding to the trace, the time
difference delta be ∆t = ti+1−ti,
i ∈[0, T]. Then, the derivative can be easily calculated
as shown in Equation 2.7. To account for loss of frames due to derivation, derivatives are
calculated with padding to preserve temporal shape.
f′(x) = x(h + ∆t) −x(h)
∆t
(2.7)
Center of mass
For each limb (forelimb, hindlimb, spine, and tail), a geometric center of mass is computed
by averaging all constituent bodypoints as shwon in Equation 2.8, where xi is the pose
value for the tracked point, and N is the number of points inside the joint. This estimate
does not reflect true physical mass but serves as a spatial proxy for limb-centric dynamics,
making it possible to infer balance-related information.
CoM =
PN
i=1 xi
N
(2.8)
Step dependent features
These features depend on accurate segmentation into step cycles. For each step, the
following metrics are computed:
• Step length: horizontal displacement between stance events.
• Step height: maximum vertical paw elevation during swing.
• Step duration: frame interval from stance to touchdown. Further divided into Stance
duration and Swing duration, which are from stance to swing and from swing to
touchdown respectively.
• Step frequency: number of steps per unit time.
• Propulsion vector: angle between the pose vector ⃗v = (x, y) from swing to the peak.
12
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:21==
In addition, step phase-specific features are extracted to characterize behavior occur-
ring during or at specific gait events. Examples include metrics such as ”Mean knee angle
during stance” and ”Hip y acceleration at peak.” An illustrative representation of these fea-
ture points is provided in Figure 2.5C. These features enhance the temporal resolution of
gait analysis and are summarized using statistical descriptors such as the mean and stan-
dard deviation. Circular means and standard deviations are applied when the value is an
angle. The complete set includes approximately 3,000 features, generated by systemat-
ically combining all 19 tracked body points with angular and derivative data across each
segment of the step phase for a single limb.
Figure 2.5: Visualization of various calculated features. A-B) Sine and cosine of the Hilbert transformation
of the pose data from the hindpaw’s fingers. It encapsules the frequency of the step without being subjected as
much to tracking noise. A) y component of the hindpaw’s finger pose data. B) x component of the hindpaw’s
finger pose data. The representation doesn’t look as informative as the vertical component. C) Feature
phases used to approximate the temporal component of the steps. They are shown on the plot of the step
using time percentage on the x-axis and vertical component of the finger point on the y-axis. The ’during’
key indicates a mean of a value over a period, while the ’at’ key indicates an instantaneous value based
on the segmentation. D) Display of how angles and phases are calculated on an example configuration
of the hindlimb. Angles are calculated as the unsigned angle between two vectors, while phases are the
counterclockwise angle from ground to the vector. For the ’hip’ key, which is the last element of the limb, the
angle is calculated with respect to ground. The same is applied for all limbs.
Time series features
Unlike the aggregated statistics above, time-series features retain frame-wise trajectories
for selected variables (e.g., tail angle, spine CoM). These yield 244 dense features per
trial and are primarily used for visualization or dimensionality reduction. Though smaller
in number, they are higher in temporal information and more sensitive to local variations
in movement.
2.4.2
Dimensionality reduction
To interpret the large number of kinematic features extracted per run, we apply dimension-
ality reduction techniques. These methods facilitate the visualization of high-dimensional
feature spaces and help identify latent structure related to experimental groups, behav-
ioral phenotypes, or motor patterns.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
13
==PAGE:22==
PCA is a linear dimensionality reduction technique that identifies orthogonal axes (princi-
pal components) along which the variance in the data is maximized. This approach allows
us to project high-dimensional feature vectors into a lower-dimensional space while re-
taining the most informative variance.
2.4.3
Testing and validation
To ensure the physiological relevance of extracted features, we compare our computed
values against published kinematic benchmarks. For example, features such as stride
length, stance duration, and interlimb coordination are compared to normative values
reported in the literature, such as those by Bellardita et al. in 2015 [28], where the authors
describe the relationship between speed and step features. This external validation will
provide confidence that our data processing pipeline and segmentation methods yield
biomechanically meaningful results aligned with established locomotor studies.
14
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:23==
3
Results
KineMatrix is a modular, interactive software platform designed to provide a complete
end-to-end pipeline for gait analysis, from raw data ingestion to advanced feature extrac-
tion. As visualized in Figure 3.1, the workflow guides the user through each critical stage
of analysis, starting with data selection and preprocessing, continuing through step seg-
mentation and validation, and culminating in the generation of a comprehensive feature
matrix.
This streamlined process reduces the need for manual work by using automated tools
such as calibration methods, step segmentation algorithms, and machine learning mod-
els. These tools help ensure that the analysis is consistent, transparent, and easy to
reproduce. Since the software is built in a modular way, users can easily adjust each step
of the pipeline based on their specific needs. This makes KineMatrix suitable for a wide
range of experimental paradigms and adaptable to multiple motor phenotypes.
Homepage
Data Selection
Preprocessing
Calibration
Point Selection
Point Validation
Segmentation
Step Validation
Feature Matrix
Foresteps and Hindsteps
Parametric
Deep Learning
Manual
Plots
Figure 3.1: Overview of the KineMatrix analysis pipeline. Core stages are shown in blue, while optional
user-defined modules appear in green. The workflow spans from data input to feature extraction via seg-
mentation and validation steps.
The user initiates the process from the Homepage (Figure 3.2), which also provides op-
tions to report bugs or request new features, which are currently tracked through spread-
sheets.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.2: Homepage of KineMatrix.
From there, they can proceed to the Data Selection module, where they choose the di-
rectory containing experimental data. The software automatically scans and pairs .csv
files with corresponding .mp4 videos based on parameters shown in Figure 3.3.
If a video is missing or a ventral view is not detected, the pipeline will issue a warning
but continue processing using available side-view data. In the Preprocessing stage, the
user is prompted to input calibration parameters (e.g., for converting pixels to meters) and
confirm that the tracked body parts are correctly labeled. If the tracked dataset includes
more or fewer than the default 19 body parts, users can choose which ones to retain.
However, the software requires four points to be included for proper step segmentation:
paw and wrist from the forepaw, and paw and finger from the hindpaw. Point Validation
follows, allowing users to visually inspect every single loaded tracked data through a stick-
figure animation. If the anatomical points are verified to be correct, the user can proceed
to the Segmentation module. Here, they can choose among four options (Appendix A):
• Parametric: Allows the user to manually tune kinematic thresholds to detect steps
based on mathematical and biomechanical rules explained in the methods section.
• Deep Learning: Enables automatic step prediction using one of the trained neural
networks. Users can select a pretrained model, apply it to all the loaded runs, and,
if the predictions are not up to standard, they can relabel some traces and retrain
the model to fine tune the prediction for their specific experimental settings.
• Manual: The user has full control over labeling each phase of the step by looking
at the video, and the x and y plots over time.
• Import/Export: Allows users to load/save segmentation results from/to .csv files.
For all segmenting options, KineMatrix will perform a check on the validity of each step
by checking the sequence condition shown in Figure 2.4. After segmentation, the Step
Validation module overlays the predicted steps on top of the corresponding kinematic
traces and video data, allowing the user to double check the work. Once validated, the
16
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: The Data Selection module of KineMatrix. This module matches .csv tracking data and video
files by extension and keywords. If the folder structure follows: batch, group, sideview-ventral views and
video, it proceeds automatically. Otherwise, the user defines the structure in the Structure Selection tab:
batch, Multiple groups, multiple mice per group, Multiple runs per mouse.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
17
==PAGE:26==
software proceeds to compute gait features in the Feature Matrix module (Figure 3.4).
The resulting features can be exported in .csv format following two distinct modalities:
• Step-dependent features: gait metrics calculated per step, summarized either per
run or per animal. These features try to make up for the loss of time resolution by
approximating at step-related times (i.e. stance, swing, peak, and touchdowns).
• Time-series features: frame-by-frame signals labeled by gait phase (i.e., stance,
swing) over the duration of each trace.
Figure 3.4: Feature Matrix section of KineMatrix. The user accesses this tab after validating the seg-
mentation. At this point, all the features have been calculated and the displayed are the features calculated
based on the foresteps segmentation and hindsteps segmentation. Each experimental group has a different
background color for accessibility. From here, the features can be exported by mouse, by runs, or over time.
After feature extraction, users can visualize the data through a series of exploratory plots.
Specifically, the software allows plotting features against each other, comparing features
across groups, and generating a principal component analysis (PCA) of the full dataset.
These visualizations are intended to provide users with an overview of the dataset’s struc-
ture, enabling informed decisions about subsequent statistical analyses, which remain the
user’s responsibility. An example output of the PCA module is shown in Figure 3.5. This
module also demonstrates the ease with which new analytical tools can be integrated into
the software.
The software architecture and workflow is explained in greater detail inside the twin thesis
by Walid Outtaleb [40].
3.1
Segmentation module
3.1.1
Implementation environment
The DL framework was developed separately from the main software within a dedicated
module, Trainer.py, designed to facilitate rapid prototyping and deployment of new fea-
tures and model architectures while progressing on the main software in parallel.
A
screenshot of the interface is shown in Figure 3.6. The core functionalities of the trainer
include:
18
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: PCA plot from KineMatrix. While the feature matrix in Figure 3.4 indicates the presence of two
groups (left and right), only a single group was displayed in this module, likely due to its experimental status.
The top panel lists the most influential features, while the bottom left shows the data projected onto the first
two principal components. The explained variance of the first three components is presented in the bottom
right.
Figure 3.6: Trainer Interface. Interface used to quickly test and deploy DL models.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
19
==PAGE:28==
• Selecting model architectures and tuning parameters such as batch size, number of
hidden units, learning rate, epochs, sliding window size, and window stride. Batch
size and sliding window size influence the training times since they are responsible
of VRAM allocation strategies in the GPU.
• Loading and matching experimental runs with corresponding labels.
• Preprocessing the data into standardized input formats so that inputs will be of shape
(B, F, T), labels (B, T), and outputs (B, 5, T)→(B, T).
• Training networks in supervised mode, with optional layer freezing for SSL and
transform learning.
• Relabeling predictions during semi-supervised training workflows.
• Saving and loading PyTorch model checkpoints.
• Making predictions on individual files or entire folders, with associated evaluation
metrics.
Following the development of the DL segmentation module, a dedicated interface was
implemented to facilitate its integration with the existing KineMatrix framework. This in-
terface serves as a communication layer between the data structures managed by Kine-
Matrix and the functionalities exposed by the trainer module, ensuring seamless inter-
operability. Due to time constraints and limited validation, the SSL component was not
included in the final deployed version of the software.
The modular architecture adopted in the software architecture abstracts the interaction
between the core application and the training backend. This design promotes separation
of concerns, enabling independent development, testing, and refinement of the model
training pipeline without impacting the stability or structure of the main system.
3.1.2
Model architecture
To improve the performance of the segmentation, a DL approach has been chosen. The
task was formulated as a frame-wise classification problem where, for each frame, the
model will output if it’s a non-event, stance, swing, or peak. At first, the touchdown was
not inserted since physiologically stance and touchdown are the same. However, the
software distinguishes them to address the unpredictable behavior of rodents during the
experiment.
To identify the most effective architecture for gait event segmentation, a variety of deep
learning models were implemented and evaluated, progressing from simpler to more com-
plex architectures in terms of both computational complexity and modeling capacity. The
order of exploration was: MLP →CNN →RNN →Transformers →GCN. A comparative
overview is provided in Table 3.1.
Training duration scaled with model complexity, with ST-GCN being the most compu-
tationally intensive architecture. This is attributable to its spatiotemporal graph-based
structure, which performs convolutions across both spatial (node) and temporal dimen-
sions. On the original dataset, ST-GCN required approximately 22 hours to complete
training. When the dataset was scaled to 1,333 experimental runs, ST-GCN failed to
complete training due to repeated runtime crashes. Similarly, the T-TR model required
over 70 hours of training and exhibited instability under the expanded dataset, including
GPU memory exhaustion and execution failures.
Each architecture was chosen to explore specific modeling needs:
20
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:29==
Model
Core Layers
Total Params
MLP
Linear (3x), ReLU (2x)
70,789
CNN
Conv1d (3x), ReLU (2x)
146,501
GRU
biGRU (2x), Linear
260,997
GRU Conv
Conv1d, biGRU (2x), Linear
475,495
GRU Attention
biGRU (2x), MultiHeadAttn (4 heads), Linear
327,045
LSTM
biLSTM (2x), Linear
957,701
LSN
biLSTM (2x), Linear
348,421
T-TR
PosEnc, Transformer (4x8 heads), Linear (2x)
844,805
ST-GCN
GCN (4x), TCN (4x), Conv2d, BN
2,630,067
Table 3.1: Comparison of model architectures for gait event segmentation. The number of parame-
ters are estimated using torchinfo with an input shape of (B, F, T) = (5, 30, 418) and an output shape of
(B, C, T) = (5, 5, 30).
MLP
Used as the baseline architecture, this model processes each time step indepen-
dently and lacks temporal modeling. It consists of three linear layers with ReLU activations
and serves primarily to validate the deep learning pipeline [41].
CNN
This model applies temporal convolution to extract local patterns over time. It
captures short-range dependencies and is more efficient than RNNs for parallel training.
However, its fixed receptive field limits the modeling of long-term dependencies [41].
LSTM
It introduces recurrent dynamics and captures long-range temporal dependen-
cies. A packed sequence strategy was employed to handle varying valid sequence lengths.
Its bidirectional configuration enables context from both past and future to influence pre-
dictions [41].
LSN
Latent State Network, it concatenates LSTM with a latent space compression mod-
ule. This architecture enriches LSTM outputs by concatenating them with a global latent
summary vector derived from the full sequence, combining local and global information
before classification. The architecture has taken inspiration from the work by Lin et al. in
2017[42].
GRU
Gated Recurrent Unit, which is a more parameter-efficient recurrent model. The
bidirectional GRU processes the input in both forward and backward directions, enabling
context from past and future like in BiLSTM models [41].
GRU Conv
A convolutional layer is applied before the input to the GRU. The rational is
that convolution would enhance the detection of short-range local patterns before passing
the representations to the GRU for sequential modeling.
GRU Attention
The GRU was augmented with a 4-headed self-attention layer applied
over the GRU output. This hybrid architecture combines the strengths of recurrent and
attention-based architectures to capture temporal dynamics in gait sequences. The mul-
tihead self-attention mechanism is applied to dynamically re-weight the importance of
each time step. This allows the model to focus on salient temporal features regardless
of their position in the sequence, making it well-suited for identifying sparse or subtle
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
21
==PAGE:30==
events. While not as computationally intensive as Transformers, this hybrid approach of-
fers improved temporal expressiveness over pure RNNs, with only moderate increases in
complexity [43].
T-TR
The self-attention mechanism allows the model to learn temporal dependencies
and context relationships across the entire sequence. However, because self-attention
alone lacks any inherent sense of order, sinusoidal positional encodings are added to
the input embeddings to provide information about the relative and absolute position of
each frame in time. These encodings use fixed sine and cosine functions at multiple
frequencies, allowing the model to differentiate events based on their temporal location.
The spatial configuration is embedded implicitly in the input features at each frame. The
implementation is close to the one performed by Vaswani et al. in 2017 [43].
ST-GCN
Is the only architecture in this study that incorporates an explicit anatomical
prior. Each frame is represented as a graph, where body parts are treated as nodes and
their physical connections are encoded as edges based on a predefined kinematic chain.
Spatial relationships are modeled through GCNs, while temporal evolution is captured by
interleaved TCNs. This structure enables the model to learn structured spatiotemporal
dynamics in a biologically informed manner. However, this expressiveness comes at a
high computational cost due to the use of 2D convolutions across both time and joint
dimensions, as well as per-node processing for each body part. The implementation is
adapted from the work of Yan et al. in 2018 [44].
3.1.3
Evaluation of segmentation
Model performance
Before training, the input data was segmented into overlapping 30-frame windows, ef-
fectively augmenting the dataset and increasing the number of training samples for each
model. Evaluation followed the procedure detailed in the Methods section, and results
are summarized in Figure 3.7A–B (losses in Appendix B).
The GRU enhanced with an attention mechanism achieved the highest F1 score (87.82%),
closely followed by the T-TR architecture. In terms of timing accuracy, the ST-GCN model
yielded the best MATE at 9.72 ms. This may be attributed to its use of an explicit body-part
connectivity graph, which could improve the precision of temporal localization. However,
despite this temporal accuracy, ST-GCN achieved a lower frame-level classification per-
formance, with an F1 score of 77.51%, which is probably due to not having enough training
data.
Effect of windowing
A performance assessment without windowing was conducted using full-length sequences,
with padding and masking to accommodate variable run durations. Results are summa-
rized in Figure 3.7C–D. Vanilla recurrent neural networks (RNNs), such as LSTMs and
GRUs, outperformed most other architectures, likely due to their ability to leverage ex-
tended temporal context (typically ∼200 frames, compared to 30 in the windowed setting).
Windowing aligns well with the average step duration of approximately 200 ms [28], or 40
frames when sampling at 200Hz.
In contrast, non-vanilla RNNs (e.g., those incorporating latent fusion or attention) under-
performed, possibly due to a loss of fine-grained temporal resolution. For example, global
representations like mean pooling become less informative over long, smooth sequences.
Similarly, attention-based mechanisms may have struggled to learn meaningful weighting
patterns, both due to the smooth periodicity of gait data and the limited size of the training
set.
22
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:31==
Among non-recurrent models, the transformer-based T-TR architecture suffered the least
from the removal of windowing, achieving an F1 score of 61.21% and a MATE of 10ms.
However, its performance likely remained constrained by insufficient training data, as it
performed markedly better under windowed conditions. All other models showed sub-
stantial performance degradation, with F1 scores dropping below 50%.
Figure 3.7: Mean performance over all label types and output of the DL models.
A-C) Table shows
all the implemented models compared to each other using typical classification performance metrics (i.e.
Precision (%), Recall (%), and F1 (%), along with timing-related performance metrics (i.e. MATE (ms)). The
color if the cell is mapped from blue (minimum) to red (maximum). Each mean performance metric has next
to itself the standard error of the mean between the four labels. A-B) Evaluation of the models in the default
setting: with all the input features and a sliding centered window of 30 frames ran through each experimental
run. B-D-E) Model output displayed on a run from the held-out set of runs. The plotted point coordinates
are from the hindlimb’s paw. Each color indicates a different phase of the step. The horizontal axis is time
in frames and the vertical axis is either x-pose or y-pose z-scored. B) Output from GRU enhanced with the
attention layer. Overall, the prediction is solid apart from some uncertainty at the beginning and end of the
trace. C-D) Evaluation of the models when removing the sliding window when preprocessing the data. To
account for different sizes, each run is padded and masked. D) Output from the LSTM model. E) Effect of
the FSM on the output of the model. The multiple detected peaks at the beginning are filtered out along with
the incomplete step at the end of the trace. The function used to aggregate multiple detections of the same
label is the median.
Effect of FSM
To ensure that predicted gait event sequences follow physiologically valid transitions, a
FSM function was applied as a post-processing step to the raw model outputs. While
the deep learning models classify each frame independently, they do not enforce the
correct temporal order of gait events. Its effects can be assessed in Figure 3.7E. The
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
23
==PAGE:32==
function effectively removes rogue predictions at the edges but it is still far from perfect as
the median for grouping sequences of same-label predictions might introduce alignment
errors, particularly in ambiguous transitions.
Performance against parametric segmentation
The parametric method was evaluated on the same test set used for the DL models, and
the results are shown in Figure 3.8. Across all metrics, the DL models outperformed the
rule-based approach. In particular, the MATE for the parametric model was, on average,
more than twice that of the DL models, with a higher mean squared error (5.76 ms vs. 1–2
ms). In terms of classification accuracy, the gap was similarly large: over 20% lower than
the top-performing networks. This discrepancy likely stems from the broader spatial and
temporal context accessible to the deep learning models, which incorporate whole-body
kinematics, compared to the parametric method’s reliance on single-limb dynamics.
Figure 3.8: All the models outperform the parametric method in both classification metrics and time-
related metrics. The performance metrics between the parametric segmentation and the best performing
models is displayed. Left axis indicates performance (%) while the right axis indicates the values for MATE
(ms).
3.2
Feature extraction
After segmenting, a manual check on all the labels is performed. And, having obtained
physiologically relevant time-points, it becomes possible to calculate all the related fea-
tures.
In all comparative plots, normalized mean trajectories for each group (healthy and SCI)
are displayed alongside their standard error of the mean (SEM), allowing for visual as-
sessment of variability and potential statistical differences between conditions. To en-
able meaningful comparisons, normalization procedures on time series features were
performed in two stages:
• Temporal normalization: each individual step was interpolated over a normalized
time axis ranging from 0 to 100%. This time-alignment standardizes steps of varying
durations and allows for a direct comparison of magnitude-related features (e.g.,
centre of mass, angle, velocity) across the full step cycle.
• Magnitude-wise interpolation: this method focuses on isolating timing differences
between groups. For this, each feature dimension (e.g., x position, y position, angle,
24
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:33==
etc.) was independently interpolated and aligned across animals. This highlights
phase shifts or delays across the step cycle.
It is important to note that these visualizations serve an exploratory purpose only. Any
numerical values displayed within the plots are intended solely to guide interpretation
and should not be considered definitive without confirmation via aggregated statistics and
formal hypothesis testing.
3.2.1
Testing on literature
As described in the methods section, a validation analysis was conducted by comparing
our extracted gait features against known relationships reported in the literature. Specifi-
cally, the work Bellardita et al. from 2015 was referenced. In the paper, they demonstrated
several key locomotor relationships in mice during different gait patterns. According to
their findings:
• Step frequency and locomotor speed exhibit a linear relationship between walk and
trot with a slope of approximately ∆f ÷∆v = (5.9−2.7)Hz÷(0.5−0.09)m/s = 7.8 1
m.
• Stride length and step velocity also scale proportionally between the two behaviors,
with a similar ratio of ∆s ÷ ∆v = (6.8−3.4)cm ÷ (0.5−0.09)m/s = 0.083s.
• Stance duration exhibits an inverse relationship with speed, decreasing in a non-
linear (approximately exponential) fashion as locomotion transitions from slower to
faster gaits. Furthermore, the stance phase should be ∼70% of the step phase
when walking and ∼50% of the step phase when trotting.
In this study, data from 95 healthy mice across 1244 healthy hind steps and 1253 healthy
fore steps were analyzed to replicate and confirm the locomotor relationships described in
the literature. The resulting feature comparisons are presented in Figure 3.9A-B-C. From
the values of the plot, it is immediate to notice how all of the mice are expressing walking to
trotting behavior since velocity is strictly under 0.5m/s. The slopes of the linear regression
found in Figure 3.9A-B were respectively 5.82 1
m and 0.045s, which implied that the two
distributions followed a similar trend. This discrepancy with literature is attributed to the
lack of higher paced behaviors like gallopping and bouding in the dataset, preventing the
linear regression to asses the whole dynamic. The data in Figure 3.9C-D visualizes that
the stance phase was on average 49% of the total duration of the step, which was 0.22 ±
0.035s. These results confirm that the animals were predominantly expressing locomotor
behavior between walking and trotting, validating the step dependent features extracted
with KineMatrix.
Bellardita et al reported angular excursions for wild-type mice during walking and trotting,
summarized in Table 3.2. To compare these with our dataset, we performed two-sample
t-tests on mean joint angles derived from KineMatrix. While the hip angle did not show a
statistically significant difference, both the knee and paw angles were significantly different
from the values reported by the paper (p<0.01). These discrepancies are likely driven by
methodological differences, particularly in sample size and selection strategy. The author
analyzed 10 steps per gait condition, specifically selecting those with step frequency and
stride length similar to the mean values for each gait. This targeted approach, while con-
trolled, effectively filters out natural variability and may underestimate both inter-individual
and step-to-step fluctuations. In contrast, the current analysis includes 192 steps sam-
pled across a different behaviors, yielding a more comprehensive and ecologically valid
estimate of gait-phase angular excursions. As a result, although the statistical compar-
isons revealed significant differences, these findings should be interpreted with caution:
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.9: Validation features from KineMatrix. A-B-C) Step velocity compared with various step features.
In purple, the linear regression of the plotted data is displayed. A) Step velocity compared against step
frequency. B) Step velocity compared against step length. C) Step velocity compared to step duration. D)
Mean healthy step displayed through length and height over step-normalized time. The alternating motion
between forelimb and hindlimb can be assessed in the figure.
it can be acknowledged that they may reflect differences in sampling strategy rather than
meaningful discrepancies in motor behavior extraction.
Gait
Thigh/Hip (°)
Shank/knee (°)
Foot/paw (°)
Walk
41 ± 1
80 ± 2
92 ± 3
Trot
62 ± 2
82 ± 3
92 ± 3
KineMatrix
62.14 ± 10.32
75.89 ± 3.92
119.72 ± 12.87
Table 3.2: Angular excursions of hindlimb segments (thigh, shank, and foot) during different gaits in wild-
type mice, measured with respect to the horizontal plane. The first two rows are from Bellardita et. al [28]. It
is important to note that KineMatrix has different naming conventions for angles compared to literature (i.e.
thigh = hip, shank = ankle, foot = paw).
3.2.2
Testing on SCI
After confirming the reliability of the extracted features, the complete analysis pipeline
was applied to investigate differences in step kinematics between healthy and SCI mice.
A total of 689 forelimb steps and 586 hindlimb steps from 53 post-SCI mice were included
in this comparison. The reduced number of mice compared to the healthy counterpart is
due to the exclusion of animals for which no steps were detected during any run. The step
analysis focused on three core step-related metrics: step height, step length, and step du-
ration. Step frequency was excluded, as it is defined as the inverse of step duration and
provides limited utility in SCI contexts, where the number of steps is inherently low. Ve-
locity features during the step phases were also taken into account. All t-tests performed
are Welch’s t-tests, as a Levene test confirmed that the variances of the distributions were
not equal. An overview of the pathology can be seen in Figure 3.10.
Broad impairment after SCI
Across all hindlimb steps (i.e., without distinguishing be-
tween left and right limbs), SCI animals exhibited significant deficits in several locomotor
features, including increased step duration, reduced step length, altered stance/swing tim-
ing, and paw velocities (full table in Appendix C.1). In particular, step duration increased
26
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.10: KineMatrix identifies motor impariment after SCI. A-B-C) Visual representation of SCI (blue)
against healthy state (purple). A) Trajectory plot showing the difference in hindlimb gait between states.
Velocity drastically drops and dragging is present. B-C-D) Average kinematic traces compared between the
two stated over standardized time. A general decrease in movement can be witnessed. B) Angle between the
knee joint and the ground over time. C) Visualization of the differences over the horizontal and vertical axis in
healthy and SCI states. D) Mean trajectories of forepaw (cyan) and hindpaw (purple) during the normalized
step. The reduction in movement is highlighted on the vertical axis.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
27
==PAGE:36==
significantly from 220 ± 35 ms in healthy mice to 276 ± 132 ms, a 25% increase. Similar
results were observed in its components: swing duration increased by 14.3% (112 ± 15
ms to 128.4 ± 29 ms), and stance duration exhibited a dramatic 36.2% increase (from
108.4 ± 26 ms to 147.6 ± 123.5 ms). All of these differences were highly significant, with
p < 0.0001. However, step height showed no significant change between groups (3.45 ±
0.7 mm for healthy and 3.64 ± 1.5 mm for SCI mice). This non-significant result prompted
a deeper investigation by analyzing side-specific limb behavior.
Left hindlimb analysis: compensatory elevation
In left hindlimb steps, SCI animals
exhibited increases in step height, reductions in step length, and prolonged step dura-
tions and phases (Appendix C.2). Unlike the previous analysis, step height differences
emerged, increasing from 3.41 ± 0.63 mm in healthy mice to 3.79 ± 1.43 mm in SCI mice:
an 11% elevation (p=0.04). This suggests a possible compensatory elevation strategy,
which is supported by visual inspection of run videos and mean values for each single
mouse.
Right hindlimb analysis: survivorship bias
In contrast, right hindlimb step features
were not significantly different between groups. Step height decreased marginally (3.56
± 0.74 mm to 3.45 ± 1.47 mm), and step length decreased slightly (5.57 ± 0.57 cm to
5.43 ± 1.23 cm). Step duration followed the trend, increasing from 226.5 ± 36 ms to
269.8 ±160 ms, but remained non-significant (Appendix C.3). These results reinforce
lateralized motor adaptation, where compensatory behavior is asymmetrically distributed
across limbs. A summary of the results regarding step features can be seen in Table 3.3.
Feature p-value
Both Hindlimbs
Left Hindlimb
Right Hindlimb
Step height
0.2477 (ns)
0.0406 (*)
0.6396 (ns)
Step length
0.0049 (**)
0.0017 (**)
0.4261 (ns)
Step duration
1.05 × 10−5 (***)
3.38 × 10−6 (***)
0.0559 (ns)
Table 3.3: Comparison of significance in step features between healthy and SCI. Significance levels:
(*) p < 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, (***) p < 0.001, (ns) not significant.
From a physiological standpoint, the results above raised questions. Evidence from the
experimental protocol suggests that the contusion model tends to affect the right side
more severely. Furthermore, by relying solely on hindlimb-defined steps, a survivorship
bias may be introduced, as only completed steps contribute features. To mitigate this, an
alternative analysis anchored to right forelimb steps was conducted.
Forelimb-gated hindlimb features
Rather than relying solely on classical step metrics,
we analyzed the angular excursions of the right hindlimb during forelimb steps, along with
lift-off events using vertical velocity as a proxy. This approach avoids the inaccuracies of
inter-joint angles during dragging, a common issue in SCI mice. Across all animals, phase
excursions at the hip, knee, ankle, and paw were significantly reduced in SCI mice, with
mean reductions ranging from 14.4° to 52.3° (p < 0.001 for all joints). Vertical velocity
during stance dropped by 65%, from -0.0144 ± 0.0295 m/s in healthy mice to -0.0051 ±
0.0154 m/s post-injury, and during swing it decreased by 80%, from 0.0066 ± 0.0103 m/s
to 0.0013 ± 0.0082 m/s. These sharp decreases suggest that the hindlimb was often not
actively contributing to forward propulsion.
Interestingly, horizontal velocity during forelimb swing increased by 52% in SCI animals,
from 0.0718 ± 0.041) m/s to 0.1092 ± 0.0461 m/s, suggesting that forward motion may
28
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:37==
be largely driven by forelimb effort dragging the hindlimbs. This is consistent with prior
descriptions of forelimb-driven locomotion post-injury.
Additional metrics corroborate these observations. While traditional step features like
step duration showed highly significant differences between healthy and SCI groups (p =
1.05×10−5 for both hindlimbs), other classical metrics such as step height and step length
were less consistently altered, which only showed significant changes on the left (less
affected) hindlimb. These asymmetries reinforce the need for whole-body, temporally
aligned analysis to detect subtle or unilateral compensations that traditional metrics may
overlook.
Altogether, these results indicate that under SCI conditions, hindlimbs are often passively
dragged rather than actively stepping, disrupting the normal alternation between forelimb
and hindlimb movement phases. By anchoring hindlimb analysis to forelimb step phases,
this approach uncovers otherwise hidden deficits in step coordination and posture control.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:39==
4
Discussion
This thesis presents a computational pipeline for quantifying locomotor behavior in rodents
using pose estimation data. A central contribution is the development and evaluation of
segmentation algorithms: parametric, manual, and deep learning–based for identifying
key gait events (stance, swing, peak, touchdown) from tracked movement trajectories.
These approaches were integrated into the KineMatrix platform, enabling step-level anal-
ysis of locomotor behavior with high temporal resolution and biological interpretability.
We demonstrated that rule-based segmentation can offer high interpretability and speed,
particularly when signal quality is high and animal behavior is stereotyped. However,
in more variable or pathological datasets, the use of deep learning models substantially
improved event detection accuracy and temporal consistency. The inclusion of phase en-
coding and structured post-processing with finite state machines further enhanced model
reliability.
4.1
Validation against literature: physiologically plausible,
yet incongruent
Step duration measurements extracted with KineMatrix in healthy mice show strong agree-
ment with values reported in previous studies, supporting the platform’s validity in captur-
ing temporal aspects of locomotion [45, 46, 47, 48, 49]. However, discrepancies emerge
when examining spatial and coordination metrics such as joint excursions and interlimb
phase relationships.
While most rodent gait studies report data from small cohorts (typically n = 6–12) [29,
46, 28], our dataset includes over 90 mice, spanning multiple experimental batches and
time points. This substantially larger sample size enhances statistical robustness but
also introduces greater biological variability, potentially uncovering behavioral patterns
that may be underrepresented or entirely overlooked in smaller-scale studies.
Additionally, prior studies often select idealized or representative locomotor sequences to
improve clarity in kinematic reporting. In contrast, KineMatrix processes all steps without
manual exclusion, capturing the full range of spontaneous variability in naturalistic behav-
ior. For example, studies by Hamers et al. [45] and Leblond et al. [46] often limit analysis
to steps within narrow speed ranges or remove irregular steps, leading to cleaner but
potentially less generalizable results.
This may partially explain why only the hip excursion in our healthy animals closely matches
literature values. Deviations in knee and ankle metrics might result from both biological
variability and methodological differences. Specifically, KineMatrix tracks hindlimb paw
motion using a single hindfinger point, a distal marker prone to occlusion and passive
movement. In contrast, several studies rely on more proximal and stable anatomical mark-
ers (e.g., metatarsophalangeal joint or ankle center), or use multi-point segment tracking
to estimate joint trajectories [50].
Moreover, subtle but impactful differences in computational pipelines, such as the defini-
tion of joint angles, segmentation of gait phases, or filtering and interpolation algorithms
can contribute to metric divergence across platforms. For instance, Bellardita et al. [28]
define swing onset based on electromyography and manual scoring, whereas KineMatrix
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
31
==PAGE:40==
uses positional information and model-driven heuristics. Such algorithmic choices may
introduce consistent biases even when targeting the same behavioral events.
Finally, speed-dependent modulation of gait must be considered. As known from multiple
rodent studies [51, 28], stance-swing ratios, limb coordination, and trajectory amplitude
scale with walking velocity. Future validation may benefit from stratifying KineMatrix out-
puts by speed ranges to improve comparability with prior datasets that often control or
normalize for this factor.
In summary, while some kinematic outcomes differ from literature benchmarks, these dif-
ferences likely reflect a combination of broader sampling, anatomical marker variability,
and differing computational definitions. Rather than undermining the platform’s accuracy,
such discrepancies highlight the importance of standardization in gait analysis and the
potential of KineMatrix to reveal richer, population-wide behavioral signatures.
4.2
Impact of SCI on gait: the Limits of local analysis
Our analysis highlights a critical limitation of focusing solely on limb-specific gait events:
such an approach fails to capture high-level compensatory strategies that emerge after
neurological injury. KineMatrix detects gait features only when step cycles are clearly
expressed. This creates a systematic blind spot in SCI mice, precisely when locomo-
tor function is most impaired, and when the absence of steps itself may hold important
behavioral information.
Within the detected steps, compensatory adaptations emerge asymmetrically. The con-
tralateral (less affected) limb often displays altered stance duration and extended swing
phases, while the ipsilateral limb preserves normal step height. However, prior studies
show that elevated paw trajectories in isolation are insufficient to infer recovery; they may
instead reflect maladaptive patterns or poor coordination [52]. A granular analysis of inter-
joint coordination or temporal variability is required to resolve whether these are functional
compensations or signs of impaired control.
Furthermore, hindpaw velocity during forelimb steps often falls below functional thresh-
olds, suggesting dragging behavior: a hallmark of severe SCI. This supports earlier find-
ings showing that forelimb-led locomotion compensates for hindlimb deficits [53]. Kine-
matic evidence of tail and lumbar spine deformation was also observed, though not quan-
tified here. Prior work has emphasized the rodent tail’s role in balance and gait rhythm,
suggesting that it may serve as an additional marker of motor strategy or instability in
injury models.
These observations support a shift toward whole-body, multidimensional assessments.
Local metrics like stance duration or step height must be contextualized within broader
coordination frameworks to avoid overestimating recovery. This motivates future expan-
sion of KineMatrix to capture latent locomotor dynamics, providing a richer and more
biologically grounded representation of motor behavior.
4.3
Linking multidimensional movement analysis to neural
control: toward a neuroscience-informed framework
While KineMatrix currently supports a broad array of biologically grounded features, such
as joint angles, center-of-mass trajectories, and step-dependent timing metrics, these fea-
tures are often analyzed in isolation or aggregated linearly (e.g., via means and standard
deviations). Such approaches, while interpretable, may fail to capture the full richness
32
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:41==
of high-dimensional motor behavior, particularly in cases involving compensatory adap-
tations or subtle coordination deficits.
A growing body of research in motor control advocates for multidimensional and non-linear
approaches to movement analysis, recognizing that motor behaviors are inherently high-
dimensional, dynamic, and context-dependent. Studies using techniques like Principal
Component Analysis (PCA), t-SNE, UMAP, and nonlinear manifold learning have shown
success in uncovering latent structure in kinematic data, revealing stereotyped movement
synergies, condition-specific adaptations, and recovery trajectories following injury (e.g.,
Flash & Hochner, 2005 [54]; D’Avella & Bizzi, 2005 [55]; Lebedev et al., 2005 [56]). To
address this, future versions of KineMatrix could incorporate nonlinear dimensionality re-
duction tools, such as Autoencoders (to learn latent dynamics of joint trajectories) and
Diffusion Maps (to reveal low-dimensional manifolds of gait). Such analyses would allow
the discovery of structure in variability, rather than treating variability as noise. This is
crucial because variability in gait timing, coordination, or angular dynamics may reflect
underlying neuroplasticity, compensatory strategies, or maladaptive patterns, which are
features that linear statistics can overlook.
Moreover, multidimensional clustering methods (e.g., Gaussian Mixture Models, HDB-
SCAN) can be employed to identify behavioral phenotypes across recovery stages or
treatment groups. This could move the field beyond coarse labels such as “impaired” or
“recovered” to a spectrum-based classification that captures continuous motor evolution.
A comparison with recent studies reinforces this need. For example, Machado et al.
(2015) [29] demonstrated that high-dimensional representations of spinal activity corre-
late with specific kinematic motifs in reaching tasks. Similarly, Berman et al. (2014) [57]
applied unsupervised learning to identify hidden behavioral states in freely moving ani-
mals, which mapped onto distinct neural activation patterns. These results suggest that
moving toward a systems-level, multidimensional framework can bridge the gap between
observed behavior and underlying neural computation. These extensions would not only
improve the biological sensitivity of the software but also align it with the evolving stan-
dards in computational motor neuroscience.
4.4
Retraining to generalize the DL model
While the current deep learning model demonstrates promise, its generalizability remains
limited. Retraining the model, particularly through semi-supervised approaches, could
extend its utility across more behavioral contexts. Semi-supervised learning would allow
the model to continue learning from vast amounts of unlabeled data, potentially capturing
subtle gait variations that are tailored for each different use. However, such methods
remain underdeveloped in this study as no empirical results have yet been obtained. This
is a clear direction for future work.
Moreover, the model architecture and training procedure were not exhaustively optimized.
Improvements could stem from a more systematic tuning of hyperparameters, such as ad-
justing the depth of the network, the number of hidden units, and dropout rates. Presently,
binary cross-entropy is used as the classification loss, which performs well but other meth-
ods are worthy of attempt, especially when assessing the generalizability to new datasets
section. Alternative losses, such as the Kullback–Leibler divergence, might better cap-
ture class distributions and improve robustness, especially when dealing with ambiguous
transitions.
Training design also warrants revision. For instance, the current pipeline does not fully
exploit modern GPU capabilities. A redesign of training blocks to better match hardware
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
33
==PAGE:42==
constraints could reduce training time and improve convergence. Furthermore, imple-
menting K-fold cross-validation would provide more reliable performance estimates and
make fuller use of the limited labeled data.
Dataset quality is another concern. Low-likelihood tracking points from DLC currently
remain in the dataset, potentially introducing noise. A more aggressive filtering or impu-
tation scheme, such as discarding points below a likelihood threshold or interpolating from
neighboring frames, could mitigate this issue.
The FSM used to aggregate label predictions also merits reconsideration. Using the me-
dian as an aggregation rule may lead to inaccuracies in labeling that are not physiologically
possible (e.g peak position not at the local maxima, or stance and touchdown being too
far away in consecutive steps). Alternatives such as a kinematically informed FSM, mode
voting, temporal smoothing filters, or even learned aggregation strategies could improve
behavioral fidelity.
Finally, ensemble learning might enhance performance by averaging predictions from
multiple independently trained models. This could stabilize predictions, especially for rare
or transitional behaviors, and help mitigate model overfitting.
4.4.1
Lack of uncertainty estimates and temporal modeling
Two key limitations of KineMatrix that impact its interpretability and analytical power are
the absence of uncertainty quantification and the lack of temporal context modeling. At
present, the system offers deterministic outputs for both step detection and feature ex-
traction, providing users with no indication of confidence or error margins. This becomes
problematic in recordings where trajectories are noisy, body part tracking is inconsistent,
or locomotor patterns deviate from the norm, as is often the case in animals with severe
spinal cord injury. Without confidence scores or probabilistic labels, it is difficult for users
to distinguish between biologically meaningful data and artifacts. This limitation restricts
the reliability of downstream analyses, particularly when decisions are made based on
thresholds or when comparing across heterogeneous datasets. Incorporating methods
such as Monte Carlo dropout, Bayesian neural networks, or ensemble models could pro-
vide confidence intervals and improve robustness.
In addition, KineMatrix currently treats each detected step as an isolated event, lacking
any modeling of the temporal dynamics across successive steps. As a result, critical in-
formation about interlimb coordination, gait rhythm, stride-to-stride variability, or recovery
trajectories is lost. This approach is especially limiting in contexts where compensatory
patterns unfold gradually over time or where subtle disruptions in rhythmicity indicate early
stages of dysfunction or recovery. To overcome this, integrating sequence-aware compu-
tational frameworks, such as Hidden Markov Models (HMMs), LSTM networks, or tempo-
ral convolutional networks would allow the software to detect and interpret trends in gait
dynamics over time. Such approaches could reveal high-level behavioral states, transi-
tions between locomotor modes, and more complex adaptations not captured by event-
centered metrics alone. Together, these enhancements would bring KineMatrix closer to
the standards of modern computational motor neuroscience, where both uncertainty and
temporal structure are recognized as essential components of behavior analysis.
34
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:43==
5
Conclusion
5.1
Conclusion
This thesis introduces and applies KineMatrix, a computational framework for the extrac-
tion and analysis of detailed kinematic features from rodent gait. Through large-scale
validation on over 90 mice, spanning healthy, spinal cord injured, and treated conditions.
This work demonstrates that KineMatrix can reliably capture biologically meaningful met-
rics such as joint angles, step timing, body posture, and interlimb coordination. These
features align with known physiological markers of motor function and reflect both impair-
ment and partial recovery in preclinical models of neurological injury.
Beyond confirming previously described gait alterations, this work reveals new patterns of
compensation, such as asymmetric hindlimb dynamics, forelimb-driven locomotion, and
trunk adaptations, that often elude conventional step-based analysis. These findings sup-
port the need for broader, more holistic approaches to behavioral profiling. Specifically,
the work highlights the limits of linear or limb-isolated metrics, advocating for future imple-
mentation of manifold learning and nonlinear analysis to uncover latent motor strategies
and compensatory mechanisms.
This thesis is part of a broader collaborative effort. The development of the underlying
machine learning pipeline, software infrastructure, and validation strategies is detailed
in the parallel thesis by Walid Outtaleb [40]. Together, the two theses establish Kine-
Matrix as a powerful open-source platform that bridges neuroscience and computational
analysis, paving the way for more precise, scalable, and biologically informed movement
assessment in rodent models of injury and disease.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
M. F. Bastide et al. “Pathophysiology of L-DOPA-induced motor and non-motor
complications in Parkinson’s disease”. In: Progress in Neurobiology (2015). DOI:
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.07.002.
[2]
S. R. Zeiler and J. W. Krakauer. “The interaction between training and plasticity in
the poststroke brain”. In: Current Opinion in Neurology (2013). DOI: 10.1097/WCO.
0000000000000025.
[3]
Movement Disorder Society Task Force on Rating Scales for Parkinson’s Disease.
“The Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS): status and recommen-
dations”. In: Movement Disorders (2003). DOI: 10.1002/mds.10473.
[4]
S. W. Scheff, D. A. Saucier, and M. E. Cain. “A statistical method for analyzing
rating scale data: the BBB locomotor score”. In: Journal of Neurotrauma (2002).
DOI: 10.1089/08977150260338038.
[5]
J. M. Galea et al. “Dissociating the roles of the cerebellum and motor cortex during
adaptive learning: The motor cortex retains what the cerebellum learns”. In: Cere-
bral Cortex (2011). DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhq246.
[6]
Asif A. Ghazanfar and Alex Gomez-Marin. “The Life of Behavior”. In: Neuron (2019).
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.09.017.
[7]
Emily Jane Dennis et al. “Systems neuroscience of natural behaviors in rodents”.
In: Journal of Neuroscience (2021). DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1877-20.2020.
[8]
Sten Grillner and Abdeljabbar El Manira. “Current principles of motor control, with
special reference to vertebrate locomotion”. In: Physiological Reviews (2020). DOI:
10.1152/physrev.00015.2019.
[9]
Ole Kiehn. “Decoding the organization of spinal circuits that control locomotion”. In:
Nature Reviews Neuroscience (2016). DOI: 10.1038/nrn.2016.9.
[10]
Stephen H. Scott. “A functional taxonomy of bottom-up sensory feedback process-
ing for motor actions”. In: Trends in Neurosciences (2016). DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2016.
06.001.
[11]
Charles S. Sherrington. The integrative action of the nervous system. Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1906.
[12]
Martyn Goulding. “Circuits controlling vertebrate locomotion: moving in a new direc-
tion”. In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience (2009). DOI: 10.1038/nrn2608.
[13]
Martin Hägglund et al. “Optogenetic dissection reveals multiple rhythmogenic mod-
ules underlying locomotion in mice”. In: pnas (2013). DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1304365110.
[14]
Mark F. Bear, Barry W. Connors, and Michael A. Paradiso. Neuroscience: Exploring
the Brain. 4th edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2016.
[15]
Anne E. Urai et al. “Large-scale neural recordings call for new insights to link brain
and behavior”. In: Nature Neuroscience (2022). DOI: 10.1038/s41593-021-00980-9.
[16]
A. K. Dhawale et al. “The basal ganglia control the detailed kinematics of learned
motor skills”. In: Nature Neuroscience (2021). DOI: 10.1038/s41593-021-00889-3.
[17]
Karl Friston et al. “Action and behavior: A free-energy formulation”. In: Biological
Cybernetics (2010). DOI: 10.1007/s00422-010-0364-z.
[18]
M. W. Mathis et al. “Decoding the brain: From neural representations to mechanistic
models”. In: Cell (2024). DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.08.051.
[19]
Grégoire Courtine et al. “Can experiments in nonhuman primates expedite the trans-
lation of treatments for spinal cord injury in humans?” In: Nature Medicine (2007).
DOI: 10.1038/nm1595.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
37
==PAGE:46==
[20]
Livia Filli and Martin E. Schwab. “The rocky road to translation in spinal cord repair”.
In: Annals of Neurology (2012). DOI: 10.1002/ana.23630.
[21]
Olivier Raineteau and Martin E. Schwab. “Plasticity of motor systems after incom-
plete spinal cord injury”. In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience (2001). DOI: 10.1038/
35067570.
[22]
Volker Dietz and Armin Curt. “Neurological aspects of spinal-cord repair: promises
and challenges”. In: The Lancet Neurology (2007). DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)
70522-1.
[23]
Björn Zörner et al. “Chasing central nervous system plasticity: the brainstem’s con-
tribution to locomotor recovery in rats with spinal cord injury”. In: Brain (2014). DOI:
10.1093/brain/awu078.
[24]
Luca Asboth et al. “Cortico-reticulo-spinal circuit reorganization enables functional
recovery after severe spinal cord injury”. In: Nature Neuroscience (2018). DOI: 10.
1038/s41593-018-0093-5.
[25]
American Spinal Injury Association. “International Standards for Neurological Clas-
sification of Spinal Cord Injury”. In: Journal of Spinal Cord Medicine (2000).
[26]
Letícia P. Diogo et al. “Kinematic and kinetic gait analysis to evaluate functional
recovery in thoracic spinal cord injured rats”. In: Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Re-
views (2019). DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.12.027.
[27]
D. M. Basso et al. “Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion detects differences in re-
covery after spinal cord injury in five common mouse strains”. In: Journal of Neuro-
trauma (2006). DOI: 10.1089/neu.2006.23.635.
[28]
Carmelo Bellardita and Ole Kiehn. “Phenotypic characterization of speed-associated
gait changes in mice reveals modular organization of locomotor networks”. In: Cur-
rent Biology (2015). DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.04.005.
[29]
Adriano S. Machado et al. “A quantitative framework for whole-body coordination
reveals specific deficits in freely walking ataxic mice”. In: eLife (2015). DOI: 10.7554/
eLife.07892.
[30]
Adolfo E. Talpalar et al. “Identification of minimal neuronal networks involved in
flexor-extensor alternation in the mammalian spinal cord”. In: Neuron (2011). DOI:
10.1016/j.neuron.2011.07.011.
[31]
Alain Frigon. “Central pattern generators of the mammalian spinal cord”. In: The
Neuroscientist (2012). DOI: 10.1177/1073858410396101.
[32]
Ivo Amende et al. “Gait dynamics in mouse models of Parkinson’s disease and
Huntington’s disease”. In: Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation (2005).
DOI: 10.1186/1743-0003-2-20.
[33]
Laura M. Murray, Kevin Talbot, and Thomas H. Gillingwater. “Review: Neuromus-
cular synaptic vulnerability in motor neurone disease: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
and spinal muscular atrophy”. In: Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology (2010).
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01061.x.
[34]
Ronald van den Brand et al. “Restoring voluntary control of locomotion after para-
lyzing spinal cord injury”. In: Science (2012). DOI: 10.1126/science.1217416.
[35]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learn-
ing and Data Mining. 2021. URL: https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/research/
research-sections/cogsys/education/intro-ml-dm.
[36]
Michael Bernstein. Dimensionality Reduction: A Short Primer. https://mbernste.
github.io/posts/dim_reduc/. 2020.
[37]
Alexander Mathis et al. “DeepLabCut: markerless pose estimation of user-defined
body parts with deep learning”. In: Nature Neuroscience (2018). DOI: 10 . 1038 /
s41593-018-0209-y.
38
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:47==
[38]
Björn Albrecht, Alexej Schatz, and York Winter. “KineWheel–DeepLabCut Auto-
mated Paw Annotation Using Deep Learning for Rodent Locomotion Analysis”. In:
eNeuro (2024). DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0304-23.2024. URL: https://www.eneuro.
org/content/11/8/ENEURO.0304-23.2024.
[39]
Baoyou Fan, Zhijian Wei, and Shiqing Feng. “Progression in translational research
on spinal cord injury based on microenvironment imbalance”. In: Bone Research
(2022). DOI: 10.1038/s41413-022-00199-9. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41413-022-00199-9.
[40]
Walid Outtaleb. “Automated Kinematic Analysis for Behavioral Quantification in Pre-
clinical Neuroscience Research”. Master’s Thesis. DTU ELECTRO and Department
of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, 2025.
[41]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016.
[42]
Zhouhan Lin et al. A Structured Self-attentive Sentence Embedding. 2017. arXiv:
1703.03130 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03130.
[43]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2017. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[44]
Sijie Yan, Yuanjun Xiong, and Dahua Lin. “Spatial Temporal Graph Convolutional
Networks for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence (2018). DOI: 10.1609/aaai.v32i1.12328. URL: https:
//ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/12328.
[45]
F. P. T. Hamers et al. “Automated quantitative gait analysis during overground loco-
motion in the rat: Its application to spinal cord contusion and transection injuries”.
In: Journal of Neurotrauma (2001). DOI: 10.1089/08977150150502613.
[46]
Hugues et al. Leblond. “Treadmill Locomotion in the Intact and Spinal Mouse”. In:
Journal of Neuroscience (2003). DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-36-11411.2003.
[47]
César S. Mendes et al. “Quantification of gait parameters in freely walking rodents”.
In: BMC Biology (2015). DOI: 10.1186/s12915-015-0154-0.
[48]
Claudia Pitzer, Barbara Kurpiers, and Ahmed Eltokhi. “Gait performance of adoles-
cent mice assessed by the CatWalk XT depends on age, strain and sex and cor-
relates with speed and body weight”. In: Scientific Reports (2021). DOI: 10.1038/
s41598-021-00625-8.
[49]
Constanza J. Cortés and colleagues. Low-Cost Gait Analysis for Behavioral Phe-
notyping of Mouse Models. Journal of Visualized Experiments (JoVE). 2019.
[50]
Vittorio Caggiano et al. “Midbrain circuits that set locomotor speed and gait selec-
tion”. In: Nature (2018). DOI: 10.1038/nature25448.
[51]
K. A. Clarke and J. Still. “Gait analysis in the mouse”. In: Physiology & Behavior
(1999). DOI: 10.1016/S0031-9384(98)00343-6.
[52]
Andre Filipe Isidro et al. “Using the MouseWalker to Quantify Locomotor Dysfunc-
tion in a Mouse Model of Spinal Cord Injury”. In: Journal of Visualized Experiments
(2023). DOI: 10.3791/65207.
[53]
Akira Takeoka et al. “Muscle spindle feedback directs locomotor recovery and circuit
reorganization after spinal cord injury”. In: Cell (2014). DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.
019.
[54]
Tamar Flash and Binyamin Hochner. “Motor primitives in vertebrates and inverte-
brates”. In: Current Opinion in Neurobiology (2005). DOI: 10.1016/j.conb.2005.10.
011.
[55]
Andrea D’Avella and Emilio Bizzi. “Shared and specific muscle synergies in natural
motor behaviors”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2005).
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0500199102.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
39
==PAGE:48==
[56]
Mikhail A. Lebedev et al. “Cortical ensemble adaptation to represent velocity of
an artificial actuator controlled by a brain-machine interface”. In: Journal of Neuro-
science (2005). DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4088-04.2005.
[57]
Gordon J. Berman et al. “Mapping the stereotyped behaviour of freely moving fruit
flies”. In: Journal of the Royal Society Interface (2014). DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0672.
40
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:49==
A
Segmentation UI
Figure A.1: KineMatrix segmentation (1/2). Top) UI for the parametric method for segmentation. It starts from
looking at the peaks and then follows the descent of the curve to find swings and touchdowns. Bottom) UI
for the deep learning based segmentation. It is possible to select the desired model between the preinstalled
ones, load a PyTorch .pt model file, save the current model as a .pt file, retrain the network based on user
corrections, and predict all the steps.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.2: KineMatrix segmentation (2/2). Top) Manual labeling mode aided with the x and y traces on
the left and a video on the right. The labeled steps will be shown inside the table ’Detected Steps’. Bottom)
Import module for steps. It will match all filenames that are closest to the loaded dataset, mouse, run combo
for all runs.
42
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:51==
B
DL model training losses
Figure B.1: Loss function over epochs of the LSTM model with a windowing of 30 frames. The best epoch
was at 637.
Figure B.2: Loss function over epochs of the enhanced GRU model with attention and a windowing of 30
frames. The best epoch was at 936.
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure B.3: Loss function over epochs of the T-TR model with a windowing of 30 frames. The best epoch
was at 921.
Figure B.4: Loss function over epochs of the ST-GCN model with a windowing of 30 frames. The best epoch
was at 992.
44
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:53==
C
Testing against SCI
Feature
Healthy (mean ± SD)
Sick (mean ± SD)
p-value
Mean step height (m)
0.00348 ± 0.00069
0.00364 ± 0.00145
0.2477
Mean step length (m)
0.05574 ± 0.00598
0.05260 ± 0.01121
0.0049
Mean step duration (s)
0.22038 ± 0.03532
0.27604 ± 0.13167
1.05 × 10−5
Mean swing duration (s)
0.11200 ± 0.01563
0.12842 ± 0.02933
5.14 × 10−8
Mean stance duration (s)
0.10838 ± 0.02587
0.14761 ± 0.12348
6.97 × 10−4
Mean stance X velocity (m/s)
0.03139 ± 0.01529
0.07549 ± 0.07651
4.13 × 10−9
Mean stance Y velocity (m/s)
0.01948 ± 0.00768
0.01369 ± 0.01361
2.96 × 10−5
Mean swing X velocity (m/s)
0.49266 ± 0.09864
0.35526 ± 0.13413
8.61 × 10−19
Mean swing Y velocity (m/s)
−0.01154 ± 0.00831
−0.01109 ± 0.00937
0.6696
Table C.1: Spatiotemporal step features during hindlimb steps without distinguishing between left and right
limb
Feature
Healthy (mean ± SD)
Sick (mean ± SD)
p-value
Mean step height (m)
0.00341 ± 0.00063
0.00379 ± 0.00143
0.0406
Mean step length (m)
0.05574 ± 0.00627
0.05132 ± 0.01020
0.0017
Mean step duration (s)
0.21428 ± 0.03382
0.28079 ± 0.10745
3.38 × 10−6
Mean swing duration (s)
0.10982 ± 0.01333
0.12789 ± 0.02857
3.95 × 10−6
Mean stance duration (s)
0.10446 ± 0.02407
0.15291 ± 0.09590
9.23 × 10−5
Mean stance X velocity (m/s)
0.03246 ± 0.01827
0.05550 ± 0.04563
1.37 × 10−4
Mean stance Y velocity (m/s)
0.01908 ± 0.00859
0.01386 ± 0.01308
0.0044
Mean swing X velocity (m/s)
0.50262 ± 0.10244
0.35841 ± 0.12350
7.03 × 10−13
Mean swing Y velocity (m/s)
−0.01301 ± 0.00806
−0.01222 ± 0.00813
0.5386
Table C.2: Spatiotemporal step features during left hindlimb steps
Feature
Healthy (mean ± SD)
Sick (mean ± SD)
p-value
Mean step height (m)
0.00356 ± 0.00074
0.00345 ± 0.00147
0.6396
Mean step length (m)
0.05573 ± 0.00570
0.05430 ± 0.01231
0.4261
Mean step duration (s)
0.22649 ± 0.03590
0.26975 ± 0.15902
0.0559
Mean swing duration (s)
0.11419 ± 0.01743
0.12913 ± 0.03056
0.0016
Mean stance duration (s)
0.11230 ± 0.02711
0.14062 ± 0.15323
0.1878
Mean stance X velocity (m/s)
0.03032 ± 0.01158
0.10189 ± 0.09861
2.62 × 10−6
Mean stance Y velocity (m/s)
0.01987 ± 0.00665
0.01348 ± 0.01440
0.0032
Mean swing X velocity (m/s)
0.48271 ± 0.09418
0.35111 ± 0.14811
1.20 × 10−7
Mean swing Y velocity (m/s)
−0.01007 ± 0.00834
−0.00960 ± 0.01069
0.7862
Table C.3: Spatiotemporal step features during right hindlimb steps
LOSSES FOR MAIN MODELS
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
45
==PAGE:54==
Feature
Healthy (mean ± SD)
Sick (mean ± SD)
p-value
Mean phase excursion – hip (°)
62.27 ± 10.34
47.88 ± 16.73
4.20 × 10−11
Mean phase excursion – knee (°)
75.74 ± 3.85
44.39 ± 21.04
1.17 × 10−25
Mean phase excursion – ankle (°)
110.48 ± 6.40
91.82 ± 44.85
1.27 × 10−4
Mean phase excursion – paw (°)
119.61 ± 12.81
67.28 ± 113.97
2.58 × 10−5
Mean stance X velocity (m/s)
0.50019 ± 0.12181
0.28621 ± 0.21170
1.82 × 10−14
Mean stance Y velocity (m/s)
−0.01441 ± 0.01295
−0.00506 ± 0.01547
1.19 × 10−5
Mean swing X velocity (m/s)
0.07178 ± 0.04125
0.10921 ± 0.04606
1.86 × 10−8
Mean swing Y velocity (m/s)
0.00656 ± 0.01032
0.00129 ± 0.00823
1.43 × 10−4
Table C.4: Right hindlimb kinematics calculated during the right fore step phases
46
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
==PAGE:55==
Computational Tool for Quantifying Movement Patterns: Linking Neural Activity to Behavior
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
