==PAGE:1==
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
Evaluating Masked Autoencoders as a Method for Label-
Efficient Automated Sea Ice Concentration Mapping
Master Thesis, June 2025
Author: Emil Haaber Tellefsen
Supervisors: Rasmus Tage Tonboe & Tore Wulf
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
Evaluating Masked Autoencoders as a Method for Label-Efficient Automated Sea Ice Con-
centration Mapping
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Emil Haaber Tellefsen
Supervised by
Rasmus Tage Tonboe & Tore Wulf
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Sentinel-1B HH image patch from central east Greenland reconstructed
and classified using masked autoencoder and a pretrained sea ice pre-
diction model developed with this project.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Approval
Emil Haaber Tellefsen - s201201
Signature
Date
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
iii
==PAGE:6==
Preface
This master thesis is submitted as the dissertation for a master’s degree in Mathematical
Modeling and Computation at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work pre-
sented here has all been conducted between February and June 2025 at the Department
of Space Research and Technology at DTU (DTU Space) as part of the Microwaves and
Remote Sensing department, as well as part of the Satellites and Arctic unit of the Na-
tional Centre for Climate Research (NCKF) at the Danish Meteorological Institute(DMI).
The project was supervised by Rasmus T. Tonboe from DTU Space along with Tore Wulf
at DMI.
Emil Haaber Tellefsen
AI Disclosure:
AI tools (Writefull and ChatGPT) were used throughout the production of this thesis to
assist with tasks such as spelling and grammar checking, sentence reformulation, writing inspiration, gener-
ating generic structures (e.g., bibliography entries and glossary items), writing simple code, and explaining
concepts. All AI-generated content was thoroughly reviewed before inclusion.
iv
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would first like to express my gratitude towards my principal supervisor Rasmus T. Ton-
boe, who has supported me since the writing of my Bachelor’s Thesis, helped me write
my first paper, is responsible for putting me in contact with the ASIP group at DMI, and
has offered guidance, support, encouragement, and company throughout this project.
I would also like to thank Tore Wulf, who conceptualized the project and has supported
me both in terms of data and coding resources, but also guided me in navigating complex
concepts within deep learning.
I am grateful to DMI for providing access to their data, hardware, and computational re-
sources. This project would not have been possible without it. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the many people I have met at NCKF at DMI; especially Matilde Brandt
Kreiner, who was crucial in helping me get set up at DMI, and Thanos Athanasiadis, who
aided me in understanding my results.
I am grateful to have been able to do my thesis at DTU Space, and I am grateful for the
talks I have been able to have with my colleagues there. I especially want to thank Roberto
Saldo for the many lively discussions we have had regarding the topics and methods
applied in my thesis.
Finally, I thank my family for supporting me, during both ups and downs. You mean the
world to me.
Contributors
Emil Haaber Tellefsen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Rasmus Tage Tonboe, Associate Professor, DTU Space
Principal Supervisor.
Tore Wulf, Scientific Researcher, Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI)
Co-Supervisor.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Sea ice concentration (SIC) is a critical parameter for climate monitoring and maritime
navigation. It is routinely mapped in ice charts by institutions such as the Danish Me-
teorological Institute (DMI), a process that is both resource-intensive and prone to bias.
Automated models offer a promising alternative, but those developed so far rely on ice
chart data and thus inherit their biases.
To address this, unbiased datasets are needed. However, their creation is constrained by
limited resources and sparse data availability, potentially resulting in small datasets. This
motivates the exploration of label-efficient learning methods that maintain model perfor-
mance under data scarcity.
One promising approach is the use of foundation models; these are pretrained on large
amounts of unlabeled data and can later be finetuned for specific tasks. These models
are often trained as masked autoencoders, which work by recovering corrupted image
data where local image patches have been removed. The use of foundation models has
the potential for improving label-efficiency, and requires newer model architectures that
have yet to be extensively explored for automatic SIC mapping.
In this project, I pretrain a foundation model as a masked autoencoder on 10,000 Arctic
SAR scenes. Three SIC prediction models are then trained using 2,742 SAR scenes
collocated with ice charts; one leveraging the pretrained foundation model, one with the
same architecture trained from scratch, and one based on a recent model developed by
DMI. To assess label-efficiency, each model is trained on 100%, 50%, 10%, and 1% of
the labeled data.
Results show that the foundation model improves performance and label-efficiency com-
pared to the same architecture trained from scratch. However, its label-efficiency does not
surpass that of DMI’s model. Still, the pretrained model achieves comparable accuracy
and demonstrates a more holistic use of global image information, suggesting a potential
use of such models for future improvements in automated ice charting.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:11==
Abbrevations
AMSR2
Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer 2
ASIDv2
ASIP/AI4Arctic Sea Ice Dataset version 2
ASIP
Automated Sea Ice Products
CE
Cross Entropy
CIS
Canadian Ice Services
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
DMI
Danish Meteorological Institute
EO
Earth Observation
EW
Extra Wideswath Mode (Sentinel-1)
FM
Foundation Model
FYI
First-year ice
GIS
Geographical Information System
GRDM
Ground range, detected, multi-looked products of medium reso-
lution
IICWG
International Ice Charting Working Group
IoU
Intercept over Union
IW
Interferometric Wideswath mode (Sentinel-1)
LLM
Large Language Model
MAE
Masked Autoencoder
MIM
Masked Image Modelling
mIoU
Mean Intercept over Union
MSE
Mean Square Error
MYI
Multi-year ice
NCKF
National Center for Climate Research
NLP
Natural Language Processing
OSI SAF
Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility
PMW
Passive Microwave
PuP
Progressive up-sampling
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
S1
Sentinel-1
S1A
Sentinel-1A
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
ix
==PAGE:12==
S1B
Sentinel-1B
S1C
Sentinel-1C
SAR
Synthetic Aperture Radar
SETR
Segmentation Transformer
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Decent
SIC
Sea Ice Concentration
SIGRID-3
Sea Ice Grid 3 format
TOPSAR
Terrain Observation with Progressive Scans SAR
ViT
Vision Transformer
VSP
ViT-S SETR-PuP
WMO
World Meteorological Organization
x
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
Acronyms
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Sea Ice and ice charting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
What is Sea Ice? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
ice charting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
SAR: Concept and Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Backscatter and Sea Ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Sentinel-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Deep Learning, Vision Transformers and Masked Autoencoders
. . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Basics: What is Deep Learning? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3.3
Transformers in Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3.4
Masked Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Automated Sea Ice Products (ASIP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4.1
ASIPNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Data and Methods
19
3.1
Data and Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.1
Pretraining data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.2
Data for Mapping SIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Model Setup and Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.1
Masked Autoencoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.2
Models for SIC Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Results
29
4.1
Masked Autoencoder Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
SIC Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2.1
Model Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2.2
Image-level Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2.3
Mosaic Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Discussion
39
5.1
What does the results show? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Possible Ways of Improving Automatic SIC Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
xi
==PAGE:14==
5.2.1
More Complex Encoder/Decoder Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2.2
Alternative FM Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2.3
Alternative Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2.4
Altering Input and/or Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.2.5
Increased Global Perception
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
45
Glossary
51
A Select patch predictions
57
B Select mosaic predictions
65
xii
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1. Introduction
CHAPTER1
Introduction
The sea ice concentration (SIC) is the proportion of a given area of the ocean covered by
sea ice [1]. Accurate mapping of SIC is essential for climate monitoring, navigation safety,
and planning operations for the extraction of resources in the Arctic and Antarctic [1].
SIC mapping for the purpose of maritime navigation is done primarily on the basis of Syn-
thetic Aperture Radar (SAR) imagery. Being an active sensor operating at microwave
frequencies, SAR can penetrate clouds and is independent of daylight. This allows con-
tinuous monitoring of SIC both day and night and in all types of weather, which is crucial
during polar winters when sunlight is not available [2]. At the same time, SAR sensors
generally have a high spatial resolution of up to a few tens of meters (40 m for Sentinel-1
(S1) in TOPSAR mode, which is used in this project [3]).
Despite SAR’s advantages, automated retrieval of SIC directly from SAR imagery remains
a challenge. The radar backscatter signal is influenced by a complex interplay of factors,
including ice type, surface roughness, salinity, and melt conditions [1]. These factors com-
plicate the development of automated algorithms that can generalize between different
ice regimes and environmental conditions. Instead, many meteorological organizations,
such as the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) [4], employ ice analysts, tasked with
constructing manual ice charts. These are based on manually interpreted SAR imagery,
integrated with other data sources and analysts’ own expertise, and are drawn manually
using Geographical Information System (GIS) software [5], [6]. Although crucial for mar-
itime navigation, manual ice charting is both time-consuming, costly, results in delayed
response, and has inherent biases and inconsistencies related to the subjectivity of the
individual analyst and to the methodology itself [7], [8]. Automated algorithms, therefore,
continue to be desirable, and given the large amounts of manually annotated ice charts in
existence, machine learning-based solutions appear ideal as they can utilize historical ice
charts as label data in their training. The Automated Sea Ice Products (ASIP) project run
at the National Center for Climate Research (NCKF) at DMI has therefore been created
to work on approaches for automatic ice charting [9].
Several papers related to ASIP have been published (Malmgren-Hansen et al. (2021) [10],
Stokholm et al. (2024) [11]). Most recently, Wulf et al. (2024)[12] made an improved,
properly calibrated Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), here referred to as ASIPNet
using S1 and AMSR2 data as input. It achieves a root mean square error (RMSE) of
15.8% compared to ice charts. For ice charting, the most recent ASIP models are already
being applied as a guide tool for ice analysts at DMI.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
1
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Although these models help overcome challenges related to resources, cost, timeliness,
and consistency in manual ice charting, they inherit some of the same biases present
in the ice charts they are trained on. The only way to address this is to replace the ice
charts with a less biased dataset, such as SIC derived from optical data. Creating such
a dataset is resource-intensive and constrained by the availability of overlapping sensor
scenes and suitable weather and lighting conditions. This makes label-efficient training
methods, which reduce the need for large data volumes, essential.
One method that might boost label-efficiency is the use of Foundation Models (FM). FMs
are a type of deep learning model that is trained on vast amounts of data that can be
adapted to a wide range of tasks and operations (downstream task) [13]. For Earth Ob-
servation (EO), a FM is commonly trained by showing the model several satellite images
and giving it a training task that teaches the model useful patterns that it can use for the
downstream task [14]. Training a FM offers several potential benefits, including improved
performance, reduced training time for downstream tasks, and a lower requirement for la-
beled data [14]. This project will therefore explore the extent to which foundation models
boost label-efficiency and, by extension, which other benefits might be derived from using
FMs.
The Masked Autoencoder (MAE) is an example of a FM training procedure[14], and is a
foundational framework in many FM frameworks [15]–[18]. The MAE builds upon a deep
learning structure called the Vision Transformer (ViT), which is inspired by the architecture
employed in many modern large language models (LLM) [19]. ViT is often considered an
alternative to CNN-based architectures, and has been shown to be able to outperform
CNN-based networks in many computer vision applications [19], [20]. Beyond FMs, this
project will therefore also explore the application of ViT-based models for automatic SIC
mapping.
In summary, this project investigates FM as a way to increase label-efficiency and improve
automated SIC mapping performance. Specifically, I have with this project:
• Investigated if, and to what extent, a MAE based FM can reduce the amount of label
data required for mapping SIC.
• Investigated the use of pretrained ViT-based neural networks and their potential
benefits and challenges in SIC mapping compared to CNN-based networks.
• Made suggestions to improve automatic SIC mapping using SAR and ice charts in
general.
To do this, I trained a MAE using 10,000 S1 scenes from the Arctic between 2014-2024.
This model has then been applied as a FM to a second ViT-based model (VSPpretrained)
finetuned to data from 2,742 SAR scenes collocated with ice charts. To be able to re-
late this ”pretrained” model to other frameworks, two other model frameworks have also
been employed; one similar to the pretrained model, though without the FM for initial-
ization (VSPscratch), and one based on the framework of ASIP (ASIPNet). To evaluate
label-efficiency, all model frameworks have been trained on 4 subsets of the full training
set (100%, 50%, 10% and 1%). Including the MAE model, this yields a total of 13 mod-
els trained. I have compared various performance metrics across all models, and have
qualitatively evaluated select scenes and predictions to get an intuition regarding how the
different models operate and what their shortcomings are.
The thesis is structured as follows; In Chapter 2 I will present background information
on sea ice, ice charts, SAR, deep learning, and ASIP necessary to understand the data,
2
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:17==
methods, and decisions made in this project. After that in Chapter 3, I will present the train-
ing data selected for the model training, as well as the model structure and the training
procedure for all models trained with this project. In Chapter 4, I will present quantitative
and qualitative results for both FM and SIC prediction models. Finally, in Chapter 5, I will
discuss what the results show, how they should be interpreted, and which recommenda-
tions I can make based on them.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
3
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1. Introduction
4
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Theory
CHAPTER2
Theory
In this chapter, I will provide a theoretical background for sea ice remote sensing, ice
charts, SAR, deep learning, the methods used in the project, and ASIP. In sect. 2.1, I will
give a general introduction to sea ice and ice charting, where I will present key concepts
and procedures used to map sea ice by ice analysts. In sect. 2.2 I will introduce SAR,
how it works, how sea ice appears in it, and the S1 satellites in particular. Then in 2.3 I will
present the concept of Deep Learning and the frameworks specifically used in this project
(FM, ViT, and MAE). Finally, in sect. 2.4 I will present the ASIP project and the model of
Wulf et al. (2024) 2.4, as the project is based on many of the same insights, concepts,
and data sources.
2.1
Sea Ice and ice charting
I will in this section provide background for sea ice physics and characteristics and on
how sea ice is mapped by ice analysts. This will provide a background for the choices
made when preparing the model training data, and will give context to the results of the
thesis.
2.1.1
What is Sea Ice?
Sea ice forms when ocean water freezes. This sets it apart from ice shelves and icebergs
that originate from land-based glaciers[21]. Sea ice occurs in both hemispheres, and its
extent follows a seasonal cycle of expansion (during winter) and contraction (during sum-
mer), where ice melts or freezes depending on temperature. For the northern hemisphere,
sea ice is predominantly found north of the Arctic Circle (at 67oN), with some seasonal
occurrences in the Labrador Sea, Bering Sea, Hudson Bay and the Bay of Bothnia south
of the Arctic Circle [22].
Sea ice is dynamic, with spatial distribution, structure, thickness, and movement changing
over time as a result of a combination of mechanical and thermodynamical processes.
These include wind-driven drift, ocean currents, internal ice stress, melting, and freezing.
This complicates the classification of sea ice and puts a high demand on up-to-date ice
charts, especially for navigation. To put things into perspective, as a rule of thumb, the
drift speed is 2% of the wind speed for unconstrained drift ice. With a wind speed of 10
m/s, that is equivalent to 17.3 km/day [23].
Examples of some common ice types are shown in Fig. 2.1. Sea ice can generally be
divided into two categories: seasonal ice or first-year ice (FYI) and multi-year ice (MYI),
which have two radiometrically distinct signatures. As the names suggest, these are de-
fined by whether the ice has survived 1 or more freezing cycles. MYI tends to be thicker
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
5
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Theory
Melt ponds formed on sea ice 
(Mid-August 2019, Wandel Sea)
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
Thin layers of Nilas
(photo: Alfred Wegener Institute / Stefan Hendricks) 
Pancake ice
 (Photo: Alfred Wegener Institute)
Figure 2.1: Examples of various sea ice types and features. a), b) and c) are from Henriette Skorup’s course
material for the DTU course 30752 Cryosphere Physics and Observation (Fall 2024) [24]. d) and e) is from
the Alfred Wegner Institute [21].
and has a more dynamic surface than FYI because it has experienced more deformation
over its lifetime. This happens as a result of collisions that cause pressure ridges, rifting
that creates leads, summer melt, and the pileup of snow. It is also less saline than FYI, as
salt water drains from the ice during the melt season. Both FYI and MYI may be covered
by melt ponds during the melt season [1], [21].
Ice usually forms in small platelets or needle-like crystals that accumulate at the ocean
surface to form a ”soup” known as frazil ice [21]. In calm ocean surface conditions, the
frazil ice develops into ”nilas”, which is a continuous sheet with a smooth surface. In
contrast, in situations of more wave action, the ice crystals clump together in small floes
that are rounded by bumping into each other. This type of ice is known as ”pancake ice”
because of its shape, and can freeze together to eventually form larger ice floes [21].
With the different types of sea ice, ice charting can be challenging and, for some satellite
modalities (like SAR), structures can appear ambiguous. An ice analyst (and a machine
learning model, for that matter) should be trained to recognize these structures to properly
classify features like ice type and concentration.
2.1.2
ice charting
On January 30, 1959, the Danish cargo-passenger liner Hans Hedtoft M/S struck an ice-
berg and sank in stormy, ice-filled waters south of Cape Farewell, Greenland, during its
maiden voyage [5]. With 95 casualties, this tragic event led to the establishment of the
DMI Ice Service, which today provides frequent high-resolution ice charts for safe mar-
itime navigation around Greenland.
Charting methods have changed since 1959 from focusing primarily on observational data
from ships and aerial reconnaissance, to today relying primarily on SAR [5]. Modern ice
charting is done by manually outlining and annotating regions of relatively homogeneous
ice characteristics based on what is seen in the available satellite imagery. This is a time-
consuming process that motivates the need for automated alternatives.
6
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:21==
2.1. Sea Ice and ice charting
Figure 2.2: Example of a ice chart made by DMI [4]. Colors represent concentration (red: 90-100% SIC,
white: Ice free). A description of the symbology can be found at https://ocean.dmi.dk/polarview/.
Ice charting is performed by various services from countries with ice-infested waters.
These services include, among others, DMI (which is responsible for ice charting in Green-
land) [4] and the Canadian Ice Service (CIS) [25], whose ice charts are also used in this
project.
To streamline ice charting for global navigation, the International Ice Charting Working
Group (IICWG) under the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has developed the
common vector format for archiving digital ice charts called Sea Ice Grid 3 (SIGRID-3)
[6]. An example of a chart using this convention is shown in Fig. 2.2. As exemplified by
the figure, ice charts are generally drawn in vector format, where relatively homogeneous
areas are represented by polygons drawn by the ice analyst. A polygon following the
SIGRID-3 code can have information about SIC, stage of development (age/thickness/o-
rigin) and form of ice (pancake ice, size of floe, icebergs, etc.). As ice dynamics can be
complex, information of up to three subtypes of ice can be present for a single polygon
(hence columns of the ”egg codes” of Fig. 2.2).
SIC is represented by the ”overall concentration” parameter of the SIGRID-3 format and
is given in discrete fractional steps from 0/10 to 10/10. The SIGRID-3 format also has
codes for intervals to describe the variation within the delineated polygon, in cases where
the concentration is irregular.
SIC depends on spatial resolution, whether it is for a grid cell or a polygon in the case of
ice charts. Therefore, the recorded SIC for ice charts is more subjective than that derived
from direct physical measures like passive microwave (PMW) emissions, since it depends
on where the analyst decided to draw the polygon. By extension, ice charts do not reflect
strict physical measurements or modeling, as is the case for other products such as those
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
7
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Theory
of the Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility (OSI SAF) [22], but rather ice charts
are intended to simplify maritime navigation. This means that an ice analysts’ priority is to
make an interpretable product that is easy to use, but which might have subjective biases
stemming from the ice analysts’ skill, inclination to be cautionary (bias to overestimate
SIC to guarantee safe navigation), and choice of discretizations (some features might be
too localized and time-consuming to be worth explicitly mapping). The latter also means
that the concept of resolution of ice charts is generally ambiguous, since even though they
are based on 40m × 40m SAR imagery, ice analysts are unlikely to be concerned with
details at that scale.
2.2
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
The most important data source for ice analysts is SAR satellite imagery. The models
developed with this project are therefore (and for simplicity) only trained on SAR imagery.
Here I will give a brief overview of the concept of SAR, its application and challenges with
sea ice, and the SAR data from ESA’s S1 satellites [3] which I have used in this project.
2.2.1
SAR: Concept and Measurements
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) is a high-resolution imaging radar, usually operated at
microwave frequencies. Being a radar, it is an active sensor that generates its own sig-
nal, which separates it from PMW radiometers that record the naturally emitted thermal
microwave radiation from Earth’s surface and optical instruments that utilize the reflected
radiation from the Sun [26].
A diagram illustrating geometry and commonly used terms in a side-looking strip-map
SAR geometry can be seen in Fig. 2.3. As a radar system, SAR transmits chirps in the
slant range direction and estimates the distance to surfaces by measuring the return time
of the reflected signals. This can be used to locate a surface in ground range. By then
iteratively sending and receiving pulses while moving along its trajectory, an image can
be generated by arranging the echoes line by line. There is, however, a catch; given that
SAR has a finite antenna size, it will have a footprint on the ground, whereby consecutive
readings might pick up on the same surface in multiple lines. This has the effect of smear-
ing out everything in the azimuth direction, and also affecting slant range, as the same
object is slightly farther away than at slant range for unaligned observations. To alleviate
that, SAR utilizes the fact that surfaces are affected by the Doppler effect due to the rela-
tive difference in velocity between the satellite and any surface being hit by its pulses. The
return signal of a surface ahead of the satellite will appear to have a higher frequency, and
vice versa for a surface behind the satellite. The Doppler shift and return time thus repre-
sent two independent measures, and through signal processing techniques, the two can
be decoupled, and the geolocated origins of the signal can be mapped accordingly [26].
In practice, this is done by applying a matched filter in the range direction that matches the
chirp signal, followed by a matched filter in the azimuth direction matching the expected
Doppler shift [26].
SAR sensors measure the phase and power of the surface backscatter signal. It can be
built to utilize different radar frequencies along with the polarization of transmitted and
received pulses.
Polarization is for SAR both a property of the emitted and the received signal, as some
horizontally polarized signals might change polarization upon certain surface encounters
and vice versa. In this project, I only use the horizontal emitted/horizontal received chan-
nel (HH) and the horizontal emitted/vertical received channel (HV) from S1 [3].
Power is a measure of how much energy is present in the backscatter, which is related
8
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:23==
2.2. Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
Last detection 
of target
First detection 
of target
Point
Target
Along-track/
azimuth
Slant 
range
Ground 
range
Swath
Figure 2.3: Diagram illustrating the geometry and commonly used terms in a strip-map SAR setup. S1 EW
works slightly different as it also electronically steers the radar beam to capture multiple swaths at a time (so
called TOPSAR mode), but the key concept is the same [3]. A signal is transmitted and returned to the same
antenna in direction of slant range [26].
to the scattering properties of the surface. I will go into more details about this in the
next section, but in short; SAR signals are primarily considered a measure of surface
roughness, with smooth surfaces returning less energy than rougher surfaces.
Given the measurement technique and geometry, certain challenges arise from SAR that
are unlike artifacts in other sensor types. In relation to the measurement of sea ice, it
is important to mention the effects of so-called speckle noise. This is a multiplicative
noise source that impacts radar-based instruments and is the result of distributed targets
within a single resolution cell [26]. Being multiplicative and surface dependent, speckle
presents a challenge for many SAR applications, as it makes pixel-wise prediction difficult
without also considering the results of each resolution cell’s neighborhood. This makes
deep learning methods desirable, as they can use a large neighborhood to make local
predictions [26].
2.2.2
Backscatter and Sea Ice
As mentioned, the power signal of the SAR is related to the amount of radiation reflected
back to the sensor and depends on the surface, polarization, and frequency. For sea ice
and oceans, backscatter can occur in various ways, as illustrated in Fig. 2.4.
As seen, many different scattering mechanisms create backscatter, which adds to the
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
9
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Theory
Figure 2.4: Diagram showing general relevant reflection/scattering mechanisms associated with SAR data
over sea ice [27].
complexity of creating reliable automated SAR algorithms for ice charting. In terms of
SIC, it is necessary to be able to reliably distinguish ocean and sea ice. Often, this is
relatively simple, given that specular reflection of calm ocean conditions results in a weak
return signal. However, it is challenged in the case of higher wind/wave conditions, which
causes Bragg scattering to occur, where the constructive interference between ocean
waves and radar signal results in an increased backscatter [2]. In general, low backscatter
from smooth ice surfaces is ambiguous with calm open water, whereas high backscatter
from wind-driven ocean surface roughness is ambiguous with the signature of young FYI,
and this is the case for all SAR frequencies [1].
As mentioned in sect. 2.1, sea ice itself can have many different forms, and this also
affects backscatter. FYI tends to be smooth compared to MYI, as MYI have experienced
more ridging over time. This causes less surface backscatter. MYI and FYI are further
distinguished by their salinity, which affects their lossiness as a dielectric medium. Brine
is a very lossy dielectric; thus, radiation penetrates only a few millimeters of FYI, making
surface scattering the dominant scattering mechanism. In contrast, penetration is deeper
for MYI, resulting in more volume scattering from voids and air bubbles, and hence more
cross-polarization [2]. Large-scale roughness arising from ridges and hummocks also
affects scattering, creating double-bounce effects. To complicate things further, volume
scattering from snow layers and specular reflection of melt ponds can add to the signature
of the different types of ice.
The mentioned signatures explain why there is yet to be a reliable SAR based model for
categorizing SIC, and although information regarding SIC can be derived from the SAR
data, ice charting of SIC remains a largely manual process [1] (though operational ver-
sions of ASIP are currently being tested). Few automated methods are available that do
not rely on machine learning. Karvonen (2012) [28] uses local autocorrelation as a statis-
tical measure of texture and considers texture a mixture of Gaussian-distributed textures
for different types of ice and open water. From this he derives SIC by quantifying the
amount of open water texture present. However, the method generalizes poorly and is
limited by the number and choice of sea ice signatures.
2.2.3
Sentinel-1
The Sentinel program is part of Europe’s Copernicus Earth observation initiative under
the European Space Agency (ESA). Its main purpose is to provide continuous and high-
quality data on the environment and climate of the Earth. The S1 satellites are a family
of satellites that specifically utilize SAR. The intended purpose of these is, among others,
10
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:25==
2.3. Deep Learning, Vision Transformers and Masked Autoencoders
to monitor sea-ice zones and polar environments, and to conduct surveillance of marine
environments [3]. The S1 series utilizes the C-band with a 5.405 GHz center frequency
(5.5 cm wavelength). So far, 3 S1 satellites have been in operation; Sentinel-1A ( S1A,
Launch: 03-04-2014); Sentinel-1B (S1B, Launch: 25-04-2016, End of operation: 23-12-
2021) and Sentinel-1C (S1C, Launch: 05-12-2024) [29]. Each satellite has a 12-day
repeat cycle and has four exclusive modes of operation, which vary in swath/scene size
and resolution [3]. For this project, all scenes will be in Extra Wideswath Mode (EW),
though the ASIP implementation of Wulf et al. (2024) also utilizes scenes in Interferometric
Wideswath mode (IW) [12]. EW mode acquires data over a 400 km swath at 20m × 40m
spatial resolution, prioritizing wide ground coverage over high spatial resolution.
Copernicus provides different preprocessed S1 products [30].
I will be utilizing their
ground range, multi-look, and detected products of medium resolution (GRDM). This prod-
uct consists of detected amplitudes (meaning no phase information), multi-looked to bring
the resolution to around 40m × 40m [30]. All scenes that I have used have been calibrated,
but I have not removed thermal noise [31].
2.3
Deep Learning, Vision Transformers and Masked
Autoencoders
I will in this section give a background overview of the main methods used in this project,
which are primarily related to the machine learning paradigm of deep learning. To guide
any reader unfamiliar with the overall topic, I will first give a brief overview of the concept of
deep learning and briefly touch upon the concept of convolutional neural networks (CNN),
which the ASIP framework is currently based upon and which will also be employed for
comparison in this project. After this, I will cover the more recent concept of vision trans-
formers (ViT) and masked autoencoders (MAE) which this project mainly focuses on.
Be aware that in this section I will use the shorthand ViT interchangeably to refer to the
original framework by Dosovitskiy et al. (2021)[19], and transformer-based computer vi-
sion frameworks with a similar backbone, in general.
2.3.1
Basics: What is Deep Learning?
Machine learning is a modeling scheme in which computers learn patterns from data to
make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed for the specific task.
A basic example of this is linear regression. Deep learning is a subfield within machine
learning, specifically focusing on multilayered artificial neural networks (commonly called
neural networks) [32].
Neural networks
A neural network is in many ways an expansion of the structure of linear regression.
Consider the left-most setup in Fig. 2.5. Here, the parameter y is defined by two inputs,
x1 and x2, weighted by the parameters w1 and w2. The only difference between this and
a linear model is the function σ(∗), which, if it were a unit function, would, in fact, make it a
linear model. This function is called the activation function and its purpose is to add non-
linearities to the function. Multiple choices for this exist, though in this project I mainly use
the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [33]. Its importance is clearer when you look at the more
complex example on the right. Here, a ”hidden layer” is added, with the fully connected
”neurons” u1 and u2. Individually, these are computed exactly the same way as y in the
left example, but are here also used in conjunction as the new input to y. This setup has
increased the total number of parameters wi,j,k to 6, thus adding more complexity to the
model. The activation function σ(∗) is now what limits this setup from collapsing into a
regular linear model [34].
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
11
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Theory
x1
x1
x2
y
x2
y
u1
u2
Input
Output
Input
Hidden
layer
Output
w1
w2
w2,1,1
w2,2,1
w1,1,1
w1,1,2
w1,2,1
w1,2,2
y = σ(w1 x1 + w2 x2)
 y  = σ(w2,1,1 u1 + w2,1,2 u2)
u1 = σ(w1,1,1 x1 + w1,2,1 x2)
u2 = σ(w1,1,2 x1 + w1,2,2 x2)
Figure 2.5: Simple examples of how neural networks work at base level. Diagrams are a visual representation
of the math shown in the equations below.
As the reader can see, this simple setup is in theory infinitely scalable, giving deep learning
models the capability to replicate almost any function. The setup here is a simplified
example of a fully connected network (or feedforward neural network). Other setups exist
where the basic building blocks are the same, but some neurons might share parameters,
be disconnected, have different activation functions, etc. [32].
Modern setups can be vastly larger than the one shown here; the models trained in this
project have on the order of millions of parameters, while modern large language models
(LLMs) such as ChatGPT have billions [35].
Training a Neural Network
Training a neural network involves fitting the parameters wi,j,k to some training data. As
the model is non-linear, simple linear algebra methods like ordinary least squares will not
work, and one instead has to rely on numerical optimization algorithms. To do so, one
needs to pick a loss function that fits the task one wants to optimize for. For regression
tasks, mean squared error loss (MSE) is commonly used, which makes sense since it
is the same function used in ordinary least squares, which minimizes the error between
ground truth and model predictions. In classification tasks, cross-entropy loss (CE) can be
used (and will be used for this project), which is related to maximum likelihood estimation.
Both are illustrated in Eq. (2.1), where y represents truth and ˆy represents prediction,
N is the number of samples, and C is the number of classes. Be aware that ˆy in the
classification case is a probability, while y is a binary defining which class is true [34].
LMSE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
LCE = −
N
∑
i=1
C
∑
j=1
yi,jlog(ˆyi,j)
(2.1)
The most commonly used optimization approach in deep learning is some version of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Gradient descent algorithms utilize the fact that one
can calculate the gradient regarding all parameters for the loss function if the loss and acti-
vation function are (at least numerically) differentiable, using the chain rule. The negative
gradient points in the direction that reduces the function value the most; thus, by taking
iterative steps through continuously evaluating the gradient and adding a scaled version
of this (scaled by the so-called learning rate) to the parameter values, one will eventually
12
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:27==
2.3. Deep Learning, Vision Transformers and Masked Autoencoders
reach a point close to a local minimum of the loss function. To effectively calculate the
gradient, the models employ backpropagation methods, which I will not cover here [34].
The ”stochastic” part of SGD refers to the fact that oftentimes it is infeasible for a computer
to load in all data at once, and instead only a sample, also known as a ”batch”, at a time is
used to calculate the gradient. An epoch refers to the milestone of processing all batches
of a training set once [34].
The version of the SGD algorithm used is called an optimizer. The algorithm should ideally
continue running until the loss stops decreasing, though one needs to be aware that neural
networks are prone to overfitting. That is, when the model starts recognizing the specific
samples of the training data and focuses on remembering those, rather than learning
useful features (an analogy would be a student learning all the exam questions but not
the subject). To detect this, one employs a validation set upon which performance is
evaluated but which is not used for training the model. As the best model is chosen using
the ”validation” set, this pick will be slightly biased; thus, another separate ”test” set is also
used for the final performance evaluation [32].
2.3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
As stated above, many deep learning setups can be built by tweaking the network struc-
ture presented in Fig. 2.5. Following AlexNet [36] in 2012 and up to the introduction of
the Vision Transformer (ViT) [19] in 2021, most deep learning-based computer vision work
was performed using CNNs. These work by learning hierarchical patterns from visual data
through the application of learned convolutional filters. A convolutional filter works by slid-
ing a small matrix (the filter or kernel) over an image and computing dot products between
the filter and local regions of the image, producing a feature map that highlights specific
patterns such as edges or textures [32]. By learning filtered representations and filtered
representations of the filtered representations (and so forth), the CNN is able to promote
any features present in an image and is therefore highly adaptable.
For pixel-wise prediction tasks (tasks where each pixel of an image has a corresponding
output), U-Net [37] inspired setups have been considered state-of-the-art until recently,
and are still competitive against newer frameworks. These utilize a symmetric encoder–
decoder structure with skip connections that combine low-level spatial details from the
encoder with high-level features from the decoder, enabling precise localization [37]. ”The
ASIP model by Wulf et al. (2024) [12] is based on the U-Net architecture. The same is
the case for the decoder used in the ViT-based networks (see Sect. 3.2.2) trained with
this project.
CNNs have a high inductive bias in relation to position, as the filters automatically infer
to them that neighboring pixels are related. The distance by which a pixel can collect
information is called the receptive field. The ViT has less inductive bias, which can give it
an edge over CNNs, but also makes it harder to train.
2.3.3
Transformers in Computer Vision
Although CNN-based frameworks are still widely used today, newer vision transformer
models (ViT) have been shown to be at least similar in performance [19], and offer new
training and evaluation methods that are not possible or harder to set up for CNNs (such
as the MAE presented in Sect. 2.3.4).
The Vision Transformer (ViT) encoder used as the backbone for this project is illustrated
in Fig. 2.6). It is adapted from the original ViT model [19] which is again adapted from
the original transformer of Vaswani et al. (2017) [38], where it was invented for natural
language processing (NLP). The transformer was invented as a way to solve long-term
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
13
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Theory
Patchify 
Patch 
Embedding
(Same Feed
Forward Network
for each patch)
P × Channels → P × E
+
Transformer
Encoder
Block 
Transformer
Encoder
Block 
...
Transformer
Encoder
Block 
Positional 
Encoding 
(PE)
Vision Transformer (ViT) Encoder
P × E
Channels × H × W
P × Channels
Figure 2.6: Conceptual drawing of the Vision Transformer (ViT) encoder. Green blocks represents tokens in
embedded space.
memory challenges of established NLP models, which tended to forget information too far
displaced in text, and is today the backbone powering the LLM revolution seen following
the launch of OpenAI’s ChatGPT [35] in 2022.
In NLP, words are represented as learned vector embeddings called ”tokens”. For ViT-
based frameworks, these tokens are created from image patches of a user-specified size
(in the literature, mostly 16 × 16 pixels), which are embedded in a feature space of a
producer-specified size. A key feature of transformer-based neural networks is that the
network, by default, is agnostic to the number of tokens and their position. This makes
sense in NLP where sentences might have arbitrary lengths and words far apart might
be closely related. The agnosticism to position means that ViTs have less inductive bias
compared to CNNs. As position is still important for predicting image properties, ViTs
treat position as a learnable parameter, and therefore the information about location must
be encoded in the individual token [19], [20]. The encoding used in this project and in
the original transformer framework entails adding sinusoids of unique frequencies to the
embedded dimensions of each token [38].
The main engine of ViT is the transformer block, which along with its sub-components
is illustrated in Fig. 2.7. To fully understand transformers, it is necessary to know what
attention is. Attention in deep learning is a mechanism that enables embedded tokens to
be related to each other. The most widely used form is Scaled Dot-Product Attention as
shown in diagram form in Fig. 2.7, as well as in Eq. (2.2):
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
(QKT
√dk
)
V
(2.2)
Scaled Dot-Product Attention works by creating 3 matrices, the Query Q, Key K and Value
V of the same shape Q, K, V ∈RL×d (where L is the number of tokens and d is the sub-
embedding dimension), by concatenating and further embedding all tokens. From this,
the matrix multiplication between Q and KT is computed. This is equivalent to calculating
the unscaled cosine similarity; thus, in essence, this calculates a similarity score between
all tokens, which is then used to scale the Value matrix V , thus promoting similarities in
the output tokens. The other terms are used for numerical stability and normalization. To
14
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:29==
2.3. Deep Learning, Vision Transformers and Masked Autoencoders
K
V
Q
Norm
Multi-Head Attention
Norm
Feed Forward
+
+
Relationship
between
tokens
Relationship
within
tokens
Embedded tokens
Modified tokens
Transformer Encoder Block
Multi-Head Attention
Scaled Dot-Product Attention
MatMul
Scale
Softmax
Q'
Feed Forward
K'
Feed Forward
V'
Feed Forward
Scaled Dot-product Attention 
Concat
Feed Forward
Q
K
V
h × 
Repeat in
parallel
MatMul
Q'
K'
V'
Figure 2.7: The transformer block as described by Vaswani et al. (2017) [38], along with its attention based
sub-components.
expand learning capabilities, multiple ”heads” h of attention can be stacked in parallel, so
that the model can learn multiple relational features in parallel.
When one understands multi-headed attention as a tool meant to relate tokens to each
other, it becomes easy to understand the transformer block itself. It consists of 2 residual
blocks [39]; the first one relates the tokens to each other through attention, while the
second block contains a simple feedforward block that relates internal structures within
each token to themselves [38].
ViTs are applicable in many computer vision frameworks, including semantic segmenta-
tion, where ViT is adapted through the Segmentation Transformer (SETR) framework of
Zheng et al. (2021) [20].
2.3.4
Masked Autoencoders
The smaller inductive bias of ViTs compared to CNNs can be considered both a blessing
and a curse; a blessing in the sense that ViT is more capable of learning global relation-
ships within an image, but a curse in the sense that since it can relate so much information,
training is often demanding and therefore requires more training data [14]. This is prob-
lematic, especially in cases where label data is scarce. Fortunately, FM-based methods
can be used to alleviate the problem in cases where sufficient amounts of input data are
available (which is often the case in EO) and labels are the only constraint.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
15
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Theory
Patch 
Embedding
+
Transformer
Encoder 
Positional 
encoding
Masked Autoencoder (MAE)
Decoder
+
Positional 
encoding
P × E
p × E
p × E
P × E
P × Channels
P × Channels
Figure 2.8: Conceptual diagram of the masked autoencoder.
Except for the masking (indicated by red
patches being removed and reintroduced), the encoder is equivalent to the ViT illustrated in Fig. 2.6.
A FM is usually trained as an autoencoder. An autoencoder is a self-supervised machine
learning structure in which input and output originate from the same data. Useful features
are then learned from the data through a learning process that often involves corrupting
the data in some way before challenging the neural network to recover the original data
[32].
The MAE is a type of autoencoder that relies on the agnosticism of ViT to the number of
tokens [14]. The concept is inspired by the pretraining method of the LLM BERT made
by Google in 2018 [40], which learns language by masking out words in sentences it then
has to guess. The idea behind MAE in computer vision, as illustrated in Fig. 2.8, is to
remove a fraction of tokens before passing them through the transformer encoder and
then reintroduce empty tokens in the removed ones’ place, which a decoder then has
to predict. In this way, the encoder learns intrinsic information about the structure of the
image and will later be able to understand intrinsic details about the input imagery before
starting on the downstream task. Following training, the encoder part of the network can
then be utilized as a FM [13] that can be repurposed for other downstream tasks. To
keep most learning within the encoder part of the MAE, the decoder is often very shallow,
consisting of a few transformer encoder blocks.
There are several potential benefits of using a FM:
• Reduced label requirements: As many intrinsic relationships have already been
learned prior to the downstream task, later fine-tuning is likely to require fewer train-
ing data samples.
• Improved performance: As satellite imagery is abundant, a FM can be trained on
vast amounts of training data, giving it some understanding of more abstract con-
cepts than the original data would have yielded and, therefore, could increase per-
formance if the acquired skills are transferable.
• Less training time/resources (MAE): The MAE only takes in a fraction of all tokens
(usually 25% is sufficient [14]). Training the FM this way is therefore very efficient
compared to other self-supervised methods. With many trivial connections already
16
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:31==
2.4. Automated Sea Ice Products (ASIP)
learned, it is likely to speed up the training of downstream tasks as well.
• Multi-use: The same FM could be reused in multiple downstream tasks.
These potential benefits have meant that a lot of research has been done in the field of
masked image modeling (MIM) (which the MAE is part of) for Remote Sensing in recent
years. Studies tend to focus on concepts of sensor fusion in which FM are trained on
multiple modalities of data at once [17], [18] to teach the model interrelationships between
sensors. The ViT allows each sensor to be represented by its own unique tokens by
also encoding the sensor type. Irvin et al. (2023) [18] also illustrate that MAE based
approaches can be adapted to handle sensors of different resolutions by aggregating
positional encodings for lower-resolution patches. They further show that a FM can be
trained on multiple modalities while only being finetuned on a subset of them all. Other
features, such as time of year, can also be embedded in the tokens, as done by Cong et
al. (2023) [17].
For SAR data specifically, methods have been applied towards trying to modify the target
data, as the naive MAE might tend to overemphasize its training on noise. Wang et al.
(2023) [16] showed that one could enhance the performance of downstream tasks through
a feature-guided MAE, learning image features of the SAR images instead of the raw
images.
One should be aware that the use of FMs does not guarantee improved performance
over all models trained from scratch. Taleghan et al. (2025) [41] recently tested various
FMs for SAR (including Wang et al. (2023) [16]) on ice types within the AI4Arctic dataset
[42], and showed that no obvious improvements were observed beyond what a standard
U-Net could perform. However, these models were not trained on data from the Arctic
specifically, and the task of classifying sea ice type is not necessarily comparable to that
of classifying SIC, meaning there is still potential for observing MAE benefits in this project.
2.4
Automated Sea Ice Products (ASIP)
Given the relationship of this project with ASIP, in this section, I will briefly go through
the history and products of ASIP, and in more detail present the framework by Wulf et al.
(2024)[12], which serves as a reference for this project.
The project ’Automated Sea Ice Products’ (ASIP) started as a collaboration between the
Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI), Harnvig Arctic & Maritime and DTU Compute and
DTU Space in November 2017, with the goal of automating the creation of high-resolution
ice charts by combining SAR and PMW data [9]. The project is now being run entirely by
DMI.
Several papers and products have been created from the paper, including the AI4Arctic /
ASIP Sea Ice Dataset - version 2 (ASIDv2) [43], which is widely used to train and bench-
mark many automated ice charting frameworks [41], [7]. A version of this dataset was also
adapted for the AI4EO sea ice competition (AutoICE) initiated by the European Space
Agency (ESA) ϕ-lab [42].
I will now present some papers from the project which are relevant for the thesis, before
explaining the ASIPNet framework of Wulf et al. (2024)[12]; Malmgren-Hansen et al.
(2021)[10] published results for the first CNN related to ASIP to predict SIC. It utilized
both S1 EW data and PMW data from the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer
2 (AMSR2) [44] and focused on intelligent fusion of the two modalities given their large
difference in spatial resolution, and successfully used cross-entropy loss to predict SIC
as a simple semantic segmentation task.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
17
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Theory
Stokholm et al. (2022)[45] continued the work by developing a U-Net structure purely for
SAR, and considering the impact of the receptive field for the model, as well as the effect
of applying various noise correction schemes for the SAR data.
Kucik and Stokholm (2023)[8] further investigated the ideal choice of loss for SIC predic-
tion based on ice charts and found that although MSE loss results in the highest prediction
R2, CE loss results in a more interpretable chart, which could be more ideal in the case
of ice charts. They also experimented with class weighting and found that inversely pro-
portional weighting improves the prediction of rarer classes, though at the expense of
majority classes (0% and 100% SIC), which might not be ideal.
Finally, Stokholm et al. (2024)[11] presented the results of the AutoICE challenge. Here,
the best model was found to be a simple U-Net with input SAR data being significantly
downsampled (800m×800m), and MSE loss for SIC.
2.4.1
ASIPNet
In 2024, Wulf et al. [12] proposed an improved framework that adds to the previous frame-
works presented with the ASIP project. The model, hereafter referred to as ASIPNet, is
U-Net-inspired and uses S1 SAR and AMSR2 downsampled or upsampled to a resolution
of 80m × 80m.
The model is trained on an expanded version of the ASIDv2 dataset[43], called ASIDv2+.
The data set consists of 5382 S1 SAR GRDM scenes (IW and EW), and PMW data from
AMSR2, spatiotemporally collocated with ice charts from the DMI Greenland Ice Service
and CIS from around Greenland and the Canadian coastline between January 2018 and
November 2021 [12]. Although operational products exist to predict both SIC, type, and
ice floe size, in this section and the project as a whole, I will only focus on the prediction
of SIC.
ASIPNet predicts SIC from ice charts using the general concentration parameter of the
SIGRID-3 code. As mentioned, the SIGRID-3 code separates SIC into discrete steps
of 1/10, and therefore the model is trained to predict 11 discrete classes 0%(0/10) to
100%(10/10). As SIGRID-3 codes allow for SIC to come in intervals, e.g. 10%-30%
(1/10-3/10), the authors have employed a principle of taking the center concentration
when possible (in this case 2/10) and otherwise they adopt the cautionary principle of
always selecting the highest concentration.
ASIPNet also employs techniques for calibrating model uncertainty, which will not be uti-
lized here, but which enable class predictions to have uncertainties and be mixed based
on class confidence, which results in a continuous prediction of SIC.
ASIPNet achieves an overall R2 score of 95% with an overall weighted RMSE of 15.8%
(20.2% when not using the class mixing mentioned above), with the highest errors occur-
ring for intermediate concentrations (20%-80%). Compared to OSI-SAF products [22],
ASIP has a positive bias, predicting more ice overall, likely due to a mixture of the cau-
tionary principle of rounding up intervals, together with the general bias of the ice analysts
being adopted by the model. However, it should be noted that ASIP results currently un-
der review suggest that OSI SAF products (specifically, OSI-458) systematically under-
estimate SIC as well.
18
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3. Data and Methods
CHAPTER3
Data and Methods
In this chapter, I will first examine the data selected and used to train my deep learning
models. After this, I will present the models that I have trained and the choices for var-
ious settings and hyperparameters chosen for their training. A general overview of the
processing performed with this project can be seen in Fig. 3.1. As illustrated, 2 sepa-
rate datasets are used (pretraining data and SIC training data), and three overall training
approaches are used (pretraining, finetuning, and ”from scratch”). A total of 13 models
are trained (1 for pretraining, 4 for finetuning and 8 for from scratch), which either differ
in model structure or training data quantity. For clarity, I will use the term ”scene” when
referring to a full S1 EW GRDM image and the term ”image” when referring to a chunk of
1,024 × 1,024 pixels extracted from a SAR scene.
3.1
Data and Preprocessing
3.1.1
Pretraining data
In order to make a FM that can be reliably finetuned for sea ice applications, it is necessary
to train the model on large amounts of satellite imagery. Unlike other frameworks [15],
[17], [18], [46] that train their autoencoder on satellite imagery of various landscapes and
surfaces, or may even use models not trained on satellite imagery [47], I have decided to
only train my FM on domain-specific SAR imagery from the Arctic. This has the potential
benefit of enhancing my FM’s understanding of sea ice dynamics specifically, without
introducing data from other landscapes irrelevant to the downstream task. In this section,
I will explain how I picked and preprocessed the data for the FM.
Available Data
As its downstream task involves the classification of SIC, the FM should be able to under-
stand the dynamics of sea ice, especially around the marginal ice zone where intermedi-
ate SICs are prevalent. Furthermore, ice dynamics depend on the season and location;
therefore, the model should have observed images from all relevant seasons and areas.
Therefore, I have created a pretraining dataset to reflect these considerations by sampling
SAR scenes based on criteria regarding their content, location, and time of year.
The pretraining dataset consists of a weighted sample of SAR scenes downsampled to
a resolution of 80m × 80m. Each scene is approximately 400km × 400km in size. Only
scenes from the northern hemisphere are considered. I arbitrarily chose a sample size of
10,000 scenes. Although the number of scenes in the sample is only 10,000, the number
of training images extracted from them is significantly higher (151,849), as the created
dataloader only handles a subset of approximately 1/5 × 1/5 of the scene at a time (1,024
× 1,024 pixels to be exact - see Sect. 3.1.1).
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
19
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Data and Methods
From Scratch
Pretraining
Finetuning
Pretraining data:
Sentinel-1 EW GRDM
 scenes from the Arctic 
2014-2024
Input data
SIC training data:
ASIDv2+ Sentinel-1 
scenes and ice charts
from 2018-2021 
MAE model (FM)
Finetuned model
(VSPpretrained)
From scratch model
(VSPscratch, ASIPNet)
Sample and prepare
data
Train MAE
Train model, after
intializing encoder via
FM 
Prepare data
Train Model
Input data
Processing steps
Output models
Figure 3.1: Flowchart illustrating the overall processing and data used to create the various models trained
in this project.
The sample was selected from 304,034 SAR scenes from between October 2014 and
August 2024, downloaded by DMI in an effort to recreate historical ice charts using their
ASIPNet implementation. For this reason, the data have already been presorted to re-
move scenes over land and over parts of the ocean where sea ice is unlikely to occur.
Selecting Data
In order to pick the pretraining data sample, 3 criteria were considered: the sea ice content
within the SAR scene, the location of the scene, and the month. To evaluate the sea
ice content, I have evaluated the SIC of all 304,034 scenes using predictions from the
ASIPNet model of Wulf et al. (2024) [12]. From this, I calculated the land area of the
scene (based on a land mask from OpenStreetMap [48]) along with the fraction of ocean
with a SIC lower than 20% and lower than 80%, respectively. The information from this
analysis was used for two things;
• Removing scenes with more than 50% land.
• Categorizing the scenes in order to make a discrete sampling scheme.
To categorize the scenes, I handcrafted a classification- and weighting scheme (shown in
Tab. 3.1), which separates scenes into one of 6 categories - ice, marginal ice and water,
in either coastal or oceanic settings. For sample weighting, scenes near the marginal ice
zone were prioritized, as the relevant SIC dynamics are mainly observed here. To also
have a significant representation of ”coastal” regions, categories for those have explicitly
been created and weighted, where ”coastal” has been defined as scenes with more than
10% land.
To keep samples unbiased by time of year, I have sampled uniformly across months. The
location was weighed by separating the Arctic into several zones and weighing each zone
on the basis of its area. The choice of zones was inspired by Zheng et al. [49], and is
shown together with the midpoints of the scene of the final sample in Fig. 3.2. As there
were no scenes with <50% land in the Baltic Sea/Gulf of Bothnia, I arbitrarily added 100
scenes from there.
For picking the sample, I used a weighted sampling approach, where a scene category, a
20
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:35==
3.1. Data and Preprocessing
Table 3.1: Definition of scene categories selected for creating sample of SAR scenes, along with the sample
weights chosen for each scene category.
Scene type
Land frac.
Area w. < 20% SIC
Area w. < 80% SIC
Sample weight
Coastal, ice
> 10%
< 10%
10%
Coastal, marginal
> 10%
< 90%
> 10%
25%
Coastal, water
> 10%
> 90%
2.5%
Ocean, ice
< 10%
< 10%
10%
Ocean, marginal
< 10%
< 90%
> 10%
50%
Ocean, water
< 10%
> 90%
2.5%
location, and a month were picked based on their weighted probability. A scene satisfying
all three is then picked and added to the sample before the process repeats. To avoid
picking outliers, samples are only picked if more than 10 scenes satisfy the chosen criteria.
This scheme will not guarantee that the sample has the same distribution as the weights
are meant to target. It is, however, flexible in the sense that it respects the constraints
and distribution of the full dataset, and still tries to fit to the weights as well as possible.
The distribution of categories in the entire data set, in the sample, and the desired dis-
tribution based on weights are shown in Fig. 3.3. Most notable here is that Hudson
Bay/Canadian Archipelago is less represented in the sample than desired, which is due
to the fact that there are very few scenes with < 10% land exist here. The distributions
are, however, close to what is desired.
Preprocessing
From all S1 scenes in the sample, the HH and HV channels are extracted. Both channels
are converted to decibel scale before being standardized in accordance with the mean
and standard deviation of the full dataset. To avoid calibration artifacts along the edge of
the scene, the outer 100 pixels on all sides are removed. Furthermore, missing values
are set to 0, so the model can learn missing values as an area of perpetual zeros.
As it is infeasible to train a ViT based neural network on the scale of a full SAR scene, the
scenes are divided into images of 1,024 × 1,024 pixels, of which the model only handles
512 × 512 pixels at a time, as done by Wulf et al. (2024)[12]. This ”chunking” is effectively
done by saving the SAR scenes as Zarr files [50]. Only images containing less than 50%
land as defined by the OpenStreetMap land mask [48] are used during training. Although
one can argue for masking out the land completely, I decided to still keep some land in
the scenes. This is motivated by the belief that the model might still achieve some benefit
from learning from land, such as a general understanding of SAR data. This has not been
tested however, and it is possible that the inclusion of land results in worse performance
for the downstream task.
With the mentioned images removed, a total of 151,849 images are available. Of those, a
sample of 1,000 images is set aside as a validation set. For the test set, I used the same
dataset as the one used to map SIC to maintain comparable results across models.
3.1.2
Data for Mapping SIC
For the finetuning and ”from scratch” models made to map SIC, a dataset which collo-
cates SAR scenes with ice charts is needed. For this, the ASIDv2+ dataset presented
in Sect. 2.4 is ideal, as it is made for that exact purpose. The dataset consists of IW
and EW scenes from S1A and S1B collocated with ice charts from DMI and CIS. My FM
is only trained on EW scenes, and to remain consistent, I have ignored all IW scenes
in the dataset. ASIDv2+ has a total of 2,253 IW scenes, thus this change reduces my
SIC training dataset to 3,129 scenes. Furthermore, there is a small overlap of 187 EW
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
21
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Data and Methods
Figure 3.2: Chosen sample zones of the Arctic, along with the center points of the 10,000 SAR scenes chosen
for the FM training data.
scenes between the MAE training set and ASIDv2+. This is likely not a problem, but out
of caution, I have removed these scenes, whereby the full set ends up consisting of 2,942
scenes. Finally, I have extracted 100 scenes for a validation set and another 100 scenes
for a test set to evaluate model performance during and after training. I have qualitatively
validated that these datasets are approximately representative of the complete dataset,
by evaluating their location and SIC distribution, which is shown in Fig. 3.4.
DMI has already prepared the dataset for training by separating scenes into images and
translating SIGRID-3 codes to SIC values. Images with limited ice chart overlap or too
much land cover have already been removed. With the alterations done here, the training
set ends up consisting of 32,586 images, while the validation and test set sizes end up at
1,043 and 1,064 images respectively (see Tab. 3.2).
As I wanted to check the label efficiency of the different models trained, subsets of the
full SIC training dataset have been created. These are made on image-level rather than
22
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:37==
3.2. Model Setup and Training
0
2
4
6
8
10
Frequency in full dataset [%]
Time
0
10
20
30
40
50
Scene type
0
10
20
30
40
Location
0
2
4
6
8
10
Frequency in Sample [%]
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
0
2
4
6
8
10
Desired destribution [%]
Coastal, ice
Coastal, marginal
Coastal, water
Ocean, ice
Ocean, marginal
Ocean water
0
10
20
30
40
50
Baffin Bay
Barents/Kara Sea
Beufort Sea/North pole
Greenland/Norwegian Sea
Hudson Bay/ Canadian Archipeligo
Laptev/East Siberian/chukchi Sea
0
10
20
30
40
Figure 3.3: Overview of data distribution in the full dataset, in the pretraining data sample, and the desired
distributions based on weights.
scene-level to reduce bias. Subsamples consisting of 50%, 10%, and 1% of the full train-
ing set are made. The SIC class frequency and scene location for all the created datasets
are evaluated in Fig. 3.4, and generally seem representative of the training set from which
they are derived.
3.2
Model Setup and Training
I will in this section present the different models trained for this project, as well as the
considerations made regarding structure, inputs, and training method. An overview of all
the different model setups can be seen in Tab. 3.2.
3.2.1
Masked Autoencoder
Encoder model
As mentioned, my FM is trained as a MAE. The MAE implemented here is structured as
seen in Figure 2.8 and the general concept is explained in Sect. 2.3.4. It uses a ViT-S
encoder as defined by Touvron et al. (2021)[51] as its backbone. This is a lightweight
version of the more commonly used ViT-B encoder from the original ViT paper [19], allow-
ing faster training at the expense of performance. Hyperparameters for both models are
shown in Tab. 3.3. I decided to pick ViT-S because the overall goal of this project is not
to achieve the best performance but to illustrate the potential benefits of a FM, although
ViT-B should be considered when moving beyond prototyping.
Decoder Model
He et al. (2021) [14] found that a single attention block decoder appears sufficient for
training a MAE. That way, most useful information is restricted to the encoder, which can
be transferred as a FM for a downstream task. Because of these findings, I have chosen a
decoder that contains one transformer block that matches the format of the ones in ViT-S.
Before the final output, a feedforward layer is added, which transforms the tokens back
from the embedding space.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
23
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Data and Methods
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC class [%]
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
Fraction of dataset [%]
Full set
Train set (100%)
Train set (50%)
Train set (10%)
Train set (1%)
Validation set
Test set
Central East
Central West
North West
North East
South East
South West
Qaanaaq
CapeFarewell
North
Eastern Arctic (CIS)
Foxe Basin (CIS)
Hudson Area (CIS)
Newfoundland (CIS)
Western Arctic (CIS)
Mid Arctic (CIS)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Fraction of dataset [%]
Figure 3.4: SIC class and location distributions for all created ice chart datasets. Locations are determined
by the related ice chart locations as defined by DMI and CIS.
Masking
I train the model using 75% random masking, which according to He et al. (2021) [14]
provides the best results in downstream tasks. Other masking approaches exist [52], but
have not been investigated further in this project.
Data Augmentation
In deep learning, data augmentation is often necessary to avoid overfitting. However, for
a MAE this is less crucial, as random masking itself works as a powerful form of data
augmentation [14]. I have decided to use some data augmentation anyway, as it might
still boost performance.
Beyond picking a random crop of 512 × 512 from a scene of 1,024 × 1,024 pixels as
described in Sect. 3.1.1, horizontal and vertical flips have been used, along with a limited
random zoom (80–100%) and stretch (0.9–1.1). These augmentations have been chosen
to respect the nature of SAR imagery, preserving geometric structures and intensity pat-
terns while introducing sufficient variability to improve generalization. Horizontal flipping
can, however, be considered controversial since it flips the direction of change for the
SAR incidence angle.
Training
The MAE is trained on RMSE loss, and therefore tries to minimize the error between
the restored image and the original. As the MAE is likely to learn the unit function for
unmasked image patches, only the masked image patches are considered for the loss,
meaning that the model is not rewarded for recreating patches it already knows.
The MAE is trained for 100 epochs using the AdamW optimizer, with weight decay = 0.05,
β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.95 [53]. To improve performance, learning rate scheduling is applied
such that the learning rate is adapted to different stages of training. I have used a scheme
24
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:39==
3.2. Model Setup and Training
Table 3.2: Key hyperparameter details for all model frameworks trained with this project.
Model
MAE
ViT-S SETR-PuP
ViT-S SETR-PuP
pretrained
ASIPNet
(short name)
(MAE)
(VSPscratch)
(VSPpretrained)
(ASIPNet)
Encoder
ViT-S
ViT-S
ViT-S
ASIPNet Enc.
(params)
(22M)
(22M)
(22M)
(22M)
Decoder
1-block ViT-S
SETR-PuP
SETR-PuP
ASIPNet Dec.
(params)
(2.5M)
(1.1M)
(1.1M)
(0.8M)
FM
None
None
MAE
None
Eff. Batch Size
64
32
32
32
Base learn. rate
3e-4
2e-4
2e-4
2e-4
Loss func.
MSE
Cross Entropy
Cross Entropy
Cross Entropy
Training set
size (100%)
151,849
32,586
32,586
32,586
Val set size
1.000
1,043
1,043
1,043
Test set size
1.064
1.064
1.064
1.064
Table 3.3: Comparison between the structure of ViT-S [51] and ViT-B [19]. Both works as shown in Figure
2.6.
Model
Layers
Hidden size E
MLP size
Attention Heads
Params
ViT-S
12
384
1536
6
22M
ViT-B
12
768
3072
12
86M
as shown in Fig. 3.5, consisting of linear warmup [40] for 10% of training time, followed
by cosine annealing [54] for the remainder. The warmup helps guide the learning towards
more ideal learning paths, while annealing reduces the learning rate at later stages of
training to help the model converge.
Checkpoints (i.e. intermediate models) are saved for all epochs, and the one with the
lowest validation loss is chosen as the final model.
3.2.2
Models for SIC Prediction
Models
A total of 3 setups have been considered for SIC prediction models; a pretrained ViT
based model utilizing the trained FM (VSPpretrained), a model with the same structure,
but trained from scratch (VSPscratch), and a U-Net-based model that uses the structure
presented by Wulf et al. (2024) [12], (ASIPNet).
The general structure of the ViT-based models (VSP) is illustrated in Figure 3.6. I chose
to base the model structure on the SETR-PuP framework by Zheng et al. (2021) [20],
who showed that a progressive upsampling decoder (PuP) had better performance than
naïve decoder approaches.
ASIPNet is trained to compare my results with the established ASIP framework by Wulf
et al. The main difference between these is the number of input channels, as I am only
using S1 data for training, while Wulf et al. also use AMSR2 data.
Data Augmentation
Similar to how I trained the MAE, I use random cropping to pick a subset of 512 × 512
pixels from 1024 × 1024 pixels. Unlike for the MAE, I decided not to use any other aug-
mentations. I motivate this by the fact that this approach stays more true to the intrinsic
geometry of SAR scenes and that it might make FM benefits clearer.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
25
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Data and Methods
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fraction of training [%]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Learning rate scaling factor
Learning rate schedule
Linear warmup
Cosine annealing
Figure 3.5: Learning rate scheduling scheme used to train MAE. First, linear warmup is applied for 10% of
training steps, followed by cosine annealing for the remainder.
Training
All 3 models (VSPscratch, VSPpretrained, and ASIPNet) are trained using cross-entropy
loss. All land pixels and missing values in the ice charts are not considered for the loss.
The models are trained on all 4 training data subsets, and the epoch with the lowest
validation loss is picked as the result for each training session.
I use linear warmup for 6 epochs (except for the 100% training data set, where I use
3). As I wanted to train all models exhaustively, I decided not to use any learning rate
annealing, as the use of annealing requires knowledge about when a given run should be
terminated, which might vary for the different setups. Instead, I used a constant learning
rate after warmup and trained until significant overfitting was observed. Through tests, I
found that overfitting correlated more with the number of epochs than with the number of
training steps.
Like for MAE training, I used the AdamW optimizer, with weight decay = 0.05, β1 = 0.9
and β2 = 0.999 [53].
Class Weighting
Class weighting in machine learning can be important, as the network can tend to overem-
phasize overrepresented classes, such as the ocean (SIC = 0%) in this project. Kucik and
Stokholm (2023)[8] however, showed that weighting classes inversely proportional to their
frequency reduced performance for the overrepresented classes, which is not ideal for ice
charting. In testing, I found similar results, and therefore I decided to weigh all classes
equally for training despite the class imbalance.
26
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:41==
3.2. Model Setup and Training
ViT 
Encoder
SETR-PuP
Decoder
SEgmentation TRansformer (SETR)
Input
Target
Channels × H × W
Classes × H × W
P × E
SETR-PuP Decoder
Target
Reshape
Classes × H × W
32 × H × W
E × H/16 × W/16 
256 × H/8 × W/8
128 × H/4× W/4
64 × H/2× W/2
P × E
conv 1×1
conv 3×3
BatchNorm
ReLU
Bilinear
Upsampe
Figure 3.6: Overall SETR-PuP structure used as the main pretrained model, and as untrained baseline, for
categorizing SIC in this project.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
27
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Data and Methods
28
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4. Results
CHAPTER4
Results
In this chapter, I will present the results of all trained models. For both the MAE and models
trained for SIC prediction, quantitative results in the form of loss and general performance
metrics are evaluated using the test set. I will also present qualitative results in the form of
predictions at image-level (resolution and shape of the model input), as well as predictions
of full SAR scenes made as mosaics of image-level predictions.
4.1
Masked Autoencoder Results
The MAE was trained for 100 epochs and achieved the best performance on the validation
set after 98 epochs with a MSE validation loss of 0.092. By comparison, the test loss is
at 0.087, which is slightly lower, and suggests that the model is not overfitted (although
due to the fact that land is masked out in the test set, some of the difference might be a
result of this). The fact that the best performance occurs this late in the training suggests
that the model could still learn more if trained for longer. However, from visual inspection,
the loss improvements had stagnated at this point, and significant improvements beyond
this point are probably limited.
Although the model is trained with a 75% masking ratio, it is possible to evaluate its per-
formance for other masking ratios. One would expect that since it has been trained on
random masking, many of the learned connections should also apply when the average
distance between patches increases. Fig. 4.1 has therefore been constructed by evalu-
ating the loss given various masking ratios. The figure shows that reconstruction results
0
20
40
60
80
100
Masking Ratio [%]
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
MSE Loss
Figure 4.1: Average MSE Loss from test set prediction via trained masked autoencoder, given masking ratios
between 1% and 99%.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
29
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Results
Masked input
masking ratio = 0.1
masking ratio = 0.25
masking ratio = 0.75
masking ratio = 0.95
Prediction
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
Figure 4.2: MAE prediction of HH channel of SAR image (image from scene originating from Foxe Basin -
see Fig. 4.8), using various different masking ratios, and with unmasked patches overlaying prediction.
do not seem to deteriorate significantly before around 90% masking. This suggests that
there are significant amounts of redundancy in the SAR imagery and that the model is
capable of utilizing global information to predict patches that are spatially far away from
the unmasked patches with reasonably good performance.
This interpretation is further supported by the illustrations in Fig. 4.2. The figure shows the
reconstruction of a SAR image (HH illustrated), given various masking ratios. Note that I
have overlaid the prediction with the unmasked patches, as the model has no incentive
to predict the unmasked patches correctly, whereby its outputs for these bear no obvious
meaning. We see that for 10% and 25% masking, the effect of masking is barely no-
ticeable in the reconstructed image,.. Meanwhile, some blurriness occurs in the masking
case 75%, although the reconstruction is still very close to the original image, and even
at 95% the model is able to predict the main features present in the image. To illustrate
its performance even further, I have made mosaics covering an entire SAR scene in Fig.
4.3.
Like in Fig. 4.2, reconstruction qualitatively appears to be successful regardless of the
masking ratio. At 95% masking ratio, some artifacts can be seen over land and at image
tile edges, although the reconstruction of the overall structure of the scene is generally
successful. This again illustrates the data redundancy of the SAR images and demon-
strates the trained model’s ability to utilize this.
The results of the MAE show that its training has taught it patch relationships at local and
global levels. However, the results shown here do not illustrate anything about its perfor-
mance as a FM since the learned connections might not be usable for the downstream
task. Its capabilities can therefore first truly be evaluated at the downstream task.
4.2
SIC Prediction
As mentioned in Sect. 3.2.2, a total of 3 model setups have been trained for SIC pre-
diction; 2 ViT-based models (VSP), where one is trained from scratch (ViT-S SETR-PuP
or VSPscratch) and the other uses the MAE-trained FM from the previous section as ini-
tialization (ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained or VSPpretrained). Finally, I have also trained a
version of ASIPNet from scratch.
30
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:45==
4.2. SIC Prediction
Masked input
masking ratio = 0.1
masking ratio = 0.25
masking ratio = 0.75
masking ratio = 0.95
Prediction
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
Figure 4.3: Mosaic of MAE prediction of HH channel of SAR scene (From Newfoundland/Labrador - see Fig.
4.9), using various different masking ratios, and with unmasked patches overlaying prediction.
100%
50%
10%
1%
Fraction of full train data set
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Epoch with lowest validation loss
100%
50%
10%
1%
Fraction of full train data set
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
Cross Entropy Loss 
Test: ViT-S SETR-PuP
Validation: ViT-S SETR-PuP
Test: ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
Validation: ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
Test: ASIPNet
Validation: ASIPNet
Figure 4.4: Epoch number, validation loss and test loss for the models selected. The best epoch is chosen
as the one that achieves the lowest validation loss.
4.2.1
Model Performance
To truly understand how the different models performed, the loss and required training
epochs have been evaluated. Furthermore, confusion matrices have been created for all
models and quantified certain overall and per-class performance-related metrics. Here I
will go through the different types of results one by one.
Loss
In Fig. 4.4 (right), I have plotted both validation and test set loss as a function of the size of
the training set and the model. The validation loss is relevant, as the best model is chosen
from this, but this might bias its capabilities as a performance metric. For both validation
and test loss, it is clear that the VSPscratch has the worst performance regardless of train-
ing set size, while ASIPNet appears to generally be slightly better than VSPpretrained,
although for larger sizes, test loss is almost the same for ASIPNet and VSPpretrained.
These results suggest 2 things: 1) pretraining is essential for the performance of the
VSP models, and 2) Using my MAE as a FM does not improve label efficiency when
compared to ASIPNet - ASIPNet actually appears to be more label efficient when looking
at loss. There can be several reasons for this which I will discuss in Chapter 5. Caution
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
31
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Results
should be exercised, however, as the loss does not necessarily represent the most desired
attributes of the model. For example, the loss is skewed by the majority class being ocean,
and better performance over ocean might outshine other factors. Furthermore, loss also
reflects model confidence, and a less confident but more correct model might have a lower
loss than the more error-prone model.
Training Time
Fig. 4.4 shows the number of epochs needed to achieve minimal loss, as well as the loss
achieved from training the different models. When looking at the number of epochs (Fig.
4.4 left), the number of epochs increases when the training set size decreases, which is to
be expected as the number of steps per epoch will also decrease, whereby less learning
is achievable per epoch. The appearance of overfitting seems to correlate more with
the number of epochs than with the number of training steps. This makes sense since
overfitting occurs once the model has seen the same data a sufficient number of times to
be able to recognize it. This graph should therefore not be confused with training time;
models with smaller training data sets still take less time to train - they just need to see
the same data more times before they can overfit it.
It generally takes fewer epochs to train VSPpretrained compared to the other models.
This makes sense since it, through the FM, has already learned many trivial connections,
which the other models will need to learn from scratch. Training VSPscratch takes the
most epochs, except for 1% of the training set, but this is likely the result of an outlier.
Confusion Matrices
Confusion matrices for all 12 trained models are shown in Fig. 4.5. The first thing to notice
is that for almost all confusion matrices, the rows for class 1, 4, and 6 (10%, 40%, and
60% SIC) are missing. This means that none of the models have bothered learning to
predict any of these SIC classes. As shown in Fig. 3.4, these SIC classes also represent
the 3 rarest classes in the training sets. This suggests that the models have implicitly
prioritized optimizing performance on the more frequent classes, where gains are more
easily achieved, rather than learning rare classes that contribute little to the overall training
objective. It is worse for the 1% data models. Especially VSPscratch, where only 4 out
of 11 classes are predicted regularly. We also see that the ASIPNet models have some
classes that they only rarely predict, which is less of a problem for the VSP models with
larger training set sizes.
The missing classes tend to be predicted by neighboring classes instead. This behavior is
likely explained by the significant overlap between the SAR data signatures of neighboring
SIC classes. This, fortunately, means that the final predictions are still reasonably valid,
as the missing classes are mostly predicted as neighboring classes.
The fact that predictions tend to be centered around the diagonal of the confusion matrices
is a good thing, as that means that the models manage to learn the hierarchy of the SIC
classes. Using CE loss, this is not something they know or are rewarded for by default,
and them learning it is again probably the result of the overlapping SAR data signatures
of neighboring SIC classes.
The models seem to predict 0% and 100% SIC better than the remaining classes, which
can be explained by the fact that these classes are easier to recognize and more dominant
in the training set. As pointed out in Stokholm et al. (2022) [45], this is an argument for
keeping classes unweighted during training, as from an ice charting perspective, this is
a good thing. However, the total lack of certain class predictions might suggest that one
should revisit class weighting and methods to encode hierarchies for future SAR-based
models.
32
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:47==
4.2. SIC Prediction
0
2
4
6
8
10
100% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
0
2
4
6
8
10
50% train data
0
2
4
6
8
10
10% train data
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
1% train data
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency of target class [%]
Figure 4.5: Confusion matrices for all SIC prediction models evaluated on the test set. Classes 0 through
10 here represent different SICs (10-100%), and columns represents target labels, while rows represent
predictions. Matrices are scaled by target frequency (divided by sum of columns) to take class balance into
account.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
33
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Results
12
14
16
18
20
RMSE [%]
20.0
22.5
25.0
27.5
30.0
Class Weighted RMSE [%]
ViT-S SETR-PuP
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
0.825
0.850
0.875
0.900
0.925
0.950
R²
0.78
0.79
0.80
0.81
0.82
0.83
Accuracy
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
mIoU
0.6
0.7
0.8
IoU ice (10-100%)
100%
50%
10%
1%
0.225
0.250
0.275
0.300
0.325
0.350
mPrecision
100%
50%
10%
1%
0.20
0.25
0.30
mRecall
100%
50%
10%
1%
0.200
0.225
0.250
0.275
0.300
0.325
mF1
Fraction of full train data set
Figure 4.6: Various global regression-oriented and segmentation-oriented metrics evaluated for all 12 models
trained for SIC prediction, using the data from the confusion matrices of Fig. 4.5
Global Metrics
The global metrics give a general overview of model performance across all classes and
are therefore, like loss, measures of the overall model performance. Fig. 4.6 shows vari-
ous metrics upon which I have evaluated the models, and each graph shows performance
as a function of model and training data size. Given that the problem of categorizing SIC is
formulated as a semantic segmentation task, but the underlying mechanics behind it might
also be considered a regression problem, here I present both regression-oriented metrics
(RMSE, R2) and segmentation-oriented metrics (accuracy, mIoU, etc.). The regression-
oriented metrics show how close the model is to the correct answer on average, while the
segmentation-oriented metrics show the exactness of the classifier.
Looking at RMSE and R2, ASIPNet and VSPpretrained perform almost on par, except for
the 1% training data, where VSPpretrained is slightly better. By comparison, the VSP-
scratch achieves lower performance in general, and especially for 1% training data. The
100% data models achieve a similar weighted RMSE and R2 value to the DMI trained
ASIPNet (Wulf et al. (2024) reports a weighted RMSE of 20.2% and R2 of 95%, when not
applying calibration).
For segmentation-oriented metrics, VSPpretrained generally outperforms the other mod-
els in the 100% data case, with ASIPNet on par or slightly worse. We do see some
special patterns for the 50% models, where VSPscratch exceeds the others for accuracy
and recall, but this does not seem to generalize to the other data sizes.
ASIPNet does not appear more label-efficient than VSPpretrained when looking at the
performance metrics, but there is still no evidence that the use of a FM has resulted in
greater label-efficiency for VSPpretrained versus ASIPNet. The conclusions here are
34
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:49==
4.2. SIC Prediction
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
RMSE for target class [%]
ViT-S SETR-PuP, trainData = 100%
ViT-S SETR-PuP, trainData = 50%
ViT-S SETR-PuP, trainData = 10%
ViT-S SETR-PuP, trainData = 1%
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained, trainData = 100%
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained, trainData = 50%
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained, trainData = 10%
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained, trainData = 1%
ASIPNet, trainData = 100%
ASIPNet, trainData = 50%
ASIPNet, trainData = 10%
ASIPNet, trainData = 1%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Target class (SIC) [%]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
IoU for target class
Figure 4.7: Per class RMSE (upper) and IoU (lower) for all trained models. Gray line in RMSE plot represents
a baseline of predicting everything to be 0% SIC.
thus the same as when looking at loss; using my FM does not improve label efficiency
compared to ASIPNet, but performance and label-efficiency are better when compared to
VSPscratch.
Per-class Metrics
To get a better overview of how the models perform for the individual SIC class, I have
created the plots in Fig. 4.7. Here, I have selected the RMSE and IoU metrics specifically
as they are widely used performance criteria and are easy to interpret. For RMSE, models
generally tend to be best at predicting 0% and 100% SIC, which is to be expected as
those classes are more distinguishable and frequent than the rest. Curiously, for the 50%
and 100% data models, it seems that ASIPNet is best for lower concentrations, while
VSPpretrained seems to be better for higher concentrations. I speculate that this might
be due to the fact that the prediction of higher concentrations requires more global context,
which VSPpretrained excels at, while lower concentrations are more related to pixel-level
details better suited for U-Net. This pattern does not generalize to the 1% and 10% data
models or to the IoU results, so this interpretation might not be true.
For IoU, we again see that 10% and 60% are never predicted for any model, and 40% is
only rarely predicted. It is clear that the 1% data models seem to predict worse than the
rest, and it appears like VSPpretrained has the best performance for many classes (20%,
30% & 80% SIC), again proving that it might slightly outperform ASIPNet when looking
beyond loss.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
35
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Results
HH
HV
Ice Chart
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Power [dB]
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
S1B Foxe Basin (CIS) 25-08-2020 (Patch)
ViT-S SETR-PuP
100% train data
50% train data
10% train data
1% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
Figure 4.8: Example of SIC prediction on sub-images of a SAR scene for all 12 models trained for SIC
prediction. The SAR images and ice chart are shown on top. More examples are available in Appendix A.
4.2.2
Image-level Predictions
To evaluate the qualitative performance of the trained models at image-level, images from
the test set were chosen manually and predicted using the 12 different models. An ex-
ample of this is seen in Fig. 4.8, with more examples available in Appendix A.
Looking at Fig. 4.8 specifically, we see that the overall way the models predict SIC is very
different when comparing ASIPNet to the VSP models. For ASIPNet the boundaries be-
tween classes appear fuzzy, illustrating a general uncertainty regarding where one class
ends and another begins. Furthermore, its predictions appear more ”pixelated” with small
local zones of one class occasionally being embedded in the other. In contrast, the VSP
models tend to have smooth segmentation boundaries and tend to have predictions sep-
arated to a degree where it would be possible to redraw a polygon around them, and
therefore resemble the original ice charts more.
Comparing VSPscratch and VSPpretrained, one generally sees that VSPpretrained tends
to predict larger continuous class segments, while VSPscratch might draw smaller local
36
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:51==
4.2. SIC Prediction
polygons with rougher boundaries. Also, for the 1% data models, VSPscratch appears
greatly affected by the lack of classes it has learned - in this example, the model only
predicts 50% SIC. From a visual judgment, the predictions by VSPpretrained at 100%
training data generally bear the closest resemblance to the original ice charts.
The observed behavior can be explained by the model architecture and training, espe-
cially in regards to the models’ effective perceptive field. The ASIPNet model I train does
have global perception for its center pixels in theory, but the transfer of information from
the furthest pixels needs to be preserved through many layers. ASIPNet does however
have skip connections and local inductive bias, and therefore tends to focus on the lo-
cal dynamics near the pixel predicted, which explains the more ”pixilated” behavior. In
contrast, the global perception of VSPpretrained enables it to use the entire image in-
discriminately to predict a single pixel. I therefore suspect that VSPpretrained learns to
copy the way ice charters draw polygons to a larger degree than ASIPNet. This is poten-
tially also true for VSPscratch, though the smaller polygons with rougher boundaries are
likely a result of worse global understanding, as it has not been pretrained. Part of the
effect might also be due to the VSP models losing local details through processing, which
ASIPNet preserves via skip connections.
4.2.3
Mosaic Predictions
The interpretation that global perceptive fields are a key difference in how the different
models predict is further supported when creating mosaics of predictions across a full S1
scene. Fig. 4.9 shows an example of a mosaic of a SAR scene from the Labrador Sea.
This is created by predicting and mosaicing image-level predictions of the SAR scene
using all 12 models. When creating the mosaic, I have removed the outer edge of all the
image-level predictions to reduce edge artifacts. Furthermore, predictions are mixed with
a 128-pixel overlap and a cosine mixing function for a smoother transition between them.
More examples are available in Appendix B.
The models generally appear good at distinguishing ocean and ice, and there is generally
a reasonable match between ground-truth ice charts and predictions. In the appendix
scenes, one does see some local predictions, which confuse 100% SIC from 0% SIC,
which likely happens due to hard-to-distinguish ambiguities of the SAR data. Notes on
the individual scenes are written in the Appendix. The ambiguities would likely be re-
solved if PMW data were included like for the ASIPNet version of Wulf et al. (2024) [12].
Interestingly, the structure of these errors appears to be very different between the VSP
models and ASIPNet. VSP predictions have square artifacts that match with the image-
level predictions, while ASIPNet errors appear more random. This again shows how VSP
models have a better global perception than ASIPNet, as this must happen because VSP
models misinterpret an entire image prediction at once. Meanwhile, ASIPNet errors tend
to be more localized and might theoretically be equally wrong, but this is less obvious to
the human eye. In other words, VSP models might, in general, be less wrong, but when
they are wrong, they are very wrong.
From all predictions, one also sees that all models overemphasize 0% and 100% SIC. This
might again reflect the fact that class imbalance is impacting the models in an undesired
way, making models less likely to predict rarer SIC classes.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
37
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 4.9: Example of mosaic of SIC predictions for a SAR scene, given all 12 models trained for SIC
prediction. SAR images and ice chart are shown on top. More examples are available in Appendix B.
38
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5. Discussion
CHAPTER5
Discussion
In this chapter, I will hold the results of the previous chapter against one another, in order
to give an overall conclusion as to what the results show, in regard to the performance
of models in general and in regard to training set size. Furthermore, I will use those
conclusions to give recommendations that could guide DMI in further improving automated
ice charting algorithms in the future.
5.1
What does the results show?
Focusing on the goals of this project, I have identified 5 key takeaways which I will sequen-
tially discuss here. The points have been separated into sections for an easy overview.
1) Aplying the FM is almost universally advantageous for ViT-based models re-
gardless of training set size.
This is evident by the fact that for almost all measured
metrics, VSPscratch models tend to perform worse than VSPpretrained. This is expected,
as without pretraining, VSPscratch will need to learn not only the connection between
SAR images and ice charts, but also the dynamics of sea ice in general, and local and
global relationships between patches in an image. These connections have already been
taught, at least to a degree, by VSPpretrained, and its training can focus on more complex
relationships until overfitting occurs. This underscores the main point of pretraining and
simply reflects the results of other MIM frameworks [14], [15], [52]. One would expect the
effect to diminish with larger training set sizes, and results for loss (Fig. 4.4), mIoU and
RMSE (Fig. 4.6) do suggest that the performance difference for 100% data is smaller
than that for lower dataset sizes. However, on the scale of the ASIDv2+ dataset, the VSP
models never reached similar performance.
2) Pretraining does not seem to boost label-efficiency compared to ASIPNet.
When
comparing ASIPNet and VSPpretrained performance dropoff does not appear to occur
faster for one than for the other. Unfortunately, this means that the application of a FM has
not succeeded in increasing label-efficiency compared to the already established ASIPNet
model.
There can be several reasons as to why this is the case; the architecture of VSPpretrained
might not be complex enough to capture the details necessary to out-compete ASIPNet’s
inductive bias, the task performance might be constrained by other factors than model
architecture, and the chosen pretraining scheme might not transfer sufficiently to the
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
39
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5. Discussion
downstream task.
Though not proven here, there might still be ways to make a FM
that achieves better label-efficiency, though the basic approach illustrated here does not
accomplish this.
3) ASIPNet and VSPpretrained appears to have similar performance.
This is some-
what surprising given the relative simplicity of the chosen ViT-S SETR-PuP model, which
is small and simple compared to state-of-the-art models. I did observe a slightly lower
loss for ASIPNet models in general, but this did not generalize to the test set for larger
training data sizes and, for most metrics VSPpretrained at 100% data performed slightly
better on the test set. This is promising for the eventual use of ViT-based models for
future automated ice charting, as there are many ways to scale up VSPpretrained [18],
[19], [55]. However, one does have to investigate whether similar performance might be
due to other factors constraining the models, such as the choice of loss function or class
imbalance.
4) Issues appear to occur as a result of class imbalance.
It remains clear that the
models tend to ignore rare classes while they overemphasize on the majority classes of
0% and 100% SIC. This is a significant problem that will need to be addressed for future
SAR-based models. It is likely not as severe when PMW data are available, as SIC values
are easier to derive from PMW data. An obvious solution is to do class weighting, but as
mentioned in sect. 3.2.2 and in Stokholm et al. (2022)[45], weighting classes inversely
proportional to class frequency in the loss might make models overly optimistic in locating
rare classes. Methods for regularized weighting exist and will be discussed in section 5.2.
An alternative way to interpret the ignoring of rare classes is that since the model does not
intrinsically know the hierarchy of SIC classes, it has less incentive to learn those rarer
classes as a step on a continuum of classes. In other words, we ideally want the model to
predict 60% SIC when it is uncertain whether to pick 50% or 70%, but with 60% SIC being
a rare class on the ice charts, the model finds it difficult to make that connection and sees
no benefit in learning it. Had the loss function of the model been structured in a way that
made the model understand the hierarchical nature of the SIC classes, the model would
be more inclined to make this connection. A simple way to include this bias would be to
reformulate the problem as a regression problem, although as mentioned in Kucik and
Stokholm (2023)[8], this brings its own problems as predicting SIC from ice charts is not
truly reminiscent of regression in the same way as it would be if it were a physical measure.
5) Transformer-based models seem to utilize global information better, which could
be exploited for better performance.
As discussed in sect. 4.2.2 and 4.2.3, VSP-
scratch and VSPpretrained appear to utilize global information in a way that makes their
predictions appear more similar to how an ice analyst would draw ice charts. It is evident
that since VSPpretrained predicts larger, smooth edge sections, its predictions are likely
easier to polygonize and interpret. Therefore, an improved version of it might be more
applicable to ice analysts and navigators from a practical point of view, even if it does not
clearly outperform ASIPNet.
The better global perception of the VSP models is especially noticeable in mosaic predic-
tions, where square artifacts appear due to misinterpretation of entire prediction patches.
40
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:55==
5.2. Possible Ways of Improving Automatic SIC Mapping
Although these errors are problematic, this type of error can only occur if the model gen-
erally uses global perception for its predictions, and this must therefore also be the case
for its correct predictions.
The fact that those ”patchy” errors occur could also point to the fact that the 40km × 40km
prediction window is insufficient to resolve some of the SIC ambiguities found in SAR im-
agery. Performance increases might therefore be achieved by increasing it. This is also
supported by the results found with the AutoICE challenge, where the best model signif-
icantly down-sampled full SAR scenes. The results here show that ViT-inspired frame-
works might benefit more from this than U-Net-based alternatives.
5.2
Possible Ways of Improving Automatic SIC Mapping
I will here, based on the points highlighted in sect. 5.1, present some general ideas
and recommendations as to how one can further improve the framework developed here.
Where possible, I will back those recommendations up with references to papers that
employ the ideas I find most promising.
5.2.1
More Complex Encoder/Decoder Structure
One of the simplest ways to improve performance might be to train a model with a more
complex encoder. As mentioned in sect. 3.2.1, the MAE, and therefore also the VSP
models are trained on the lightweight ViT-S encoder. This could easily be replaced by ViT-
B. ViT-B has more parameters than ViT-S and, therefore, has a larger learning potential
but is heavier to train in terms of computation and might be more prone to overfitting.
Alternatively, one could focus on the decoder. Other frameworks [41], [55] use the UPer-
Net decoder [56] for segmentation tasks. I have been experimenting with this myself and
although it did show promising results, I decided not to use it as it was more complex,
took more resources to train, and did not show better results in tests. I do believe that
with more work one might achieve better results from UPerNet than I have achieved.
5.2.2
Alternative FM Framework
The FM model developed here is based on the original MAE paper by He et al. (2021)
[14]. Since then, many more frameworks have appeared that adapt these methods to
have better overall performance, or are better adapted to earth observation data. In sect.
2.3.4,I already mentioned a few which either utilize more satellite modalities [17], [18] or
alter SAR imagery to help the model focus on more essential features for the downstream
task [16]. One can retrain these models to make foundation models specifically adapted
to the domain of sea ice. Alternatively, one could see whether already trained models exist
which can be finetuned to ice chart data, and check whether this boosts performance or
label-efficiency.
5.2.3
Alternative Loss
I mentioned in sect. 5.1 that class imbalance issues might be alleviated using different loss
functions that are aware of the SIC hierarchy. I would therefore propose looking into the
use of ordinal regression methods. Modeling data as ordinal means assigning a natural
order or ranking to the classes, without assuming a specific numerical distance between
them. There are many ways to do this. Zhang et al. (2023) [57] add a regularizing term
encoding ordinality to cross-entropy loss, and show that this improves performance for
select regression tasks. Polat et al. (2025)[58] propose a similar but different loss mod-
ification for severity predictions in medical image analysis and show generally favorable
results for U-Net structures similar to ASIPNet. One can also convert the problem into
cumulative probability estimation for each class, predicting the probability of being larger
than a certain class rather than the class itself.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
41
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. Discussion
To address class imbalance, loss functions like focal loss [59] and dice loss [60] are de-
signed to account for uneven class distributions automatically. Alternatively, one could
use class weighting. As mentioned, weighting classes inversely proportional to class fre-
quency, f−1, makes the classifier slightly too opportunistic, but this can be regularized;
one could use (f + k)−1 or log(f + k)−1 where k is a regularization parameter.
5.2.4
Altering Input and/or Output
The choice was made to only use SAR data for this project to simplify the scope of the
project as a whole. More input modalities could be added. DMI is already using PMW
data from AMSR2, which would resolve some ambiguities in the models presented here.
Positional and temporal encoding is also an option, which would make the model aware
of the time of year and the geographical location. The downside to this is that it does not
generalize beyond the training data around Greenland and Canada, and should thus be
handled with care.
One could include SAR incidence angle in the model. For transformer-based models, this
would be relatively easy, as it could be embedded as an additional input to each token
without increasing computational costs in any significant way. In this way, the model could
easily learn not to be affected by artifacts and effects in the range direction of the SAR
image, which occasionally occurs (Appendix B in Cape Farewell for instance).
For outputs, one could consider ways to include more information from the ice charts than
what is currently done. The SIGRID-3 code for ice charts allows ice analysts to select
SIC ranges rather than exact concentrations. This information might be used; one could
make a setup where the prediction is considered correct if any SIC class in the interval
is predicted. This might improve segmentation metric performance and allow the model
to break up larger, more complex polygons where the ice analysts might have simplified
their drawing.
5.2.5
Increased Global Perception
The models trained here are disadvantaged compared to ice analysts, as they are only
able to observe a very small fraction of a full SAR scene. With a larger prediction window
size, the models will have more information upon which to make their predictions, which
might improve performance.
I propose two approaches that might address this; first, one could investigate the po-
tential of using a Swin Transformer [61]. The Swin Transformer is a hierarchical vision
transformer that computes self-attention within shifted local windows, in contrast to the
global attention used in standard ViT, which scales poorly with image size.
Alternatively, one could use a multi-step method where one first applies a neural network
to a downscaled version of the full SAR scene. The local predictions of this could then be
used as input to a model on patch scale like the one once trained with this project. This
might be less powerful than Swin but might be easier and more versatile to implement.
42
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
CHAPTER6
Conclusion
For this project, I have investigated the potential benefits regarding label-efficiency and
performance when using a MAE-based FM as an initializer for models tasked with pre-
dicting SIC from ice charts. To do so, I have created a MAE and have used it to train a
ViT-based model for predicting SIC (VSPpretrained) and compared it to a non-pretrained
similar model (VSPscratch) and a model based on the most recent SIC predicting ASIP
model (ASIPNet). To evaluate label-efficiency, all models are trained on 4 subsets of
varying sizes of a full training data set.
The trained MAE has been shown to perform its task well, being able to recreate realistic
representations of SAR imagery with more than 75% data missing, thus illustrating that it
successfully learns the task for which it is trained.
Comparing VSPpretrained to VSPscratch, I found that VSPpretrained, regardless of train-
ing set size, outperformed VSPscratch on most metrics, including loss, RMSE, training
time, mIoU, and more, implying that the application of a FM for ViT-based frameworks re-
sults in more label-efficient and performative results compared to the training of a similar
model from scratch.
The results are less clear when comparing VSPpretrained to ASIPNet; ASIPNet gener-
ally achieves a lower minimum loss compared to VSPpretrained, though the difference is
small, especially for larger training set sizes. The models generally have similar perfor-
mance for all performance metrics, with VSPpretrained perhaps outperforming ASIPNet
slightly in segmentation-based metrics like mIoU and mF1. There are no indications that
VSPpretrained is more label-efficient than ASIPNet, which implies that the application of
my FM does not improve the label efficiency in the downstream task of categorizing SIC
compared to ASIPNet.
Using qualitative analysis of model predictions, I have seen that ViT-based models appear
better at utilizing global perception, resulting in clearer segmentation boundaries between
concentrations and more uniform predictions. For the act of making ice charts, this might
be an advantage, and ways to utilize the global perception better might result in better
performance.
Overall, I have found that VSPpretrained shows similar performance compared to ASIP-
Net for most metrics. Thus, though not necessarily more label-efficient, pretrained ViT-
based models appear to be a viable alternative to CNN-based frameworks for future de-
velopments in the field of automatic SIC prediction.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
43
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
44
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
Bibliography
Bibliography
[1]
M. Shokr and N. Sinha, Eds., Sea Ice: Physics and Remote Sensing (Geophysical
Monograph Series). American Geophysical Union, 2015, vol. 209, Accessed: 2025-
05-14, ISBN: 9781119028000. DOI: 10.1002/9781119028000. [Online]. Available:
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/9781119028000.
[2]
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, “SAR (synthetic aperture radar).
earth observing system. volume 2F: Instrument panel report,” NASA, Tech. Rep.
NASA-TM-89701, 1987, Accessed: 2025-05-14. [Online]. Available: https://ntrs.
nasa.gov/citations/19880005902.
[3]
European Space Agency, “Sentinel-1: ESA’s radar observatory mission for GMES
operational services,” European Space Agency, Tech. Rep. ESA SP-1322/1,
2012, Accessed: 2025-05-14. [Online]. Available: https://esamultimedia.esa.int/
multimedia/publications/SP-1322_1/offline/download.pdf.
[4]
Danish Meteorological Institute, Sea ice charts of Greenland waters, Accessed:
2025-05-14, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://ocean.dmi.dk/arctic/icecharts.uk.php.
[5]
DMI, Iscentralen 50 år – i glimt, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.dmi.dk/
fileadmin/user_upload/Bruger_upload/Nyhed/2019/1/jubihaefte-DMI_Isc.pdf.
[6]
World Meteorological Organization, “SIGRID-3: A vector archive format for sea
ice charts,” World Meteorological Organization, JCOMM Technical Report No.
23 WMO/TD-No. 1214, 2010, Accessed: 2025-05-14. [Online]. Available: https :
//library.wmo.int/records/item/37171-sigrid-3-a-vector-archive-format-for-sea-ice-
charts.
[7]
S. A. Taleghan, A. P. Barrett, W. N. Meier, and F. Banaei-Kashani, IceBench: A
benchmark for deep learning based sea ice type classification, 2025. arXiv: 2503.
17877 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.17877.
[8]
A. Kucik and A. Stokholm, “AI4SeaIce: Selecting loss functions for automated SAR
sea ice concentration charting,” Scientific Reports, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 5962, 2023,
ISSN: 2045-2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598- 023- 32467- x. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-32467-x.
[9]
A. A. Nielsen, D. Malmgren-Hansen, L. Toudal Pedersen, et al., “Interpolation of
AMSR2 data for improvement of ice charting,” in Abstract from SPIE Remote Sens-
ing Conference 2019, Strasbourg, France, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://orbit.
dtu.dk/files/197991141/imm7139.pdf.
[10]
D. Malmgren-Hansen, L. T. Pedersen, A. A. Nielsen, et al., “A convolutional neural
network architecture for Sentinel-1 and AMSR2 data fusion,” IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1890–1902, 2021. DOI:
10.1109/TGRS.2020.3004539.
[11]
A. Stokholm, J. Buus-Hinkler, T. Wulf, et al., “The AutoICE challenge,” The
Cryosphere, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 3471–3494, 2024. DOI: 10.5194/tc-18-3471-2024.
[Online]. Available: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/18/3471/2024/.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
45
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[12]
T. Wulf, J. Buus-Hinkler, S. Singha, and M. B. Kreiner, “Operational SAR-based sea
ice concentration products for copernicus marine service,” pp. 68–71, 2024. DOI:
10.1109/IGARSS53475.2024.10641836.
[13]
Competition and Markets Authority, “AI foundation models: Initial report,” UK Gov-
ernment, Tech. Rep., 2023, Accessed: 2025-05-14. [Online]. Available: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-foundation-models-initial-report.
[14]
K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, Masked autoencoders are
scalable vision learners, 2021. arXiv: 2111.06377 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2111.06377.
[15]
M. Allen, F. Dorr, J. A. Gallego-Mejia, et al., “Large scale masked autoencoding
for reducing label requirements on SAR data,” 2024. arXiv: 2310.00826 [cs.CV].
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.00826.
[16]
Y. Wang, H. H. Hernández, C. M. Albrecht, and X. X. Zhu, “Feature guided masked
autoencoder for self-supervised learning in remote sensing,” 2023. arXiv: 2310 .
18653 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18653.
[17]
Y. Cong, S. Khanna, C. Meng, et al., “SatMAE: Pre-training transformers for tempo-
ral and multi-spectral satellite imagery,” 2023. arXiv: 2207.08051 [cs.CV]. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.08051.
[18]
J. Irvin, L. Tao, J. Zhou, et al., “USat: A unified self-supervised encoder for multi-
sensor satellite imagery,” 2023. arXiv: 2312 . 02199 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02199.
[19]
A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers for image recognition at scale,” 2021. arXiv: 2010 . 11929 [cs.CV].
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929.
[20]
S. Zheng, J. Lu, H. Zhao, et al., “Rethinking semantic segmentation from a
sequence-to-sequence perspective with transformers,” 2021. arXiv: 2012 . 15840
[cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.15840.
[21]
K. Grosfeld, R. Treffeisen, J. Asseng, et al., Online sea-ice knowledge and data
platform <www.meereisportal.de>, Bremerhaven, 2016. DOI: 10.2312/polfor.2016.
011.
[22]
EUMETSAT Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility, OSI SAF global sea
ice concentration (SSMIS), OSI-401-d, Data extracted from OSI SAF FTP server:
(January 2020 to December 2021,) (Arctic,) accessed 2025-05-12, 2023. DOI: 10.
15770/EUM_SAF_OSI_NRT_2004. [Online]. Available: https://osi-saf.eumetsat.int/
products/osi-401-d.
[23]
Finnish Meteorological Institute, Sea ice movements, https://en.ilmatieteenlaitos.fi/
ice-movements, Accessed: 2025-06-02, 2025.
[24]
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Cryosphere physics and observation
(course 30752), Course offered by DTU Space, 5 ECTS credits, taught in English,
2025. [Online]. Available: https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/30752.
[25]
Canadian Ice Service, Canadian ice service – environment and climate change
canada, Accessed: 2025-05-14, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.canada.
ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/ice-forecasts-observations/about-ice-
service.html.
[26]
J. J. Mohr, “SAR light: An introduction to synthetic aperture radar,” Course note for
the DTU course, 30350 Remote Sensing, 2005.
[27]
S. Aparício, “Review article: Earth observations of melt ponds on sea ice,” Jun.
2023. DOI: 10.5194/tc-2023-75.
[28]
J. Karvonen, “Baltic sea ice concentration estimation based on C-Band HH-
polarized SAR data,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations
46
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
and Remote Sensing, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 1874–1884, 2012, Accessed: 2025-05-26.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=6280596.
[29]
European Space Agency, Sentinel-1: Radar vision for copernicus, Accessed: 2025-
05-14, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.esa.int/Applications/Observing_the_
Earth/Copernicus/Sentinel-1.
[30]
Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem, Sentinel-1 mission data documentation, Ac-
cessed: 2025-05-26, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://documentation.dataspace.
copernicus.eu/Data/SentinelMissions/Sentinel1.html.
[31]
European Space Agency, “Thermal denoising of products generated by the S-1
IPF,” European Space Agency, Tech. Rep. MPC-0392 DI-MPC-TN V2.2, 2024,
Accessed: 2025-05-14. [Online]. Available: https : / / sentiwiki . copernicus . eu / _ _
attachments/1673968/DI- MPC- TN- MPC- 0392%20- %20Thermal%20Denoising%
20of%20Products%20Generated%20by%20Sentinel-1%20IPF%202024%20-%202.2.
pdf.
[32]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016, http:
//www.deeplearningbook.org.
[33]
A. F. Agarap, Deep learning using rectified linear units (ReLU), 2019. arXiv: 1803.
08375 [cs.NE]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08375.
[34]
M. A. Nielsen, Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press, 2015,
http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com.
[35]
OpenAI, ChatGPT: Introducing a conversational AI system, Accessed: 2025-04-11,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
[36]
A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton, “ImageNet classification with deep con-
volutional neural networks,” Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 25, Jan.
2012. DOI: 10.1145/3065386.
[37]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation,” 2015. arXiv: 1505.04597 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
[38]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, et al., “Attention is all you need,” 2017. arXiv:
1706.03762 [cs.CL]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[39]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,”
2015. arXiv: 1512.03385 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.
03385.
[40]
J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2019. arXiv: 1810 . 04805
[cs.CL]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.
[41]
S. A. Taleghan, M. Karimzadeh, A. P. Barrett, W. N. Meier, and F. Banaei-Kashani,
“Assessing foundation models for sea ice type segmentation in Sentinel-1 SAR im-
agery,” 2025. arXiv: 2503.22516 [cs.LG]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2503.22516.
[42]
J. Buus-Hinkler, T. Wulf, A. R. Stokholm, et al., AI4Arctic sea ice challenge dataset,
2022. DOI: 10.11583/DTU.c.6244065.v1. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
11583/DTU.c.6244065.v1.
[43]
R. Saldo, M. B. Kreiner, J. Buus-Hinkler, et al., AI4Arctic / ASIP sea ice dataset -
version 2, Oct. 2020. DOI: 10.11583/DTU.13011134.v3. [Online]. Available: https:
//data.dtu.dk/articles/dataset/AI4Arctic_ASIP_Sea_Ice_Dataset_-_version_2/
13011134.
[44]
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), “Advanced microwave scanning
radiometer 2 (AMSR2) on GCOM-W1 ”shizuku”,” Japan Aerospace Exploration
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
47
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
Agency, Tech. Rep., 2012, Accessed: 2025-05-14. [Online]. Available: https :
//global.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/gcom_w/.
[45]
A. Stokholm, T. Wulf, A. Kucik, R. Saldo, J. Buus-Hinkler, and S. M. Hvidegaard,
“AI4SeaIce: Toward solving ambiguous SAR textures in convolutional neural net-
works for automatic sea ice concentration charting,” IEEE Transactions on Geo-
science and Remote Sensing, vol. 60, pp. 1–13, 2022. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.
3149323.
[46]
Y. Wang, H. H. Hernández, C. M. Albrecht, and X. X. Zhu, “Feature guided masked
autoencoder for self-supervised learning in remote sensing,” 2023. arXiv: 2310 .
18653 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18653.
[47]
Z. Jafari, P. Bobby, E. Karami, and R. Taylor, “Machine learning-based detection of
icebergs in sea ice and open water using SAR imager,” Remote Sensing, vol. 17,
no. 4, 2025, ISSN: 2072-4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs17040702. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/17/4/702.
[48]
OpenStreetMap contributors, OpenStreetMap: The free wiki world map, Accessed:
2025-04-02, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.openstreetmap.org.
[49]
L. Zheng, X. Cheng, Z. Chen, and Q. Liang, “Delay in arctic sea ice freeze-up linked
to early summer sea ice loss: Evidence from satellite observations,” Remote Sens-
ing, vol. 13, p. 2162, May 2021. DOI: 10.3390/rs13112162.
[50]
A. Miles, “Zarr: A cloud-friendly format for chunked, compressed, N-dimensional
arrays,” GitHub Repository, 2020, Accessed: 2025-04-02. [Online]. Available: https:
//zarr.dev.
[51]
H. Touvron, M. Cord, M. Douze, F. Massa, A. Sablayrolles, and H. Jégou, Training
data-efficient image transformers & distillation through attention, 2021. arXiv: 2012.
12877 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.12877.
[52]
V. Hondru, F. A. Croitoru, S. Minaee, R. T. Ionescu, and N. Sebe, Masked image
modeling: A survey, 2025. arXiv: 2408.06687 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2408.06687.
[53]
I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2017. arXiv:
1711.05101 [cs.LG]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101.
[54]
I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts,
2017. arXiv: 1608.03983 [cs.LG]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.
03983.
[55]
R. Yang, K. Liu, S. Xu, J. Yin, and Z. Zhang, “ViT-UperNet: A hybrid vision trans-
former with unified-perceptual-parsing network for medical image segmentation,”
Complex & Intelligent Systems, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 3819–3831, 2024, ISSN: 2198-
6053. DOI: 10.1007/s40747-024-01359-6. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s40747-024-01359-6.
[56]
T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, and J. Sun, Unified perceptual parsing for scene
understanding, 2018. arXiv: 1807.10221 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1807.10221.
[57]
S. Zhang, L. Yang, M. B. Mi, X. Zheng, and A. Yao, Improving deep regression
with ordinal entropy, 2023. arXiv: 2301.08915 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2301.08915.
[58]
G. Polat, Ü. M. Çağlar, and A. Temizel, “Class distance weighted cross entropy loss
for classification of disease severity,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 269,
p. 126 372, Apr. 2025, ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI: 10.1016/j.eswa.2024.126372. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2024.126372.
48
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[59]
T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, Focal loss for dense object
detection, 2018. arXiv: 1708.02002 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1708.02002.
[60]
C. H. Sudre, W. Li, T. Vercauteren, S. Ourselin, and M. Jorge Cardoso, “Gener-
alised dice overlap as a deep learning loss function for highly unbalanced segmen-
tations,” in Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning for
Clinical Decision Support. Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 240–248,
ISBN: 9783319675589. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-67558-9_28. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67558-9_28.
[61]
Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, et al., Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows, 2021. arXiv: 2103.14030 [cs.CV]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2103.14030.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
49
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
50
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
Bibliography
Glossary
Accuracy Fraction of correct predictions.
Activation function Function used in neural networks as a non-linearity.
Arctic Circle the latitude above which there is at least one day of sun or darkness each
year (approx 67oN).
Artificial neural network See Neural Networks.
Attention A mechanism in deep learning-based transformers that relates individual to-
kens to one another.
Autocorrelation A measure of how similar a signal is to a shifted version of itself.
Autoencoder A machine learning structure uses the same data as the input and target.
Azimuth direction For SAR this represents the direction of the sensor’s movement.
Backbone The encoder portion of an encoder/decoder-based neural network.
Backpropagation An effective method for calculating the gradient of a neural network.
Backscatter The reflected return signal for a radar.
Batch A subset of the training data processed together in one training step of the neural
network.
Bragg scattering Scattering mechanism that occurs when waves, such as radar signals,
are reflected by a surface with periodic structures (like ocean waves) at specific angles,
causing constructive interference that enhances the return signal.
Brine a high-concentration solution of salt.
C-band a microwave band in the range of 4–8 GHz.
Chain rule fundamental concept in calculus used to find the derivative of a composite
function.
Checkpoint An intermediate deep learning model saved during training.
Chirp A signal whose frequency increases or decreases over time.
Class hierarchy The concept of classes in a machine learning setting having an intrinsic
structure that enables them to be ordered.
Class weighting Tweaking the loss function to make some classes more valuable to
predict than others.
Classification task A task that involves predicting a specific class given some input data.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
51
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
Collocation In Earth observation, it is the act of matching up different map modalities.
Computer vision The scientific field of analyzing digital imagery and video.
Confusion matrix A matrix that contains the frequency of predictions that are true posi-
tives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives.
Convolutional filter A matrix used as a kernel for a convolution operation.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) A neural network framework that is trained to learn
sequential convolutional filters of input data as a way to predict its outcomes.
Cosine annealing A learning rate scheduling procedure that reduces the learning rate
over epochs using a quarter period of a cosine function.
Cross-entropy loss (CE loss) A loss function used in multiclass prediction settings.
Data Augmentation In deep learning, this regards random alterations of data in order to
virtually expand the size of the training dataset.
Decoder The second half of an encoder/decoder-based neural network, which transforms
embedded features into the format of the target data.
Detected amplitude For Sentinel-1, this refers to products where only the amplitude (i.e.,
power data) is preserved, and the phase is discarded.
Deep Learning A machine learning paradigm that covers the training of neural networks
that are deeper than 1 layer.
Dielectric medium A medium that interacts with electromagnetic fields.
Doppler effect The change in the wavelength of a signal that occurs as a result of emitting
or receiving objects having different velocities.
Downstream task The task of a foundation model is to be applied to following its training.
Earth Observation (EO) The scientific field of gathering information about the Earth’s sur-
face, waters, and atmosphere via ground-based, airborne, and/or satellite remote sensing
platforms.
Egg code A standardized symbol used in ice charts to concisely represent sea ice con-
ditions, including concentration, stage of development, and floe size.
Embedding space a continuous vector space where data (like words, images, or classes)
is represented as dense vectors.
Encoder The first half of an encoder/decoder-based neural network, which transforms
input data into embedded features.
Epoch A training milestone by which all training data have been shown to the deep learn-
ing model once.
Feedforward neural network A type of artificial neural network in which information flows
in one direction, from the input layer through hidden layers to the output layer, without
loops or feedback connections.
Finetuning The process of adapting a foundation model to a downstream task.
First-year ice (FYI) Sea ice less than one year old. Used synonymously with seasonal
ice.
52
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Footprint The ground area from which a satellite sensor receives data at a time.
Foundation Model (FM) An already trained deep learning model that is intended to be
used as an initializer to train a network for another task.
Frazil ice an early stage of sea ice development, where the ice appears as a soup of
needle-like crystals on the surface of the ocean.
From scratch Training models without a foundation model as an initializer.
Geolocation The act of referencing observations to a location on Earth’s surface.
Glacier A land-based body of ice created through the accumulation of frozen precipitation.
Global information Information from all sections of an image.
Gradient Vector containing all partial derivatives of a multivariate function.
Ground range The projected distance on the ground between the SAR satellite and an
object.
Hidden layer A layer of neurons in a neural network that processes inputs from the pre-
vious layer and passes the result to the next layer.
Hummocks Ridges or mounds formed when sea ice blocks collide and pile up.
Hyperparameters Parameters can be tweaked when establishing a model.
Ice analyst An employee tasked with the creation of sea ice charts.
Ice chart a mapping of sea ice conditions intended primarily to be used for maritime
navigation.
Ice floe A large disconnected sheet of ice floating at the surface of the ocean.
Ice shelf A glacier outlet floating on top of the ocean.
Iceberg A floating breakaway piece of a glacier.
Incidence angle The angle by which the SAR signal interacts with a surface.
Inductive bias Bias a model has due to its intrinsic structure.
Label data Annotated data that can be used as a target to train a machine learning model.
Large Language Model (LLM) Deep Learning Model trained to analyze and predict text
and/or speech.
Lead A long, narrow opening or crack in the sea ice, exposing open water or thin ice.
Learning rate A scaling factor for the gradient in gradient descent optimization algorithms.
Learning rate scheduling Adaptation of the learning rate throughout the model training.
Linear regression Predicting the optimal linear model that explains some given training
data.
Linear model A mathematical model that assumes a straight-line relationship between
the input variables and the output.
Linear warmup Increasing the learning rate linearly for a fixed number of training steps.
Loss The error function for which one wants to minimize in a machine learning application.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
53
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
Lossiness In the context of dielectrics, it refers to a dielectric’s ability to absorb incoming
radiation.
Machine learning A modeling scheme in which computers learn patterns from data to
make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed for the specific task.
Masked Autoencoder (MAE) An autoencoder framework that is trained by masking out
image patches and tasking the model with their recovery. It is typically used to train foun-
dation models.
Masked image modeling (MIM) The scientific field of training deep learning-based au-
toencoders to predict parts of an image that have been masked.
Matched filter A signal processing technique used to maximize the signal-to-noise ratio
for detecting a known signal in noise.
Maximum likelihood estimation A method to find the parameter values that make the
observed data most probable in a given model.
Memory In deep learning for signal processing, it refers to a model’s ability to utilize data
far displaced in a sequence.
Model calibration Tuning a classification model’s predictions such that its output repre-
sents true probabilities.
Mosaic A prediction of a larger scene created by predicting and tiling smaller subimages.
Multilooking A SAR processing technique that reduces speckle noise by averaging mul-
tiple independent looks of the same area.
Multi-Head Attention A structure for applying multiple layers of scaled dot-product atten-
tion in parallel.
Multi-year ice (MYI) Ice that has survived more than one cycle of melting and refreezing,
in contrast to first-year ice.
Natural language processing (NLP) The scientific field that works with models that an-
alyze and predict data related to text and speech.
Neural network In machine learning, this refers to a model which mixes sequential linear
models with nonlinear activation functions.
Neuron A node in a neural network where the data is combined, weighted, and the acti-
vation function is applied.
Nilas A form of new sea ice that appears as a continuous sheet with a smooth surface.
Nonlinearity Linear nonlinear features applied to a model.
Numerical stability A function’s robustness to finite precision errors stemming from very
large or small numbers occurring, which the computer struggles to handle.
Optical sensors Sensors that operate in optical and near-optical wavelengths.
Optimizer The specific optimization algorithm used when training a model.
Ordinality The degree to which classes have an intrinsic hierarchy they can be sorted
according to.
Ordinary least squares A linear regression method that minimizes the squared residual
error between the model and the data.
54
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Overfitting When a model learns the training data too well, including noise and details
that do not generalize, it leads to poor performance on new data.
Pancake ice And ice type occurring when new ice is formed in rough wave conditions,
where ice clumps together in round ”pancakes” that are rounded by continuous collisions
with other clumps.
Parameter A model variable in a machine learning model that can be tweaked to make
the model fit the training data.
Passive microwave data (PMW data) data from passive microwave radiometers that
monitor Earth’s greybody microwave emissions.
Pixel-wise prediction Modeling schemes where a prediction is assigned to each pixel of
an input image.
PMW radiometer A sensor that monitors Earth’s greybody microwave emissions.
Polarization A property of electromagnetic radiation, which can be both horizontally and
vertically polarized.
Pressure ridge A raised structure in sea ice formed when ice floes collide and compress,
causing ice blocks to pile up above and below the surface.
Pretraining The act of training a foundation model to be used for the final desired task.
Random cropping A data enhancement method in which a random crop of an image is
chosen.
Receptive field In convolutional neural networks, this refers to the furthest pixel that has
an impact on the prediction of targeted pixels.
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) A commonly used activation function that nullifies all neg-
ative values.
Redundancy The presence of repeated or predictable information, such as similar col-
ors, patterns, or structures, which can be compressed or removed without significantly
affecting the data content or quality.
Regression A machine learning task in which a continuous output is predicted.
Residual block A neural network structure in which a residual value is learned and added
to the input of the block.
Remote Sensing The scientific field analyzes remotely sensed data from sensors usually
onboard drones, aircrafts, and satellites.
Scaled dot-product attention A specific attention mechanism used in a transformer
block.
Scattering The process occurs when electromagnetic radiation interacts with a surface
and is scattered in different directions as a result of the properties of the surface.
Sea Ice Frozen ocean water floating atop the ocean.
Sea Ice concentration (SIC) The proportion of a given area of the ocean covered by sea
ice.
Sea Ice Extent The global area covered by sea ice.
Seasonal Ice See first-year ice.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
55
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
Semantic Segmentation A pixel-wise prediction task in which a model is trained to predict
discrete classes for each pixel in an image.
Slant Range The direct range between a SAR sensor and a surface.
Speckle Noise A multiplicative noise type that occurs in SAR images.
Stochastic When something is determined by a random process.
Stochastic Gradient Decent (SGD) An optimization method in which a batch of training
data is used to calculate a loss function gradient that is used to improve the model by
moving in a direction that improves its performance.
Strip-map A simple SAR gathering modus, where only one swath of data is recorded at
a time.
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) A type of high-resolution imaging radar.
Test Set The dataset used to evaluate a model’s performance.
Thermal Microwave Radiation The microwave radiation emitted by any object is accord-
ing to Planck’s law.
Thermal Noise Noise that in SAR occurs due to the random motion of electrons in the
electronic components of the radar system.
Tokens Embedded elements in a transformer-based neural network, which can be related
through the use of attention.
TOPSAR A SAR imaging mode that enhances image quality by using burst-mode scan-
ning and beam steering to reduce distortions and ensure uniform image coverage across
wide swaths.
Training Set The dataset used to train a machine learning model.
Transformer A deep learning framework created for sequential data.
Transformer Encoder Block Deep learning structure consisting of 2 residual blocks con-
taining multi-head attention and a sequenced feedforward network.
UNet A convolutional neural network that employs an encoder/decoder structure and skip
connections to learn multilevel image features that can be applied in pixel-wise prediction
tasks.
Validation set The dataset used to tune hyperparameters and determine overfitting in
machine learning models.
Vision Transformer (ViT) A transformer-based neural network structure adapted for com-
puter vision tasks.
Weight decay A regularization technique used in some optimizers to achieve better model
performance.
Zarr A file format that excels at separating large arrays of data into subchunks that can
be loaded separately or in parallel.
56
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A. Select patch predictions
APPENDIX1
Select patch predictions
Cape Farewell 22-04-2021
HH
HV
Ice Chart
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Power [dB]
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
S1A Cape Farewell (DMI) 22-04-2021 (Patch)
ViT-S SETR-PuP
100% train data
50% train data
10% train data
1% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
57
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A. Select patch predictions
Foxe Basin 28-07-2021
HH
HV
Ice Chart
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Power [dB]
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
S1B Foxe Basin (CIS) 28-07-2021 (Patch)
ViT-S SETR-PuP
100% train data
50% train data
10% train data
1% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
58
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:73==
Central East 13-05-2021
HH
HV
Ice Chart
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Power [dB]
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
S1B Central East (DMI) 13-05-2021 (Patch)
ViT-S SETR-PuP
100% train data
50% train data
10% train data
1% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
59
==PAGE:74==
Appendix A. Select patch predictions
Mid Arctic 25-08-2021
HH
HV
Ice Chart
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Power [dB]
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
S1B Mid Arctic (CIS) 25-08-2021 (Patch)
ViT-S SETR-PuP
100% train data
50% train data
10% train data
1% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
60
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:75==
Newefoundland and Labrador 29-04-2019
HH
HV
Ice Chart
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Power [dB]
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
S1B Newfoundland/lab. (CIS) 29-04-2019 (Patch)
ViT-S SETR-PuP
100% train data
50% train data
10% train data
1% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
61
==PAGE:76==
Appendix A. Select patch predictions
North West 22-01-2021
HH
HV
Ice Chart
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Power [dB]
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
S1A North West (DMI) 22-01-2021 (Patch)
ViT-S SETR-PuP
100% train data
50% train data
10% train data
1% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
62
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:77==
South East 04-10-2018
HH
HV
Ice Chart
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Power [dB]
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Power [dB]
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
S1B South East (DMI) 04-10-2018 (Patch)
ViT-S SETR-PuP
100% train data
50% train data
10% train data
1% train data
ViT-S SETR-PuP pretrained
ASIPNet
No data
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SIC [%]
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
63
==PAGE:78==
Appendix A. Select patch predictions
64
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:79==
Appendix B. Select mosaic predictions
APPENDIX2
Select mosaic predictions
Cape Farewell 20-05-2021
VSPpretrained appears to perform well compared to others. Many models register a patch
of 100% ice in the southwest. This artifact seems to occur as a result of an image artifact.
This artifact is present in both HH and HV, though most recognizable in HV.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
65
==PAGE:80==
Appendix B. Select mosaic predictions
Central East 31-10-2020
Models generally overestimate SIC and struggle to distinguish patches of ocean from
100% SIC. Some models, especially ASIPNet, mistake a patch of ocean to the south
for 100% SIC. In investigating historical wind maps, strong alongshore winds (∼20 m/s)
going to the south encounter slower westward winds at this point.
66
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:81==
Mid Arctic, 10-10-2020
Segmentation between ocean and ice seems good for most models, although all tend
to overestimate SIC. ASIPNet In particular, they seem to predict too high SIC. Some
patchiness exists for VSP models, probably because the ice types change too gradually
for the models to recognize the change at image scale.
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
67
==PAGE:82==
Appendix B. Select mosaic predictions
Qaanaaq 12-05-2021
Scene is entirely covered with ice, with some slightly lower concentrations in the north-
west. VSP models seem to capture some signs of this lower concentration which ASIPNet
do not. However, the predictions are again patchy, probably because the details for de-
termining the difference in SIC are too subtle to be properly captured at this image scale.
68
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
==PAGE:83==
Foundation Models for Sea Ice
69
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
