==PAGE:1==
Design and Implementation of a
Cloud-Based IoT Security System for
Anomaly Detection in Smart Cities
Master’s Thesis
Authors
Jan Kitanovski - s232649
July 3, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In the rapidly evolving landscape of Smart Cities, the inclusion of IoT devices plays
a crucial role. A large number of diverse IoT devices also means communication occurs
over multiple wireless technologies. Developing a centralized system for threat and anomaly
detection across these networks is essential to ensure security and reliability. Until now,
research has mainly focused on improving machine learning models or targeting specific pro-
tocols rather than addressing multi-protocol, real-world implementations. This thesis presents
a proof of concept system that captures, processes and analyses streams of data from WiFi,
Bluetooth and Zigbee in order to identify potential threats. The main findings show that the
system achieved high accuracy in detecting anomalies on WiFi, proving the effectiveness of
the complete data processing chain. Detection for Bluetooth was inconsistent in real-world
tests despite the development of custom parsing tools. Zigbee posed the greatest challenge
due to the lack of decrypted data, which prevented a full evaluation of the system for this
protocol.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
List of Figures
iii
List of Tables
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Statement
3
3
State Of The Art
4
4
Proposal on Tackling the Problem
7
5
Technologies in Use
9
5.1
Raspberry Pi
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.2
MQTT - Message Queuing Telemetry Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3
Wireless Technologies in Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3.1
802.11 standard - WiFi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3.2
Zigbee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.3.3
Bluetooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.4
Machine Learning Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.4.1
Datasets used for training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.4.2
RNN - Recurrent Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.4.3
CNN - Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.4.4
Transformer Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4.5
Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.4.6
Discussion on Parameter Values Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.5
Docker and Containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.6
Technologies Used for Testing and Attack Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Bringing it All Together
24
6.1
Packet Capture Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.1.1
Wifi
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.2
Bluetooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.3
Zigbee and the firmware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2
Datasets, data handling, feature extraction and machine learning algorithms
33
6.2.1
WiFi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
i
==PAGE:4==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
6.2.2
Bluetooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.3
Zigbee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Evaluation of Our Models Against Existing Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.5
Testing Ground Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.5.1
WiFi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.5.2
Bluetooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7
Testing and Results
46
7.1
WiFi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.1.1
Conducting Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.1.2
Performance of Host Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Bluetooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2.1
Conducting Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2.2
Performance of Host Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.3
Overall Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Future Improvements
53
9
Conclusion
54
Appendix A
61
ii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
4.1
System Design Proposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.1
MQTT Connection [18] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.2
Diagram of a Recurrent Neural Network[36]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
LSTM cell overview[38] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.4
CNN model[39] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5
Transformer Model Architecture[42] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.6
General Structure of an Autoencoder[46] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.7
Comparison of VM and Container System Usage[47] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.1
Automatic saving of .pcap files to the correct folder within the Thesis volume
25
6.2
No decryption - we can see only OSI layer 2 Frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
With decryption - we are able to see OSI layer 3 and 4 . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.4
WiFi flows - from capture to threat analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.5
Bluetooth capture using HCIdump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.6
Bluetooth flows - from capture to threat analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.7
Flashing of new firmware onto the CC2531 module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.8
Zigbee packet processed with Scapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.9
RNN with Autoencoder performance on 100 epochs and λ = 0.001 . . . . . .
39
6.10 CNN with Autoencoder performance on 50 epochs and λ = 0.001
. . . . . .
40
6.11 RNN and CNN training performance on pre-existing dataset . . . . . . . . .
41
6.12 User Interface showing WiFi detection results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.13 WiFi Testing Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.14 Bluetooth Testing Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.1
Processing Times for File Pre-Processing and Machine Learning for WiFi . .
48
7.2
Processing Times for File Pre-Processing and Machine Learning for Bluetooth
49
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of Tables
6.1
RNN setup 2 - Performance Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Transformer Neural Network setup - Performance Summary
. . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
CNN Model Performance Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.1
Comparison of WiFi model performance on different network traffic test cases
47
7.2
Comparison of Bluetooth model performance on different network traffic test
cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
iv
==PAGE:7==
1.
Introduction
In today’s fast-paced and interconnected world, the number of connected devices is
growing almost exponentially. A sector, having a big momentum, is the Internet of Things
(IoT), which is projected to reach 21.5 billion connected devices by the end of 2025. Looking
ahead, the global IoT ecosystem is expected to almost double, with forecasts anticipating
over 40 billion connected devices by 2030[1]. With the large number of IoT devices, different
protocols are being developed in order to connect them. By this we do not mean messaging or
application level protocols, but rather wireless technologies, such as WiFi, Bluetooth, Lora,
5G and many others, which enable the devices to communicate. As IoT continues to develop,
we can already see the growing implementation of these technologies in Smart Cities. Smart
Cities are urban developments, which aim to incorporate advanced technologies, such as IoT,
intelligent infrastructure, in order to optimize resource management, improve public services
and all together improve the quality of life in the cities. As the cities grow more complex
and thousands upon thousands of new devices are joining the various wireless communica-
tion networks, they can also become increasingly vulnerable to security threats. Despite the
benefits of IoT devices used in these settlements, many lack, due to their processing power,
limited memory and low energy, strong security mechanisms. In addition to this, the numer-
ous communication technologies like WiFi, Bluetooth and Zigbee, which by design are very
different from each other, introduce a problem when designing a unified security framework.
Security breaches in Smart Cities can lead to severe consequences, ranging from data theft
and surveillance to critical infrastructure disruption. Because of this, we have decided to
undertake the project of designing a threat detection system that allows users to effectively
monitor the traffic flowing through devices using the aforementioned technologies, giving
them insight into whether the communication is benign or potentially malicious. This thesis
focuses on the design and implementation of a cloud-based anomaly detection system aimed
at improving the security of IoT in smart cities. For the scope of this research, we concen-
trate exclusively on these three protocols, excluding others such as LoRa, 5G, or NFC. By
using machine learning techniques, it analyses the traffic and provides meaningful insight.
This thesis is organized into several chapters, each focusing on a key aspect of the
research.
We will first begin with the problem statement, explaining what the security
issues of IoT are and the threats that it faces.
We will then continue with a review of
already existing solutions, presenting research done in this field, helping us understand what
approaches have already been explored, and what results were achieved, showing both their
strengths and limitations. With this in mind we will present our proposed solution, as to how
we wish to tackle the issue, mentioning which technologies we will use, as well as how they
1
==PAGE:8==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
will be interconnected. A more in depth overview of the technologies will follow, detailing
their functionalities, advantages, and an explanation of why they have been chosen. Chapter
six, for this project perhaps the most important one, is going to describe our system building
process, issues that we have encountered, thoughts and ideas that we had on how we wish to
solve problems, as well as the practical steps taken to implement and test our solution. In
this section, we also present the training results of our machine learning models and explain
how the real-world testing environment is set up. This is followed by the real world testing
phase and a discussion of the results. Chapter Eight outlines potential improvements to our
system and how they could be integrated. Finally, we conclude with reflections and final
thoughts on the project.
Page 2 of 62
==PAGE:9==
2.
Problem Statement
As IoT continues to grow and integrate a wide variety of devices and communication pro-
tocols, maintaining clear visibility into the security status of these systems becomes increas-
ingly difficult. Real-time detection of malicious activity across such a distributed and diverse
network presents a significant challenge. Many IoT devices are inherently low power and
resource constrained, making them unsuitable for running traditional, computation heavy
security mechanisms. In addition to this; as much as the different communication protocols
allow the ease of use of IoT devices in different setup scenarios, they also present multiple
attack entry points, which would need to be monitored. Explained in depth by research[2],
several challenges further complicate the security of IoT systems. These challenges range
from economic and organizational pressures that can lead to rushed products, to unrealistic
end-user expectations, as well as infrastructural issues like difficult device access and limited
update capabilities.
A great example of failed security, or better said failed detection of nefarious connections,
emerged in 2016 in the form of the largest DDoS attack of its kind: the Mirai[3] attack. The
perpetrators’ preparation step included gaining access to IoT devices, which had virtually no
security (weak or default credentials). After compromising hundreds of thousands of these
devices, they orchestrated a massive, synchronized attack on a major DNS provider. At
its peak the attack generated 1.2 terabits per second of traffic, causing disruptions in the
operations of the DNS provider. Another example of such malicious doing was uncovered
in 2018, where it was discovered, that through installation of a small piece of software, the
firmware of network devices could be altered and routers would allow access to sensitive
personal data, enable remote control by attackers, and even manipulate network traffic
without the user’s knowledge, putting the entire smart home ecosystem at risk. The attack
was more widely known as VPNfilter[4].
Given the scale and impact of these attacks, it becomes clear that there is a crucial
need to develop a system that allows for the constant monitoring of network traffic in IoT
environments. This should not be limited to traditional IP-based traffic, as many IoT de-
vices communicate using alternative protocols such as Bluetooth, Zigbee, LoRa, or Sigfox.
These communication methods are often overlooked by standard intrusion detection sys-
tems, leaving significant blind spots in the overall security architecture. What is needed is
a unified system that can monitor traffic across all these different communication methods
in real time. By forwarding this traffic to a central backend for analysis, the system should
provide a complete view of the network and help identify suspicious or unexpected behavior,
regardless of how the devices are communicating.
3
==PAGE:10==
3.
State Of The Art
In this section we will take a look at existing research done in the field of Network
Intrusion Detection System and prevention for IoT networks. This will also entail how they
are built, their features, which protocols do they focus on, as well as the main findings. By
understanding this research, it is then important to see what the improvements might be,
or better said, what ways of tackling the issue have not yet been well documented.
Network Intrusion Detection System for IoT Networks
The first paper we have looked at by Alrashdi et. al. [5] focuses on the development
of an AD-IoT (Anomaly Detection Internet of Things) system, where they point out the
main challenges of such a system to be zero day attacks, detecting cyber attacks without
the need of going into the packet content itself, and the development of such a system in
the so called fog architecture (a decentralized model, where some processing is done closer
to the end nodes instead of just relying on the cloud back-end). They also show that the
majority of currently available IDS (Intrusion Detection Systems) are not designed or rather
optimised for IoT applications - this is where they propose their own solution of an IDS that
would help in this realm. The paper mainly focuses on the challenges of "normal" IP type of
communication (where one of the most prevalent threats is for the IoT devices connecting to
different routers in a smart city), and do not go deeper into analysis of other communication
protocols. In their research they have created a simulation, with the use of different machine
learning ensemble methods such as Random Forrest and Extra Tree, where the dataset for
training the models was the UNSW-NB15 dataset. The results have shown that with their
model, precision for normal traffic is very high (0.99), and that the recall for attacks shows
similar values - that of 0.97, however the lower precision for attack detection, shows that
there might still be some false positives.
Design of Threat Detection Model for IoT-Enabled Smart Environment
Similarly to the first paper, the second one by Mittal et. al. [6] is also focusing on a
threat detection model with the use of the DS2OS dataset. They propose the use of ensemble
methods - by combining the performance of multiple techniques, such as SVM (Support Vec-
tor Machine), Decision Tree, Random Forrest Tree and XGBT (Extreme Gradient Boosting).
Trained on the beforementioned dataset the goal was to use communication traces between
the different network nodes in IoT to determine possible attacks. Their results show, that
the proposed model with the Voting Classifier outperforms all other single machine learning
4
==PAGE:11==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
techniques in terms of precision, recall and accuracy, whilst achieving the values of 99.1%,
99% and 99% respectively. Their research does not go deeper into the practical implemen-
tation of the proposed model, but relies solely on the processed simulation.
IoT based Smart Access Controlled Secure Smart City Architecture Using Blockchain
A different approach to the IoT security question was taken by Rourab et. al. [7]. In
their research the main focus lies in the issue of SSL/TLS encryption standards that requires
high memory and processing power, which is for low power devices such IoT not suitable.
In their paper they so propose the use of Blockchain as the top layer for packet confirmation
between devices (and the use of so called Smart Contracts as a means of Verification).
For easier data processing they have so introduced also a lightweight hashing technique.
Since Blockchain is based on the confirmation of the data blocks it might happen that
some devices be "out of sync". With their approach they introduced a variable delay timer
that is appropriated for different types of devices. Their system relied on a central block
manager, which has overseen the entire networks’ transactions and data flow. For securing
new connections into the network (adding of new devices) an implementation of key exchange
had to be done between the management node and the newly added device. This was done
with the use of the Diffie-Hellman process of key exchange. The key conclusion of their
research was that the system scheme they proposed would prevent different types of attacks,
such as the injection attack, appending attack, DoS and DDos in local and canopy networks.
Review of IoT-enabled Smart Cities:
Cybersecurity Threat Detection Using
Cloud Computing
In this paper, the authors focused on the more broad question of security in Smart
Cities[8] and how it can affect the QoL (Quality of Life) within these cities. The authors of
this paper did so not go into great technical solutions of how to undergo threat detection,
but rather give an in depth look at what are the major attack vectors on the most popular
trasmission protocols, such as Bluetooth, WiMAX, WiFi,... and into what security category
they fit (Authentication, Confidentiality, Integrity and Privacy)[9].
Cyber Attack Detection in IoT Networks with Small Samples: Implementation
And Analysis
The thematic of this research paper by Kanthuru et. al.[10] was the focus on building a
practical implementation of a system that would allow to capture ZigBee data in an already
existing deployment, capture the available markers of the packets of communication, and
with the use of machine learning algorithms determine the state of operation - namely is
it operating normally or is it a subject of an ongoing attack. For the implementation the
researchers used Raspberry Pi computers with additional XBee modules for them to allow
the ZigBee network. The main attack vectors researched here were the redirection of traffic
towards a different node in the network (potentially a type of DoS attack) and a redirection
of packets towards an invalid address (named Black Hole attack by the authors). For train-
ing their models they have first used their own network to log the packets/data and conduct
Page 5 of 62
==PAGE:12==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
their own attack on that same network. As they wished to extend the capabilities and "accu-
racy/test" of the NIDS system, they have added some data from the IoT-23 dataset[11]. The
key findings of their paper are the performance of their triplet network-CNN (Convolutional
Neural Network) for accuracy and F1 score (trained on IoT23) were around 91.4% and 92%,
while their triplet network DNN (Dense Neural Network) showed values of 95.69% and 96%
respectively.
FlowSpotter: Intelligent IoT threat detection via imaging network flows
An interesting approach was done by the authors of the paper[12]. In their research they
have proposed a system that would encompass multiple technologies for threat detection in
IP networks from a standalone low power device in a network, such as a raspberry pi -
first the proposed a flow screening programe, that would analyze the packets in a time
series approach, dividing the traffic into three groups: normal flows, malware delivery and
telnet penetration. Then they would use the data for the NIDS system, where they have
incorporated off the shelf CNNs such as MobileNET, SqueezeNET and ShuffleNET. They
have also proposed the incorporation of a IOT Honeypot, which would keep track of all the
attacks and then use the gathered data to further train the NIDS.
Intrusion Detection System for Bluetooth Mesh Networks: Data Gathering and
Experimental Evaluations
This paper has mainly focused on the Bluetooth Low Energy technology and its secu-
rity[13]. The authors have stated that although BLE has some standard encryption tech-
niques, there are also a lot of possible attack vectors that cannot be greately detected due to
the missing of extensive datasets available. They have proposed the use of ESP32 modules
to build a simple network consisting of 13 nodes, where they would be split into Server,
Client and Relay modes, where one Relay would also operate in malicious mode. With a
setup like this they were able to create their own dataset, consisting of both normal and
malicious operation. Based on that they have created their own NIDS, allowing them to
detect anomalies with strong accuracy.
Towards Efficient Network Traffic Classifications via Multi-modal Learning
A new, not yet fully published paper by Liyuan Chang and Bin Cao[14] discusses the use
of deep learning classification methods, as a way of determining what type of traffic is flowing
through the IP-based network. The classes are not only benign and malicious, but rather
giving a deeper understanding, with the inclusion of attack types. A threat detection model
is proposed, tested on the CICIoT23, CICIoMT2024 datasets, using attention mechanisms
for data relation, as well as a so called feature fusion with the connection to cross-attention
modules. Their evaluation metrics are based on accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score.
Their results show an accuracy, precision and F1 score of 80%, recall score of 85%, with
the use of the CICIoMT2024 datasets and a 6 class setup, tested against logreg, perceptron,
adaboost, MLP. The setup is also tested with variations in class numbers, as well as with
different datasets, showing the model outperformed others included in research.
Page 6 of 62
==PAGE:13==
4.
Proposal on Tackling the Problem
This section is dedicated to the explainaition and in-depth process preparation as to how
we wish to tackle the aforementioned problem with IoT network security. We will present the
technologies that we plan on using, the connections between them, and the logical topology
of file processing - from capturing to final anomaly detection. For such a system we have
decided to capture data on the front end and send them to a cloud based solution simulation
for processing. The description will follow the data capture stream.
First let us start by introducing what the focus of this assignment will be. Since focusing
on all the wireless technologies that can be used by IoT would be an impossible task, we
have chosen too focus on the three more common ones - namely WiFi, Bluetooth and Zigbee.
These have been chosen as they are part of many home automation systems, as well as being
supported by numerous commercially available devices, due to their balance of cost, power
consumption and data transmission capabilities.
To capture the traffic on these devices we also need a simple and cheap device, which
will be able to capture the data from all three sources. A great example for such device
would be a Raspberry Pi 4 or 5 module, as they are relatively compute powerful, meaning
that any capture or processing done on them would not crash the system. Since the module
only supports monitoring mode for Bluetooth, Wifi and Zigbee need additional adapters,
namely the DWA-171 WiFi module and the CC2531 Zigbee module. The idea behind this
part being that all the capture would be saved in separate .pcap files, which are then sent
to the back-end, read and processed into more comprehensive data.
The next step in the system would be the connection of the "sniffing" section to the
back end. The plan here would include the setup of a Message Queuing Telemetry Trans-
port(MQTT) brokerage system, where each wireless protocol would be sent to its own topic.
Since the RPi would have the wireless dongle in constant use, as well as for network stability,
the wired connection would be used for sending this data to the backend.
On the other end of the MQTT broker we would like to simulate a cloud environment,
through the use of Docker containerization. Initially we would separate the receiving of
the packets by using three separate containers just for capturing the data and saving it
into storage. Another three containers would be used for pre-processing the received data
into forms, that would be easier to use with machine learning algorithms. This step would
also include removing any duplicate packets, removing redundancy within the data, as well
as keeping track which packets have been processed and which did not, as a continuously
running script on the same packets would not be power efficient.
After the data has been preprocessed our plan is to setup additional three containers,
7
==PAGE:14==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
one for each protocol, where each container would contain machine learning models for threat
analysis. The models that we would use for this task are Recurrent Neural Networks(RNN),
Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN), and Transformer Networks.
All three have been
chosen as they do offer support for time series analysis. The models would be trained on
publicly available datasets, as well as datasets that we would produce, by saving the captured
packets in the previous steps. The idea here is to train all models on both benign as well
as malicious data and create a classification system, where in the end, the results from the
models would be put through an ensemble container, which would initiate a majority voting
on the final result.
Figure 4.1: System Design Proposition
After the system will be merged and everything would be connected as intended, we
will need to test it against real world scenarios. For this part we will try to conduct simple
attacks on each of the protocols, in order to observe how the system will react, and if it
will shows signs of attack detection. For this part, we could use a few different approaches,
but perhaps the more interesting ones would include hardware such as Flipper or similar,
and software tools such as Scapy to conduct those attacks against the networks. Each test
will also need to well documented, where will save all the logs from the various parts of the
process.
Page 8 of 62
==PAGE:15==
5.
Technologies in Use
Following the introduction, state of the art review and the proposal of how we wish to
tackle the problem, we will continue with the description of the technologies that will be
used in the proposed solution. We will describe both, hardware as well as software, how
they work, where they are used. When describing wireless protocols, we will also present the
potential attack vectors on them, as well as other tools that help us extract data from the
communication. Machine learning models will include a brief structure explainaition behind
their working. The effectiveness and performance of the technologies listed and explained
below will be seen and presented in later chapters, especially in 6.
5.1
Raspberry Pi
Our main capturing device, the Raspberry Pi is a low power computer[15], [16], that is
mainly used for smaller non-compute heavy tasks and projects, where low power consumption
is the main factor. Despite this, the devices (we will be using RPi 4 and 5), are able to
run light versions of Linux Distros, such as the Debian for Raspberry distro (Raspbian).
The devices offer also great connectivity, with USB 2.0/3.0 and an RJ45 connector, which
can be of great use for our system design (connecting the RPi to the back-end via high
bandwidth connection and using SSH for securely deploying new code and managing the
device remotely). GPIO connection pins are also an important feature, as we will see in the
upcoming sections - they will be used as a way to load firmware onto different modules. The
models that we use are equipped with 1, 2 and 8GB of RAM, and also offer much needed
processing power for capturing and attack simulation with the Cortex A72/A76 processors
on board. One of the key reasons for choosing Raspberry Pi is its compatibility with a wide
range of Linux-based tools and scripting capabilities. This enables us to install and run
various network monitoring and packet analysis tools5.6 such as tcpdump, Wireshark, and
aircrack−ng. These tools will show as essential in our building stages, as file pre-processing
without them would be very difficult. The compact form factor and low power requirements
of the Raspberry Pi also make it a strong candidate for potential implementation in smart
city environments. In such a setting, it can be used to collect data for further offline analysis,
while remaining unobtrusive and cost efficient in a large deployment.
9
==PAGE:16==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
5.2
MQTT - Message Queuing Telemetry Transport
When connecting our capturing device to the back end, we need a technology that
would allow seamless and lightweight integration, as well as offering separation based on the
context of the data that we are sending. For this we are using MQTT[17], a protocol that
was developed by IBM as a machine to machine communication protocol in 1999. It operates
in a publish/subscribe model, where the client publishes the data or messages to the pre-
selected topics and subscribes to the topics of interest. A central MQTT broker receives and
published the messages, while at the same time also manages all the incoming and outgoing
connections. A key thing to point out here is that the broker does not retain the messages
in long term storage (it can for some time, depending on the QoS setup), meaning that the
subscriber and publisher are to be connected at times when data transfer needs to be done.
This is of course an easier task if the publisher is a sensor or similar, which sends data to
the broker in intervals, meaning that it does not need to be always connected. Below we can
see a visual representation:
Figure 5.1: MQTT Connection [18]
5.3
Wireless Technologies in Question
5.3.1
802.11 standard - WiFi
In this chapter we will look at the 802.11 IEEE[19], [20] standard or for us better known
as WiFi. Early standards like 802.11b (1999) supported the 2.4 GHz band with transfer
speeds up to 11 Mbps, while 802.11a introduced the 5 GHz band with speeds up to 54 Mbps.
Later standards such as 802.11g merged these bands, offering 54 Mbps on both 2.4 GHz
and 5 GHz frequencies. Advances continued with 802.11n and 802.11ac, which introduced
technologies like multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO), pushing speeds into the hundreds
of Mbps on 2.4 GHz and up to 1 Gbps on 5 GHz. The latest standards, 802.11ax (WiFi 6) and
WiFi 6E (adding the 6 GHz band), focus on improving efficiency and handling high-density
device environments while maintaining high throughput. Alongside improvements in speed
and efficiency, the 802.11 standard also evolved in the realms of secure communication. Early
implementation were introduced with the Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), which aimed
Page 10 of 62
==PAGE:17==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
to provide confidentiality through the use of 64 and up to 256-bit RC4 stream encryption
keys, and integrated a 32-bit Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) for data integrity. Due to
major vulnerabilities with such approach, it has been quickly discontinued and replaced by
the WiFi Protected Access (WPA), whose modern iterations are still in use today. WPA
improved security by implementing the Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP). WPA
comes in two main variants: WPA-Personal and WPA-Enterprise. WPA-Personal uses a pre-
shared key (PSK) for all devices on the network, relying on a shared secret to authenticate
clients, which is effective for smaller and trusted environments but vulnerable if the key
is compromised. WPA-Enterprise, on the other hand, uses the Extensible Authentication
Protocol (EAP) framework and requires a dedicated authentication server to dynamically
generate unique credentials per client. WPA2, similar to WPA-Personal, relies on a single
pre-shared key (PSK) that is shared among all devices on the network, which means every
device uses the same encryption key, while WPA3 introduces individual encryption keys for
each device. WiFi’s presence extends beyond home and office networking. It’s applications
range from connecting smart home devices into a network, making video and audio calls
over the internet, support of public hotspots such as cafes and airports. It also supports the
creation of personal hotspots.
Hardware used
For capturing WiFi data, as well as to connect the device to the network, we will be
using the RPi onboard adapter, part of the System on a Chip (SoC). It support the 802.11ac
standard, meaning being able to connect on both bands - the 2.4GHz, as well as the 5GHz.
As the drivers/firmware that the device comes with do not natively support monitoring
mode, or they do in a limiting fashion, and since we do not wish to alter the firmware of
the device, additional hardware is needed. In this project we will so use both the D-link
DWA-131 and the D-link DWA-171 USB WiFi adapters for testing. The first gives us access
to the lower 2.4GHz band, while the latter offers support for both aforementioned bands.
Another feature, by which we have chosen these devices, is the out-of-the-box monitoring
mode support, without the need of additional driver installation. Connecting all the devices
together, we will be using the TP-Link TL-WR841N router, which supports traffic over the
2.4GHz band, in accordance with the 802.11n standard. RJ45 connections can also be made,
allowing us to control the devices by "cable" instead of interfering on the Wireless interface.
Attacks on WiFi
As WiFi is a crucial technology that is a part of our lives, there have been developed a
plethora of attacks on this technology. We will now present a handful of potential attacks
vectors[21]–[24], and what their characteristics are. Note, that the attacks described here
will not be used in a 1 to 1 copy in our practical implementation, where we will make use of
additional attacks as well. It is also important to point out that the number of known attacks
is increasing each day, caused by new found vulnerabilities, evolving attack techniques, and
even changes introduced by firmware updates or new features in setups.
The first common attack vector is known as eavesdropping, or more commonly, a sniffing
Page 11 of 62
==PAGE:18==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
attack. In this type of attack, the perpetrator actively monitors network traffic and saves
the captured data to their own machine. While most home networks are encrypted and
protected with a password (although password cracking is still possible), a common entry
point for such attacks is public WiFi hotspots. These networks typically offer little to no
encryption on a per-device basis, making it easy for an attacker to capture unencrypted data
using tools such as Wireshark or Aircrack-ng.
Another attack that we can come by is the so-called Evil Twin attack. Such attack
encompasses the attacked to setup a rogue WiFi access point that impersonates a legitimate
one, by using the same SSID. Devices, such as phones and computers can then use their
"feature" to automatically connect to known networks, causing that they unknowingly con-
nect the fake access point. The idea behind this type of attack is that the data is still being
forwarded normally, however the attacker now has full overview of the traffic and settings of
the network.
Zeek
Zeek[25] is a open source network analysis tool, that will allow us to generate files
containing flows between the devices, focusing mostly on ISO/OSI layers 3 and 4. With
the flags option enabled, it provides detailed insights into the connection status, packet
types, sizes, sequences, and much more. Unlike tools such as Wireshark, which focus on
packet level capture and inspection, Zeek processes network traffic into structured, more
easily readable logs. It can also perform real time analysis, while automatically flagging
anomalies or unexpected behavior - such as suspicious activity into files like weird.log for
further investigation. In our project we will mainly focus on the conn.log files, which include
flow metadata, and can be easily parsed into the implementation of a anomaly detection
machine learning model.
5.3.2
Zigbee
Zigbee is a low power wireless technology designed to connect devices of the IoT ap-
plications. It is based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard and operates with a mesh or similar
network layout. This means that all devices are able to communicate with each other, re-
laying data between them if needed. Zigbee[26] operates in the 2.4GHz range, however it
can also make use of different sub-GHz bands, depending on the location, for example in
Europe at 868MHz. Since it is designed to be power efficient, the maximum transfer rate is
said to be up to 250kbps, and the signal range approximately 10 to 100m. Around the year
2016, the Zigbee Alliance introduced the Zigbee 3.0, which aimed to unify the previously
fragmented application profiles into a single standard. Zigbee also incorporates 128bit AES
encryption, which provides for the protocol simplicity an adequate layer of security.
Zigbee’s wide range of applications[27] range from home automation and control, Fit-
ness monitoring, commercial and utility networks, Patient monitoring, industrial processes
monitoring, building automation...
Page 12 of 62
==PAGE:19==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Hardware used
Since the hardware from RPi and similar does not support the Zigbee protocol, we will
be using other off-the-shelf components. First, for listening into the connections we will be
using the CC2531 USB dongle from Texas Instruments (TI), which is Zigbee enabled, and
at the same time allows us to flash custom firmware onto it. Besides that, it gives us the
possibility to use it with software provided by TI, as well as the option to communicate with
it with a simple serial connection. The second piece of hardware that we will use for testing
purposes is a Sonoff sensor kit, consisting of three SNZB-02D temperature and humidity
sensors, as well as one ZB Bridge-P gateway, with support for mobile app connection.
Attacks on Zigbee
Zigbee, a low power, low compute intense protocol is also susceptible to a number of
different attack vectors. One notable threat is the mimicry attack[28], where an attacker
impersonates a legitimate device by spoofing its MAC address and identity credentials during
access attempts. With it, the attacker can then exploit this weakness to deceive a ZigBee
coordinator into accepting malicious traffic.
Once the attacker successfully assumes the
identity of a trusted node, they can inject unauthorized commands, intercept sensitive data,
or disrupt normal communication within the network. In practice, this means the attacker
could, for instance, send fake control messages to IoT devices like smart lights or locks,
potentially altering their state without detection. Another attack vector (similar to WiFi and
Bluetooth) is the DDoS[29]. In this scenario, a large number of malicious devices flood the
ZigBee network with protocol compliant but functionally disruptive messages, overwhelming
the coordinator and making legitimate communication impossible. The attack manipulates
features of the ZigBee stack to exhaust memory and processing resources, thus degrading
network performance.
5.3.3
Bluetooth
The third wireless technology that we will use as a part of our project will be Blue-
tooth[30]. Early implementations (1994), were developed to operate in the same frequency
range of 2.4GHz, with chanels being spaced at 1MHz intervals. As the spectrum in this range
was already used by other devices, an implementation of channel hopping was implemented,
in hopes of reducing the interference by those devices. Throughout the years, Bluetooth
has received numerous updates to the protocol, receiving an Enchanced Data Rate (EDR)
version(2004), which instead of focusing on Frequency Shift Keying (FSK), used different
types of Phase Shift Keying (PSK). Later iterations also added support for high speed data
transfer, as well as a Low Energy version (BLE), which today is mainly used by smaller
personal devices such as smart watches, or sensor installations. Bluetooth security[31], [32]
has also improved with each new iteration of the protocol. Earlier versions relied on PIN
Pairing, where the same PIN was needed to be entered on both devices. With Bluetooth 2.1
Secure Simple Pairing (SSP) was introduced, which has greatly simplified the pairing pro-
cess, as well as made use of four different association models (Numeric Comparison, Passkey
Page 13 of 62
==PAGE:20==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Entry, Just Works and Out of Band). Bluetooth 3.0 introduced AMP link key derivation to
secure high speed data transfers over alternate transports like WiFi, thus enhancing perfor-
mance. Bluetooth 4.0 added AES-CCM encryption and support for Bluetooth Low Energy
(LE), which was later strengthened in version 4.2 with LE Secure Connections using FIPS-
approved algorithms like AES-CMAC. With the latest Bluetooth 5.0 and 6.0 specifications,
BLE now supports extended and isochronous advertising across all 40 channels, enabling
more efficient data transmission, lower latency, and synchronized audio streaming.
Bluetooth’s usecases nowadays are practically unlimited. As it has a lower data rate
than WiFi for example, it is usually used with wireless headphones, device to device file
sending, smart devices, proximity based access control, such as the ability to unlock doors,
start cars or indoor positioning.
The usecases listed of course contain a combination of
Bluetooth Classic and BLE.
Hardware used
When using Bluetooth for this project, we will be relying solely on the built in adapter
on the various RPi modules. This also means that we are able to use monitoring mode and
capture without the installation of any additional drivers.
Attacks on Bluetooth
Similar to WiFi, there are also a numerous amount of attack vectors[30] on this protocol.
PIN cracking focuses on the pairing process of the devices, where the attacker eavesdrops the
process in order to obtain the exchanged messages. Since the PIN can be up to 8 bytes in
length, it is feasible to brute force it. During eavesdropping, the MAC address of the device
can also be obtained. Using the MAC address and a guessed 128 bit number, the attacker
can derive the initialization key. With this key and the intercepted data, the shared session
link key can be computed. Once the PIN and session key are recovered, the attacker can
impersonate a trusted device and gain unauthorized access. Another significant attack vector
is the Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attack. In this scenario, an attacker leverages previously
gained trust to intercept and manipulate communications between two legitimate devices.
By positioning themselves between the devices, the attacker can continuously monitor data
exchanges, and even inject or alter messages to impersonate either party. This can have
severe consequences: for instance, if the attacker intercepts communications with a Bluetooth
enabled smart lock, they could potentially unlock it remotely without the owner’s knowledge,
posing a serious security risk.
5.4
Machine Learning Techniques
In this section, we will explore the machine learning techniques that are applied through-
out this project. We will discuss how each technique works, including the underlying mathe-
matical principles. We will then highlight the areas where these techniques are most effective
and provide insight into how they contribute to solving the problem at hand.
Page 14 of 62
==PAGE:21==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
5.4.1
Datasets used for training
One of the most important parts of the back-end section (potentially cloud processing)
of the system was based on the use of datasets, that provide the capture of normal wireless
traffic, as well as malicious wireless network traffic, which has been saved into .pcap files.
After some research we have found a few publicly available datasets that seem to provide good
captures of different types of wireless technology traffic, as well as different attacks vectors
on these technologies. The datasets were sourced through research done in Universities and
other institutions, and do not include data from illegally obtained sources. The first two
sets named the IOT-23 dataset and the CTU-13 dataset [33] have been developed within
the Stratosphere Project at the CTU University in Prague in collaboration with the Avast
AIC laboratory. Together, the sets contain around 115GB of different capture scenarios,
as well as full labeled data in a few of the scenarios. The datasets also include captured
data for different IOT hardware solutions, such as Philips Hue and Amazon Echo. Another
dataset has been chosen for this project, namely the TON-IoT [34], a successor to the
well known UNSW-NB15 Dataset - which was partly included, both constructed by the
Intelligent Security Group at UNSW Canberra, Australia. It was chosen as it also includes
some normal traffic data, which will help to train our models on more equally distributed
dataset (between benign and malicious, despite malicious parts contain multiples of packet
numbers from benign parts - due to attacks such as DDOS). We will focus mainly on the
already pre-processed .pcap files saved as conn.log files, which have been produced by the
Zeek5.3.1 tool. Searching for datasets that would include Bluetooth traffic capture on a
decrypted packet level was seen as difficult, as we did not find any datasets that would match
our requirements. The requirements of course being that the dataset has been developed by
a reputable source or an institution. This meant that our own dataset had to be developed,
through the capture of benign bluetooth data. This was done in the same setup as in the final
testing stage6.5. For Zigbee, we also observed a lack of large public datasets. However, we
were able to find the ZBDS2023[35] dataset from the Centre de Recherche en Informatique,
Signal et Automatique de Lille (CRIStAL) in France. It consists of 1.2 GB of raw PCAP
files collected over a 10 day period in a smart home environment.
5.4.2
RNN - Recurrent Neural Network
The first Machine Learning model that we will take a look at is the Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN)[36]–[38]. Traditional neural networks work with fixed size input data in no
particular order between the features. Since many real world applications involve the use of
sequential data, as is where the sequence of input parameters matters, as in example a time
series analysis or text, a different type of network is needed to be built. RNNs solve this
issue by being designed specifically for processing sequences, as it reads data in a sequential
manner. The input vectors are so of fixed length, while the sequence length is variable. For
easier explainaition let us take a look at the following equation of the hidden state:
ht = func(Wxh · xt + Whh · ht−1 + bh)
(5.1)
Page 15 of 62
==PAGE:22==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Where ht represents the hidden state at time t, func represents the activation function, such
as tanh, ReLU, Sigmoid, which introduce non-linearity into the system, Wxh weights from
the input to the hidden state, xt input at the input time t, Whh weights from the previous
hidden state to the current hidden state, ht−1 the time step and bh the bias for the current
hidden state. From this we see that the current state is not only dependent on the input,
but also from all other previous states. This operation could also be explained as some sort
of "memory".
Figure 5.2: Diagram of a Recurrent Neural Network[36]
They are typically trained using Backpropagation Through Time, which adapts the
weights based on errors accumulated across the sequence. Implementations with Forward
Propagation as well as Bidirectional Propagation are also possible, however for these, the
whole sequence needs to be known in advance. RNNs support various input-output formats:
one-to-one (classification), one-to-many (captioning), many-to-one (sentiment analysis), and
many-to-many, either aligned (tagging) or unaligned (translation). RNNs are also widely
supported in modern deep learning frameworks like PyTorch and TensorFlow - which we will
use for this project, where their sequential structure and training efficiently implemented.
This model was chosen as it represents an entry point into model development when it comes
to Sequential data analysis, and through research we have discovered that its applications
could cover the basis of our anomaly detection needs.
Diminishing gradient problem
One of the biggest challenges when training Recurrent Neural Networks is the diminish-
ing gradient problem, also called the vanishing gradient. This issue shows during training,
when the network uses BPTT to update its weights. In BPTT, the error is backpropagated
not just through the layers of the network, but also through every time step in the sequence.
The problem starts when we look at how the gradient is calculated: the further back
in time the network goes, the more times the gradients get multiplied by the same weights
and derivatives over and over again. If these values are small (less than 1), they get smaller
and smaller at each step. Eventually, they shrink so much that they become too small to
make meaningful updates to weights, and the early layers stop learning anything at all. This
shrinking of the gradient is what can cause the NN to forget earlier parts of the sequence,
even though they might be important. In a practical implementation, this can mean that the
network only "learns" short term dependencies and fails to capture longer sequence patterns,
Page 16 of 62
==PAGE:23==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
which in our case of anomaly detection could be crucial. In a similar way, if the values of
the weights are greater than 1, a so called Exploding Gradient problem could unfold, where
the values exceed all limits. This can cause the model training to be unreliable.
Long Short Term Memory - LSTM
In order to combat the issues laid out before, a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
network has been implemented. It is a special type of RNN designed to address the gradient
problem by introducing a gated architecture that controls the flow of information over time.
These mechanisms can be viewed as specialized neural network layers that enable the model
to selectively forget, ignore, or retain information within the memory cell. The cell acts as a
separate entity alongside the hidden state, regulating information flow during training. This
allows LSTMs to preserve information over longer sequences, which standard RNNs could
not do. Below we can observe a graphical representation of a LSTM cell:
Figure 5.3: LSTM cell overview[38]
Here we see the clear distinction between the different functions inside of the cell: The
forget gate, which removes the information that is no longer needed, producing a binary
output, the input gate, which determines, which new information should be added to the
memory cell and the output gate, which can control, how much of the output of the memory
cell is passed to the hidden state.
5.4.3
CNN - Convolutional Neural Network
The second model that will be used in project is a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN)[39]–[41]. While CNNs are more optimized and widely used in computer vision prob-
lems as well as other image and video processing steps, we have chosen to include this model
in our project. This decision stems from our research interest, where we wanted to include
CNNs as a way to compare their performance against models like the RNN and Transform-
ers, which would for this anomaly detection task be seen as more appropriate. The main
building block of a CNN is a convolutional layer, which applies filters(kernels) to a localized
zone of a 2D represetation of the data. In our case the two dimensions of data would repre-
sent the values of packet features against a sequence of time. The CNN can also involve the
use of multiple different filters on the same 2D plane (in our case, the packet features can be
Page 17 of 62
==PAGE:24==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
treated as a 1D sequence where the convolutional filters can learn local feature correlations),
with which the network can detect different patterns - thus creating different feature maps.
The filters then move across the data in steps, also defined as stride. A stride can be thought
of as a kind of "moving window of focus". It determines how far the window (or filter) shifts
across the input data after each operation. A small stride value means that the window
moves slower and examines the overlapping areas in detail, while a larger value skips more.
At each position, the filter performs a dot product between its weights and the correspond-
ing region of input data, thus producing a single value. These outputs collectively form a
feature map, which represents how strongly the learned pattern (from the filter) appears at
different positions in the input. The generated feature map of the products is processed with
an activation function in order to introduce non-linearity. Since this type of model operation
is seen as compute heavy, additional simplification methods are introduced. As described
before - in the case of an increase in the stride parameter the feature map will be smaller,
and vice versa. A different approach to this is called Pooling, where the feature maps are
further reduced through a separate operation called pooling, this time with a smaller filter
cross section. In this step instead of a product between the filter values and the feature val-
ues, the cross section uses two common approaches for pooling, namely the max pooling and
mean pooling: the first selects the largest value of the region and the latter calculates the
mean of the region. In order to control the spacial dimensions of the feature maps, padding
can be added, as to manually extend them to match others. A graphical representation can
help understanding the working of the model:
Figure 5.4: CNN model[39]
Residual Network
A Residual CNN could be seen as an solution to the previous model, which, when build-
ing a deeper architecture, often struggles with issues such as vanishing gradients, training
instability, and degradation of accuracy, where adding more layers actually leads to worse
performance rather than improvement. It does so, by introducing what is known as a resid-
ual block, where instead of passing information like the standard CNN from one layer to
another, creates a sort of shortcut connection which skips one or more of these layers. This
means that the model is not learning the full transformation of the input, but rather focuses
Page 18 of 62
==PAGE:25==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
on the difference, or residual between the input and the output of the transform.
5.4.4
Transformer Neural Network
The third and for this project last Machine Learning model that will be used is a Trans-
former[42]–[45]. Since their introduction for natural language processing tasks, Transformer
Neural Networks have seen rapid development and adoption; most notably in the rise of
Large Language Models (LLMs) and other intelligent Agents, all largely built on this ar-
chitecture. Due to their sequence modeling capabilities, which allow them to capture both
short and long range dependencies within data, we have decided that they might be a good
fit for our classification anomaly detection problem.
The architecture of the Transformer is based on the encoder-decoder structure. Each
encoder consists of a MultiHead Attention mechanism and a Feed forward type of network.
One of the key advantages in this stage is that the operations are carried out in parallel
across the input sequence, as opposed to models like RNN, where the process is done in a
purely sequential manner, which can lead to longer training times. Each encoder block of the
Transformer also includes what are called residual connections, which allow the output of a
sublayer to be added directly to its input before moving forward. This "skipping" of layers
helps to stabilize training and allows information to flow more freely through the network,
especially in deeper architectures. After these residual connections, a normalization step
is applied to ensure consistent scaling of the outputs across layers. Since the Transformer
model does not rely on recurrence or convolution like previous architectures, it does not have
a built-in sense of sequence or time. This becomes an issue when dealing with ordered input,
such as sequences, where the position of each element carries important information. To
overcome this, the model introduces what is known as positional encoding. This encoding is
calculated with the use of sin and cos sinusoidal functions with varying length wavelengths.
These values are then passed into the attention layers, allowing the model to understand the
position of each element in the sequence.
Figure 5.5: Transformer Model Architecture[42]
Page 19 of 62
==PAGE:26==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Self Attention
An important building block of the Transformer is the Self Attention[42] module. This
function allows the model to take an element from the sequence, and calculate the amount
of attention it should be given. The input is split into queries, keys and values, where the
product between the query and all keys is calculated in order to determine how strongly each
input position should attend to the others. This value is then scaled by the square root of the
key dimension, as a way to prevent extreme values, and passed through a softmax function
to convert them into a set of weights. These attention weights are then used to compute
a weighted sum of the values, meaning that each output is essentially a combination of all
input elements, scaled by how relevant they are to the current position.
Attention(queries, keys, values) = softmax
 queries · keys⊤
√key dimension

· values
(5.2)
5.4.5
Autoencoders
When trying to apply machine learning models with classification in mind to a dataset, it
can occur that we find ourselves with a dataset, that is either heavily imbalanced, or does not
have a representation of other classes in it (in the case of network traffic benign/malicious).
To solve this issue, we will be using Autoencoders[46], as a mean to recognize anomalies.
Autoencoders offer a encoder-decoder structure, where the main objective is to reconstruct
the data with low error rate. A typical architecture of an Autoencoder can be described
in a sense as a hourglass, where the neural network first compresses the input data into a
lower dimensional space, after which, through the bottleneck it tries to reconstruct it from
the compressed form. This bottleneck is crucial, as it forces the network to learn the most
essential features of the input data, stripping away noise or less relevant details. If trained
correctly, the network will be then able to reproduce data that is similar to the original
input, but only if the data matches some sort of structure it has seen before during training.
This concept can be very helpful when detecting outliers, or anomalies within the stream,
as if the model has been trained on one type of data (benign) and different data is passed
through it (malicious), the resulting output will have a large mean squared error rate, which
signifies unusual activity.
Figure 5.6: General Structure of an Autoencoder[46]
5.4.6
Discussion on Parameter Values Used
During training of the above mentioned machine learning models, we will need to apply
different parameters to them, so that the training and test results meet the objectives of
Page 20 of 62
==PAGE:27==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
our implementation. Since an option to find the best performing combination of parameters
would take weeks if not months, where different complexities of the models would be tested
(different number of layers, hidden states, activation functions, dropout layers...), we will for
this project mainly rely on three main ideas. The first being the constraints of our testing
environment(computer), where the training time for a model should not exceed one hour,
and the second being, using reliable parameter data from other sources, such as research
papers and GitHub repositories, where researchers and developers have tried with a similar
implementation, and the results were of high significance. In order to maintain fairness in
model comparison, some parameters, such as batch size, number of train epochs, test size,
learning rate, random state, and optimization metrics, were set to be the same across all
models within one section(different wireless technologies might need different setups). The
specific parameters used will be presented in later sections.
5.5
Docker and Containers
Virtualization of software due to security or purely optimization reasons has been a
concern of developers for decades. With solutions like FreeBSD Jails, it was possible to
restrict the activities of the jailed process, mainly focusing on the network separation between
different processes. A few years later, with the introduction of cgroups and LXC, the isolation
of processes went forward with the limitation of resource usage, such as CPU and memory.
An important thing when talking about (Docker) Containerization is the difference it has
to standard Virtual Machines. While VM’s usually create a lot of overhead when running
scripts, as they use the machines’ resources for first running the Host OS, then a hypervisor,
followed by the Guest OS of the VM, and only then do Libraries and the App itself come
into play. Containers on the other hand aim to remove this additional resource usage by
using the systems’ resources more directly. It also allows for faster deployment of software,
as containers can be built, and launched within seconds, without the need to boot an entire
OS.
Figure 5.7: Comparison of VM and Container System Usage[47]
For this project, we will be using Docker Containerization as the backbone for the
back end deployment of our software. It was chosen, due to being one of the most popular
container platforms, as well as great feature support and documentation. We will be using
Page 21 of 62
==PAGE:28==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
the Docker Desktop application, which offers a graphical interface, allowing us to keep track
of resource usage as well as running processess easier.
Hardware used
As many Container instances will be run at the same time, and we will be processing
multiple big files, a powerful computer will be needed for these tasks. For this we have opted
to use a personal laptop with an Apple Silicon M1 Max chipset, and 32GB of RAM, giving
us enough resources for uninterupted work.
5.6
Technologies Used for Testing and Attack Vectors
Below listed technologies will play a crucial role when undergoing the tests of the final
system. With them we will simulate normal network traffic, capture and process it, as well
as conduct different attack attempts on the wireless technologies we introduced before.
Iperf
For IP traffic simulation we will be using Iperf[48]. It is a tool that allows a user to sim-
ulate traffic between different devices, usually set up within a terminal window. It supports
both TCP and UDP data streams, as well as provides metrics (such as bandwidth, packet
loss and delay jitter) to evaluate the performance of the network. The tool provides the user
with options to create custom connections, by modifying the throughput, directional/bidirec-
tional communication, support for IPv4 and IPv6, selecting the port number, buffer size...
Users can also automate tests or script them for repeated use, which is especially useful
during troubleshooting or performance benchmarking.
Wireshark and Tcpdump
Wireshark[49] and its CLI based extensions Tshark[50] and Pyshark[51], as well as
Tcpdump[52] give us a great set of tools that will be used for capturing the packets. The
capture will save the files into the standard .pcap or newer .pcapng format, that is then
easy to send into the back end for processing and analysis. Wireshark offers the capture
on the vast majority of interfaces, ranging from build in network and bluetooth adapters,
externally connected dongles and virtual instances, such as VM’s or containers. Once the
packets are captured, it can then apply filters to the traffic, extracting and showing only the
relevant data. It is also equipped with other features such as automatic traffic decryption,
or the option to export the packet contents into more readable files, such as .csv. Tshark,
the CLI counterpart to Wireshark can be used with the Pyshark wrapper, in order to create
scripts, which we will also use throughout this project. TCPdump on the other hand, can
offer a more lightweight approach to the other platforms, still offering a plethora of features,
while at the same time having less of an impact on system resources, which will to us be very
useful, especially in the deployment of the capturing scripts on a compute-limited Raspberry
Pi.
Page 22 of 62
==PAGE:29==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Scapy and AirCrack-ng
Conducting attack simulations will be done with the use of Scapy[53] and AirCrack-
ng[54]. With Scapy we are able to create custom packets, determining almost every pa-
rameter, send the packets, and analyze data streams. It is mainly used for its flexibility
when creating packets, as we are also able to modify the layers to our wishes, it decodes
packets in raw format instead of an interpretation, it offers a in-depth documentation about
possible attack vectors and its working, as well as support for the implementation alongside
a python script. Scapy also features the use of ASN.1 for working with structured protocols
like SNMP or X.509. Its ASN.1 engine is intentionally lenient, letting users decode, encode,
or even create broken or non standard data. AirCrack-ng on the other hand could be de-
scribed as a tool, that offers more top level analysis and attack options. It is specifically
designed for wireless network testing and includes built-in functionality for capturing pack-
ets, analyzing them for vulnerabilities, performing deauthentication attacks, and cracking
WEP and WPA/WPA2-PSK keys. While Scapy does support direct python code creation,
aircrack-ng supports the automation through shell scripting and command line arguments.
Flipper Zero
Flipper[55] is a multi-purpose tool that combines different wireless technologies like
RFID, NFC, Bluetooth, Infrared as well as other sub-GHz technologies. With expandable
modules through the use of onboard GPIO, it can also operate in other frequency ranges,
as WiFi for example. Its main purspose is to allow the users to for example save different
Key Card information onto one device for convenience, as well as use it as a universal
controller for appliances. Another feature of this device, perhaps for use more important, is
the ability to simulate different attacks on the many wireless technologies mentioned. Since
it is running on open source firmware, it is also possible for the user to modify or extend
the devices’ functionality. This is possible, as the device has a powerful enough on board
compute module that does not require the connection to a computer. As a connection to the
computer is also possible, it can simulate a Human Interface Device (HID), thus simulating
keyboard and mouse input, as well as attacks similar to the ones achieved by devices such
as Rubber Ducky.
Page 23 of 62
==PAGE:30==
6.
Bringing it All Together
In this section, we explain how we connected all the different technology pieces into a
complete system. We describe how the individual modules - Bluetooth, Zigbee, and WiFi
capture devices - were connected, how they communicate through the message broker, and
how data flows through the system from initial capture to final analysis. We take a look at
the testing we have done to ensure everything was working as intended, as well as issues we
have faced while building the system. During the development of code, we have used LLM
tools, as a way of bug finding/fixing, and general code improvements.
6.1
Packet Capture Setup
For the packet capture setup, we have opted to use the Raspberry Pi 4 and 5 modules,
primarily due to their high performance to cost ratio, as well as the absolute cost of one
unit. They were also chosen as they are very energy efficient (actively running on around
10W of power), as well as small form factor and consequently portable. These compute
modules have also been selected, as they give us the ability to capture Bluetooth packets
without the need for external hardware, thus simplifying the deployment. When it came to
Zigbee packet capture, however, the onboard hardware was not sufficient, so we integrated
the low-cost CC2531 USB modules into the setup. This allowed us to actively listen/monitor
for packets in a (from WiFi and Bluetooth) different part of the frequency spectrum.
WiFi packet capture required a slightly different approach. The built-in wireless chipsets
on Raspberry Pi do not support monitor mode out of the box, which is an important re-
quirement for capturing WiFi traffic. To address this, we have selected the D-link DWA-131
and D-link DWA-171 USB WiFi adapters, both of which offer support for monitor mode
under the drivers we tested, and in the case of the latter, also support for the 5GHz band.
While we have also tried to use TP-Link dongles, they showed persistent issues with driver
compatibility and stability, which led us to exclude them from the final configuration.
To store the captured packet data, we have set up lightweight Docker containers, where
each was operating by subscribing to a specific protocol topic from the MQTT broker. These
containers were handling incoming packet files by giving each one a unique file name, making
sure that there would be no overlapping or overwriting of the already saved files, and then
saving them onto the Volume. An important addition to this setup was the creation of
separate folders for each protocol, as well as for each step within the processing chain.
When capturing WiFi packets, we have the code setup in a way, that it focuses on one
24
==PAGE:31==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
network at once with the use of Service Set Identifier (SSID) recognition, since the capture
of many different networksÂ´ packets at the same time would generate immense amount of
data, which might impact the performance of our setup, and it would also be more difficult
for analysis. Capturing Zigbee and Bluetooth packets was done in a similar manor, despite
us not expecting such large amounts of data as with WiFi. An additional setting has been
implemented, where we split .pcap files every minute of capture, so they will be easier to
transfer. All of the captured packets have been then saved into separate .pcap files, each for
their respectable wireless technology, and published/sent to three different MQTT topics.
The MQTT topics were connected to the same broker. Initially we have opted to setup
the broker as a separate process running inside of the terminal on the computer, however
due to some networking issues, as well as the potential of expanding the operations into
the cloud domain, we have switched the operation into a docker setup, with the use of
the eclipse −mosquitto image[56], available on the Docker Hub platform. The setup was
completed by running the container and opening the port 1883 to the system (1883 is the
default MQTT port). A small issue arose here with the network port translation and access
to the MQTT broker from the other docker containers that will be used for saving the
received .pcap files onto the storage Volume. This was quickly solved by enabling the use of
Docker network as an extension of the systems’ network, instead of creating a sub-network
and operating within that. An additional setting before running the Broker’s container was
used, namely the −−net = host command, to force the setting of using the same network
as the host. Running a short test, with the capture python script on the Raspberry, the
broker and file saving container within Docker, shows that we are successfully transmitting
.pcap files and saving them onto the pre-specified Volume.
Figure 6.1: Automatic saving of .pcap files to the correct folder within the Thesis volume
Page 25 of 62
==PAGE:32==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
6.1.1
Wifi
For Wifi capture, it was first required to change the dongle that we were using into
monitoring mode, so we were able to capture all the traffic that is being sent, instead of
only the traffic directed to and from our capturing device. That was done with the following
triplet of commands (in our case, the ifconfig command returned the dongle interface as
wlan1):
1
sudo ip link set wlan1 down
2
sudo iw dev wlan1 set type monitor
3
sudo ip link set wlan1 up
After this, we needed to scan the surrounding networks for their SSIDs, mac addresses and
most importantly the channel on which they operate. With the command sudoairmon −
ngstartwlan17, we simply determine on which channel the dongle should listen for traffic -
in our case this was channel 7 in the 2.4GHz range operating at the frequency of 2.442GHz.
A key thing we had to keep in mind is that we might need the capability to capture on both
2.4 as well as 5GHz range, which meant (as we were unable to put the dongles into multi-
monitoring mode for both frequency ranges), that we had to use two separate dongles6.1
- each set their own respectable frequency range. Performing initial capturing tests with
one WiFi adapter and a simple Scapy based Python script showed that, in comparison to
the capture with the Wireshark application, a lot of the supposedly captured packets were
dropped and were not saved into the newly generated .pcap files. As this issue would impact
later setups, as well as the decryption itself, explained in continuation of this section, a
solution in the form of improved performance has had to be found. For this, a change to the
monitoring library was implemented - changing from Scapy to Airodump, where the packets
would not be written to a new file one by one, but rather gathered in a buffered storage, and
added to the file at the end of the loop. Another change to the code was the use of a new
thread for the packet writer, so that the packet capture and packet writing processes could
operate concurrently. This helped to improve performance by allowing the capture process
to focus solely on sniffing packets while the writer thread handled the file-saving tasks. This
avoided unnecessary blocking of the capture process due to I/O operations. This enabled
the capture of all packets without causing a bigger constraint on the system resources of the
Raspberry Pi.
When capturing WiFi packets, it was important to note that, by default, we wouldn’t
see the source and destination IP addresses. Instead, we would only see the Layer 2 frames,
as these were embedded in the packet5.3.1. Since the packets were encrypted with WPA2, we
needed to provide both the SSID and password in Wireshark to decrypt the traffic. However,
just adding these details did not immediately reveal the packet contents. To decrypt the
traffic, we also needed to capture the four-way handshake between the device and the access
point, which showed up as Extensible Authentication Protocol over LAN (EAPOL) packets.
Once we captured the handshake and set up Wireshark with the SSID and password, we
were able to decrypt the encrypted packets and see the Layer 3 (IP addresses) and Layer
4 (transport protocols like TCP/UDP) information in the data. On some devices (such as
Apple phones and computers), we found that the setting of "Limiting IP tracking" also had
to be disabled, as the capture of packets with that setting enabled seemed to be very difficult,
Page 26 of 62
==PAGE:33==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
causing a lot of packets to be dropped. Below, we can see how the traffic capture looked with
and without decryption.
This feature of showing decrypted data seemed to be only available
Figure 6.2: No decryption - we can see only OSI layer 2 Frames
Figure 6.3: With decryption - we are able to see OSI layer 3 and 4
inside the Wireshark application, as when we saved the decrypted packets to another sys-
tem, they seemed to have been sent in their original form. Having tried multiple options on
the receiver side (back-end) to automate this process of decryption, with command line op-
tions such as tshark -r inputfile -w outputfile -o wlan.enable_decryption:TRUE
-o "uat:80211_keys:\"wpa-pwd\",\"{password}:{ssid}\"" , where we would put in
the SSID and password similarly to the Wireshark application, with it, we were unable
to replicate the process.
After deeper research into the issue, we have found that the
use of the airedecap-ng module from the aircrack-ng library showed to be working as we
had hoped: airdecap-ng -e "SSID" -p "Password" -l inputfile.pcap. .
Since the
decryption needs the handshake to be present in the capture, we have modified the code on
the capture side, where the system would still capture packets as before and save them into
separate .pcap files, but at the same time also extract all the available EAPOL handshakes
and concatenate them to the original stream, thus ensuring that we will be able to future
decrypt the packets with limited added overhead to the stream of packets. Testing has shown
that this concatenation isn’t possible because of WPA2’s security setup. EAPOL packets in
a stream are used to create a session and shouldn’t be moved to other streams, as it could
lead to security issues. This meant that a new session would need to be created for every
batch of packets that had been captured by our wifi dongle. How this would be achieved is
by forcing the connected devices of one SSID network to reconnect - ideally on their own,
without the need for us to disconnect and reconnect each device manually. One option that
presents itself in this situation is the use of forced deauthentication from one of the adapters.
As we were using one 2.4GHz adapter already in monitoring mode to listen for incoming
packets, the second one was used for the deauthentication "attack" on the connected device,
such as a phone. For this, we have used the Scapy library, where a deauthentication packet
was created, and the target MAC address of the phone was added. The setup has been
updated so that after every batch of a minute of capture, a stream of 100-200 deauthentica-
tion packets would be sent. The idea behind it is to have the EAPOL packets available at
the beginning of each file, making processing them easier. What we have discovered here is
that Android operating system based phones are more succeptible to these deauthentication
attacks, which in this case helps us gather the handshake more easily, while for example
iOS based phones seem to have a different type of handling such packets/attacks, causing
us to be unable to properly disconnect the phone from the network with the use of a dongle.
Page 27 of 62
==PAGE:34==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Following these results, we have opted for a fully decrypted, open network for ease of use
in the final tests. Since we have had an open network, the decryption was not necessary
anymore, thus it has been removed from the processing section, leaving only Zeek.
With this part of the setup complete, the capturing of WiFi packets was completed,
and they have been sent through the MQTT broker into our back-end processing device.
Following the receipt of the encrypted .pcap packets in our back-end, a Python script was
implemented, running continuously on one of the Docker images, processing the incoming
packets through Zeek, and after processing them, also deleting them, as a storage optimiza-
tion solution was needed in this case.
Below we can observe how the processing of the
packets, that has been done in the back-end, including the connections between the different
parts of the system, as well as the machine learning analysis of the incoming packets.
Figure 6.4: WiFi flows - from capture to threat analysis
In the image above, we see the edge device coloured in blue, folders of differently pro-
cessed .pcap files coloured in orange, and multiple Docker containers running simultaneously,
coloured in green. Analysis by machine learning was combined into one single Docker image,
as scaling it over multiple images would take longer, especially when it comes to debugging.
The last generated file will keep track of the results from all three machine learning tech-
niques - applying a majority voting algorithm on them, saving as a simple text file, which is
then sent to the UI?? part of the system (website or similar).
Page 28 of 62
==PAGE:35==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
6.1.2
Bluetooth
As Bluetooth Classic is available on the Raspberry Pi itself, and does not require any
additional dongles to listen to the traffic, we were able to use the hcidump[57] command
feature to listen to Bluetooth traffic, while extracting some important information from it.
At first, we wished to only record a test sample of what the data returned, and as shown in
the image below, we could see the simple HEX values of it (as well as an indication if it is
going to or from the device).
Figure 6.5: Bluetooth capture using HCIdump
We wanted to collect more detailed data from the captured packets-similar to what
Wireshark provides, such as flags, timestamps, and intervals. To achieve this, we updated our
original packet-capturing code to use a different tool, tshark, and focused on the bluetooth0
interface (also referred to as hci0 in some cases). This was discovered after we were unable
to capture anything using the hci0 interface. Issuing then the command
sudo tshark -D
in a terminal on the Raspberry, we were presented with all the available interfaces to be
used within the tshark environment. The same principle was then applied, as for the WiFi
packets, saving them into separate .pcap files.
For initial testing, we have set up for a
capture of 100 packets per batch, and for later testing we have increased that to a minute
of capture. While we have ultimately used the tshark command tool, we have also tested
our code with other tools such as the btmon capture. However, in comparison to the tshark
capture, where the separation for the .pcap file format is done automatically, with btmon,
it was not the case. The output of the btmon capture is very similar, if not identical, to the
capture with hcidump, providing a capture of the packets in a hex form. After the capture
and writing of the packet information into the .pcap file, it has been sent through the MQTT
broker into the back-end for further processing. In our server-side setup, we have set up two
packet processing containers. A very simple piece of code was responsible for subscribing
to the MQTT broker’s "ble/packets" topic and saving them into our Docker volume for
further processing. The second container has been used to extract the .pcap information
and create .log files, in a similar manner to the WiFi setup.
In this case, however, the
processing has not been done with a tool such as Zeek, as it did not support other types of
packets outside of the IP traffic domain. As searching for tools that would achieve a similar
setting as Zeek seemed to be a long process, where we would have to test numerous tools,
mainly available from different GIT repositories, it seemed to be more time efficient to build
a custom parser in Python. This would also allow us to have complete control over how we
Page 29 of 62
==PAGE:36==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Figure 6.6: Bluetooth flows - from capture to threat analysis
wish to handle packets, with no need to go through the heavy documentation of some tools.
This parser continuously reads each .pcap file and uses tshark with the -V flag to produce
a detailed breakdown of every packet. Then, using regular expressions, we extract specific
features that are useful for analysis. These include basic packet metadata like arrival time,
frame size, direction, and HCI packet types. We also pull command-level details such as
opcodes, parameter lengths, status codes, and timing values. Each packet is processed into
a structured format, and, if it contains useful data(non-null values), it is added to the final
output. The result is a .csv file where each row represents a Bluetooth frame with selected
features. This format is easy to work with for further analysis or for feeding into machine
learning models.
Since we were not expecting immense amounts of data packets, as for
example with WiFi, we have not opted to remove the existing .pcap files in this part. This
ended the pre-processing of data, and the .csv files were ready to be added to our models.
6.1.3
Zigbee and the firmware
Since we were using the CC2531 module, which usually(our module did have some
firmware) does not come with a pre-flashed firmware that would allow us to capture Zigbee
network traffic, meaning we would have to flash new firmware onto it by ourselves. For this,
we could have used the CC debugger and a downloader cable; however, since at the time of
working on this part of the project, this hardware was not bought/available, we have opted
to use a Raspberry Pi with Dupont line cables to directly connect to the pins of the module.
Page 30 of 62
==PAGE:37==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
In the picture below, we can see the connections between them, underneath it, we observe
the commands.
Figure 6.7: Flashing of new firmware onto the CC2531 module
1
cd flash_cc2531
2
./cc_erase
3
./cc_write FirmwareFile.hex
The firmware has been loaded onto the module with the use of the flash_cc2531 reposi-
tory[58]. The CC2531 sniffer is known to operate reliably with Texas Instruments’ software;
however, the application is only available for the Windows platform. Since our requirements
included a compact form factor, low cost, and ease of deployment, we opted to maintain a
Linux-based environment on the Raspberry Pi, rendering this solution incompatible with our
setup. At first, we tried with the original firmware that was already on the device; however,
during testing, we found that others might be more useful to us. A clear choice here would
have been the official Sniffer firmware provided by Texas Instruments[59]; however, this one
did not seem to work, as the device was still being recognized by the computer (RasPi), but
it did not allow for serial communication with the dongle. Because of that, we have chosen
to go with the Z-stack firmware provided on GitHub[60]. With the new firmware loaded onto
the module, we have assumed that the capture of the packets would work from the get-go;
however, that turned out not to be true, as no output could be captured. Putting the Zigbee
bridge and the CC2531 module into pairing modes should enable them to recognize each
other and establish a connection, but that did not seem to work either. After testing numer-
ous firmware options, as well as trying out different frequency ranges and channels5.3.2, we
finally found one that showed great promise: the Zboss_sniffer firmware[61]. This firmware
allowed us to actively listen to packets using the Zigbee module with the code we had already
prepared beforehand. One of its advantages over other firmwares we have tested was that
it made use of the ttyACM0 serial port, with no additional drivers needed to be installed
for it to capture data, thus giving us monitoring mode. Upon capturing the initial packets,
we noticed they were in hexadecimal format. In order to extract more meaningful data, we
processed them through Scapy, which revealed that security was enabled by default. Below,
we can observe a sample packet and the information extracted:
Page 31 of 62
==PAGE:38==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Figure 6.8: Zigbee packet processed with Scapy
From this, we observe that the output from the tool gives us some information or rather
metadata about the packet. Fields such as the frametype, ackreq, and security give us
the control settings used in the frame, and showing that security has been enabled. We are
also able to see the seqnum value, which indicates the position of the frame in the sequence.
Below the frame information, we can also see the load of the packet, in a similar way that
a TCP/IP packet holds data after the header. Another observation we made is that the
load was in a what seemed to be encrypted form. The next step we have tried here is to
decrypt the incoming messages using the AES keys. This presented a problem, as we were
unable to find what the actual keys used by the Sonoff hardware were. Since there are some
publicly known base-set AES keys, such as the ZigbeeAlliance09 Default Trust Center Link
Key[62]. After running a decryption script, where we would apply all publicly known keys,
in an effort to brute force the decryption, we were unsuccessful. Without access to decrypted
messages between the devices, we were unable to continue using the CC2531 module with
the ZBOSS firmware. As we were still keen on implementing a Zigbee anomaly detection
model, we began exploring alternative solutions. Fortunately, ZBOSS has also developed a
Zigbee network simulation tool that not only allows the generation of traffic between devices
but also gives the option of generating a .pcap file, that we could use for further analysis.
The simulator, however, is not supported by any newer operating systems, meaning that
the installation of Ubuntu 12.04 was needed. For this, a new Virtual Machine has been set
up, where the installation of the 32-bit version of Ubuntu was done. Another issue came
to be when trying to download the simulator to the VM, as all SSL certificates were long
overdue, making it almost impossible to access any website, as it automatically dropped
the connection. Given how outdated the simulator is and the extensive setup it requires,
including an obsolete operating system, a dedicated virtual machine, and workarounds just
to bypass expired SSL certificates, we finally decided it wasn’t worth continuing down this
path.
A different simulator was also available by Ns 3 Simulations[63], which did not require
such an extensive workaround. The package could simply be downloaded and built with the
following commands:
Page 32 of 62
==PAGE:39==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
1
git clone https://github.com/nsnam/ns-3-dev-git
2
cd ns-3-dev-git
3
./ns3 configure --enable-examples --enable-tests
4
./ns3 build
With this the simulator was successfully built, and we are now able to run sample Zigbee
transmissions. However, the problem emerged in the form of a programming language used
for developing further, more complex simulations. As we lacked knowledge and experience
with programming in C, as well as the fact that the installation of the NS3 Python hooks was
not fruitful, we were forced to find a different option for sourcing files for machine learning
operations.
The continuation of this work involved the use of an existing dataset, as we were unable
to establish a consistent stream of live data for the system.
Consequently, the machine
learning models were developed and trained solely using the pre-existing dataset.
6.2
Datasets, data handling, feature extraction and ma-
chine learning algorithms
In this section, we will present the continuation of the previously explained data-
capturing setups and data flow pipelines, with the inclusion of ML models.
6.2.1
WiFi
When first looking at the datasets that we have chosen, we quickly noticed that there
might be some issues when training the machine learning algorithms on the data, as it has
been captured on different days, with different setups (in the case of WiFi, different IP
ranges). This would mean that the algorithms might have trouble creating a "meaningful"
connection between the datasets that we have put into the process. Another issue that we
thought might play a big role was the lack of background/normal data, which, according to
the authors of the aforementioned datasets, was left out due to privacy and security concerns.
In our first test setup for the machine learning algorithm of RNN(5.4.2), we have decided
to have a simple setup, without over-complex data preparation, so we could see and learn
how the model behaves on "almost" raw data. For this, we have decided to use a few different
.pcap files from the IoT-23 dataset, namely the 5-1_honeypot_capture for the benign data,
and the 1-1_Malware_Capture .pcap files as the malicious dataset. After this, we needed
to process the datasets, so we would extract the information from the packets. For this,
we have used the Scapy library to extract the following features: Source IP, Destination
IP, Source and Destination Ports, Protocol, Packet Length, Timestamp, Inter Packet Time
(Which was calculated during the processing). An Info column was added to the combined
dataset where the value of 0 was added to packets from the benign dataset, and 1 to the
packets from the malicious dataset, to help with the classification during machine learning.
Since IP addresses are not very well suited for machine learning operations, they needed
to be changed into a more appropriate form. This was done by hashing their values so
that they retained their uniqueness and at the same time were prepared for training. A
Page 33 of 62
==PAGE:40==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
StandardScaler function was applied to the whole dataset to normalise the data in order
that some features would not have a bigger impact on the result than others. As expected,
the initial results showed limited potential. The achieved accuracy was largely influenced by
the dataset’s distribution and the size ratio between benign and malicious packets, rather
than meaningful classification. Another issue with this approach was the processing of the
data. As we handled each incoming packet separately, extracting all of the features from it
and saving it into the computer memory, it quickly showed signs of overwhelming the system
- a relatively small dataset collection of a combined sized of roughly 0.5GB, and an estimated
400,000 packets caused our system to use around 13.5GB of memory for the datasets to load
and be prepared for machine learning, thus meaning that we had to find a solution that
would treat the packets more storage efficiently. Despite the large impact on the system, the
initial tests continued with the changes being made to the model settings and parameters,
in order to see if they produced any improvements. As the improvements were minuscule,
we have chosen to take a different path in packet preparation and handling. In this step
we found an interesting tool called Zeek5.3.1, that helps extract flows between devices, as
well as other information such as history, duration, origin port, protocol, service and many
more, and compiling them into multiple small sized LOG files, that made the analysis with
our future machine learning setups easier and most importantly quicker. The LOG files that
were produced include data such as active connections between devices, DNS queries, HTTP
requests, Metadata about transferred files, Unusual events and security alerts raised by Zeek
itself. For our machine learning part, we will exclusively use the connections LOG file, as it
offers an overview of data flows, as well as the flags tagging. In the next step, we have set
up an improved version of the RNN using the Zeek processed dataset. For this, we have put
up to a few gigabytes of data through the process, as well as captured our own data during
normal operation in order to have a very broad set of different malicious and benign LOG
records. Looking now at the 2nd RNN test, we again labeled the sub-datasets with either a 0
for benign and 1 for malicious based on the name of the file, and then extracted the features
from the files. Before applying the StandardScaler as we did in the first RNN test, we had to
make a few more changes to the features. The IP addresses were this time not encoded with
the help of hashing, but rather just split into groups of public and private addresses (this
could then again be split further into different classes or ranges, like the A, B and C private
class [64], however for this test we left this split out), then they were one-hot encoded. A
few features ought to be removed from the dataset, as they could negatively impact the
performance or they would just be redundant. Session IDs have been removed, alongside
timestamps, which could cause our Neural Network to misclassify the packets, purely based
on the timestamp, causing, for example, packets gathered recently could all be classified
as benign, as the benign datasets were more recent. Examples of other removed features
are missed_bytes, tunnel_parents and history, which at first seemed to be an important
feature. Later, while one-hot encoding, it showed an increase in the number of columns by a
large margin, which would also impact the performance of the system, so they were removed
completely. Missing values in the dataset primarily showed under the columns of duration
and orig_bytes, so a quick replacement of ’_’ with ’0’ was set in place. For the machine
learning model, we used a Sequential model with three LSTM layers containing 128, 64, and
32 units, respectively. The model was compiled with binary cross-entropy loss and trained
Page 34 of 62
==PAGE:41==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
for 25 epochs with a batch size of 64, learning rate of 0.0001. Below, we can see the initial
results of this setup: As we can see from the results, the test accuracy is very high with the
Metric
Value
Test Accuracy
0.9880
Confusion Matrix
27970
86
1099
69637

Precision
0.9988
Recall
0.9845
F1 Score
0.9916
Table 6.1: RNN setup 2 - Performance Summary
value of nearly 99%, which indicates that the model is performing well; however, a heavily
imbalanced dataset could skew such results - in our case, the full dataset was made of around
72% malicious and 28% benign packets. Looking at the test set results, which represented
25% of the total dataset, we see that the recall is high, showing that the model identifies
most of real positives, a high precision where only a few false positive errors are made, and a
harmonic mean (F1 score) of 99%, showing the model handles precision and recall well. As
the results seemed very promising, a "never-before-seen" dataset was used for testing to see if
it would be deemed benign or malicious. The results from the test confirmed our assumption
that indeed, the setup is able to distinguish if the stream of packets is "dangerous" or not.
Since the RNN is used for the analysis of continuous time series, we aimed to implement
a similar but at the same time different - more modern approach for this type of analysis,
that builds upon the capabilities of RNNs and improves them. In this part, we have chosen to
use the Transformer Neural Networks5.4.4 for time series analysis, as they have become the
state of the art in many different modern sequence-dependent implementations. To ensure
a fair comparison between the different techniques, as well as to make sure that the end
results of the analysis would not be skewed in any way whatsoever, the exact same approach
to pre-processing of .log files has been used. With this, we made sure that any differences in
performance would be based purely on the design of the architecture of the machine learning
algorithm. Transformers were selected for their ability to capture long-range dependencies -
in this case, the relationships between multiple packets in a stream. In contrast, RNNs can
struggle with long-term memory due to the vanishing gradient problem[65], if not correctly
setup with LSTM. As transformer networks do not treat data in the same way as RNN
would - namely a sequential manner, positional encoding has had to be incorporated into
the model, in order to provide information about the order of the packets[42]. To increase
the ability of the model to focus on different parts of the sequence, positional encoding has
been implemented.
The model architecture begins with a dense layer of 256 units, followed by four stages of
dense layers, where the first three layers use the ReLU activation function, and the final layer
employs the sigmoid activation function. Training this Transformer-based model required
significantly more processing power and training time, when compared to the RNN. This
was expected due to the increased complexity of the model. We trained the model using
Page 35 of 62
==PAGE:42==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
the Keras Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001, and optimizing for metrics such
as accuracy, precision, recall, and AUC. It was also trained over 25 epochs, making sure
that the metrics optimization would stabilize. Similarly to RNN performance, we can also
observe the performance metrics below:
Metric
Value
Test Accuracy
0.9750
Confusion Matrix
17061
330
2104
68692

Precision
0.9952
Recall
0.9703
F1 Score
0.9826
Table 6.2: Transformer Neural Network setup - Performance Summary
Since two models could produce different outputs for the same input packet stream -
for instance, the RNN might classify it as malicious while the Transformer model does not -
we decided to introduce a third model to enable true majority voting. For this purpose, we
have implemented a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) as the final algorithm. The CNN
model has been implemented with an initial Conv1D layer with 256 filters, followed by a
MaxPooling1D layer to reduce dimensionality. This was again followed by another Conv1D
with 128 filters and a GlobalAveragePooling1D layer for compression. Finally we add a dense
layer with 128 neurons, using a ReLU activation function, finishing with a single dense layer
using sigmoid activation function in order to perform binary classification. Similarly to the
previous two models, we implemented the Adam optimizer, with a leaning rate of 0.0001,
optimized based on accuracy, precision, recall and AUC. For consistency reasons, the pre-
processing of packet has been copied from previous models, and the input features have been
reshaped in order to fit the CNN’s expected input structure. Although CNNs are usually
used for different applications5.4.3 than network packet analysis, we decided to choose it
over a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) after conducting tests with both models. Our results
showed better performance with the CNN, as it was more effective recognizing patterns
within the data, leading to improved accuracy in analyzing network traffic. Compared to
the RNN, the CNN required slightly more processing power due to the added convolutional
operations, but still trained faster and with less computational demand than the Transformer
model. Training was done over 25 epochs, where similar to RNN, the performance metrics
seemed to have converged. Taking a look at the performance summary, we observe, that it
is similar to RNN.
Page 36 of 62
==PAGE:43==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Metric
Value
Test Accuracy
0.9849
Confusion Matrix
17343
48
1281
69515

Precision
0.9993
Recall
0.9819
F1 Score
0.9905
Table 6.3: CNN Model Performance Summary
As the tests, that we ran locally showed promising results, the next step was to move
the algorithm inside of docker containers, where they could be run continuously, without
interference, giving us up-to-date results on the incoming packet streams. An important
step was to export the trained models. We have exported the RNN and CNN models as .h5
files, which are a standard format of saving Keras models. We have however encountered
an issue when trying to export the Transformer Neural Network in the same format, as the
loading of the model did not work after. After some research, we found that such issue could
arise in more complex models, like the Transformer, meaning the export had to be done in
the .keras format, which seemed to work with no issues after. In addition to the models, we
also had to export the scaler settings for each model separately. This was done to avoid any
potential misconfiguration during the Docker deployment part - as it could impact our end
results. Without the correct scaler, the input data fed into the models might be misaligned,
leading to incorrect predictions. To prevent this, we saved each model’s scaler as a separate
.pkl file using the joblib library, and made sure they were properly loaded within the Docker
containers.
With the models and scalers properly setup and imported into the Docker volume, so
that they could be directly accessed by the three models, the algorithms could be container-
ized in a way that it would continuously monitor the incoming packet stream, preprocess
the data, and predict the results. The monitoring script, which handled file preprocessing
(done in the same manner as for all models) and model prediction, was important to making
sure the process ran smoothly. It continuously checked for new log files, processed them
accordingly, and made predictions using the three models.
6.2.2
Bluetooth
After first completing the WiFi Machine Learning section, we have seen what the re-
quirements were for creating an effective threat detection system. One of the more important
parts being a big, well balanced dataset, that has included benign data, as well as many dif-
ferent attack vectors. With Bluetooth however, this was sadly not possible, as the datasets
that we have previously used for training WiFi, from which we could use them for creating a
classification Machine Learning solution, did not also include Bluetooth data - meaning we
would need to have a different approach. To solve this, we decided to create our own dataset.
We focused on capturing as much normal Bluetooth traffic as possible. This included things
like text transfers, audio and video streaming, and other forms of communication.
Page 37 of 62
==PAGE:44==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Since our dataset only included normal traffic and we didn’t have any recorded attack
vectors, and considering that capturing all possible types of Bluetooth attacks would take a
lot of time and effort, we decided to take a slightly different approach to machine learning.
Instead of going for a classification method like we did with WiFi - where data would be
labeled as either normal or malicious - we rather focused on anomaly detection. This meant
that we have trained our algorithms purely on benign Bluetooth traffic.
The idea here
being that the model learned what "normal" traffic looks like, then identifying everything
that didn’t fit that pattern - like an attack, would be flagged as unusual or non - standard
behavior. This way, even if we have not had every possible attack in our training data, the
system could still react when something unexpected happened.
The first model we have implemented with anomaly detection for Bluetooth was a
Recurrent Neural Network. Since we were not able to use the same procedure as for WiFi
packets, for as we did not have both types of packets, that would allow us to properly
conduct a classification problem, a few changes had to be done to the model.
First we
had to extract the features that were most important for the training of the model. This
was done, by loading the .csv file that was produced by our parser, and if needed one-hot
encoding was used for categorical data. When initiating a short list of rows of features, in
order to see if there was anything out of the line, we have quickly noticed that some extracted
features contained empty values, meaning that there were no values to be extracted from
the .pcap file by the parser. As all the packets would have the same value for the same
features, it did not make sense to keep them in the loaded dataset, thus removal of these
features seemed in place. This also helped clean up the dataset, making it easier to work
with and cutting down on the processing power and time needed for training. Next, the
autoencoder5.4.5 has been added. The implementation of which, has been done with help
from the following[66], [67].
The autoencoder was trained then on the benign data we
provided, with the goal of learning a representation of what normal behaviour patterns
looked like. After learning, it has then attempted to reconstruct its input from the encoder
part. Any data that has then significantly deviated from the standard behaviour, would
result in a higher reconstruction error. This reconstruction error was then used as a metric
for anomaly detection. After training, we calculated the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between
the original and reconstructed data. A threshold based on the 95th percentile has also been
set up, meaning that any samples with the error values higher that the 95th percentile
would be flagged as anomalous. Other settings of the model included LSTM layers, sizing
from 32 up to 64, which, as seen with previous tests on other protocols seemed to be a
good choice for time-dependent data. In the same sense as the aforementioned sources have
done, we have also implemented a hourglass-shaped architecture structure, starting with 64
layers, continuing with 32, through the lower dimensional space, before reconstructing it in a
reverse manner as the encoder. Training has been done over 10 epochs, with a batch size of
8. We have tested the training procedure with many different learning rates of the optimizer
and have settled for 0.005. To verify the performance of the model, we have set aside 25%
of the dataset for validation. As we could see from the tests, both the Training as well
as Validation loss have reduced with continuing epochs - the values ending at 0.35 mean-
squared train validation error, and 0.4 for the test mean-squared validation error. After
this initial test running the RNN model, we have looked into how the performance could be
Page 38 of 62
==PAGE:45==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
improved even further. One way of initiating that would be with the introduction of K-Fold
Cross Validation, as well as the use of a regularization parameter λ[68]. When applying the
regularization parameter, we have opted for a static value for all samples, one, which was
determined by running the model against 10 different λ values, spanning the logarithmic
space between 10−5 and 10−1. For the cross validation we have selected a fold value of 5.
Running the same model with these new features applied, we have noticed two interesting
observations: The first one being that the performance of the model did not improve, which
can be attributed all the way back to the feature extraction process, where we might have
missed more important features from the .pcap files, which were then not included in the
processed .csv file. The second observation was the processing time. In the initial test the
runtime of the model equated to around 7-8 minutes, while the much more complex model
with regularization and K-fold cross validation enabled, resulted in a runtime of around 4-5
hours. Next, we wished to see if the model improves by introducing a few changes to it. The
first change being, adding a sliding window over the packets, hoping that it would better
capture the connections between the packets. The window size has been set to 20 packets
for processing at once. Time of arrival of packets has also been change from the UNIX time
format to a relative time form - making sure that large values of the UNIX code would
not affect the data too much. Another change that we wanted to see, where the values
for the Train and Test validation errors converge. Having had removed the K-fold and the
regularization parameter λ has been set to a static value of 0.001, we were confident that
even a 100 epochs run would not take too much time. Below we can see the performance of
the now slightly improved model, where the values have converged:
Figure 6.9: RNN with Autoencoder performance on 100 epochs and λ = 0.001
The second model we have wished to incorporate into the anomaly detection for Blue-
tooth packets, was the Convolutional Neural Network. As we have used this model before,
only a few changes needed to be implemented (such as the Autoencoder). The idea be-
hind this setup for the Convolutional Neural Network stems from the following implemen-
tation[69]. We have set up the CNN with the following settings: For the window size we
have chosen the value of 20, and used a similar set of values 64, 32 and 16, this time for
convolutional filters’ values for the encoder, and at the same time in reverse values for the
Page 39 of 62
==PAGE:46==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
decoder. The model has used ReLU as the activation function, and the MSE value has been
used for the optimizer. The learning rate has been kept the same as the RNN at 0.005,
and the regularization at 0.001 to mitigate potential overfitting. Below we can see similar
performance to RNN, where both train and test values limited out at similar values:
Figure 6.10: CNN with Autoencoder performance on 50 epochs and λ = 0.001
As we can see from both models, the test validation error rates were still quite high. This
can be attributed to the fact that the dataset that was used for training was very monotone,
meaning that it did not take into account multiple devices, each running a different script.
Our dataset was very simple, meaning we have only captured the transfer of files, instructions,
text and audio, on the span of only 3 devices, thus indicating that the models could have
had issues with true generalization.
Initial tests with Transformer Networks have been carried out, however due to the
data characteristics and performance of the model, we have seen very limited potential. As
continuing with this model would not yield useful results for us, we have omitted it from the
final setup.
After we have exported both models into separate files, as well as their scalers, the next
step was to incorporate them into a single script, that could be run in a docker container
and detect anomalies on bluetooth traffic.
6.2.3
Zigbee
As described in the data aquisition section of Zigbee6.1.3, we have noticed that devel-
oping a piece of code that would successfully listen to the Zigbee traffic, was in a sense
more difficult than anticipated.
As we still wished to include the test anomaly detec-
tion for this protocol, we have resorted to the use of an already existing one[35].
The
dataset pcap files have then been parsed through the tshark tool with the following com-
mand: tshark -r file.pcap -T fields -E separator=, -e quote=d -e header=y -e
frame.number -e frame.time\_epoch
-e wpan.frame\_type -e wpan.seq\_no -e wpan
.dst\_pan -e wpan.dst16 -e wpan.src16 -e wpan.fcs\_ok > output.csv. Looking at
the output dataset that was created we notice something very important. The created set
Page 40 of 62
==PAGE:47==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
was very simple - meaning that it consisted of only 7 features. This was with the exclusion
of the frame number as it was only representing the absolute value of the frame position
in the .pcap file. Using these existing datasets, despite the aforementioned issues with the
dataset structure and capturing the Zigbee packets, we still wished to see how the algorithms
performed. For this we have decided to go with a similar setup as for Bluetooth, namely with
RNN and CNN, both using Autoencoders, Transformers have again been left out, since our
implementation was unsuccessful. Having a similar setup, with the largest LSTM and Con-
volutional Filter layer having 64 units, both using ReLU activation function, a learning rate
of 0.001, and a threshold set to 95th percentile, we observe interesting outputs. As shown in
the graphic below, we observe that both models converge to the error rate way below 0.01,
which according to [70], could indicate that the model is not learning generalization of the
data, but rather the patterns within it.
Figure 6.11: RNN and CNN training performance on pre-existing dataset
6.3
Evaluation of Our Models Against Existing Research
Stemming from section 3, where we looked at existing research in this field, the authors
also presented results from their machine learning models. Here, we want to compare those
results, where applicable, to our own and discuss how and why they differ.
Looking first at WiFi anomaly detection: in the first paper [5], the authors focused
mainly on IP traffic using the UNSW-NB15 dataset and applied a tree-based model (Extra-
TreesClassifier). While their approach and model type differ from ours, the results (around
97% recall, 99% accuracy, and 79% precision) are still close to what we achieved. However,
there are a few important differences to keep in mind. Our models (RNN, CNN, and Trans-
formers) were trained not only on UNSW-NB15 but also on additional datasets. We have
also used over 30 features in training, compared to the 12 mentioned in their work. These
differences in both the data and the model architectures likely explain the variations we see,
especially in precision. Similarly, [12] used parts of the IoT23 dataset along with additional
sources we did not include. Our comparison focuses on their 1D-CNN and FlowSpotter
architectures versus our CNN implementation. Our model achieved metrics comparable to
Page 41 of 62
==PAGE:48==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
their 1D-CNN, which shares a similar design (20-packet window) but differs slightly in the
number of layers and possibly the number of nodes. However, their FlowSpotter model, also
CNN-based, outperformed both, achieving near-perfect results across all metrics.
For Bluetooth and Zigbee, we are unable to draw direct comparisons with the research
discussed in Section 3, due to significant differences in both the datasets used and the model
architectures.
6.4
User Interface
As we also wished to make the data more accessible to the end user, we have also
designed a simple website, which displayed the information about the anomaly levels. For
this we have again used python for the creation of a flask-based website, which took the
data from the docker volume sub-folder and updated the graphical representation of the
status every few seconds. Below we can see how the website looks like, with files being read
in intervals from the results .json files from both WiFi (same as for Bluetooth), and then
displayed. We also show how each separate Machine Learning algorithm has reacted to the
incoming files and what the final result was.
Figure 6.12: User Interface showing WiFi detection results
6.5
Testing Ground Setup
In this section we explain how we prepared for real-life testing of our threat/anomaly
detection system for chosen wireless technologies.
We designed the testing environment
to closely mimic real-world conditions, giving us a better understanding of the systems’
performance. We will also take a look at different attack vectors against the protocols, and
how we prepared to execute them.
6.5.1
WiFi
For WiFi, we have opted for a small network setup, including a router and three Rasp-
berry Pi modules. The modules were the series 4 and 5, as we have previously also used
them for capturing packets, while the router in question has been the TP-Link TL-WR841N,
which supports connections on the 2.4GHz frequency bands. For the tests it was also impor-
tant that it allowed us the use of non-encrypted setup, as this would best simulate the free
Page 42 of 62
==PAGE:49==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
open network access points, we come to see in public. Each Raspberry Pi was assigned a
static IP address, within the same subnet, making sure that different runs of the test would
have similar setup settings. To simulate data transmission under realistic network loads, we
have used the iperf tool. This has allowed us to generate controlled traffic. It was used, as
we could easily modify the parameters of the connection, such as bandwidth, test duration,
and packet size. Between the devices we have setup a bidirectional communication with
both UDP and TCP packets, such that we did not have to rely on using multiple terminal
windows, acting once as server and once as client. Below we can observe a graphical repre-
sentation of the setup: Three Pi devices, where one is used as a means of sniffing the network
traffic and reporting/sending the recorded pcap files to the back-end, and at the same time
actively cooperating in the exchange of traffic, one device which was only generating traffic,
and a third device which has also been participating in packet exchange, but at the same
time also been used for tool testing such as Scapy attack vectors. We can also observe an
external device, which represents other tools such as Flipper Zero.
Figure 6.13: WiFi Testing Setup
Attack Vectors
Below we will take a look at the attack vectors that were used in testing, and what
their characteristics are. As mentioned in previous sections, we will mostly focus on layer 3
and 4 attacks, as the algorithms were also trained to recognize these types. The first attack,
or better said introduction to a potential attack was port scanning. Port scanning can be
used as a reconnaissance technique to identify open ports and determine, which services
are running on the target system. Despite it not being inherently malicious, it can show a
potentially more malicious motive. A more known tool for port scanning is nmap[71], which
we had tried to imitate with a similar script that would probe multiple ports. The second
vector, again not necessarily an attack, was the sending of malformed packets. This could
indicate that there is something unusual happening within the network, hence the anomaly
detection. The third - attack vector is an attack focused on gaining SSH access - for this, we
have downloaded an additional list of plausible simple passwords[72]. As we did not wish to
Page 43 of 62
==PAGE:50==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
resort to any possibly illegally obtained passwords, we have only stuck with the list of 1000
most common ones. The passwords were then fed into the script testing them one by one
against the SSH port 22 on another Raspberry Pi. Fourth, a full DDoS attack was developed.
For this, we used both our primary attacking module (the RPi 3 shown in the graphic) and
some extra computing power from a personal computer to better simulate the kind of heavy
load such an attack would involve in a real-world scenario. Fifth, a SYN flooding attack was
implemented. Despite it being similar to a conventional DoS attack in that it overwhelms a
target system with excessive traffic, a SYN flooding specifically exploits the TCP three-way
handshake process. In this attack, we have generated sends a large number of TCP SYN
(synchronize) requests to a target server, with spoofed IP addresses. Lastly, we have also
wished to see if the models would recognize an upcoming preparation of a Botnet attack,
where we would simulate communication calls to a certain external website/ip address from
within the network. An additional attack vector has been carried out with the help of the
Flipper Zero module - namely a de-authentication attack, which focuses on layer 2, targeting
connected devices with de-authentication packets, in hopes of them disconnecting from the
network.
6.5.2
Bluetooth
For Bluetooth, we have opted again for the three Raspberry Pi modules setup, leveraging
their built-in Bluetooth modules. The difference now is that instead of using a mesh where
the malicious device is included in the transmission of benign data included, we focus rather
on a two module communication setup, with the third device trying to disrupt the connection
in different ways. The distinction in our opinion better reflects the possible attack surfaces,
where the attacker would target point-to-point communication links.
The attacks were
performed against the Raspberry module, acting as a main controller, which was at the same
time also the attack sniffing device. The two main Raspberry Pi units were paired using
standard Bluetooth protocols, with one acting as a data sender and the other as a receiver.
For consistency and to simulate realistic Bluetooth usage scenarios, we transferred files of
varying sizes, as well as simulated streaming via RFCOMM channels. The third Raspberry Pi
was configured to attempt a variety of Bluetooth-based disruptions. The disruptions included
active attack vectors that could hinder the use of the connection. Passive reconnaissance
and MITM type of attacks were not used. This was mostly due to the potential long set up
time in comparison to the much simpler attacks used in this testing.
Page 44 of 62
==PAGE:51==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
Figure 6.14: Bluetooth Testing Setup
Attack Vectors
The first attack vector on Bluetooth was a Denial of Service, implemented by sending a
continuous burst of L2CAP echo requests/pings to the target device. These bursts were sent
in 10ms intervals to simulate traffic flooding, thus creating a high packet frequency. While
not complex in design, this type of behaviour could cause communication instability, while
at the same time being easily distinguishable from normal traffic. The second vector was a
so-called Replay Attack. The idea behind this attack was to look for a sequence of pings
between the original devices, and then try to simulate or playback the same sequence to the
devices. Even though the attack was not disruptive, it was implemented to test the anomaly
detection in the communication. A third test involved a Rapid Connect/ Disconnect to the
target sniffing device. For this we first needed to pair the devices. This attack relied on
constant quick establishment and breaking of the connection between devices. This pattern
was designed to simulate the kind of abnormal behavior that might occur if a trusted or
known device had been compromised or was behaving erratically. Since the devices involved
had already established a trusted connection, this test allowed us to assess whether the
anomaly detection system could recognize irregular session behaviour. Finally, a so-called
Idle Injection scenario was tested. After initiating a connection with the target device, the
attacker device entered a prolonged idle state and sent no packets for a defined period after
which it was followed by a sudden burst of data requests/pings. While it is similar to a DoS
attack, here we are not focusing on a constant burst of data.
Page 45 of 62
==PAGE:52==
7.
Testing and Results
Since most existing research focuses primarily on theoretical testing and model devel-
opment, our work takes a step further by implementing a full-scale testing setup that closely
mimics real-world application scenarios. In this section, we present the results of the tests
conducted within the system to evaluate the effectiveness of the machine learning models
under different conditions. We will begin by showing how the models perform under normal
traffic conditions, followed by their response to various attack scenarios. Each attack test
has been executed ten times to show the consistency and variability in the models’ reactions
across multiple runs. We will also show the performance of the host machine when it comes
to the processing times for different-sized files. As the models needed some fine tuning for
threat detection, such that they would not over or under-react to data, we have adjusted
the thresholds for each model (based on the outputs at the training test). WiFi testing
thresholds for RNN and CNN were set to 0.65, while Transformer Neural Networks’ were set
to 0.49. As the models for Bluetooth have been trained on 95th percentile of traffic to be
benign, we had to to include a similar MSE threshold. All of these values are based on our
initial test findings, which produced the best output results and were not selected to skew
the final results in any way.
7.1
WiFi
7.1.1
Conducting Tests
First we would generate normal traffic for the system. This included packets generated
from the iperf tool, browsing web through the Raspberry Pi machines, downloading random
files, as well as capturing the VNC protocol, when remote accessing the machines. The
capture of normal traffic lasted for 10 minutes, giving enough time to take into account
many different types of behaviour.
Our sniffing device has in this timeframe generated
10 .pcap files which were analyzed. All captured files showed the vast majority of correct
outputs, giving a 90% correct realization rate, after the majority voting of the three models,
indicating that the models were correctly trained for recognizing benign data. We can also
notice a few false positives for RNN and CNN networks, however the voting mechanism
keeps the result from being too affected by only one model. In the table below, benign data
has been marked as 0, while attack vectors were assigned a Ground Truth (GT) value of
1. SYN flooding and port scanning both showed high detection rates with the RNN and
CNN models, whereas the Transformer failed to detect any SYN flooding attempts and only
46
==PAGE:53==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
identified port scanning correctly in 50% of the runs. Nevertheless, the final classification
based on majority voting was correct in all test iterations. Malformed packets, SSH password
cracking, and the DDoS simulations, have shown consistent detection with perfect accuracy
across all models. These types of malicious traffic seem to have distinct patterns that were
reliably detected by the models. In the botnet preparation test, the Transformer has again
shown a small drop (90% success rate), which was acceptable, as other two models were
consistent throughout all runs. A major failure for the system occured on the last test -
namely the deauthentication attack, conducted with the use of Flipper Zero. None of the
models have picked up any suspicious activity. This can be attributed to a few reasons. The
first being, that a deauthentication/deassociation attack is primarily an attack on ISO/OSI
layer 2 - the MAC layer. As we are using Zeek for processing, the conn.log does not include
such frames, but focuses on layer 3 and 4. It logs types of weird behaviour(Deauthentication)
into a separate weird.log file, which we have not used for testing nor training.
In the table below we can observe how each model performed across different network
traffic scenarios:
Test Name
GT
RNN
CNN
Transformer
Voting
Benign traffic
0
9/10
8/10
10/10
9/10
SYN flooding
1
10/10
10/10
0/10
10/10
Port scanning
1
10/10
10/10
5/10
10/10
Malformed packets
1
10/10
10/10
10/10
10/10
SSH password cracking
1
10/10
10/10
10/10
10/10
DDoS
1
10/10
10/10
10/10
10/10
BotNet preparation
1
10/10
10/10
9/10
10/10
Deauth. - FlipperZero
1
0/10
0/10
0/10
0/10
Table 7.1: Comparison of WiFi model performance on different network traffic test cases
7.1.2
Performance of Host Machine
WiFi capturing, processing and applying machine learning algorithms to it can be seen
as compute intensive. Since we are applying all of these techniques inside of different docker
containers, all running on the same machine, we wish to see how it impacts the machines’
performance. Pcap files ranging in size from 9 KB to 500 MB were used. Corresponding
processed log files generated from these captures were then employed to conduct the same
principle test using machine learning. For this, we have modified our scripts to log perfor-
mance metrics, which focus on two distinct metrics. First metric compared different sized
files against the time it took for processing. On the left graphic, in blue, we see packet pre-
processing (.pcap into .log) times, where we notice a high variation on our X-axis, as different
sized files had similar pre-processing times. This could be attributed to the different number
of packets inside of each such file, which we can also see on the right graphic - showing a
much more "stabilised" correlation between packet count and processing time. The second
metric compared the same parameters, and focused on Machine Learning instead. Looking
at both graphics we notice a similar distribution of points. This can be attributed to the
Page 47 of 62
==PAGE:54==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
way ML processes data - since we are using time series analysis, the data is also processed
in a sequential manner, giving a more consistent relation between both Y-axis metrics and
processing time.
Figure 7.1: Processing Times for File Pre-Processing and Machine Learning for WiFi
7.2
Bluetooth
7.2.1
Conducting Tests
Similarly to WiFi, we have also started the testing by introducing the system to what
was deemed normal/benign data. This data, similarly to what the models were trained on,
included transmissions between the devices, which included text, instructions, video and
audio. Benign tests were also split into two sub-groups; the first being benign data that
included the reconnection of the devices between capture, and the second not.
We can
observe that in the first case, RNN scored 0 out of 5 predictions - false positives, while CNN
correctly classified it as benign. As the voting was set to be malicious in case both models
showed malicious markers, the voting resulted in all-correct output. The output of the RNN
can be attributed to our training procedure, where we have trained both models on only data,
without ever exposing them to the handshakes between devices. It appears that CNN did
not cross the threshold in any of the runs. Benign data without reconnection was correctly
classified by both models. When it comes to malicious tests, results varied significantly.
The DoS test showed a mixed outcome, with RNN identifying 60% correctly, and CNN 40%
correctly. Due to our voting policy, and none overlap during the 10 tests, the final prediction
received a 0/10 score. The replay test presented a similar pattern, however CNN performed
better, identifying 8/10 runs correctly, while RNN only did 2. The rapid connect-disconnect
attack was detected perfectly by both models and voting, scoring 10 out of 10 in all cases,
indicating this attack is clearly visible to the system. The idle injection attack exposed a
more stark contrast. The CNN identified all samples as malicious, while the RNN failed to
detect any instances. Overall, these results show, that while CNN is generally more sensitive
Page 48 of 62
==PAGE:55==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
to different attack patterns, the RNN struggles with certain sequences of attacks. The voting
approach that we are using can in some instances cause an attack to pass undiscovered.
Test Name
GT
RNN
CNN
Voting
Benign with New Connection
0
0/5
5/5
0/5
Benign
0
5/5
5/5
5/5
DoS
1
6/10
4/10
0/10
Replay Attack
1
2/10
8/10
0/10
Rapid Connect Disconnect
1
10/10
10/10
10/10
Idle injection
1
0/10
10/10
0/10
Table 7.2: Comparison of Bluetooth model performance on different network traffic test
cases
7.2.2
Performance of Host Machine
As we had already seen the performance metrics for WiFi processing, we also wanted to
evaluate how our system handled Bluetooth packet processing under similar conditions. For
this, we used pcap files that ranged in size from as small as 20KB all the way up to 34MB,
giving us a fairly wide range of test data to work with. In terms of packet count, these
captures varied significantly as well - from only 534 frames to more than 900,000 frames in
a single file. The preprocessing of these files was done using our custom parser, which relied
on tshark to extract relevant data from the pcap files. This raw output was then processed
by our own code, which sliced and structured the data into a clean CSV format, ready for
machine learning. Below we can observe the graphical representation of the gathered data:
both graphs set in the logarithmic scale. These results show that both pre-processing and
machine learning stages demonstrate near linear scaling behavior relative to packet count,
which is expected given the sequential nature of the algorithms used. Since there is a strong
correlation between size/count and time, it appears that the operations were mostly I/O
bound.
Figure 7.2: Processing Times for File Pre-Processing and Machine Learning for Bluetooth
Page 49 of 62
==PAGE:56==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
7.3
Overall Discussion
This subsection reflects on the observed test outcomes, examining model behavior and
detection consistency across different traffic types and scenarios. It is important, that we
are able to rationally evaluate our work, compare results to other research. First, let us take
a look at the WiFi classification results. We observe that RNN and CNN models performed
consistently on different types of attacks, while the Transformer Network did not. This can
be attributed to the way our threshold setting has been set up. While we did set a static
threshold for all three models, we could also observe how close or far away the models came
to classify the data in each direction. Reviewing the output threshold of the models, we
see that RNN and CNN were much more reactive - sensitive to data. The values showed
large movements between the "extremes" of 0 and 1, while as Transformer output shows
more conservative value movements, fluctuating within a 10 to 20 percent range, depending
on the data seen. Here, a dynamic threshold value setup for Transformers would perhaps
be a better choice, as a larger "gap" between benign and malicious output values would
introduce stronger decisions in either direction. We also notice that our implementation
of the voting mechanism worked well for WiFi, as it shows that different misclassifications
across models meant the consensus still leaned toward correct detection. We must however
point out, that since we are using two reactive models, and since majority voting is in
place, misclassifications, as mentioned, can cause the system to fail. This is a topic that
is currently working for this real world setup, however, a more dynamic switch between
unamity and majority voting is to potentially cover other deployments. We also observe the
failure on Deauthentication attack detection. As mentioned in the previous sections, this can
be attributed to the blind spot in our design, namely the non-inclusion of other Zeek tool
outputs for training of the models. This is due to the fact, that files we are currently using for
analysis are based on the layer 3 and 4 communication, while lower layers, layer 2 especially,
where the Deauth attack happens, is missing from them. The inclusion of other Zeek .log
files into analysis would broaden the capabilities of the system, however the implementation
of these files would be troublesome, as the layout, size and formatting does not coincide with
the layout of the conn.log files.
A comparison can be drawn with [14], paper that as of writing of this thesis has not yet
been published, as they have described their research in a way, we deem similar to our initial
design, despite us using only a binary classification approach. While they have achieved high
test scores with a similar pre-processing setup idea, namely focusing on lower network layers,
we must point out that our models’ scores did achieve better results, which can be attributed
to the number of classes, where our models only needed to accomplish a two-class solution,
while the expansion to multiple classes, of course, lowers the scores, since two attack vectors
can have similar characteristics, which can trigger misclassification.
Thirdly, looking at the Bluetooth classification results.
We first observe that CNN
outperformed RNN in most of the test cases. This can be attributed to a slightly better
generalization by CNN over the latter. This likely stems from fundamental differences in
how CNNs and RNNs learn: while RNN takes into account patterns over time (sequential
read), CNN can focus also on more local patterns or features and might not be so sensible
Page 50 of 62
==PAGE:57==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
to the order of packets itself. This is also caused by the datasets themselves, as a dataset
with more variety(such as handshakes), would allow RNN to generalize patterns better. A
notable shortcoming was observed with the RNN during the benign data tests involving
device handshakes. Since the models were either not exposed to such handshakes during
training or only encountered them in a limited form, the RNN’s misclassification in these
cases is an expected outcome. Similarly to the WiFi setup, we also observed that both CNN
and RNN showed wide output value movements across the MSE threshold range, indicating
a high sensitivity to input variations. Another reason for the relatively high MSE threshold
values of the training of the models can be attributed to how we have parsed the data,
but more importantly the pre-processing of it. Since we wished to distinguish between the
source and destination devices, in a similar way to IP-traffic, we needed to implement a way
of assigning the addresses. Bluetooth does not use such an addressing system, but rather the
BD_ADDR address, similar to a MAC address. This meant that we were unable to directly
specify private or public addresses as we did with WiFi, but rather use the full BD_ADDR.
When applying one-hot encoding to this feature, it meant that we would produce the same
number of "new" feature columns as there were different Bluetooth devices. With the limited
sized datasets, this meant the reconstruction MSE would be higher. In contrast to WiFi,
the voting system failed on Bluetooth tests, as attacks were missed in the cases where the
models disagreed. This limitation was reinforced by the missing third, what can be called,
tie-breaker model in the form of a Transformer Network, which was excluded from live testing
due to its underwhelming performance during the training phase. This issue can cause the
system to not be production ready, since the model disagreement in critical systems can
potentially be disastrous. A mitigation in such case would rely on confidence voting instead
of pure majority voting, which is to be perhaps a feature.
Comparing WiFi performance and Bluetooth performance, we can see the better perfor-
mance in the first. This can be attributed to more extensive and widely available datasets,
which included a balanced mix of benign traffic and various attack vectors. This also made it
great for a full scale classification. Bluetooth on the other hand showed these shortcomings,
as we needed to create those datasets from scratch. Since we did not have enough data
to go from to do a full classification, the anomaly detection based on just benign data was
chosen, which limited the detection capabilities and made the models more prone to show-
ing anomalous results at unfamiliar but non-malicious sequences. This approach, naturally
reduced detection precision, as the models were more likely to flag unfamiliar but benign
events, such as device reconnections, as anomalies.
Another important point to highlight is the performance of the chosen models and
what they have been optimized for, or better said, what their original intent of creation
was. We mention this because we have also included models such as CNNs, which were
perhaps originally designed more for image and video processing/machine learning tasks,
and can arguably be replaced by other, more suitable models, which can potentially keep
the performance of WiFi processing, but also improve on Bluetooth anomaly detection. The
optimization for image processing stems from the focus of the model on local connections
between pixels on an image.
However, doing so would introduce another issue, namely
the challenge of testing and comparing a large number of different techniques, which might
perform better or worse. Due to the time constraints of this project, the models were pre-
Page 51 of 62
==PAGE:58==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
selected from the beginning, and we chose not to diverge into testing alternatives.
Zooming out on the protocols themselves we observe numerous things: comparing ways
of extracting information from the packets seems to be working excellently with WiFi, due
to it being the most documented, as well as the technology that is transmitting the most
data. In comparison to Bluetooth, we were forced to create our own parser, which despite
it being able to perform the operation it was designed for in a manner, that allows for the
application of machine learning methods. In order to create a more powerful, perhaps flow
based that would also be able to do a more in-depth analysis, like Zeek5.3.1 is able, the scope
of this project would need to be heavily extended. Zigbee on the other hand would need a
completely different approach, than what we have tried. Despite managing to capture some,
encrypted, traffic, and do some basic analysis on it, we notice that without gaining access to
the contents of the packets, we would be unable to perform more in-depth analysis. For this,
the focus should perhaps have to be more on the gateway, than purely on passive network
sniffing, as with it we can potentially see decrypted data.
Now let us compare the final system to our proposed concept. The first comparison will
be between the capturing of the data. While in the initial graphic we have proposed a system,
which is able to gather (sniff) packets passively on all three technologies, we have come that
this has been done in a different way. Capturing, similar to the proposal is achievable in
a simultaneous way across all three protocols, however, changes in the final testing ground
setup needed to be done in order for the capture to be of quality. By this we mean that
the interfaces (WiFi, Bluetooth) needed to be connected to the representative networks in
order to capture data that can be used for machine learning. This has been proven with the
initial tests, where we found, for example WiFi, we were unable to achieve any meaningful
results, without the decrypted packets - meaning the later test setup had to be accustomed to
this, by enabling a non-encrypted network. The connection to the back-end via MQTT has
remained the same. The second comparison is a reflection to the back end implementation.
It has remained largely in line with the proposed plan, particularly with regard to the use of
machine learning models, although, as previously mentioned, some trimming needed to be
done, especially in the case of Bluetooth and Zigbee. The main deviation from the original
idea was in the preprocessing of data. While we initially expected to apply machine learning
directly to the received packet files, it has later became clear that a significant amount of
preprocessing was required in order to make it achievable. In the case of Zigbee, however,
this preprocessing approach did not yield usable results, which meant, that the part of the
system remains limited in its current form.
Page 52 of 62
==PAGE:59==
8.
Future Improvements
During our development of the system, but more especially during the testing phase, we
have noticed, that certain parts of it could be improved in one way or another. This section
discusses four potential improvements, detailing the problems they address and proposing
implementation approaches under ideal, unconstrained conditions.
The first potential improvement comes from the WiFi classification setup. In this project
we have mainly relied on a binary classification between the benign and malicious activities
in the network. A potential improvement in this part would be to introduce a multi-class
setup, where each attack vector would receive its own class. This could then also enable the
user to more easily handle the said attack, as they will know its characteristics. A downside
to this approach would be the time needed to fully optimize the system. This is due to the
need of training done on larger datasets.
Secondly, focusing on Zigbee, we see throughout this project, that the main issue of
the setup stems from the inability to decrypt the data that the devices are sending. This
could potentially be solved, by instead of relying on passive sniffing of data within a network,
creating our own gateway for all the connections. Since this would be the main controller
of the network, all the packets within it could be seen in their decrypted form. While this
would increase control over the network, it may also raise privacy concerns or complicate
deployment in real-world environments.
A third potential improvement that could be explored as future work for this project
is focusing on Bluetooth. As we have seen in the results, the machine learning algorithms
struggle to perform the anomaly detection task in a precise way. To address this challenge,
different, simpler models could be considered, as they may better capture the patterns and
relationships between packets. In addition to this, it may be beneficial to extend the analysis
beyond Layers 3 and 4, as these layers might offer limited visibility into the features necessary
for accurate anomaly detection.
Lastly, a more overall improvement, that would impact the system operation as a whole,
would be to enable the automatic upload of new and updated models and scaler files. This
would be done separately from the anomaly detection setup as the re-training of the models
would use a lot of machine resources. With this, new types of attacks would also be included
in the analysis, making sure that the system remains adaptive and up to date with the latest
threats, without the need for constant manual updates or reconfiguration.
53
==PAGE:60==
9.
Conclusion
This final chapter will conclude the thesis project by summarizing the key findings and
observations in relation to the goals and plan outlined in one of the earlier chapters. The
aim of this project was to develop and test a threat or better-said anomaly detection system,
using different capturing and processing technologies, which will allow the end user to have
a more in-depth overview of the security of the different wireless communication protocols,
as well as show if malicious activities are threatening their networks. The project was aimed
at a proof of concept development of a system that would also be suitable for Smart Cities
deployment, since the rapid expansion of these wireless technologies within them need a
better security overview.
The results we have come to see indicate that such a system is feasible to some degree.
Optimization and refinement are required, in the sense that the current proof of concept
highlights potential, but also exposes several limitations which suggest that alternative ap-
proaches may be necessary in order to improve effectiveness. While the setup for WiFi did
show great potential, from the capture, processing as well as with the classification in ma-
chine learning, reaching high accuracy for threat or anomaly detection, other technologies
did not. Bluetooth, while it lacked an already existing solution for parsing data, we have
developed additional software to fix the issue. Real world tests gave mixed results, meaning
anomaly detection for Bluetooth packets did not perform in a consistent manner. Zigbee
implementation part of the system caused the most issues, as without a decrypted data-
gathering step, we were unable to complete the chain of the system. This means that only
WiFi and Bluetooth have been tested to the full planned extent.
Although much of the existing research in wireless anomaly detection focuses primarily
on machine learning model performance, our work emphasizes real world implementation
across the full data processing chain. With the integration of data capture, parsing, and
analysis for multiple wireless protocols, this thesis aims to bridge the gap between theoretical
research and practical deployment.
Despite deviating from the original plan due to protocol-specific limitations, the project
fulfilled its core objectives.
These challenges provided deeper insight into the practical
limitations of real world deployments and highlighted the importance of designing a flexible
anomaly detection systems that can accommodate the characteristics of different wireless
technologies.
54
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
IoT Analytics, “State of iot 2024: Number of connected iot devices growing 13% to 18.8
billion globally,” IoT Analytics GmbH, Tech. Rep., Sep. 2024, Accessed: 2025-06-17.
[Online]. Available: https://iot-analytics.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/09/
INSIGHTS-RELEASE-Number-of-connected-IoT-devices-vf.pdf.
[2]
M. Bures, M. Klima, V. Rechtberger, B. S. Ahmed, H. Hindy, and X. Bellekens, “Re-
view of specific features and challenges in the current internet of things systems impact-
ing their security and reliability,” in Trends and Applications in Information Systems
and Technologies, Á. Rocha, H. Adeli, G. Dzemyda, F. Moreira, and A. M. Ramalho
Correia, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 546–556, isbn: 978-
3-030-72660-7.
[3]
J. Margolis, T. T. Oh, S. Jadhav, Y. H. Kim, and J. N. Kim, “An in-depth analysis
of the mirai botnet,” eng, Proceedings - 2017 International Conference on Software
Security and Assurance, Icssa 2017, pp. 6–12, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ICSSA.2017.12.
[4]
J. C. S. Sicato, P. K. Sharma, V. Loia, and J. H. Park, “Vpnfilter malware analysis
on cyber threat in smart home network,” eng, Applied Sciences (switzerland), vol. 9,
no. 13, p. 2763, 2019, issn: 20763417. doi: 10.3390/APP9132763.
[5]
I. Alrashdi, A. Alqazzaz, E. Aloufi, R. Alharthi, M. Zohdy, and H. Ming, “Ad-iot:
Anomaly detection of iot cyberattacks in smart city using machine learning,” eng, 2019
Ieee 9th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (ccwc),
pp. 0305–0310, 2019. doi: 10.1109/CCWC.2019.8666450.
[6]
A. Dahiya and P. Mittal, “Design of threat detection model for iot-enabled smart en-
vironment,” eng, 2023 5th International Conference on Advances in Computing, Com-
munication Control and Networking (icac3n), pp. 1434–1439, 2023. doi: 10.1109/
ICAC3N60023.2023.10541469.
[7]
R. Paul, N. Ghosh, S. Sau, A. Chakrabarti, and P. Mahapatra, “Iot based smart access
controlled secure smart city architecture using blockchain,” und, 2019.
[8]
B. P. Balasaheb and M. S. Kumar, “Review of iot-enabled smart cities: Cybersecu-
rity threat detection using cloud computing,” eng, 2024 15th International Conference
on Computing Communication and Networking Technologies (icccnt), pp. 1–11, 2024,
issn: 24737674. doi: 10.1109/ICCCNT61001.2024.10725673.
55
==PAGE:62==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
[9]
H. Touqeer, S. Zaman, R. Amin, M. Hussain, F. Al-Turjman, and M. Bilal, “Smart
home security: Challenges, issues and solutions at different iot layers,” eng, Journal
of Supercomputing, vol. 77, no. 12, pp. 14 053–14 089, 2021, issn: 15730484, 09208542.
doi: 10.1007/s11227-021-03825-1.
[10]
V. A. Kanthuru, S. Rajasegarar, P. Rathore, et al., “Cyber attack detection in iot net-
works with small samples: Implementation and analysis,” eng, Advanced Data Mining
and Applications, pp. 118–130, 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-22064-7_10.
[11]
S. IPS, Iot-23: A labeled dataset with malicious and benign iot network traffic, https:
//www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-iot23, Accessed: 2025-02-13, 2020.
[12]
S. Tan, D. He, S. Chan, and M. Guizani, “Flowspotter: Intelligent iot threat detection
via imaging network flows,” eng, Ieee Network, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 268–274, 2024, issn:
1558156x, 08908044. doi: 10.1109/MNET.2023.3321372.
[13]
A. Lacava, E. Giacomini, F. D’Alterio, and F. Cuomo, “Intrusion detection system for
bluetooth mesh networks: Data gathering and experimental evaluations,” eng, 2021 Ieee
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops
and Other Affiliated Events, Percom Workshops 2021, pp. 661–666, 2021. doi: 10.
1109/PerComWorkshops51409.2021.9430966.
[14]
L. Chang and B. Cao, “Towards efficient network traffic classifications via multi-modal
learning,” eng, Ieee Internet of Things Journal, 2025, Forthcoming; not yet published,
issn: 23722541, 23274662. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3563987.
[15]
Raspberry Pi Ltd, Raspberry pi 4 model b specifications, Accessed: 2025-06-07, n.d.
[Online]. Available: https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-4-
model-b/specifications/.
[16]
Raspberry Pi Ltd, Raspberry pi 5 specifications, Accessed: 2025-06-07, n.d. [Online].
Available: https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-5/.
[17]
D. S. Thavamani, “Mqtt messages-an overview,” und, International Journal of Mathe-
matics and Computer Research, vol. 09, no. 04, 2021, issn: 23207167. doi: 10.47191/
ijmcr/v9i4.07.
[18]
M. Bender, E. Kirdan, M. O. Pahl, and G. Carle, “Open-source mqtt evaluation,” eng,
2021 Ieee 18th Annual Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, Ccnc
2021, p. 9 369 499, 2021, issn: 23319852, 23319860. doi: 10.1109/CCNC49032.2021.
9369499.
[19]
Wi-Fi Alliance, History of wifi, https://www.wi-fi.org/who-we-are/history,
Accessed: 2025-06-05.
[20]
IEEE, Ieee standard for wireless lan medium access control (mac) and physical layer
(phy) specifications, https : / / ieeexplore - ieee - org . proxy . findit . cvt . dk /
document/654749, Accessed: 2025-06-05.
Page 56 of 62
==PAGE:63==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
[21]
A. Bartoli, E. Medvet, and F. Onesti, “Evil twins and wpa2 enterprise: A coming
security disaster?” Computers Security, vol. 74, pp. 1–11, 2018, issn: 0167-4048. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2017.12.011. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404817302808.
[22]
Fortinet, What is eavesdropping? https://www.fortinet.com/resources/cyberglossary/
eavesdropping, Accessed: 2025-06-08.
[23]
Offensive Security, Wireless network attacks, https://www.offsec.com/cyberversity/
wireless-network-attacks/, Accessed: 2025-06-08.
[24]
Kaspersky, Evil twin attacks, https://www.kaspersky.com/resource- center/
preemptive-safety/evil-twin-attacks, Accessed: 2025-06-08.
[25]
Zeek Project, Zeek monitoring overview, https://docs.zeek.org/en/lts/monitoring.
html, Accessed: 2025-06-08, 2025.
[26]
M. Elkhodr, S. Shahrestani, and H. Cheung, “Emerging wireless technologies in the
internet of thingsâż: A comparative study,” International Journal of Wireless amp;
Mobile Networks, vol. 8, no. 5, 67â82, Oct. 2016, issn: 0975-3834. doi: 10.5121/ijwmn.
2016.8505. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.5121/ijwmn.2016.8505.
[27]
P. Dhillon and H. Sadawarti, “A review paper on zigbee (ieee 802.15. 4) standard,”
International journal of engineering research and technology, vol. 3, 2014.
[28]
C. He, Y. Xu, J. Shi, C. Lei, and G. Li, “Detection algorithm of the mimicry attack and
its implementation in the zigbee platform,” eng, International Conference on Commu-
nication Technology Proceedings, Icct, vol. 2020-, pp. 1083–1088, 2020, issn: 25767828.
doi: 10.1109/ICCT50939.2020.9295731.
[29]
E. A. Asonye, I. Anwuna, and S. M. Musa, “Securing zigbee iot network against hulk
distributed denial of service attack,” eng, Honet 2020 - Ieee 17th International Confer-
ence on Smart Communities: Improving Quality of Life Using Ict, Iot and Ai, pp. 156–
162, 2020, issn: 19494106, 19494092. doi: 10.1109/HONET50430.2020.9322808.
[30]
S. Zeadally, F. Siddiqui, and Z. Baig, “25 years of bluetooth technology,” Future In-
ternet, vol. 11, no. 9, 2019, issn: 1999-5903. doi: 10.3390/fi11090194. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/11/9/194.
[31]
J. Padgette, J. Padgette, J. Bahr, et al., Guide to bluetooth security. US Department
of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2017.
[32]
D. H. Morais, “Bluetooth 5/6 overview,” eng, 5g/5g-advanced, Wi-fi 6/7, and Bluetooth
5/6, pp. 181–204, 2025. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-82830-0_10.
[33]
Stratosphere. “Stratosphere laboratory datasets.” Accessed: 2025-03-01. (2015), [On-
line]. Available: https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-overview.
[34]
U. Canberra. “Ton iot dataset.” Accessed: 2025-04-06. (2025), [Online]. Available:
https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/toniot-datasets.
[35]
O. Lourme and M. Hauspie, Zigbee dataset, version V2, 2023. doi: 10.57745/NDW74U.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.57745/NDW74U.
Page 57 of 62
==PAGE:64==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
[36]
J. Whitaker, J. Liu, and U. Kamath, “Recurrent neural networks,” eng, Deep Learning
for Nlp and Speech Recognition, pp. 315–368, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-14596-
5_7.
[37]
C. Aggarwal, “Recurrent neural networks,” eng, Neural Networks and Deep Learning,
pp. 265–304, 2023. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-29642-0_8.
[38]
GeeksforGeeks. “Deep learning: Introduction to long short-term memory.” Last up-
dated on 28 May 2025; accessed 13 June 2025. (May 2025), [Online]. Available: https:
//www.geeksforgeeks.org/deep-learning-introduction-to-long-short-term-
memory/.
[39]
E.-A. Hisham and H. Mahmoud, “Convolutional neural network,” eng, Apress Ebooks,
pp. 367–413, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-5349-6_11.
[40]
C. Lei, “Convolutional neural network,” eng, Deep Learning and Practice With Mind-
spore, pp. 61–82, 2021. doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-2233-5_5.
[41]
Y. V. Nagapawan, K. B. Prakash, and G. R. Kanagachidambaresan, “Convolutional
neural network,” eng, Eai/springer Innovations in Communication and Computing,
pp. 45–51, 2021, issn: 25228609, 25228595. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-57077-4_6.
[42]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, et al., “Attention is all you need,” arXiv, p. 15,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[43]
X. Li, Y. Zhong, W. Shang, X. Zhang, B. Shan, and X. Wang, “Total electricity con-
sumption forecasting based on transformer time series models,” eng, Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 214, no. C, pp. 312–320, 2022, issn: 18770509. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.
2022.11.180.
[44]
Y. Boo and W. Sung, “Fixed-point optimization of transformer neural network,” eng,
Icassp, Ieee International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing -
Proceedings, vol. 2020-, pp. 1753–1757, 2020, issn: 2379190x, 15206149. doi: 10.1109/
ICASSP40776.2020.9054724.
[45]
J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time series anomaly
detection with association discrepancy,” und, 2022.
[46]
U. Michelucci, “Autoencoders,” eng, Applied Deep Learning With Tensorflow 2, pp. 257–
283, 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-8020-1_9.
[47]
NetApp. “Container vs. vm.” Accessed: 2025-06-09. (n.d.), [Online]. Available: https:
//www.netapp.com/media/container-vs-vm-inline1_tcm19-82163.png?v=85344.
[48]
ESnet, Iperf - the ultimate speed test tool for tcp, udp and sctp, https://iperf.fr/
iperf-doc.php, Accessed: 2025-06-09, 2025.
[49]
Wireshark, https://www.wireshark.org, Accessed: 2025-06-09.
[50]
Tshark, https://tshark.dev, Accessed: 2025-06-09.
[51]
KimiNewt, Pyshark, https://github.com/KimiNewt/pyshark/, Accessed: 2025-06-
09.
Page 58 of 62
==PAGE:65==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
[52]
Tcpdump, https://www.tcpdump.org, Accessed: 2025-06-09.
[53]
Scapy Project. “Scapy documentation.” Accessed: 2025-06-09. (2025), [Online]. Avail-
able: https://scapy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
[54]
Aircrack-ng Team. “Aircrack-ng official documentation.” Accessed: 2025-06-09. (2025),
[Online]. Available: https://www.aircrack-ng.org/doku.php.
[55]
Flipper Devices. “Flipper zero documentation.” Accessed: 2025-06-09. (2025), [Online].
Available: https://docs.flipper.net.
[56]
E. Foundation. “Eclipse mosquitto - official docker image.” Accessed: 2025-03-26. (2025),
[Online]. Available: https://hub.docker.com/_/eclipse-mosquitto.
[57]
FreeBSD Project. “Hcidump(1) - freebsd manual pages.” Accessed: 2025-03-27. (2012),
[Online]. Available: https://man.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=hcidump&
sektion=1&apropos=0&manpath=FreeBSD+9.0-RELEASE+and+Ports.
[58]
J.-M. Michault, Flash_cc2531, https://github.com/jmichault/flash_cc2531,
Accessed: 2025-02-01, 2020.
[59]
T. Instruments. “Packet sniffer.” Accessed: 2025-03-19. (2025), [Online]. Available:
https://www.ti.com/tool/PACKET-SNIFFER.
[60]
Koenkk. “Z-stack firmware repository.” Accessed: 2025-03-19. (2025), [Online]. Avail-
able: https://github.com/Koenkk/Z-Stack-firmware.
[61]
DSR-IoT. “Zboss sniffer firmware.” Accessed: 2025-04-02. (2025), [Online]. Available:
https://dsr-iot.com/files-info/zboss-sniffer/.
[62]
T. Zillner and S. Strobl, “Zigbee exploited: The good, the bad and the ugly,” in Black
Hat USA, White Paper, Black Hat USA 2015, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.
blackhat.com/docs/us-15/materials/us-15-Zillner-ZigBee-Exploited-The-
Good-The-Bad-And-The-Ugly-wp.pdf.
[63]
NS3 Simulation Team, Zigbee simulation, Accessed: 2025-05-09, 2024. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://ns3simulation.com/zigbee-simulation/.
[64]
IONOS. “Private ip address ranges.” Accessed: 2025-04-11. (n.d.), [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.ionos.com/help/server-cloud-infrastructure/private-
network/private-ip-address-ranges/.
[65]
Y. BENGIO, P. SIMARD, and P. FRASCONI, “Learning long-term dependencies with
gradient descent is difficult,” Ieee Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 157–166, 1994. doi: 10.1109/72.279181.
[66]
F. Chollet, Building autoencoders in keras, https://blog.keras.io/building-
autoencoders-in-keras.html, Accessed: 2025-05-03, 2016.
[67]
TensorFlow Authors, Autoencoder tutorial (tensorflow), https://github.com/tensorflow/
docs/blob/master/site/en/tutorials/generative/autoencoder.ipynb, Ac-
cessed: 2025-05-03, 2024.
Page 59 of 62
==PAGE:66==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
[68]
Y. Yao, J. Ma, and Y. Ye, “Regularizing autoencoders with wavelet transform for
sequence anomaly detection,” eng, Pattern Recognition, vol. 134, p. 109 084, 2023,
issn: 00313203, 18735142. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2022.109084.
[69]
B. Amos, Convolutional autoencoder in keras, https : / / github . com / snatch59 /
keras- autoencoders/blob/master/convolutional_autoencoder.py, Accessed:
2025-05-11, 2016.
[70]
C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals, Understanding deep learning
requires rethinking generalization, 2017. arXiv: 1611.03530 [cs.LG]. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.03530.
[71]
G. Lyon, Nmap: Network mapper, https://nmap.org, Accessed: 2025-05-21, 2025.
[72]
D. Miessler et al., Seclists: Pwdb_top-1000.txt, https://github.com/danielmiessler/
SecLists/blob/master/Passwords/Common-Credentials/Pwdb_top-1000.txt, Ac-
cessed: 2025-05-21, 2023.
Page 60 of 62
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
This section is a copy of our Readme File, where we explain the location of each script
file that we have used during this project. We also shortly describe what each file has been
used for.
1
Wifi
2
Attack Vectors
3
DOS.py -> Denial of service attack
4
SSHCrack.py -> SSH password attack
5
BotnetPrep.py -> Preparation of a Botnet attack
6
Malformed.py -> Malformed packets sending
7
PortScanning.py -> Port scanning reconnaissance
8
SYNFlood.py -> SYN flooding attack
9
PreProcessing Docker
10
WifiProcessingNoDecrypt.py -> PreProcessing of WiFi files with no decryption (
Zeek)
11
WifiReceiveTest.py -> MQTT receiver for WiFi packets
12
Wifi_processing_dockerfile -> Dockerfile for WifiProcessingNoDecrypt.py
13
WIFI_dockerfile -> Dockerfile for WifiReceiveTest.py
14
replacing_dockerfile -> Python file replacement for WifiProcessingNoDecrypt
container
15
Raspberry Capture
16
FinalWiFiCapture.py -> RasPi Capture script for WiFi packets and sending to
MQTT
17
ML
18
Training
19
RNNInitialTest.py -> Initial Training of RNN without any pre-processing
20
RNNTest2.py -> Training of RNN LSTM with pre-processed files
21
CNN_test1.py -> Training of CNN with pre-processed files
22
Transformer_test1.py -> Training of Transformer with pre-processed files
23
Real World
24
AllThreeMLTogetherAnalyzerNew.py -> Combining of all three models into one
detection module
25
ModelAnalyzer_dockerfile -> Dockerfile for AllThreeMLTogetherAnalyzerNew.py
26
replacingml3_dockerfile -> Python file replacement for
AllThreeMLTogetherAnalyzerNew.py container
27
28
Bluetooth
29
Attack Vectors
30
Ping.py -> Idle injection attack
31
DOS.py -> Denial of service attack
32
RapidConDiscon.py -> Rapid Connect/Disconnect of device
33
Replay.py -> Replay attack with previously hardcoded intervals
34
PreProcessing Docker
35
ble_parser_local.py -> Bluetooth parser that can be used locally (is manually
added to Docker volume)
61
==PAGE:68==
Design and Implementation of a Cloud-Based IoT Security System for Anomaly Detection
in Smart Cities
36
BLE_processing.py -> Uses ble_parser_local.py and checks for new files
37
BLEReceiveTest.py -> MQTT receiver for Bluetooth packets
38
BLE_dockerfile -> Dockerfile for MQTT receiver script
39
ble_processing_dockerfile -> Dockerfile for BLE_processing.py
40
Raspberry Capture
41
BluetoothCaptureFinal.py -> Capturing of Bluetooth packets and sending to MQTT
42
BluetoothCommRandom.py -> Random communication with other Bluetooth device via
RFCOMM
43
ML
44
Training
45
BLERnn.py -> RNN with Autoencoder model training
46
BLE_CNN_AUTOENCODER.PY -> CNN with Autoencoder model training
47
Real World
48
AllTwoBLETogether.py -> Combining both models into one detection module
49
alltwobletogether_dockerfile -> Dockerfile for AllTwoBLETogether.py
50
blereplaceml_dockerfile -> Python file replacement script for
AllTwoBLETogether.py container
51
52
Zigbee
53
Raspberry Capture
54
ZigbeeCapture.py -> Capture of Zigbee through ACM0 and CC2531
55
Docker
56
ZigbeerReceiveTest.py -> MQTT receiver for Zigbee
57
ML
58
Zigbee_RNN.py -> RNN model for Zigbee
59
ZigbeeCNN.py -> CNN model for Zigbee
60
61
Datasets
62
WiFi -> Contains pre-processed .log files from our capture
63
Bluetooth -> Contains pre-processed .csv files from our capture
64
65
Other Tests
66
WiFiCaptureDeauth.py -> WiFi packet capture with de-authentication of device at
each packet block
67
ZigbeeCapture.py -> Different approach to Zigbee Capture
68
69
Sample Pictures -> Contains sample screenshots of the website UI
Page 62 of 62
