==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Integration of EVs chargers with 
distributed energy resources and 
building consumption
Christian Berg Navarro 
DTU Wind-M-0914 June 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0914
June 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s): 
Simone Striani 
Mattia Marinelli
Pietro Zunino
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Christian Berg Navarro
Title:
Integration of EVs chargers with 
distributed energy resources and 
building consumption
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building con-
sumption.
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Christian Berg Navarro
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Frederiksborgvej 399,
4000 Roskilde Denmark
https://wind.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[N/A] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[N/A] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[N/A] (printed version)
ISBN:
[N/A] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for E-mobility and Pro-
sumer Integration, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
Christian Berg Navarro - s233223
Signature
Date
ii
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As part of the ongoing green transition, the energy industry is among the sectors undergo-
ing one of the most significant transformations. Focusing on the demand side, traditional
polluting technologies are being replaced with alternative solutions that rely only on elec-
tricity. A key driver of this shift is the decarbonization of the transportation sector, which
is increasing the electricity demand through the adoption of electric vehicles.This trend
poses new challenges for existing grid infrastructure, requiring innovative strategies to
manage the additional load.
Despite these challenges, electric vehicle demand presents a promising opportunity in
energy flexibility that can help to mitigate grid stress. In response to this emerging is-
sue, this thesis investigates the energy demand flexibility of a real world electric vehicle
charging cluster located at the Denmark’s Technical University campus of Risø.
For purpose of this investigation, the first part of the thesis presents the first data analysis
conducted on this specific cluster. This analysis provides valuable insights of the observed
user behavior and operational patterns of the cluster, and reinforces the hypothesis that
EV demand in workplace settings offers considerable potential for demand-side flexibility.
The second part focuses on the development of a smart charging strategy designed to
leverage this potential. This strategy employs a rule-based algorithm to dynamically al-
locate power based on provided inputs, aiming to enhance sustainability, alleviate grid
stress, and reduce operational costs, all without compromising user satisfaction. The
proposed approach demonstrates promising results, and therefore positioning itself as an
effective tool to address the challenges associated with the increasing electrification of
the demand.
In conclusion, through the execution of a comprehensive data analysis and with the de-
velopment of a smart charging strategy, this master thesis serves as a practical solution
for addressing the upcoming future energy challenges while providing a solid foundation
for future research.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to both the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU) and the Polytechnical University of Valencia (UPV) for the opportunity to
be part of the T.I.M.E Double Degree program. These institutions have not only shaped my
academic path but also provided my the environment where I could grow both personally
and professionally.
I am deeply thankful to my supervisors, Mattia Marinelli, Simone Striani, and Pietro Zunino,
for offering me the opportunity to work with them, and for the time and guidance they pro-
vided throughout these months. Their constant support is something I truly appreciate. I
am also especially grateful to María José Palomo, my supervisor from UPV, for always
being available,not only in professional matters but also in other aspects of life.
Furthermore, I want to thank everyone who has been by my side during this seven-year
university journey. These have probably been the best years of my life,filled with unfor-
gettable adventures, laughter and meaningful moments, but also with many challenges
and struggles along the way. We learned a lot, and I truly believe we’ve grown into bet-
ter people because of it. A special mention goes to my flatmates in Valencia and now in
Copenhagen, the ones who were there for the toughest days, and more importantly, for
the small everyday victories that made it all worthwhile.
I also want to mention what is, without a doubt, my biggest fans, my family. You are the
ones who have always given me the spark to keep going. Your love, encouragement, and
belief in me are the true reasons I’ve made it this far. You are not only the reason these
words are being written, but also the reason I’ve become the person I am today. Without
you, none of this would have been possible, and for that, I will always be grateful.
Lastly, I want to thank my past self . For all the efforts, sacrifices and all the hours you
spent away from family and friends in pursuit of your dreams and what you believed was
best for you. It wasn’t always easy to step out of the comfort zone, but you kept going.
For the future Christian, just a message to keep in mind: with the right attitude and by
doing things the right way, everything you truly desire can be accomplished. Never ever
give up on your dreams.
iv
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement and Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Structure of the document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Background & Literature Review
5
2.1
EVSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Charging modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Control Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Additional Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
EV cluster overview and current status
13
3.1
The EV Cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Current Cluster’s Smart Charging Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Statistical Analysis of Risø EV Cluster
21
4.1
Data Analysis: Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Data Analysis: Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
Smart Charging Rule Based Algorithm Solution
31
5.1
Description of the New Smart Charging Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Model Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Conclusions
51
Bibliography
53
A Appendix
57
A.1 Chapter 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 Chapter 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.3 Smart Charging Strategy Rule-Based Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Types of EV charging connector depending on the location. Source: EVESCO
(2025)[24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Centralized and Decentralized Architectures variations in Electric Vehicles
contexts. Adapted from Nimalsiri et al.(2021) [34] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Types of Distributed Control Architectures in Electric Vehicles contexts.
Adapted from Nimalsiri et al.(2021) [34]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Distinction between Behind-The-Meter and Front-The-Meter Systems. Source:
Department of Environmental Protection of New Jersey (2025) [40] . . . . .
11
3.1
Location of DTU Risø Campus (blue tag). Source: Google Earth (2025) . . 13
3.2
Satellite picture of the facilities under study. On the left Building 330. At
the center the EV parking lot with 6 chargers. Source: Google Earth (2025)
14
3.3
Flowchart of the current cluster architecture. In this setup, each VA trans-
mits its internally computed priority to the CA. The CA then calculates the
total power reference (P ref
CA ) and the total aggregated internal priority. Us-
ing the total power measurement from the PCC (P meas
PCC ) it computes the
power error (P error
PCC ). This information is sent back to each VA where the
new updated power setpoint is allocated to its corresponding plug. . . . . . 19
4.1
Sequential steps involved in the data preprocessing methodology used to
prepare the dataset for analysis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Weekly hourly Power Measurements at the PCC when only using active
chargin periods. Different power profiles are shown to illustrate that the
total capacity of the cluster is not reached (43 kW) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Distribution of Total Energy Charged per Session by Day
. . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Hourly distribution of Arrivals and Departures over the study period (show-
ing hours from 5 to 22) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1
Flowchart of the proposed strategy architecture. In this revised structure,
additional information is communicated from each VA to the CA, repre-
sented by the pink asterisk. Among the parameters transmitted is the power
measured at each plug (P meas
V A,i ), compensating for the absence of a Point
of Common Coupling (PCC) in the simulation environment. . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Visual representation of the double loop mechanism. First VA sends the
initial parameters to the CA. CA then computes the cluster‘s total power
reference, the total internal priority and error 1. VA allocates the interme-
diate power based in this information, which serves as the intermediate
power allocation and therefore intermediate measurement. This is sent to
the CA, and only the error is updated obtaining error 2, which is again sent
to the VA to allocate the final power setpoint to the plug.
. . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Rule-Based Algorithm decision tree for allocating one of the six proposed
modes for computing the cluster’s total power reference. Complemented
with Table 5.1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.4
Inconsistencies found in Strategy 3, where the maximum plug power oscil-
lates after every iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.5
Distribution of the total cluster power reference modes for the selected sce-
narios of upper bound threshold values of 0.9, 0.95 and 1. . . . . . . . . . . 46
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
vii
==PAGE:10==
A.1 Risø cluster real-time dashboard picture 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 Risø cluster real-time dashboard picture 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
viii
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
4.1
Average time between timestamps (seconds) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Different percentiles of Power Measurement Values of across all the hourly
averages used in the analysis (in kW)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Status percentages per charger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Overall usage of the cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.5
Comparison of real versus average values for session durations and energy-
related parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.6
Accumulated number of charging sessions per weekday over the study period 28
5.1
Summary of the cluster’s total power reference allocation modes. Modes
1-5 are allocated in periods with active sessions, while Mode 6 is allocated
in periods without active sessions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Selected KPIs for the comparison of the different proposed strategies for
allocating the plug’s maximum power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
Selected KPIs used to compare different lower threshold values in the sen-
sitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.4
Percentile distribution of Priceratio during the simulation period
. . . . . . . 45
5.5
Selected KPIs used to compare different upper threshold values in the sen-
sitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.6
Comparison of the metrics between the current Risø strategy and the pro-
posed smart charging strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.7
Performance comparison between the current Risø strategy and the smart
charging strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.1 Full KPIs comparison of of the different proposed strategies for allocating
the plug’s maximum power
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.2 Full KPIs comparison for different lower bound threshold values . . . . . . . 60
A.3 Full KPIs comparison for different upper bound threshold values
. . . . . . 61
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
In December 2015, 196 countries came together to confront the global climate crisis by
establishing the Paris Agreement, where all parties agreed on taking action to mitigate cli-
mate change and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by setting long term targets [1]. This
agreement aims to reduce emissions by 43% by 2030 and to reach net-zero emissions by
2050 [2]. Within Europe and Denmark, this targets are even more ambitious, with the EU
aiming for a 55% reduction by 2030, while Denmark targeting a 70% - seeking to become
the first continent to become carbon-neutral [3].To meet these targets, a global transfor-
mation towards greener and more sustainable solutions is underway, commonly referred
to as the ”Green Transition”. This transition not only focuses on replacing outdated pollut-
ing methods and reducing emissions, but also on adopting a holistic change in the entire
paradigm of energy consumption and production, in order to ensure a sustainable and
resilient future [4].
Within this Green Transition, one of the sectors undergoing one of the most significant
transformation is the energy sector, experiencing major changes in both production and
consumption. On the production side, old fashioned traditional methods such as coal,
gas and oil are gradually being replaced by Renewable Energy Sources (RES). These
technologies offer cheap and clean energy, however, due to their nature on depending
on weather conditions makes them produce variable outputs, posing a challenge for the
future stability of energy supply. On the consumption side, the electrification of energy
demand is taking place. Many energy uses, especially the ones involving combustion
technologies, are being replaced with alternative that rely only on electricity, helping to
reduce the carbon footprint. This shift is leading to a significant increase in electricity
demand. According to the International Energy Agency, electricity demand rose by 4.3%
in 2024 alone and it is expected to continue growing at a similar rate in the coming years
[5]. By 2030, this electricity is projected to account for approximately 27% of the total
share of energy demand, where in countries like the U.S., it is expected to reach a 78%
share by 2050 [6].
One of the main drivers of the increase of the electricity demand is the transportation sec-
tor, which is the only sector that has increased emissions since 1990 [7], and at the time it
is responsible for the 30% of the emissions in the Eurozone. Internal combustion engines
are being replaced by Electric Vehicles (EVs), and it is expected that more than 40% of
the cars sold by 2030 will be electric. In Denmark, Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) ac-
counted for over 50% of car sales last year, and it is expected to rise to 70% this 2025
[8].This is largely due to government incentives in form of tax reductions, aimed at pro-
moting the adoption of EVs, an approach that is also being implemented by many other
countries. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that, there is also a deadline in Europe that
states from January 2035, only electric vehicles will be permitted for sale in the European
market, indicating that a full transition to electric mobility will eventually be reached [9].
This means that the demand from the transportation will increase to a 10% of the total
electrical demand, 20 times more than it consumes today [10].
Given all this, to accomplish the Green Transition in the energy sector, the capacity of the
total installed RES must significantly grow in order to meet the rising electricity demand.
However, due to the variable nature of these technologies, integration poses a substantial
challenge. Key elements that could support this transition include [11]:
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
1
==PAGE:14==
• Energy storage systems: Due to the intermittency and variability of RES, these sys-
tems are critical to ensure energy balance and facilitate their adoption [12].
• Digitalization and demand management: Optimization plays a vital role in efficient
energy use and integration. Reducing and intelligently managing demand can signif-
icantly lower the need for additional generation capacity. Among the various sectors,
transportation presents a particularly strong potential for applying these strategies.
1.1
Problem Statement and Objectives
This project focuses on the second key element of the energy transition: demand manage-
ment. As EVs become widespread, they represent a substantial and growing component
of the increase in total electricity demand. This rise introduces not only challenges related
to energy generation but also presents a challenge in terms of additional stress on the ex-
isting grid infrastructure [13].However, as shown in [14] and [15], EV charging demand
offers a considerable opportunity to mitigate peak load consumption due to its potential
for energy demand flexibility.
One approach to mitigate this peak consumption and to alleviate grid stress is the im-
plementation of smart charging strategies. This strategies involve adjusting the power
allocation to charging EVs based on input parameters. These parameters are provided
to an operator, who can then monitor, manage and optimize energy consumption [16].
In this context, the present thesis proposes a smart charging strategy aimed at enhancing
sustainability and reducing grid stress. To support this, an analysis is conducted using
real-world data from an EV charging cluster located at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) Risø campus, which forms part of the European project EV4EU. This analysis
not only offers insights into the current operational characteristics of the cluster but also
serves as the foundation for the development of the smart charging strategy, which is
implemented as a tool to address the identified challenges.
Objectives:
The specific objectives of this project:
• To present the statistical characteristics of key parameters associated with a real-
world EV charging cluster located at the DTU Risø campus.
• To develop a smart charging strategy tailored to the characteristics of the cluster
under study, with the broader objective of ensuring its applicability and transferability
to other similar EV charging clusters.
• To evaluate the performance of the proposed smart charging strategy by assess-
ing its contributions to sustainability, grid load reduction, and operational cost sav-
ings, through comparison with a baseline scenario representing the currently imple-
mented strategy.
2
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:15==
1.2
Structure of the document
The structure of the document is the following:
• Chapter 2 presents the State of the Art and a thorough explanation of the key con-
cepts used throughout the project. This section aims to provide the necessary the-
oretical background to ensure a comprehensive understanding of the technologies
and strategies involved.
• Chapter 3 describes the specific characteristics of the EV cluster under study. This
includes an overview of the current control system, system architecture, and other
relevant aspects, forming the foundation of the case study.
• Chapter 4 focuses on the analysis of historical data from the EV cluster. This anal-
ysis is based on data collected since November 2024, when systematic measure-
ments began. At the request of the department, this newly gathered data has been
analyzed to gain insights into the current operating conditions and performance of
the system. The findings are not only relevant for this project but will also serve
future research efforts.
• Chapter 5 presents the development of a smart charging algorithm. The chapter
details the model, its architecture, and the results obtained from its application to
the EV cluster at Risø DTU.
• Finally, the document concludes with a summary of key findings and a discussion
of potential future work.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
3
==PAGE:16==
4
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:17==
2
Theoretical Background & Literature
Review
In this chapter, all the necessary background information for a better understanding of the
document is provided. The main components of the charging infrastructure are explained,
along with the different charging modes and the control architectures available today that
enable power delivery using smart charging techniques. The chapter concludes with ad-
ditional concepts that will support the reader throughout the rest of the document.
2.1
EVSE
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) refers to the equipment required to supply en-
ergy to the Electric Vehicles (EVs). It encompasses all the components and technologies
to charge an Electric Vehicle (EV) safely and efficiently [17], which are:
• Housing or enclosure
• Electronics
• Firmware
• Network connectivity
• Power connection
• Ports and cables
• Connectors or plugs
All of these components can be broadly categorized into two primary elements: the charg-
ing station or charging point and the connector or plug.
2.1.1
The Charging Station
The charging point or charging station is the infrastructure that comprises all the previously
listed components, excluding the plug. It represents the physical system through which
EVs are charged. Charging stations are connected on one side to the power grid, from
which they draw the electricity, and on the other side to the EVs through the connector.
These stations contain the electronics and software responsible for the communication
with the vehicle and for the control of the power output. They support various charging
speeds and standards, and can be installed in public, commercial and residential areas
[18].
The energy that they deliver can be either in DC or AC, depending on the charging tech-
nology used. Since EV batteries can only be charged with DC current and grid supplies in
AC, a power conversion stage is required. Depending on whether this conversion takes
place inside or outside the vehicle,chargers are classified as s on-board or off-board.
When the conversion stage occurs inside the vehicle, the charger is referred to as an
on-board charger. This type of charger offers flexibility, allowing vehicles to be charged
from any compatible power outlet. Furthermore, it is also considered simpler and safer,
as it ensures that the voltage delivered matches the battery’s requirements. However, an
on-board charger increases the weight, volume and overall cost of an EV. Additionally,
it presents a lower charging speed, in comparison to an off-board chargers, due to the
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
5
==PAGE:18==
lower power-handling capability. Despite this drawbacks, on-board charging is currently
the most widely used approach, as it is particularly suitable for situations where the EV
remains parked for a long period of time [19].
When conversion takes place outside the vehicle, the system uses an off-board charger.
These chargers supply DC power directly to the battery, making communication with the
vehicle essential to ensure the correct voltage and current are delivered. Off-board charg-
ers can provide a wide range of voltage and current levels to adapt to different battery
specifications, and due tot his versatility, they are commonly used in public charging sta-
tions [20]. Also, this type of charging is significantly faster, as off-board systems can
supply higher voltage and current levels, and benefit from greater energy conversion ef-
ficiency [21].
Both on-board and off-board charging systems can be implemented through various meth-
ods, depending on how the energy is transferred to the vehicle: conductive, inductive, and
wireless charging, where conductive charging is the most common used method and is
the one used in this research.
2.1.2
The Connector
The EV connector or plug is the part of the charging station that transfers the energy to
the EV. Depending on the charging speed, power output and current levels, connectors
are classified into three levels [22] [23]:
• Level 1: Corresponds to the slowest charging method. Delivers AC power between
1 and 1.8 kilo-watts (kW) using 120 volts single phase connection.
• Level 2: Faster than level 1, with a voltage increased to 230 volts per phase (400
volts in three-phase systems), and delivering up to 22 kW (AC). It is the most com-
monly installed charging level worldwide and serves as the focus of this research.
• Level 3: Also known as DC fast charging, this level can deliver up to 360 kW. It is
typically associated with off-board chargers, and due to its ability to fully charge a
standard EV in under 20 minutes, is commonly referred to as superchargers or fast
chargers.
As shown in Figure 2.1, there are plenty of types of connectors, and depends a lot on
the location. Focusing on the ones used in Europe, two main connector types are com-
monly used. Type 2 or Mennekes connector is the standard of AC and it is the most
widespread type of plug used in Europe. It supports both single-phase and three-phase
Level 2 charging, with a maximum output of 22 kW. The CCS Type 2, is the primary plug
for DC charging, and it is capable of reaching Level 3 and delivering up to 360 kW DC
power [24].
6
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: Types of EV charging connector depending on the location. Source: EVESCO
(2025)[24]
2.2
Charging modes
To properly understand the results presented later in this document, it is important to es-
tablish a clear understanding of the different charging approaches.The discussion begins
with the distinction between controlled and uncontrolled charging.
Uncontrolled charging, often referred to as dumb charging, is the conventional method in
which an EV is simply plugged into the power supply and begins charging immediately
[25]. Here, the charger is only capable of providing electricity supply, with no communi-
cation capabilities or any type of integrated network. Although simple, this method can
place significant stress on the grid, specially during peak hours, where residents return
home from work and begin charging simultaneously, leading to even higher peak loads
[26].
In response to this, controlled charging is developed. This approach includes any any
form of charging that is intentionally manged or scheduled, rather than left to occur au-
tomatically. As simple as setting a time schedule when the EV is charging. One form of
controlled charging is smart charging, a configuration in which EVs and charging infras-
tructure communicate in real time in order to monitor, mange, and control the charging
process. This communication adjusts charging based on multiple inputs such as user
inputs, renewable energy production, grid conditions and other constraints. Therefore,
this form of charging becomes essential given the growth rate of EVs adoption and the
available grid capacity [27].
2.2.1
Power flow direction
Depending on the charging configuration, electric power can flow in one or two directions,
from the grid to the vehicle or from the vehicle back to the grid. When the power can
only flow in one direction, from the grid to the vehicle, it is referred to as unidirectional
charging. In contrast, bidirectional charging allows the power transfer between EVs and
the grid: from the grid to the vehicle (G2V) when the vehicle is charging, and from the
vehicle back to the grid (V2G) when the vehicle is discharging.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
7
==PAGE:20==
Regardless of the charging configuration, both systems can offer regulation services to the
grid. When only unidirectional charging is possible and a smart charging strategy is im-
plemented, the approach is referred to as V1G (Vehicle-to-Grid with one-way flow). In this
setup, the vehicle’s consumption is dynamically adjusted in response to signals coming
from the grid. If bidirectional charging is allowed, the system is termed V2G (Vehicle-
to-Grid with two-way flow). This configuration offers a greater flexibility for regulation
services, as vehicles can not only draw power from the grid but also inject it back. Doing
so, EVs can be seen as mobile energy storage solutions or even as distributed energy
generators form the grid’s perspective [28] [29].
This added flexibility and potential is the reason why most current applications of bidirec-
tional charging focus on V2G, as it offers the highest commercial potential. For instance,
[30] demonstrates that EVs participation in V2G regulation services can not only reduce
costs but also generate profits. However, the benefits of bidirectional charging go be-
yond V2G. It can also support V2X (Vehicle to Everything) applications, including V2B
(Vehicles-to-Building) or V2H (Vehicles-to-Home). Here, EVs can help balancing energy
usage at local level and improve sustainability, providing backup power during outages
or supporting self-consumption, specially when combining it with local renewable energy
systems.
Despite these promising potential, bidirectional charging still faces several significant chal-
lenges. This technology not only implies a higher technical complexity, which drives up
equipment costs and implementation requirements. In addition, it faces a more demand-
ing regulatory and legal compliance issue, particularly related to local electrical codes
and utility regulations. All these obstacles help explaining why many current EV models
do not support bidirectional charging, which limits the immediate scalability of these solu-
tions and underscores why unidirectional chargers remain the most widely adopted option
today[31] .
2.3
Control Architectures
Deploying a smart charging technique involves using a control system to manage the
power delivery to charge an EV cluster. These control systems follow one of these three
types of architectures: centralized, decentralized and distributed, each of them presenting
different advantages and disadvantages [32].
2.3.1
Centralized Architectures
A centralized control architecture is a computing structure that relies on a single control
unit, which gathers and processes all relevant information. This central aggregator, rep-
resented by the red dot in (a) of Figure 2.2 , collects data from all charging sessions, grid
infrastructure and other relevant sources to determine the optimal setpoint for the entire
cluster, and the individual setpoints for each EV.
The primary advantages of this architecture are its simplicity and that the aggregator has
a complete knowledge of the entire charging cluster. However, relying on a single con-
trol point introduces some vulnerabilities. First, if the central controller fails, the entire
system may collapse, making it highly susceptible for cyber-attacks [33]. Second, a high
volume of data can create processing bottlenecks, which results in performance issues
and scalability limitations.
8
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.2: Centralized and Decentralized Architectures variations in Electric Vehicles
contexts. Adapted from Nimalsiri et al.(2021) [34]
2.3.2
Decentralized Architectures
Decentralized architectures distribute control across multiple nodes, often spread across
different locations. Each node operates independently but communicates and shares in-
formation with the others. As shown in Figure 2.2, this architecture can be implemented
either with or without an indirect central aggregator, represented by the purple dot in (c).
Regardless of whether this indirect aggregator is present or not, communication in decen-
tralized systems is done indirectly and aimed at achieving common objectives among the
nodes.
This configuration reduces the computational burden found in centralized systems,as the
control process is shared across multiple points, making this architecture more scalable.
It also enhances robustness, if one node fails the system can continue operating. In
contrast, this approach sacrifices the global system visibility, which may lead to suboptimal
decisions.
2.3.3
Distributed Architectures
Distributed control architectures combine elements of both centralized and decentralized
systems. These typically present structured hierarchical layers of control. The upper layer,
usually a cloud server, acts as a central aggregator that processes grid infrastructure data
and other inputs to manage the charging cluster at a global level. The lower level, formed
by local aggregators, control groups of EVs and are the responsible of providing the final
setpoint to the individual vehicles.
The relationship between upper and lower levels of control can vary significantly. As seen
in Figure 2.3, there are multiple ways to implement this type of hierarchical architecture.
The variation depends on factors such as the type and direction of information (direct or
indirect), how the power is computed and allocated, and the level of control assigned to
each aggregator.
This approach combines the advantages of both centralized and decentralized architec-
tures. It adopts the global view of the charging cluster, characteristic of centralized sys-
tems, enabling a more informed decision-making. At the same time, the flow of infor-
mation is reduced, alleviating the computational burden and addressing the scalability
problems. It also benefits from key features of decentralized models, as the system does
not only rely on a single control point, gaining robustness and reliability. Overall, this type
of architecture offers a promising and well-balanced solution, though it comes at the cost
of higher design complexity, requiring careful planning and coordination among multiple
control layers.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
9
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.3:
Types of Distributed Control Architectures in Electric Vehicles contexts.
Adapted from Nimalsiri et al.(2021) [34]
2.4
Additional Key Concepts
In this last section of Chapter 2, some of the concepts that are essential for the further
comprehension of the document and that have not been mentioned yet, are explained.
Load shifting: Strategy that involves moving energy consumption from one time period
to another. The main objectives of load shifting include aligning consumption with periods
of higher renewable energy production, lower electricity prices, or relieving stress on the
power grid during peak demand periods [35].
Demand-side flexibility: Closely related to the previous concept. Demand-side flexibil-
ity refers to the extent to which a specific type of energy demand can be adjusted or shifter
over time [36]. Unlike certain types of inflexible demand, such as industrial processes that
must run continuously or individual households that do not respond to price signals, EV
charging presents significant potential for flexible consumption [15].
Power sharing: It refers to the system in which multiple chargers share the available
electrical capacity, allowing power to be allocated among multiple charging spots. Instead
of allocating fixed power, the system continuously adjusts power delivery based on real-
time status and needs, ensuring that the optimal amount of power is delivered to every
EV [37].
Power scheduling: It refers to the system in which the power allocated to a charging
session can be deferred and deliver later in time, rather than supplied immediately upon
connection.
Load balancing: This strategy takes into account power consumption of buildings and
households, which, as previously mentioned, is typically inflexible. Therefore,when a EV
charging station is installed in a residential or workplace setting, the charging process is
adapted based on the building’s energy consumption, in order to ensure safe operation
and avoid overloading the system. In resume, it serves as a method to allocate power to
the charging EVs in response to the building consumption [38].
10
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:23==
BTM-FTM: The utility meter is the measurement device responsible for tracking and con-
trolling energy usage and serves as a diving point between Behind-the-Meter (BTM) and
Front-of-the-Meter (FTM) systems. As shown in Figure 2.4, BTM refers to the energy
systems located in the customer side of the meter. These include on-site loads such as
EV consumption, local renewable energy production, local energy storage systems and
all type of self-sufficiency solutions. FTM refers to the systems on the utility side of the
meter, including all the equipment involved in distribution and transmission, all type of
utility scale power plants and grid-connected energy storage systems [39].
Figure 2.4:
Distinction between Behind-The-Meter and Front-The-Meter Systems.
Source: Department of Environmental Protection of New Jersey (2025) [40] .
With this distinction, a further classification can be made between BTM and FTM services.
BTM services are provided to end users and involve load coordination at the connection
point, whether it is from buildings, EVs or Distributed Energy Resources (DERs). FTM
services, on the other hand, are delivered to Distribution System Operators (DSOs), in
where for example EVs can be coordinated and aggregated to provide flexibility services
directly to the grid [41].
.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
11
==PAGE:24==
12
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:25==
3
EV cluster overview and current status
In this chapter, a detailed description of the Electric Vehicle (EV) parking facility that serves
as the central focus of this study is provided. The system in which the retrieved data of
this cluster is also outlined. Finally, the currently implemented charging strategy is pre-
sented, as it forms the basis for the development of the smart charging strategy proposed
in Chapter 5.
3.1
The EV Cluster
The case study in this thesis focuses on the EV cluster located within the research facilities
at Risø (55°41′21″ N, 12°06′00″ E) , where the Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
operates one of its primary research campuses, just 5 km north of Roskilde and about 30
km west of Copenhagen.
Figure 3.1: Location of DTU Risø Campus (blue tag). Source: Google Earth (2025)
Specifically, the cluster is located in front of Building 330 of Risø campus, where the E-
mobility and Prosumer Integration Section is based, and consists of six smart chargers.
This cluster is exclusively available for personnel working in the facilities. Aligning with
the explanations given in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, these are three-phase unidirectional on-
board chargers that deliver 230 Volts (V) and up to 32 Amperes (A) per phase, resulting
in a total charging capacity of 22 kilo-watts (kW) per charger, corresponding to a Level
2 of charging. Each charger is equipped with two Type 2 plugs, allowing two EVs to
charge simultaneously from the same unit. The power delivered through the two plugs
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
13
==PAGE:26==
does not need to be distributed equally, as long as the combined output does not exceed
the charger’s maximum capacity of 22 kW. This configuration gives a potential maximum
charging capacity of 132 kW. However, the grid capacity of the cluster is limited to 43 kW
(63 A, three-phase), meaning that the cluster operates under a constrained grid capacity
scenario.
Figure 3.2: Satellite picture of the facilities under study. On the left Building 330. At the
center the EV parking lot with 6 chargers. Source: Google Earth (2025)
3.1.1
Distributed Architecture
The EV cluster presents a distributed control architecture composed of two hierarchical
control levels. At the upper level, a central entity referred to as the Cloud Aggregator
(CA) is the responsible of first, having a complete comprehensive overview of the cluster’s
status, and second, processing the information from the grid and other external sources.
In addition, the CA is the responsible of computing the aggregated power reference of
the entire cluster. At the lower level, each of the twelve plugs is equipped with a Virtual
Aggregator (VA), which communicates with the CA and manages the allocation of power
to the respective plug.
3.1.2
The Dataset
This subsection provides an overview of the dataset and its structure. The explanation
begins with the tagging system assigned to the chargers. Each of the 12 possible con-
nections of the cluster, 2 per charger, is identified with a four digit tag, where the first three
digits correspond to the charger identifier and the fourth digit designates the specific plug.
For example, tags 1241 and 1242 refer to the charger 124 but to plugs 1 and 2 respec-
tively. It is important to mention that these tags are fixed to the charger. If a charger is
replaced, a new tag will appear in the system. For instance, during the data collection pe-
riod relevant to this study, charger 124x (i.e., 1241 and 1242) was removed from Risø for
maintenance, and two new chargers were registered in its place (199x and 256x). These
alterations only affect the dataset, as the underlying control logic remains unchanged.
14
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:27==
Energydata.dk
Since November 2024, the data from the cluster has been stored and made available
in EnergyData.dk (https://energydata.dk/en/), a data hub platform for energy related
datasets in Denmark. This date marks the beginning of the dataset’s operation. Within
the EV4EU section, data from DTU’s EV parking facilities of Risø and Bornholm are pre-
sented. For both clusters, the measurements are categorized based on their point of ac-
quisition, either at the Point of Common Coupling (PCC) or at the Electric Vehicle Supply
Equipment (EVSE) level, where PCC refers to the measurements taken at whole cluster
level, while EVSE refers to the ones acquired at every individual plug. An overview of the
available measurements at each level is presented below, starting with those collected at
PCC level:
• Timestamp (ts): Indicates the specific date and time in which the measurement
was retrieved. The format used is dd/mmmm/yyyy hh:mm:ss, providing a temporal
resolution at the second level.
• Power reference (P ref
CA ): Computed by the CA, this parameter represents the power
setpoint for the entire cluster. This value defines the target power that the cluster
aims to follow, although deviations may occur. The power reference is specified per
phase. For example, if a total setpoint of 21 kW is desired, it will be represented as
7 kW in each of the three phases. Currently, there are two strategies to compute
this power. The first and most basic one, consists on aligning this power reference
to the maximum capacity of the cluster, 43 kW (14.4 kW per phase), while the other
one , still in the implementation phase, aims to follow the reference of real-time local
renewable energy production. Values are expressed in watts (W).
• Power measured (P meas
PCC ): Denotes the actual power delivered to the cluster, which
may deviate from the reference value. Measurements are expressed in watts (W)
for each of the three phases.
• Measured Voltage (V meas
PCC ): Provides the voltage levels in volts (V) measured across
each of the three phases. Values are typically close to the nominal value of 230 V.
• Measured Current (Imeas
PCC ): Provides the current levels measured in amperes (A)
measured across each of the three phases. This parameter directly controls the
power delivery and ranges from 0 to a maximum of 63 A per phase.
• Measured Reactive Power (Qmeas
PCC): Provides the reactive power present across
each the three phases.Values are provided in volt-ampere reactive (VAR).
• Measured Frequency (freqmeas
PCC): Captures the frequency at the PCC. This pa-
rameter is of particular interest if the cluster was to provide grid flexibility services.
Values are given in hertz (Hz).
• THDI: Expressed as a percentage (%), this parameter represents the Total Har-
monic Distortion of Current, indicating the degree of distortion in the current wave-
form due to harmonics.
• THDV: Expressed as a percentage (%), this parameter represents the Total Har-
monic Distortion of Voltage, measuring the distortion in the voltage waveform due
to harmonics.
While the measurements available at the EVSE level, corresponding to each individual
plug, include the following:
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
15
==PAGE:28==
• Timestamp (ts): Identical to the timestamp at the PCC level. It indicates the specific
date and time in which the measurement was retrieved.
• Power reference (P ref
V A,i): Represents the power reference assigned to the individ-
ual plug and it is identical across all three phases. The method to compute this value
is described later in section 3.2. Units are expressed in watts (W).
• Power measured (P meas
V A,i ): Denotes the actual power delivered to the plug and it is
given for each of the 3 phases. This parameter serves as a way to identify if the
connected vehicle is charging using one or three phases. Units are expressed in
watts (W).
• Energy charged (Echargedi): Indicates the cumulative amount of energy delivered
to the vehicle during a charging session and therefore this value only increases over
time in an active session. Units are expressed in kilowatt-hours (kWh).
• Time of departure (tdepdesired
i
): Specifies the departure time input by the user at
the beginning of the charging session, and therefore denoted as desired time of
departure. It is provided in epoch time format ( seconds since January 1st 1970).
• Energy desired (Edesiredi): Specifies the total energy requested by the user at
the beginning of the charging sessions. This value reflects the desired energy to be
delivered and it is given in kilowatt-hours (kWh).
• State of the plug (plug−statei): It indicates the operational status of the plug. The
states are defined as follows: 0 for error, 12 for idle (available and ready for use), 6
for connected ( vehicle is plugged in, but charging has not yet started due to pending
user input, system delay or the allocation of a power scheduling mechanism), 3 for
actively charging and -1 for unavailable (out of service).
• State of the VA (V A −statei): Denotes the logical state of the Virtual Aggregator,
with state values ranging from 0 to 17. A complete description of each state is
available in the VA documentation at VA modes.
• Priority (ρ): Parameter used in the priority-based power allocation method de-
scribed in section 3.2. Ranging from 0 to 1, it reflects the urgency of a charging
session based on the user inputs and the state of the cluster.
To conclude this section, it is worth noting that both clusters feature a real-time monitor-
ing interface designed to provide users a intuitive overview of the system’s status. The
interface for the Risø cluster, accessible via dashboard, is illustrated in Figures A.1 and
A.2 in the Appendix. It offers a live display of key parameters such as the power and state
of each plug, energy requested and delivered, priority values and real-time consumption
metrics.
3.2
Current Cluster’s Smart Charging Strategy
This section presents a detailed overview of the current smart charging strategy imple-
mented in the Risø EV cluster, which serves as the base for the later proposed smart
charging algorithm (Chapter 5). The operational control logic is outlined along the com-
munication mechanisms within the system’s distributed architecture. While the expla-
nation is not examined in full technical detail, it focuses on the essential elements and
functionalities required to understand the current strategy of the cluster.
Building on this overview, the current strategy implemented in Risø is based on the ap-
proach developed by DTU Wind and Energy Systems Department in [42]. This strat-
16
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:29==
egy employs a priority based system through local distributed control that relies on user-
provided inputs to manage both power sharing and power scheduling among the EVs.
These user inputs define the charging urgency of each session, enabling the system to
allocate the available power according to the level of urgency.
When an EV arrives to the charging station, users are required to input the desired amount
energy to be charged (Edesiredi) and the desired time of departure (tdepdesired
i
), by which
the requested energy should be delivered. These inputs are processed by the corre-
sponding VA to which the EV is connected, in order to compute the internal priority of the
charging session, denoted as ρint. The value of this parameter depends on the current
status of the session:
• When there is no EV connected to the plug: ρint = 0
• When a new charging session begins:ρint = 1 . This mechanism makes the VA to
request additional capacity from other VAs, reallocating available power to accom-
modate the newly connected session and preventing overloading situations within
the cluster.
• When a session is actively charging,the internal priority is dynamically updated:
ρint,i =
Edesiredi −Echargedi
(
tdepdesired
i
−tnow
)
· Pmax,i
∈[0, 1)
(3.1)
Where tnow denotes current time, and Pmax,i refers to the maximum power that the
plug i can deliver.
Fundamentally, this Equation 3.1 is a form of quantifying the ratio between the minimum
(Pmin,i) and the maximum deliverable power for a given session (Pmax,i). The minimum
power (Equation 3.2) corresponds tot the average power that must be delivered to meet
the user defined energy request given the remaining time until the desired departure.
Notably, this minimum power must not exceed the physical maximum power that can be
allocated to the session.
Pmin,i = min
(
Edesiredi −Echargedi
(
tdepdesired
i
−tnow
)
, Pmax,i
)
(3.2)
The maximum power that the plug can deliver (Pmax,i), is determined by the charger’s
rated capacity, which in this case is 22 kW. Individual plugs are capable of delivering this
amount of power but the presence of two plugs per charger imposes that the combined
output of both plugs must not exceeds the charger’s maximum capacity. Consequently,
the current scenario adopts a simplified allocation strategy by equally dividing the available
power by the number of plugs, resulting in a maximum power of 11 kW per plug.
The individual internal priority of each active session (ρint,i ) is then computed and com-
municated to CA, which aggregates all these individual internal priorities and computes
the total internal priority of the system (Equation 3.3).
∑
i
ρint,i
(3.3)
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
17
==PAGE:30==
In addition and as outlined before, the CA is responsible for setting the power reference
for the entire cluster (P ref
CA ). This reference value is continuously compared with the total
measured power at the PCC (P meas
PCC ), resulting in a difference that constitutes the mea-
surement error, which quantifies the deviation between the actual power consumption and
the desired setpoint:
P error
PCC = P ref
CA −P meas
PCC
(3.4)
With this information, each VA is ready to compute the individual power reference set-
point for the plug under its control. Each VA receives both the total power error and
the aggregated total internal priority of the cluster from the CA, eliminating the need for
direct communication between the VAs, optimizing the overall communication and data
exchange process.
Using the received total internal priority of the system, the VA computes the relative priority
of the session (ρr,i). This parameter serves as a metric to compare the relative urgency
of the current active sessions of the cluster. It is calculated as follows:
ρr,i =
ρint,
∑
i ρint,i
(3.5)
The updated individual power reference setpoint is determined using a PI controller, which
takes into account the previous power setpoint, the session’s relative priority and the
global power error received from the CA. Equation 3.6 presents how the power setpoint
is updated:
P ref
V A,i,t =
{
P ref
V A,i,t−1 + P error
PCC · ρr,i
if
P error
PCC > 0
P ref
V A,i,t−1 + P error
PCC · (1 −ρr,i)
if
P error
PCC < 0
(3.6)
This process is executed iteratively at each timestep, where all parameters are dynami-
cally updated.
Finally, a visual representation of the system’s communication and control architecture is
presented in Figure 3.3, where the main systems components, data flows and exchanged
parameters are illustrated.
18
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.3: Flowchart of the current cluster architecture. In this setup, each VA transmits
its internally computed priority to the CA. The CA then calculates the total power reference
(P ref
CA ) and the total aggregated internal priority. Using the total power measurement from
the PCC (P meas
PCC ) it computes the power error (P error
PCC ). This information is sent back to
each VA where the new updated power setpoint is allocated to its corresponding plug.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
19
==PAGE:32==
20
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:33==
4
Statistical Analysis of Risø EV Cluster
This section addresses the first major objective of the present master thesis. It presents a
data analysis based on the information previously introduced in Chapter 3 of the Electric
Vehicle (EV) cluster located at Risø campus. The analysis is conducted in response to the
release of the dataset on EnergyData.dk in November 2024, with the goal of investigating
the characteristics of key EV charging parameters. As the first analysis conducted on
this dataset, it not only contributes to achieving the objectives of this thesis, such as the
development of the smart charging algorithm presented in Chapter 5, but also provides
foundation for future research and supports a deeper understanding of the current status
of the EV parking infrastructure.
Due to the extensive volume of data and preprocessing efforts required, the analysis fo-
cuses on the period from November 2024 to February 2025 inclusive. Notably, holiday
periods including the Christmas break are excluded from the analysis to avoid atypical us-
age patterns. Extending the analysis beyond this period is not feasible, as the second part
of the thesis also demands substantial development, and the overall project is conducted
under strict temporal constraints.The following subsections present the methodology used
for data structuring and preprocessing, followed by the results obtained from the analysis.
4.1
Data Analysis: Methodology
The data used for this analysis is obtained from EnergyData.dk in CSV format. Due to
the high temporal resolution of the dataset with timestamp intervals of only few seconds,
the data is downloaded separately for each month in order to ensure manageable file
sizes. The initial preprocess is performed using Microsoft Excel. The first step involves
categorizing the data from each month, distinguishing between values recorded at the
Point of Common Coupling (PCC) and Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) level.
Once this step is completed, the methodology used to compute the cluster power refer-
ence (P ref
CA ) is identified. In this analysis, only the first strategy for computing the power
reference is considered, which is the one that sets P ref
CA to the maximum capacity of the
cluster. There are several justifications for not using the second strategy, the one allo-
cating the power based on real-time local Renwables Energy Sources (RES) production.
First and foremost, the maximum-capacity approach provides a less constrained power
availability scenario, offering a more consistent baseline for evaluating user and charging
behavior. Second, the second strategy strategy remains still in the implementation phase
during the time of this analysis.In addition, this strategy is not actively tested in the cluster
until February 2025, resulting in a limited sample size that would not support a robust
analysis.
The next step involves selecting the most relevant parameters for the analysis. At the
PCC level, the selected parameters where the reference and the measured power for
each of the phases. Regarding the EVSE level, most of the parameters are used, with
the exception of the state of the Virtual Aggregators (VAs) and the priority values, which
are excluded. The reason for this selection is that this analysis focuses primarily on power
and energy metrics, with the objective to quantify the operational behavior of the cluster.
Moreover, the retained parameters are the ones most relevant to the Rule-Based Algo-
rithm (RBA) proposed in Chapter 5.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
21
==PAGE:34==
For the processing of the PCC data, both the power reference (P ref
CA ) and the power mea-
sured (P meas
PCC ) are set to outlier removal. A lower bound of 0 kilo-watts (kW) is applied
in order to eliminate occasional negative power values. An upper bound of 16 kW per
phase is also established, slightly higher than the limit of 14.4 kW, allowing minor devia-
tions while filtering out significantly high values.This power values, are then aggregated
into hourly values, where only periods with active usage were considered (non-zero), in
order to facilitate the final data analysis. As the dataset provides the power in per phase
values, the total cluster power is computed by adding these three phases, resulting in a
four month dataset of hourly averages for both P ref
CA and P meas
PCC , and ready to be analyzed
using Phyton.
Figure 4.1: Sequential steps involved in the data preprocessing methodology used to
prepare the dataset for analysis.
The preprocessing of the EVSE data requires significantly more time compared to the
data from the PCC. Unlike the PCC measurements, EVSE data exhibits frequent and
abrupt interruptions, during which the data is either missing or lost. On several occasions,
interruptions occur during active charging sessions, where recording data suddenly stops
and then resumes, sometimes resulting in a complete reset. This poses a significant
challenge for accurately tracking the Echarged parameter, which represents the cumulative
energy delivered to an EV during a charging session. Each interruption causes a reset to
zero, giving the false impression that a new session has started.
To identify and resolve this issue, several indicators suggest that these resets do not cor-
respond to new sessions. First, non-zero values of Echarged are observed in preceding
timesteps, indicating that the session is already underway. Additionally, the desired en-
ergy and time of departure remain unchanged, supporting the continuity of the session.
Therefore, a thorough manual inspection is necessary to correct such inconsistencies in
order to ensure the integrity of the data for the subsequent analysis.
Next steps involve examining each of the selected parameters individually, similar to the
22
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:35==
what it is done for the PCC data. For the power reference and power measurements of
each plug, a filter to exclude negative values is applied (P ref
V A,i≥0 and P meas
V A,i ≥0). Other
parameters, such as plug state (plug −statei, desired time of departure (tdepdes
i
), and
desired energy (Edesiredi), are primarily processed to improve data structuring, rather
than to implement significant modifications.
In addition these steps, new several parameters are computed to support the analysis:
• Arrived: Takes a value of 1 when a new session is started. A new session is defined
when the user sets the tdepdesired for the first time. Changes to this setting during
an active session were not considered as new session.
• Time of arrival: Serves as an intermediate parameter. It marks the exact time of
arrival when Arrived = 1.
• Desired duration: Computes the time difference, in hours, between the time of
arrival and the desired departure time.
• Real energy charged(realEi
charged): It represents the actual energy delivered in
kWh to a charging session. It is computed by taking the final recorded value of the
measured accumulated energy (Echargedi). This parameter serves as an indicator
that the session has ended.
• Real departure: Takes a value of 1 when a session concludes, either because
the EV departs or the requested energy has been delivered. This parameter is
necessary because actual departure time does not often match with the departure
time set by the user.
• Real duration: Computes the time difference, in hours, between the time of arrival
and the real departure time.
The final preprocessing step involves aggregating all the obtained values. For both power
reference and power measurements are aggregated in average hourly values. However,
these values are not used in the final analysis due to the reliability of the EV measure-
ments. Instead, the more robust and consistent PCC power data is utilized.
For the metrics related to the number of charging sessions arriving and departing, the data
is aggregated by summing the number of arrivals and departures every hour. A maximum
of two arrivals or departures is obtained in a single plug during certain hours across the
four month period.
Plug status is processed by counting the number of timestamps that each status occurs for
each charger. The total timestamps in each of the modes is divided by the total number
of timestamps in order to obtain distribution of the plug status throughout the analysis
period.
Lastly, for both real and desired duration and energy parameters, hourly averages are
computed. Since at most only one session is completed per hour, only a single value is
recorded per hour, simplifying the subsequent analysis.
The preproccesing steps are then completed, resulting in two final Excel spreadsheets,
one for the PCC data and one for the EVSE data, containing hourly values over the four
month period. This structured approach significantly reduces the computational time re-
quired for handling the large volume of data, enabling a more efficient and scalable anal-
ysis.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
23
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Data Analysis: Results
Following the completion of the preprocessing stage, the structured datasets are imported
into Pyhton for the analysis. The results are presented by assessing each parameter
individually.
4.2.1
Timestamp Interval
The first parameter that it is analyized is the timestamp (ts), which is common to both
PCC and EVSE parameters. While this parameter does not directly impact other metrics,
it provides useful information about the evolution of data reliability and system maturity
over time.
It is observed that the average time between timestamps intervals varies along the four-
period. Initially, this variation is suspected to result from the presence of outliers between
timesteps. Therefore, a simple outlier removal technique is applied, using an interquartile
range to define some acceptable bounds. For this technique, both first (Q1) and third (Q3)
quartiles of the time interval between timestamps are computed. The difference between
both quartiles is computed (INT) which is later used to establish the desired bounds:
INT = Q1 −Q3
(4.1)
Lower bound = Q1 −1.5 · INT
(4.2)
Higher bound = Q3 + 1.5 · INT
(4.3)
By applying this outlier filter, a more accurate assessment of the timestamp intervals is ob-
tained. Table 4.1 presents the average time intervals before and after the filtering. A clear
trend is observed, as the average time between timestamps increases over time. This is
likely due to the growing number of datastreams in the system, as additional chargers are
integrated throughout the deployment period. Consequently, the volume of data transmit-
ted in each iteration increases, leading to longer processing and communication times. In
addition, the largest discrepancy between pre and post filtering values is observed for the
first month. These two observations, suggest that the system was still relatively immature
at its initial deployment, gaining stability and reliability as usage increased.
Month
Before filtering
After filtering
Relative variation (%)
November
3.33
2.03
-39.04
December
3.45
3.36
-2.61
January
5.92
5.47
-7.6
February
6.27
6.19
-1.28
Table 4.1: Average time between timestamps (seconds)
4.2.2
Power measurements
The evaluation of the power is conducted using the PCC dataset, being this the only pa-
rameter to be analyzed from this source. The focus is placed primarily on the cluster’s
total measured power, given that the total power reference remains constant through-
out the observation period. As outlined in the methodology, this constancy results from
the selection of a single power allocation strategy, which assigns the cluster’s maximum
capacity of 43 kW as the reference value. This lack of variability does not provide any
meaningful observation for this analysis.
24
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:37==
Cluster’s total power measurements are presented in Figure 4.2, which represents the
hourly averages of non-zero values (active charging periods) across the week:
Figure 4.2: Weekly hourly Power Measurements at the PCC when only using active char-
gin periods. Different power profiles are shown to illustrate that the total capacity of the
cluster is not reached (43 kW)
In the figure, average, 75th and 90th percentiles of power measurements are shown. This
is done intentionally in order to highlight that the measured power consistently falls below
the cluster’s capacity of 43 kW. This pattern indicates that, although operating under a
constrained grid capacity scenario, the cluster never reaches its maximum limit, suggest-
ing a general underutilization of the available power. This statement is further supported
by Table 4.2 , which shows that even the maximum ever recorded power measurement
stays within the cluster’s capacity, while the average remains significantly lower. Finally,
Figure 4.2 reflects a typical charging behavior of a workplace setting, where usage is
minimal during weekends.
Maximum
75th Percentile
Average
25th Percentile
Power Measured (kW)
39.57
16.18
12.44
6.64
Table 4.2: Different percentiles of Power Measurement Values of across all the hourly
averages used in the analysis (in kW)
4.2.3
Cluster and Plugs status
The plug status for the entire cluster and for each individual plug are evaluated over the
four month period. These results are obtained from the EVSE dataset, and as it is the first
parameter analyzed from this source, it is important to recall that this dataset originates
from data with certain inconsistencies.
The analysis starts with obtaining the distribution of the percentage of time that each of the
individual plugs spends charging, idle or connected is shown. Additionally, the percentage
of time each plug is actively charging while an EV is plugged is also computed, offering
further insight into utilization patterns.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
25
==PAGE:38==
The results of this analysis provided in Table 4.3 show an expected workplace setting pat-
tern, where idle time dominates across all chargers, due to the uncommon usage during
nights and weekends. Hence, idle time exceeds 90% , showing an overall low activity and
further highlighting the underutilization of the cluster.
Charger
Charging %
Idle %
Connected %
Charging when plugged %
1161
0.00
100.00
0.00
0.00
1162
0.00
100.00
0.00
0.00
1241
1.66
97.26
1.08
60.66
1242
2.92
95.01
2.07
58.49
1321
2.96
95.58
1.46
66.98
1322
3.84
93.51
2.65
59.21
2641*
3.19
89.43
7.38
10.58
2642
3.83
94.36
1.81
67.83
3711
0.00
100.00
0.00
0.00
3712
0.00
100.00
0.00
0.00
7541
1.32
97.72
0.96
57.99
7542
0.80
98.98
0.22
78.40
Table 4.3: Status percentages per charger
This final table presents a cleaned dataset, obtained after filtering out observed anoma-
lous values. First, for plug 2641 and unusual idle time percentage of 73.4% is observed.
This is attributed to anomalies in November, during which this plug shows a connection
time of 100%, possibly due to a testing event or a retrieval error. As this coincides with
the early and less mature phase of the system, the latter explanation is considered. The
month of November is then excluded for this plug, leading to an updated idle time of
89.43% and new charging and connected percentages of 3.19% and 7.38% respectively-
still making the most used plug in the cluster. Second, four plugs (1161, 1162, 3711, and
3712) show 100% of idle time. This is attributed to these chargers being under mainte-
nance during the analysis period.
These two anomalies are taken into account when computing the overall usage profile for
the entire cluster to ensure a more accurate and representative analysis (Table 4.4).
Charging %
Idle %
Connected %
Charging when plugged %
2.54
92.97
4.48
36.17
Table 4.4: Overall usage of the cluster
Lastly, the charging while plugged percentages are also computed. These values show
that vehicles are not always actively charging during the time they are plugged. This
behavior is expected, mainly due to the fact hat the charging sessions complete charging
before the vehicle is unplugged, and the utilization of power scheduling methods. These
findings indicate that the cluster could have significant potential for demand-side flexibility.
4.2.4
Energy and Duration Figures
Regarding duration and energy, a comparison between user provided inputs( desired pa-
rameters) and the real session outcomes is made.
26
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:39==
To ensure data quality, an outlier filter is applied based on the data observed in Excel.
A lower bound of 1 kilo-watt-hour (kWh) is established in order to exclude sessions with
non-zero energy requested but no energy is delivered. Additionally, an upper bound of 60
kWh is set, as this value is considered more than sufficient for charging an EV. In terms
of duration, sessions falling outside the range of 20 minutes to 24 hours are excluded, es-
pecially for removing the short duration sessions that could bias the analysis. A summary
of the results is presented in the following table:
Expected values
Real values
Relative variation (%)
Duration in h
4.38
3.05
56.36
Energy Delivered in kWh
29.73
19.11
33.76
Table 4.5: Comparison of real versus average values for session durations and energy-
related parameters
A significant difference is observed between the real and desired values. On average,
individual charging sessions differ notably between what it is requested and what it is
delivered. This discrepancy likely stems from he characteristic of the cluster, where users
are not charged for the energy consumed, leading to an overestimation of user needs
and introducing bias in the behavior. This feature highlights the importance of making the
distinction between requested and delivered values, essential for understanding the real
operational behavior of the cluster.
Despite of the bias, the 56.36% variation on duration terms further demonstrates that
the cluster presents a promising opportunity for flexibility in energy demand. In terms of
energy, the variation of 33.76% is also substantial. It is important to note that his value
would have been much higher without the preprocessing and outlier steps. For instance
the total accumulated energy requested is reduced from 6511 to 3359 kWh, out of which
2159.87 kWh are delivered.
To further characterize the cluster’s energy behavior, the Average User Satisfaction pa-
rameter introduced. This parameter, calculated using Equation 4.4, represents the av-
erage proportion of energy delivered relative to the energy requested in each charging
session.
Individual User Satisfaction =
Session Energy Delivered
Session Energy Requested
(4.4)
The cluster achieves a final average user satisfaction level of 66.24%, a relatively modest
result which implies that the operational delivery of power might be inefficient. However,
given the nature of the cluster where the requested values tend to be inflated, this result
should be interpreted with caution. The obtained figure does not necessarily indicate user
dissatisfaction or technical limitations but rather reflect a behavioral bias on the charging
infrastructure usage.
Finally, to illustrate the distribution of energy delivered across the days of the week, a
box-and-whisker plot is presented based on the sessions that remained after the filtering
process (Figure 4.3). Weekend sessions are excluded from the plot, as only a single
session was recorded on each weekend day, as shown in Table 4.6.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
27
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: Distribution of Total Energy Charged per Session by Day
This plot shows that energy delivered per session varies significantly across the week, but
median values remain relatively consistent around 15-20 kWh. Monday to Wednesday
present more compact distributions, while Thursday and Friday have broader ranges,
probably arising from more irregular work schedules or users preparing their vehicles for
the weekend.
4.2.5
Arrivals and Departures
In this section, the distribution of the arrivals and departures of the cluster EV charging
sessions is presented. The analysis is based only on complete valid sessions, ensuring
consistency with the number of sessions used in the previous sections.
Departures are based on the real time of departure to ensure that actual user behavior is
reflected, rather than using user set preferences.Table 4.6 shows the number of sessions
every day. It shows a typical workplace setting pattern, with a higher number of sessions
on Mondays and Tuesdays and a nearly absent usage on weekends.
Day
Number of Sessions
Mondays
35
Tuesdays
32
Wednesdays
14
Thursdays
11
Fridays
19
Saturdays
1
Sundays
1
Total
113
Table 4.6: Accumulated number of charging sessions per weekday over the study period
In addition, the distribution of the charging sessions throughout the day is also presented,
where Figure 4.4 shows the real hours of arrival and departure. In this representation, ar-
rivals and departures are rounded down to the nearest hour (an arrival at 07:40 is recorded
28
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:41==
as hour 7).
Figure 4.4: Hourly distribution of Arrivals and Departures over the study period (showing
hours from 5 to 22)
This figure reveals again a typical daily usage pattern of a workplace setting. Arrivals
peak at 08:00,consistent with the standard working schedules in Denmark (08-17). De-
partures peak between 13:00 and 16:00, before the expected end of the typical workday.
As departures are shown after the real time of departure, the reason for this early depar-
ture could arise from the fact that sessions are finished before the end of the work day,
as energy has been delivered. This behavior indicates that charging sessions end before
the vehicle leaves the cluster, and reinforces that this cluster offers potential in demand
flexibility.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
29
==PAGE:42==
30
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:43==
5
Smart Charging Rule Based Algorithm
Solution
This chapter addresses the second major objective of the present master’s thesis: the
development of a rule-based smart charging algorithm. The design of this algorithm is
based on the findings obtained in the data analysis presented in Chapter 4, which provides
a real-world foundation using the data from the Electric Vehicle (EV) Risø cluster.
Hence, the algorithm is specifically developed to address the characteristics of the Risø
cluster, with a particular emphasis on overcoming its underutilization and leveraging its
potential for energy demand flexibility. Nevertheless, the algorithm is designed to be ap-
plicable to other workplace EV charging facilities and residential contexts.
The complete implementation of the algorithm is provided in Section A.3 in the Appendix.
5.1
Description of the New Smart Charging Strategy
This section introduces the newly developed smart charging strategy. To facilitate clarity
and coherence, the new introduced aspects are presented in parallel with the existing
strategy described in section 3.2. This comparative approach enables the reader to iden-
tify the novel contributions and understand how they are integrated in the current control
strategy.
The primary objective of the proposed algorithm is to enhance sustainability and reduce
grid stress by utilizing Distributed Energy Resources (DERs). Specifically, the algorithm
aims to minimize the energy consumption of the grid by aligning total local demand with
local renewable energy generation, thus contributing to alleviating grid congestion. This
minimization effort is concentrated in the flexible side of the local demand, the EV charg-
ing load. By doing so, the algorithm addresses the growing challenge of demand electri-
fication, particularly in the transportation sector, as discussed in Chapter 1. Additionally,
the algorithm is designed to reduce overall energy costs for end users, and therefore, it
can be stated that the adopted smart charging system supports both environmental and
economic objectives.
In pursuit of these objectives, a Rule-Based Algorithm (RBA) is developed. This kind of
approach is chosen due to the large volume and nature of the data that must be processed
at each iteration of the algorithm, making other methods such as optimization-based al-
gorithms less suitable. Moreover, given that the model is built from scratch, the RBA
provides a practical foundation that can be improved in future stages with the integration
of an optimization model.
The RBA approach employs a decision tree structure that determines the power refer-
ence of the cluster based on predefined rules. These rules are designed to respond to
signals obtained from key input data sources such as electricity spot prices, local building
consumption, local grid capacity constraints, local renewable energy generation, and the
operational status of the EV cluster. A detailed explanation of how each of these data
inputs is obtained is provided:
Electricity Spot Prices
Hourly Day-Ahead Market prices are used. For simplicity purposes, this study uses data
from the year 2024 and treated as representative of 2025 prices. This approximation
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
31
==PAGE:44==
can be replaced with actual 2025 values if needed, by updating the system daily with
newly published Day-Ahead Market prices. The data is obtained from Energinet, the
Danish Transmission System Operator (TSO), through its Energy Data Service platform
(https://www.energidataservice.dk/tso-electricity/Elspotprices). The dataset
provided hourly spot prices for the DK2 zone (Eastern Denmark, location of this study),
expressed in DKK/MWh. In this study, electricity prices are assumed to remain constant
within each hour.
Local Renewable Energy Production
For local renewable energy production, the initial intention was to use data from the exist-
ing solar photovoltaic (PV) installation located at Risø. However, due to lack of access to
this data, an alternative dataset was employed. Specifically, solar production data from a
61 kilo-watt peak (kWp) solar PV installation at the DTU campus on Bornholm was used.
As with the electricity pricing data, the values used correspond to recorded measurements
from the year 2024 and are treated as representative of real-time values for 2025. If
required, actual real-time data from 2025 could be integrated.
For simplicity of the study, the original data which is provided as secondly measurements
of AC power output is aggregated into hourly average power values. These values are
interpolated when a smaller temporal resolution is needed, ensuring that the model does
not have static hourly values and can capture intra-hour variability.
Local Building Consumption
For local building consumption, the initial idea was to use the data of Risø’s Building
330, the building hosting the EV charging cluster under study. However, as there was no
access to this dataset, an alternative building had to be selected. Specifically, Building
325 of DTU Lyngby Campus is used. This building, which also belongs to the DTU Wind
and Energy Systems Department, also features an EV parking lot, making it suitable for
the study.
The dataset consist of hourly power consumption values of 2024, which are once again
treated as representative of 2025. As with the other datasets, this approximation can be
replaced with real-time consumption data if required. These values are interpolated when
a smaller temporal resolution is needed, ensuring that the model does not have static
hourly values and can capture intra-hour variability.
Finally, before presenting the implementation details of the new strategy, the newly intro-
duced parameters are explained:
•
Total minimum power (∑Pmin): Represents the sum of the minimum power re-
quired for each individual session. Based on the formulation of individual sessions
minimum power (Equation 3.2), this aggregated parameter defines the lower bound
value for the cluster’s total power allocation to satisfy the energy demands of all
active sessions.
• Available power (Pavailable) :This value represents the remaining renewable power
capacity available after meeting the building’s instantaneous power demand (PBC)
from the renewable energy output (PRES). The allocation prioritizes supplying the
building load first, as it is generally more stable and less flexible than the EV cluster’s
demand
Pavailable = PBC −PRES
(5.1)
32
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:45==
• Flexibility: This parameter quantifies the current power usage of the EV cluster.
It reflects the difference between the cluster’s total power capacity constraint (CC)
and the measured power consumption. Ideally, the measurement would be based
on real-time power data; however, in this algorithm, the value from the previous
iteration is used as an approximation.
Flexibility = CC −P meas
PCC
CC
(5.2)
In this context, a flexibility value of 0.5 indicates that the cluster is currently operating
at half of its maximum capacity, meaning half of the total available power remains
unused.
• Horizon time:This parameter represents the time window within which the RBA
performs its computations at each iteration. It is determined by identifying the latest
desired departure time among all currently active charging sessions in the cluster.
• Average future prices (AFP): It represents the average electricity price over the
computation period, which spans from the current time to the defined horizon time.
Specifically, this parameter only considers full hour values. For instance, if the cur-
rent time is 12:10 and the horizon time is 17:50, the AFP is determined by averaging
electricity prices for the full hours from from 12 to 17.
• Price now (Pricenow): Parameter that captures the electricity price at the current
time.
• Price ratio (Priceratio): It computes the ratio between pricenow and AFP,serving
as a method to assess whether the current prices are low or high relative to the
average prices of the computation period.
5.2
Model Implementation
This section presents a detailed explanation of the implementation of the new smart strat-
egy that it is developed. The explanation resembles the current strategy, while also in-
corporating the newly adopted elements.
Similar to the existing approach, the new strategy begins by retrieving the data provided
by the users to compute the internal priority of each individual charging session. This pa-
rameter remains defined as the ratio between the minimum power that has to be provided
to the charging session (Pmin,i) shown in Equation 3.2, and the maximum power that the
plug can deliver (Pmax,i) , and its value continues to vary depending on the session status
( 0 , 1 or as described in Equation 3.1).
The first improvement introduced in the strategy concerns the computation of the plug’s
maximum power. This enhancement is designed to improve the overall efficiency by using
the full capacity of the charger, which is limited under the current strategy. To achieve
this, two new methods are proposed, both developed under the assumption that the two
Virtual Aggregators (VAs) associated with the same charger can exchange information,
as they are managed by the same microcontroller. A comparison of these methods is
conducted to identify the most suitable approach for the new strategy. The three methods
are described in detail below:
• Strategy 1: Current Risø’s strategy. This approach limits the the power of each plug
to a maximum of 11 kW.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
33
==PAGE:46==
• Strategy 2: In this approach, the charger is aware of the number of EVs currently
connected (either one or two). The VA computes the the maximum power to the
plug as a fraction of the total available power (22 kW) divided by the number of
connected EVs, setting the value to either 11 kW or 22 kW.
• Strategy 3: In this approach both VAs will share the relative priority of the session to
compute the aggregated relative priority of the charger. The total power allocated to
each plug is allocated proportionally based on each session’s relative priority (ρr).
For example, for Charger 116:
Total relative priority116 = ρr,1161 + ρr,1162 = 0.14 + 0.26 = 0.4
Pmax,1161 =
ρr,1161
Total relative priority116
· Charger’s Pmax = 0.14
0.4 · 22kW = 7.7kW
Pmax,1162 =
ρr,1162
Total relative priority116
· Charger’s Pmax = 0.26
0.4 · 22kW = 14.3kW
With the information transmitted from each VA, the Cloud Aggregator (CA) can compute
some of the key parameters relevant for the calculation of the P ref
CA :
• Flexibility
• Total internal priority ∑
i ρint,i
• Total ∑
i Pmin,i
• Horizon time
• Total cluster power measurement (P meas
PCC
In addition to the data from the VAs, the CA incorporates the external inputs of local Re-
newable Energy Sources (RES) generation, local building consumption, grid constraints
and electricity prices, and further calculates:
• Pricenow
• AFP
• Priceratio
With al these parameters computed, the CA is now ready for setting the cluster’s power
reference P ref
CA . The explanation for deriving this value is discussed later in detail (Sub-
section 5.2.1). Subsequently, with both values of P ref
CA and P meas
PCC the power error (Perror )
is determined. In accordance with the current strategy, this error is communicated along
with the total internal priority, to each VA in order to allocate the individual power setpoint
at every plug using Equation 3.6. The new flowchart of the new strategy is depicted in
Figure 5.1.
At this stage, a significant challenge is presented, as this strategy is only conducted in a
simulation environment and does not extend to real world testing scenario. In the simula-
tion environment, power measurements align with the desired setpoint, meaning that there
is no difference in value between the reference and measured individual power delivered
by each plug. Furthermore, the simulation lacks an external reference point such as the
PCC to measure the real consumption in order to compare the deviation from the desired
34
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:47==
setpoint. Nevertheless, obtaining the real measurements remains crucial. Even under
simulation scenarios, there are instances where the total and individual power setpoints
are not equal to what it is actually delivered, specially when new sessions are added or
removed, or when physical constraints are encountered.
Figure 5.1: Flowchart of the proposed strategy architecture. In this revised structure,
additional information is communicated from each VA to the CA, represented by the pink
asterisk. Among the parameters transmitted is the power measured at each plug (P meas
V A,i ),
compensating for the absence of a Point of Common Coupling (PCC) in the simulation
environment.
To resolve this problem, and being able to compare the P ref
CA and P meas
PCC , a double loop of
power allocation is performed. This loop makes the algorithm able to do this comparison
in the same timestep, as comparing the P ref
CA with the previous timestep P meas
PCC was leading
to huge power error values.
This process is referred to as a ”double loop” because each iteration consists of two se-
quential steps (Figure 5.2). In the first step, the CA calculates the initial power error,
denoted as error1, based on the inputs of the current timestep and the total power mea-
surement from the previous iteration. Using this error1, an intermediate allocation is per-
formed, assigning preliminary power setpoints to each individual plug.
This intermediate allocation initiates the second step, during which the total power mea-
surement is updated after the newly assigned setpoints. The updated total power, along
with the rest of the other parameters, which remain unchanged from the first step, are
again sent to the CA. With this information, the CA computes a second power error, error2.
This error2, which is lower than error1, is sent along the unchanged total internal priority
to determine the final power setpoints for each individual plug. As a result of this second
step, the definitive power values of the iteration are obtained. This values are the ones
used in subsequent computations and act as the initial conditions for the next iteration.
This mechanism addresses the limitations inherent to the simulation environment, miti-
gating the absence of an external measurement point and reducing the magnitude of the
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
35
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.2: Visual representation of the double loop mechanism. First VA sends the initial
parameters to the CA. CA then computes the cluster‘s total power reference, the total in-
ternal priority and error 1. VA allocates the intermediate power based in this information,
which serves as the intermediate power allocation and therefore intermediate measure-
ment. This is sent to the CA, and only the error is updated obtaining error 2, which is
again sent to the VA to allocate the final power setpoint to the plug.
power error. The iteration is then completed, and the process is executed iteratively at
each timestep, where all parameters are dynamically updated.
5.2.1
P ref
CA allocation method
The final step in explaining the implementation of the smart charging strategy involves
determining how the cluster’s power reference is computed.
As previously mentioned, the CA receives the inputs from both the cluster and other data
sources in order to compute P ref
CA . This value is determined through a RBA, which se-
lects the computation mode based on some predefined conditions, and is structured as a
decision tree. The result, six different power allocation modes, all illustrated in Figure 5.3.
The first distinction in the decision tree concerns the presence of active charging sessions.
This is determined by checking the value of Total ∑Pmin,i. If this value is zero or lower,
this means that there are not active sessions and then Mode 6 is selected, where the
power reference is set to 0 kW. If Total ∑Pmin,i is greater than 0, indicating at least one
active session, the algorithm proceeds by evaluating the value of the Priceratio parameter.
36
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.3: Rule-Based Algorithm decision tree for allocating one of the six proposed
modes for computing the cluster’s total power reference. Complemented with Table 5.1.
If Priceratio is below a predefined lower threshold (initially set to 0.4), this indicates that
current prices are significantly lower than average future prices. In this case, Mode 1 is
selected, and the power reference is set to the maximum power available, which corre-
sponds to the Cluster’s Capacity (CC). This mode has the objective to maximize energy
consumption taking advantage of the current low prices, regardless of whether the energy
comes from the grid or from local RES generation.
P ref
CA = CC
(5.3)
When Priceratio exceeds the upper threshold (initially set at 1.1), indicating high current
prices, the selection depends on the availability of renewable energy power production
(Pavailable).
• Mode 4: If Pavailable > ∑Pmin,i the cluster has sufficient renewable generation to
meet the minimum demand. The power reference is then set to the available power
from RES:
P ref
CA = min {CC, Pavailable}
(5.4)
• Mode 5: If Pavailable < ∑Pmin,i the system is in a worst-case scenario, with high
prices and insufficient RES production. In this case, the power reference is set to
the minimum possible, ensuring that the minimum energy demand is satisfied, even
under unfavorable conditions.
P ref
CA =
∑
Pmin
(5.5)
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
37
==PAGE:50==
If Priceratio falls between the lower and upper thresholds, indicating mid-level prices, the
mode again depends on Pavailable:
• Mode 2: If Pavailable > ∑Pmin,i, t Corresponding to a mid-price and high RES avail-
ability scenario. Pref is allocated based in the following formula:
P ref
CA = min {CC, Pavailable · flex ratio · β}
(5.6)
Here two new parameters are introduced:
- flexratio: proportionality factor based on the flexibility of the cluster. This ratio
slightly increases the power allocation when the cluster is underutilized, allowing
more power to be assigned when there is excess capacity available. The objective
is to proactively mitigate potential future issues due to limited flexibility.
flexratio = 1 + 0.25 ∗
( flexibility- 0.5
1 −0.5
)
∈[1, 1.25]
(5.7)
-β: Proportionality factor based on how close the price ratio is to the lower or upper
threshold.
β = 2 −Priceratio −0.4
1.1 −0.4
(5.8)
• Mode 3: If Pavailable < ∑Pmin,i. Corresponding to a mid-price and low RES avail-
ability scenario. Pref is computed using:
P ref
CA = min
{
CC,
∑
Pmin,i · RESratio · flexratio · β
}
(5.9)
Where RESratio corresponds to the proportion of renewable energy available rel-
ative to the cluster’s minimum power needs. As this parameter is only computed
when Mode 3 is allocated, its value will range between 1 and 2.
RESratio =
∑Pmin.i + Pavailable
∑Pmin.i
∈[1, 2]
(5.10)
A summary of all power allocation modes and their corresponding computation methods
is provided in Table 5.1.
38
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:51==
Mode
Power Reference Computation
Comment
1
CC
Low prices
2
min {CC, Pavailable · flexratio · β}
Mid prices, High RES
3
min
{
CC, ∑Pmin,i · RESratio · flexratio · β
}
Mid prices, Low RES
4
min {CC, Pavailable}
High prices, High RES
5
∑Pmin,i
High prices, Low RES
6
0
No active sessions
Table 5.1: Summary of the cluster’s total power reference allocation modes. Modes 1-5
are allocated in periods with active sessions, while Mode 6 is allocated in periods without
active sessions.
The initial upper and lower bounds established for the price ratio (0.4 and 1.1) are chosen
to provide a clear illustration of the strategy. These values are selected based on an anal-
ysis of the distribution percentiles of the parameter. However, this is subject to adjustment
through a sensitivity analysis, which is conducted to identify the optimal values.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that although the cluster power reference is allocated taking
in consideration its electrical limits, situations in which the total requested power exceeds
this limits might arise. To mitigate such overloads and prevent power peaks, a scaling
mechanisms is applied at both cluster and cluster level, adjusting the allocated power
proportionally to all the sessions.
For the total cluster power reference:
If P meas
PCC > CC :
Scaling =
CC
P meas
PCC
For the individual charger power reference:
If P meas
V A
> Charger’s capacity :
Scaling = Charger’s capacity
P meas
V A
5.2.2
Simulation scenario
The implemented strategy is tested during a simulation period that spans from November
2024 to April 2025 inclusive. Each iteration of the simulation is conducted every 30 sec-
onds timesteps, a duration that is sufficiently small to accurately represent real power al-
location mechanisms, but large enough to account with the communication delays among
the systems components.
A total of 156 sessions are utilized during the simulation period. This number of sessions
is derived in the same manner as for the data analysis, only including complete valid
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
39
==PAGE:52==
sessions that provided data on arrival and real departure times, as well as real energy
delivered. Real values are considered as the user inputs, in order to mitigate the bias
identified in the cluster discussed in Chapter 3.
During this simulation period, there are instances where the generated RES is not allo-
cated either to building or EV consumption. In such cases, the surplus of RES energy is
assumed to be exported to the grid. Therefore, to quantify the revenue associated with
this exported energy, a selling price must be established. For this study, this price is
defined as the real-time electricity spot price minus a fixed amount, which accounts for
fees and tariffs imposed by energy retailers. According to a comparative analysis of vari-
ous energy suppliers ([43] [44] [45] [46]), the highest identified tariff is approximately 0.07
DKK/kWh. This value is conservatively rounded up to 0.10 DKK/kWh for the purpose of
the simulation, thereby setting the effective selling price as:
RES selling price (DKK/kWh) = Electricity price −0.1
(5.11)
It is important to note that the RES surplus will only be sold when the selling price is
positive. If the resulting price is negative, the surplus of energy is not sold and is regarded
as lost.
5.2.3
Definition and Categorization of Key Performance Indicators
This subsection provides a detailed explanation of the key performance indicators (KPIs)
and the methodology used to derive them. These KPIs are essential for interpreting the
results and facilitating the comparison between scenario, and depending on the specific
aspect they evaluate, they are organized in distinct categories:
Energy metrics
• Total energy delivered to the cluster: This parameter quantifies the total amount
of energy delivered to the cluster in kWh. It can be compared to the total energy
requested, a total of 2875 kWh for all scenarios, in order to see the effectiveness of
each scenario.
• EV energy from RES: Measures the proportion of energy that the cluster consumes
from the available RES (Pavailable) out of the total energy delivered.
• Grid usage reduction: Evaluate the reduction in grid energy consumption using RES.
It is determined by comparing the total energy consumed from the grid by both build-
ing and EV cluster, with the scenario in which all energy demand comes from the
grid.
• RES Utilization: It assesses how efficiently the total RES produced is used in per-
centage. It is obtained with the RES utilization breakdown, which shows how much
of the RES is allocated to each type of demand, how much RES is sold, and how
much RES is produced.
Financial metrics
This subsection addresses the financial aspects of the simulation results, focusing on both
costs and savings. Costs are primarily associated with energy consumption from the grid,
while savings are calculated as the difference between costs with and without the use of
RES energy. Three levels of analysis are computed:
• At EV cluster level: Takes the breakdown of the total energy demand of the cluster.
Costs are computed using only the actual amount of energy delivered from the grid,
40
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:53==
and savings compare this value to the hypothetical cost if the whole demand of the
cluster would only come from the grid.
• At EV +Building level: Same as for the cluster, the same is done for the building
consumption. This costs and savings are added to the one computed before.
• At this level, the financial analysis includes the revenue generated from selling sur-
plus RES back to the grid. This additional income contributes to a reduction in total
system costs and an increase in overall savings. The purpose of this level is to en-
able a comparison with the previous stage (excluding RES sales), thereby offering
insight into the financial impact of choosing whether or not to sell excess renewable
energy.
All these costs and savings are expressed in Danish Kroner (DKK). Additionally, to ac-
count for differences in energy consumption across scenarios, the cost is also normalized
and presented in terms of DKK/kWh consumed.
Usage metrics
This subsection focuses on metrics related to the internal functioning of the algorithm and
the operational behavior of the EV cluster. Since the algorithm operates on an iterative
basis, the total number of iterations of the simulation period is recorded, which serves to:
- To track which P ref
CA computation mode is allocated. The total number of iterations in
which each mode is used is compared to the total number of iterations with and without
sessions.
- To track the number of iterations in which the physical constraints are reached, distin-
guishing between:
• Intentional Capping of Cluster Power: This occurs when the algorithm deliberately
limits the power reference to a specific value, indicating a planned constraint on total
cluster power.
• Unintentional Capping Due to Cluster Capacity (CC): When the requested power
exceeds the cluster capacity, the algorithm activates a scaling mechanism, effec-
tively capping the power. The frequency of this event reflects how often the cluster
power demand surpasses the system’s physical limitations.
• Charger Limitation: This constraint is identified when the individual charging power
reaches its maximum plug capacity, yet the total power delivered does not align with
the intended cluster reference. This indicates that charger-specific limits have been
reached.
User behavior
• Average user satisfaction: Defined as the percentage of energy delivered in each
session relative to the initially requested. This percentage is computed for every
session and the average is computed to provide an overall satisfaction score.
• Total number of charging sessions not completed: It is based on the reason of termi-
nation, making a distinction with the sessions that conclude because the requested
energy was fully delivered and those that ended before the desired departure time
respectively. Here, the sessions that are finished by time are considered as not
completed.
• Average session duration deviation: The actual and desired durations of each charg-
ing session are recorded. The difference between these two values defines the du-
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
41
==PAGE:54==
ration deviation for each session. This deviation is calculated individually and then
averaged across all sessions to determine the overall average deviation.
5.3
Results
In this section the results of the proposed smart charging strategy are presented. The
analysis begins by identifying the most suitable allocation of the maximum plug power
(Pmax,i) for the new strategy. Following this, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to tune the
parameters of the RBA. These two steps serve not only to define the final configuration
of the smart charging strategy but also to provide valuable insights of the operational
behavior of the algorithm.
Once the final configuration is established, the proposed smart charging strategy is com-
pared with the current Risø strategy, which consists in a non-optimized dumb charging
method combined with a priority based system and where no RES is used. In addition,
the final configuration is also compared to a modified version of the current strategy. This
allows a fairer comparison under similar conditions and enables a clearer assessment of
the impact resulting solely from the implementation of the RBA.
5.3.1
Pmax Strategy selection
The evaluation begins with the selection of the maximum plug power allocation strategy.
As a reminder:
• Strategy 1: Current Risø’s strategy. Maximum of 11 kW per plug.
• Strategy 2: Maximum set to 11 kW or 22 kW.
• Strategy 3: Power allocated based on priority values.
Simulations are conducted over the defined period, and the corresponding results are pre-
sented. A full overview of the results is provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix, presenting
the most relevant outcomes below:
Metric / Category
Unit
Strategy 1
Strategy 2
Strategy 3
Energy Metrics
Total Energy Delivered
kWh
2773.8
2819.9
2823.3
EV energy from RES
%
26.25
25.95
25.95
Usage Metrics
Pref Intentional Capping
%
85.19
92.35
89.72
Plug Constraint Reached
%
14.73
6.81
9.81
CC Constraint Reached
%
0.09
0.84
0.46
User Behavior Metrics
Avg Session Satisfaction
%
97.1
98.49
98.73
Total Sessions Not Completed
12
7
6
Avg Time Deviation
mins
-45.46
-51.44
-48.37
Table 5.2: Selected KPIs for the comparison of the different proposed strategies for allo-
cating the plug’s maximum power
42
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:55==
Table 5.2 indicates that the differences between strategies are not high but the two newly
adopted approaches perform better than the current one. Due to a more effective uti-
lization of the charger’s available power more energy is delivered. This leads to better
user behavior metrics, with higher number of completed sessions, higher average user
satisfaction and lower session durations. Furthermore, as expected, the total amount of
times in where the electrical constraints are reached is reduced.
It is also worth noting that Strategy 1 shows a slightly higher percentage of energy drawn
from RES. This can be explained by the fact that when the power allocation is higher, the
most likely is to draw power from the grid. Combined with a slightly lower total energy
demand, this results in a marginally higher RES percentage.
The final conclusion is that the new strategies improve the performance, with Strategy 2
selected as the preferred approach. The reason for this is due to some inconsistencies
in Strategy 3.
Figure 5.4: Inconsistencies found in Strategy 3, where the maximum plug power oscillates
after every iteration
These inconsistencies stem from the fact that internal priorities are directly dependent on
the maximum plug power, as defined in Equation3.1. When two sessions are active on
the same charger, the allocation of power between them causes the maximum available
power to vary dynamically. This dynamic adjustment of power leads to corresponding
changes in the priority values. Since the maximum power also depends on these priority
values, the interdependence creates a feedback loop that results in continuous oscillations
in both parameters within the charger. This behavior is illustrated in Figure 5.4,which
shows how the maximum power power allocated to the plugs 7501 and 7502 fluctuate at
certain point in the simulation period. Although not shown, the same behavior and same
pattern is observed for both internal and relative priority values.
Given the variability and resulting instability observed in Strategy 3, and that it presents
similar results to Strategy 2, the latter is selected. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that
Strategy 3, although currently incomplete, demonstrates strong potential. If the identified
issue is effectively addressed, it could become a promising solution.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
43
==PAGE:56==
5.3.2
Price ratio sensitivity analysis
This section aims to refine the threshold values of the Priceratio parameter employed in
the RBA to determine the appropriate power reference of the cluster (P ref
CA ). The final
selection of the values for these thresholds is done considering not only the simulation
outcomes, but also the purpose of the thresholds within the overall strategy. Upon the
completion of this tuning process, the definitive version of the algorithm is established,
which will serve as the reference configuration for the comparative analyses presented in
the following sections.
Regarding the lower bound, an initial value of 0.4 was assigned. This threshold is intended
to trigger an aggressive allocation of maximum cluster power when electricity prices are
significantly low, thereby enabling the strategy to take advantage on favorable economic
conditions. In this analysis, alternative threshold values of 0.2 and 0.6 are explored to
assess their impact. The most salient differences observed in the results are discussed
below in Table 5.3, while a comprehensive summary of all outcomes is provided in Table
A.2 in the Appendix.
Lower Threshold Values
Metric / Category
Unit
0.2
Initial 0.4
0.6
Sustainable Metrics
EV energy from RES
%
26.03
25.50
24.71
Usage Metrics
Pref Intentional Capping
%
92.84
92.35
90.28
Plug Constraint Reached
%
6.41
6.81
8.14
CC Constraint Reached
%
0.75
0.84
1.58
Avg Time Deviation
mins
-50.58
-51.44
-57.75
Table 5.3: Selected KPIs used to compare different lower threshold values in the sensi-
tivity analysis
In general, the results indicate that changing the lower bound has only marginal impact
on the overall system performance. Nevertheless, a slightly improvement is observed as
the lower bound decreases. Comparing the results for the 0.2 and 0.4 threshold values,
the slightly better results observed with the lower value suggest that the system does not
substantially benefit from a more aggressive response to low price conditions, allocat-
ing P ref
CA via Mode 1. However, this marginal improvement comes at the expense of the
intended role of the lower bound, which is to capitalize low electricity price periods allo-
cating maximum power to the cluster. Setting the bound to low may overly constrain this
mechanism, especially considering that this strategy is intended to be transferable to other
clusters with different characteristics and operational profiles. Furthermore, an analysis
of the frequency of Mode 1 allocation—that is, the number of iterations in which Mode
1 was selected—reveals only a 0.04% difference between the two threshold values.This
negligible variation further reinforces the decision to retain the original 0.4 setting, as it
offers a more balanced and generalizable parameter choice.
44
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:57==
The tuning of the upper bound is more complex, as a large share of the Priceratio values
fall within this range. As shown in Table 5.4, the distribution of Priceratio percentiles during
the simulation period highlights how frequently the model operates near this threshold. As
a result, the upper bound becomes a more influential parameter in the decision-making
process of the RBA, making the sensitivity analysis for this value of relevant importance.
25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile
Price ratio value
0.91
0.99
1.05
Table 5.4: Percentile distribution of Priceratio during the simulation period
The original value for the upper bound is set at 1.1, and a sensitivity analysis is carried
out by testing values around this point, based on the distribution shown in Table 5.4. The
tested range goes from 0.9 to 1.2. While the full set of results is presented in Table A.3 in
the Appendix, the most relevant outcomes are summarized below.
Upper Threshold Values
Metric / Category
Unit
0.9
0.95
1.0
Initial 1.1
1.2
Sustainable Metrics
EV energy from RES
kWh
735.87
734.33
728.79
719.21
701.58
EV energy from RES
%
26.10
26.04
25.84
25.50
24.88
RES Utilization
%
64.12
64.11
64.10
64.07
64.03
Usage Metrics
Pref Intentional Capping
%
92.78
92.64
92.64
92.35
92.05
Plug Constraint Reached
%
6.44
6.57
6.58
6.81
7.07
CC Constraint Reached
%
0.78
0.78
0.78
0.84
0.88
User Behavior Metrics
Avg Session Satisfaction
%
98.49
98.49
98.49
98.49
98.49
Avg Time Deviation
mins
-50.6
-50.7
-51.02
-51.44
-52.12
Table 5.5: Selected KPIs used to compare different upper threshold values in the sensi-
tivity analysis
A noticeable trend across the tested configurations is that reducing the upper bound gen-
erally improves system performance. However, it is essential to balance between these
outcomes and the functional role of the upper bound, which is to differentiate between mid
and high price electricity periods. To further examine this trade-off, the evaluation focuses
on the frequency of power reference mode allocations for the three threshold values that
yielded the strongest results: 0.9, 0.95, and 1.0. The corresponding distribution of Modes
1 through 5 is presented in Figure 5.5.
As depicted, a lower upper bound results in a higher frequency of Mode 5 activation,
which corresponds to minimum power allocation to the cluster. This trend suggests that
reduced power allocation contributes to better sustainability and infrastructure usage met-
rics, while maintaining user satisfaction, meaning overall better results. These findings
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
45
==PAGE:58==
are consistent with the observation that higher charging rates (involving greater power
allocation) are more likely to draw energy from the grid, thereby diminishing the benefits
from RES generation.
Based on the observed results and the intended purpose of the upper bound—namely, to
distinguish between mid- and high-price periods—the value is set to 0.95. This threshold
delivers performance metrics comparable to those obtained with the 0.9 value, but without
reducing the bound as aggressively. Additionally, 0.95 lies close to the median Priceratio
value of 0.99, offering a balanced trade-off between the desired operational outcomes
and the conceptual role of the threshold within the strategy.
Figure 5.5: Distribution of the total cluster power reference modes for the selected sce-
narios of upper bound threshold values of 0.9, 0.95 and 1.
With the smart charging strategy now fully defined, it is ready to be compared against
the current baseline strategy. It is worth noting that a more robust tuning process would
ideally involve testing the algorithm across different clusters to evaluate its applicability
and performance under varying operational conditions.
5.3.3
Performance Evaluation: Comparison between the Current and the
Proposed strategies
In the final section of this chapter, the performance of the newly proposed strategy is
evaluated against the currently implemented approach to assess the benefits of its imple-
mentation. Two comparative analysis are conducted. The first one addresses the direct
comparison between the current strategy with the new approach, aiming to capture the
full extent of the improvements that are introduced with the new smart charging strategy.
The second involves a more fair comparison, where certain characteristics of the current
strategy are adjusted to align with the proposed method, allowing an equitable assess-
ment under similar conditions, which enables an isolated evaluation of the impact of the
RBA.
46
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:59==
Real world comparison
In the final comparison, the newly implemented smart charging strategy is evaluated
against the current approach used at Risø, which relies on a conventional, priority-based
dumb charging system, in which it is assumed that no RES are allocated to either the
building loads or the EV cluster. This comparison offers a comprehensive perspective
on the overall improvements introduced by the proposed strategy.The full set of results is
presented in Table 5.6.
Category
Metric
Unit
Current Strategy
New Strategy
Sustainable Metrics
Total Energy Delivered
kWh
2823.25
2819.93
EV energy from RES (%)
%
0.00
26.47
EV energy from RES (abs)
kWh
0.00
734.33
Grid usage reduction
%
0.00
24.24
Grid usage reduction (abs)
kWh
0.00
24549.76
RES Utilization
%
0.00
64.11
Financial Metrics
EV cost with RES
DKK
1404.16
1110.63
EV cost per kWh using RES
DKK/kWh
0.50
0.39
Total EV savings
DKK
0.00
265.80
Total BC + EV cost
DKK
55726.03
44788.60
Total BC + EV cost in DKK/kWh
DKK/kWh
0.55
0.44
Total BC + EV savings
DKK
0.00
10909.70
Total cost with selling RES
DKK
55726.03
41286.15
Total savings with selling RES
DKK
0.00
14412.15
Total cost in DKK/kWh selling RES
DKK/kWh
0.55
0.41
Usage Metrics
Pref Intentional Capping
%
0.00
92.64
Plug Constraint Reached
%
86.30
6.57
CC Constraint Reached
%
13.69
0.78
User Behavior Metrics
Avg Session Satisfaction
%
98.73
98.49
Total Sessions Not Completed
sessions
6
7
Avg Session duration
mins
65.52
167.08
Avg Time Deviation
mins
-152.26
-50.70
Table 5.6: Comparison of the metrics between the current Risø strategy and the proposed
smart charging strategy
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
47
==PAGE:60==
These results demonstrate that the new smart charging strategy presents significant ben-
efits when comparing it to the currently approach. First, the comparison shows that the
new strategy effectively allocates the local RES production , achieving a 26% allocation of
RES produced to the cluster demand, which leads to a total grid reduction of 734.33 kWh
over the simulation period. If we translate this to terms of the whole demand of buildings
and EVs combined, the total grid energy consumption is reduced in a 24.24%, with a total
of 24.5 MWh of energy directly supplied from RES.
Regarding the financial metrics, the use of the new algorithm along the usage of local
RES production results in a cost saving of 10.9 thousand DKK, comparing it to the cost of
if all the energy would have been retrieved from the grid. If surplus of RES is sold back,
the total savings increase to 14.4 thousand DKK.
This grid reduction is further backed with the infrastructure usage metric, in which it can
be seen that the smart strategy significantly reduces in a 92% the frequency in which
the physical constraints are reached, showing significant reductions in both charger-plug
constraints and when the cluster capacity constraints are reached. This basically reflects
that the controlled power allocation of the cluster is quite effective.
However, these improvements come with a minor setback. Compared to the current strat-
egy, the smart algorithm results in a slightly lower numbers in terms of total energy de-
livered, average session satisfaction and average session duration. Nevertheless, the
current strategy still delivers 2819.9 kWh out of the total 2875 kWh requested, provides a
average session satisfaction above 98% and reduces the average session time by more
than 50 minutes.
These outcomes reinforce the earlier mentioned trade off, in which higher power allocation
may enhance immediate performance indicators but at the cost of higher grid usage and a
less efficient energy management.Therefore, the new approach demonstrates that power
and energy can be managed more effectively to achieve improvements in sustainability,
grid load reduction, and economic performance.
Aligned conditions comparison
The current Risø strategy is now modified to enable a fairer comparison with the newly
proposed approach. This modification implies that the current strategy also considers
the use of local RES for both building and EV loads. For the EV cluster, a simple RES
allocation mechanism is applied, in which the energy is drawn from local RES when it is
available. Additionally, the maximum plug power in the current setup is updated to match
that used in the smart strategy.
This alignment ensures that both strategies are compared under same conditions, with the
only distinction being the use of the RBA for determining the reference power allocation
of the cluster (P ref
CA ) in the new approach.The comparative results are presented below,
including an additional column that reflects the relative variation between the updated
current strategy and the proposed smart approach.
The results obtained from this fair comparison demonstrates the positive impact of the
RBA implementation. With the new strategy, the total energy consumed from the EV
cluster drawn from local RES production increases in 200 kWh, representing a 34.21%
improvement. Additionally, charging costs are reduced in a 8%. For the remaining finan-
cial indicators , no significant changes are observed, as the allocation of RES to building
consumption is the same for both methods. This part of the results is more aligned for the
comparison of the real world scenario comparison.
48
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:61==
Category
Metric
Unit
Current Modified
New
Δ (%)
Sustainable Metrics
Total Energy Delivered
kWh
2823.25
2819.93
-0.12
EV energy from RES (%)
%
19.73
26.47
34.21
EV energy from RES (abs)
kWh
547.15
734.33
34.21
Grid usage reduction
%
24.06
24.24
0.77
RES Utilization
%
63.62
64.11
0.77
Financial Metrics
EV cost with RES
DKK
1207.54
1110.63
-8.03
EV cost per kWh using RES
DKK/kWh
0.43
0.39
-7.92
Total EV savings
DKK
196.47
265.80
35.29
Total BC + EV cost
DKK
44885.51
44788.60
-0.22
Total BC + EV cost in DKK/kWh
DKK/kWh
0.44
0.44
-0.21
Total BC + EV savings
DKK
10840.36
10909.70
0.64
Total cost with selling RES
DKK
41331.64
41286.15
-0.11
Total savings with selling RES
DKK
14294.24
14412.15
0.82
Total cost in DKK/kWh selling RES
DKK/kWh
0.41
0.41
-0.11
Usage Metrics
Pref Intentional Capping
%
0.00
92.64
–
Plug Constraint Reached
%
80.35
6.57
-91.82
CC Constraint Reached
%
19.65
0.78
-96.02
User Behavior Metrics
Avg Session Satisfaction
%
98.73
98.49
-0.24
Total Sessions Not Completed
sessions
6
7
16.67
Avg Duration Session
mins
59.32
167.08
181.65
Avg Time Deviation
mins
-158.46
-50.70
-68.00
Table 5.7: Performance comparison between the current Risø strategy and the smart
charging strategy
For the remaining parameters, the outcomes are consistent with those observed in the
real-world scenario. The usage metrics confirm that the RBA contributes to reducing the
frequency with which physical infrastructure constraints are triggered, as a result of its
controlled and adaptive power allocation. Meanwhile, user behavior metrics again exhibit
a slightly lower performance, which is primarily attributed to the reduced power allocation
compared to the current strategy.
Overall, although a higher economic performance was expected, the results demonstrate
that the implementation of the RBA alone effectively fulfills the primary objectives of en-
hancing sustainability and reducing grid stress.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
49
==PAGE:62==
50
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:63==
6
Conclusions
This thesis investigates the energy demand flexibility potential of the electric vehicle (EV)
cluster located adjacent to Building 330 of the Technical University of Denmark Risø cam-
pus, and it is presented in two main parts.
The first part of the thesis consists on a comprehensive data analysis conducted on the
newly available measurement data of the EV cluster, marking the first study carried out
on this specific cluster. The analysis reveals that the charging infrastructure remains idle
approximately 93% of the time. Additionally, almost 98% of charging sessions occur on
weekdays, and the power usage, as well as the arrival and departure time distributions,
confirm that the cluster exhibits a typical usage pattern of a workplace environment.
The results of the analysis also show several inconsistencies in the dataset. On one hand,
data retrieval issues had to be fixed manually, highlighting the need for improvements in
the current data acquisition and processing system. On the other hand, the identified user
behavior bias associated with the absence of direct energy costs for users show a sig-
nificant overestimation in the energy and the duration time requested. For instance, the
average requested session duration and energy were 4.38 hours and 29.73 kWh, while
the actual averages delivered were only 3.05 hours and 19.11 kWh, demonstrating a no-
table difference. Furthermore, the cluster operates under a grid constrained scenario,
where the total 132 kW that the cluster could deliver is limited to 43 kW. Even under these
restricted conditions, the total power usage remains well below the available limit, indi-
cating a significant undertutilization of the cluster’s capacity. All these findings reinforce
the assumption that EV demand presents a considerable potential for energy demand
flexibility.
The second part of thesis builds on these insights to develop a rule-based algorithm smart
charging strategy designed to improve sustainability, alleviate grid stress, and reduce
operational costs. This strategy is tailored to the characteristics of the cluster under study,
with the broader intention to be applicable to other workplace settings.
Within a simulation environment, and over a simulation period spanning from November
2024 to April 2025, the obtained results demonstrate that the proposed strategy exhibits
promising performance. The integration of Renewable Energy Sources (RES) enabled a
reduction of 734 kWh in grid-supplied electricity for the EV cluster alone, and up to 24.5
MWh when including building loads. This translates into a total savings of 14412 DKK if
the surplus of the generated RES is sold back to the grid.
The rule-based algorithm responsible for determining the cluster’s power reference set-
point also showed strong performance when evaluated independently, yielding a signifi-
cant reduction in grid stress, with grid constraint violations decreasing by 92%. The find-
ings suggest that capping the power below the maximum available improves the utilization
of locally generated renewable energy and reduces the reliance on the grid without com-
promising user satisfaction. Under the new proposed strategy, 98.5% of the total energy
requested was successfully delivered, along an average reduction of 50 minutes in charg-
ing time compared to initial user requests.
Future work could focus on extending the duration of the data analysis to capture sea-
sonal variations in charging behavior and energy demand. Additionally, similar to the
approach proposed by Liu et al. in [47], the development of a predictive model to forecast
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
51
==PAGE:64==
the cluster demand could be integrated into the smart charging strategy to improve its
responsiveness and operational efficiency.
Regarding the strategy itself, the data sources used in the presented model should be
updated. This includes, first, incorporating real measurements from Building 330 and
the local renewable energy production from the photovoltaic installation at Risø campus
when available, and second, by transitioning from historical 2024 values to real-time in-
puts. Furthermore, the development of Pmax Strategy 3 could be explored as a means to
enhance the allocation of maximum power at each individual charging plug. In addition,
a critical next step involves implementing the whole new strategy in a real-world testing
environment within the current cluster, and across other clusters, would provide valuable
insights of the real performance of the strategy. Finally, future work could also explore the
optimization of the proposed strategy, with a particular focus on enhancing its economic
performance to further improve the obtained results.
In conclusion, this thesis highlights the potential of electric vehicle in energy demand
flexibility. It also demonstrates that smart charging strategies are effective tools for lever-
aging this potential, helping to address the upcoming challenge of the rising in electricity
demand. The contributions of this work provide both practical insights and a solid founda-
tion for continued research in smart charging systems, distributed energy management,
and sustainable mobility.
52
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations. “The Paris Agreement”. In: United Nations Climate Change (2015).
URL: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement.
[2]
United Nations. “For a livable climate: Net-zero commitments must be backed by
credible action”. In: United Nations (2015). URL: https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/
net-zero-coalition.
[3]
European Comission. “The European Green Deal”. In: Strategy and Polciy priorities
2019-2024 (2019). URL: https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/priorities-
2019-2024/european-green-deal_en.
[4]
ESG Voices. “What is Energy Transition? The Shift Towards a Sustainable Future”.
In: ESG Voices (2024). URL: https://www.esgvoices.com/post/what- is- energy-
transition-the-shift-towards-a-sustainable-future.
[5]
International Energy Agency. “Entering the Age of Electricity”. In: International En-
ergy Agency (2024). URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/electricity-2025/demand.
[6]
ICF. “Electricity Demand Expected to Grow 25 percent By 2030”. In: ICF Report
(2025). URL: https://www.icf.com/news/2025/05/electricity-demand-expected-to-
grow-25-percent-by-2030.
[7]
European Parliament. “Climate Change in Europe: Factors and figures”. In: Euro-
pean Parliament (2018). URL: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/topics/en/article/
20180703STO07123/climate-change-in-europe-facts-and-figures.
[8]
European Alternative Fuels Observatory. “Denmark: BEVs Take Over in 2024”. In:
European Comission (2025). URL: https://alternative-fuels-observatory.ec.europa.
eu/general-information/news/denmark-bevs-take-over-2024-515-market-share.
[9]
Lena Hunter. “Green milestone: More than one in ten Danish cars are electric”. In:
The Copenhagen Post (2024). URL: https://cphpost.dk/2024-09-03/news/round-
up/one-in-ten-danish-cars-now-runs-on-electricity/.
[10]
Professor Jessika Trancik MIT Climate Portal. “How much extra electricity would
we need to switch every gas-powered car for an electric vehicle?” In: MIT Climate
Portal (2024). URL: https://climate.mit.edu/ask-mit/how-much-extra-electricity-
would-we-need-switch-every-gas-powered-car-electric-vehicle.
[11]
World Economic Forum Andres Gluski Christian Bruch. “Powering the future: How
to meet global energy demand in the age of electricity”. In: World Economic Forum
(2025). URL: https://www.weforum.org/stories/2025/03/key-steps-for-meet-the-
growing-global-demand-for-electricity/.
[12]
Khalid Simjee Harshal Patel. “The role of battery energy storage systems’ in the
future of energy”. In: BECA (2024). URL: https : / / www . beca . com / ignite - your -
thinking/ignite-your-thinking/october-2024/exploring-battery-energy-storage-systems-
role-in-the-future-of-energy.
[13]
Hanne Sæle. “Electric vehicles in Norway and the potential for demand response”.
In: SINTEF (2019). URL: https://blog.sintef.com/energy/electric-vehicles-norway-
demand-response/.
[14]
Han Wang, Fangce Guo, and Aruna Sivakumar. “Analysing the impact of electric
vehicle charging on households: An interrelated load profile generation approach”.
In: Energy and Buildings 335 (2025), p. 115558. ISSN: 0378-7788. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2025.115558. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0378778825002889.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
53
==PAGE:66==
[15]
Natascia Andrenacci, Antonino Genovese, and Giancarlo Giuli. “Strategies for Work-
place EV Charging Management”. In: Energies 18 (Jan. 2025), p. 421. DOI: 10.3390/
en18020421. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/388213380_Strategies_
for_Workplace_EV_Charging_Management.
[16]
Driivz Team. “Smart EV Charging and Energy Management: the Essential Guide”.
In: Driivz (2023). URL: https://driivz.com/blog/ev-smart-charging-benefits/.
[17]
Driivz. “What is Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE)”. In: Driivz (2025). URL:
https://driivz.com/glossary/electric-vehicle-supply-equipment-evse/.
[18]
Kempower glossary. “Charging point glossary”. In: Kempower (2025). URL: https:
//kempower.com/glossary/charging-points/.
[19]
TotalEnergies. “Charging an electric vehicle: how does it work?” In: TotalEnergies
(2025). URL: https://totalenergies.com/news/charging-electric-vehicle-how-does-it-
work.
[20]
Mohammed Abdullah Ravindran et al. “A Novel Technological Review on Fast Charg-
ing Infrastructure for Electrical Vehicles: Challenges, Solutions, and Future Re-
search Directions”. In: Alexandria Engineering Journal 82 (2023), pp. 260–290.
ISSN: 1110-0168. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2023.10.009. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1110016823008943.
[21]
Ben Rundle. “Why is DC EV charging faster?” In: HYDRA Electric Vehicle Chargers
(2023). URL: https://hydraev.co.uk/why-is-dc-ev-charging-faster/.
[22]
ChargeLab.Inc. “The complete guide to Level 1 vs. Level 2 vs. Level 3 charging for
EVs”. In: ChargeLab.Inc (2023). URL: https://chargelab.co/blog/level-1-vs-level-2-
vs-level-3-charging%C3%A7.
[23]
EVESCO. “Levels of Charging”. In: EVESCO (2025). URL: https://www.power-
sonic.com/blog/levels-of-ev-charging/.
[24]
EVESCO. “EV charging connector types: A complete guide”. In: EVESCO (2025).
URL: https://www.power-sonic.com/blog/ev-charging-connector-types/..
[25]
University of Strathclyde. “Uncontrolled and Controlled Charging”. In: University of
Strathclyde (2018). URL: https://www.esru.strath.ac.uk/EandE/Web_sites/17-
18/findhornev/uncontrolled--controlled-charging.html.
[26]
Chargie. “What is the Difference Between a Smart EV Charger and Dumb EV Charger?”
In: Chargie (2024). URL: https://www.chargie.com/resources/what-is-the-difference-
between-a-smart-ev-charger-and-dumb-ev-charger.
[27]
M. Subashini and Sumathi Vijayan. “Smart Charging for Zero Emission Vehicles
– A Comprehensive Review”. In: Renewable Energy Focus 46 (2023), pp. 57–67.
ISSN: 1755-0084. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ref.2023.05.005. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1755008423000455.
[28]
Poul Paulraj. “SMART CHARGING 102: What are V1G, V2G and V2H / V2B / V2X
smart charging? | Integrating electric vehicles into power grid”. In: Emobility Simpli-
fied (2019). URL: https://www.emobilitysimplified.com/2019/12/what-is-vehicle-to-
grid-v1g-v2g-v2x-v2h.html.
[29]
Sudhanshu Mittal, Alka Singh, and Prakash Chittora. “EV Control in G2V and V2G
modes using SOGI Controller”. In: 2022 IEEE 3rd Global Conference for Advance-
ment in Technology (Oct. 2022), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/GCAT55367.2022.9972182.
URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366228039_EV_Control_in_G2V_
and_V2G_modes_using_SOGI_Controller.
[30]
Atul Manmohan and Patrick Bampanga. “Comparison of Unidirectional and Bidi-
rectional charging optimization using a composite EV load model”. In: CIGRE Con-
ference Canada 2020, Published by ResearchGate, (2020). URL: https://www.
54
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:67==
researchgate . net / publication / 347839205 _ Comparison _ of _ Unidirectional _ and _
Bidirectional_charging_optimization_using_a_composite_EV_load_model.
[31]
Sarah Lozanova. “Enphase Bidirectional EV Charger May Be a Game Changer”. In:
GreenLancer (2021). URL: https://www.greenlancer.com/post/enphase-bidirectional-
ev-charger.
[32]
Geeksforgeeks. “Centralized vs. Decentralized vs. Distributed Systems”. In: Geeks-
forgeeks (2025). URL: https : / / www . geeksforgeeks . org / comparison - centralized -
decentralized-and-distributed-systems/.
[33]
Scarlett Chen, Zhe Wu, and Panagiotis D. Christofides. “Cyber-security of central-
ized, decentralized, and distributed control-detector architectures for nonlinear pro-
cesses”. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design 165 (2021), pp. 25–39.
ISSN: 0263-8762. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2020.10.014. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0263876220305207.
[34]
Nanduni Nimalsiri et al. “A Survey of Algorithms for Distributed Charging Control of
Electric Vehicles in Smart Grid”. In: (Nov. 2019). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1911.06500.
[35]
M.A. López et al. “Demand-side management in smart grid operation considering
electric vehicles load shifting and vehicle-to-grid support”. In: International Journal
of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 64 (2015), pp. 689–698. ISSN: 0142-0615.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijepes.2014.07.065. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0142061514005006.
[36]
Energy Transmission Comission. “Demand side flexibility: unleashing untapped po-
tential alongside electricity grids and storage”. In: Energy Transmission Comission
(2025). URL: https://www.energy-transitions.org/bitesize/demand-side-flexibility-an-
important-route-alongside-electricity-grids-and-storage/.
[37]
Chargetronoix. “Dynamic Power Sharing: Revolutionizing EV Charging”. In: Char-
getronix (2024). URL: https://chargetronix.com/dynamic-power-sharing-revolutionizing-
ev-charging/.
[38]
Carlos Huerta. “Electric Vehicle Load Management and Power Sharing”. In: Revcharge
(2025). URL: https://www.revcharge.com.au/blog/load-balancing-and-power-sharing-
capabilities.
[39]
EVESCO. “Behind the Meter vs Front of the Meter. What’s the difference?” In:
EVESCO (2025). URL: https://www.power- sonic.com/blog/behind- the- meter-
vs-front-of-the-meter/.
[40]
Department of Environmental Protection of New Jersey. “Deep Dive: Charging In-
frastructure”. In: (2025). URL: https://dep.nj.gov/drivegreen/deep-dive-charging-
infrastructure/.
[41]
Simone Striani; Kristian Sevdari; Lisa Calearo; Peter Bach Andersen; Mattia Marinelli.
“Barriers and Solutions for EVs Integration in the Distribution Grid”. In: Proceed-
ings of 2021 International Universities Power Engineering Conference (2021). DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1109/UPEC50034.2021.9548235. URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/
publications/barriers-and-solutions-for-evs-integration-in-the-distribution-gr.
[42]
Kristoffer Laust Pedersen; Simone Striani; Jan Engelhardt;Mattia Marinelli. “Imple-
mentation of priority-based scheduling for electric vehicles through local distributed
control”. In: Proceedings of 2024 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
Europe (ISGT EUROPE) (2025). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ISGTEUROPE62998.
2024 . 10863249. URL: https : / / orbit . dtu . dk / en / publications / implementation - of -
priority-based-scheduling-for-electric-vehicles.
[43]
Vinstoed. “Vindstød giver dig Danmarks bedste afregningspris på den strøm, som
du ikke selv bruger”. In: Vinstoed (2025). URL: https://www.vindstoed.dk/tilmelding-
solcelle.
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
55
==PAGE:68==
[44]
NRGi. “Sælg overskuds strømmen fra jeres produktions anlæg”. In: NRGi (2025).
URL: https://nrgi.dk/erhverv/vi-tilbyder/stroem/salg-af-solcellestroem.
[45]
elberegner.dk. “Salg af strøm fra solcelle”. In: elberegner.dk (2025). URL: https:
//elberegner.dk/elselskaber/salg-af-stroem-fra-solceller/.
[46]
Byggemesterguiden. “Solceller pris pr kwh: Salg af solcellestrøm i 2025”. In: Byggemester-
guiden (2025). URL: https://www.byggemesterguiden.dk/solceller-pris-pr-kwh/.
[47]
Jiayan Liu et al. “Data-driven intelligent EV charging operating with limited chargers
considering the charging demand forecasting”. In: International Journal of Electrical
Power and Energy Systems 141 (2022), p. 108218. ISSN: 0142-0615. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ijepes.2022.108218. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0142061522002484.
56
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
A.1
Chapter 2
Figure A.1: Risø cluster real-time dashboard picture 1
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
57
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.2: Risø cluster real-time dashboard picture 2
58
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:71==
A.2
Chapter 5
Category
Metric
Unit
Strategy 1
Strategy 2
Strategy 3
Energy Metrics
Total Energy Delivered
kWh
2773.8
2819.9
2823.3
EV energy from RES
%
26.25
25.93
25.95
Grid usage reduction
%
24.25
24.23
24.23
RES Utilization
%
64.10
64.07
64.08
Financial Metrics
EV cost with RES
DKK
1088.29
1116.89
1116.94
EV cost per kWh using RES
DKK/kWh
0.392
0.396
0.396
Total EV savings
DKK
253.53
259.15
258.7
Total BC + EV cost
DKK
44794.86
44791.21
44794.91
Total BC + EV cost
DKK/kWh
0.442
0.442
0.442
Total BC + EV savings
DKK
10903.05
1096.88
10902.6
Total cost with selling RES
DKK
41253.38
41287.35
41286.84
Total savings with selling RES
DKK
14410.31
14410.55
14410.67
Total cost with selling RES
DKK/kWh
0.408
0.408
0.408
Usage Metrics
Pref Intentional Capping
%
85.19
92.35
89.72
Plug Constraint Reached
%
14.73
6.81
9.81
CC Constraint Reached
%
0.09
0.84
0.46
User Behavior Metrics
Avg Session Satisfaction
%
97.1
98.49
98.73
Total Sessions Not Completed
sessions
12
7
6
Avg Time Deviation
mins
-45.46
-51.44
-48.37
Table A.1: Full KPIs comparison of of the different proposed strategies for allocating the
plug’s maximum power
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
59
==PAGE:72==
Category
Metric
Unit
Threshold 0.4
Threshold 0.6
Threshold
Sustainable Metrics
Total Energy Delivered
kWh
2819.93
2819.93
2819.93
EV energy from RES
%
25.50
24.71
26.03
Grid usage reduction
%
24.23
24.21
24.24
RES Utilization
%
64.07
64.02
64.11
Financial Metrics
EV cost with RES
DKK
1116.89
1113.46
1113.04
EV cost per kWh using RES
DKK/kWh
0.396
0.395
0.395
Total EV savings
DKK
259.15
255.63
264.10
Total BC + EV cost
DKK
44794.86
44791.43
44791.00
Total BC + EV cost in DKK/kWh
DKK/kWh
0.442
0.442
0.442
Total BC + EV savings
DKK
10903.05
10899.52
10908.00
Total cost with selling RES
DKK
41287.35
41282.56
41286.90
Total savings with selling RES
DKK
14410.55
14408.39
14412.11
Total cost in DKK/kWh selling RES
DKK/kWh
0.408
0.408
0.408
Usage Metrics
Pref Intentional Capping
%
92.35
90.28
92.84
Plug Constraint Reached
%
6.81
8.14
6.41
CC Constraint Reached
%
0.84
1.58
0.75
User Behavior Metrics
User Behavior Metric
%
98.08
98.08
98.08
Avg Session Satisfaction
%
98.49
98.49
98.49
Total Sessions Not Completed
sessions
7
7
7
Avg Time Deviation
mins
-51.44
-57.75
-50.58
Table A.2: Full KPIs comparison for different lower bound threshold values
60
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:73==
Category
Metric
Unit
Initial (1.1)
UB 0.9
UB 0.95
U
Sustainable Metrics
Total Energy Delivered
kWh
2819.933
2819.933
2819.933
28
EV energy from RES (%)
%
25.50
26.10
26.04
2
EV energy from RES (abs)
kWh
719.21
735.87
734.33
7
Grid usage reduction
%
24.23
24.25
24.24
2
RES Utilization
%
64.07
64.12
64.11
6
Financial Metrics
EV cost with RES
DKK
1116.89
1110.59
1110.63
11
EV cost per kWh using RES
DKK/kWh
0.396
0.394
0.394
0
Total EV savings
DKK
259.15
266.09
265.80
2
Total BC + EV cost
DKK
44794.86
44788.56
44788.60
44
Total BC + EV cost in DKK/kWh
DKK/kWh
0.442
0.442
0.442
0
Total BC + EV savings
DKK
10903.05
10909.99
10909.70
10
Total cost with selling RES
DKK
41287.35
41282.22
41286.15
41
Total savings with selling RES
DKK
14410.55
14412.32
14412.15
14
Total cost in DKK/kWh selling RES
DKK/kWh
0.408
0.408
0.408
0
Usage Metrics
Pref Intentional Capping
%
92.35
92.78
92.64
9
Plug Constraint Reached
%
6.81
6.44
6.57
CC Constraint Reached
%
0.84
0.78
0.78
User Behavior Metrics
User Behavior Metric
%
98.08
98.08
98.08
9
Avg Session Satisfaction
%
98.49
98.49
98.49
9
Total Sessions Not Completed
sessions
7
7
7
Avg Time Deviation
mins
-51.44
-50.6
-50.7
-5
Table A.3: Full KPIs comparison for different upper bound threshold values
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
61
==PAGE:74==
A.3
Smart Charging Strategy Rule-Based Algorithm
1
2
#WELCOME TO THE STRATEGY DEVELOPED FOR THE MASTER THESIS OF CHRISTIAN BERG
NAVARRO
3
import pandas as pd
4
from collections import defaultdict
5
import os
6
from datetime import datetime
7
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
8
from collections import deque
9
import numpy as np
10
11
12
13
# --- Configurable Parameters ---
14
CLUSTER_CAPACITY = 43 # kW
15
CHARGER_MAX_POWER = 22
# kW
16
TIMESTEP_SECONDS = 30
# seconds
17
RES_PRICE_FACTOR = 0.1 #cost of selling RES surplus in DKK/kWh
18
19
# --- Utility Functions ---
20
def safe_get_value(series, timestamp):
21
previous_times = series.index[series.index <= timestamp]
22
next_times = series.index[series.index >= timestamp]
23
24
if previous_times.empty and next_times.empty:
25
return 0.0
26
27
if previous_times.empty:
28
value = series.loc[next_times.min()]
29
return float(value.iloc[0] if isinstance(value, pd.Series) else value)
30
31
if next_times.empty:
32
value = series.loc[previous_times.max()]
33
return float(value.iloc[0] if isinstance(value, pd.Series) else value)
34
35
t_prev = previous_times.max()
36
t_next = next_times.min()
37
38
v_prev = series.loc[t_prev]
39
v_next = series.loc[t_next]
40
41
# If duplicates exist, take the first or handle as needed
42
if isinstance(v_prev, pd.Series):
43
v_prev = v_prev.iloc[0]
44
if isinstance(v_next, pd.Series):
45
v_next = v_next.iloc[0]
46
47
if t_prev == t_next:
48
return float(v_prev)
49
50
total_seconds = (t_next - t_prev).total_seconds()
51
elapsed_seconds = (timestamp - t_prev).total_seconds()
52
weight = elapsed_seconds / total_seconds
53
interpolated_value = v_prev + weight * (v_next - v_prev)
54
55
return float(interpolated_value)
56
57
# --- PlugSession Class ---
58
class PlugSession:
59
def __init__(self, tag, energy_requested , energy_delivered , arrival_time ,
departure_time):
62
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:75==
60
self.tag = tag
61
self.charger_id = tag // 10
62
self.plug_number = tag % 10
63
self.energy_requested = energy_requested
64
self.energy_delivered = energy_delivered
65
self.arrival_time = arrival_time
66
self.departure_time = departure_time
67
self.pmax = 0
# Maximum power
68
self.pmin = 0
# Minimum power
69
self.internal_priority = 1
# Start with internal priority 1
70
self.relative_priority = 0
# Computed later by VA
71
self.pref = 0
# To be calculated later
72
#self.pmeas = 0
# Measured power (if applicable)
73
self.is_new = False
# Flag for new session , used to track initial
conditions
74
self.p_from_res = 0
# Power from the resource
75
self.p_from_grid = 0
# Power from the grid
76
self.total_energy_delivered_pct = 0
# Energy delivered as percentage
of requested
77
self.total_sessions_completed = 0
# Number of sessions completed
78
self.finished = False
79
self.energy_delivered_this_timestep = 0.0
80
self.actual_departure_time = None
81
82
83
# --- Virtual Aggregator (VA) ---
84
85
86
class VA:
87
def __init__(self, charger_id):
88
self.charger_id = charger_id
89
self.plug_sessions = []
# List of session objects (for the charger)
90
self.total_energy_delivered_pct = 0
# Total energy delivered across
all sessions
91
self.total_sessions_completed = 0
# Total completed sessions
92
self.sessions_ended_by_time = []
#Total sessions ended by time
93
self.sessions_ended_by_energy = [] #Total sessions ended energy
delivery
94
95
96
def mark_new_sessions(self, current_time , timestep):
97
"""Mark sessions as new if they arrived in this timestep."""
98
# Ensure current_time is in seconds
99
if isinstance(current_time , pd.Timestamp):
100
current_time = current_time.timestamp()
101
102
for session in self.plug_sessions:
103
arrival_time = session.arrival_time
104
if isinstance(arrival_time , pd.Timestamp):
105
arrival_time = arrival_time.timestamp()
106
107
# Mark session as new if it arrived within this timestep window
108
if 0 <= (current_time - arrival_time) < timestep:
109
session.is_new = True
110
else:
111
session.is_new = False
112
113
def initialize_sessions_pref(self):
114
"""Initialize preferences for new sessions."""
115
for session in self.plug_sessions:
116
if session.is_new:
117
#print(" Initializing session preferences")
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
63
==PAGE:76==
118
session.pref = session.pmin
# Start pref as pmin
119
#session.pmeas = 0.0
# Measured power starts at zero
120
session.is_new = False
# Mark the session as no longer new
121
#print(f" Session started: Charger {session.charger_id} Plug {
session.plug_number} at {session.arrival_time}")
122
123
def update_sessions_internal_priority(self, current_time):
124
"""Update internal priorities and compute Pmin for each session."""
125
total_internal_priority = 0.0
126
total_pmin = 0.0
127
128
if isinstance(current_time , datetime):
129
current_time = current_time.timestamp()
130
131
num_sessions = len(self.plug_sessions)
132
#if num_sessions == 0:
133
#print("No sessions available to allocate pmax!")
134
135
finished_sessions = []
136
for session in self.plug_sessions:
137
arrival_epoch = session.arrival_time
138
departure_epoch = session.departure_time
139
140
# Check if the session is active
141
is_active = (arrival_epoch <= current_time <= departure_epoch)
and (session.energy_delivered < session.energy_requested)
142
143
if is_active:
144
# # # Allocate pmax dynamically (Stragey 3)
[GO TO LINE
800 to activate this allocation]
145
# if session.pmax == 0:
# Only set pmax if it's not
already assigned
146
#
session.pmax = CHARGER_MAX_POWER / num_sessions if
num_sessions > 0 else 0
147
148
session.pmax = CHARGER_MAX_POWER / num_sessions if
num_sessions > 0 else 0 #Strategy 2
149
#session.pmax = CHARGER_MAX_POWER / 2 #(Strategy 1)
150
151
152
remaining_energy = max(session.energy_requested - session.
energy_delivered , 0)
153
remaining_time_seconds = departure_epoch - current_time
154
remaining_time_hours = max(remaining_time_seconds / 3600,
1e-6)
# Prevent division by zero
155
156
# Compute Pmin
157
session.pmin = min(remaining_energy / remaining_time_hours
, session.pmax)
158
159
# Compute internal priority as pmin / pmax
160
session.internal_priority = session.pmin / session.pmax if
session.pmax > 0 else 0.0
161
162
total_internal_priority += session.internal_priority
163
total_pmin += session.pmin
164
165
else:
166
# Session ended due to time
167
percent_delivered = min(100, (session.energy_delivered /
session.energy_requested) * 100) if session.
energy_requested > 0 else 0
64
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:77==
168
print(f"￿￿Session ended due to departure time! Charger {
int(session.charger_id)} - Plug {int(session.
plug_number)} at {datetime.fromtimestamp(current_time)
.strftime('%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S')} (Delivered {
percent_delivered:.1f}%)")
169
170
session.finished_due_to_time = True
# Custom flag
171
self.sessions_ended_by_time.append(session)
# Store
separately
172
finished_sessions.append(session)
173
174
# Remove finished sessions after iteration
175
for finished in finished_sessions:
176
self.plug_sessions.remove(finished)
177
178
return total_internal_priority , total_pmin
179
180
181
def send_data_to_ca(self):
182
"""Collect VA session data for CA."""
183
data_to_send = []
184
for session in self.plug_sessions:
185
session_data = {
186
'session_id': session.session_id ,
187
'charger_id': session.charger_id ,
188
'pref': session.pref,
189
'pmin': session.pmin,
190
'internal_priority': session.internal_priority ,
191
'departure_time': session.departure_time ,
192
}
193
data_to_send.append(session_data)
194
return data_to_send
195
196
def receive_update_from_ca(self, update_data):
197
"""Receive updates from CA, e.g., error and total_internal_priority.
"""
198
self.ca_total_cluster_internal_priority = update_data['
total_cluster_internal_priority']
199
#print(f"Received CA update: Total Internal Priority = {self.
ca_total_internal_priority}")
200
201
# Now compute relative priority for each session
202
for session in self.plug_sessions:
203
if self.ca_total_cluster_internal_priority > 0:
204
session.relative_priority = session.internal_priority / self.
ca_total_cluster_internal_priority
205
else:
206
session.relative_priority = 0.0
207
#print(f"Session {session.session_id} Relative Priority: {session.
relative_priority:.4f}")
208
209
210
def update_sessions_relative_priority(self,
total_cluster_internal_priority):
211
for session in self.plug_sessions:
212
# Convertimos el arrival_time a un formato datetime
213
arrival_time_dt = pd.to_datetime(session.arrival_time , unit='s')
214
215
# Verificamos si la diferencia entre current_time y arrival_time
es menor que el timestep
216
if abs((current_time - arrival_time_dt).total_seconds()) <
TIMESTEP_SECONDS:
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
65
==PAGE:78==
217
# Si la sesión acaba de llegar , la prioridad interna es 1.0
218
session.internal_priority = 1.0
219
220
# Set `pmeas` to 0 (as it should not be updated until the next
timestep)
221
#session.pmeas = 0
222
else:
223
# For sessions that are not new, update the internal priority
224
session.internal_priority = session.relative_priority /
total_cluster_internal_priority
225
226
# Compute relative priority based on internal priority
227
if total_cluster_internal_priority > 0:
228
session.relative_priority = session.internal_priority /
total_cluster_internal_priority
229
else:
230
session.relative_priority = 0.0
231
232
def update_dynamic_pmax(self, charger_max_power):
233
# Group sessions by charger
234
charger_sessions = {}
235
for session in self.plug_sessions:
236
charger_id = session.charger_id
237
charger_sessions.setdefault(charger_id , []).append(session)
238
239
for session in self.plug_sessions:
240
total_priority_of_charger = sum(s.relative_priority for s in self.
plug_sessions)
241
if total_priority_of_charger > 0:
242
session.pmax = (session.relative_priority /
total_priority_of_charger) * CHARGER_MAX_POWER
243
else:
244
session.pmax = 0
245
246
print(f"[DEBUG] Updating Pmax for charger {session.charger_id} →New
Pmax: {session.pmax:.2f} kW")
247
248
249
def first_allocation_loop(self, ca_error):
250
"""First allocation loop (adjust preferences based on error and
relative priority)."""
251
cluster_sessions_count = len(self.plug_sessions)
252
253
for session in self.plug_sessions:
254
if session.is_new:
255
session.pref_intermediate = session.pref
256
continue
257
258
if cluster_sessions_count == 1:
259
session.pref_intermediate = session.pref + ca_error * session.
relative_priority
260
elif cluster_sessions_count > 1:
261
if ca_error >= 0:
262
session.pref_intermediate = session.pref + ca_error *
session.relative_priority
263
else:
264
session.pref_intermediate = session.pref + ca_error * (1 -
session.relative_priority)
265
266
# Clip to pmin and pmax
267
session.pref_intermediate = min(max(session.pref_intermediate ,
session.pmin), session.pmax)
66
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:79==
268
269
# Scale total pref if above charger max
270
charger_pref_total = sum(s.pref_intermediate for s in self.
plug_sessions)
271
if charger_pref_total > CHARGER_MAX_POWER:
272
scaling = CHARGER_MAX_POWER / charger_pref_total
273
for session in self.plug_sessions:
274
session.pref_intermediate *= max (0 ,session.pref_intermediate
*scaling)
275
276
total_pref = sum(session.pref for session in self.plug_sessions)
277
278
279
def second_allocation_loop(self, ca_error):
280
"""Second allocation loop (final adjustment to preferences)."""
281
cluster_sessions_count = len(self.plug_sessions)
282
283
for session in self.plug_sessions:
284
if session.is_new:
285
continue
286
287
if cluster_sessions_count == 1:
288
session.pref = session.pref_intermediate + ca_error * session.
relative_priority
289
elif cluster_sessions_count > 1:
290
if ca_error >= 0:
291
session.pref = session.pref_intermediate + ca_error *
session.relative_priority
292
else:
293
session.pref = session.pref_intermediate + ca_error * (1 -
session.relative_priority)
294
295
# Clip between pmin and pmax
296
session.pref = min(max(session.pref, session.pmin), session.pmax)
297
298
# Scale total pref if above charger max
299
charger_pref_total = sum(s.pref for s in self.plug_sessions)
300
if charger_pref_total > CHARGER_MAX_POWER:
301
scaling = CHARGER_MAX_POWER / charger_pref_total
302
for session in self.plug_sessions:
303
session.pref = max(0, session.pref * scaling)
304
#session.pmeas = max(0, session.pref * scaling)
305
306
307
308
309
310
311
def update_energy_delivered(self):
312
completed_sessions = []
313
delivered_this_step = []
314
315
# Iterate over each session and update energy delivered
316
for session in self.plug_sessions:
317
# Skip if session is new (not ready for energy delivery yet)
318
if session.is_new:
319
continue
320
321
# Reset energy delivered this timestep for tracking
322
session.energy_delivered_this_timestep = 0.0
323
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
67
==PAGE:80==
324
remaining_energy = session.energy_requested - session.
energy_delivered
325
energy_to_deliver = min(session.pref * (TIMESTEP_SECONDS / 3600),
remaining_energy)
326
327
session.energy_delivered += energy_to_deliver
328
session.energy_delivered_this_timestep = energy_to_deliver
329
330
delivered_this_step.append((session , energy_to_deliver))
331
332
# Check if session is completed
333
if session.energy_delivered >= session.energy_requested:
334
335
percent_delivered = min(100, (session.energy_delivered /
session.energy_requested) * 100)
336
print(f"￿￿Session ended due to energy delivery! Charger {int(
session.charger_id)} - Plug {int(session.plug_number)} (
Delivered {percent_delivered:.1f}%)")
337
338
session.finished_due_to_energy = True
339
session.actual_departure_time = current_time
340
self.sessions_ended_by_energy.append(session)
341
completed_sessions.append(session)
342
343
# Remove completed sessions after iteration
344
for finished in completed_sessions:
345
self.plug_sessions.remove(finished)
346
347
return delivered_this_step
348
349
350
351
# --- Cloud Aggregator (CA) ---
352
class CA:
353
def __init__(self):
354
self.vas = {}
355
self.renewable_production = pd.DataFrame()
356
self.building_consumption = pd.DataFrame()
357
self.energy_prices = pd.DataFrame()
358
self.sessions_ended_by_time = []
359
self.sessions_ended_by_energy = []
360
self.measured_history = deque(maxlen=1)
# Number of periods to
compute the average of power measurements
361
self.exceeded_capacity_counter = 0
362
self.power_capped_counter = 0
363
self.intentionally_limited_counter = 0
364
self.physical_constraint_counter = 0
365
self.max_capacity_used_counter = 0
366
self.total_iterations_check = 0
367
self.missing_mode_counter = 0
368
369
370
371
def load_inputs(self, renewable_path , consumption_path , prices_path):
372
""" Loads data from Excel files """
373
df_prices = pd.read_excel(prices_path , sheet_name="data")
374
df_renewable_production = pd.read_excel(renewable_path , sheet_name="
DATA")
375
df_building_consumption = pd.read_excel(consumption_path , sheet_name="
B325_2024")
376
377
# Convert to datetime and set the index
68
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:81==
378
df_prices['Datetime'] = pd.to_datetime(df_prices['DATE']) + pd.
to_timedelta(df_prices['HourDK'], unit='h')
379
df_prices = df_prices.set_index('Datetime')
380
381
df_renewable_production['Datetime'] = pd.to_datetime(
df_renewable_production['DATE']) + pd.to_timedelta(
df_renewable_production['HOUR'], unit='h')
382
df_renewable_production = df_renewable_production.set_index('Datetime'
)
383
384
df_building_consumption['Datetime'] = pd.to_datetime(
df_building_consumption['DATE']) + pd.to_timedelta(
df_building_consumption['HOUR'], unit='h')
385
df_building_consumption = df_building_consumption.set_index('Datetime'
)
386
387
# Assign DataFrames to the CA instance
388
self.energy_prices = df_prices
389
self.renewable_production = df_renewable_production
390
self.building_consumption = df_building_consumption
391
392
def get_input_at_time(self, t_now):
393
""" Get renewable production , consumption , and price for the given
time """
394
production = safe_get_value(self.renewable_production['TOTAL POWER'],
t_now)
395
consumption = safe_get_value(self.building_consumption['LOAD KW'],
t_now)
396
price_hour = t_now.floor('h')
397
price = self.energy_prices['SpotPriceDKK'].get(price_hour , 0) /1000
398
return production , consumption , price
399
400
def assign_sessions(self, plug_sessions):
401
""" Assign sessions to VAs (chargers) """
402
charger_groups = defaultdict(list)
403
for session in plug_sessions:
404
charger_groups[session.charger_id].append(session)
405
406
for charger_id , sessions in charger_groups.items():
407
if charger_id not in self.vas:
408
self.vas[charger_id] = VA(charger_id)
409
existing_tags = {s.tag for s in self.vas[charger_id].plug_sessions
}
410
new_sessions = [s for s in sessions if s.tag not in existing_tags]
411
self.vas[charger_id].plug_sessions.extend(new_sessions)
412
existing_tags = {s.tag for s in self.vas[charger_id].plug_sessions
}
413
new_sessions = [s for s in sessions if s.tag not in existing_tags]
414
self.vas[charger_id].plug_sessions.extend(new_sessions)
415
416
417
def compute_cluster_metrics(self, t_now):
418
"""Compute metrics for the whole cluster at the current time."""
419
total_cluster_internal_priority = 0.0
420
total_cluster_pmin = 0.0
421
422
# First, update all VAs (chargers)
423
for va in self.vas.values():
424
va_internal_priority , va_pmin = va.
update_sessions_internal_priority(t_now)
425
va.initialize_sessions_pref()
# Make sure new sessions get pref
initialized
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
69
==PAGE:82==
426
total_cluster_internal_priority += va_internal_priority
427
total_cluster_pmin += va_pmin
428
429
# Now that all sessions are updated , proceed with cluster -wide metrics
430
all_sessions = [s for va in self.vas.values() for s in va.
plug_sessions]
431
if not all_sessions:
432
return 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0
433
434
production = safe_get_value(self.renewable_production['TOTAL POWER'],
t_now)
435
consumption = safe_get_value(self.building_consumption['LOAD KW'],
t_now)
436
p_available = production - consumption
437
438
latest_dep_time = max(s.departure_time for s in all_sessions)
439
horizon_epoch = latest_dep_time - TIMESTEP_SECONDS
440
horizon_time = pd.to_datetime(horizon_epoch , unit='s', origin='unix')
441
442
prices_future = self.energy_prices.loc[
443
(self.energy_prices.index >= t_now) & (self.energy_prices.index <
horizon_time)
444
]
445
avg_future_price = prices_future['SpotPriceDKK'].mean()/1000 if not
prices_future.empty else 0
446
447
flexibility_min = (CLUSTER_CAPACITY - total_cluster_pmin) /
CLUSTER_CAPACITY
448
if self.measured_history:
449
avg_measured_power = sum(self.measured_history) / len(self.
measured_history)
450
flexibility_comp = (CLUSTER_CAPACITY - avg_measured_power) /
CLUSTER_CAPACITY
451
else:
452
flexibility_comp = 1.0
# Assume max flexibility initially
453
454
#flexibility = max( flexibility_min , flexibility_comp)
455
flexibility = flexibility_comp
456
#flexibility = (CLUSTER_CAPACITY - total_cluster_pmin) /
CLUSTER_CAPACITY
457
458
459
# Print relative priorities only after the entire cluster update
460
for va in self.vas.values():
461
for session in va.plug_sessions:
462
session.relative_priority = session.internal_priority /
total_cluster_internal_priority if
total_cluster_internal_priority > 0 else 0
463
#print(f￿￿" Updated relative priority for Charger {session.
charger_id} | Plug {session.plug_number}: {session.
relative_priority:.4f}")
464
465
466
467
468
469
return total_cluster_internal_priority , total_cluster_pmin ,
horizon_epoch , p_available , avg_future_price , flexibility
470
471
def update_cluster_pref(self):
472
"""Update the preference of the whole cluster , ensuring it stays
within capacity"""
70
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:83==
473
all_sessions = [s for va in self.vas.values() for s in va.
plug_sessions]
474
475
# Fix: Check all_sessions , not sessions
476
if not all_sessions:
# If no sessions found
477
return 0
# Explicitly return 0 when no sessions are available
478
479
total_pref = sum(s.pref for s in all_sessions)
480
cluster_measured = total_pref
481
482
if total_pref > CLUSTER_CAPACITY:
483
scaling = CLUSTER_CAPACITY / total_pref
484
for s in all_sessions:
485
s.pref = max(0, s.pref * scaling)
486
cluster_measured = CLUSTER_CAPACITY
487
488
return cluster_measured
489
490
def compute_cluster_power_reference(self, t_now, mode_1 , mode_2 , mode_3 ,
mode_4, mode_5,mode_6):
491
492
"""Compute the cluster's power reference based on inputs and
constraints."""
493
total_cluster_internal_priority , total_cluster_pmin , horizon_epoch ,
p_available , avg_future_price , flexibility = self.
compute_cluster_metrics(t_now)
494
495
496
497
production ,consumption , price_now = self.get_input_at_time(t_now)
498
499
500
total_pmin = total_cluster_pmin
501
502
if total_pmin > 0:
503
# Only track values when sessions are active
504
if not hasattr(self, 'price_ratios'):
505
self.price_ratios = []
506
self.flexibilities = []
507
508
price_ratio = price_now / avg_future_price if avg_future_price > 0
else 1.0
509
self.price_ratios.append(price_ratio)
510
self.flexibilities.append(flexibility)
511
p_available=production -consumption
512
513
print(f"￿￿RES: {production:.2f} kW | Consumption: {consumption:.2f} kW
| Pavailable: {p_available:.2f} kW")
514
print(f"￿￿Total Cluster Pmin: {total_pmin:.2f} kW | Sum_int_priority:
{total_cluster_internal_priority:.2f} | Flexibility: {flexibility
:.2f}")
515
print(f"￿￿Horizon Time: {horizon_time} | Price now: {price_now:.2f}
DKK/kWh | Avg Future Price: {avg_future_price:.2f} DKK/kWh")
516
517
518
#--- Parameter settings (can be tuned or swept in sensitivity analysis
) ---
519
price_low = 0.4
520
price_high = 0.95
521
522
flex_low = 0.5
523
flex_high = 1
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
71
==PAGE:84==
524
525
526
# --- Compute scaling factors ---
527
price_ratio = price_now / avg_future_price if avg_future_price > 0
else 1.0
528
529
beta = 2 - (price_ratio - price_low) / (price_high - price_low)
530
beta = max(1.0, min(beta, 2.0))
#
531
532
# 2. Flexibility ratio
533
if flexibility <= flex_low:
534
flex_ratio = 1.0
535
elif flexibility >= flex_high:
536
flex_ratio = 1.25
537
else:
538
flex_ratio = 1 + 0.25 * ((flexibility - flex_low) / (flex_high -
flex_low))
539
540
541
542
543
# 3. RES availability scaling
544
res_ratio = (p_available + total_pmin) / total_pmin if total_pmin > 0
else 1.0
545
res_ratio = min(res_ratio , 2.0)
546
547
# --- Decision logic ---
548
if total_pmin <= 0:
549
cluster_pref = 0
550
mode_6 += 1
551
print("Mode 6: No current sessions")
552
553
else:
554
modes_before = mode_1 + mode_2 + mode_3 + mode_4 + mode_5
555
self.total_iterations_check +=1
556
557
558
if price_ratio < price_low:
559
cluster_pref = CLUSTER_CAPACITY
560
mode_1 += 1
561
print("Mode 1: Super low price — full cluster allocation")
562
563
564
elif price_ratio < price_high:
565
if p_available >= total_pmin:
566
cluster_pref = min(CLUSTER_CAPACITY , p_available * beta *
flex_ratio)
567
mode_2 += 1
568
print(f"Mode 2: Medium price & High RES | price ratio: {
beta:.2f} | flex ratio: {flex_ratio:.2f}")
569
570
571
else:
572
573
cluster_pref = min(CLUSTER_CAPACITY , max(total_pmin ,
total_pmin * res_ratio * beta * flex_ratio))
574
mode_3 += 1
575
print("Mode 3: No Pavailable but low prices")
576
577
print(f"Mode 3: Medium price & Low RES
| price ratio: {
beta:.2f} | flex ratio: {flex_ratio:.2f} | res ratio:
{res_ratio:.2f}")
72
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:85==
578
579
else:
580
if p_available >= total_pmin:
581
cluster_pref = min(CLUSTER_CAPACITY , p_available)
582
mode_4 += 1
583
print("High price — use RES only: P_available allocation")
584
else:
585
cluster_pref = total_pmin
586
mode_5 += 1
587
print("High price & Low RES: Pmin allocation")
588
589
modes_after = mode_1 + mode_2 + mode_3 + mode_4 + mode_5
590
if modes_after == modes_before:
591
print(f"￿ No mode assigned at {current_time} despite active
session.")
592
self.missing_mode_counter += 1
593
594
595
596
print(f" Cluster Power Reference: {cluster_pref:.2f} kW")
597
return max(0, cluster_pref) ,mode_1 , mode_2 , mode_3 , mode_4 , mode_5 ,
mode_6
598
599
600
def control_step(self, cluster_pref , current_time):
601
""" Run a control loop to update preferences and adjust the cluster
state """
602
for va in self.vas.values():
603
va.update_sessions_internal_priority(current_time)
604
605
total_cluster_internal_priority , total_cluster_pmin , horizon_epoch ,
p_available , avg_future_price , flexibility = self.
compute_cluster_metrics(current_time)
606
607
all_sessions = [s for va in self.vas.values() for s in va.
plug_sessions]
608
cluster_measured_prev =max(0,sum(s.pref for s in all_sessions))
609
610
error1 = cluster_pref - cluster_measured_prev
611
print(f"First cluster meas (meas_prev): {cluster_measured_prev:.2f} |
Error 1: {error1:.2f}")
612
613
for va in self.vas.values():
614
va.first_allocation_loop(error1)
615
616
cluster_measured_intermediate = max(0, sum(s.pref_intermediate for s
in all_sessions))
617
618
error2 = cluster_pref - cluster_measured_intermediate
619
print(f"Second cluster meas (meas_int): {cluster_measured_intermediate
:.2f} | Error 2: {error2:.2f}")
620
621
622
for va in self.vas.values():
623
va.second_allocation_loop(error2)
624
625
cluster_measured_final = max(0, self.update_cluster_pref())
626
self.measured_history.append(cluster_measured_final)
627
628
print(f"Cluster Measured Final: {cluster_measured_final:.2f}")
629
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
73
==PAGE:86==
630
return cluster_measured_final , cluster_measured_prev , error1 ,
cluster_measured_intermediate , error2
631
632
def orchestrate_control_step(self, current_time):
633
# Step 1: Collect data from VAs (optional)
634
va_data_list = [va.send_data_to_ca() for va in self.vas.values()]
635
636
# Step 2: Compute cluster power reference
637
cluster_pref = self.compute_cluster_power_reference(current_time)
638
639
# Step 3: Send cluster reference back to each VA
640
for va in self.vas.values():
641
va.receive_data_from_ca(cluster_pref)
642
643
# Step 4: Run control loop inside CA and VAs
644
cluster_measured = self.control_step(cluster_pref , current_time)
645
646
total_grid_power = sum(s.p_from_grid for va in self.vas.values() for s
in va.plug_sessions)
647
#print(f￿￿" Total Grid Power (Pgrid): {total_grid_power:.2f} kW\n")
648
649
# ￿Step 5: Now update energy delivered (this is the "big iteration")
650
for va in self.vas.values():
651
va.update_energy_delivered(current_time)
652
653
return cluster_measured
654
655
656
# --- Load Sessions from Excel ---
657
def round_up_to_next_timestep(timestamp , timestep_seconds):
658
# Round timestamp up to the next timestep
659
return ((int(timestamp) + timestep_seconds - 1) // timestep_seconds) *
timestep_seconds
660
661
session_df = pd.read_excel("CHANGING SESSIONS.xlsx")
662
663
# Convert time columns to pandas datetime
664
session_df["arrival_time"] = pd.to_datetime(session_df["ARRIVAL"])
665
session_df["departure_time"] = pd.to_datetime(session_df["DEPARTURE"])
666
667
668
def generate_sessions_from_excel(t_now, active_plugs):
669
670
sessions = []
671
session_df["arrival_time"] = session_df["arrival_time"].dt.floor(f"{
TIMESTEP_SECONDS}s")
672
t_now_unix = int(t_now.timestamp())
673
next_step_time = t_now + pd.Timedelta(seconds=TIMESTEP_SECONDS)
674
#session_df["arrival_time"] = session_df["arrival_time"].dt.floor(f"{
TIMESTEP_SECONDS}s")
675
676
677
678
# Filter sessions that should start between t_now and next_step_time
679
sessions_now = session_df[
680
(session_df["arrival_time"] >= t_now) &
681
(session_df["arrival_time"] < next_step_time) &
682
(~session_df["CHARGER TAG"].isin(active_plugs))
683
]
684
685
for _, row in sessions_now.iterrows():
686
tag = row["CHARGER TAG"]
74
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:87==
687
start = int(row["arrival_time"].timestamp())
688
end = int(row["departure_time"].timestamp())
689
energy = row["ENERGY REQUESTED"]
690
691
new_session = PlugSession(tag, energy , 0, start, end)
692
new_session.is_new = True
# Flag the session as new
693
sessions.append(new_session)
694
active_plugs.add(tag)
695
696
# Optionally , print debug message for new session
697
#print(f￿￿" New Session Started: Charger {tag} | Energy: {energy} kWh |
{row['arrival_time ']} →{row['departure_time ']}")
698
699
return sessions , active_plugs
700
701
# --- Main Simulation ---
702
ca = CA()
703
704
renewable_path = "2024_RES.xlsx"
705
consumption_path = "B325_2024.xlsx"
706
prices_path = "ELSPOT PRICES.xlsx"
707
708
# Load input data
709
if not os.path.exists(renewable_path):
710
print(f"Error: {renewable_path} not found!")
711
else:
712
ca.load_inputs(renewable_path , consumption_path , prices_path)
713
714
# Define simulation time window
715
start_time = pd.Timestamp("2024-11-01 00:00:00")
716
end_time = pd.Timestamp("2025-04-30 23:59:59")
717
718
# Initialize counters
719
current_time = start_time
720
active_plugs = set()
721
722
total_energy_desired = 0.0
723
total_energy_delivered = 0.0
724
session_satisfaction_sum = 0.0
725
completed_sessions = 0
726
total_energy_delivered_pct=0.0
727
hypothetical_full_grid_cost = 0.0
728
total_building_energy = 0.0
729
total_building_grid_energy = 0.0
730
total_building_cost = 0.0
731
building_cost_full_grid = 0.0
732
total_res_sold_energy = 0.0
733
total_res_revenue = 0.0
734
total_res_used_by_building = 0.0
735
total_iterations = 0
736
missing_mode_counter= 0
737
total_iterations_check=0
738
739
740
741
742
743
total_res_energy = 0.0
744
total_grid_energy = 0.0
745
total_cost = 0.0
746
mode_1 = 0
747
mode_2 = 0
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
75
==PAGE:88==
748
mode_3 = 0
749
mode_4 = 0
750
mode_5 = 0
751
mode_6=0
752
seen_sessions = set()
753
754
755
while current_time < end_time:
756
print("-" * 30)
757
print(f"Current Time: {current_time.strftime('%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S')}")
758
759
# --- Load Sessions ---
760
sessions , active_plugs = generate_sessions_from_excel(current_time ,
active_plugs)
761
ca.assign_sessions(sessions)
# Assign sessions to VAs (virtual
aggregators)
762
763
for va in ca.vas.values():
764
va.mark_new_sessions(current_time , TIMESTEP_SECONDS)
765
766
for session in sessions:
767
if session.tag not in seen_sessions:
768
total_energy_desired += session.energy_requested
769
seen_sessions.add(session.tag)
770
771
772
# ￿PRINT when new session just arrived
773
for va in ca.vas.values():
774
for session in va.plug_sessions:
775
if session.arrival_time == int(current_time.timestamp()):
776
print(f"￿￿New session arrived! Charger {int(session.charger_id
)} - Plug {int(session.plug_number)} at {current_time}")
777
778
779
# --- Get input data ---
780
production , consumption , price_now = ca.get_input_at_time(current_time)
781
782
# --- Compute Cluster Metrics ---
783
(
784
total_cluster_internal_priority ,
785
total_pmin ,
786
horizon_epoch ,
787
p_available ,
788
avg_future_price ,
789
flexibility
790
) = ca.compute_cluster_metrics(current_time)
791
792
horizon_time = pd.to_datetime(horizon_epoch , unit='s', origin='unix')
793
794
# --- Update Relative Priority ---
795
for va in ca.vas.values():
796
va.update_sessions_relative_priority(total_cluster_internal_priority)
797
798
# **Call the internal priority update here**
799
total_internal_priority , total_pmin = va.
update_sessions_internal_priority(current_time)
800
801
# # **UNCOMMENT IF STRATEGY 3 WANTS TO BE USED**
802
# for session in va.plug_sessions:
# Update all plugs, not just the
last session
803
#
#print(f"Before dynamic pmax update: Charger {session.charger_id
}, Plug {session.plug_number}, Pmax: {session.pmax}")
76
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:89==
804
#
va.update_dynamic_pmax(CHARGER_MAX_POWER)
805
#
#print(f"After dynamic pmax update: Charger {session.charger_id
}, Plug {session.plug_number}, Pmax: {session.pmax}")
806
807
808
# --- Allocation Loops ---
809
ca_error = 0.0
# Start with zero error for first allocation
810
for va in ca.vas.values():
811
va.first_allocation_loop(ca_error)
812
813
# --- Update Pmeas after the first allocation loop ---
814
for va in ca.vas.values():
815
for session in va.plug_sessions:
816
# Update session's Pmeas based on real-time power measurement
817
session.pmeas = session.pref
818
819
820
# --- Cluster Metrics Update ---
821
# Recalculate cluster measured power based on actual Pmeas values
822
cluster_measured_final = sum(session.pref for va in ca.vas.values() for
session in va.plug_sessions)
823
824
# --- Compute Cluster Reference ---
825
cluster_pref , mode_1, mode_2 , mode_3 , mode_4 , mode_5 , mode_6= ca.
compute_cluster_power_reference(current_time , mode_1 , mode_2 , mode_3 ,
mode_4, mode_5,mode_6)
826
827
# Calculate the errors based on the actual cluster measured power
828
error1 = cluster_pref - cluster_measured_final
829
830
# --- Second Allocation Loop ---
831
for va in ca.vas.values():
832
va.second_allocation_loop(ca_error)
833
834
# --- Initialize cluster_measured_initial ---
835
cluster_measured_initial = cluster_measured_final if '
cluster_measured_final' in locals() else 0.00
836
837
# --- Control Step ---
838
cluster_measured_final , cluster_measured_prev , error1 ,
cluster_measured_intermediate , error2 = ca.control_step(cluster_pref ,
current_time)
839
# Compare your intent (cluster_pref) vs what was delivered (
cluster_measured_final)
840
if cluster_pref > 0:
841
total_iterations += 1
# Count timestep with sessions
842
843
if abs(cluster_measured_final - cluster_pref) < 1e-3:
844
if cluster_pref < CLUSTER_CAPACITY:
845
ca.intentionally_limited_counter += 1
846
elif cluster_pref >= CLUSTER_CAPACITY:
847
ca.max_capacity_used_counter += 1
848
else:
849
ca.physical_constraint_counter += 1
850
851
852
853
delivered_sessions = []
854
855
for va in ca.vas.values():
856
delivered_sessions.extend(va.update_energy_delivered())
857
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
77
==PAGE:90==
858
timestep_energy_delivered = sum(ed for _, ed in delivered_sessions)
859
total_energy_delivered += timestep_energy_delivered
860
861
# Mark finished sessions and accumulate satisfaction
862
for session , ed in delivered_sessions:
863
if not session.finished:
864
session_departure_time = pd.to_datetime(session.departure_time ,
unit='s')
865
866
if (session.energy_delivered >= session.energy_requested) or (
current_time >= session_departure_time):
867
session.finished = True
868
print(f"￿Session finished! Charger {session.charger_id} -
Plug {session.plug_number} at {current_time}")
869
870
session_satisfaction = min(1.0, session.energy_delivered /
session.energy_requested)
871
print(f" ￿
Delivered {session.energy_delivered:.2f} kWh out
of {session.energy_requested:.2f} kWh ({
session_satisfaction:.2%})")
872
873
session_satisfaction_sum += session_satisfaction
874
completed_sessions += 1
875
total_energy_desired += session.energy_requested
876
877
# === STEP 2: RES & GRID ENERGY ATTRIBUTION ===
878
# Estimate RES used by building first
879
building_power_demand = consumption
# in kW
880
res_used_by_building = min(production , building_power_demand)
881
building_grid_demand = building_power_demand - res_used_by_building
882
883
total_res_used_by_building += res_used_by_building * (TIMESTEP_SECONDS /
3600)
884
885
building_energy = building_power_demand * (TIMESTEP_SECONDS / 3600)
886
building_grid_energy = building_grid_demand * (TIMESTEP_SECONDS / 3600)
887
building_cost = building_grid_energy * price_now
888
889
total_building_energy += building_energy
890
total_building_grid_energy += building_grid_energy
891
total_building_cost += building_cost
892
893
# Hypothetical: all from grid
894
building_cost_full_grid += building_energy * price_now
895
896
897
cluster_power_demand = sum(session.pref for va in ca.vas.values() for
session in va.plug_sessions)
898
res_power_used = min(cluster_power_demand , max(p_available , 0))
899
grid_power_used = cluster_power_demand - res_power_used
900
901
if cluster_power_demand > 0:
902
res_ratio = res_power_used / cluster_power_demand
903
grid_ratio = grid_power_used / cluster_power_demand
904
else:
905
res_ratio = grid_ratio = 0.0
906
907
# --- RES Surplus for Potential Sale ---
908
res_used_by_ev = res_power_used
# This is the RES power allocated to EVs
909
res_total_used = res_used_by_building + res_used_by_ev
# Total RES used
locally
78
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:91==
910
res_surplus = max(0.0, production - res_total_used)
# Surplus RES power
in kW
911
912
# Convert to energy (kWh) based on timestep
913
res_surplus_energy = res_surplus * (TIMESTEP_SECONDS / 3600)
# kWh
914
915
# Revenue from selling RES surplus
916
revenue_from_res_sale = res_surplus_energy * max(0,(price_now -
RES_PRICE_FACTOR))
917
918
# Accumulate totals
919
total_res_sold_energy += res_surplus_energy
920
total_res_revenue += revenue_from_res_sale
921
922
# Track exact totals
923
accum_res_energy = 0.0
924
accum_grid_energy = 0.0
925
926
for i, (session , ed) in enumerate(delivered_sessions):
927
if ed > 0:
928
# For all except the last, do regular attribution
929
if i < len(delivered_sessions) - 1:
930
res_energy = ed * res_ratio
931
grid_energy = ed * grid_ratio
932
else:
933
# Last session gets the residual to ensure match
934
res_energy = total_res_energy + total_grid_energy
935
res_energy = (timestep_energy_delivered - accum_res_energy -
accum_grid_energy) * res_ratio
936
grid_energy = timestep_energy_delivered - accum_res_energy -
accum_grid_energy - res_energy
937
938
accum_res_energy += res_energy
939
accum_grid_energy += grid_energy
940
941
total_res_energy += res_energy
942
total_grid_energy += grid_energy
943
total_cost += grid_energy * price_now
944
hypothetical_full_grid_cost += ed * price_now
945
946
947
# Assign back to session (for diagnostics)
948
session.p_from_res = res_energy / (TIMESTEP_SECONDS / 3600)
949
session.p_from_grid = grid_energy / (TIMESTEP_SECONDS / 3600)
950
951
952
# --- Print VA and Session Status ---
953
for va in ca.vas.values():
954
for session in va.plug_sessions:
955
session.total_energy_delivered_pct = min(100,(session.
energy_delivered / session.energy_requested) * 100)
956
session.p_from_grid = max(session.pref - session.p_from_res , 0)
957
958
959
print(f"\￿￿n Session {int(session.charger_id)}-{int(session.
plug_number)} | {pd.to_datetime(session.arrival_time , unit='s
')} - {pd.to_datetime(session.departure_time , unit='s')}")
960
print(f" Pmin {session.pmin:.2f} kW | Pmax {session.pmax:.2f} kW |
Pref {session.pref:.2f} kW | Pmeas {session.pmeas:.2f} kW")
961
print(f" ￿
Internal Priority: {session.internal_priority:.2f} |
Relative Priority: {session.relative_priority:.2f}")
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
79
==PAGE:92==
962
print(f" ￿
Delivered Energy: {session.energy_delivered:.2f} kWh
({session.total_energy_delivered_pct:.1f}%) \n")
963
964
965
current_time += pd.Timedelta(seconds=TIMESTEP_SECONDS)
966
967
ca.sessions_ended_by_time = []
968
ca.sessions_ended_by_energy = []
969
970
for va in ca.vas.values():
971
ca.sessions_ended_by_time.extend(va.sessions_ended_by_time)
972
ca.sessions_ended_by_energy.extend(va.sessions_ended_by_energy)
973
974
# Recompute energy accurately from finished sessions
975
all_finished_sessions = ca.sessions_ended_by_time + ca.
sessions_ended_by_energy
976
total_energy_delivered = sum(s.energy_delivered for s in all_finished_sessions
)
977
total_energy_requested = sum(s.energy_requested for s in all_finished_sessions
)
978
979
total_modes = mode_1 + mode_2 + mode_3 + mode_4 + mode_5
980
total_modes_sum = total_modes + mode_6
981
982
983
print("\￿ n Capacity Use Summary:")
984
print(f"￿￿Strategically limited (intentional): {ca.
intentionally_limited_counter} times") # I limit it to some value under CC
985
print(f"￿￿Physically constrained (PLUG/CHARGER CONSTRAINT): {ca.
physical_constraint_counter} times") #Delay in error or plug constraint
986
print(f"￿￿Max capacity requested and matched (CC CONSTRAINT): {ca.
max_capacity_used_counter} times") # Total cluster constraint
987
print((f"Total periods with sessions: {total_modes} out of {total_modes_sum}")
)
988
print((f"Total periods with sessions: {total_iterations}"))
989
print(f"￿￿Timesteps with sessions but no mode assigned: {ca.
missing_mode_counter}")
990
print(f"￿￿Total times mode assigned: {ca.total_iterations_check}")
991
992
993
994
# === End of Simulation: Report ===
995
print("\n\n===== SIMULATION SUMMARY =====\n")
996
print("￿Simulation Complete!\n")
997
998
# EV CLUSTER
999
print("\￿￿n ===== EV CLUSTER SUMMARY =====")
1000
print(f"￿￿Total Energy Delivered: {total_energy_delivered:.3f} / {
total_energy_requested:.3f} kWh")
1001
print(f" ￿
From RES:
{total_res_energy:.2f} kWh")
1002
print(f" ￿
From Grid: {total_grid_energy:.2f} kWh")
1003
if total_energy_requested > 0:
1004
print(f"￿Delivery Ratio: {total_energy_delivered / total_energy_requested
:.2%}")
1005
else:
1006
print("￿ No completed EV sessions.")
1007
1008
print(f"\￿￿n EV Charging Cost (With RES): {total_cost:.2f} DKK")
1009
print(f"￿￿EV Charging Cost (Grid Only): {hypothetical_full_grid_cost:.2f} DKK"
)
1010
print(f"￿￿EV Charging Savings via RES: {hypothetical_full_grid_cost -
total_cost:.2f} DKK")
80
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:93==
1011
1012
# EV Shortfalls
1013
print("\￿ n Underdelivered EV Sessions:")
1014
shortfall_sessions = [s for s in all_finished_sessions if abs(s.
energy_delivered - s.energy_requested) > 0.001]
1015
if shortfall_sessions:
1016
for s in shortfall_sessions:
1017
print(f"Session {s.charger_id}-{s.plug_number} →Delivered {s.
energy_delivered:.2f} / {s.energy_requested:.2f} kWh")
1018
else:
1019
print("None. All sessions fully delivered.")
1020
1021
# BUILDING CONSUMPTION
1022
print("\￿￿n ===== BUILDING ENERGY SUMMARY =====")
1023
print(f"￿￿Total Building Consumption: {total_building_energy:.2f} kWh")
1024
print(f" ￿
From RES:
{total_building_energy - total_building_grid_energy:.2
f} kWh")
1025
print(f" ￿
From Grid: {total_building_grid_energy:.2f} kWh")
1026
1027
print(f"\￿￿n Building Energy Cost (With RES): {total_building_cost:.2f} DKK")
1028
print(f"￿￿Building Cost (Grid Only):
{building_cost_full_grid:.2f} DKK")
1029
print(f"￿￿Savings via RES for Building:
{building_cost_full_grid -
total_building_cost:.2f} DKK")
1030
1031
# ENVIRONMENT -WIDE VIEW
1032
print("\￿￿n ===== TOTAL ENVIRONMENT COSTS =====")
1033
total_env_cost = total_cost + total_building_cost
1034
env_cost_full_grid = hypothetical_full_grid_cost + building_cost_full_grid
1035
print(f"￿Total Cost With RES:
{total_env_cost:.2f} DKK")
1036
print(f"￿Total Cost Without RES:
{env_cost_full_grid:.2f} DKK")
1037
print(f"￿￿Total Savings from RES:
{env_cost_full_grid - total_env_cost:.2f}
DKK")
1038
1039
# GRID ENERGY COMPARISON
1040
total_grid_energy_consumed = total_grid_energy + total_building_grid_energy
1041
total_energy_if_all_from_grid = total_res_energy + total_grid_energy +
total_building_energy
1042
print("\￿n Grid Energy Comparison:")
1043
print(f" ￿
Actual Grid Energy Used (with RES): {total_grid_energy_consumed
:.2f} kWh")
1044
print(f" ￿
Hypothetical Grid Use (no RES):
{
total_energy_if_all_from_grid:.2f} kWh")
1045
1046
# RES SURPLUS & SALE
1047
print("\￿￿n ===== RENEWABLE ENERGY SUMMARY =====")
1048
print(f"￿￿Surplus RES Sold: {total_res_sold_energy:.2f} kWh")
1049
print(f"￿￿Revenue from RES Sale: {total_res_revenue:.2f} DKK")
1050
1051
net_env_cost_after_sale = total_env_cost - total_res_revenue
1052
print(f"\￿￿n Net Environmental Cost (After Selling RES): {
net_env_cost_after_sale:.2f} DKK")
1053
print(f"￿￿Final Savings (Cost Avoided + Revenue): {(env_cost_full_grid -
net_env_cost_after_sale):.2f} DKK")
1054
1055
# RES FLOW
1056
print("\￿￿n RES Utilization Breakdown:")
1057
print(f" ￿￿
Used by Building: {total_res_used_by_building:.2f} kWh")
1058
print(f" ￿￿
Used by EVs:
{total_res_energy:.2f} kWh")
1059
print(f" ￿￿
Sold to Grid:
{total_res_sold_energy:.2f} kWh")
1060
print(f" ￿￿
Total RES Output: {total_res_used_by_building + total_res_energy
+ total_res_sold_energy:.2f} kWh")
1061
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
81
==PAGE:94==
1062
1063
# --- Average Session Satisfaction ---
1064
1065
1066
ca.sessions_ended_by_time = []
1067
ca.sessions_ended_by_energy = []
1068
1069
for va in ca.vas.values():
1070
ca.sessions_ended_by_time.extend(va.sessions_ended_by_time)
1071
ca.sessions_ended_by_energy.extend(va.sessions_ended_by_energy)
1072
1073
all_finished_sessions = ca.sessions_ended_by_time + ca.
sessions_ended_by_energy
1074
ca.total_sessions_completed = len(all_finished_sessions)
1075
ca.total_energy_delivered_pct = sum(
1076
min(100, (s.energy_delivered / s.energy_requested) * 100) if s.
energy_requested > 0 else 0
1077
for s in all_finished_sessions
1078
)
1079
1080
average_session_satisfaction = (
1081
ca.total_energy_delivered_pct / ca.total_sessions_completed
1082
if ca.total_sessions_completed > 0 else 0
1083
)
1084
1085
print(f"\￿￿n Average Session Satisfaction: {average_session_satisfaction:.2f}%
over {ca.total_sessions_completed} sessions ")
1086
print(f"\￿￿n Sessions ended by energy delivery: {len(ca.
sessions_ended_by_energy)} | By time: {len(ca.sessions_ended_by_time)}")
1087
1088
1089
# After the simulation loop ends, print the statistics:
1090
1091
total_modes = mode_1 + mode_2 + mode_3 + mode_4 + mode_5
1092
total_modes_sum = total_modes + mode_6
1093
1094
if total_modes > 0:
1095
print("\nMode Statistics:")
1096
print((f"Total periods with sessions: {total_modes} out of {
total_modes_sum} [{(total_modes / total_modes_sum) * 100:.2f}%], where
:"))
1097
print(f"Mode 1: {mode_1} times ({(mode_1 / total_modes) * 100:.2f}%)
[{(mode_1 / total_modes_sum) * 100:.2f}%]")
1098
print(f"Mode 2: {mode_2} times ({(mode_2 / total_modes) * 100:.2f}%)
[{(mode_2 / total_modes_sum) * 100:.2f}%]")
1099
print(f"Mode 3: {mode_3} times ({(mode_3 / total_modes) * 100:.2f}%)
[{(mode_3 / total_modes_sum) * 100:.2f}%] ")
1100
print(f"Mode 4: {mode_4} times ({(mode_4 / total_modes) * 100:.2f}%)
[{(mode_4 / total_modes_sum) * 100:.2f}%] ")
1101
print(f"Mode 5: {mode_5} times ({(mode_5 / total_modes) * 100:.2f}%)
[{(mode_5 / total_modes_sum) * 100:.2f}%]")
1102
print(f"Total times without sessions (Mode 6): {mode_6} out of {
total_modes_sum} times [{(mode_6 / total_modes_sum) * 100:.2f}%]")
1103
1104
else:
1105
print("No modes were selected during the simulation.")
1106
1107
1108
print("\￿￿n Completed Sessions Summary with Duration Analysis:\n")
1109
print(f"{'Charger ID ':<12} {'Plug ':<5} {'Arrival ':<20} {'Actual Departure
':<22} {'Scheduled Departure ':<22} "
82
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:95==
1110
f"{'Delivered ':<10} {'Desired ':>12} {'Actual ':>12} Δ{' Duration ':>12} {'
Reason'}")
1111
print("-" * 125)
1112
1113
for session in ca.sessions_ended_by_energy + ca.sessions_ended_by_time:
1114
charger_id = session.charger_id
1115
plug = session.plug_number
1116
arrival_dt = pd.to_datetime(session.arrival_time , unit='s')
1117
scheduled_departure_dt = pd.to_datetime(session.departure_time , unit='s')
1118
actual_departure_dt = (
1119
pd.to_datetime(session.actual_departure_time , unit='s')
1120
if hasattr(session , 'actual_departure_time') and session.
actual_departure_time
1121
else scheduled_departure_dt
1122
)
1123
1124
arrival_str = arrival_dt.strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
1125
scheduled_str = scheduled_departure_dt.strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
1126
actual_str = actual_departure_dt.strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
1127
1128
desired_duration = (scheduled_departure_dt - arrival_dt).total_seconds() /
60.0
1129
actual_duration = (actual_departure_dt - arrival_dt).total_seconds() /
60.0
1130
duration_diff = actual_duration - desired_duration
1131
1132
delivered = f"{session.energy_delivered:.2f}/{session.energy_requested:.2f
}"
1133
reason = "Energy" if session in ca.sessions_ended_by_energy else "Time"
1134
1135
print(f"{charger_id:<12} {plug:<5} {arrival_str:<20} {actual_str:<22} {
scheduled_str:<22} "
1136
f"{delivered:<10} {desired_duration:>7.1f} min {actual_duration:>7.1
f} min {duration_diff:>+7.1f} min {reason}")
1137
1138
1139
# --- Final Average Duration Statistics ---
1140
total_desired_duration = 0.0
1141
total_actual_duration = 0.0
1142
total_duration_difference = 0.0
1143
num_sessions = len(ca.sessions_ended_by_energy + ca.sessions_ended_by_time)
1144
1145
for session in ca.sessions_ended_by_energy + ca.sessions_ended_by_time:
1146
arrival_dt = pd.to_datetime(session.arrival_time , unit='s')
1147
scheduled_departure_dt = pd.to_datetime(session.departure_time , unit='s')
1148
actual_departure_dt = (
1149
pd.to_datetime(session.actual_departure_time , unit='s')
1150
if hasattr(session , 'actual_departure_time') and session.
actual_departure_time
1151
else scheduled_departure_dt
1152
)
1153
1154
desired_duration = (scheduled_departure_dt - arrival_dt).total_seconds() /
60.0
1155
actual_duration = (actual_departure_dt - arrival_dt).total_seconds() /
60.0
1156
duration_diff = actual_duration - desired_duration
1157
1158
total_desired_duration += desired_duration
1159
total_actual_duration += actual_duration
1160
total_duration_difference += duration_diff
1161
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
83
==PAGE:96==
1162
if num_sessions > 0:
1163
avg_desired_duration = total_desired_duration / num_sessions
1164
avg_actual_duration = total_actual_duration / num_sessions
1165
avg_duration_diff = total_duration_difference / num_sessions
1166
1167
print("\￿￿n Average Duration Metrics Across Completed Sessions:")
1168
print(f"￿ Avg Desired Duration: {avg_desired_duration:.2f} minutes")
1169
print(f"￿ Avg Actual Duration:
{avg_actual_duration:.2f} minutes")
1170
print(f"￿ Avg Duration Δ:
{avg_duration_diff:+.2f} minutes")
1171
else:
1172
print("\￿ n No completed sessions to compute average durations.")
1173
1174
1175
if hasattr(ca, 'price_ratios') and ca.price_ratios:
1176
price_ratios = np.array(ca.price_ratios)
1177
flex_vals = np.array(ca.flexibilities)
1178
1179
print("\￿￿n Price Ratio Percentiles:")
1180
for q in [0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9]:
1181
print(f" {int(q*100):>2}% →{np.percentile(price_ratios , q*100):.2f}")
1182
1183
print("\￿￿n Flexibility Percentiles:")
1184
for q in [0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9]:
1185
print(f" {int(q*100):>2}% →{np.percentile(flex_vals , q*100):.2f}")
1186
else:
1187
print("￿ No session -active data points collected.")
Listing A.1: Full code of the proposed for the implementation of the new smart charging
strategy
84
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
==PAGE:97==
Integration of EVs chargers with distributed energy resources and building consumption.
85
==PAGE:98==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://wind.dtu.dk/
