==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENHANCED RETENTION OF PFAS BY 
AIR-SPARGING 
Alessandra Pertoso 
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering – DTU Sustain 
MASTER’S DEGREE IN ENVIRONMENTAL AND LAND ENGINEERING 
Academic Year 2024/25 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
2 
 
ABSTRACT 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of over 10,000 synthetic chemicals known for their 
persistence, mobility, and adverse health effects, including bioaccumulation and carcinogenicity. Their 
widespread industrial use and environmental persistence have led to global contamination, particularly 
threatening groundwater resources. Despite regulatory restrictions, remediation remains a major challenge due 
to PFAS resistance to conventional degradation processes.  
This study, inspired by Newell et al. (2021), investigates the potential application of in situ air-sparging – a 
technique historically used for volatile organic compounds – for the remediation of PFAS-contaminated 
groundwater. PFAS behave as surfactants and exhibit strong partitioning to air-water interface, that induces 
their adsorption into rising gas bubbles generated during air-sparging. This facilitates vertical transport through 
the porous medium, as PFAS are carried upward by the buoyant flow of the sparging gas. The process results 
in their progressive accumulation from the saturated zone toward the water table. The goal is to assess whether 
air-sparging can promote vertical transport and retention at the air-water interface in the capillary fringe. The 
potential advantages of using this technique include a reduction in the extent of the PFAS-contaminated plume 
and an enhancement in PFAS removal from the subsurface.  
Laboratory-scale column experiments were conducted where air-sparging was applied over a six-day period 
to evaluate PFAS migration and retention behaviors. A mixture of short- and long-chained PFAS and precursors 
was tested in coarse and fine sand solid matrix. Water samples were collected periodically from lateral ports 
along the column. 
Results show that after six days of air-sparging, PFAS concentration decreased at the bottom of the column 
and increased at intermediate depths, indicating that vertical mobilization occurred in both coarse and fine 
solid matrices. Within 48 hours of air-sparging, long-chained PFAS and precursors migrate vertically, 
accumulating at the air-water interface in the capillary fringe. Short-chained PFAS exhibited a similar 
migration behavior, though over a longer timescale and at lower concentrations, due to their lower tendency 
to adsorption at the air-water interface.  
From a mass balance perspective, both column experiments maintained overall PFAS mass consistency after 
air-sparging, with differences within the analytical uncertainty. However, after six days, a noticeable mass loss 
of long-chained PFAS and precursors was observed. This may be attributed to adsorption in unsampled zones, 
particularly around the water table, and potential limitations in water samples extraction.  
These results demonstrate that air-sparging can effectively induce vertical PFAS transport and enhance their 
redistribution in the subsurface, supporting its potential application for in situ remediation strategies. While 
the results are promising, further studies in two- or three-dimensional laboratory conditions are needed before 
advancing to field pilot testing. Proper testing at field conditions are needed to assess the long-term 
effectiveness and scalability of air-sparging for PFAS remediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
3 
 
PREFACE 
The work presented in this master’s thesis, entitled "Enhanced retention of PFAS by air-sparging", was carried 
out at the Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering (DTU Sustain), Technical University of 
Denmark. This project was conducted under the supervision of Professor Poul Løgstrup Bjerg, Senior 
Researcher Annika Sidelmann Fjordbøge, PhD Student Laura Morsing and Professor Rajandrea Sethi from the 
Polytechnic of Turin. Technical guidance was received from the Head of Laboratory Section Jens Schaarup 
Sørensen, Field Technician Tajs Nielsen, Technician Erik Rønn Lange and Research Engineer Mikael Emil 
Olsson. This master’s thesis of 30 ECTS points was conducted in the period from 27th of January 2025 to 27th 
of June 2025. The thesis is prepared by Alessandra Pertoso (s242154). 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark, 27th of June 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alessandra Pertoso 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
4 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Professor Poul L. Bjerg, 
Annika S. Fjordbøge, and Laura Morsing. Thank you for making me feel truly welcomed and supported 
throughout this project. Your guidance has not only helped me grow as a researcher but also taught me the 
importance of attention to detail, critical thinking, and maintaining a broad and open perspective. Your 
mentorship has been both inspiring and empowering. 
A heartfelt thank you goes to Professor Rajandrea Sethi, whose passion and dedication over the past two years 
sparked my own interest in this field. Your teaching and encouragement played a key role in shaping this work 
and fueling my desire to contribute to research with purpose and curiosity. 
I would also like to thank the laboratory technicians, Jens S. Sørensen, Tajs Nielsen and Erik R. Lange, for 
always being ready to help and for enabling and supporting every step of the lab work.  
Special thanks to Mikael E. Olsson for the PFAS analyses, to Ebba C. Schnell for conducting the bromide 
analysis, to Frederikke Hansen for handling the sand samples, and to Emilie Rosenmejer for the TOC analysis.  
I am also thankful to Charles J. Newell, Poonam R. Kulkarni and David T. Adamson, whose original idea laid 
the foundation for this project. The guidance and thoughtful advice of Charles J. Newell and Joseph Scalia 
were fundamental throughout the process. 
To my parents – thank you for your unconditional love and trust, and for once again giving me the opportunity 
to live new experiences, to get to know myself, the others and the world.  
To my family and my friends back in Italy, thank you for being constant pillars in my life. 
To Copenhagen and my Cope friends – it’s been great!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
5 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
6:2 FTAB: 6:2 Fluorotelomer Sulfonamide Alkylbetaine;  
6:2 FTS: 6:2 Fluorotelomersulfonic Acid;  
CAS: Chemical Abstract Service;  
CMC: Critical Micelle Concentration;  
DNAPL: Dense Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid;  
LNAPL: Light Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid;  
NAPL: Non-Aqueous Phase Liquid;  
PFAA: Perfluoroalkyl Acids;  
PFAS: per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances;  
PFASAs: Perfluoroalkane Sulfonamides Acids; 
PFBS: Perfluorobutanesulfonic Acid;  
PFCAs: Perfluoroalkyl Carboxylic Acids; 
PFHpA: Perfluoroheptanoic Acid;  
PFHxA: Perfluorohexanoic Acid;  
PFHxS: Perfluorohexanesulfonic Acid;  
PFNA: Perfluorononanoic Acid;  
PFOA: Perfluorooctanoic acid; 
PFOS: Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid;  
PFOSA: Perfluorooctanesulfonamide;  
PFPAs: Perfluorophosphonic/-phoshoric acids;  
PFPeA: Perfluoropentanoic Acid;  
PFSAs: Perfluoroalkane Sulfonic Acids;  
POPs: Persistent Organic Pollutants;  
VOCs: Volatile Organic Compounds;  
ZOI: Zone of Influence; 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
6 
 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
8 
2. 
PER- AND POLYFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES 
10 
2.1 
CHEMICAL DESCRIPTION 
10 
2.2.1 
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 
11 
2.2.2 
CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 
13 
2.3 
SHORT- AND LONG- CHAINED PFAS 
13 
2.4 
PRECURSORS AND TERMINAL PFAS 
13 
2.5 
HEALTH EMERGENCY 
13 
2.6 
EUROPEAN LEGISLATION: FOCUS ON DANISH AND ITALIAN REGULATION 
14 
3. 
PFAS TRANSPORT MECHANISMS 
15 
3.1 
ADVECTION 
15 
3.2 
HYDRODYNAMIC DISPERSION 
15 
3.3 
PHASE PARTITIONING 
16 
3.3.1 
PARTITIONING TO SOLID PHASE 
17 
3.3.2 
PARTITIONING TO AIR-WATER INTERFACE 
17 
4. 
AIR-SPARGING REMEDIATION TECHNIQUE 
20 
4.1 
PHASES AND REMOVAL PROCESSES 
20 
4.2 
PFAS RETENTION BY AIR-SPARGING 
22 
4.2.1 
COLUMN EXPERIMENTS 
26 
4.2.2 
LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS 
26 
4.3 
OTHER REMEDIATION TECHNIQUES 
27 
5. 
MATERIALS AND METHOD: LABORATORY COLUMN EXPERIMENTS 
28 
5.1 
DESIGN AND PRELIMINARY TESTS IN THE LABORATORY 
28 
5.2 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
29 
5.3 
SOLID MATRIX 
30 
5.4 
PFAS SOLUTION 
31 
5.5 
SAND LAYERS PREPARATION WITHIN THE COLUMN 
32 
5.6 
TRACER ANALYSIS 
33 
5.8 
POROSITY AND SATURATION 
33 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
7 
 
5.9 
SAMPLES COLLECTION 
34 
6. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
39 
6.1 
PFAS CONCENTRATIONS IN TIME AND IN SPACE 
39 
6.1.1 
PFAS VERTICAL MIGRATION DURING AIR-SPARGING IN COARSE SAND 
40 
6.1.2 
PFAS VERTICAL MIGRATION DURING AIR-SPARGING IN FINE SAND 
46 
6.1.3 
PFAS VERTICAL MIGRATION AFTER SPARGING INTERRUPTION 
49 
6.2 
MASS BALANCE IN THREE-PHASE SYSTEM 
51 
6.2.1 
MASS BALANCE IN EXPERIMENT WITH COARSE SAND 
51 
6.2.2 
MASS BALANCE IN EXPERIMENT WITH FINE SAND 
52 
6.3 
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF PFAS FUNCTIONAL GROUPS AND HEAD CHARGES 
53 
6.4 
COLUMN EXPERIMENTS: LIMITATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
54 
7. 
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
55 
8. 
CONCLUSIONS 
56 
APPENDIX A: PRELIMINARY TESTS IN THE LABORATORY 
64 
APPENDIX B: SOLID MATRICES PROPERTIES 
66 
APPENDIX C: PFAS CHARACTERISTICS 
68 
APPENDIX D: EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 
69 
APPENDIX E: SODIUM BROMIDE CALIBRATION CURVE 
72 
APPENDIX F: SAMPLING PORT VOLUMES 
73 
APPENDIX G: CONCENTRATION OF EACH PFAS IN SPACE AND IN TIME 
74 
APPENDIX H: ELECTRONIC FILES 
77 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
 
8 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of more than ten thousand synthetic chemicals (ECHA, 
2023), currently present either in commercial use or dispersed in the environment and characterized by a wide 
range of chemical and physical properties (ITRC, 2023).  Recent inventory of PFAS identified more than 4,700 
PFAS with Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) Registry Numbers that may be on the global market (OECD, 
2021). Some PFAS are characterized by persistence and mobility that combined with decades of extensive use 
in industrial applications - as for firefighting foams, galvanization, and paints - have led to their presence in 
natural media worldwide. First discovered in the 1950s, they have recently come to the attention of both the 
public and the scientific community. This renewed interest is due to findings that their levels in natural media 
could lead to potential human health effects, given their bioaccumulative nature and possible carcinogenicity. 
In particular, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has evaluated the carcinogenicity of 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS). In recent years growing concerns 
about PFAS contamination have prompted regulatory agencies to take action to prevent their further spread 
and to protect human health (Abunada et al., 2020). As a result, PFOS, PFOA, their salts and related 
compounds have been classified as Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) by the European Chemical Agency 
(ECHA, 2023). The European regulation establishes specific limits for the concentration of PFAS in water 
intended for human consumption.  According to Italian regulations, the threshold limits are set for a sum of 24 
PFAS, compared to 20 PFAS established by the EU. In 2021 the Danish EPA sharpened the European quality 
criteria for PFAS in groundwater to 2 ng/l for the sum of 4 PFAS, and to 100 ng/l for the sum of 22 PFAS 
(Danish EPA, 2021). 
Over 15,000 potentially PFAS-contaminated sites have been identified in Denmark, representing a serious risk 
to the country’s drinking water resources (Danske Regioner, 2024). Characterized by a chemical structure like 
surfactants, PFAS transport in the vadose zone is governed by solid-phase sorption and accumulation at the 
air-water interface, a unique feature of this contaminant compared to other pollutants. PFAS are very mobile 
and persistent to natural and chemical degradation, so it is highly challenging to remediate PFAS-contaminated 
sites (Darlington et al., 2019). Current groundwater remediation technologies capable of destroying 
contaminants in situ are either highly costly or less practical for addressing PFAS source zones or plumes. For 
example, bioremediation has not yet been successfully implemented in the field and most studies suggest that 
PFAS undergo only partial biotransformation into PFAA end products (Newell et al., 2021). 
In situ air-sparging is a remediation technique, successfully used since 1985 (Suthersan et al., 2017), usually 
implemented for saturated soils and groundwater contaminated by volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Its 
widespread use is primarily due to its cost-effectiveness in treating large aquifer volumes due to the zones of 
influence (ZOI) that can be achieved for each sparge well (Newell et al., 2021). The remediation processes that 
occur with air-sparging are volatilization or stripping of VOCs and biodegradation of aerobically 
biodegradable contaminants. Its implementation for remediation of PFAS-contaminated sites has not been 
considered until 2021, since most PFAS aren’t highly volatile and biodegradable. A study conducted by Newell 
et al. in 2021 exploits the partition of PFAS to the air-water interfaces through air-sparging that would 
concentrate PFAS directly from the aquifer to the water table. PFAS, due to their surface-active properties, 
exhibit partitioning to the air-water interface. During air-sparging, they are driven upwards by the buoyant 
force of the sparged gas and subsequently accumulate at the air-water interface in the capillary fringe (Newell 
et al., 2021). Then, the reduction of PFAS plume and their accumulation in the upper part of the aquifer 
facilitate their removal through vacuum pump or skimmers. So far, these considerations remain purely 
theoretical and have only been explored in laboratory settings, since the effectiveness and the feasibility of the 
implementation of this technology with PFAS plumes must be verified. 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
 
9 
 
The overall aim of this project is to assess the potential of air-sparging for shrinking PFAS-contaminated 
plumes, by promoting PFAS vertical migration within the saturated zone to enhance their retention at the air-
water interface in the capillary fringe. To conduct this study, column experiments in the laboratory are designed 
and performed, followed by sample analysis from the column and data processing of the obtained results. To 
fulfil the aim, the specific objectives to be reached are:  
• 
Investigate the physical and chemical properties of PFAS, with focus on PFAS partition to the air-
water interface and the potential benefit of application of an air-sparging remediation technology. 
• 
Design a laboratory column experiment capable of replicating the capillary fringe between vadose and 
saturated zones, ensuring uniform air flow through sand and enabling PFAS vertical migration and 
retention at the air-water interface.    
• 
Analyze differences in vertical migration of a mixture of short- and long- chained PFAS and precursors 
during air-sparging in different porous media, such as homogeneous fine and coarse sand using column 
tests in the laboratory. 
• 
Evaluate the effectiveness of air-sparging in retaining PFAS, taking into account the differing 
behaviors between short- and long-chained PFAS, as well as terminal PFAS and precursors. 
• 
Assess the feasibility of in situ air-sparging as a method for retaining PFAS within the capillary fringe, 
while considering the potential long-term remobilization of the concentrated PFAS layer.  
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
 
10 
 
2. PER- AND POLYFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES  
2.1 CHEMICAL DESCRIPTION 
In 2011, Buck et al. defined PFAS as aliphatic substances in which one or more carbon atoms have all their 
hydrogen substituents, present in the nonfluorinated analogues, replaced by fluorine atoms. This structural 
modification ensures that PFAS contain the perfluoroalkyl moiety CnF2n+1. PFAS substances are composed of 
perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances. Perfluoroalkyl substances are defined as aliphatic substances 
for which all the H atoms attached to C atoms in the nonfluorinated substance have been replaced by F atoms, 
except those H atoms of the functional groups present. Instead in polyfluoroalkyl compounds all H atoms 
attached to at least one, but not all C atoms have been replaced by F atoms, in such a manner that they contain 
the perfluoroalkyl moiety CnF2n+1(Buck et al., 2011). A PFAS family tree with two main classes- polymers and 
nonpolymers- organizes this range of PFAS with various characteristics. Numerous subclasses, groups and 
subgroups may exist within each class; some of them are depicted in Figure 2.1.  
Perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) are among the simplest PFAS molecules. They are highly persistent and do not 
degrade under normal environmental conditions. Many polyfluoroalkyl substances can undergo biotic and 
abiotic transformations, often leading to the formation of PFAAs. Because of their stability, PFAAs are 
sometimes referred to as “terminal PFAS” or “terminal transformation products”, meaning they do not degrade 
further in the environment. Polyfluoroalkyl substances that degrade into terminal PFAAs are known as 
“precursors”. Additionally, longer-chain PFAAs are not known to biotransform into shorter-chain PFAAs 
(ITRC, 2023). 
The type of functional group determines industrial use, solubility in water, persistence in the environment and 
bioaccumulation in organisms. The three types of functional groups considered in this study are carboxylic 
Figure 2.1 Overview of groups of PFASs  (Buck et al., 2011; Danske Regioner, 2024; ECHA, 2023) 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
 
11 
 
acids (-COOH), sulfonic acids (-SO3H) and fluorotelomers (-CH2CH2-X). The first have intermediate stability 
and high persistence, whereas the sulfonic acids have great solubility and extremely high persistence; the 
former are precursors. 
The functional head charge, whether it is anionic, cationic or zwitterionic, is another difference. Anionic PFAS 
exhibit more mobility compared to cationic or zwitterionic PFAS (Newell et al., 2022).  
In this study, ten representative PFAS were selected to ensure a balanced representation of both terminal PFAS 
and precursors, including carboxylic, sulfonic acids and fluorotelomers, anionic and zwitterionic species, as 
well as a mix of long- and short-chained compounds (see Tab. 5.2). 
2.2 PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES 
Understanding PFAS transport and fate requires knowledge of their physicochemical properties, which are 
often uncertain due to limited measured data and reliance on predictive models (ITRC, 2023). These properties 
vary with carbon chain length, functional group, and environmental conditions. General trends can still be 
identified. 
2.2.1 
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES  
At room temperature, the majority of PFAS are solids, frequently crystalline or powdered, although shorter-
chained compounds typically take on a liquid state (ITRC, 2023). It is rare for PFAS to appear in the 
environment as a distinct phase, such as solid PFAS, LNAPL PFAS or DNAPL PFAS, because of its great 
aqueous solubility (ITRC, 2023). At high concentrations, aqueous PFOA and PFOS solutions have been shown 
to exhibit floating separate-phase liquid layers on their surface (J. Costanza et al., 2019). However, rather than 
density, the tendency of PFAAs to concentrate and aggregate at air-water interfaces seems to be what drives 
the creation of these layers (ITRC, 2023).  
Early studies on PFAAs suggested that they behave like traditional surfactants, forming both micelles and 
mixed micelles (Pedone et al., 1997; Downer et al., 1999).  Due to the distinct behavior of hydrophilic ‘head’ 
and hydrophobic ‘tail’, traditional surfactants, containing hydrocarbon chain, tend to aggregate into micelles 
in water when their concentration exceeds a certain threshold. Surfactants can also form other supramolecular 
assemblies, such as hemi-micelles or mixed micelles (Fig. 2.2), either freely in solution or at phase boundaries 
(ITRC, 2023). Some observed properties of PFAS do not fully align with conventional micelle formation 
theory. For instance, certain reported critical micelle concentration (CMC) values exceed the known solubility 
limits of the corresponding compounds. Additionally, some researchers propose that PFAA supramolecular 
aggregation is far more complex in the environmental settings than the simple micelle formation observed in 
single-compound systems (ITRC, 2023). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
 
12 
 
It has been hypothesized that PFAA aggregation may occur at concentrations much lower than the CMC in 
groundwater due to interaction with particles, co-contaminants, hemi-micelle formation, or spatially variable 
concentrations within soil matrices (Johnson et al., 2007; Yu et al., 2009). These complex supramolecular 
interactions, combined with adsorption processes at interfaces such as the air-water interface, suggest that 
PFAS behavior in the environment is highly intricate and not yet fully understood (ITRC, 2023).  
Furthermore, the amphiphilic nature of PFAAs leads to the accumulation at fluid-fluid interfaces, such as air-
water or NAPL-water boundaries, aligning themselves so that their hydrophobic tails extend into the air while 
their hydrophilic heads remain in the water (Fig. 2.3) (Krafft & Riess, 2015a).  
Most data on solubility, vapor pressure and Henry’s Law constant have been determined through extrapolation 
or modelling (ITRC, 2023). Reported values may vary depending on the method used to determine each 
property, as well as factors such pH, salinity, temperature. In many cases, PFAS exhibit high solubility, low 
vapor pressure and low Henry’s Law constant, meaning they tend to remain in the aqueous phase without 
significant volatilization or stripping.  
 
Figure 2.3 Illustration of the interfaces at which PFAS can be distributed in the unsaturated zone. The figure illustrates that 
PFAS can sorb to the soil, adsorb to the air-water interface, and be dissolved in the water phase (Guo et al., 2020; Morsing et 
al., 2025)
Figure 2.2 Overview of the different binding sites for PFAS; mono-layer, hemi-micelle, micelle, air-water and soil-water 
(VMR, 2022) 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
 
13 
 
2.2.2 
CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 
The unique properties of PFAS primarily stem from the characteristics of the carbon-fluorine (C-F) bond. The 
high electronegativity and small atomic size of fluorine contribute to the formation of an exceptionally strong 
C-F bond, recognized as the strongest covalent bond in organic chemistry (Kissa E., 2001). Additionally, 
fluorine’s low polarizability results in weak intermolecular interactions, such as Van der Waals forces and 
hydrogen bonding (Kissa E., 2001). These distinctive fluorine-related properties confer many PFAS dual 
hydro- and lipophobic nature, surfactant behavior, and remarkable thermal and chemical stability (ITRC, 
2023).  
2.3 SHORT- AND LONG- CHAINED PFAS 
PFAS can be divided into long-chained and short-chained, considering that, according to the Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD, 2011) “long-chained” refers to 
• 
perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids with seven or more C-F bonds 
• 
perfluoroalkane sulfonates with six or more C-F bonds 
Short-chain PFAS are more water-soluble and hydrophilic than long-chained PFAS. Due to the strong carbon-
fluorine bond, short-chain PFAAs are considered highly persistent, much like long-chained PFAAs (Parsons 
et al., 2008; Vierke et al., 2012). They resist both abiotic and biotic degradation under environmental conditions 
and are regarded as stable end-products formed from the breakdown of the precursors (D’Agostino & Mabury, 
2017; Wang et al., 2013). Because of their low adsorption potential, short-chained PFAAs remain largely 
dissolved in the water phase and show minimal binding to particles (Brendel et al., 2018). 
Table 2.1 Vapor pressure, Henry’s law constant and water solubility between short- and long-chained PFAS and PFAA (Brendel et al., 
2018; D’Agostino & Mabury, 2017; Li et al., 2020; Parsons et al., 2008; Vierke et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2013) 
2.4 PRECURSORS AND TERMINAL PFAS 
Another distinction refers to precursors and terminal PFAAs. Some PFAS precursors degrade into terminal 
PFAAs that pose risks to human health (Sunderland et al., 2018). During this process, persistent intermediate 
compounds can also form, with different mobility and transformation behavior compared to the primary 
compounds (Harding-Marjanovic et al., 2015; Yi et al., 2018). Studies show that precursor biotransformation 
occurs more slowly under anaerobic conditions and results in different products than under oxic conditions (Yi 
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2013). The main differences between precursors and terminal PFAAs in terms of 
physicochemical properties relate to their stability, solubility, volatility and environmental behavior. 
2.5 HEALTH EMERGENCY 
Current scientific research indicates that exposure to certain PFAS may be linked to adverse health effects. 
Human exposure to PFAS occurs through ingestion of contaminated drinking water and food, inhalation of 
PFAS type 
Vapor pressure 
Henry’s Law Constant 
Water solubility 
Long-chained PFAS 
Low 
Low 
Low, tends to adsorb to 
soil’s particles and 
sediments 
Long-chained PFAA Extremely low 
Very low, tend to remain 
in aqueous phase 
Higher, due to acidic 
nature  
Short-chained PFAS 
 
Higher, but lower 
than VOCs 
Higher, but limited 
volatility 
High, high mobility and 
diffusion in water 
Short-chained 
PFAA 
 
Low 
Low, tend to remain in 
aqueous phase 
Very high 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
 
14 
 
indoor air, and contact with other contaminated media. The bioaccumulation tendency of PFAS is attributed to 
their rapid absorption, their ability to bind to plasma proteins, the absence of biotransformation (except for 
precursors substances), and their slow renal elimination. 
Toxicological studies on laboratory animals and epidemiological research in humans suggest that long-term 
exposure to environmentally relevant levels of PFOA and PFOS may lead to health effects. Some outcomes, 
such as alterations in serum lipids, liver biomarkers, uric acid levels, thyroid function, vaccine response, and 
fetal growth, have been assessed across multiple studies and populations (ITRC, 2023). 
Moreover, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), the cancer agency of the World Health 
Organization (WHO), has evaluated the carcinogenicity of PFOA and PFOS. A task force classified PFOA as 
carcinogenic to humans (Group 1) and PFOS as possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B) (Zahm et al., 
2023).  
2.6 EUROPEAN LEGISLATION: FOCUS ON DANISH AND ITALIAN REGULATION 
In Europe, numerous PFAS are subject to restrictions under Regulation (CE) n. 1907/2006 (REACH) and other 
specific sectoral provisions, with ongoing bans on the production and/or use of certain PFAS. Additionally, the 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutant (POPs), adopted in MAY 2001 under United Nations 
Environment Program (UNEP), mandates various actions that have been integrated into EU legislation through 
Regulation (CE) n. 850/2004 to minimize global emissions of PFAS into the environment. 
In 2020, the EU established a requirement for all member states to measure 20 PFAS compounds by no later 
than 2026, setting a quality criterion of 0.10 μg/L for the total concentration of these 20 PFAS and 0.50 μg/L 
for total PFAS (Directive 2020/2184) (European Union Council, 2020). Based on the Legislative Decree 
18/2023, Italian threshold limits align with those established at the European level while accounting for 24 
PFAS. Instead, according to the Danish Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the threshold limits that must 
be met are 2 ng/L for the combined concentration of four PFAS substances (PFOS, PFNA, PFHxS, PFOA), 
while the total concentration for the sum of 22 PFAS present in groundwater must not exceed 100 ng/L. 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
 
15 
 
3. PFAS TRANSPORT MECHANISMS 
PFAS distribution across different media and PFAS migration within and between these media are influenced 
by physical, chemical, and biological mechanisms. Due to the vast diversity of PFAS, they exhibit a wide range 
of physical and chemical properties, which significantly impact their environmental behavior. This variability 
increases the complexity of fate and transport assessments. 
 
3.1 ADVECTION 
Advection is the process by which a contaminant is transported by water along the flow direction at a velocity 
equal to the effective average velocity of groundwater (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019): 
𝑣𝑒 = 𝑣
𝑛𝑒
 = 𝐾∙𝑖
𝑛𝑒
  
(3.1) 
In an ideal scenario where advection is the only active transport process the concentration of a pulse input 
would remain constant over time. For continuous contaminant sources, the concentration front would be 
perfectly perpendicular to the propagation direction and would advance along x at the groundwater velocity 
(Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019).  
 
3.2 HYDRODYNAMIC DISPERSION 
The hydrodynamic dispersion describes the spread of solute mass flow along three main axes, resulting from 
molecular diffusion and kinematic dispersion, which are due to thermal motion and porous medium 
heterogeneities, respectively (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). The hydrodynamic dispersion is described by: 
𝐷𝐿= 𝛼𝐿∙𝑣𝑝+ 𝐷∗ 
(3.2) 
Figure 3.1 Conceptual figure illustrating potential PFAS sources and pathways in Denmark, indicating both point sources from 
contaminated sites and diffuse sources. The types of point sources include, among others, airfields, fire training areas, sewage 
treatment plants, leakage from chrome plating tanks and sewers, and landfills. The diffuse sources include, among others, PFAS 
from agriculture, incinerators, the sea, and precipitation (Morsing et al., 2025). 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
 
16 
 
where αL is the dispersivity coefficient, vp is the pore water velocity, and D* is the molecular diffusion 
coefficient. 
Spreading along the flowline is controlled by longitudinal dispersion, whereas spreading over the flowline is 
controlled by transversal and vertical dispersion (Appelo & Postma, 2004; Cook, 2022).  
3.3 PHASE PARTITIONING  
The fate and transportation of PFAS in source zone may be influenced by retention/attenuation mechanisms. 
PFAS commonly found in the environment typically consist of a carbon-fluorine tail and a nonfluorinated polar 
head group. The tail is both hydrophobic and lipophobic, meaning it repels both water and nonpolar organic 
matter. In contrast, the head group is polar and hydrophilic, allowing interaction with water (Buck et al., 2011). 
These opposing properties influence their distribution in the environment, often leading to an uneven spread. 
Additionally, PFAS behavior can vary with concentration, as they may from micelles, mixed micelles, 
hemimicelles, or bilayer structures (Fig. 3.2) when present at high levels due to their surfactant properties 
(ITRC, 2023).  
 
Considering the variety of subsurface conditions, soils with varying surface charges, organic carbon, air-water 
interfaces, and interfaces with co-contaminants that include hydrocarbons and water, retention/attenuation 
mechanisms involve (Brusseau, 2018): 
a. Partitioning to the soil in the vadose zone 
b. Adsorption to air-water interfaces in the vadose zone 
c. Partitioning (absorption) to nonaqueous-phase liquids (NAPL), accumulated in source zones (both 
unsaturated and saturated zones) 
d. Adsorption to NAPL-water interfaces in NAPL-contaminated source zones 
For PFAS, sorption is governed by two major mechanisms: solid-phase sorption and air-water interfacial 
adsorption. Based on these two sorption processes, the retardation factor can be derived according to the 
equation: 
Figure 3.2 Illustration of the formation of PFAS micelles, hemi-micelles, and bilayers. Also shown is an example of 
aggregation at a positively charged surface. Note that the opposite effect (electrostatic repulsion of PFAS) can occur if the 
surface is negatively charged (ITRC, 2023) 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
 
17 
 
𝑅= 1 + 𝐾𝑑∙𝜌𝑏
𝜃𝑤
+ 𝐾𝑎𝑖∙𝐴𝑎𝑖
𝜃𝑤
 
(3.3) 
where Kd is the solid phase sorption coefficient, ρb is the bulk density, Kai is the air-water interfacial coefficient, 
Aai is the air-water interfacial area and θw is the water-filled porosity (Lyu et al., 2022). 
3.3.1 
PARTITIONING TO SOLID PHASE 
Diffusive mass transfer is known to affect plume attenuation/persistence and solute transport in heterogeneous 
systems. PFAS transport and attenuation may be significantly impacted by the phase partitioning retention 
process of PFAS sorption by the solid phase of geologic medium (Brusseau, 2018). Research has dNewell et 
al. (2021), investigates the potential application of in situ air-sparging – a technique historically used for 
volatile organic compounds – for the remediation of PFAS-contaminated groution process of PFAS sorption 
by the solid phase of geologic medium (Brusseau, 2018). Research has d. Electrostatic interactions, based on 
the properties of the PFAS functional group can influence the solid-phase sorption of ionizable PFAS (Du et 
al., 2014; Ferrey et al., 2012; Hellsing et al., 2016; Higgins & Luthy, 2007; Johnson, Anschutz, Smolen, 
Simcik, & Penn, 2007; Merino et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2014). Zwitterionic and particularly cationic species 
would likely have higher retention. The soil-specific distribution coefficient Kd is used to characterize sorption 
(Pancras et al., 2016). Hydrophobic sorption to naturally existing solid organic particles and surface sorption 
to charged particles and minerals, commonly referred to as electrostatic interaction, are the two primary ways 
by which PFAS sorption is measured overall (Pancras et al., 2016; Adamson et al., 2020). 
Hydrophobic sorption refers to the interaction between a nonpolar hydrophobic compound and its tendency to 
bind to hydrophobic surfaces, such as soil organic carbon (Lei et al., 2023; Pancras et al., 2016). The extent to 
which PFAS sorb to organic carbon can be estimated using method that involves a linear relationship between 
Koc and foc (Brusseau, 2023b):  
𝐾𝑑= 𝐾𝑜𝑐∙𝑓𝑜𝑐 
(3.4) 
Where Koc is the organic carbon normalized sorption coefficient, and foc is the fraction of organic carbon.  
PFAS are amphiphilic molecules that contain fluoroalkyl groups of varying chain lengths and structures. Chain 
length, often used as a proxy for molecular size, has been shown to significantly influence the distribution and 
the fate of PFAS in the environment (Brusseau, 2023b). Several laboratory studies have investigated the 
relationship between chain length and PFAS sorption in soils and sediments, consistently finding that longer-
chain PFAS exhibit greater sorption (Brusseau, 2023). In some cases, correlations have been established 
between log Kd or log Koc and chain length-related properties such as molecular weight (Nguyen et al., 2020), 
fluorinated carbon number (Fabregat-Palau et al., 2021; Sorengard et al., 2019), and molar volume (Brusseau, 
2019). However, studies have also reported deviations in the sorption behavior of short-chain PFAS, suggesting 
that the chain length correlations observed for long-chain PFAS may not be directly applicable. These findings 
indicate that a single chain length function may not be sufficient for short-chain PFAS, which has important 
implications for estimating sorption coefficients using the standard Koc approach or other simplified models.  
3.3.2 
PARTITIONING TO AIR-WATER INTERFACE 
The main PFAS characteristic used in this study is its propensity to partition at the air-water interfaces. For 
this reason, it is crucial to focus on this particular aspect.  
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
 
18 
 
Substances that accumulate at the air-water interface in concentrations higher than their aqueous levels and 
reduce water cohesion are commonly known as surfactants, a shorten term for ‘surface-active agents’ (J. 
Costanza et al., 2019).  
 
Air-water partitioning is different from interfacial adsorption since the latter refers to the transfer of 
components into the bulk fluid, while the former indicates the retention at the fluid-fluid interface (Brusseau, 
2018). In the transport of aqueous-phase constituents, air-water interfaces can serve as an additional domain 
for retention and retardation, particularly when the interface is either stationary or moves more slowly than the 
surrounding bulk aqueous phase (Brusseau, 2018). 
Because many of them have both hydrophobic and hydrophilic characteristics, PFAS frequently behave like 
surfactants. Fluorinated surfactants generally exhibit greater surface activity than their hydrocarbon 
counterparts (e.g., Krafft & Riess, 2015b), a properly largely attributed to the distinctive characteristics of their 
tail groups. Like conventional hydrocarbon surfactants, the tails of fluorinated surfactants are hydrophobic due 
to their nonpolar and fully saturated structure (Brusseau, 2018). However, what sets them apart is that they are 
also lipophobic. This dual repellence arises from the low polarizability of the carbon-fluorine (C-F) bond, 
which reduces interactions not only with water but also with organic phases (Brusseau, 2018). They reduce the 
interfacial tension and preferentially form films at air-water interface, with the hydrophilic head group 
dissolved in the water and the hydrophobic carbon-fluorine (C-F) tail oriented toward the air (Krafft & Riess, 
2015).  
For solutes undergoing adsorption at the air-water interface, the R only accounting for retention due to air-
water interfacial adsorption is provided as (Brusseau et al., 2007b; Kim et al., 1998): 
𝑅= 1 + 𝐾𝑎𝑖 ∗𝐴𝑎𝑖
𝜗𝑤
 
(3.5) 
where Kai is the air-water interface adsorption coefficient (cm3/cm2), Aai is the specific air-water interfacial 
area (cm2/cm3), and θw is volumetric water content (−). 
To accurately characterize and model the transport of PFAS, it is essential to determine the air-water interfacial 
adsorption coefficient, Kai, and understand how it changes with concentration (Brusseau, 2021). Kai can be 
Figure 3.3 Adsorption of PFAS to the air-water interface in the unsaturated zone. At this interface, the hydrophilic head is 
placed in the water and the hydrophobic/lipophobic tail is placed in the air (Morsing et al., 2025) 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
 
19 
 
defined in terms of surface excess (Γ), which indicates the amount of a substance adsorbed at the air-water 
interface, and the aqueous-phase concentration (Cw) (Brusseau & Van Glubt, 2021; Lyu et al., 2018). 
𝐾𝑎𝑖=  𝛤∙𝐶𝑤 
(3.6) 
Kai can be estimated by measuring the surface tension as a function of the aqueous concentration and applying 
the Gibbs adsorption equation (Brusseau & Van Glubt, 2021). A study by Lyu et al. (Lyu et al., 2022) 
demonstrated that long-chained perfluorocarboxylic acids (PFCAs) have a higher adsorption to the air-water 
interface compared to shorter-chained PFCAs. Moreover, the results showed that interfacial adsorption 
predominantly influenced the retention of long-chained PFCAs, while solid-phase adsorption was the primary 
mechanism for the retention of short-chained PFCAs.  
According to Costanza and Brusseau (2000), the compound’s molecular characteristics-such as its ionic 
strength, pH, and temperature-affect the value of Kai.  Based on studies, the presence of co-occuring PFAS 
compounds (Vecitis et al., 2008), water chemistry characteristics like ionic composition (Downes et al., 1995), 
and compound chain length (Lunkenheimer et al., 2015; Psillakis et al., 2009) all affect surface activity and 
air-water interface adsorption potential.  
The air-water interface in porous media consists of two main components: the capillary interface, which 
includes features where bulk air and water phases are in contact; and the film interface, which involves air in 
contact with thin water films coating solid surfaces (Brusseau, 2018). Experimental, theoretical, and modeling 
studies have demonstrated that the total air-water interfacial area (i.e. the sum of capillary and film 
contributions) varies with the relative amounts of water and air present (Brusseau, 2018). In particular, as water 
content decreases – and air content increases – the total interfacial area increases progressively (Brusseau et 
al., 2006, 2007a; Cary, 1994; Costanza-Robinson & Brusseau, 2002; Dalla et al., 2002; Kim et al., 1997, 1999; 
Oostrom et al., 2001; Or & Tuller, 1999; Peng & Brusseau, 2005; Schaefer et al., 2000). When water content 
becomes extremely low, the total air-water interfacial area approaches the specific area of the solid matrix 
(Brusseau, 2018).  
An estimation method using the median grain diameter can be applied to evaluate the specific air-water 
interfacial area (Brusseau, 2023a) 
𝐴𝑎𝑖= (−2.85 ∙ 𝑆𝑤+ 3.6) ∙((1 −𝑆𝑤) ∙3.9 ∙𝑑50
−1.2) 
(3.7) 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
 
20 
 
4. AIR-SPARGING REMEDIATION TECHNIQUE 
Air sparging is a remediation technology that involves injecting pressurized air below the water table through 
a network of vertical wells. This system can be coupled with a vapor recovery and treatment unit to capture 
and manage contaminants volatilized into the unsaturated zone (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). The contaminant 
removal process relies on three primary mechanisms: 
• 
Stripping of dissolved contaminants from the aqueous phase. 
• 
Direct volatilization of contaminants presents in separate-phase or adsorbed states. 
• 
Aerobic biodegradation facilitated by microbial metabolism. 
The effectiveness of air sparging in removing dissolved contaminants via stripping depends largely on Henry’s 
law constant of the compound and the way air distributes within both the saturated and unsaturated zones. In 
contrast, the direct volatilization mechanism is influenced by the vapor pressure of the contaminant zone (Sethi 
& Di Molfetta, 2019). Lastly, aerobic biodegradation is highly dependent on factors such as the type of 
contaminant, the presence of suitable microbial communities, and the availability of essential nutrients in 
sufficient quantities zone (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). 
Its implementation for remediation of PFAS-contaminated sites has not been considered until 2021, since most 
PFAS are not highly volatile and biodegradable. A study conducted by Newell et al. in 2021 exploits the 
partition of PFAS to the air-water interfaces through air-sparging that would concentrate PFAS directly from 
the aquifer to the water table (Newell et al., 2021). 
The applicability of air sparging technology is highly dependent on the characteristics of both the contaminant 
and the porous medium. Its effectiveness relies on the ability to deliver a uniform air flow across a wide portion 
of the contaminated aquifer. Therefore, the site must exhibit geological homogeneity, as preferential flow paths 
can reduce treatment efficiency zone (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019).  
• 
Low-permeability layers can trap injected air, forcing it to accumulate beneath these layers and then 
spread horizontally, potentially expanding the contaminant plume. 
• 
High-permeability layers may also redirect air laterally, leading to uncontrolled vapor migration and 
increasing the risk of contaminant spread. 
In situ air sparging has gained widespread attention due to its advantages over traditional pump-and-treat 
methods, such as ease of implementation, minimal wastewater generation, lower capital and operational costs 
and enhanced biological activity through oxygen supply to groundwater (Kim et al., 2004). 
4.1 PHASES AND REMOVAL PROCESSES 
The effectiveness of air sparging systems depends on understanding how air moves through saturated media 
(Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019).  
At low air flowrates, the buoyancy force dominates, and air flows vertically up from the air injection point in 
a few distinct air channels (Leeson et al., 2002). The air distribution takes on a more bush-like appearance 
(Fig. 4.1) as the air flowrate is increased. At some point, further increases in air injection flowrate do not yield 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
 
21 
 
further expansions of the air flow zone but rather cause increases in the density of air channels and an overall 
desaturation of water from within the established air flow zone (Rutherford & Johnson, 1996). 
During air injection into an aquifer, a temporary rise in the water table (water table mounding) may occur at 
the injection point (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). This can pose design challenges, as it triggers radial movement 
of water and contaminants around the well. Numerical models (Nyer, 2000), confirmed by field measurements, 
indicate that air injection follows two transient phases before reaching a steady state.  
Initially, air accumulates in the injection zone because the injected volume surpasses the amount transferred to 
unsaturated zone, leading to local expansion (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). In the second phase, the water table 
gradually lowers as preferential air pathways form, eventually balancing the injected air with the portion 
escaping into the unsaturated medium (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). 
At steady state, the water table rise becomes negligible (Fig. 4.2, Fig. 4.3).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.2 Initial phase of air injection with consequent mounding (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019) 
Figure 4.1 Effect of air flowrate changes on air distribution in a model homogeneous setting (Leeson et al., 2002) 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
 
22 
 
The time required to reach steady state conditions in the air-sparging system depends on the air permeability 
and homogeneity of the medium. Groundwater mixing during air sparging plays a crucial role in both 
transporting contaminants out of the aquifer and delivering oxygen into it (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019).  
The main mechanisms driving water mixing during air sparging include (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019): 
• 
Displacement caused by injected air, 
• 
Capillary interactions between air and water, 
• 
Shear stresses induced by rising air, 
• 
Water movement to compensate for evaporation losses,  
• 
Thermal convection, 
• 
Migration of fine particles within the porous medium.  
Water displacement occurs as air rises through the saturated zone during the transient phase, before preferential 
air pathways are established. The extent of this phenomenon is mainly determined by how long the transient 
phase lasts, which in turn depends on the permeability of the medium (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). Specifically, 
lower permeability leads to a shorter transition to steady state conditions.  
Pulsed air injection extends the transient phase, enhancing water mixing within the aquifer. Unlike physical 
mixing - which results from variations in air saturation within the pores - capillary interactions between air 
and water can induce groundwater movement even without changes in saturation (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019).  
To improve air sparging effectiveness, prolonging the transient phase is beneficial. This can be achieved by 
cyclically adjusting the injected flow rate, optimizing mixing and contaminant removal (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 
2019).   
4.2 PFAS RETENTION BY AIR-SPARGING  
PFAS act as surfactants and strongly partition to air-water interfaces (Brusseau, 2019; J. Costanza et al., 2019; 
Lyu et al., 2018). Leveraging this key property, in 2021 Newell’s at al. study proposed a widely used, cost-
effective groundwater remediation technique – air-sparging - could serve as a novel in situ method for 
remediating PFAS-contaminated plumes (Newell et al., 2021). This approach would concentrate PFAS from 
Figure 4.3 Contraction of the injection zone and achievement of steady state conditions (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
 
23 
 
the aquifer to the water table, rather than volatilizing contaminants like chlorinated solvents or promoting the 
biodegradation of compounds such as benzene (Newell et al., 2020).   
When sparging gas is introduced into a groundwater treatment zone, PFAS accumulate at the air-groundwater 
interfaces and are drawn upward by the buoyancy of the sparged gas (Fig. 4.4) (Newell et al., 2021). While the 
exact mass transfer rates are not yet fully understood, it is likely that sparging will lower PFAS concentrations 
in the deeper parts of the sparged zone, thereby providing some level of remediation (Newell et al., 2021). The 
sparging process will also increase PFAS concentrations, creating a buoyant mixture of air, water, and PFAS 
that is less dense than water and therefore rises through the subsurface to near the top of the aquifer, sometimes 
following channels formed by the buoyant material or through pressure (Newell et al., 2021).  
During a gas sparging application, PFAS retention is expected to occur in two primary zones within the 
subsurface. Within the entire sparging zone, PFAS are removed from the aqueous phase through partitioning 
to residual air bubbles and gas-filled channels, resulting in a reduction of the overall mass discharge of the 
contaminant plume (Newell et al., 2021). Simultaneously, sparging induces upward transport of PFAS-
contaminated water toward the water table and the capillary fringe, where the air–water interfacial area is at 
its maximum (Newell et al., 2021). This upper zone acts as a secondary retention zone, where PFAS 
accumulation is enhanced due to the increased interfacial adsorption and reduced relative permeability of the 
multiphase system, further limiting PFAS mobility compared to unsparged conditions (Newell et al., 2021). 
Migration makes it easier to remove PFAS by skimming the relatively small volume of groundwater with 
higher PFAS concentrations or by directly removing any foam or buoyant material near the water table (Newell 
et al., 2021). Even without the direct removal of concentrated PFAS near the water table, sparging can help 
concentrate and displace the PFAS away from active groundwater flow or extraction zones (Newell et al., 
2021). This could effectively sequester PFAS in less used or more stagnant portions of the aquifer. The 
concentration of PFAS also reduces the volume of aquifer that needs to be treated, and the amount of waste 
generated by in situ technologies, compared to pump-and-treat (Newell et al., 2021). 
The in-situ implementation of air-sparging to remediate PFAS-contaminated aquifer would provide several 
advantages (Newell et al., 2021):  
i. 
Reducing the extent of contaminated plume,  
ii. 
Limiting the volume of groundwater requiring treatment, 
iii. 
Enhancing PFAS removal from the subsurface, and 
Figure 4.4 Gas sparging to concentrate per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) (Morsing, 2025) 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
 
24 
 
iv. 
Minimizing the generation of PFAS-contaminated waste. 
Regarding the reduction of the extent of the PFAS-contaminated plume, there are three different possibilities 
(Newell et al., 2021): 
1. Extract the concentrated groundwater to remove PFAS from the formation. Examples of extraction 
systems include groundwater pumping wells or the installation of phytoremediation systems. 
2. Extract the concentrated groundwater and any foam/buoyant material that may be present, using well 
point type system that removes both water, air, and foam; and 
3. Rely on the strong air‐water partitioning in the capillary fringe to retain the PFAS for long time scales. 
This is an alternative retention‐based technology compared to for example injecting particulate 
sorbents directly into the formation. 
Considering the third possibility, retention-based monitored natural attenuation (MNA) processes can offer 
important benefits for managing PFAS plumes in groundwater, even if they do not lead to permanent 
sequestration: 
• 
Plume stabilization: in some cases, retention and dispersion are sufficient to halt plume expansion. If 
the source has been removed or exhausted, the plume may gradually shrink (Newell et al., 2022). 
• 
Plume slow-down: retention processes can significantly delay plume migration, allowing more time 
before receptors are impacted. This enables site managers to prioritize areas with more immediate risks 
and evaluate cost-effective or emerging remediation technologies (Newell et al., 2022).  
• 
Peak shaving: some retention processes exhibit hysteresis, where PFAS are absorbed quickly but 
released slowly. When retention capacity is high, this effect reduces peak contaminant discharge by 
distributing it over a longer period, effectively smoothing the plume’s impact (Newell et al., 2022).  
 
However, there are key limitations to relying on retention as an attenuation strategy for PFAS plume: 
• 
No mass destruction: retention slows PFAS migration but does not eliminate the contaminant. Since 
PFAAs are not known to degrade naturally, plumes may continue to grow over extended periods if the 
source remains active (Farhat et al., 2022) 
Figure 4.5 PFAS peak shaving with some retention processes (Newell et al., 2022) 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
 
25 
 
• 
Regulatory acceptance: non-permanent retention may be viewed less favorably by regulatory agencies 
compared to remediation approaches that involve the permanent removal or destruction of PFAS (e.g. 
USEPA, 1999) 
• 
Delayed but not prevent impact: although retention delays PFAS migration, if the source persists and 
no additional remediation is implemented, the eventual contaminant levels at downgradient discharge 
points (e.g. lakes) could still reach harmful concentration – only over a longer timeframe- posing 
similar risks to receptors (Newell et al., 2022). 
In 2024, Hort et al. examined PFAS retention in the unsaturated zone above the water table using a 
mathematical model, MODFLOW-USG-Transport PFAS, that incorporates adsorption onto air-water 
interfaces, providing a more comprehensive understanding of PFAS retention near the water table and release 
to groundwater. This study suggested that redistributing PFOS from the saturated zone to the vadose zone (e.g., 
through gas sparging) could be an effective strategy for managing PFOS plumes (Hort et al., 2024). Findings 
that after initial redistribution via gas sparging, PFOS can persist near the water table for many years. However, 
certain recharge patterns and water table fluctuations influence both the amount of PFOS retained and the 
duration of its retention near the water table (Hort et al., 2024). Some results suggested that (Hort et al., 2024): 
• 
Long-term PFOS retention in the vadose zone could be enhanced by limiting recharge, for example, 
through the installation of an impermeable cap or cover. 
• 
Reduced long-term PFOS retention with fine sands compared to coarse sand. PFOS accumulation to 
air-water interfaces is reduced in presence of fine sands, which exhibit higher moisture content just 
above the water table and higher permeability, leading to higher PFOS concentration in the aqueous 
phase at and above the water table.  
Air sparging can be operated in different temporal configurations depending on site-specific hydrogeological 
characteristics such as groundwater flow velocity, infiltration rate, and seasonal fluctuations of the water table 
(Newell et al., 2021). It may be applied as a semi-permanent operation, which would be significantly more 
cost-effective than conventional pump-and-treat systems; a periodic treatment, implemented every few months 
or years; or as a one-time event, sustained over weeks or months, intended to trap PFAS near the capillary 
fringe and maintain retention even after the sparging phase is concluded (Newell et al., 2021). 
Furthermore, air-sparging, by increasing oxygen concentrations in groundwater, has the potential to stimulate 
the aerobic biodegradation of PFAS precursors into PFAAs, i.e. more mobile forms of PFAS in groundwater 
(Newell et al., 2022). However, this transformation could be managed by: 
a) Using inert gas such as nitrogen for sparging (Newell et al., 2022), or 
b) Implementing sparging in areas with low precursor concentrations, such as the leading edge of the 
PFAS plume (Adamson et al., 2020).  
Alternative designs include sparging with horizontal wells, sparging in trenches (ESTCP, 2021; Newell et al., 
2021) or integrating sparging with phytoremediation to extract PFAS retained near the water table (Newell et 
al., 2021). Also using colloidal gas aphrons – small structures formed by mixing gases, water, and surfactants 
with powerful sorbent properties - instead of conventional sparging may be more effective, increasing the gas-
liquid interfacial area and improving PFAS transport control (Kulkarni et al., 2022). 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
 
26 
 
4.2.1 
COLUMN EXPERIMENTS 
PFAS transport by air-sparging can be evaluated and quantified through laboratory column experiments, 
followed by sample analysis from the column and data processing of the obtained results. The vadose zone 
and the saturated zone are replicated inside the column, emphasizing the capillary fringe where PFAS may 
retain after sparging. Compressed air is injected into the column to determine the effectiveness of air-sparging 
technology in PFAS migration and retention. When conducting column experiments, it is essential to simulate 
real-world conditions as closely as possible to obtain realistic behaviors of the sand, water, air and contaminant. 
However, achieving perfect reproduction of natural conditions - such as groundwater flow, soil composition, 
granulometry and characteristics, multiple chemical substances, seasonal variation of water level - is not 
feasible in a laboratory setting. Understanding the limitations and deviations from natural conditions is crucial. 
Therefore, factors such as column size, soil grain distribution, soil homogeneity, compressed air injection, type 
of sparging, must be carefully analyzed.  
Figure 4.5 illustrates the aim of the project: assessing the potential of air-sparging for reducing PFAS-
contaminated plume, by promoting PFAS vertical migration within the saturated zone to enhance their 
retention at the air-water interface in the capillary fringe. 
4.2.2 
LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS 
Column tests, while often more complex, offer a more accurate representation of environmental conditions. 
They allow for in-depth analysis by replication of multiple layers (contaminated, saturated and unsaturated) 
and enabling sampling along the column to track different parameters such as contaminant concentration 
trends. Column experiments provide reliable and comprehensive data for testing air sparging, as they are the 
most suitable method for studying it. 
Furthermore, the choice of using column test experiments was followed by consultation of the study conducted 
by Newell et al. (2021; 2022) on PFAS concentration and removal from groundwater through gas sparging and 
the consequent related laboratory column experiments performed by J. Scalia, J. White and G. Dooley from 
Figure 4.6 Illustration of the project’s aim to highlight the correlation between column experiments and in-situ air-sparging system in 
retaining PFAS at the air-water interface. 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
 
27 
 
Colorado State University, E. Stockwell from GSI Environmental Inc. and J. Blotevogel from CSIRO 
(Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization). Additional studies assessing the 
effectiveness of air-sparging were considered, particularly the works of Adams & Reddy (2003), Liu et al. 
(2017) and Kim et al. (2004).  
4.3 OTHER REMEDIATION TECHNIQUES 
Treatment technologies leverage a contaminant’s chemical and physical properties to immobilize, separate, 
concentrate, or destroy it (ITRC, 2023). However, the unique characteristics of PFAS render many 
conventional treatment methods ineffective, particularly those that rely on contaminant volatilization (e.g., air 
stripping, soil vapor extraction) or bioremediation (e.g., biostimulation, bioaugmentation (ITRC, 2023). Even 
advanced approaches such as thermal and chemical oxidation may not fully degrade PFAS, often requiring a 
combination of technologies to address the diverse range of PFAS compounds present in contaminated sites 
(ITRC, 2023).  
The absence of effective in-situ remediation technologies means that most PFAS plumes requiring control are 
managed through groundwater pump-and-trat systems, which rely on ex situ removal or destructive methods 
(Simon et al., 2019). While these systems are effective in preventing plume migration, experience within the 
groundwater remediation community has shown that they are highly inefficient for groundwater restoration. 
This inefficiency arises from the need to extract large volumes of low-concentration groundwater over several 
decades (National Research Council, 1994; Naval Facilities Engineering Command, 2001). 
Currently, full-scale field applications for treating PFAS-contaminated liquids or solids are limited to 
sequestration methods that remove or bind PFAS rather than destroy them (ITRC, 2023). Among these, 
sorption techniques using granular activated carbon (GAC) and ion exchange media have demonstrated 
effectiveness at full scale (Regenesis, 2020). 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
 
28 
 
5. MATERIALS AND METHOD: LABORATORY COLUMN EXPERIMENTS 
The overall aim of this project is to assess the potential of air-sparging for shrinking PFAS-contaminated 
plumes, by promoting PFAS vertical migration within the saturated zone to enhance their retention at the air-
water interface in the capillary fringe. To conduct this study, column experiments in the laboratory will be 
designed and performed, followed by sample analysis from the column and data processing of the obtained 
results. 
5.1 DESIGN AND PRELIMINARY TESTS IN THE LABORATORY 
Several laboratory tests were performed during the first month of the research to evaluate the most effective 
solutions for designing the experimental setup and procedure. Every step of the procedure was previously 
tested, from sand packing and saturation using a peristaltic pump, to the addition of tracer and detergent and 
the air-sparging process.  All these preliminary experiments were performed without PFAS injection and in a 
smaller column, 30 cm high and 4 cm wide. 
Different air flow rates were tested to assess the optimal rate that would avoid fracturing of the solid matrix. It 
was found that sparging at a lower flow rate of 60 cm3/min effectively prevents sand fractures.  In these tests, 
Persil detergent mixed with the colored tracer Methylene Blue (Newell et al., 2021) was used to simulate PFAS 
behavior at the air-water interface, given the surfactant nature of Persil. As theorized by Newell et al. in 2021, 
Persil was observed to migrate upward in the column after air-sparging for 24 hours. Subsequently, Methylene 
Blue also moved upwards after approximately 2 days of sparging. Following several laboratory tests, dry sand 
was selected as ‘unsaturated sand’ layer (see Fig. 5.2) instead of wet sand, as air flow caused water 
displacement that led to the accumulation of free water at the top of the column, thereby eliminating the air-
water interface between saturated and unsaturated layers.   
Figure 5.1 Picture of the preliminary test setup in the laboratory. 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
 
29 
 
 
Table 5.1 List of preliminary tests in the laboratory: objectives and results 
nr. 
Setup  
Objective 
Solutions 
1 
Tap water + coarse sand 
Fill the column  
2 
Tap water + fine sand 
Use of air sparging  
Implementation of a flowmeter 60 
cm3/min - 300 cm3/min   
3 
Tap water + coarse sand 
Creation of unsaturated layer 
saturated from above 
Implementation of PARAFILM 
membrane over the top of the 
column 
4 
Tap water + fine sand  
Creation of unsaturated layer 
saturated from above 
Implementation of PARAFILM 
membrane over the top of the 
column 
5 
Tap water + EOSIN and 
NaCl + fine sand 
Creation of unsaturated layer with 
wet sand - tracer addition –  
calculation of residual saturation in 
unsaturated layer 
6 
Tap water + EOSIN and 
NaCl + coarse sand  
Creation of unsaturated layer with 
wet sand - tracer addition - 
calculation of residual saturation in 
unsaturated layer 
 
7 
Tap water + EOSIN and 
NaCl + Persil detergent 
+ coarse sand   
Tracer and detergent addition - air 
sparging 
As unsaturated layer, use of dry 
sand instead of wet sand  
8 
Tap water + Methylene 
blue + Persil detergent + 
coarse sand   
Creation of an unsaturated layer 
with dry sand - tracer and detergent 
addition - air sparging 
Dilution of Persil detergent 
because too dense  
9 
Tap water + Methylene 
blue + Persil detergent + 
coarse sand    
Detergent dilution - air sparging 
Reduction of the number of holes 
through the PARAFILM 
membrane to avoid evaporation of 
water inside the column 
Further details and tests results can be found in Appendix A. 
5.2 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
Using the experience from preliminary experiments a column setup was designed. The column set up was 
designed by the author after discussion with supervisors and manufactured by the laboratory technicians, Jens 
Schaarup Sørensen, Tajs Nielsen and Erik Rønn Lange.  
The experimental setup is depicted in Figure 5.2. It consists of one acrylic transparent column, 80 cm high and 
with an inner diameter equal to 9 cm. The column dimensions are set according to previous experience of air-
sparging laboratory tests performed by to ensure uniform pathways and distribution of airflow along the 
column and prevent displacement or overflow of the filling material caused by its upward movement during 
sparging (Adams & Reddy, 2003; Liu et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2004; Newell C. and Scalia J., personal interview, 
20 February 2025).  
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
 
30 
 
Column presents seven lateral ports made of stainless steel and silicone membranes for sampling, to avoid 
PFAS sorption. From the bottom of each column compressed air is injected through a tube. Air flow rate is 
regulated by a flowmeter (Platon 60-600 cm3/min) and opposite water flow inside the tube is avoided through 
check valves.  
Danish groundwater natural temperature is around 10°C. While this and light exclusion are important in 
degradation-sensitive experiments, PFAS are highly persistent and unaffected by these factors, so the 
experiments are conducted at room temperature. The column is covered at the top with Parafilm “M” by 
BEMIS to limit evaporation and variation of water content within the sandy sediments.  
Laboratory equipment materials 
Laboratory equipment – such as columns, tubing, pumps, and vials – can both adsorb and release PFAS with 
the extent depending on the specific compound and matrix (e.g., water or sediment) (Lath et al., 2019). 
Although several studies have successfully used materials like acrylic columns, glass beads, flow distributors, 
and polypropylene vials without observed interferences (Brusseau, 2018, 2019; Brusseau et al., 2020; Lyu et 
al., 2022; Yan et al., 2020), other research has shown significant PFAS sorption to both polypropylene (up to 
45%) and glass (up to 24%) (Lath et al., 2019). The variability highlights that material choice can influence 
results and may depend on experimental conditions, supplier, and batch.  
Based on these considerations, glass beads were not used as the bottom layer of the column; instead, a coarser 
sand was selected to avoid potential interactions with PFAS.  
5.3 SOLID MATRIX 
One of the objectives of this project is to analyze differences in vertical migration of a mixture of PFAS during 
air-sparging in different porous media, such as homogeneous fine and coarse sand using column tests in the 
Figure 5.3 Experimental setup sketch 
Figure 5.2 Experimental setup sketch 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
 
31 
 
laboratory. Therefore, several experiments are performed to assess the effectiveness of air-sparging and 
consequent PFAS migration and retention across different media. Two main setups have been installed: 
1. Homogeneous coarse sand (sand n.3, Φ=0.90-1.60 mm, D10/D60=1.5) 
2. Homogeneous fine sand (sand n.0, Φ=0.40-0.80 mm, D10/D60=1.5) 
At the bottom of the column, 2 cm of coarser sand (sand n.6, Φ=2.00-3.55 mm, D10/D60=1.5) is placed to allow 
uniform distribution of the air flow.  
To ensure homogenous solid matrix in both the first and second setups, the sand was sieved to remove finer 
particles. The granulometry characteristics of the sand used are shown in the Appendix B. 
5.4 PFAS SOLUTION 
The experiments are performed using a PFAS solution in tap water, with a concentration of each PFAS of 
50μg/L.  Among the various PFAS available at DTU, ten representative compounds were selected for this 
study, as listed in Table 5.2: PFOA, PFHpA, PFOS, PFHxS, 6:2 FTS, 6:2 FTAB, PFHxA, PFPeA, PFBS and 
PFOSA. The selection was made to ensure a balanced representation of both terminal PFAS and precursors, as 
well as a mix of long- and short-chained compounds.  
These selected PFAS are also among the most frequently detected in the environment, particularly in Denmark 
according to “Substance flow analysis of PFAS in Denmark” final report by the Ministry of Environment of 
Denmark of February 2024 (Lassen et al., 2024), making them relevant for understanding contamination 
patterns and potential remediation strategies. The selected PFAS are also included in the sum of 22 PFAS for 
which threshold criteria have been established.  
Figure 5.3 Picture of the experimental setup in the laboratory 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
 
32 
 
Table 5.2 Main characteristics of the ten selected PFAS (Brusseau, 2023b; ITRC, 2023; Lyu et al., 2022) 
This selection ensures a diverse range of physicochemical behaviors, allowing for a comprehensive evaluation 
of their partitioning behavior and interactions within environmental systems. Other characteristics of each 
compound are displayed in Appendix C. 
5.5 SAND LAYERS PREPARATION WITHIN THE COLUMN 
The steps of the experimental procedure are shown in Appendix D.  
A fine metal mesh was first placed between the bottom of the column and the first layer of sand to prevent 
clogging of the air injection outlet. 
Compound 
Chain 
length 
Type of PFAS 
Functional head 
charge 
Main properties 
PFOA 
Long (C7) 
Terminal 
PFCA 
Anionic (–COO⁻) 
Great sorption to solid 
phase, great adsorption 
to air-water interface  
PFHpA 
Short (C6) 
Terminal 
PFCA 
Anionic (–COO⁻) 
Less adsorption to air-
water interface, solid-
phase adsorption 
primary mechanism 
PFOS 
Long (C8) 
Terminal 
PFSA 
Anionic (–SO₃⁻) 
Great sorption to solid 
phase, great adsorption 
to air-water interface 
PFHxS 
Long (C6) 
Terminal 
PFSA 
Anionic (–SO₃⁻) 
Great sorption to solid 
phase, great adsorption 
to air-water interface 
6:2 FTS 
Short (C6) 
Precursor 
Fluorotelomer 
sulfonic 
Anionic (–SO₃⁻) 
It could degrade into 
PFHxA, behavior like 
long-chained 
6:2 FTAB 
Short (C6) 
Precursor 
Fluorotelomer Zwitterionic 
PFCA precursor, 
behavior like long-
chained 
PFHxA 
Short (C5) 
Terminal 
PFCA 
Anionic (–COO⁻) 
Less adsorption to air-
water interface, solid-
phase adsorption 
primary mechanism 
PFBS 
Short (C4) 
Terminal 
PFSA 
Anionic (–SO₃⁻) 
Less adsorption to 
solid phase and to air-
water interface 
PFPeA 
Short (C4) 
Terminal 
PFCA 
Anionic (–COO⁻) 
Less adsorption to air-
water interface, solid-
phase adsorption 
primary mechanism 
PFOSA 
Long (C8) 
Precursor 
Per-
fluoroalkane 
sulfonamides 
Anionic (–COO⁻) 
PFOS precursor; 
lipophilic, behavior 
like long-chained 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
 
33 
 
Then, four layers of sand are created inside the columns, as shown in Figure 5.2, to reproduce the air-water 
interface between vadose zone and the aquifer and to highlight the vertical migration of the contaminant: 
I. 
Clean coarser sand: clean dry coarse sand (nr.6) packed inside the column saturated from the top 
through a Peristaltic pump (Watson-Marlow 502s) and a Tygon tube 
II. 
Contaminated saturated layer: sand saturated with PFAS solution outside the column in a glass beaker, 
and then packed inside the column 
III. 
Clean saturated layer: clean sand packed inside the column and saturated from the top through a 
Peristaltic pump (Watson-Marlow 502s 150 μg/l- 4 mg/l) and a Tygon tube 
IV. 
Clean dry layer: clean dry sand packed inside the column 
To achieve longitudinal and lateral homogeneity packing of the sand, the sand was deposited in layers of 
around 140 grams and compacted using a pestle. This approach was employed to minimize lateral segregation 
between layers and to eliminate air pockets and potential preferential flow paths. Previous studies have 
demonstrated that this method effectively ensures uniformity in the sand structure while preventing the 
formation of preferential flow channels (Oliviera et al., 1996).  
5.6  TRACER ANALYSIS 
In this study, sodium bromide (NaBr) was employed as a conservative tracer to investigate fluid dynamics 
within fine sand column undergoing air-sparging. NaBr was selected due to its well-established properties as 
a non-reactive, highly soluble and easily detectable tracer that reliably represents water movement without 
interacting with the porous medium or undergoing degradation. A preliminary evaluation was conducted to 
determine the optimal NaBr concentration. Different concentrations were tested, and their electrical 
conductivity (EC) was measured and compared to that of the tap water used to saturate the column. The 
calibration curve is displayed in the Appendix E, and it was used to establish the relationship between NaBr 
concentration and EC, allowing for the indirect estimation of tracer concentration during the column 
experiments. A concentration of 100 mg/L NaBr was chosen, as it resulted in an approximately 20% increase 
in EC relative to the background, providing a clear and distinguishable EC signal without significantly altering 
the physicochemical properties of the background water. After six days of continuous air-sparging, water 
samples were collected from multiple lateral sampling ports along the column.  
5.7 PULSED AND CONTINUOUS SPARGING 
The experiments were conducted using continuous air injection, as this configuration was the simplest to 
implement and the most feasible for potential field application. Initially, the use of pulsed air-sparging had also 
been considered, especially following discussions with Newell and Scalia, given its several advantages in 
remediating contaminated sites. 
During air-sparging, the formation of preferential flow paths can reduce the effectiveness of contaminant 
removal and limit the treatment area (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 2019). Using pulsed air injection helps overcome 
this issue by preventing the development of these channels and promoting better mixing within the aquifer, 
thanks to the repeated opening and collapse of air pathways. Additionally, in the initial expansion phase, the 
zone of influence is typically larger, which further enhances the efficiency of the process (Sethi & Di Molfetta, 
2019).  
However, for the purposes of this study, continuous injection was selected as a more practical and 
straightforward approach.  
5.8 POROSITY AND SATURATION 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
 
34 
 
The porosity of the columns was measured prior to the start of the experiments. To determine total porosity, 
each column was saturated from the top using tap water to replicate the saturated zone, before adding the third 
layer of dry clean sand. A Tygon tube, compatible with the peristaltic pump (Watson-Marlow 502s), was 
connected to the top of the column to ensure consistent flow. Water was introduced at a controlled rate of 1.8 
mL/min using a peristaltic pump. Once the water reached the top cap and a visible water table formed, the flow 
was stopped. The column was then weighed in its saturated state. Assuming full saturation with no trapped air, 
the resulting water-filled porosity was calculated to be 37% for both fine sand and coarse sand experiments. 
Calculations are available in Appendix H.2.  
At the end of the six-day experiments, the column was weighed again, revealing a weight loss of approximately 
50 grams. This loss was attributed to the removal of water samples during the experiment. 
During both experiments, a rise in the water level was observed within the first few seconds after air injection 
began. This indicated an initial displacement of water, followed by a stabilization of the water level, which 
remained constant for the whole experiment. Since the total amount of water is known and it did not change – 
confirmed by the absence of evaporation – the rise in water level suggests a change in the saturation state of 
the column.  
By comparing the final volume occupied by the water, obtained measuring the final height of the water table 
after six days of air-sparging, with the initial water volume, it was determined that the column reached a water 
saturation of 88%, meaning that 12% of the pore space was occupied by air. 
For the purposes of the calculations, saturation is assumed to be constant throughout the entire column. 
However, it is highly likely that this assumption does not reflect actual conditions, given the potential 
variability in water and air distribution within the pore space over time. Such variability may be influenced 
both by the natural dynamics of the system and by experimental procedures, such as sample extraction. For 
instance, water was only recoverable from port 4 during the initial hours of the experiment with the coarse 
sand; subsequent changes in internal saturation, due to also daily extraction of water samples, made it 
impossible to collect further samples from that port.  
5.9 SAMPLES COLLECTION 
The sampling process was recorded throughout both the entire experiments, and the multimedia files are 
available in Appendix H.1. 
During each experiment, 1 ml water samples are collected in 2 ml polypropylene (PP) vials at different stages 
of the sparging process: 
i. 
At the first sampling port - before saturation of the third layer (Fig. 5.2) (only in coarse sand setup)  
ii. 
At the first, second and third ports – before starting sparging 
iii. 
At the first, second, third and fourth port - during sparging after 1 h, 24 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h and 120 h 
iv. 
At the first, second, third and fourth port – 1 h after sparging has ended (only in coarse sand setup) 
No samples were collected from the portion of the column representing the vadose zone, as it remained dry 
throughout the entire experiment. Consequently, water sampling from this section was not possible, and it was 
not involved in PFAS distribution due to absence of water and a water-air interface.  
Additionally, soil samples are collected after sparging, due to lack of water in the ports in correspondence of 
the capillary fringe. These samples are taken at different depths while the column is being emptied at the end 
of the experiment. Soil samples are stored in 15 ml polypropylene (PP) vials.  
To sample with fine sand setup, it was necessary to stop continuous injection of compressed air to allow the 
extraction of water sample through the ports, since the presence of injected air within the fine porous medium 
created significant resistance to water flow. The small pore size in fine sand leads to higher capillary forces, 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
 
35 
 
which retain water more tightly and make it more difficult to displace. As a result, continuous air injection 
disrupts the formation of a stable water phase at the sampling ports, making it difficult to collect representative 
water samples unless the air flow is temporarily suspended.  
5.10 
INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS  
A mass balance is performed to assess the fate of PFAS within the system and to verify that the total mass of 
PFAS remained constant within the column, despite its redistribution among the aqueous phase, the soil matrix, 
and the air-water interface. Since the system is closed, any changes in concentration at specific locations or 
times must reflect internal redistribution rather than loss, allowing for an accurate assessment of PFAS 
behavior and retention mechanisms. Mass loss would only be possible if precursors were transformed into 
terminal PFAS. However, under the conditions of this study, such transformation is unlikely, as the 
experimental conditions required for chemical oxidation, microbial activity, or photodegradation are not 
present.  
The total mass 𝑀𝑇 in the system results from the sum of its distribution across all phases: dissolved in the 
aqueous phase, adsorbed onto the solid matrix, and accumulated at the air-water interface. 
𝑀𝑇= 𝐶𝑤𝑉𝑤+ 𝐶𝑠𝑀𝑠+ 𝐶𝑖𝑎𝐴𝑖𝑎 
(5.1) 
With: 
• 
𝐶𝑤 pore water concentration 
• 
𝐶𝑠= 𝐾𝑑𝐶𝑤 soil solids concentration 
• 
𝐶𝑖𝑎= 𝐾𝑖𝑎𝐶𝑤 air-water interface concentration 
• 
𝑉𝑤= 𝑉𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝜃𝑤 pore water volume 
• 
𝑀𝑠= 𝜌𝑏𝑉𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 soil solids mass  
• 
𝐴𝑖𝑎 air-water interfacial area obtained with (3.8) formula, considering that the water saturation is 
equal to 88% (see section 5.7) and the medium diameters d50 are displayed in Table 5.5.  
All the calculations can be found in Appendix H.3. 
Knowing the pore water concentration corresponding to the measured data, it is necessary to assess the solid-
phase partition coefficient 𝐾𝑑 and air-water interfacial adsorption coefficient 𝐾𝑖𝑎 to determine PFAS 
concentration in the other phases (soil and air-water interface). Furthermore, an analysis (see Appendix F) is 
carried out to evaluate the impact of the assumed port volumes on the accuracy of the mass balance 
calculations.  
Solid-phase partition coefficient 
The 𝐾𝑑 value depends on the organic carbon fraction 𝑓𝑜𝑐, i.e. the weight fraction of organic carbon relative to 
the total weight of the solid. The organic carbon fraction of the sand used in the laboratory experiments is 
under the detection limits, 𝑓𝑜𝑐< 0.01, for both fine sand and coarse sand. To calculate the total PFAS mass in 
the system, two different 𝐾𝑑 values are used: one based on experimental data obtained in the lab (5.2), and 
another derived from the regression curve proposed by Lyu et al., 2023 (5.3; 5.4).  
𝐾𝑑= 𝐶0𝑉0 − 𝐶𝑤𝑉𝑤
𝐶𝑤𝑀𝑠
 
(5.2) 
With 𝐶0 the PFAS concentration in the stock solution, 𝐶𝑤 pores water concentration in the column at t=0, 𝑉0 
stock solution volume added, 𝑉𝑤 water volume related to sampling port 1, and 𝑀𝑠 soil solid mass in the volume 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
 
36 
 
related to port 1 (since the two concentrations used are collected from port 1). For this calculation, the data 
from the first experiment, conducted with coarse sand, are selected because concentration data at time zero are 
available. This initial concentration is measured before any dilution effects occurred due to the addition of the 
clean, fully saturated sand layer. 
The regression curve formulas are function of the molar volume (Lyu et al., 2023), intrinsic property of each 
PFAS (EPA, 2025). 
log 𝐾𝑑= 0.0114𝑉𝑚−3.76,
𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛 𝑃𝐹𝐴𝑆 
(5.3) 
log 𝐾𝑑= 0.0012𝑉𝑚−1.32,
𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛 𝑃𝐹𝐴𝑆 
(5.4) 
Since the difference between the mass balances obtained using the two different results is minimal, the 𝐾𝑑 
value obtained from the laboratory experiment is considered accurate and valid and it’s used for further 
analysis. 
 
Table 5.3 Solid-phase partition coefficients derived from Lyu et al. (2023) regression equation and from the laboratory experiment 
 
Kd Lyu (l/kg) 
Kd (l/kg) 
PFBS 
0.07 
0.01 
PFOA 
0.09 
0.17 
PFOS 
0.22 
0.22 
PFHxA 
0.08 
0.12 
PFHpA 
0.09 
0.13 
PFPeA 
0.07 
0.12 
PFHxS 
0.05 
0.19 
6:2 FTS 
0.10 
0.37 
PFOSA 
0.26 
0.22 
6:2 FTAB 
0.10 
0.24 
 
It is noticed that most PFAS have the similar Kd values, comparing the two obtained results. However, the 
partition coefficients of 6:2 FTS, 6:2 FTAB, PFHxS are higher with respect to the values obtained by the 
regression curve. Since PFOSA and PFOS share similar characteristics in terms of their perfluorinated 
structure, environmental persistence, and potential for bioaccumulation, Kd value of PFOSA is chosen equal 
to the PFOS one. The adjustment was required to address the discrepancy in the calculated value, which is 
attributed to the anomalous behavior of PFOSA.  
Air-water interfacial adsorption coefficient 
The 𝐾𝑖𝑎 is determined using the QSPR (Quantitative structure-property relationship analysis) model for air-
water interfacial adsorption coefficient versus molar volume, proposed by Brusseau & Van Glubt, 2021. The 
regression equation is  
𝑙𝑜𝑔𝐾𝑖𝑎= 0.019(±0.002)𝑉𝑚−7.1(±0.45) 
(5.5) 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
 
37 
 
 
 
 
Table 5.4 Air-water partition coefficients derived from regression curve proposed by Brusseau & Van Glubt (2021) 
 
Kia (cm) 
PFBS 
0.0001 
PFOA 
0.0025 
PFOS 
0.0117 
PFHxA 
0.0002 
PFHpA 
0.0008 
PFPeA 
0.0001 
PFHxS 
0.0011 
6:2 FTS 
0.0045 
PFOSA 
0.0152 
6:2 FTAB 
0.0045 
 
Sand properties  
To perform calculations about the mass balance in the system is fundamental to describe properly the solid 
matrices that are used in the experiments. Table 5.5 recaps sands properties: bulk density, medium diameters, 
organic carbon content and air-water interfacial areas. The organic carbon fraction was determined though 
TOC analysis in the lab. Grain size distribution curves and further details are presented in Appendix B. 
Table 5.5 Bulk density, medium diameter, organic carbon fraction and air-water interfacial area of both solid matrices used in the 
experiments 
 
ρb (kg/l) 
D50 (cm) 
foc 
Aia (cm-1) 
Coarse sand (n.3) 
1.67 
0.121 
<0.01 
6.44 
Fine sand (n.0) 
1.67 
0.06 
<0.01 
14.95 
  
It’s important to highlight in analyzing the air-water interfacial retention process that the air-water interfacial 
area is greater with fine sand than with coarse sand. This is related to the surface area that is greater with 
smaller diameters. So, it is expected greater PFAS migration and retention at the air-water interface in the fine 
sand experiments rather than in the experiment with coarse sand.  
Sampling ports volumes 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
 
38 
 
The saturated section of the column is divided into four different volumes, each corresponding to one of the 
four sampling ports (Fig. 5.4). Since assuming uniform concentration over such large volumes is a strong 
simplification and may not accurately reflect the actual spatial variability of PFAS distribution within the 
column, another subdivision of the volumes was considered (see Appendix F). However, the first case is 
selected for further calculations, as it is more practical to apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4 Saturated column divided in four volumes 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
 
39 
 
6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The effectiveness of air-sparging in moving PFAS at the air-water interface near the water table is evaluated 
through the analysis and interpretation of laboratory data collected during the experiments. The data provides 
PFAS concentrations in water samples taken at various time intervals and from different ports. These 
concentrations are then compared to the initial concentration of the stock solution, initially added to the 
column, allowing for an assessment of PFAS mass distribution and potential vertical migration, promoted by 
the air flow. The objective of this section is to analyze differences in behavior of short- and long- chained 
PFAS and precursors during air-sparging in different porous media, such as homogeneous fine and coarse sand. 
6.1 PFAS CONCENTRATIONS IN TIME AND IN SPACE 
To first analyze the results of this research (Appendix H.4), the normalized concentration c/c0 - normalized 
with respect to the initial concentration in the stock solution - is displayed. Normalized concentrations are 
chosen to allow for a consistent comparison among the ten PFAS, as their initial concentrations (i.e., those in 
the stock solution) were not identical.  
The actual pore water concentration values of each PFAS studied in the column experiments are graphically 
presented in Appendix G, showing the variation in concentration over time at each sampling port. 
Initial conditions in the system 
The experiments are performed using a PFAS solution in tap water, with a target concentration of 50μg/L for 
each compound. However analytical results (Appendix H.4) revealed significant deviations from the expected 
values: PFPeA was present at around 150 μg/, while PFOS, PFOSA, and 6:2 FTAB were detected at 
concentrations equal or below 5 μg/L. These discrepancies indicate that the actual composition of the solution 
did not match the intended formulation.  
Tracer results 
The electrical conductivity of the water samples collected was measured after six days of continuous air-
sparging. Results (Fig. 6.2) showed a measurable increase in EC even at the third port, where EC rose to  
Figure 6.1 PFAS initial concentration (μg/l) before starting sparging 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
 
40 
 
approximately 960 μS/cm with respect to the background value (905 μS/cm), indicating limited but detectable 
vertical migration of the sodium bromide tracer. As expected, the highest EC values were observed near the 
bottom of the column, consistent with the expected behavior of short-chained PFAS, which consists in limited 
tendency to vertical migration promoted by the retention at the air-water interface of the air bubbles. The 
bromide concentration trend (Appendix H.4) is also similar to short-chained PFAS behavior, with a higher 
concentration at the bottom and a decreasing trend along the column.  
By monitoring the transport of sodium bromide through the column, through EC and concentrations, it’s 
assessed that water advective flow is limited, as required by this experiment. This approach is particularly 
relevant for distinguishing between advective water movement and the air-water interface partitioning that 
may influence PFAS distribution.  
PFAS transport mechanism through air-sparging  
The transport of PFAS within the column during air sparging may occur via two mechanisms: (1) transport by 
rising air bubbles, where PFAS adsorb onto the bubble surfaces and are carried upward by buoyant lift; and 
(2) transport along air channels, where PFAS adsorb at the air–water interface and are mobilized by viscous 
drag. In these experiments, air bubbles were likely generated within the porous medium, as no preferential 
flow paths or fractures were observed, and the solid matrix exhibited high porosity.  
6.1.1 
PFAS VERTICAL MIGRATION DURING AIR-SPARGING IN COARSE SAND 
Data is presented from 48 hours of sparging, as during the experiment with coarse sand it was only possible to 
collect samples from the fourth sampling port after 24 and 48 hours. This allows for meaningful representation 
of the processes occurring at the water table. In contrast, at 120 hours it is not possible to characterize the 
behavior at the water table due to the absence of extractable water in that region.  
During the first 48 hours of sparging, PFOSA showed anomalous behavior, with concentrations significantly 
higher than those of the stock solution, despite no additional compound being introduced in the system. As no 
conclusive explanation can be determined for this anomaly, PFOSA data is treated separately from the other 
precursors in the analysis of the first experiment.  
Figure 6.2 Bromide concentration trend and EC variation in presence of NaBr along the column after sparging for 120 hours in fine 
sand 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
 
41 
 
It is particularly noteworthy that already after 48 hours, long-chained PFAS and precursors exhibited vertical 
migration, not driven by advective water flow, but rather driven upwards by the adsorption to the air bubbles. 
The hypothesis of the absence of an advective flow is supported by the limited short-chained PFAS movement 
during air-sparging and from bromide analysis. After sparging for 120 hours, greater PFAS removal is observed 
from the bottom of the column, resulting in higher normalized concentrations at the second and third sampling 
ports (Fig. 6.3a-b). 
 
 
The variation in normalized PFAS concentrations with increasing air-sparging duration is also presented for 
each sampling port. The graphs are organized by PFAS type in order to highlight the different behaviors 
exhibited under the same experimental conditions.  
Focusing on the first sampling port, at the bottom of the column, the concentrations of short-chained, long-
chained PFAS and their precursors decreased relative to the initial levels (Fig. 6.4a-d).  
Figure 6.3a PFAS concentrations variation after sparging 
for 48 hours in coarse sand. PFAS concentrations is 
decreasing from port 1 to port 2. From port 2, they start to 
increase up to the port 4. 
Figure 6.3b PFAS concentration variation after sparging 
for 120 hours in coarse sand. PFAS concentrations is 
decreasing from port 1 to port 2. From port 2, they start 
to increase up to the port 3. Sampling from the port 4 
was not possible. 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
 
42 
 
 
 
 
  
This suggests that part of the compounds initially present at the bottom of the column either migrated upwards 
to the air-water interface near the water table or were partially adsorbed onto the solid matrix. Long-chained 
PFAS and precursors exhibited more pronounced mobilization compared to short-chained PFAS, likely due to 
the short-chained PFAS lower tendency to adsorption at the air-water interface and to the sand. The limited 
movement of short-chained PFAS further supports the limited advective water flow within the column. 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 1 - SHORT CHAINED PFAS
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFHpA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 1 - LONG CHAINED PFAS
PFHxS
PFOA
PFOS
Figure 6.4a Short-chained PFAS concentration variation 
throughout the air-sparging process at port 1 in coarse 
sand. The concentrations after 24 hours of sparging 
increase, and then it starts to slightly decrease. 
Figure 6.4b Long-chained PFAS concentration variation 
throughout the air-sparging process at port 1 in coarse 
sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
Figure 6.4c Precursors concentration variation 
throughout the air-sparging process at port 1 in coarse 
sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
Figure 6.4d PFOSA concentration variation throughout 
the air-sparging process at port 1 in coarse sand. The 
concentration after 24 hours of sparging increase, and 
then it starts to decrease. 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 1 - PRECURSORS
6.2 FTS
6:2 FTAB
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 1 - PFOSA
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
 
43 
 
At the second sampling port (Fig. 6.5a-d), the concentrations trends differ from the first port. Over time the 
concentrations increase, mostly short-chained PFAS ones, considering their slower vertical transport due to 
their lower tendency to migrate attached to the air-water interface of the air bubbles. The lower concentration 
of long-chained PFAS and precursors is likely due to their faster vertical migration along the column, leading 
to their retaining near the water table after just 24 hours of air-sparging (Fig. 6.7b-c). Additionally, long-
chained PFAS and precursors have higher affinity for soil adsorption that may reduce their pore water 
concentration.  
 
 
 
 
 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h) 
PORT 2 - PRECURSORS 
6.2 FTS
6:2 FTAB
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 2 - PFOSA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 2 - SHORT CHAINED PFAS
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFHpA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 2 - LONG CHAINED PFAS
PFHxS
PFOA
PFOS
Figure 6.5a Short-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 2 in 
coarse sand. The concentrations increase in time. 
Figure 6.5b Long-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 2 in 
coarse sand. The concentrations increase in time. 
Figure 6.5c Precursors concentrations variation 
throughout the air-sparging process at port 2 in coarse 
sand. The concentrations increase in time. 
Figure 6.5d PFOSA concentration variation throughout 
the air-sparging process at port 2 in coarse sand. The 
concentrations increase in time. 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
 
44 
 
The PFAS behavior exhibited at the third sampling port (Fig. 6.6a-d) is similar to the one at the second 
sampling port.  
 
PFAS concentrations are shown also for the fourth port (Fig. 6.7a-d), located at the water table, although 
laboratory data are only available at 24 and 48 hours, since water was not extractable at other times due to too 
low saturation. It is relevant that a sharp increase in the concentrations of long-chained PFAS and precursors 
was observed during the initial days of air-sparging.    
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 3 - LONG CHAINED PFAS
PFHxS
PFOA
PFOS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 3 - PRECURSORS
6.2 FTS
6:2 FTAB
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 3 - PFOSA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 3 - SHORT CHAINED PFAS
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFHpA
Figure 6.6a Short-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 3 in 
coarse sand. The concentrations increase in time. 
Figure 6.6b Long-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 3 in 
coarse sand. The concentrations increase in time. 
Figure 6.6c Precursors concentrations variation 
throughout the air-sparging process at port 3 in coarse 
sand. The concentrations slightly increase in time. 
Figure 6.6d PFOSA concentrations variation throughout 
the air-sparging process at port 3 in coarse sand. The 
concentrations increase in time. 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
The high concentration of long-chained PFAS and precursors detected at port 4 suggests that these compounds 
accumulated at the air-water interface within the water table, as early as 24 hours after the start of sparging, 
and likely persisted throughout the subsequent stages of the experiment. This accumulation likely explains the 
absence of elevated concentrations at the lower sampling ports (second (Fig. 6.5b-c) and third (Fig. 6.6b-c)), 
even as the experiment progressed over time. However, this hypothesis cannot be fully confirmed due to the 
lack of samples from port 4 during the final days of the experiment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 4 - SHORT CHAINED PFAS
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFHpA
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 4 - LONG CHAINED PFAS
PFHxS
PFOA
PFOS
Figure 6.7a Short-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation after air-sparging for 24h and 48h at port 4 in 
coarse sand. The concentrations increase in time, mostly 
PFHpA. 
Figure 6.7b Long-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation after air-sparging for 24h and 48h at port 4 in 
coarse sand. The concentrations highly increase in time. 
Figure 6.7c Precursors concentrations variation after 
air-sparging for 24h and 48h at port 4 in coarse sand. 
The concentrations highly increase in time. 
Figure 6.7d PFOSA concentration variation after air-
sparging for 24h and 48h at port 4 in coarse sand. The 
concentrations highly increase in time. 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 4 - PRECURSORS
6.2 FTS
6:2 FTAB
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 4 - PFOSA
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
 
46 
 
6.1.2 
PFAS VERTICAL MIGRATION DURING AIR-SPARGING IN FINE SAND 
In the second experiment, it was not possible to extract water from the fourth port corresponding to the water 
table area at any time, due to too low saturation in water. Normalized PFAS concentrations are shown by 
sampling ports after 48 and 120 hours of sparging to compare how the PFAS distribution changes in time. Over 
time, a decrease in concentration at the bottom of the column and a corresponding increase at the third port 
can be observed (Fig. 6.8a-b).  
As in the previous section, temporal trends in normalized PFAS concentrations over the air-sparging duration 
are illustrated for each sampling port for the second experiment.   
Figure 6.8a PFAS concentrations variation after sparging for 
48 hours in fine sand. PFAS concentrations is decreasing 
from port 1 to port 2. From port 2, they start to increase up 
to the port 4. Sampling from the port 4 was not possible. 
Figure 6.8b PFAS concentrations variation after sparging for 
120 hours in fine sand. PFAS concentrations is decreasing 
from port 1 to port 2. From port 2, they start to increase up 
to the port 4. Sampling from the port 4 was not possible. 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
 
47 
 
The trends at the first sampling port are shown in Fig. 6.9a-c. As in the experiment with coarse sand, the 
concentration at the bottom of the column is decreasing over time. However, it’s important to highlight that 
short-chained PFAS appear more mobile in fine sand than in coarse sand. This is suggested by the lower 
normalized concentrations observed in fine sand in the final days of sparging, likely due to increased air-water 
interfacial area of fine sand (Tab. 5.5) that enhance adsorption to the air-water interface and vertical migration. 
Long-chained PFAS and precursors seem to exhibit less mobility in fine sand compared to coarse sand (Fig. 
6.4b-c). Probably it is related to stronger adsorption to the solid matrix due to higher specific surface and/or to 
the air-water interface, rather than interactions with air bubbles.  
   
 
 
 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 1 - PRECURSORS
6.2 FTS
PFOSA
6:2 FTAB
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 1 - SHORT CHAINED PFAS 
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFHpA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 1 - LONG CHAINED PFAS
PFHxS
PFOA
PFOS
Figure 6.9a Short-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 1 in 
fine sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
Figure 6.9b Long-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 1 in 
fine sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
Figure 6.9c Precursors concentrations variation 
throughout the air-sparging process at port 1 in fine 
sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
 
48 
 
At the second port (Fig. 6.10a-c), in the intermediate portion of the saturated zone, short-chained PFAS 
concentrations are increasing over time, while precursors and long-chained PFAS concentrations are 
decreasing. This is likely due to a faster vertical migration of long-chained PFAS and precursors along the 
column, leading to their retaining at the water table after just 48 hours of air-sparging, as previously observed 
in the experiment with coarse sand (see Chapter 6.1.1). As a result, the majority of these compounds are not 
detectable anymore in the middle of the partially saturated zone (the initial ‘saturated zone’, see Fig. 5.2), 
because they have already moved upward and retained above the fourth port, near the water table. This 
hypothesis is confirmed by the total concentration trends and the mass balance in Chapter 6.1.3. 
The overall same PFAS behavior is observed at the third port of the column (Fig. 6.11a-c).  
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 2 - SHORT CHAINED PFAS
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFHpA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 2 - LONG CHAINED PFAS
PFHxS
PFOA
PFOS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 2 - PRECURSORS
6.2 FTS
PFOSA
6:2 FTAB
Figure 6.10a Short-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 2 in 
fine sand. The concentrations increase in time. 
Figure 6.10b Long-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 2 in 
fine sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
Figure 6.10c Precursors concentrations variation 
throughout the air-sparging process at port 2 in fine 
sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
6.1.3 
PFAS VERTICAL MIGRATION AFTER SPARGING INTERRUPTION 
Laboratory data from the sand samples show the PFAS total concentration (Appendix H.4), from port 2 to the 
water table above port 4, at the end of the experiment when the compressed air flow was stopped (Fig. 6.12a-
b). The total concentration is comprehensive of the concentration dissolved in the pore volume and adsorbed 
to the sand grains. Considering these values is important to explain the distribution of the different PFAS within 
the three-phase system and to support the hypothesis about the adsorption to the solid matrix and migration to 
the water table of the long-chained PFAS and precursors. 
Figure 6.12a-b highlights that all PFAS moved upwards to the water table in both the experiments because a 
certain concentration for each PFAS is detected above the fourth sampling port.  
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 3 - SHORT CHAINED PFAS
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFHpA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 3 - LONG CHAINED PFAS
PFHxS
PFOA
PFOS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1
24
48
72
96
120
c/c0
sparging time (h)
PORT 3 - PRECURSORS
6.2 FTS
PFOSA
6:2 FTAB
Figure 6.11a Short-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 3 in 
fine sand. The concentrations increase in time, mostly 
PFHpA. 
Figure 6.11b Long-chained PFAS concentrations 
variation throughout the air-sparging process at port 3 in 
fine sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
Figure 6.11c Precursors concentrations variation 
throughout the air-sparging process at port 3 in fine 
sand. The concentrations decrease in time. 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
In the experiment with coarse sand (Fig. 6.12a), the total concentration of the majority of long- and short-
chained PFAS and precursors increased until port 3 and then started to decrease towards the water table. This 
result was not expected since it doesn’t align with pore water concentration trends obtained one hour after 
interrupting sparging (Fig. 6.13).  
Figure 6.12a Water content and PFAS total 
concentrations variation after interrupting air-spanging 
in coarse sand. The concentrations increase up to port 3 
and then start to decrease up to the water table. 
Figure 6.12b Water content and PFAS total 
concentrations variation after interrupting air-spanging 
in fine sand. PFAS total concentrations increase from 
port 3 up to the water table. 
Figure 6.13 PFAS pore water concentrations variation after interrupting air-
spanging in coarse sand. PFAS pore water concentrations decrease up to port 3. 
Sampling from the fourth port was not possible.  
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
 
51 
 
The water content of coarse sand has the same trend as the total PFAS concentrations, opposite with respect to 
the pore water concentrations (Fig. 6.13). This may be attributed to a dilution effect: in wetter zones, PFAS are 
more diluted in the larger volume of pore water, leading to lower aqueous concentrations despite a higher total 
PFAS load. In drier zones, the smaller water volume results in higher pore water concentrations even if the 
total PFAS is lower. 
Thus, differences in water content appear to control the distribution of PFAS between the solid and liquid 
phases, explaining the observed trends. 
At the third sampling port, particularly high is the concentration of PFHxS, PFOA and 6:2 FTS that exhibit 
greater mobility with respect to the other compounds. PFOS total concentration is consistent with the 
hypothesis made for PFOS pore water concentration, which is that the low concentrations at the second and 
third port are justified since its total concentration is higher around the water table. This means that PFOS is 
retained at the air-water interface near the water table.  
Regarding the experiment with fine sand (Fig. 6.12b), the PFAS total concentration trends differ from the 
previous ones (Fig. 6.12a). In this case, almost all PFAS have increasing concentrations from port 3 to the 
water table, particularly long-chained PFAS and precursors, with a behavior very similar to the pore water 
concentrations (Fig. 6.8b). As a result, they have very low pore water concentrations in the middle of the 
partially saturated zone because they have already moved upward and retained above the fourth port, near the 
water table. PFPeA presents a very high concentration at the bottom of the column, likely related to its initial 
concentration in the stock solution that is significantly higher than the other compounds.  
6.2 MASS BALANCE IN THREE-PHASE SYSTEM 
Initial PFAS mass before sparging 
The initial PFAS mass introduced into the column corresponds to the mass in volume of the stock solution that 
is added to the ‘contaminated sand’ layer (see Fig. 5.2) and then inserted in the column. As initial concentration 
for both the experiments, it is considered the PFAS concentration in the water sample extracted from the 
‘contaminated sand’ layer of the column with coarse sand. Initial concentrations in coarse sand were also used 
for the mass balance calculations in fine sand, due to the lack of initial concentration data for the latter. This 
approach is justified by the comparable organic carbon content and porosity between the two sand types, which 
allows for a reasonable comparison. To calculate this initial mass, the volume of the ‘contaminated sand’ layer 
is used, which is fully saturated (Sw=1). Calculations are displayed in Appendix H.3. Under these conditions, 
the system is considered a two-phase system (water and solid) so no contribution from the air-water interface 
is included at this stage. 
Knowing the initial PFAS mass added to the sand before starting sparging and the pore water concentration at 
different levels of the column, it was possible to compare the PFAS masses before and after sparging, to 
evaluate that total mass of PFAS remained constant within the column. 
6.2.1 
MASS BALANCE IN EXPERIMENT WITH COARSE SAND 
The mass balance for the experiment with coarse sand is calculated considering the initial PFAS mass before 
sparging and the PFAS masses after air-sparging for both 48 and 120 hours. PFOSA mass balance is not 
discussed, due to the high inconsistency of the results (see 6.1.1).  
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
 
52 
 
After two days of air-sparging, the mass balance appears reasonably consistent, aside from some variability 
between the initial and final masses, which for most PFAS falls for most compounds within the analytical 
uncertainty (around 20%) reported by the laboratory. Therefore, there is no indication of significant mass loss 
or analytical error, except for PFOA, PFHxS and 6:2 FTS masses which increase of about 100% with sparging. 
Some inconsistencies could be related to the initial simplification about the sampling ports volumes (see 
Chapter 5.10), that may not accurately reflect the actual spatial variability of PFAS distribution within the 
column.  
 
The mass balance changes significantly if the total mass after sparging for six days is considered, due to the 
lack of samples from the fourth port. A high mass loss of long-chained PFAS and precursors is observed that 
it likely refers to the missing data from the column section near the water table. Additionally, this observed 
mass loss can be reasonably attributed to the PFAS distribution among the three phases (see Appendix H.3). 
In particular, approximately 50% of the mass of PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, 6:2 FTS and 6:2 FTAB is adsorbed to 
the solid phase. Moreover, PFOA, 6:2 FTS and 6:2 FTAB show a percentage in mass – around 3% - retained 
at the air-water interface, PFHxS a percentage close to 1%, while PFOS exhibit a higher affinity to air-water 
interface, close to 10%. These data help to explain the negative mass balance (Tab. 6.1), suggesting that most 
PFAS remain within the system, although samples extraction, rather than actual removal or degradation. 
Instead, the mass balance of short-chained PFAS still appears sufficiently consistent even after 120 hours, 
which corresponds with these compounds did not migrate extensively upwards and that most of their mass 
remained in the lower part of the column. Among the short-chained PFAS, PFHpA and PFBS exhibit the lowest 
mass balance compared to the compounds of the same group (Tab. 6.1). However, it is important to note that, 
even though the mass balance between these two compound is similar, PFHpA migrated upwards by adsorption 
to the air bubbles air-water interface - in fact, approximately 1% of its mass is retained at the air-water interface 
(see Appendix H.3) - , while PFBS, as PFPeA and PFHxA, did not exhibit any tendency to adsorb to this 
interface in coarse sand.  
6.2.2 
MASS BALANCE IN EXPERIMENT WITH FINE SAND 
The mass balance for the experiment with fine sand is calculated considering the initial PFAS mass before 
sparging and PFAS masses after air-sparging for 48 hours and 120 hours (Tab. 6.2). This mass balance differs 
from the previous one (Tab. 6.1), even though it overall confirms the previous interpretation of the laboratory 
data about the effective vertical migration of most PFAS.   
 
Total mass before 
sparging (μg) 
Total mass after 
sparging for 48h 
(μg) 
Difference 
Total mass after 
sparging for 120h 
(μg) 
Difference 
PFBS 
14.469 
11.551 
-20% 
14.824 
2% 
PFOA 
14.848 
28.990 
95% 
3.280 
-78% 
PFOS 
1.482 
1.884 
27% 
0.084 
-94% 
PFHxA 
21.831 
28.033 
28% 
29.984 
37% 
PFHpA 
13.306 
16.987 
28% 
13.531 
2% 
PFPeA 
36.568 
48.950 
34% 
56.431 
54% 
PFHxS 
13.966 
26.926 
93% 
7.017 
-50% 
6:2 FTS 
10.763 
23.480 
118% 
3.227 
-70% 
PFOSA 
2.704 
5.322 
97% 
0.615 
-61% 
6:2 FTAB 
0.448 
0.594 
32% 
0.173 
-77% 
Table 6.1 PFAS mass balance between initial PFAS mass before sparging, and PFAS masses after air-sparging for both 48 and 
120 hours, for the experiment with coarse sand. Differences between masses are displayed to highlight both mass loss and mass 
gain.   
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
 
53 
 
 
 
Total mass before 
sparging (μg) 
Total mass after 
sparging for 48h 
(μg) 
Difference 
Total mass after 
sparging for 120h 
(μg) 
Difference 
PFBS 
14.469 
8.945 
38% 
7.779 
46% 
PFOA 
14.848 
15.039 
1% 
7.287 
-51% 
PFOS 
1.482 
0.361 
-76% 
0.419 
-72% 
PFHxA 
21.831 
20.236 
-7% 
19.451 
-11% 
PFHpA 
13.306 
20.302 
53% 
15.796 
19% 
PFPeA 
36.568 
31.916 
-13% 
25.238 
-31% 
PFHxS 
13.966 
19.929 
43% 
10.938 
-22% 
6:2 FTS 
10.763 
13.422 
25% 
7.058 
-34% 
PFOSA 
2.704 
0.294 
-89% 
0.311 
-89% 
6:2 FTAB 
0.448 
0.184 
-59% 
0.204 
-55% 
 
The difference between the total masses of short-chained PFAS before and after air-sparging falls within the 
analytical uncertainty (around 20%) reported by the laboratory, mostly in the first two days. Some 
discrepancies may be related to the initial simplifications about the initial concentration and the sampling ports 
volumes. After 120 hours of sparging, a negative mass balance is noticed for PFHxA. This compound, that in 
the experiment with coarse sand did not considerably interact with the air-water interface, exhibits a certain 
retention to the air-water interface and so a higher vertical transport, which makes it less detectable in the first 
three ports. In Appendix H.3 it is shown that 1% of the PFHxA is retained at the air-water interface, and PFHpA 
has a higher tendency to this retention, around 2% of its mass.  
Regarding long-chained PFAS and precursors, they exhibit negative mass balance after 120 hours. This could 
be related to:  
• 
Inconsistencies related to the initial simplification about the sampling ports volumes. 
• 
Missing data from the column section near the water table, which could show PFAS mass above the 
fourth port (as it is displayed in Fig. 6.12b). 
• 
Adsorption to solid phase. 
It is relevant that with fine sand a greater portion of long-chained PFAS and precursors mass is partitioned to 
the air-water interface. In fact, approximately 7% of the total mass of PFOA, 6:2 FTS and 6:2 FTAB is retained 
at the air-water interface, compared to 2% for PFHxS as much as 20% for PFOS.  
Therefore, it is clear that finer sand enhances the retention at the air-water interface, due to the greater air-
water interfacial area. 
6.3 COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF PFAS FUNCTIONAL GROUPS AND HEAD CHARGES 
Until now, the discussion of the results has focused primarily on the influence of PFAS chain length, without 
considering differences related to the functional head group. This is because the most significant variations in 
behavior and distribution were observed among compounds differing in chain length, rather than in headgroup 
charge or functional group type. 
However, it can be noted that 6:2 FTAB, a zwitterionic precursor, exhibited behavior very similar to 6:2 FTS, 
an anionic compound. Nonetheless, based on the mass balance, 6:2 FTAB showed a greater affinity for the 
air–water interface compared to 6:2 FTS (Appendix H.3). 
Table 6.2 PFAS mass balance between initial PFAS mass before sparging, and PFAS masses after air-sparging for both 48 and 
120 hours, for the experiment with fine sand. Differences between masses are displayed to highlight both mass loss and mass 
gain.   
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
 
54 
 
As for the functional group, no clear or consistent differences were observed. PFOS, a PFSA, showed the 
highest retention at the air–water interface, but PFHxS, another PFSA, behaved more similarly to PFOA, a 
PFCA. 
A similar trend was seen among short-chain compounds. PFHpA was the most mobile, primarily due to its 
longer chain length compared to the others, rather than its classification as a PFCA. In fact, PFPeA, which is 
also a PFCA, exhibited much lower mobility, likely due to weak retention at the air–water interface. 
Additionally, in the fine sand experiment, PFHxA (a short-chain PFCA) also exhibited some mobility, although 
it remained relatively limited.  On the other hand, PFBS, a very short-chain PFSA, showed very low affinity 
for the air–water interface, despite belonging to the same class as PFOS and PFHxS. 
6.4 COLUMN EXPERIMENTS: LIMITATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
Column experiments proved to be an effective method for investigating the applicability of air sparging in 
PFAS transport, especially considering that results confirmed the predominant role of air–water interfacial 
retention in the vertical transport of most PFAS compounds. However, the experiments also presented several 
limitations. One of the main issues was related to sample extraction, which could only be performed at the 
lower sampling ports. This constraint prevented a complete quantification of PFAS distribution throughout the 
column during and after the air sparging phase. 
The most critical limitation was the inability to maintain a clearly defined and stable water table. Upon 
initiating air sparging, the water level increased to an unpredictable height, making it impossible to identify or 
sample precisely at the interface between unsaturated and dry zones. Since the study focused on understanding 
PFAS behavior in correspondence with the top of the sparging zone, this uncertainty represented a significant 
drawback. 
Moreover, the experiments could not replicate the natural horizontal groundwater flow that, under field 
conditions, helps maintain the treated zone saturated or interacts with the effects of air sparging. Understanding 
how groundwater flow influences the overall effectiveness of air sparging remains essential for in-situ 
applications. 
Additionally, the use of pulsed air sparging should be considered as a potential improvement, as it may help 
overcome the formation of preferential flow paths and promote enhanced mixing within the column, which is 
desirable because it would homogenously distribute the treatment across the entire column and increase the 
likelihood of treating contaminants.  
While monitoring PFAS distribution over the six-day experimental period was informative, it would have been 
equally valuable to investigate how concentrations evolved after the cessation of compressed air injection. This 
would allow us to assess whether the compounds remained retained over time or instead began to migrate 
downward again shortly after the end of air sparging. Such behavior would significantly limit the long-term 
effectiveness of air sparging as a remediation strategy for PFAS, as sustained retention near the capillary fringe 
is essential to achieve removal benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
 
55 
 
7. FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
To further evaluate the applicability and long-term performance of air-sparging for PFAS remediation, several 
research directions and methodological improvements should be explored.  
First, future studies should aim to simulate more realistic hydrogeological conditions by incorporating a 
horizontal groundwater flow, which is a key component in natural aquifer systems, e.g., in 2D or 3D tank 
experiments. Including this dynamic would provide more accurate insight into how air-sparging performs 
under field-relevant conditions, where water movement can influence PFAS mobilization, dilution, and 
retention. 
Furthermore, the effectiveness of air-sparging is strongly dependent on the hydrogeological setting, and its 
applicability is mostly limited to unconfined aquifers with shallow PFAS plumes and no confining units. In 
confined or semi-confined aquifers, upward gas movement and interface generation may be significantly 
limited or unpredictable. This highlights the importance of conducting detailed site characterization before 
implementing air-sparging, to ensure that the subsurface conditions are compatible with gas flow and PFAS 
removal dynamics. 
From a broader field-scale perspective, several challenges must also be considered. Fluctuations in the water 
table may reduce PFAS retention by altering the location and stability of the air-water interface. Moreover, 
sparging in geologically heterogeneous aquifers could lead to preferential gas pathways, potentially causing 
unwanted lateral spreading of PFAS instead of enhancing their capture.  
To overcome some of these limitations, alternative designs and hybrid approaches should be considered in 
future work. These include: 
• 
Sparging in trenches to improve gas distribution and allow better control over the treatment zone 
geometry (ESTCP, 2022). 
• 
Coupling air sparging with phytoremediation, which could enhance long-term PFAS stabilization and 
uptake through plant-root interactions (Newell et al., 2021). 
• 
The use of colloidal gas aphrons to increase gas–liquid interfacial area and improve PFAS transport 
control (Kulkarni et al., 2022). 
• 
Implementing inert gases, such as nitrogen, instead of ambient air to avoid oxidative effects or promote 
more stable gas pathways (Newell et al., 2022). 
• 
Limiting recharge of the aquifer by installing impermeable cap (Hort et al., 2024) 
Air-sparging effectiveness in reducing the extent of the PFAS-contaminated plume and thereby facilitating 
PFAS removal could be significantly improved by first addressing the source of contamination. Removing or 
treating the source would limit the continuous input of PFAS into the subsurface, helping to slow or halt the 
further spreading of the plume. As a result, PFAS already present in the saturated zone would accumulate more 
effectively through air-sparging, allowing for a more focused and efficient remediation process.  
Overall, while air-sparging shows promise as a remediation strategy for PFAS-contaminated sites, particularly 
due to its potential to exploit air-water interfacial retention, its in-situ application will require careful site-
specific design, further validation under dynamic hydrogeological conditions, and potential integration with 
complementary technologies to ensure effectiveness and sustainability. 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
 
56 
 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are persistent, surface-active compounds known for their complex 
behavior in subsurface environments. A key property influencing their environmental fate is their strong 
tendency to adsorb at the air-water interface, a phenomenon that becomes increasingly significant with the 
length of the fluorinated carbon chain. This property opens new perspectives for PFAS remediation techniques, 
particularly the use of air-sparging, which historically have been used for volatile organic compounds, but now 
may be used to remediate amphiphilic pollutants such as PFAS.  
This study explored the effectiveness of air-sparging in shrinking PFAS-contaminated plumes, by promoting 
vertical migration and interfacial retention of PFAS within the transitional zone between unsaturated and 
saturated conditions. Two laboratory column experiments were designed and conducted over a six-days period 
to apply continuous compressed air flow through homogeneous solid media, coarse and fine sand. The lower 
part of the column was saturated with PFAS solution in tap water, containing a mixture of both short- and long-
chained PFAS and precursors, including: PFBS, PFHxA, PFHpA, PFPeA, PFHxS, PFOA, PFOS, 6:2 FTS, 
PFOSA, and 6:2 FTAB.   
Result demonstrated significant differences in mobility and retention of PFAS depending on their molecular 
structure and the characteristics of the porous medium: 
• 
Long-chained PFAS and precursors, due to their stronger surface activity, showed more pronounced 
vertical transport through air-water interfacial adsorption, particularly evident in coarse sand. After 
just 24 hours of air-sparging, a sharp concentration increase was observed at the water table, suggesting 
rapid accumulation via interfacial migration.  
• 
Short-chained PFAS, in contrast, were less affected by air-water interfacial processes but exhibited 
greater mobility in fine sand. This is likely due to the higher specific air-water interfacial area in fine-
grained media, which facilitates interfacial transport.  
• 
However, long-chained PFAS in fine sand exhibited lower mobility, possibly due to enhanced retention 
to the air-water interface, which may outweigh the mobilizing effect of air-sparging. The majority of 
these compounds were not detectable anymore in the middle of the saturated zone, likely because they 
have already adsorbed to the solid matrix and/or moved upward and retained near the water table.  
Among individual compounds, PFOA and PFHxS displayed lower mobility than PFOS, suggesting that PFOS 
has a higher affinity for air-water interface adsorption. Interestingly, PFHpA, despite being a short-chained 
PFAS, showed significant vertical migration through interfacial retention. It is important to note that the 
vertical transport of PFAS was driven by adsorption at the air-water interface of rising bubbles, rather than by 
advective water flow, as supported by the bromide and short-chained PFAS results. 
From a mass balance perspective, both column experiments maintained overall PFAS mass consistency after 
air-sparging, with differences within the analytical uncertainty. However, after six days, a noticeable mass loss 
of long-chained PFAS and precursors was observed. This may be attributed to adsorption in unsampled zones, 
particularly around the water table, and potential limitations in water samples extraction.  
The findings suggest that air-sparging can be a viable in situ technology for promoting vertical migration and 
retention of PFAS at the top of the sparging zone, particularly for long-chained PFAS and precursors. However, 
its application is limited to unconfined aquifers and its effectiveness in retaining PFAS over long-term period 
is reduced by water table fluctuations. Therefore, the feasibility of using air-sparging for PFAS-contaminated 
sites remediation is closely linked to the hydrodynamic stability of the subsurface.  
Nevertheless, the use of air-sparging to reduce the extent of PFAS-contaminated plume, by promoting their 
vertical migration and subsequent accumulation at the air-water interface at the water table, remains a 
promising remediation approach. Further studies in two- or three-dimensional laboratory conditions are needed 
before advancing to field pilot testing. Proper testing at field conditions is needed to assess the long-term 
effectiveness and scalability of air-sparging for remediation of PFAS-contaminated sites.  
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
 
57 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Abunada, Z., Alazaiza, M. Y. D., & Bashir, M. J. K. (2020). An overview of per-and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (Pfas) in the environment: Source, fate, risk and regulations. In Water (Switzerland) (Vol. 
12, Issue 12). MDPI AG. https://doi.org/10.3390/w12123590 
Adams, J. A., & Reddy, K. R. (2003). Extent of benzene biodegradation in saturated soil column during air 
sparging. In Ground Water Monitoring and Remediation (Vol. 23, Issue 3, pp. 85–94). National Ground 
Water Association. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6592.2003.tb00686.x 
Adamson, D., Nickerson, A., Kulkarni, P., Higgins, C., Popovic, J., Field, J., Rodowa, A., Newell, C., 
DeBlanc, P., & Kornuc, J. (2020). Mass-Based, Field-Scale Demonstration of PFAS Retention within 
AFFF-Associated Source Areas. Environmental Science & Technology, 54, 15768–15777. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c04472 
Appelo, C. A. J., & Postma, Dieke. (2004). Geochemistry, groundwater and pollution. A.A. Balkema 
Publishers. 
Brendel, S., Fetter, É., Staude, C., Vierke, L., & Biegel-Engler, A. (2018). Short-chain perfluoroalkyl acids: 
environmental concerns and a regulatory strategy under REACH. Environmental Sciences Europe, 
30(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-018-0134-4 
Brusseau, M. L. (2018). Assessing the potential contributions of additional retention processes to PFAS 
retardation in the subsurface. Science of the Total Environment, 613–614, 176–185. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.065 
Brusseau, M. L. (2019). The influence of molecular structure on the adsorption of PFAS to fluid-fluid 
interfaces: Using QSPR to predict interfacial adsorption coefficients. Water Research, 152, 148–158. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.12.057 
Brusseau, M. L. (2023a). Determining air-water interfacial areas for the retention and transport of PFAS and 
other interfacially active solutes in unsaturated porous media. Science of the Total Environment, 884. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.163730 
Brusseau, M. L. (2023b). Differential Sorption of Short-Chain versus Long-Chain Anionic Per- and Poly-
Fluoroalkyl Substances by Soils. Environments - MDPI, 10(10). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/environments10100175 
Brusseau, M. L., Lyu, Y., Yan, N., & Guo, B. (2020). Low-concentration tracer tests to measure air-water 
interfacial area in porous media. Chemosphere. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126305 
Brusseau, M. L., Peng, S., Schnaar, G., & Costanza-Robinson, M. S. (2006). Relationships among air-water 
interfacial area, capillary pressure, and water saturation for a sandy porous medium. Water Resources 
Research, 42(3). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/2005WR004058 
Brusseau, M. L., Peng, S., Schnaar, G., & Murao, A. (2007a). Measuring Air−Water Interfacial Areas with X-
ray Microtomography and Interfacial Partitioning Tracer Tests. Environmental Science & Technology, 
41(6), 1956–1961. https://doi.org/10.1021/es061474m 
Brusseau, M. L., Peng, S., Schnaar, G., & Murao, A. (2007b). Measuring air-water interfacial areas with X-
ray microtomography and interfacial partitioning tracer tests. Environmental Science and Technology, 
41(6), 1956–1961. https://doi.org/10.1021/es061474m 
Brusseau, M. L., & Van Glubt, S. (2021). The influence of molecular structure on PFAS adsorption at air-
water interfaces in electrolyte solutions. Chemosphere, 281. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.130829 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
 
58 
 
Buck, R. C., Franklin, J., Berger, U., Conder, J. M., Cousins, I. T., Voogt, P. De, Jensen, A. A., Kannan, K., 
Mabury, S. A., & van Leeuwen, S. P. J. (2011). Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances in the 
environment: Terminology, classification, and origins. Integrated Environmental Assessment and 
Management, 7(4), 513–541. https://doi.org/10.1002/ieam.258 
Cary, J. W. (1994). Estimating the surface area of fluid phase interfaces in porous media. Journal of 
Contaminant Hydrology, 15(4), 243–248. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0169-7722(94)90029-9 
Cook, P. (2022). Introduction to Isotopes and Environmental Tracers as Indicators of Groundwater Flow. 
Costanza, J., Arshadi, M., Abriola, L. M., & Pennell, K. D. (2019). Accumulation of PFOA and PFOS at the 
Air-Water Interface. Environmental Science and Technology Letters, 6(8), 487–491. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.9b00355 
Costanza, M. S., & Brusseau, M. L. (2000). Contaminant vapor adsorption at the gas-water interface in soils. 
Environmental Science and Technology, 34(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1021/es9904585 
Costanza-Robinson, M. S., & Brusseau, M. L. (2002). Air-water interfacial areas in unsaturated soils: 
Evaluation of interfacial domains. Water Resources Research, 38(10), 13-1-13–17. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/2001WR000738 
D’Agostino, L., & Mabury, S. (2017). Aerobic biodegradation of 2 fluorotelomer sulfonamide-based aqueous 
film-forming foam components produces perfluoroalkyl carboxylates. Environmental Toxicology and 
Chemistry, 36. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.3750 
Dalla, E., Hilpert, M., & Miller, C. T. (2002). Computation of the interfacial area for two-fluid porous 
medium systems. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, 56(1), 25–48. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-7722(01)00202-9 
Danish EPA. (2021). Liste over kvalitetskriterier i relation til forurenet jord. Danish Environmental 
Protection Agency. 
Danske Regioner. (2024). Stof til eftertanke - regionernes arbejde med jordforurening.Stof til eftertanke - 
regionernes arbejde med jordforurening. Www.Jordforureninger.Dk. 
Darlington, R., Barth, E., & McKernan, J. (2019). The challenges of PFAS remediation. Society of American 
Military Engineers (SAME), 110, 58–60. 
Downer, A., Eastoe, J., Pitt, A. R., Penfold, J., & Heenan, R. K. (1999). Adsorption and micellisation of 
partially-and fully-fluorinated surfactants. In Physicochem. Eng. Aspects (Vol. 156). 
www.elsevier.nl/locate/colsurfa 
Downes, N., Ottewill, G. A., & Ottewill, R. H. (1995). An investigation of the behaviour of ammonium 
perfluoro-octanoate at the air/water interface in the absence and presence of salts. Colloids and 
Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 102, 203–211. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0927-7757(95)03191-F 
Du, Z., Deng, S., Bei, Y., Huang, Q., Wang, B., Huang, J., & Yu, G. (2014). Adsorption behavior and 
mechanism of perfluorinated compounds on various adsorbents—A review. Journal of Hazardous 
Materials, 274, 443–454. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.04.038 
ECHA. (2023). List of substances subject to POPs Regulation. Https://Echa.Europa.Eu/It/List-of-
Substances-Subject-to-Pops-Regulation. 
EPA. (2025). Comptox Chemicals Dashboard. Https://Comptox.Epa.Gov/Dashboard/. 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
 
59 
 
ESTCP. (2021). Low‐Cost, Passive In Situ Treatment of PFAS‐Impacted Groundwater Using Foam 
Fractionation In an Air Sparge Trench. 
ESTCP. (2022). Rapid and Inexpensive Delivery off Particulate Carbon for In Situ PFAS Treatment in 
Groundwater. 
European Union Council. (2020). Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliment and of the Council of 
16 December 2020 on the quality of water intended for human consumption. 
Fabregat-Palau, J., Vidal, M., & Rigol, A. (2021). Modelling the sorption behaviour of perfluoroalkyl 
carboxylates and perfluoroalkane sulfonates in soils. Science of the Total Environment, 801. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.149343 
Farhat, S., Newell, C., Looney, B., & Falta, R. (2022). Impact of matrix diffusion on the migration of 
groundwater plumes for Perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) and other non-degradable compounds. Journal 
of Contaminant Hydrology, 247, 103987. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconhyd.2022.103987 
Ferrey, M. L., Wilson, J. T., Adair, C., Su, C., Fine, D. D., Liu, X., & Washington, J. W. (2012). Behavior and 
Fate of PFOA and PFOS in Sandy Aquifer Sediment. Groundwater Monitoring & Remediation, 32(4), 
63–71. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6592.2012.01395.x 
Harding-Marjanovic, K., Houtz, E., Yi, S., Field, J., Sedlak, D., & Alvarez-Cohen, L. (2015). Aerobic 
Biotransformation of Fluorotelomer Thioether Amido Sulfonate (LodyneTM) in AFFF-Amended 
Microcosms. Environmental Science & Technology, 49. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b01219 
Hellsing, M. S., Josefsson, S., Hughes, A. V, & Ahrens, L. (2016). Sorption of perfluoroalkyl substances to 
two types of minerals. Chemosphere, 159, 385–391. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.06.016 
Higgins, C. P., & Luthy, R. G. (2007). Modeling Sorption of Anionic Surfactants onto Sediment 
Materials:  An a priori Approach for Perfluoroalkyl Surfactants and Linear Alkylbenzene Sulfonates. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 41(9), 3254–3261. https://doi.org/10.1021/es062449j 
Hort, H. M., Stockwell, E. B., Newell, C. J., Scalia, J., & Panday, S. (2024). Modeling and Evaluation of 
PFOS Retention in the Unsaturated Zone above the Water Table. Groundwater Monitoring and 
Remediation, 44(3), 38–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/gwmr.12662 
ITRC. (2023). Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Subastances (PFAS). 
Johnson, R. L., Anschutz, A. J., Smolen, J. M., Simcik, M. F., & Lee Penn, R. (2007). The adsorption of 
perfluorooctane sulfonate onto sand, clay, and iron oxide surfaces. Journal of Chemical and 
Engineering Data, 52(4), 1165–1170. https://doi.org/10.1021/je060285g 
Johnson, R. L., Anschutz, A. J., Smolen, J. M., Simcik, M. F., & Penn, R. L. (2007). The Adsorption of 
Perfluorooctane Sulfonate onto Sand, Clay, and Iron Oxide Surfaces. Journal of Chemical & 
Engineering Data, 52(4), 1165–1170. https://doi.org/10.1021/je060285g 
Kim, H., Annable, M. D., & Rao, P. S. C. (1998). Influence of air-water interfacial adsorption and gas-phase 
partitioning on the transport of organic chemicals in unsaturated porous media. Environmental Science 
and Technology, 32(9), 1253–1259. https://doi.org/10.1021/es970868y 
Kim, H., Rao, P. S. C., & Annable, M. D. (1997). Determination of effective air-water interfacial area in 
partially saturated porous media using surfactant adsorption. Water Resources Research, 33(12), 2705–
2711. https://doi.org/10.1029/97WR02227 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
 
60 
 
Kim, H., Rao, P. S. C., & Annable, M. D. (1999). Gaseous Tracer Technique for Estimating Air–Water 
Interfacial Areas and Interface Mobility. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 63(6), 1554–1560. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj1999.6361554x 
Kim, H., Soh, H.-E., Annable, M. D., & Kim, D.-J. (2004). Surfactant-Enhanced Air Sparging in Saturated 
Sand. Environmental Science & Technology, 38(4), 1170–1175. https://doi.org/10.1021/es030547o 
Kissa E. (2001). Fluorinated Surfactants and Repellents:  Second Edition, Revised and Expanded Surfactant 
Science Series. Volume 97. By Erik Kissa (Consultant, Wilmington, DE). Marcel Dekker:  New York. 
2001. xiv + 616 pp. $195.00. ISBN 0-8247-0472-X. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 
123(36), 8882. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja015260a 
Krafft, M. P., & Riess, J. G. (2015a). Per- and polyfluorinated substances (PFASs): Environmental 
challenges. In Current Opinion in Colloid and Interface Science (Vol. 20, Issue 3, pp. 192–212). 
Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cocis.2015.07.004 
Krafft, M. P., & Riess, J. G. (2015b). Selected physicochemical aspects of poly- and perfluoroalkylated 
substances relevant to performance, environment and sustainability—Part one. Chemosphere, 129, 4–
19. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.08.039 
Kulkarni, P. R., Aranzales, D., Javed, H., Holsen, T. M., Johnson, N. W., Richardson, S. D., Mededovic 
Thagard, S., & Newell, C. J. (2022). Process to separate per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances from water 
using colloidal gas aphrons. Remediation Journal, 32(3), 167–176. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/rem.21716 
Lassen, C., Maag, J., Krag, A., & Dau, M. S. (2024). Publisher: Ministry of Environment of Denmark. 
Lath, S., Knight, E. R., Navarro, D. A., Kookana, R. S., & McLaughlin, M. J. (2019). Sorption of PFOA onto 
different laboratory materials: Filter membranes and centrifuge tubes. Chemosphere, 222, 671–678. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.01.096 
Leeson, A., Johnson, P. C., Johnson, R., & Hinchee, R. (2002). Air Sparging Design Paradigm. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235108749 
Lei, X., Lian, Q., Zhang, X., Karsili, T. K., Holmes, W., Chen, Y., Zappi, M. E., & Gang, D. D. (2023). A 
review of PFAS adsorption from aqueous solutions: Current approaches, engineering applications, 
challenges, and opportunities. In Environmental Pollution (Vol. 321). Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2023.121138 
Li, Y., Barregard, L., Xu, Y., Scott, K., Pineda, D., Lindh, C. H., Jakobsson, K., & Fletcher, T. (2020). 
Associations between perfluoroalkyl substances and serum lipids in a Swedish adult population with 
contaminated drinking water. Environmental Health: A Global Access Science Source, 19(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-020-00588-9 
Liu, Z., Liu, S., Mao, B., & Cheng, Y. (2017). Laboratory Remediation Test of MTBE-Contaminated Sands 
with Surfactant-Enhanced Air Sparging. https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784480434.059 
Lunkenheimer, K., Prescher, D., Hirte, R., & Geggel, K. (2015). Adsorption Properties of Surface 
Chemically Pure Sodium Perfluoro-n-alkanoates at the Air/Water Interface: Counterion Effects within 
Homologous Series of 1:1 Ionic Surfactants. Langmuir, 31(3), 970–981. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/la503450k 
Lyu, Y., Brusseau, M. L., Chen, W., Yan, N., Fu, X., & Lin, X. (2018). Adsorption of PFOA at the Air-Water 
Interface during Transport in Unsaturated Porous Media. Environmental Science and Technology, 
52(14), 7745–7753. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02348 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
 
61 
 
Lyu, Y., Wang, B., & Brusseau, M. L. (2023). The influence of chain length on the sorption of C4-C10 
perfluorocarboxylic acids during transport in a sand. Journal of Hazardous Materials Letters, 4. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hazl.2023.100084 
Lyu, Y., Wang, B., Du, X., Guo, B., & Brusseau, M. L. (2022). Air-water interfacial adsorption of C4-C10 
perfluorocarboxylic acids during transport in unsaturated porous media. Science of the Total 
Environment, 831. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154905 
Merino, N., Qu, Y., Deeb, R. A., Hawley, E. L., Hoffmann, M. R., & Mahendra, S. (2016). Degradation and 
Removal Methods for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Water. Environmental 
Engineering Science, 33(9), 615–649. https://doi.org/10.1089/ees.2016.0233 
Morsing, L. (2025). Concepts for remediation of PFAS contaminated sites. DTU Sustain, Technical 
University of Denmark. 
Morsing, L., Tsitonaki, K., Dyreborg, S., Mosthaf, K., Sidelmann, A., Rune, F., Bolette, H., Jensen, B., Baun, 
A., & Bjerg, P. L. (2025). 2 Miljøstyrelsen / Konceptuel model for transport og skaebne af PFAS ved 
forurenede grunde. 
National Research Council. (1994). Alternatives for ground water cleanup. 
Naval Facilities Engineering Command. (2001). Final air sparging guidance. 
Newell, C. J., Javed, H., Li, Y., Johnson, N. W., Richardson, S. D., Connor, J. A., & Adamson, D. T. (2022). 
Enhanced attenuation (EA) to manage PFAS plumes in groundwater. Remediation, 32(4), 239–257. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/rem.21731 
Newell, C. J., Kulkarni, P. R., & Adamson, D. T. (2021). In situ gas sparging for concentration and removal 
of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from groundwater. Remediation, 31(4), 35–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/rem.21696 
Nguyen, T. M. H., Bräunig, J., Thompson, K., Thompson, J., Kabiri, S., Navarro, D. A., Kookana, R. S., 
Grimison, C., Barnes, C. M., Higgins, C. P., Mclaughlin, M. J., & Mueller, J. F. (2020). Influences of 
Chemical Properties, Soil Properties, and Solution pH on Soil-Water Partitioning Coefficients of Per- 
And Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs). Environmental Science and Technology, 54(24), 15883–
15892. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c05705 
Nyer. (2000). In Situ Treatment Technology (E. K. Nyer, Ed.). CRC Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420032642 
OECD. (2011). PFCS: Outcome of the 2009 Survey – Survey on the Production, Use and Release of PFOS, 
PFAS, PFOA, PFCA, Their Related Substances and Products/Mixtures Containing These Substances. 
Http://Www.Oecd.Org/Officialdocuments/Publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?Cote=env/Jm/Mono(2011)1&do
clanguage=en. 
OECD. (2021). Reconciling Terminology of the Universe of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances: 
Recommendations and Practical GuidanceReconciling Terminology of the Universe of Per- and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances: Recommendations and Practical Guidance. 
Https://One.Oecd.Org/Document/ENV/CBC/MONO(2021)25/En/Pdf. 
Oliviera, I. B., Demond, A. H., & Salehzadeh, A. (1996). Packing of Sands for the Production of 
Homogeneous Porous Media. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 60(1), 49–53. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj1996.03615995006000010010x 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
 
62 
 
Oostrom, M., White, M. D., & Brusseau, M. L. (2001). Theoretical estimation of free and entrapped 
nonwetting–wetting fluid interfacial areas in porous media. Advances in Water Resources, 24(8), 887–
898. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0309-1708(01)00017-3 
Or, D., & Tuller, M. (1999). Liquid retention and interfacial area in variably saturated porous media: 
Upscaling from single-pore to sample-scale model. Water Resources Research, 35(12), 3591–3605. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/1999WR900262 
Pancras, T., Schrauwen, G., Held, T., Baker, K., Ross, I., & Slenders, H. (2016). Environmental fate and 
effects of poly-and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) Prepared for the Concawe Soil and Groundwater 
Taskforce (STF/33). 
Parsons, J., Saez, M., Dolfing, J., & De Voogt, P. (2008). Biodegradation of Perfluorinated Compounds. 
Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 196, 53–71. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-
387-78444-1_2 
Pedone, L., Chillura Martino, D., Caponetti, E., Floriano, M. A., & Triolo, R. (1997). Determination of the 
Composition of Mixed Hydrogenated and Fluorinated Micelles by Small Angle Neutron Scattering. 
https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines 
Peng, S., & Brusseau, M. (2005). Impact of soil texture on air-water interfacial areas in unsaturated sandy 
porous media. Water Resources Research - WATER RESOUR RES, 41. 
https://doi.org/10.1029/2004WR003233 
Psillakis, E., Cheng, J., Hoffmann, M. R., & Colussi, A. J. (2009). Enrichment Factors of Perfluoroalkyl 
Oxoanions at the Air/Water Interface. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 113(31), 8826–8829. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp902795m 
Regenesis. (2020). Plumestop liquid activated carbon. Https:// Regenesis.Com/En/Remediation-
Products/Plumestop-Liquidactivated-Carbon/. 
Rutherford, K. W., & Johnson, P. C. (1996). Effects of Process Control Changes on Aquifer Oxygenation 
Rates During In Situ Air Sparging in Homogeneous Aquifers. Groundwater Monitoring & Remediation, 
16(4), 132–141. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6592.1996.tb01180.x 
Schaefer, C. E., DiCarlo, D. A., & Blunt, M. J. (2000). Experimental measurement of air-water interfacial 
area during gravity drainage and secondary imbibition in porous media. Water Resources Research, 
36(4), 885–890. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000WR900007 
Sethi, R., & Di Molfetta, A. (2019). Groundwater Engineering: A Technical Approach to Hydrogeology, 
Contaminant Transport and Groundwater Remediation (1st ed. 2019.). Springer Nature. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20516-4 
Simon, J. A., Abrams, S., Bradburne, T., Bryant, D., Burns, M., Cassidy, D., Cherry, J., Chiang, S.-Y. (Dora), 
Cox, D., Crimi, M., Denly, E., DiGuiseppi, B., Fenstermacher, J., Fiorenza, S., Guarnaccia, J., Hagelin, 
N., Hall, L., Hesemann, J., Houtz, E., … Wice, R. (2019). PFAS Experts Symposium: Statements on 
regulatory policy, chemistry and analytics, toxicology, transport/fate, and remediation for per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) contamination issues. Remediation Journal, 29(4), 31–48. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/rem.21624 
Sorengard, M., Kleja, D. B., & Ahrens, L. (2019). Stabilization of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFASs) with colloidal activated carbon (PlumeStop®) as a function of soil clay and organic matter 
content. Journal of Environmental Management, 249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.109345 
Sunderland, E., Hu, X., Dassuncao, C., Tokranov, A., Wagner, C., & Allen, J. (2018). A Review of the 
Pathways of Human Exposure to Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) and Present 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
 
63 
 
Understanding of Health Effects. Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology, 29. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41370-018-0094-1 
Suthersan, S. S., Horst, J., Scnobrich, M., Welty, N., & McDonough, J. (2017). REMEDIATION 
ENGINEERING Design Concepts Second Edition. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315367088 
USEPA. (1999). Use of Monitored Natural Attenuation at Superfund, RCRA Corrective Action, and 
Underground Storage Tank Sites. 
Vecitis, C. D., Park, H., Cheng, J., Mader, B. T., & Hoffmann, M. R. (2008). Enhancement of 
Perfluorooctanoate and Perfluorooctanesulfonate Activity at Acoustic Cavitation Bubble Interfaces. The 
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 112(43), 16850–16857. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp804050p 
Vierke, L., Staude, C., Biegel-Engler, A., Drost, W., & Schulte, C. (2012). Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)-
main concerns and regulatory developments in Europe from an environmental point of view. 
http://www.enveurope.com/content/24/1/16 
Wang, Z., Cousins, I. T., Scheringer, M., & Hungerbühler, K. (2013). Fluorinated alternatives to long-chain 
perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids (PFCAs), perfluoroalkane sulfonic acids (PFSAs) and their potential 
precursors. Environment International, 60, 242–248. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2013.08.021 
Yan, N., Ji, Y., Zhang, B., Zheng, X., & Brusseau, M. (2020). Transport of GenX in Saturated and 
Unsaturated Porous Media. Environmental Science & Technology, 54. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b07790 
Yi, S., Harding-Marjanovic, K. C., Houtz, E. F., Gao, Y., Lawrence, J. E., Nichiporuk, R. V, Iavarone, A. T., 
Zhuang, W.-Q., Hansen, M., Field, J. A., Sedlak, D. L., & Alvarez-Cohen, L. (2018). Biotransformation 
of AFFF Component 6:2 Fluorotelomer Thioether Amido Sulfonate Generates 6:2 Fluorotelomer 
Thioether Carboxylate under Sulfate-Reducing Conditions. Environmental Science &amp; Technology 
Letters, 5(5), 283–288. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.8b00148 
Yu, Q., Zhang, R., Deng, S., Huang, J., & Yu, G. (2009). Sorption of perfluorooctane sulfonate and 
perfluorooctanoate on activated carbons and resin: Kinetic and isotherm study. Water Research, 43(4), 
1150–1158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2008.12.001 
Zahm, S., Bonde, J., Chiu, W., Hoppin, J., Kanno, J., Abou-Elwafa Abdallah, M., Blystone, C., Calkins, M., 
Dong, G.-H., Dorman, D., Fry, R., Guo, H., Haug, L., Hofmann, J., Iwasaki, M., Machala, M., Mancini, 
F., Maria-Engler, S., Møller, P., & Schubauer-Berigan, M. (2023). Carcinogenicity of perfluorooctanoic 
acid and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid. The Lancet Oncology, 25. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-
2045(23)00622-8 
Zhang, S., Szostek, B., McCausland, P., Wolstenholme, B., Lu, X., Wang, N., & Buck, R. (2013). 6:2 and 8:2 
Fluorotelomer Alcohol Anaerobic Biotransformation in Digester Sludge from a WWTP under 
Methanogenic Conditions. Environmental Science and Technology, 47. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es4000824 
Zhao, L., Bian, J., Zhang, Y., Zhu, L., & Liu, Z. (2014). Comparison of the sorption behaviors and 
mechanisms of perfluorosulfonates and perfluorocarboxylic acids on three kinds of clay minerals. 
Chemosphere, 114, 51–58. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.03.098 
  
 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
 
64 
 
 
APPENDIX A: Preliminary tests in the laboratory 
In Figure A.1 the list of preliminary tests of air-sparging is presented. In particular, there is a description of the 
substances used in these tests, the sand types, the sparging time, the main objectives, the results obtained from 
the tests and then the solutions found to solve problems related to the experimental setup.  
 
The substances used in preliminary tests are shown in Fig. A.2-4.  
 
The following pictures illustrate the issues encountered during the test due to setup errors (Fig. A.5-7). 
 
Figure A.2 Tracer 
EOSIN and NaCl 
Figure A.1 Specifications on preliminary tests in the laboratory 
Figure A.3 Tracer 
Methylene Blue 
Figure A.4 Persil 
detergent 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
Figure A.5 Fractures in the column caused by too 
high air flowrate. Test nr.2 on date 28/02/25.  
Figure A.6 Free water above the sand, caused by too much 
amount of water in the system. Test nr.7 on date 13/03/25.  
Figure A.7 Persil detergent mostly concentrated at the bottom of the column 
because too dense. Certain migration of the detergent attached to air 
bubbles. No migration of Methylene blue showing no advective water flux. 
Test nr.8 on date 25/03/25.  
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
66 
 
APPENDIX B: Solid matrices properties 
 
e 
Figure B.1 Grain size distribution curve of fine sand nr.0.  
Figure B.2 Grain size distribution curve of coarse sand nr.3.  
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
 
67 
 
 
 
TOC analysis results are also displayed in Fig. B.4 
 
Controls (n=3) 
TOC - g/kg 
ERM - CC144 - Ref. value (g/kg) 
360 
Cert Ref Standard, soil (%RSD) 
3% 
Cert Ref Standard, soil (%Recovery)  
95% 
SampleIdentity 
TOC - g/kg 
B1 
< 10 mg/g 
B2 
<10 mg/g 
B3 
<10 mg/g 
Figure B.3 Grain size distribution curve of coarser sand nr.6, used at the bottom of the column to homogenously 
distribute the air flow.  
Figure B.4 TOC analysis results  
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
 
68 
 
APPENDIX C: PFAS characteristics 
PFAS details and chemical characteristics are displayed in Figure C.1. These data were collected through the 
CompTox Chemicals Dashboard by EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). Instead, the 
partition coefficients to solid phase and to air-water interface values were calculated as shown in Chapter 5.10 
and Appendix I.3.  
  
 
 
 
 
Figure C.1 PFAS details and chemical characteristics 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
 
69 
 
APPENDIX D: Experimental procedure 
This appendix contains step-by-step descriptions of the key stages of the experimental procedure for column 
preparation, prior to the start of the air sparging process. The experimental procedure consists of four main 
steps (see Chapter 5.5). After each addition of material (sand or water), the column is weighed (Fig. D.1). 
 
The first step involves placing a fine metal mesh and a layer of coarse sand at the bottom of the column. Next, 
the PFAS solution (Fig. D.2) is prepared by adding it to a pre-measured volume of clean sand in a glass beaker 
(Fig. D.3) and thoroughly mixing the two to achieve full saturation (Fig. D.4). 
 
Figure D.1 Weighing sand layer  
Figure D.2 Beaker with PFAS 
solution  
Figure D.3 Adding PFAS solution to 
clean dry sand  
Figure D.4 Mixing PFAS solution 
with the sand to achieve 
homogeneous distribution of PFAS  
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
 
70 
 
The now-contaminated sand is then packed into the column using a pestle. Afterward, a layer of clean, dry 
sand is added up to the height of the fourth sampling port and compacted with the pestle (Fig. D.5). 
 
The column is then saturated with tap water from the top using a peristaltic pump (Fig. D.6). Once full 
saturation is achieved, an additional layer of clean, dry sand is placed on top to simulate the vadose zone and 
compacted with the pestle. 
Figure D.5 Packing clean dry sand 
with a pestle  
Figure D.6 Saturating the column 
from the top with tap water through a 
peristaltic pump 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
 
71 
 
Finally, the column is connected to the flowmeter (Fig. D.7), and the air flow is initiated.  
 
In the experiment with fine sand, sodium bromide (Fig. D.8) is added to the PFAS solution as a tracer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure D.7 Platon flowmeter 60-600 
cm3/min 
Figure D.8 Sodium bromide used in 
the experiment with fine sand  
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
 
72 
 
APPENDIX E: Sodium bromide calibration curve 
The calibration curve was used to establish the relationship between NaBr concentration and EC, allowing 
for the indirect estimation of tracer concentration during the column experiments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
0
50
100
EC (uS/cm)
NaBr concentration (mg/L)
NaBr calibration curve
Figure E.1 NaBr calibration curve 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
 
73 
 
APPENDIX F: Sampling port volumes  
An investigation is conducted to explore the influence of the selected port volumes on the accuracy of the 
calculated mass balance. By varying volumes assigned to each sampling port, the goal is to evaluate whether 
this would lead to more precise or representative results. Two cases are considered: the first assumes that the 
saturated section of the column is divided into four different volumes, each corresponding to one of the four 
sampling ports (Fig. F.1). In the second case, four equal volumes are assigned to each port, while for the 
remaining sections, the pore water concentration is assumed to be the average of the concentrations measured 
at adjacent ports (Fig. F.2). The concentration in the volume between port 1 and the bottom of the column is 
considered equal to the one of the first port. Smaller volumes are considered in an attempt to improve the 
accuracy of the concentration analysis. This decision is based on the observation that the small sample volumes 
collected are assumed to represent relatively large volumes within the column. Assuming a uniform 
concentration over such large volumes is a strong simplification and may not accurately reflect the actual 
spatial variability of PFAS distribution system.  
From this analysis, the difference in mass values between the two approaches was found to be minimal. 
Therefore, the first case – using four different volumes for each sampling port – is selected for further 
calculations, as it is more practical to apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure F.1 Case 1: saturated column divided in four volumes 
Figure F.2 Case 2: saturated column divided in eight volumes 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
 
74 
 
APPENDIX G: Concentration of each PFAS in space and in time 
Concentration variation of each PFAS is represented in Figures G.1-3 for the experiment with coarse sand and 
in Figures G.4-6 for the experiment with fine sand. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure G.1 Short-chained PFAS concentration variation before sparging and during sparging at different height of the 
column. Experiment with coarse sand.   
Figure G.2 Long-chained PFAS concentration variation before sparging and during sparging at different height of the 
column. Experiment with coarse sand.   
==PAGE:75==
 
 
 
 
75 
 
 
Figure G.3 Precursors concentration variation before sparging and during sparging at different height of the column. 
Experiment with coarse sand.   
Figure G.4 Short-chained PFAS concentration variation before sparging and during sparging at different height of the 
column. Experiment with fine sand.   
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
 
76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure G.5 Long-chained PFAS concentration variation before sparging and during sparging at different height of the 
column. Experiment with fine sand.   
Figure G.6 Precursors concentration variation before sparging and during sparging at different height of the column. 
Experiment with fine sand.   
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
 
77 
 
APPENDIX H: Electronic files 
H.1 MULTIMEDIA FILES OF LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS 
H.2 POROSITY AND SATURATION CALCULATION 
H.3 MASS BALANCE CALCULATION 
H.4 PFAS PORE WATER CONCENTRATIONS, TOTAL CONCENTRATIONS AND 
BROMIDE CONCENTRATIONS 
 
