==PAGE:1==
Study of static reconfiguration
of existing construction via BIM
Master’s Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
Master’s Thesis
June, 2025
By
Frederik Jønsson Madsen - s183666
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include a cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Tim Kildeborg Jensen, 2022 [1]
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Brovej, Building
118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Construct, the Department for
Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial
fulfillment of the degree Master of Science in Engineering (Architectural Engineering),
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader knows basic programming principles and has a basic knowl-
edge of the area of structural analysis.
Frederik Jønsson Madsen - s183666
Signature
Date
ii
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
Signature
06-06-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The reuse of structural concrete elements offers great potential for reducing the environ-
mental impact of new structures. However, obsolete concrete is often crushed down to
be used as filling in road construction, thereby degrading its value. Current examples and
methods of reusing concrete structures showcase comprehensive testing and validation
methods.
Therefore, the aim of this thesis is to develop a methodology for digitally obtaining and
storing elements’ bearing capacities based on registered section forces in ULS load com-
binations.
This was investigated by creating a structural analysis model from an IFC donor structure,
which contains geometric, material, and loading data. The IFC data was imported into
Rhino Grasshopper, which generates a structural analysis model by the FEM-Design API.
From this, the results of section forces were obtained and embedded back into the IFC
model of the donor structure. Regarding grouped vertical elements (columns and walls),
interaction diagrams between axial force and bending moment were used to define a
failure envelope.
A sensitivity analysis showed that the variation of the structural elements’ stiffnesses had a
significant impact on the load distribution and thereby the obtained results of the analysis.
This underlined the importance of accurate modeling and correct assumptions of the static
system.
An evaluation algorithm was developed to automatically determine the reusability of donor
structure elements in a recipient structure based on well-defined criteria. Additional inves-
tigations showed that varying the assumed variable loads by ±20%, influenced the amount
of reusable elements in a presented case.
It is concluded that the developed methodology offers an alternative approach to current
methods, which enables quick initial scans of the minimum bearing capacities of struc-
tural elements. However, the method is sensitive to pitfalls such as incorrect modeling
and assumptions, which can greatly vary the results. Additionally, real-life test cases are
needed in order to verify the reliability of the method.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kristoffer Negendahl, Thesis supervisor, DTU Construct, Department of Civil and Me-
chanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Kristoffer Negendahl, for his guid-
ance, support, and feedback throughout the process of writing this thesis. His ideas and
perspectives in the fields of BIM and the future of the building industry were a huge in-
spiration for me. His expertise and encouragement have been essential in shaping the
direction and quality of my work.
Per Goltermann, Professor, DTU Construct, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engi-
neering, Technical University of Denmark
I would like to thank Professor Per Goltermann for his valuable guidance and input on
the structural analysis of concrete structures. His expertise and willingness to share his
knowledge greatly contributed to clarifying complex issues in this thesis.
iv
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
IFC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Software and attachments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Background
9
2.1
Projects with reuse of structural concrete
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Methods for structural reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3
Assessment of existing concrete elements’ reusability . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4
Identified challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Sources of information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Donor Structure
17
3.1
File initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Floors and grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Materials and sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Generation of elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.6
Load combinations and scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Analytical Model
39
4.1
Static system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.2
Grasshopper script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.3
Verification of FEM results by hand calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.4
Sensitivity study of beam stiffnesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5
Implementation of Results in IFC
59
5.1
Storing capacity results in IFC elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.2
Storage of element condition and reusability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6
Evaluation of reuse
65
6.1
Recipient structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.2
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.3
Algorithm results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
6.4
Required information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
7
Discussion
75
8
Conclusion
79
Bibliography
81
A Python classes
85
B Grasshopper script
87
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The Paris Agreement was adopted in December 2015 by 196 Parties at the UN Climate
Change Conference, which main goal is to “hold the increase in the global average tem-
perature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels” and pursue efforts “to limit the
temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.”[2] [3].
According to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 2024 was the first time global
temperatures exceeded 1.5°C above the pre-industrial level, making it the warmest year
on record [4]. Even though average global temperatures should be evaluated over a
longer period this is a clear sign that taking action on climate change is more crucial than
ever.
Looking at the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report [5], the total greenhouse gas emissions
from the building sector are equivalent to 21% of the global emissions, of which 18%
comes from the production of cement and steel used for construction. Supported by the
fact that about 5% of the world’s CO2 emissions stem from the production of cement [6],
new concrete structures all over the world have a significant impact on climate change.
It is estimated that in Denmark, 856.000 tons of high-quality concrete (concrete with the
potential for reuse) are demolished every year [7]. In this current day and age, this con-
crete is crushed down to be used as filling layers in road construction as a substitute
for gravel, thereby degrading its value [8]. Additionally, some examples show that using
crushed concrete as aggregates in the production of new concrete can be done [9]. Both
are, however, examples of recycling material.
When prevention of waste can’t be done, the second-best alternative is to reuse materi-
als, which does not degrade the product’s value. The Waste Hierarchy supports this, as
illustrated in Figure 1.1, where ”Reuse” is a more preferable handling of waste material
than ”Recycling”.
Currently, the industry lacks a clear methodology for reusing materials in renovation, trans-
Prevention
Reuse
Recycling
Recovery
Disposal
Most 
Preferred
Least 
Preferred
Figure 1.1: Waste Hierarchy, inspired by [10].
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
1
==PAGE:10==
formation, and new building projects. Reusing structural elements has huge potential,
even though it faces many challenges, such as verifying material quality and bearing ca-
pacities, economic and logistic challenges, a lack of standards and guidelines, difficulties
during disassembly and storage, and the relation between supply and demand.
Even though the industry faces these unknowns, what is known about existing structures
is that they exist and resist a loading, thereby having a bearing capacity.
This leads to the objective of this Master’s Thesis.
1.1
Thesis Objective
The project involves static analysis of existing load-bearing building elements, which are
intended for use in new load-bearing construction. The primary focus is on concrete struc-
tures, such as beams, columns, slabs, and walls.
The objective is to illustrate a case wherein parts or entire concrete elements of a building
are reconfigured, with a particular emphasis on static considerations to ensure a healthy
and stable construction.
This master’s thesis aims to develop a methodology via BIM to systematize the reuse
of structural elements by registering and storing their bearing capacities digitally, thereby
facilitating their integration into new contexts and additionally setting up a tool that can
evaluate an element’s suitability for reuse based on its bearing capacity and demands of
resistance in a new context.
1.2
Terminology
In this project, the donor structure is referred to as the structure from which building el-
ements are reclaimed for use in a new structure. The new structure that receives the
reclaimed structural elements is referred to as the recipient structure.
1.3
Methodology
A structural element is considered safe if the design actions (Ed) are less than or equal
to the design resistance (Rd) of the element as seen in Equation (1.1) [11].
Ed ≤Rd
(1.1)
By this reasoning, the project sets out to establish a minimum estimate of the structural
elements’ bearing capacity by generating a structural analysis model of a donor structure
and obtaining the combination of design actions (section forces) that the structural element
is subjected to.
This experiment is in contrast to current methods, which rely on testing methods, and it
investigates the initial steps in exploring this approach.
A methodology based on an iterative process is developed to identify the information
necessary to complete a structural analysis of a donor structure, before its results are
evaluated against the design demands from a potential recipient structure.
The structural analysis is based on current calculation methods and norms for applying
loads on structures. However, it is not certain that the structural element has been sub-
jected to ultimate limit state (ULS) scenarios or that the structural element is designed
with no residual bearing capacity. To get a grasp of this, additional scenarios with less
2
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:11==
Calculation tool
Knowledge field of 
donor structure
Bearing capacity
Sufficient degree of information
Knowledge field of 
recipient structure
Demand
Capacity
Element evaluation
?
Figure 1.2: Project methodology: Expansion of donor structure knowledge field until cal-
culation is possible. Then, evaluating the obtained bearing capacity against the demand
of a recipient structure.
and more load than the ULS cases are incorporated into the project. This is expanded
upon in Section 3.6.
As illustrated in Figure 1.2, the knowledge field of the donor structure is explored and
expanded by building up a database and identifying the necessary information in order to
establish a structural analysis model. The database is based on IFC, a standard that is
elaborated on in Section 1.5.
Firstly, information based on the donor structure’s placement and outer geometry must be
determined. Next, geometries and materials of the individual elements are to be discov-
ered. Then, loadings upon the global structure and on the individual structural elements
are identified. This is paired with load combinations and an assumption of the static sys-
tem to establish the foundation of a structural analysis.
The scope of the IFC for the donor structure in this project is not to establish a non-
exhaustive database, but to identify the key parameters that would enable a structural
engineer to establish an estimation of the bearing capacities of the elements.
When a sufficient degree of information has been established, a calculation tool is utilized
to determine the section forces that act in a given element. The calculation result is then
embedded in the structural element’s corresponding IFC element, which is to be compared
with the demands from a design element in a recipient structure.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
3
==PAGE:12==
To create and update data in IFC, the Python library IfcOpenShell [12] is utilized. The
primary calculation tool for this project is FEM-Design [13], which is accessed through the
use of an API in Rhino Grasshopper [14]. This is done to systematize data, enabling high
potential for automation of the process.
Firstly, a Python coding project is created to generate a custom IFC file, which acts as the
donor structure, containing the structural elements that can be reused.
By an extraction function, the structural elements’ geometry, profile, material data, load-
ings etc., are stored in data tables which can be imported in Rhino Grasshopper and
converted to an interpretable list of properties.
The list of properties can be used to interact with the Grasshoppper FEM Design API.
This generates a FEM model in FEM-Design. The results from the FEM analysis can be
accessed by the FEM-Design API in Grasshopper. These results are converted to csv
files that, by a Python script, can be used to embed the obtained results in IFC by custom
property sets on an element level.
The results of the analysis are then used in an evaluation algorithm that determines if an
element can be reused in the recipient structure. The demands for the structural elements
in the recipient structure are determined by calculations in Microsoft Excel [15], which by
csv and IfcOpenShell is embedded into the IFC file of the recipient structure.
The project’s data flow is illustrated in Figure 1.3.
Extraction function
API
Calculation
API
CSV
CSV
Element evaluation
Capacity
Capacity
Demand
DONOR
RECIPIENT
?
Figure 1.3: Project data flow: generation of donor structure embedded with calculation
results to be evaluated against demands of a recipient structure.
As a part of the coding project, generative AI by ChatGPT [16] has been used to assist in
generating code and managing data structures.
4
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:13==
1.4
Research questions
By the presented method, the thesis objective is to be obtained by investigating the fol-
lowing research questions with supplementary sub-questions:
What are the state-of-the-art methods and examples of reusing structural concrete?
• What are the current methods for obtaining bearing capacities of existing concrete
structures?
• How can the reusability of a concrete element be assessed?
How can a donor structure be modeled in IFC to support structural analysis and
reuse of its elements?
• What information is needed to perform a structural analysis of an existing structure,
and what is the most appropriate way of storing this information using IFC?
• How can the generation of load be automated based on the use and geometry of
the structure, and how can this be stored in IFC?
How can a structural analysis model be created from IFC to evaluate the bearing
capacity of existing elements?
• How can the transformation from IFC to a structural analysis model be automated?
• What results are needed to derive a minimum bearing capacity based on the element
type, and how can the results be stored in IFC?
How can the reusability of existing structural elements in a new context be evalu-
ated and automated using IFC?
• What criteria should be used to evaluate the reusability of a structural element?
• What impact does the precision of the input variables have on the results?
1.5
IFC
As the database for storing information about the structural elements, Industry Foundation
Classes (IFC) is used.
IFC is a standardized schema developed by buildingSMART International, used by the
building industry to describe buildings and infrastructures. The key features of this stan-
dard are that it enables every participant to share and exchange data in a standardized
way, and that it is published under a Creative Commons license and as ISO 16739 -
making it open for everyone to use [17].
The IFC data can be captured as an .ifc file, which is a STEP file format. In this project,
this is referred to as an IFC file.
This project is based on IFC version 4.3.2, which architecture is shown in Figure 1.4,
where the most relevant domains are highlighted.
The structural analysis domain seems as the most preferable choice as it features stan-
dards for establishing a structural analysis model. However, at the time of writing, support
from IfcOpenShell in creating these structural analysis models is very limited. Because of
this, the structural elements domain is chosen as the primary domain for this project.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.4: IFC scheme architecture, relevant domains highlighted in red, from [18].
Additionally, it is not common practice for structural engineers to create a structural anal-
ysis model based on the IFC standard today. Therefore, donor structures IFC models will
not contain this information, and will be based on the structural elements domain.
Most obsolete structures today are not expected to have an up-to-date IFC model of the
structure, plausibly because of the fact that it was not invented or used at the time of
construction, or that renovation of the structure has led to an inaccurate model. This
might lead to the creation of IFC models of donor structures as preliminary work before
this method can be applied.
IFC elements exist within a hierarchical structure such that an IfcElement (e.g. beam,
column, slab and wall) is located in an IfcBuildingStorey, which consists in an IfcBuilding,
that is located inside an IfcSite. The elements can be described in many ways and by
their relation to other elements existing in IFC. In this project, the elements are primarily
described by IfcPropertySets (Pset) and their geometrical representation.
At the time of writing, no standardized ways of storing bearing capacities of structural
elements in IFC have been identified. Therefore, custom property sets are generated
when needed.
6
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:15==
1.6
Software and attachments
The software used in this project was presented in Section 1.3. Additionally, a list of the
developed project and csv files is shown in Table 1.1 and Table 1.2, which are stored in the
attached folder Coding project. The created IFC files are shown in Table 1.3 and can be
found in the attached folder IFC models. Additionally, the attachments listed in Table 1.4
are delivered, which can be found in the attached folder Calculations of recipient structure.
The files attached to this report are also available through this Dropbox folder [19].
Table 1.1: Project Python and calculation files
File name
Description
beam.py
Stores Python beam class
BEF_column_cal.py
Stores function that uses the BEF excel calculation
program [20] to determine the failure envelope of a
column
column.py
Stores Python column class
column_cal.xlsx
BEF excel column calculation program [20]
column_cal_modified.xlsx
Modified version of column_cal.xlsx that stores the
results of the calculation
create_donor_structure.py
Python main script (generation of donor structure)
create_recipient_structure.py
Python main script (generation of recipient structure)
evaluation_algorithm.py
Algorithm that takes a donor and a recipient structure
and determines what elements of the donor structure
can be used in the recipient structure
Export_GH_to_csv.py
Python code from Python component in Grasshopper
script that exports data from Grasshopper to csv
grid.py
Store Python grid class
help_functions.py
Stores helpful functions which are called by other
scripts
IFC_extraction_function.py
Contains a function that extracts and converts rele-
vant IFC data to data frames that can be interpreted
by Rhino Grasshopper to use for structural analysis
IFC_extraction_function_SF_capacities.py
Extract structural capacities and demands from IFC
files to use in evaluation_algorithm.py
Import_IFC_to_GH.py
Python code of Python component in grasshopper
script that imports the information from the IFC file
sensitivity study.py
Compares the obtained section forces for different
stiffnesses of the beams and returns statistics
SF_to_RS.py
Transfers section forces (SF) from csv files to the re-
cipient structure (RS)
slab.py
Stores Python slab class
transfer_FEM_results_to_ifc.py
Transfers results from FEM analysis (csv files) to ele-
ments in IFC
wall.py
Stores Python wall class
wind_load.py
Stores Python function that generates wind loads of a
box-like structure and returns peak velocity pressure
and pressure coefficients
donor_structure_FEM_model.str
FEM-Design file for structural analysis of donor struc-
ture
IFC_FEM_structural_analysis.gh
Grasshopper script which transforms an IFC file into a
structural analysis model using the FEM-Design API
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
7
==PAGE:16==
Table 1.2: Project csv files
File name
Description
bars_SF.csv
Stores section forces of FEM-Design bar elements
lc_table_donor.csv
Stores load combinations for the donor structure
lc_table_recipient.csv
Stores load combinations for the recipient structure
slabs_SF.csv
Stores section forces obtained for slab elements
walls_SF.csv
Stores section forces obtained for wall elements
Folder Recipient structure
Stores section forces for the recipient structure
Folder Sensitivity study
Stores section forces for the senitivity study
Table 1.3: Project IFC files
File name
Description
donor_structure.ifc
Clean donor structure IFC
donor_structure with capacities Today.ifc
Donor structure IFC embedded with results from
structural analysis in the ”Today” scenario
donor_structure with capacities Historic.ifc
Donor structure IFC embedded with results from
structural analysis in the ”Historic” scenario
donor_structure with capacities Future.ifc
Donor structure IFC embedded with results from
structural analysis in the ”Future” scenario
recipient structure with SF Today.ifc
Recipient structure IFC with section forces for ”Today”
scenario
recipient structure with SF Future.ifc
Recipient structure IFC with section forces for ”Future”
scenario
Table 1.4: Project attachments
File name
Description
Section forces recipient structure Today.xlsx
Excel file containing calculation of section forces in the recipi-
ent structure in the Today scenario
Section forces recipient structure Future.xlsx
Excel file containing calculation of section forces in the recipi-
ent structure in the Future scenario
8
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:17==
2
Background
A background of the topic of reuse of structural concrete elements is obtained by reviewing
academic literature such as books, articles, and standards, as well as looking into meth-
ods for obtaining bearing capacities of existing structures, and state-of-the-art examples
of reusing structural elements.
This is done to ensure that the developed method includes the most appropriate methods,
tools, and data sources.
2.1
Projects with reuse of structural concrete
Despite the recent years’ focus on reuse and upcycling, reusing building elements in new
structures isn’t a new thing. It was common sense before industrialization, but due to the
mechanization of construction sites and a rise in labour costs, it lost focus in the industry
[21].
Recent projects of reclaiming building material from obsolete buildings include interior el-
ements such as flooring, kitchen and sanitary elements, but not commonly the reuse of
structural elements [21]. However, some projects focus on reusing structural concrete
elements. In [22], the reuse of concrete components in new construction projects is in-
vestigated. 77 cases are looked into and 7 different trends of practices are identified from
1967 to 2022.
Early stage practices include the reuse of structural components in low-rise buildings, and
16 case studies are identified mainly from and into industrial sites in Germany from 1967
to 1998. Often in these cases, the distance between the donor structure and the location
of the recipient structure is short, and sometimes on the same or adjacent site [22].
A wide variety of reused elements are identified, but the dismantled elements are often
used for the same function without any modifications. Some examples do, however, show
a different function in the recipient structure. For example, wall panels of a gym hall are
reused as floor reinforcement in an industrial building, and columns are reused as strip
foundations [22].
Examples of reusing structural concrete components in multistorey buildings are seen
in Sweden and the Netherlands in the 1980s. Where structural concrete components
are reclaimed from the upper floors of mass-housing buildings and reused in housing
buildings with 2-7 floors. For the case in the Netherlands, the hooked connections in the
precast system eased the disassembly procedure. After cleaning of the reclaimed panels,
80%-85% of them were suited for reuse [22].
In 1997, the Swedish pioneer project ”Udden project” [23] shows that cast-in-place con-
crete structures can be sawn and dismantled before being reassembled with new connec-
tions. 1850 tons of concrete walls, floor beams and foundations from two donor structures
were reused in a building housing 26 apartments, 64km away from the donor structure.
Environmental analysis of the project showed that the reuse of the structural components
saved 60% of the CO2 emissions and 40% of the energy use when compared to a sim-
ilar building made from new concrete [22]. Photographs of the project can be seen in
Figure 2.1.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
9
==PAGE:18==
(a) Donor structure
(b) Wall reused at the recipient structure.
Figure 2.1: Photos from the Udden project, retrieved from [23].
In Germany in 1999, a period of research and construction activities in regards to reusing
precast concrete panels started.
Panels were reclaimed from obsolete East-German
mass-housing buildings from the 1960s-1980s and used in low-rise projects such as fam-
ily houses, garages, low silos and prototypes of dikes [22].
More ambitious projects were presented at the start of the 21st century, however, they
remained partially or fully incomplete. The ”Nya Udden” project consisted of 500 apart-
ments, where 54 flats were built from reusing 400 precast, wall, beam, and staircase com-
ponents. The remaining flats were then made from new materials. Solutions for acoustic
and thermic performance were created, and reinforcement with steel beams was inserted
where needed [22].
However, the reuse process was interrupted due to the fact that different contractors were
handling the deconstruction and the reassembly. This caused delays, difficulty in storing
the elements between deconstruction and reuse, and gave the firm responsible for de-
constructing the elements little incentive to handle the dismantled elements with care,
ensuring they were not damaged [22][24]. This meant that most of the new 500 apart-
ments were built with conventional methods and virgin materials [23].
Some of the newest trends in the reuse of concrete elements are seen with examples
such as the Recreate project [25]. The project is an EU-funded project that focuses on the
deconstruction and reuse of precast concrete elements in new buildings. As an example,
the Re:Crete footbridge prototype used 25 reclaimed concrete blocks, which were post-
tensioned, forming a 10m spanning arc bridge. An LCA study showed that the footbridge
prototype with reclaimed concrete blocks emitted 72% less greenhouse gases than one
made from new concrete [26].
In Denmark, recent cases of reuse of pre-cast concrete elements are also seen, such as
when 30 concrete elements from Gellerrupparken were built into new terraced houses
a few hundred meters from the donor structure. The bearing capacity of the elements
where determined based on testing, and some elements were refitted by cutting [27].
A paper with some case studies from Switzerland [28], presents a new design workflow
that supports the reuse of structural concrete elements as seen in Figure 2.2.
The first deviation from a conventional design process sequence is the fact that the obso-
lete structure isn’t demolished, but is assessed for reuse. To do this, the paper proposes
to perform an obsolete structure audit. It is a straightforward process where an inventory
10
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.2: Proposed workflow for reuse of structural concrete elements in a new struc-
ture, including obsolete structure audit and reusability assessment. Figure 1 from [28].
of the structural elements is created. The inventory includes the elements classification,
count and a collection of properties such as geometry, reinforcement layout and mechan-
ical characteristics.
To obtain this data, existing methods such as review of the building’s documentation, vi-
sual inspections, material investigations etc. are performed. The registration also includes
the assessment of damages with the characteristics of concrete structures in mind. This
includes cracking, spalling, steel corrosion etc. Based on the damage assessments, the
individual elements are graded on a scale from A (good) to E (failure).
In the case study, two different potential donor structures are investigated. Firstly, three
15-storey obsolete buildings that used to house hospital staff in Zürich are investigated.
Secondly, an office building in Basel is considered. In these cases, only the architec-
tural drawings are available for the audit and the reinforcement layout and bending resis-
tance are then estimated by a combination of analytical methods, destructive openings in
the concrete cover and non-destructive scans with Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR). A
conservative estimate of the bending resistance of the slabs is performed based on the
minimum reinforcement in the codes in force at the time of construction of the buildings.
After the obsolete audit, the reuseability of the structural elements is assessed based on
the condition and the structural capacity of the element. This is done by a protocol focusing
on pre-existing damages, the intended use and the planned possible modifications of the
element.
An allocation process is then initialized, where the planning of the use of the reclaimed
elements is done. For a third case study, an algorithm is developed to allocate parts of
the donor structure to an optimal position in the recipient building. The algorithm seeks to
minimize the need for structural reinforcement of the reclaimed elements while ensuring
they meet the structural requirements of the recipient building. At this stage, the structural
requirements are only based on the bending moment. It results in an optimal sawing
pattern, which underlines the importance of the fact that this study should be carried out
before the deconstruction of the donor building.
When the concept of the new building is fixed, additional investigations and visual inspec-
tions should be performed to validate the good quality of the concrete elements. It is
proposed that GPR scanning is used for this.
The third case study concludes that savings of 75% kgCO2−eq are possible when com-
paring the reuse of the structural elements to a new cast-in-place building (assuming that
the donor structure and recipient structure are located on the same site).
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2
Methods for structural reuse
In addition to the case study in Switzerland [28], other audits for reuse are seen. A re-
port by the European research project Facilitating the circulation of reclaimed building
elements in Northwestern Europe (FCBRE) [29] has reviewed reclaimation audits and
delivered guidelines in [30] that have the purpose of summarizing the obtained elements
in tables containing fact sheets for the specific element.
In terms of procedures for reusing structural elements, the following sources have been
identified.
1. A memorandum of a research team from Brandenburgische Technische Universität
Cottbus (BTU) on precast reinforced concrete panels. The aim of the procedure is
to verify the potential for reuse by checking against design codes and the possibility
for safely dismantling and reassembling the structure [31] [21].
2. A standard for assessment of pre-cast hollow core slabs from Norway. The stan-
dard NS 3682 Hollow core slabs for reuse describes the dismantling of the hollow
core slabs and the assessment of the bearing capacities, such that they can be doc-
umented in a manner similar to new hollow core slabs. This is done by full-scale
load test [32].
3. Recently the Danish standard DS 11990:2024 Structural appraisal of existing con-
structions [33] has been released. It sets up guidelines and methodologies to as-
sess existing bearing structures in Denmark, such as how to handle design based
on tests. However, its content is more suitable for renovation and transformation
projects, where the structure stays in the same location, rather than the reuse of
structural elements in a new context.
4. The Danish research project Structural Reuse (which is still ongoing at the time of
writing), has published a publication for the project’s midway conference [34]. The
overall aim of the project is to ”enable business by reuse of basic building compo-
nents” [34], hereunder precast concrete elements.
One of the goals hereunder is to ”form the foundations for the formulation of an
appropriate testing regime for reusing concrete aimed towards structural engineers
and other technical personnel that will undertake future processes in reuse”[34].
More specifically, the publication proposes a classification system for the reusability
of the reclaimed concrete elements.
5. As a part of the European research project ReCreate, a guideline lays down rec-
ommendations for how to perform a pre-deconstruction-audit using BIM [35]. The
project tests the process of obtaining data for pre-cast elements in donor buildings
using four real-life projects in Europe.
The BIM models form a digital twin of the donor structures, trying to obtain data in
regards of geometry, load-bearing capacity and degradation of the element. Cus-
tom properties are also added to the model, for example, an R-value, which is a
classification of the element’s potential for reuse.
The project shows the general possibilities of using BIM as the best practice for
storing data in regards of building elements with high flexibility.
12
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:21==
2.3
Assessment of existing concrete elements’ reusability
By the aforementioned projects and methodologies, and the procedure provided by [36],
a recommended approach for estimating bearing capacities of existing structures is given
here.
The first step in the identification of the structural element’s bearing capacity is to inves-
tigate the documentation of the structure. If the static documentation is sufficient, this
should result in a bearing capacity of the element at the time of construction. However,
identification of the bearing capacity of structural elements like this might not be sufficient,
as degradation of the element should be taken into account, yielding further investigations.
Additionally, an agreement on the legal responsibility under these circumstances can be
troublesome.
According to [36], useful information in the documentation to assess the structural ele-
ment’s reusability is:
• Date and location of construction of the structure.
• The structural elements’ location and function.
• Structural design notes, such as drawings and calculations.
• Drawings and information about the structural element, such as material properties
and expected conditions.
• History of modifications of the structure throughout its lifetime.
• Information regarding element fabrication.
• Documentation of inspections of the structure.
• Building owner’s manual.
Based on the initial desktop research, the information found in the documentation should
be verified by on-site inspections.
Visual inspections play a huge role in the verification of the structural elements’ integrity, as
this is the most effortless method of judging the condition of the element. When performing
a visual inspection of concrete elements, crucial points to note are, according to [36]:
• Unexpected/permanent deformations of the structural elements.
• Signs of damage to the structural element caused by high temperatures, such as
soot or burnt paint.
• Signs of structural damages such as local openings, cracks or carbonation (see
Section 2.3.1 for potential damages and degradations of concrete structures).
At this stage, damage that can not be repaired or structural elements with doubtful struc-
tural integrity should be discarded.
Visual inspection of the element should be performed before and after dismantling to
ensure that the deconstruction process has not damaged the element.
Based on the level of information obtained at this stage, different types of testing method-
ologies are proposed.
If the element is declared free from damage, the placement of the reinforcement can be
verified using Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) (see Figure 2.3a) - ensuring consistency
between drawings and the structure as-built.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
13
==PAGE:22==
If no information, such as drawings or calculations, is found in the desktop research, one
could perform a full-scale load test on a sample of the elements. This would demand that
the structural elements can be grouped into test units. According to [36], the elements can
be grouped together if they have the same: donor structure, structural function, geometry
(outer and cross-section), expected loadings, exposure conditions and manufacture.
According to [34], by grouping structural elements by the listed criteria, the test results
from a few representative elements can be considered valid for the entire group, eliminat-
ing the need to test each element.
Other testing methods include inspections of the structural element using Ultrasonic Pulse
Echo (UPE) to assess the amount of honeycombing, delamination, cracks, voids and
water damage inside the concrete. Lastly, one of the most crucial properties of concrete
structures, the compressive strength, can be determined using core sample testing (see
Figure 2.3b & 2.3c).
By utilizing desktop research, visual inspections and testing methods, a set of structural
properties as listed here can be determined for each structural element. The list is a
shortened extract of a list of properties to be declared from [34] in order for the element
to be certified under DS/EN 13369 - Common rules for precast concrete products [37].
• Compressive strength of the concrete
• E-modulus of the concrete
• Tensile yield strength of the steel reinforcement
• Outer geometry of the structural element
• Geometry of the cross-section of the structural element
• Water/cement ratio and cement type to establish exposure class
By this, theoretical and/or experimentally obtained bearing capacities can be obtained.
(a) Ground Penetrating Radar
(GPR), photo from [38].
(b) Core sample drilling, photo
from [39].
(c) Core sample test, result-
ing in concrete compressive
strength, photo from [40].
Figure 2.3: Testing methods
14
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:23==
2.3.1
Degradation and potential damages of concrete structures
When reusing concrete elements, the condition of the individual element should be as-
sessed. This includes the possible degradation and damage that can be present in a
given concrete element.
From [21] and [41], common degradation processes of reinforced concrete structures are
identified. The degradation process includes corrosion caused by chlorides or carbon-
ation. This might be seen by corrosion spots on the concrete surface or local spalling
of the concrete cover. Treatment of this type of damage can include protection of rein-
forcement against corrosion through corrosion inhibitors, alkalization of the concrete, and
establishing a new cover layer.
Large cracks can be seen in concrete elements which has been subjected to loads larger
than they are designed for, or due to restrained deformation. The cracks can be treated
by applying an injection into the crack with a resin or mortar.
Alkali-silica reactions become visible as a mesh of cracks on the surface of the concrete
[42], and can be treated with waterproofing.
The mentioned damages above are illustrated together with potential irregularities to occur
under disassembly of the donor structure in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Common concrete damages, inspired by [28].
2.4
Identified challenges
From the content of this chapter and the review of case studies performed in [21]. The
following barriers to reusing load-bearing components in the construction industry have
been identified.
Economic challenges
Uncertainty of the cost of integrating the reuse of concrete elements into project workflows.
From [21], cases with profitable and unprofitable examples are identified. However, it is
expected that the profitability will improve due to increasing landfill taxes and material
costs.
Current construction and demolition methods
The methods of construction and demolition are not suited for the reuse of structural ele-
ments. This includes selective disassembly of structures without damaging the elements
and construction methods to incorporate reclaimed elements into new structures.
Current workflows
Current workflows in the construction industry are not suited to the reuse of structural
elements, as design with reused elements requires flexibility, as the amount of available
elements can change throughout the design phases.
Logistical challenges
When reusing elements, storage of the reclaimed elements is often needed if the dis-
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
15
==PAGE:24==
mantling of the donor structure is not synchronized with the construction of the recipient
structure. This can result in delays and thereby extra costs if not well managed.
Lack of technical standards
There is a need for clear standardized criteria for the reuse of structural elements, which
makes the current approaches doubtful and ineffective. Hereunder is the lack of guide-
lines for sufficient documentation of elements’ reusability.
2.5
Sources of information
Based on the previous sections in this chapter, the sources of information and their po-
tential findings have been identified and are shown in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Sources of information and potential findings
Source
Potential findings
The Central Register of Buildings
and Dwellings (BBR) [43]
Year of construction, building usages
Documentation of the structure
Drawings and calculations containing information re-
garding material properties as well as calculation as-
sumptions, static system and bearing capacity at the
time of construction.
Visual inspections
Identification of material, static system, geometry and
assessment of element degradation or damage.
Non-destructive testing
Verification of location and amount of reinforcement
and internal degradation and damages of concrete.
Destructive testing
Sample test for verification of material properties or
full-scale load test to verify element bearing capacity.
16
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:25==
3
Donor Structure
To develop and implement a method for estimating the bearing capacity of an existing
structure using BIM, an IFC of a donor structure is created.
This structure serves as a manageable IFC model that represents a building from which
elements can be reused. By developing a well-defined and project-specific model, sys-
tematic integration with other digital tools such as finite element software (FEM) becomes
more manageable.
The donor structure is generated using Python and the Python library IfcOpenShell, and is
inspired by examples found at [44][45][46]. By using this approach, total control over the
IFC file is enabled, which ensures precise modeling and easy implementation of project-
specific property sets.
The donor structure represents a 3-storey concrete element building with in situ cast
cores, which act as the stabilizing system of the structure.
The lateral load is distributed from simply supported slabs to simply supported beams,
which are supported by corbels that transfer the loads to columns/walls and down into
the ground (foundations are not a part of this project). Please see Section 4.1 for a more
detailed explanation of the static system.
For this project, it is imagined that the donor structure has been used for office facilities.
The donor structure is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Graphic representation of the IFC donor structure.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
17
==PAGE:26==
3.1
File initialization
When generating an IFC file using IfcOpenShell, an initialization is needed as the first
step. This includes defining the following:
• File name and file location
• Directions of the global coordinate system and placement of the global origo
• Units for length, area and volume (m, m2 and m3 respectively)
• Geometric representation context
• The spatial hierarchy including the IfcProject, IfcSite, IfcBuilding, IfcBuildingstorey
This section of the script also features the input variables shown in table 3.1 which allows
for the creation of many variations of the design.
Table 3.1: Donor script input variables
Variable name
Description
Value
floor_height
Floor-to-floor height between the levels in the structure
4.0m
num_floors
Total number of floors including ground floor and roof
4
x_grid_num
Number of grids in x-direction (A, B, C etc.)
4
x_grid_dist
Distance between grids in x-direction
8.4m
y_grid_num
Number of grids in y-direction (1, 2, 3 etc.)
4
y_grid_dist
Distance between grids in y-direction
6.0m
slab_height
Height of slab elements
0.2m
slab_width
Width of slab elements
1.2m
slab_length
Length of slab elements
6.0m
beams_width
Width of beam elements
0.45m
beams_height
Height of beam elements
0.8m
columns_width
Width of column elements
0.45m
wall_width
Width of wall elements
0.2m
The input section also features a file path to a csv file storing the load combinations with
corresponding load factors as specified in section 3.6.
3.2
Floors and grid
Each floor is generated as an IfcBuildingStorey and is embedded with the corresponding
Name, Elevation and ObjectPlacment attributes according to the input variables.
In regard to the grid generation, a custom grid Python class is utilized to enable manage-
able generation of the IfcGridAxis and IfcGrid. This results in a grid as seen in Figure 3.2.
The grid serves as a fundamental reference system in the model, providing a structured
framework for organizing all other elements. While its primary role is to define placement
at grid intersections, it also serves as the basis for the naming convention of structural
elements, ensuring clear identification and traceability.
18
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: IFC grid in the donor structure with coordinate system.
3.3
Materials and sections
As a general starting point, all structural elements reference the same IFC material,
concrete, with the properties shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Ifc Material Properties for concrete
Property
Value
Name
c20/25
Category
concrete
MassDensity
2500 kg
m3
The MassDensity property is a part of the Pset_MaterialCommon property set, which is
referenced to the material. To establish an interpretable unit of density, an IfcDerivedUnit
is created by two IfcDerivedUnitElements consisting of the mass and the volume.
For the wall and slab elements, an IfcMaterialConstituentSet is created and related to the
material concrete. The material set is referenced to the wall and slab elements under the
element generation.
In regard to beams and columns, an IfcMaterialProfileSet is used due to the convenience
of storing both section and material properties in one.
For the beams, the IfcMaterialProfileSet is created with the following name scheme:
Concrete section, Rectangle, {beam_width} x {beam_height}
This is chosen as this is the naming scheme that most effortlessly interacts with the FEM-
Design API at a later stage.
The profile is defined by an IfcRectangleProfileDef with the ProfileType = ”AREA” and
the XDIM and YDIM set as the beam width and beam height, respectively, as seen in
Figure 3.3.
The same procedure is carried out for the columns, and lastly the concrete material and
the sections are collected as material sets, which are referenced to the beam and column
elements.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.3: Definition of IfcRectangleProfileDef, found at [47].
3.4
Generation of elements
Structural elements such as beams, columns, slabs, and walls are created using object-
oriented programming in Python.
By defining each element as a Python class, the code becomes more modular and
reusable. Each class contains the properties of its respective structural element, which
enhances the structure of the data, as elaborated on in the following subsections.
3.4.1
Columns
The initialization of the Python class for columns is seen in Listing A.1 in Appendix A.
An explanation of the input and derived attributes of the column class is listed in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Attributes for column object
Attribute
Description
Unit
ifc_column
Placeholder for storing the IfcColumn entity instance
Ifc entity
ifc_file
IFC file that the object relates to
Ifc entity
base_point
Coordinate defining the placement of the bottom of the column
(m,m,m)
height
Height of the column
m
width
Width of the square cross section of the column
m
g
Dead load of column - derived from width and density
kN/m
g_si
Super imposed dead load on the column
kN/m
q
Live load on the column
kN/m
s
Snow load on the column
kN/m
storey
IfcBuildingStorey that the column is related to
Ifc entity
Name
Name of the specific column instance
Ifc entity
material_set
Material set that should be assigned to the column
Ifc entity
density
Density - derived from material_set
kg/m3
context
Geometrical representation context - derived from ifc_file
Ifc entity
The class also features the following functions create(), delete() and modify().
The create() function takes the object attributes and generates an IfcColumn based on
these.
Firstly, an IfcColumn entity is generated. This is assigned to an object placement based
on the base_point and the global directions of the ifc_file.
20
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:29==
An axis representation is then generated and assigned to the IfcColumn. This represen-
tation is chosen to simplify the later extraction of relevant coordinates that represent the
column object in the FEM calculation.
The IfcColumn is then assigned to a spatial container (an IfcBuildingStorey) and the ma-
terial set is assigned to the column.
A custom IfcPropertySet is also generated and assigned to the column at this point, which
handles loading on the object; this is elaborated on in Section 3.5.5.
When utilizing this function in the main script create_donor_structure.py, a loop is used
to create unique names for each column. The columns’ names are based on the following
name scheme, making identifying the column placement easy.
Column {x-grid}{y-grid}-{floor name}
Example: Column C1-Floor 0 is placed at the intersection of grid lines C and 1, with the
bottom of the column placed at Floor 0, please see Figure 3.4.
Using a loop all coordinates for the column base_points are generated by determining the
intersection points of the grid lines and the elevation attributes of the IfcBuildingStoreys.
Even though the placement of the columns is now defined, some columns are to be re-
moved to avoid clashes with the walls of the building, this is elaborated on in Section 3.4.5.
For this, the delete() function is utilized, which deletes the column element.
3.4.2
Beams
Beams are generated similarly to the columns. Utilization of a Python class for beams
which initialization can be seen in Listing A.2 in Appendix A.
An explanation of the input and derived attributes to the beam class is listed in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Attributes for beam object
Attribute
Description
Unit
ifc_beam
Placeholder for storing the IfcBeam entity instance
Ifc entity
ifc_file
IFC file that the object relates to
Ifc entity
base_point
Coordinate defining the placement of the base point of the beam
(m,m,m)
height
Height of the beam cross section
m
width
Width of the beam cross section
m
length
Length of the beam in direction with the x-axis
m
g
Dead load of the beam - derived from width, height and density
kN/m
g_si
Super imposed dead load on the beam
kN/m
q
Live load on the beam
kN/m
s
Snow load on the beam
kN/m
storey
IfcBuildingStorey that the beam is related to
Ifc entity
Name
Name of the specific beam instance
Ifc entity
material_set
Material set that should be assigned to the beam
Ifc entity
density
Density - derived from material_set
kg/m3
context
Geometrical representation context - derived from ifc_file
Ifc entity
The class has similar features as the column class with the functions create(), delete()
and modify().
The generation of the IfcBeam object is carried out using the create() function. This func-
tion creates an IfcBeam entity, assigns it an object placement based on the base_point,
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
21
==PAGE:30==
and then defines its axis representation. Which, as for the columns, is chosen to simplify
the later extraction of relevant coordinates that represent the beam in the FEM calculation.
Next, the beam is assigned to a spatial container (an IfcBuildingStorey), followed by the
assignment of a material set. Finally, a name is assigned to the object.
The following name scheme is used for the beams:
Beam {x-grid start}{x-grid end}-{y-grid}-{floor name}
Example: Beam BC-1-Floor 1 is going from grid line B to grid C along grid line 1 at the
level of Floor 1, please see Figure 3.4.
The
name
scheme
is
automatically
handled
by
a
loop
in
the
main
script
create_donor_structure.py as for the columns.
Even though the placement of the beams is now defined, some beams are to be removed
to avoid clashes with the walls of the building, this is elaborated on in Section 3.4.5. For
this, the delete() function is utilized, which deletes the beam element.
A custom IfcPropertySet is also generated and assigned to the beam at this point, which
handles loading on the object, this is elaborated on in Section 3.5.5.
3.4.3
Slabs
The slab elements play a crucial role in the donor structure as they are the horizontal
elements that distribute the surface load to the other structural members.
As for the beams and columns, the slabs also have a respective class, which is used to
generate the slab elements. The initialization of the slab class is seen in Listing A.3 in
Appendix A.
An explanation of the input and derived attributes of the slab class is listed in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Attributes for slab object
Attribute
Description
Unit
ifc_slab
Placeholder for storing the IfcSlab entity instance
Ifc entity
ifc_file
IFC file that the object relates to
Ifc entity
base_point
Coordinate of the slab corner closest to origo
(m,m,m)
height
Height of the slab cross section
m
width
Width of the slab cross section
m
length
Length of the slab
m
g
Dead load of the slab
kN/m2
g_si
Super imposed dead load on the slab
kN/m2
qA
Live load on the slab - load configuration A
kN/m2
qB
Live load on the slab - load configuration B
kN/m2
qC
Live load on the slab - load configuration C
kN/m2
qD
Live load on the slab - load configuration D
kN/m2
s
Snow load on the slab
kN/m2
storey
IfcBuildingStorey that the slab is related to
Ifc entity
Name
Name of the specific slab instance
Ifc entity
material_set
Material set that should be assigned to the slab
Ifc entity
density
Density - derived from material_set
kg/m3
context
Geometrical representation context - derived from ifc_file
Ifc entity
The slabs are generated by utilizing the create() function in the slab class.
22
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:31==
Firstly, an extrusion profile is generated for the body representation of the slab. Then, a
solid is used to define an IfcShapeRepresentation. The slab is then generated by use of
IfcOpenShell’s dynamic Python API (and the command ifc_file.createIfcslab(...)).
The slab is then assigned a spatial container (an IfcBuildingStorey), a material set and a
custom property set which handles the loads on the slab (see Section 3.5.5).
In the main script (create_donor_structure.py), the slabs are generated in a loop, which
determines the embedded loadings according to their position and the load configurations
(see Section 3.6.1). Additionally, a name is generated according to the following name
scheme:
Slab {floor name} {x-grid border start}{x-grid border end}
{y-grid border start}{y-grid border end}-{index}
Example: Slab Floor 2 BC12-4 is placed in the field enclosed by grid lines B,C,1 and 2 at
the level of Floor 2 and it has the element index 4, please see Figure 3.4.
Similar to the other structural element classes, the slab class includes a modify() function,
which proves particularly useful for adjusting individual slabs in designated areas. In this
context, the ability to modify loads for specific load configurations on selected slabs is
essential. The load configurations are elaborated on in Section 3.6.1.
3.4.4
Walls
Walls are generated to form cores at the opposite corners of the building, which act as
the stabilizing elements in the building’s structural system.
As for the other structural elements, the walls also have a Python class, the initialization
of which is seen in Listing A.4 in Appendix A.
An explanation of the input and derived attributes of the wall class is listed in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Attributes for wall object
Attribute
Description
Unit
ifc_wall
Placeholder for storing the IfcWall entity instance
Ifc entity
ifc_file
IFC file that the object relates to
Ifc entity
base_point
Coordinate of the wall corner closest to origo
(m,m,m)
height
Height of the wall
m
width
Thickness of the wall cross section
m
length
Length of the wall
m
wall_dir
Direction of the wall, either x- or y-direction
’str’
g
Dead load of the wall
kN/m2
g_si
Super imposed dead load on the wall
kN/m
q
Live load on the wall
kN/m
s
Snow load on the wall
kN/m
storey
IfcBuildingStorey that the wall is related to
Ifc entity
Name
Name of the specific wall instance
Ifc entity
material_set
Material set that should be assigned to the wall
Ifc entity
density
Density - derived from material_set
kg/m3
context
Geometrical representation context - derived from ifc_file
Ifc entity
The walls are generated similarly to the slabs by an extrusion profile that is based on the
height, width and wall_dir attributes of the wall object. An IfcShapeRepresentation and
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
23
==PAGE:32==
IfcProductDefinintionShape are defined before generating the IfcWall object. The IfcWall
is then assigned to a spatial container (an IfcBuildingStorey) and a material set.
By specifying the base points for the walls and utilizing a loop in the main script
(create_donor_structure.py), the walls are generated as cores in opposite corners of
the building. In this process, unique names are assigned to each wall element by the
following name scheme:
Wall {start grid}{end grid}-{grid along}-{floor name}
Example: Wall AB-1-Floor 2 is a wall going from grid A to grid B along grid 1 which
underside is placed on Floor 2, please see Figure 3.4.
3.4.5
Deletion of unwanted elements
At this stage of the modeling, there is a column at every grid intersection on every floor,
together with beams along every grid line in the global x-direction, and slabs located within
the cores. This is a faulty model, and deletion of clashing elements is necessary.
To remove the right structural elements, every element has been stored in a Python dictio-
nary as an object with its name as the dictionary key. This gives the opportunity to easily
filter out the troublesome elements and use the class-defined delete() functions.
Firstly, the columns that clash with the walls are removed. This is done by the following
steps:
1. Loop over walls and extract the wall.base_point and wall.length, such that the
end point of the wall extrusion can be determined.
2. Loop over each column and determine the distance from column.base_point to the
points associated to the walls.
3. If the determined distance is less than 0.1m, delete the column.
Then, a similar procedure is carried out for the clash detection of the beams:
1. Loop over the walls and exact the wall.base_point and add the floor height to the
z coordinate to determine the coordinates on the top of the walls.
2. Loop over each beam and determine the distance from beam.base_point to the
points associated with the walls.
3. If the determined distance is less than 0.1m, delete the beam.
In regard to the slabs, a name-based filtering approach is applied to remove the slab
elements located within the cores.
Since the core slabs are enclosed by grid lines AB12 and CD34, the naming convention
can be used to identify and filter out only the relevant slab entries for deletion. The inclu-
sion of the related floor name in the slab names further ensures that slabs on the roof are
excluded from deletion, even if they fall within the core area.
The script is set up to place the cores at the opposite corners regardless of the building
size. By obtaining the first two and last two names in the list of grids, the correct slabs
are identified and deleted. For the case of this donor structure, the slabs on floor 1 and 2
named AB12 and CD34 are the ones to be deleted.
The final IFC model generated from create_donor_structure.py with examples of the
name schemes is shown in Figure 3.4..
24
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.4: IFC donor structure with name scheme examples.
3.5
Loads
Defining correct and realistic loads acting upon the structure is crucial to obtaining a useful
and reliable result of this method. There can be many approaches to this as for example,
by estimation of the dead loads, live loads and nature loads, by visual inspection, by
historical data or by inspecting the drawing and calculation material.
For this project, loads acting upon the structure are defined in the following subsections,
which are based on the standards listed in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Applied standards for loading
Standard
Description
Reference
Eurocode 1
Actions on structures
DS/EN 1991-1-1:2007
Part 1-1: General actions – Densities,
[48]
self-weight, imposed loads for buildings
DS/EN 1991-1-1 DK NA:2024
National Annex to Eurocode 1 part 1-1
[49]
DS/EN 1991-1-3:2007
Part 1-3: General actions – Snow loads
[50]
DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2024
National Annex to Eurocode 1 part 1-3
[51]
DS/EN 1991-1-4:2007
Part 1-4: General actions – Wind actions
[52]
DS/EN 1991-1-4 DK NA:2024
National Annex to Eurocode 1 Part 1-4
[53]
Actions from geometrical imperfections are not included in this project, as it is not conser-
vative to assume that the structure is constructed with imperfections yielding horizontal
load contributions.
Additionally, it must be highlighted that load actions from seismic load and accidental
loads, such as fire and collisions, are not within the scope of this project.
Standards concerning loadings at the time of construction could also be relevant to inves-
tigate, but are neglected in this project for simplification of the calculations.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
25
==PAGE:34==
3.5.1
Dead Load
The dead load (g) is determined in line with Eurocode 1 part 1-1 [48] and the associated
Danish national annex [49] and refers to the self-weight of the structural elements, such as
beams, columns, slabs, and walls. For the massive structural elements such as beams,
columns and walls the dead load is determined by the geometry of the element and the
density of the material.
In regard to the slabs, the dead load does not represent the load of a massive slab, but
the dead load of hollow core slabs (HCS) where the grout has been cast. By reference to
the concrete element supplier Spæncom, this value for an HCS with height of 180mm is
3.06 kN/m2 [54].
The superimposed dead load (g_si) includes additional permanent or semi-permanent
dead loads that are not part of the primary structural system, but still contribute to the total
dead load. These may include floor finishes, fixed partition walls, suspended ceilings, and
mechanical or electrical installations.
An estimation of the characteristic value of the superimposed dead load on an office floor
is shown in Table 3.8 and for the roof in Table 3.9. To get a good estimation of these
values, one could consult drawing materials or use the knowledge about the given building
systems at the time of construction.
Table 3.8: Superimposed dead load - office floor
Layer
[kN/m2]
Screed layer, 40mm
1.0
Linoleum, 16mm
0.2
Installations and ceilings
0.5
Partition walls
0.5
SUM
2.2
Table 3.9: Superimposed dead load - roof
Layer
[kN/m2]
Roof structure
2.0
Screed layer, 40mm
1.0
Installations and ceilings
0.5
SUM
3.5
The superimposed dead loads are only applied to the slab elements.
3.5.2
Live Load
Live loads are variable and movable actions that reflect the intended use of a given space.
Since the donor structure was originally used as office facilities, the live load correspond-
ing to office use has been selected in accordance with Eurocode 1 part 1-1 [48] and the
associated Danish national annex [49]. The associated load values and combination fac-
tors are presented in Table 3.10.
Table 3.10: Office live load
Load cat.
qk
ψ0
ψ1
ψ2
B (office)
2.5 kN/m2
0.6
0.4
0.2
26
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:35==
The building also features a roof that should be able to withstand a point load of 1.5kN
(cat. H), however, this is not taken into account as it is evaluated that the snow load on
the roof will provide a more critical loading situation.
A typical office building also features other live loads, such as for the access ways. As
there are not modeled any elements in the access ways and to simplify the number of
load combinations, this load is not taken into account, but could easily be implemented to
give a larger resulting force on the wall elements.
The live load is only applied to the slab elements.
3.5.3
Wind Load
Wind load is determined by Eurocode 1 part 1-4 [52] and the associated Danish national
annex [53].
As the wind load on the building relies on the building geometry and geographical place-
ment, a Python function wind_load(x,y,z) has been implemented to determine the wind
load regardless of the building geometry.
The function wind_load(x,y,z) will not be discussed in depth here, but it takes three di-
mensions (x,y,z) as input, representing the building’s box-like geometry. It then returns
the peak velocity pressure on the building and two tables that represent the pressure coef-
ficients and their distribution on the building for the two main wind directions. The function
is a modified version of the author’s previous work found at [55].
To determine the wind load on a box-like structure in accordance with the norms, the
following information is needed:
1. If the placement of the building is less than 25km from the west coast in Denmark
2. The terrain category of the surrounding environment for every wind direction
3. The width, depth and height of the building
To simplify this project it is chosen that the building is placed more than 25km from the
west coast of Denmark and that the terrain category for all wind directions is III, which is
equivalent to an area with regular cover of vegetation or buildings or with isolated obsta-
cles with separations of maximum 20 obstacle heights (such as villages, suburban areas,
or permanent forest) [52]. A sketch of terrain category III is shown in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Sketch of an example of terrain category III from [52] annex A.1.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
27
==PAGE:36==
Determination of peak velocity pressure
The peak velocity pressure refers to the maximum base point pressure applied to a struc-
ture due to the wind velocity. To determine the resulting action on the structure from wind,
one must also consult the pressure coefficients.
For simplification of the calculation and due to the fact that the orientation of the building is
not determined, the direction factor cdir = 1 for all wind directions. In a real application, this
reduction for the wind directions should be taken into account, such that an overestimation
of the applied load is not present. Additionally, the seasonal factor cseason = 1 as the
structure has been there for many years all year round.
As the fundamental value of the basic wind velocity in Denmark, more than 25km from
the west coast, is vb,0 = 24 m/s, the base wind velocity vb can be determined as in Equa-
tion (3.1).
vb = cdir · cseason · vb,0 = 24 m/s
(3.1)
The terrain factor kr can be determined as in Equation (3.2), where z0 = 0.3 m is the
roughness length for the terrain category for the given wind direction, which in this case
is terrain category III, and z0.II = 0.05 m is the roughness length for terrain category II.
kr = 0.19 ·
( z0
z0.II
)0.07
(3.2)
According to Eurocode 1 part 1-4 [52] the roughness factor cr(z), as seen in Equa-
tion (3.3), takes into account the variability of the mean wind velocity at the site of the
structure due to the height above ground level z and the ground roughness of the terrain
upwind of the structure in the considered wind direction.
cr(z) = kr · ln
( z
z0
)
(3.3)
In Eurocode 1 part 1-4 [52] the turbulence intensity Iv(z) at the height z is defined as seen
in Equation (3.4), where kI is the turbulence factor with the recommended value of 1.0
and the orography factor as is set to co = 1.0 as it is assumed that the terrain is flat.
Iv(z) =
kI
co · ln
(
z
z0
)
(3.4)
The mean wind velocity Vm(z) is determined as seen in Equation (3.5).
Vm(z) = cr(z) · c0 · vb
(3.5)
As the density of air is ρair = 1.25kg/m3, the characteristic peak velocity qp(z) can finally
be determined by Equation (3.6).
qp(z) = (1 + 7 · Iv(z)) · 0.5 · ρair · Vm(z)2
(3.6)
28
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:37==
According to Eurocode 1 part 1-4 [52], there are different definitions for the wind profile
along the height of the building based on the height h and the width of the building across
the wind direction b, as seen in Figure 3.6.
However, for simplification of the automation in this project, the wind profile with constant
wind pressure (h ≤b) is chosen regardless of the building geometry. This also fits the
geometry of the presented donor structure.
For further use, one should make sure to select the right pressure profile to avoid overes-
timation of the bearing capacity of the stabilizing elements in the structure.
Figure 3.6: Possible wind profiles for different cases of h and b taken from [52] Figure
7.4.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
29
==PAGE:38==
Determination of pressure coefficients
To establish a model of the wind actions on the building, pressure coefficients in accor-
dance with Eurocode 1 part 1-4 [52] are utilized. Please see Figure 3.7 for the general
location of the different zones of the pressure coefficients.
Figure 3.7: Pressure coefficients on vertical walls taken from [52] Figure 7.5.
To determine the value of the different pressure coefficients, interpolation in Table 3.11 is
done based on the ratio between the height of the building and the depth of the building
in the wind direction (h/d).
The values of cpe,10 and cpe,1 are pressure coefficients at an area of 10m2 and 1m2 respec-
tively. As these pressure coefficients are used to investigate global destabilizing effects
on the structure, the values of cpe,10 are chosen.
Table 3.11: Pressure coefficients table values on vertical walls taken from [52] Table 7.1.
30
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:39==
Wind action on the flat roof of the building is not taken into account. This might generate
a lift on the roof surface, however, this is not relevant for the investigations in this project.
The stretch of the zones on the walls along the wind direction (A, B and C) is determined
based on e = min(b, 2h), where b is the width of the building across the wind direction and
h is the height of the building. The exact determination of the length of the zones is shown
in Figure 3.7 for different cases of e and d (depth of the building in the wind direction).
Results of wind load determination
As a result of the characteristic peak velocity pressure and the shape coefficients, the
resulting wind load W in the respective zone can be determined as the product of the two
values as seen in Equation (3.7).
W = qp(z) · cpe
(3.7)
For the shown donor structure, the results of the wind analysis are shown in Table 3.12
and Table 3.13.
Results represented by ”short” indicate wind action along the short dimension of the build-
ing plan, which, for this case, is wind in the global y-direction (please refer to Figure 3.2).
Similarly, the results represented by ”long” indicate wind action along the long dimension
of the building plan, which, for this case, corresponds to wind in the global x-direction
(please refer to Figure 3.2).
Values LA-LE indicate the length of the pressure zones, and ρ is the correlation factor,
which in the stability investigation of the structure should be multiplied by the resulting
action of the D and E pressure coefficients. For values A-E, positive values indicate a
pressure acting against the wall, and negative values indicate a pressure (suction) acting
away from the wall.
Table 3.12: Result of wind load in the ”short” / y-direction
h/d
A
B
C
D
E
ρ
LA
LB
LC
LD
LE
qp
-
cpe,10
cpe,10
cpe,10
cpe,10
cpe,10
-
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[kN/m2]
0.67
-1.2
-0.8
0
0.76
-0.41
0.85
4.8
13.2
0
25.2
25.2
0.66
Table 3.13: Result of wind load in the ”long” / x-direction
h/d
A
B
C
D
E
ρ
LA
LB
LC
LD
LE
qp
-
cpe,10
cpe,10
cpe,10
cpe,10
cpe,10
-
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[kN/m2]
0.48
-1.2
-0.8
-0.5
0.73
-0.36
0.85
3.6
14.4
7.2
18
18
0.66
An illustration of the wind loads and the pressure coefficients for the donor structure is
shown in Figure 3.8 and Figure 3.9.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.8: Pressure coefficients for wind along the short side of the donor structure / in
y-direction.
Figure 3.9: Pressure coefficients for wind along the long side of the donor structure / in
x-direction.
32
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:41==
3.5.4
Snow Load
Snow load is determined on the roof in accordance with Eurocode 1 part 1-3 [50] and
the associated Danish national annex [51]. Snow load is treated as a variable action,
which magnitude in general depends on geographical location, roof geometry, and thermal
conditions. The donor structure features a simple flat roof geometry with no obstacles that
could induce snow accumulation.
The following values are determined in order to determine the final characteristic snow
load on the roof as seen in Equation (3.8).
• Shape coefficient µi = 0.8 for a flat mono-pitched roof.
• The characteristic terrain value sk = 1.0 kN/m2, [51].
• The exposure coefficient Ce = 1.0
• The thermal coefficient Ct = 1.0
s = µi · Ce · Ct · sk = 0.8 kN/m2
(3.8)
Thereby, a characteristic snow load of 0.8 kN/m2 will be applied to the slabs on the roof
level.
3.5.5
IfcPropertySet for loads
Loads on elements
To store loads on the individual elements, a custom property set with the name
”Reuse_Pset_loads” has been assigned to the elements in the element generation. The
structure of the property set is shown in Table 3.14, where the units of the loads corre-
spond to the ones presented in Section 3.4 for the different types of objects.
Table 3.14: Properties of ”Reuse_Pset_loads”
Property name
Description
g
Dead load of the object
g_si
Superimposed dead load on the object
qA
Live load on the object in load configuration A
qB
Live load on the object in load configuration B
qC
Live load on the object in load configuration C
qD
Live load on the object in load configuration D
s
Snow load on the object
The values represent the source of the force acting on the individual element. To clar-
ify, this is not representative of any distribution of load through a static system, but only
represents the applied load in a specific location.
One could argue that superimposed dead load, live load and snow load will never act as
a source load on beams, columns and walls, and are only relevant for the slab elements.
However, this enhances the flexibility for future use of this code. Additionally, this makes
the treatment of data when interacting with the FEM-Design API more manageable. For
an explanation of qA, qB, qC and qD, please refer to Section 3.6.1.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
33
==PAGE:42==
Wind loads
To store the determined peak velocity pressure and the pressure coefficients together
with the length of the zones the results from Table 3.12 and Table 3.13 are stored
as custom property sets with the names ”Reuse_Pset_wind_load_in_y-direction” and
”Reuse_Pset_wind_load_in_x-direction” respectively.
The property sets are then as-
signed to the IfcBuilding, on which the wind load acts.
Please note that these property sets should be interpreted by a structural engineer by
reference to Eurocode 1 part 1-4 [52] in order to get the actual resulting loads that act on
the structure. For the case of this project, this is handled by the Grasshopper script and
the FEM-Design API utilizing Equation (3.7) (please see Section 4.2.5).
3.6
Load combinations and scenarios
The consequence class is determined manually in accordance with DS/INF 1990:2024
[33] Table 2, of which a snippet is presented in Table 3.15.
Table 3.15: Recommended limits for determination of consequence class based on di-
mensions, Table 2 from [33] (translated from Danish to English by generative AI Chat-
GPT[16]). ÷ = not relevant, ∞= no upper limit.
Building Use
Max Structural Span [m]
Max Height Above/Depth
Below Terrain [m]
Max No.
of Storeys
Above Terrain [count]
No.
Description
CC1
CC2
CC3
CC1
CC2
CC3
CC1
CC2
CC3
1
Long-term stay, e.g., residence, office,
hotel, holiday home, day and night in-
stitution, education, clinic
÷
16
∞
0/0
12/6
÷/9
÷
5
15
The building falls within No. 1, which is representative of longer occupancy, such as office
use. As the largest span of any structural member is less than 16m, and the top floor
(not including the roof) is no more than 12m above ground and the fact that the building
does not have more than 5 stories the consequence class is determined as CC2 (Medium
consequence for loss of human life, economic, social or environmental consequences are
considerable). This gives KFI = 1.0.
Load combinations are set up in accordance with Eurocode 0 [11] and the associated
Danish national annex [56]. The load combinations are used to account for the fact that
different load categories can act simultaneously with different probabilities and magni-
tudes. Establishing the correct and most appropriate load combinations is essential in
order to ensure a safe design.
Table 3.17 shows the load combinations that are investigated in this project. The loads
related to the factors in columns g-s are explained in Table 3.14, while wx and wy refer to
wind in the x- and y-direction, respectively. All load combinations are based on Ultimate
Limit State (ULS).
The load combinations are grouped into three scenarios, of which an explanation can be
seen in Table 3.16. Please note that the factor for g is the same in Today and Future
scenarios, as the dead load of the element won’t change regardless of the outer circum-
stances.
Table 3.16: Scenario of load combinations
Scenario
Description
Today
Load combinations as of today
Future +20%
Loads are 20% larger
Historic -20%
Loads are 20% smaller
Scenario Today represents load combinations of the current calculation methods in Eu-
34
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:43==
rocode 1 [48]. As it is not likely that a structure has been subjected to ULS conditions,
the historic scenario is included to represent a more plausible loading of the structure.
However, as engineers often do not calculate with a utilization of a structural element to
be 100% the scenario future is taken into account, representing potential residual bear-
ing capacity. The variation of ±20% in this implementation of the method is, however,
arbitrary and does not represent a recommended value.
In IFC, the load combinations are stored as a custom property set with the name
”Reuse_Pset_load_combinations” that is assigned to the IfcBuilding. Using a loop, the
table with load combinations stored as a csv file is transformed into an IfcPropertyTable.
Each load combination is stored as a property in the property set.
Table 3.17: Load combinations for the donor structure
ID
Description
g
g_si
qA
qB
qC
qD
s
wx
wy
LC1
Today, Permanent load
1.20
1.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LC2
Today, Live load, A
1.00
1.00
1.50
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.45
0.00
0.45
LC3
Today, Live load, B
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
0.00
0.45
0.00
0.45
LC4
Today, Live load, C
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
0.45
0.00
0.45
LC5
Today, Live load, D
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.45
0.00
0.45
LC6
Today, Snow load
1.00
1.00
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
0.45
LC7
Today, Wind load, in y
1.00
1.00
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
LC8
Today, Wind load, in x
1.00
1.00
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
LC9
Today, Stab. Wind load, in y
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
LC10
Today, Stab. Wind load, in x
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.50
0.00
LC11
Future +20%, Permanent load
1.20
1.44
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LC12
Future +20%, Live load, A
1.00
1.00
1.80
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.54
0.00
0.54
LC13
Future +20%, Live load, B
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.80
0.00
0.00
0.54
0.00
0.54
LC14
Future +20%, Live load, C
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.80
0.00
0.54
0.00
0.54
LC15
Future +20%, Live load, D
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.80
0.54
0.00
0.54
LC16
Future +20%, Snow load
1.00
1.00
1.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.80
0.00
0.54
LC17
Future +20%, Wind load, in y
1.00
1.00
1.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.80
LC18
Future +20%, Wind load, in x
1.00
1.00
1.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.80
0.00
LC19
Future +20%, Stab. Wind load, in y
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.80
LC20
Future +20%, Stab. Wind load, in x
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.80
0.00
LC21
Historic -20%, Permanent load
0.96
0.96
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LC22
Historic -20%, Live load, A
1.00
1.00
1.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.36
0.00
0.36
LC23
Historic -20%, Live load, B
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.20
0.00
0.00
0.36
0.00
0.36
LC24
Historic -20%, Live load, C
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.20
0.00
0.36
0.00
0.36
LC25
Historic -20%, Live load, D
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.20
0.36
0.00
0.36
LC26
Historic -20%, Snow load
1.00
1.00
0.72
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.20
0.00
0.36
LC27
Historic -20%, Wind load, in y
1.00
1.00
0.72
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.20
LC28
Historic -20%, Wind load, in x
1.00
1.00
0.72
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.20
0.00
LC29
Historic -20%, Stab. Wind load, in y
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.20
LC30
Historic -20%, Stab. Wind load, in x
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.20
0.00
3.6.1
Load configurations
To handle the fact that some loads are variable and movable, four load configurations
are set up for the live load. These configurations are made to ensure that the worst-
case scenario of the placement of the live load is handled. This ensures the columns are
subjected to the correct maximum combination of normal force and moment, and that all
slabs are subjected to the maximum live load.
In Figure 3.10-3.13, the location of the different load intensities is shown. Red areas
indicate a maximum characteristic live load of qk = 2.5 kN/m2, while blue areas indicate
a reduced live load with the factor ψ0 = 0.6 for live load in category B.
The process of placing the live loads has not been automated, but is, to some extent,
taken care of manually in the code.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Floor 2
(b) Floor 1
Figure 3.10: Load configuration A - Red: qk = 2.5 kN/m2 Blue: ψ0qk = 1.5 kN/m2.
(a) Floor 2
(b) Floor 1
Figure 3.11: Load configuration B - Red: qk = 2.5 kN/m2 Blue: ψ0qk = 1.5 kN/m2.
(a) Floor 2
(b) Floor 1
Figure 3.12: Load configuration C - Red: qk = 2.5 kN/m2 Blue: ψ0qk = 1.5 kN/m2.
36
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:45==
(a) Floor 2
(b) Floor 1
Figure 3.13: Load configuration D - Red: qk = 2.5 kN/m2.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:47==
4
Analytical Model
To automate the method of static calculations in the project, FEM-Design’s API in
Grasshopper is utilized. By extracting relevant geometrical and structural data from the
donor structure’s IFC model, a corresponding FEM model can been created to enable
structural analysis. An illustration of the FEM model obtained from the converted IFC file
of the donor structure is shown in Figure 4.1.
It is important to note that not all information related to the structural system is embedded
in the IFC file. Ideally, details such as degrees of freedom in connections and support
conditions would be included. However, due to the scope and time constraints in this
project focus has not been on creating an exhaustive IFC model.
It would be possible to add this information through custom property sets or relationships
within the IFC schema, but such data is rarely found in existing IFC models of real-world
buildings. However, even if this information is in the IFC model, a structural engineer
must always consult the drawing material and inspect the existing structure to accurately
determine the characteristics of the structural system and integrate this into the structural
analysis model.
Figure 4.1: Visualization of the analytical model for the donor structure in FEM-Design.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
39
==PAGE:48==
4.1
Static system
Many factors and observations are needed to obtain the correct static system of an exist-
ing structure. Support conditions and connections are especially crucial as they influence
the load paths and section forces.
Often, in the design of buildings of this type, conservative simplifications of the load paths
are used. Now going the other way around, one should be careful by choosing the same
static simplifications or choosing ones that would be on the safe side.
For example, the FEM model distributes the loads elastically based on the stiffnesses in
the system, but in the design of the structure, some loads can be determined to have
another load path by a plastic distribution.
A sketch of the static system can be seen in Figure 4.2. Surface loads imposed on the
slabs are transferred to the supporting beams. The slabs in this project are modeled as
simply supported slab elements (with connections at each edge). Even though it is also
common to find structures that feature an in-situ cast slab, which would yield a continuous
slab that would allow for moment transfer across the beams (i.e. a rigid connection).
Figure 4.2: Sketch of the static system of the donor structure in grid 2.
The beams are also assumed to be simply supported as they rest on corbels that are
rigidly connected to the columns and walls. The corbels are not modeled in IFC, but the
eccentricity they introduce to the columns and walls is handled by a stiff virtual bar element
(please see Section 4.2.2).
The columns take down the vertical loads from the beams. They have a rigid connection
at the top to transfer the moments from the corbels. The connection is hinged at the
bottom of the column, which makes sure that the moment is not transferred from column
to column. Usually, a connection detail of this type could look like shown in Figure 4.3.
The load from the column above N0 would act with a tolerance eccentricity of e0 = 20mm,
and the largest of the loads from the beams N1 would act with an eccentricity e1 corre-
sponding to the outer third of the triangular stress distribution on the contact area between
beam and corbel. The load N2 would be the smallest of the two beam loads and act with
an eccentricity e2 corresponding to the inner third of the triangular stress distribution.
However, this level of detail in regards to the modeling of the eccentricities has not been
40
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.3: Design eccentricities in the connection between beams and columns.
taken into account. In this project, the eccentricities are the same on both sides and can
be modified in the Grasshopper script.
For this project, it is evaluated that it is reasonable to assume that the resulting force of
the beams acts at the center of the contact area between the beam and the corbel. It
should be noted that this will minimize the moment on the column, which will be on the
safe side when estimating the bearing capacity of the column elements.
Also, the eccentricity of the loads from the column above is set to e0=0mm due to the
fact it would not be conservative to assume that the column above is placed off-center,
inducing a larger moment on the column (even though this should have been accounted
for in the design).
As the width of the column is 450mm and it is assumed that the corbel has a depth of
200mm, the resulting eccentricity used in this project is 450mm/2 + 200mm/2 = 325mm.
The horizontal loads from wind that act on the facade are distributed to the different floors,
which, by a rigid diaphragm action, distribute the loads to the walls. The bottom of the
walls, situated on floor 0, has a simply supported line support. The connections between
the walls are rigid. This makes sure that the wall can obtain a bending moment from
eccentric loading from the beams on the corbels, just like the columns. On a global level,
this means that the stabilizing core of walls acts as a cantilever beam.
It is assumed that every column has the same reinforcement layout, that the layout of re-
inforcement in beams isn’t varied through their length, and that walls in the same direction
have the same reinforcement.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
41
==PAGE:50==
4.2
Grasshopper script
To transform the IFC into an analytical model, a Grasshopper script has been created.
The script contains different segments and modules of Grasshopper and FEM-Design
API components, which are connected to form a model in FEM-Design.
Firstly, IFC data is converted to lists interpretable by Grasshopper and the FEM-Design
API. The model is then generated before analysis is carried out, and results are exported
to csv files. An overview of the Grasshopper script can be seen in Figure 4.4, and an
overview where the script is broken down into modules can be seen in Appendix B.
To fully understand the script’s data structure, it’s necessary to refer to the attached file
IFC_FEM_structural_analysis.gh for an overview, as a complete and exhaustive de-
scription can not be provided here.
Figure 4.4: Overview of the Grasshopper script.
4.2.1
Import of information
The data embedded in IFC shall be converted to a data stream that is interpretable by
Rhino, Grasshopper and the FEM-Design API.
To handle this, a Python function extract_elements(ifc_file) has been developed. An
overview of the input and outputs of the function is given in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Input and output of extract_elements(ifc_file)
Input
Description
ifc_file
IFC file containing the structural objects
Outputs
Data frame containing data about the...
beams_df
beams
columns_df
columns
slabs_df
slabs
walls_df
walls
storeys_df
storeys
wind_y_df
wind load in the y-direction
wind_x_df
wind load in the x-direction
load_combinations_df
load combinations
42
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:51==
The function reads through all IfcBeam, IfcColumn, IfcWall and IfcSlab elements in the
IFC file and extracts data about element geometry, profile, materials and loads on the
elements as defined in Table 3.14.
For bar elements (beams and columns), the location and length of the elements are rep-
resented by a start and end point in the global coordinate system. For shell elements
(walls and slabs), the location and span of the elements are represented by three points
defining a rectangle in 3D space. An example of a row from the beams_df data frame is
shown in Table 4.2, and the Grasshopper Python component utilizing the function can be
seen in Figure 4.5.
Table 4.2: Example of a row from beams_df
Name
beam_start
beam_end
length
profile
material
g
g_si
qA
qB
qC
qD
s
Beam BC-2-Floor 1
(8.4, 6.0, 4.0)
(16.8, 6.0, 4.0)
8.4
Concrete section,
c20/25
-9.0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Rectangle, 450x800
Figure 4.5: Custom Python script component for import of IFC data to lists in Grasshop-
per. The script is available in the attached file Import_IFC_to_GH.py.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
43
==PAGE:52==
4.2.2
Generation of structural elements
The generation of the structural elements is an interaction between the generated geom-
etry in the Rhino environment and the FEM-Design Grasshopper API components.
Bar elements (beams and columns)
The bar elements are defined in Rhino geometry as a line between two points. However,
for the beam elements, the line is shortened at each end to simulate the real span of a
beam resting on corbels, please see Figure 4.6.
The theoretical eccentricity of the load acting on the corbel is not stored in IFC, and is
directly chosen in the Grasshopper script. The eccentricity could be stored in IFC, but this
would require a comprehensive structural analysis model in IFC, or a custom property set
storing the connection between the beam and column.
Figure 4.6: Rhino geometry of donor structure showcasing columns, beams and corbels
(highlighted in green).
Figure 4.7: FEM-Design API - Beam material and sections.
When the geometry has been generated in Rhino, the FEM-Design API is utilized to gen-
erate a FEM-Design bar element.
44
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:53==
Firstly, the material is chosen from the FEM-Design database based on the country code
DK and a list of the material names (c20/25), which chooses the correct FEM-Design
material. The same methodology applies to the section of the bar element as shown in
Figure 4.7.
Then the Rhino geometry line, material, section, connectivity, and the identifier (the name
of the bar element) are inputted into a FEM-Design API component, which generates a
FEM-Design bar element with the specific properties as seen in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: FEM-Design API - Generation of FEM-Design beam element.
Shell elements (walls and slabs)
Shell elements are generated in Rhino using the Grasshopper component, Rectangle 3Pt,
which generates a rectangle from the three points defined in the data frame for walls and
slabs, please see Figure 4.9a-4.9b. The FEM-Design material is defined in the same way
as for the beam and columns.
(a) Walls
(b) Slabs
Figure 4.9: Rhino geometry of donor structure shell elements.
When generating the wall, the edge connections are specified as seen in Figure 4.10.
For all edge connections, the motion and rotation boundary conditions are restricted for
all directions. The latter is chosen such that the moment from the beams resting on the
corbels can be resisted.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
45
==PAGE:54==
Edge connections for slabs are set in a similar manner, where translation of forces is
allowed, but rotations can not be transferred. This is in line with the simply supported
local static system for slabs, where concrete has been cast between the slabs.
Figure 4.10: FEM-Design API - Generation of FEM-Design element wall.
4.2.3
Generation of supports
Supports are generated for columns and walls by deconstructing their geometry and find-
ing the corresponding lines or points, which in the global coordinate system are located
close to the ground floor.
These geometries are then used by the FEM-Design API to create the supports. All sup-
ports are simple supports (i.e., no rotational rigidity), however, not in the case of translation
across the walls (local y-direction), where there is no support. The definition of the support
condition in the FEM-Design API can be seen in Figure 4.11 and 4.12.
Figure 4.11: FEM-Design API - Support conditions for wall elements.
46
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.12: FEM-Design API - Support conditions for column elements.
4.2.4
Load combinations
In FEM-Design, the different types of loads are stored in load cases. To make the project
more manageable, these are created manually with the FEM-Design component as seen
in Figure 4.13. However, automation can easily be obtained by readout of the columns
from the load combination table stored in the IFC file (such as Table 3.17).
Figure 4.13: Load case g created with FEM-Design API.
By listing the generated load case elements in the correct order, the data set with the
load factors for each load combination can be used to generate the FEM-Design load
combination elements as seen in Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Generation of load combinations with FEM-Design API.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
47
==PAGE:56==
4.2.5
Loads
By utilizing the FEM-Design load components, the loads are generated from the Rhino
geometry and the list of characteristic loads on a given element.
Loads on structural elements
In Figure 4.15, it is shown how the FEM-Design SurfaceLoad component is used to gen-
erate loads on the slab elements. The values of the slab loads are transformed to a vector
in the global z-direction (the direction of gravity). Please note that the values of the loads
per definition are given as negative if they are pointing towards the ground and positive if
they act upwards.
This is together with the respective surface and load cases used to generate the loads in
FEM-Design.
Figure 4.15: FEM-Design API - Generation of loads on slabs.
Surface loads on walls are generated similarly. For line loads on bar elements, the pro-
cedure is the same, however, this is done using a FEM-Design API LineLoad component.
Wind load
To establish wind load on the structure and automatically generate a distribution of the
wind load to the stabilizing walls FEM-Design’s cover and diaphragm elements are uti-
lized.
Firstly, the cover elements are generated on the facade of the building, as shown in Fig-
ure 4.16a. The function of these elements is to distribute the surface loads to the adjacent
supporting structural elements as seen in Figure 4.16b, creating the converted loads. The
slabs and walls of the structure are used as the supporting elements for the covers.
(a) FEM-Design cover elements shown in blue
(b) Converted loads in red, green and blue
Figure 4.16: Conversion of surface wind loads to line loads on diaphragm.
48
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:57==
FEM-Design diaphragm elements are generated at each floor level and are used to trans-
fer the loads to the stabilizing walls.
The generation of the surface load of the wind in the different zones is done based on the
imported geometry, lengths of the different pressure zones, and the loads in the different
zones.
A comprehensive walkthrough of the generation of the loads in the Grasshopper and
FEM-Design environment is not presented here, but the general steps are as follows:
1. From the structural elements, find the outermost point in every direction, and use
these as reference points of the pressure zones.
2. Use the reference points together with the given lengths of the zones to generate a
surface for the load zone.
3. Use the pressure coefficients and the peak velocity pressure to determine the sur-
face load in the zone. For zones D and E, the resulting action is multiplied by the
correlation factor (ρ).
4. Use the FEM-Design API SurfaceLoad component to create a FEM-Design load
element.
5. Repeat the process for both wind directions.
Wind surface loads on the structure for wind in y-direction can be seen in Figure 4.17.
Figure 4.17: Wind surface loads in FEM-Design for wind in y-direction.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
49
==PAGE:58==
4.2.6
Model generation
When all FEM-Design elements have been generated the FEM-Design model is assem-
bled using the model construct component as seen in Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: FEM-Design API - Generation of FEM-Design model.
The analysis settings are then set as seen in Figure 4.19. The analysis is set to run as an
elastic calculation with no second-order deflection calculations. The diaphragm setting is
set to 1, which means that the diaphragm acts as a membrane, i.e., vertical displacements
of the slabs are allowed.
Figure 4.19: FEM-Design API - Analysis settings.
50
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:59==
4.2.7
Result extraction
The analysis results from FEM-Design are extracted using the FEM-Design API and a
custom Python scripting component that exports the results as csv files.
An in depth walkthrough of how the results are extracted is not shown here, but an exam-
ple of extraction of results on bar elements is shown in Figure 4.20. From the BarInternal-
Force component, a list of the different section forces in the different load combinations
is obtained.
Figure 4.20: FEM-Design API - Extraction of bar results.
For walls, the average line load (Fy) on the top of the wall is determined by extracting re-
sults from the relevant edge connection and determining a mean value. Also, the moment
across the wall Mx is found in this way.
It is possible to read out the shear acting along the edge of the walls however, this yielded
complex variations of the shear force along the element, which made it troublesome to
extract a single representative value. Instead, a simplified method is used.
The shear forces acting on the walls in the different load combinations are obtained by
multiplying the characteristic wind load acting on the wall by the load factor in the given
load combination. The characteristic wind load acting on the wall is obtained from the
distribution of loads in the FEM-Design load case for wind loads.
Please refer to Figure 5.4 for an illustration of the section forces on the wall.
Concerning slabs, directly extraction of section forces from the FEM analysis gave trou-
bles due to stress singularities, and that some slabs were not represented by their full
potential.
Therefore, a part of the Grasshopper script determines the maximum bending moment
and shear force by calculation as a simply supported beam as seen in Figure 4.21. As
there is no load transferring from other structural elements to the slab, the determination
of the design load in the load combination is easily obtained.
Finally, the analysis results are exported to multiple csv files in the custom Python scripting
component as seen in Figure 4.22.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.21: Moment and shear force curve for simply supported beam. Model used for
determining section forces for slabs.
Figure 4.22: Custom Python scripting component for export of analysis results. The script
is available in the attached file Export_GH_to_csv.py.
52
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:61==
4.3
Verification of FEM results by hand calculations
The FEM model has been thoroughly checked for having correct geometry and loadings
through a sample test. Additionally, the results obtained by the FEM analysis are to be
verified by hand calculations.
For this, load combination LC2 Today, Live load, A is going to be investigated since it
contains loads from all load categories (dead load, live load, snow load and wind load).
4.3.1
Beams
Beam BC-2-Floor 2 is investigated and the area that tributes to load on this beam is shown
in Figure 4.23.
Figure 4.23: Loading area for Beam BC-2-Floor 2 highlighted in red.
The design bending moment and shear force can now be determined by hand calculation
in the following way:
Dead load of slab
gslab = 3.06 kN/m2
Superimposed dead load on slab
gsi = 2.20 kN/m2
Live load of on slab
qslab = 2.50 kN/m2
Depth of load area
d = 6 m
Design load on slab
pslab,d = gslab + gsi + 1.5qslab = 9.01 kN/m2
Dead load of beam
gbeam = 25 kN/m3 · 450 mm · 800 mm = 9 kN/m
Design load on beam
pbeam,d = pslab,d · d + gbeam = 63.06 kN/m
Span of beam
L = 8.4 m −2 · 325 mm = 7.75 m
Design moment
M = 1
8 · pbeam,d · L2 = 473 kNm
Design shear force
V = 1
2L · pbeam,d = 244 kN
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
53
==PAGE:62==
From Figure 4.24 the results from the FEM analysis can be read as MFEM = 452kNm
and VFEM = 262kN. This is equivalent to a deviation of +5% (
M
MF EM = 1.05) and -7%
(
V
VF EM = 0.93) respectively, compared to the hand calculation.
From Figure 4.24 it can also be noticed that the section forces of Beam BC-2-Floor 2 and
Beam CD-2-Floor 2 is not the same even though the adjacent loading area is the same.
Please see Section 4.4 and Chapter 7 for further discussions.
(a) Moment curve
(b) Shear force curve
Figure 4.24: Results of bar elements from FEM-Design analysis, grid line 2, in load com-
bination LC2.
54
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:63==
4.3.2
Columns
Column C2-Floor 0 is inspected, and the normal force in the column is now derived by the
following hand calculations. The loading area for the column is highlighted in Figure 4.25.
Figure 4.25: Loading area for column C2-Floor 0 highlighted in red.
Loading area
A = d · 2 · 8.4m
2
= 50.4 m2
Dead load of one column
gcolumn = 25 kN/m3 · 450 mm · 450 mm · 4m = 20.25 kN
Design load, roof (table 3.9, eq. (3.8))
proof = gslab + gsi.roof + 0.45s = 6.92 kN/m2
Design load, floor 2
pF2 = gslab + gsi + 1.5q = 9.01 kN/m2
Design load, floor 1
pF1 = gslab + gsi + 1.5ψ0q = 7.51 kN/m2
Design load, structure
pstruc = 3 · 2 · 8.4m
2
· gbeam + 3 · gcolumn = 287.55 kN
Normal force in Column C2-Floor 0
Ncolumn = Aload · (proof + pF2 + pF1) + pstruc = 1467 kN
Figure 4.26: Normal force results of bar elements from FEM-Design analysis, grid line 2,
in load combination LC2.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
55
==PAGE:64==
From Figure 4.26 the normal force from the FEM analysis can be read of as
NFEM=1508kN. This is equivalent to an error from the hand calculation of -3% ( Ncolumn
NF EM =
0.97).
Even though, this building features fairly simple geometry the differences in the hand
calculation and FEM results can be due to the fact that slabs can transfer vertical loads
to the adjacent slabs and they have a direct connection to the columns.
At edges where the slab is along a wall, this connection offloads all the slab members,
which introduces a slightly different result than can be obtained by hand calculations,
where other assumptions in regards of the support conditions have been made.
However, this reasoning would indicate that the load on the column obtained by FEM
should be smaller than by the hand calculation, which is not the case. The load distribution
is investigated in Section 4.4.
A sketch of the intensity of the bending moment in the slabs are illustrated in Figure 4.27.
Here, it is clear to see that the slabs that act along the walls are subjected to less bending
moment.
Figure 4.27: Results of FEM-Design analysis in load combination LC2. Intensity of bend-
ing moment around the global x-axis in shell elements. Scale: red indicate high intensity
and green low intensity.
56
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:65==
4.4
Sensitivity study of beam stiffnesses
As the stiffness of the elements in a FEM analysis is crucial to the load distribution of a
statically indeterminate system, a sensitivity study is carried out to investigate the impact
the beam stiffness has on the extracted section forces of the beams.
By utilizing the FEM-Design stiffness modification tool, the stiffnesses of the beam ele-
ments are varied as seen in Figure 4.28, where the beams’ moments of inertia are multi-
plied by a stiffness factor.
Figure 4.28: FEM-Design API component utilized to edit stiffnesses of beam elements.
Stiffness factors of 0.5, 2, and 10 are to be compared with the default results obtained by
using the default determined stiffness (stiffness factor=1.0).
For the results of every beam element, the relative error is calculated, as determined by
Equation (4.1).
RE = value + reference value
reference value
· 100%
(4.1)
The statistics of the relative errors (RE) are presented in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Statistics of relative errors [%] compared to a stiffness factor of 1, obtained by
varying the stiffness of beams through the FEM-Design API.
Stiffness factor
Section force
Min
Max
Mean
Standard deviation
0.5
V
-5.97
4.70
1.93
2.83
M
-10.30
-1.17
-5.21
3.46
2
V
-2.33
6.81
1.61
3.49
M
0.53
6.92
3.28
2.45
10
V
-4.50
13.97
3.85
6.96
M
1.12
14.21
6.56
5.17
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
57
==PAGE:66==
By halving the stiffness (i.e. a stiffness factor of 0.5), it is seen that the mean of the bending
moments is changed by -5.21%, ranging from -10.30% to -1.17%. This is consistent with
the relation between load distribution and stiffness in FEM, as the stiffer elements take
more of the load. This indicates that in this case, the loads are redistributed to other
load-bearing elements, such as walls, compared to the case of a stiffness factor of 1.
Following this tendency, the moments in the beams increase for a stiffness factor of 2,
where the mean value of the relative error is 3.28%. This is even clearer when raising
the stiffness factor to 10, where the mean value of the relative error is 6.56%, with some
beams varying up to 14.21%.
This shows that if this method should rely on FEM modeling, there is a need for a precise
estimation of the stiffnesses to obtain reliable results. In this current case, there is a
difference in the obtained capacity of bending moments of -10.30% to +14.21%.
Depending on the geometry and static system of a structure, this could very even more
or less. Otherwise, realistic assumptions of the behavior of connections should be made
to allow for statically determinate systems.
Regarding the shear forces in the beams, the observed relative errors are not at the same
magnitude as for the bending moments, with a mean increase in the values of 1.61% to
3.28% without a clear dependency on the stiffness factor. However, larger variations in
the values are observed with a stiffness factor of 10.
Sensitivity studies could be carried out for other parameters, such as the stiffness of the
slabs. This could be interesting as the stiffnesses of slab elements (such as hollow core
slabs) do not have the same stiffness in both directions due to the reinforcement layout
(as incorrectly modeled in this FEM model). Additionally, a sensitivity study of the mesh
refinement could be carried out to ensure a level of sufficient mesh density.
58
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:67==
5
Implementation of Results in IFC
As a part of this methodology, the results of the structural analysis shall be embedded
within the IFC file of the donor structure.
This includes creating custom IFC property sets that store the bearing capacities of the
elements, which form the initial steps of a standardized way to store bearing capacities of
structural elements in IFC.
5.1
Storing capacity results in IFC elements
The results from the FEM analysis are stored in csv files outputted by the Grasshopper
script as mentioned in Section 4.2.7. These are interpreted as data frames in Python,
where IfcOpenShell is used to transform the element-specific results into a custom prop-
erty set assigned to the specific IFC element. In all cases, the properties are stored in a
property set named Reuse_Pset_capacity.
5.1.1
Beams
For beams, the maximum value of a given section force in the beam is obtained for all load
combinations within a given calculation scenario. As the sign of the section force refers
to the direction of the action of the section force, both positive and negative maximum
values are obtained.
In Table 5.1, the section forces obtained for beams, together with a description, are shown.
A sketch of the orientation of the local coordinate system in bar elements is shown in
Figure 5.1.
Table 5.1: Section forces obtained for bar elements related to the local coordinate system.
Section force
Description
fx / N (+-)
Normal force in x-direction (negative=compression)
fy / Vy (+-)
Shear force in the y-direction
fz / Vz (+-)
Shear force in the z-direction
mx / Mx (+-)
Torsional moment around the local x-axis
my / My (+-)
Bending moment around the local y-axis
mz / Mz (+-)
Bending moment around the local z-axis
Figure 5.1: Local coordinate system for bar elements in FEM-Design.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
59
==PAGE:68==
Due to the nature of the static system, no beams are subjected to fx, fy or mz. Even
though the beams do have a capacity to resist these section forces, they can not be
derived from the FEM analysis’ results. However, these capacities are not crucial if the
beam is to be used as a beam element with the same orientation when integrating into a
new structure. This is due to the fact that similar loading constellations will yield the same
section forces. The beams can theoretically also be subjected to a torsional moment mx,
however, these actions are so small that they will be neglected.
5.1.2
Columns
For column design, the interaction between the normal force and the bending moment is
crucial. Often in the design of new structures, interaction diagrams are drawn to illustrate
the bearing capacity of column elements subjected to combined axial load (N) and bending
moment (M). This defines a capacity envelope within which the column can safely operate.
In the design of a new column, bi-axial bending should also be investigated; however, for
the simplification of this project, this is neglected.
To establish an interaction diagram, the combination of the normal force and moment
acting on the column in the different load combinations is stored. For this project, it is as-
sumed that all columns have the same geometry and cross-section. This allows storing
data points of the combinations of normal force and bending moment from all columns
in the same dataset. This forms a failure envelope based on the section forces that the
columns have been subjected to. This can be seen in Figure 5.2 where the failure enve-
lope is computed by the convex hull functionality of the SciPy Python library[57].
Please note that the column element also will have a capacity in pure bending (N=0kN),
however, this can not be derived from the FEM analysis, as a normal force from dead load
always will be present. Also, due to the symmetry of the building, some of the results are
overlapping, which leads to a hard identification of all columns in Figure 5.2.
One must be aware that for very slender columns, the otherwise convex failure envelope
can become concave at some points (aka. the transition point), which would lead to a
faulty assumption of the bearing capacity of the column in some cases [58].
Figure 5.2: MN interaction diagram for all columns based on section forces in the today
scenario load combinations.
60
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:69==
For the columns, the section forces listed in Table 5.1 are also extracted. However, the
only relevant section forces for the column are N and My. Therefore, the coordinates of
the points defining the failure envelope are stored in the custom property set. The N- and
My-values of the coordinates are stored as individual properties N.i and M.i, where i is
an index enabling assembling of the values to a coordinate of (N.i, M.i).
As an example, the curve shown in Figure 5.2 can be represented by the custom property
set shown in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Example of the custom property set containing the coordinates of the failure
envelope shown in Figure 5.2, where N.i values are in kN and M.i values are in kNm.
N.1
510
M.1
93
N.2
257
M.2
85
N.3
244
M.3
82
N.4
0
M.4
0
N.5
1510
M.5
0
N.6
1510
M.6
5
N.7
1472
M.7
16
N.8
773
M.8
92
N.9
717
M.9
92
Identification of the column material properties and reinforcement configuration will yield
a larger failure envelope.
By choosing the characteristic compression strength of the concrete to be 20MPa and
utilizing minimum reinforcement, the failure envelope is as represented by the red line
in Figure 5.3.
The failure envelope is determined with the use of a Python function
BEF_column_cal.py that interacts with the spreadsheet calculation program Søjlebereg-
ning (column calculation) from Beton Element Foreningen [20] and extracts the failure
envelope.
It is assumed that the distance from the edge of the concrete cross section to the center
of the reinforcement is c = 30mm + 8mm + 12mm/2 = 44mm (30mm of cover layer +
8mm stirrups + radius of Ø12 reinforcement). Also, the safety factors for the concrete and
steel materials are γc = 1.40 and γs = 1.2, respectively.
From Figure 5.3 it is seen that not all combinations of N and M from the FEM analysis lie
within the red failure envelope, even though there is a large excess capacity in the normal
force domain. This would indicate that the column is not designed properly and could
have a failure due to a large bending moment with minimal normal force.
By inspecting and testing the element, the material properties can be determined as seen
in Chapter 2. Preferably non-destructive test can be used to identify the reinforcement
layout. As an example, one could imagine that 2K16 is identified as the reinforcement.
This would yield the failure envelope represented by the blue line in Figure 5.3.
It is seen that all the possible combinations of normal force and bending moment are
within the blue failure envelope. This newly obtained curve can now act as the one that
represents the real bearing capacity of the element (even though this is not carried out
in the following investigations in this project). One could also imagine a core sample test
of the concrete to be performed, yielding a higher characteristic compressive strength of
the concrete. This would enlarge the envelope even more, yielding a higher capacity for
normal forces.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.3: MN interaction diagram for columns. Obtained envelope plotted against ones
calculated by [20]. L = 4000mm. Red: fck = 20MPa, fyk = 500MPa and minimum
reinforcement 2K12, c = 44mm. Blue: fck = 20MPa, fyk = 500MPa and reinforcement
2K16, c = 46mm.
The structural engineer should also be aware of other limit stages, such as ALS (Acciden-
tal limit stage), where the cross section is exposed to fire, reducing its bearing capacity in
the hot and cold conditions. However, this is out of the scope of this project.
5.1.3
Slabs
For slabs, the maximum bending moment [kNm] and shear force [kN] are obtained and
stored as properties M and V respectively. This is based on the hand calculation method
presented in Section 4.2.7 that is depicted in Figure 4.21.
5.1.4
Walls
For walls, the average line load on top of the wall is stored as the property N [kN/m], the
average moment acting across the wall as M [kNm/m] and the average shear force acting
at the top of the wall as V [kN/m]. An illustration of this can be seen in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Section forces obtained for walls. N: normal force, M: moment across the wall,
V: shear force along the length of the wall.
62
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:71==
It is assumed that all walls in the same direction are reinforced in the same way. Therefore,
walls are grouped for the x-direction and the y-direction.
Coordinates of the MN interaction diagrams are generated for the two wall groups and
stored in the property set in the same way as for the columns. Additionally, the maximum
obtained shear force on the wall is stored in the property set by the property V.
5.2
Storage of element condition and reusability
Even though the focus of this project is on the bearing capacities of the existing structures,
it would be beneficial also to store the registered condition of the donor structure elements
in a custom property set, Reuse_Pset_condition.
This could be set up as seen in Table 5.3, where the elements are categorized into groups
A, B and C. An explanation of the categories are given in Table 5.4.
Table 5.3: Proposed structure of property set for element condition.
Property
Value
Reusability condition
[A or B or C]
Table 5.4: Explanation of condition categories.
Value
Description
A
The element can be reused directly without any treatment or modification.
B
The element can be reused if repair of damage or modifications are done.
C
The element is not suitable for reuse due to irreparable damage.
The property set is not embedded into the IFC file of the donor structure, but sets an
example for how the results of visual inspections or non-destructive tests can be handled
in future real-life tests of this method.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:73==
6
Evaluation of reuse
An evaluation algorithm, exchange_algorithm.py, is developed to automate the evalua-
tion of structural elements from a donor structure in a new structural context.
In the following, DS refers to the donor structure and RS to the recipient structure.
6.1
Recipient structure
To demonstrate the algorithm’s work, a recipient structure is created using a modified
version of the Python script used to create the donor structure. The recipient structure is
a 6-storey residential building featuring a central core as seen in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Graphic representation of the IFC of the recipient structure.
As this structure features more storeys than the donor structure, the manual placement of
the live loads, such as in load configurations A, B, C, and D, will be too comprehensive.
Therefore, load cases are not embedded into the IFC model and FEM is not used to
determinate section forces in the recipient structure.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
65
==PAGE:74==
Instead, the determination of section forces is handled by hand calculations in Microsoft
Excel[15], which results are exported to csv files that, by a Python script SF_to_RS.py, are
embedded into the structural IFC elements of the recipient structure by a custom property
set Reuse_Pset_Design_actions.
The calculations for the section forces in the recipient structure can be seen in the attached
Excel files Section forces recipient structure Today.xlsx and Section forces re-
cipient structure Future.xlsx.
For the calculations of the recipient structure, it is assumed that the slabs are supported
by corbels on the walls in the x-direction, which yield an eccentricity of 167mm. Also, it
is assumed that beams located in grids AB-2, AB-3, CD-2 and CD-3 are supported on
corbels on the y-walls with an eccentricity of 167mm. The moment from this action is
assumed to be evened out along the length of the y-wall. Additionally, loads from the
storey above act with an eccentricity of e0 = 20mm.
By utilizing the automatically determined wind load on the structure, and the simple and
symmetric layout of stabilizing walls in the recipient structure, the shear forces acting on
the walls are determined by use of the static model of a cantilever beam.
In a real-life calculation of the recipient structure, the criteria in terms of robustness should
be fulfilled. One way of handling this can be by identifying the columns as being key-
elements, where additional safety is incorporated into the design of the columns by multi-
plying the partial factors of the materials by a factor of 1.2, however, this is not taken into
account here.
The loadings on the recipient structure are similar to the donor structure, however, the
consequence class of the building is classified as CC3, yielding KFI = 1.1, and the live
load for residential areas as defined in Table 6.1 is used.
Table 6.1: Residential areas, live load
Load cat.
qk
ψ0
ψ1
ψ2
A (residential)
1.5 kN/m2
0.5
0.3
0.2
Due to the project’s focus on the structural criteria, distances of the grid lines are the same
as for the donor structure, such that an evaluation of the structural elements’ geometry
is not taken into account. However, it is not difficult to envision an algorithm taking the
geometry of an element into account and checking if it can be fitted to fulfill the new criteria.
However, it must be highlighted that cutting pre-stressed concrete elements such as
beams and slabs should be done with caution, as cutting pre-stressed wires can result in
a huge release of energy, leading to fatal consequences.
6.2
Algorithm
The first part of the algorithm utilizes an extraction function in the Python file
IFC_extraction_function_SF_capacities.py to extract the action on the elements of
the recipient structure (i.e. section forces), and the capacities of the elements of the donor
structure. These data are stored in data frames in Python together with the element ID,
which for the donor structure gets the prefix DS_ and for the recipient structure gets the
prefix RS_.
When the data is imported, the evaluation of the different element types can be performed.
66
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:75==
6.2.1
Beams and slabs
The algorithm evaluates whether or not a beam or slab element from the donor structure
can be reused in the recipient structure based on the following structural criteria:
My,RS ≤My,DS ∧Vz,RS ≤Vz,DS
(6.1)
Where My is the bending moment and Vz is the shear force.
The algorithm for the beams and slabs works in the steps presented below:
1. Sort the data table of the beams/slabs of the recipient structure, such that the
beam/slab with the highest demand of bending capacity (My) is placed at the top.
2. Sort the data table of the beams/slabs of the donor structure, such that the beam/s-
lab with the highest bending capacity (My) is placed at the top.
3. Starting from the top, pick out a beam/slab of the data frame for the recipient struc-
ture and look through the data frame of the beams/slabs from the donor structure.
Take the first beam/slab of the donor structure that matches the evaluation criteria
in Equation (6.1).
4. If a match with a beam/slab in the donor structure has been found, then print to con-
sole ”RS-Beam/Slab X can be replaced by DS-Beam/Slab Y”, and remove this from
the list of potential matches to look through, and continue to the next beam/slab of
the recipient structure. The potential element that can be reused is also embedded
in the data table of the recipient structures’ elements for an enhanced overview.
If no match is found, continue to the next beam of the recipient structure.
Steps 1-4 are performed until there are no more beams/slabs of the recipient struc-
ture to be checked.
6.2.2
Columns
For columns, the validation of potential reuse is based on whether or not all load combi-
nations’ resulting combination of section forces [normal force, bending moment] lie within
the failure envelope of the column element.
Compared to the algorithm for beams and slabs, this part does not propose a specific
element to replace another but identifies which columns in the recipient structure can be
replaced by a column from the donor structure. This is based on the assumption that every
column in the donor structure has the same bearing capacity. As a rule of thumb, one
should start by replacing the columns from the bottom of the recipient structure, ensuring
the highest possible utilization of the donor structure elements.
The algorithm for the column works as in the steps presented below:
1. Extract the points of the failure envelope curve from the donor structure’s column
data frame.
2. Extract the points of design actions [N,M] of the recipient structure’s column ele-
ments from the respective data frame.
3. For a column in the recipient structure, check if every combination of [N,M] lies within
the failure envelope of the donor structure columns. Print a list of columns in the
recipient structure that are exchangeable with the donor structure column element,
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
67
==PAGE:76==
and store this in the data table of columns of the recipient structure with a boolean
value.
Continue until all columns of the recipient structure have been checked and print
out the total number of columns that can be substituted by a column from the donor
structure.
6.2.3
Walls
The handling of the in situ cast walls is similar to that of the columns, but it is slightly more
complicated because the wall is additionally subjected to lateral loads from wind, which
introduces shear loads upon it.
To handle this, the combined utilization of the wall is determined and evaluated as seen
in Equation (6.2).
(NM)Ed
(NM)Rd
+ VEd
VRd
≤1
(6.2)
Where (NM)Ed
(NM)Rd is the utilization from the MN-diagram and VEd
VRd is the utilization of the shear
effects on the wall.
The utilization of the MN-diagram is determined as the fraction of the linear increase of
the point [N,M] until failure as seen in Equation (6.3), where a is the distance from origo
to the point [N,M] and b is the distance from origo to the intersection between the failure
envelope and a line going through origo and the point [N,M]. a and b are illustrated in
Figure 6.2.
(NM)Ed
(NM)Rd
= a
b
(6.3)
Figure 6.2: Distances for determination of NM-utilization of a wall element.
68
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:77==
The part of the algorithm concerning the walls works in the steps presented below:
1. Group and extract walls for the donor and the recipient structure based on the walls’
direction.
2. Extract the coordinates of the failure envelope of the donor structure walls and their
shear capacity VRd.
3. Pick out a wall from the recipient structure and extract the combinations of [N,M]
actions on the wall, together with its demand for shear capacity VEd.
4. Go through the walls of the donor structure and check if a point [N,M] lies within the
failure envelope and calculate the utilization from the MN-diagram (NM)Ed
(NM)Rd .
• If this criterion is not satisfied, continue to check the next wall.
• If the criterion is satisfied, calculate the shear utilization VEd
VRd , and finally check
the combined utilization from Equation (6.2). If Equation (6.2) is satisfied, mark
the wall in the data table as ”Exchangeable”.
Continue until all walls of the recipient structure have been checked.
6.2.4
Overall output
The print statements that have been presented above can be overwhelming for large
structures and are, at the current state of the algorithm, turned off by out-commenting.
Instead, it prints out an overview of the number of elements in the different categories,
which can be reused, as well as a total percentage of reuse (based on the number of
elements).
The console output could look as presented here:
---DS scenario: Today, RS scenario: Today---
24/24 beams reused, 100%
98/161 slabs reused, 61%
24/24 columns reused, 100%
0/12 x-walls reused, 0%
0/12 y-walls reused, 0%
Total amount of reuse: 63%
6.3
Algorithm results
By running the algorithm on the donor and recipient structure, results regarding which
structural elements can be reused based on the bearing capacities are obtained.
The results obtained by the algorithm for the combination of different calculation scenarios
are presented in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Algorithm results, numbers of reused donor structure elements (reused/avail-
able).
DS
RS
Beams
Slabs
Columns
Walls x
Walls y
Total
Today
Today
24/24
98/161
24/24
0/12
0/12
146/233
63%
Historic
Today
24/24
98/161
24/24
0/12
0/12
146/233
63%
Historic
Future
22/24
0/161
24/24
0/12
0/12
46/233
20%
Today
Future
24/24
98/161
24/24
0/12
0/12
146/233
63%
Future
Future
24/24
98/161
24/24
0/12
0/12
146/233
63%
Future
Today
24/24
161/161
24/24
0/12
0/12
209/233
90%
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
69
==PAGE:78==
By using the known geometries of the elements of the donor structure as shown in Ta-
ble 6.3, the volume of reused concrete can be determined as seen in Table 6.4.
Table 6.3: Donor structure element volumes
Beams
Columns
Slabs
Walls x
Walls y
Volume [m3]
3.02
0.81
0.88
6.72
4.8
Table 6.4: Algorithm results, volume of reused concrete (reused/available) [m3].
DS
RS
Beams
Slabs
Columns
Walls x
Walls y
Total
Today
Today
72.6/72.6
86.2/141.7
19.4/19.4
0/80.6
0/57.6
178.3/371.9
48%
Historic
Today
72.6/72.6
86.2/141.7
19.4/19.4
0/80.6
0/57.6
178.3/371.9
48%
Historic
Future
66.5/72.6
0/141.7
19.4/19.4
0/80.6
0/57.6
86/371.9
23%
Today
Future
72.6/72.6
86.2/141.7
19.4/19.4
0/80.6
0/57.6
178.3/371.9
48%
Future
Future
72.6/72.6
86.2/141.7
19.4/19.4
0/80.6
0/57.6
178.3/371.9
48%
Future
Today
72.6/72.6
141.7/141.7
19.4/19.4
0/80.6
0/57.6
233.7/371.9
63%
For the case of DS=Today and RS=Today all of the 24 beams from the donor structure
can be reused in the recipient structure, which has 60 beams in total. For the slabs, 98
out of 161 slabs from the donor structure can be reused in the recipient structure, which
has 343 slabs in total. The slabs that cannot be reused from the donor structure are the
roof slabs.
Even though the roof slabs are subjected to the same characteristic loadings and the ge-
ometry is the same, the 10% increased design load caused by the KFI factor causes
the design actions to increase. This results in the fact that, based on the reasoning pre-
sented in this project and the criteria Equation (6.1), the slabs can not be said to have the
necessary safety level in this new design context.
Figure 6.3: Results of evaluation algorithm for columns for the DS=Today and RS=Today
case. Failure envelope from Figure 5.2 and design actions from the recipient structure as
a scatter plot.
70
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:79==
64 out of the 72 columns in the recipient structure can be exchanged with a column from
the donor structure, which results in the reuse of all possible 24 columns from the donor
structure. The design actions on the columns in the recipient structure are shown in Fig-
ure 6.3, along with the failure envelope derived from the actions on the donor structure’s
columns, as identified by the analytical model.
A graphical representation of the algorithm result for the DS=Today and RS=Today case
is shown in Figure 6.4. Please note that beams on residential floors in grid 2 and 3 are
marked as they can not be exchanged with a donor structure beam, even though a simple
reasoning of loadings in the two structures would yield other results. This is due to the
results obtained by the distribution of loads discussed in Section 4.4.
Figure 6.4:
Results of the exchange algorithm, for the case of DS=”Today” and
RS=”Today”. The recipient structure is shown with colors indicating the following. Green:
Element is exchanged by a donor structure element, Orange: Possible exchange with a
donor element, Red: can not be exchanged by a donor structure element.
For the case of DS=Historic and RS=Today, it can be seen that there is no difference
in the number of elements that can be reused (compared to the case of DS=Today and
RS=Today), even though the bearing capacity is lowered.
In the case of the historic load combinations (LC21-LCY30 in Table 3.17) it is only the vari-
able loads that are lowered by 20%. Since the dead load of the slab and the superimposed
dead load are a significant part of the resulting loading on the slab, varying the live load
by 20% only results in a total change of the loading (and thereby the bearing capacity) of
8% as seen in Table 6.5.
This might indicate that if the dead load can be verified by inspections of the structure,
and it is a significant part of the total load on the slab elements, variations in the live load
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
71
==PAGE:80==
do not have a significant impact on the bearing capacity in this specific case. As the slabs
are the only elements with variable loads, such as live load, this affects the other structural
elements similarly.
Table 6.5: Bearing capacities and demand of common floor slab in the different scenarios.
Donor structure (capacity)
Recipient structure (demand)
M [kNm]
V [kN]
Deviation from ”Today”
M [kNm]
V [kN]
Deviation from ”Today”
Historic
44.6
29.74
-8%
-
-
-
Today
48.65
32.44
-
46.1
30.7
-
Future
52.7
35.14
+8%
47.52
31.68
+3%
The case of DS=Historic and RS=Future results in the fact that no slabs can be reused,
which is also supported by the results in Table 6.5. Additionally, 22/24 of the donor struc-
ture beams can be reused. This could represent a case where there is uncertainty in
the applied loads to the donor structure, and additional safety in the recipient structure is
needed.
Future scenarios are also investigated in the case of DS=Today/Future and RS=Future,
which does not impact the amount of reusable elements compared to DS=Today and
RS=Today.
For the cases of DS=Future and RS=Today, it is seen that all possible elements (besides
walls) can be reused in the new structure. This equates to 90% of the number of elements
and 63% of the volume of the structural elements of the donor structure.
Even though it would not be on the safe side to assume that the donor structure has
been designed for future scenarios, one could argue that the utilization of the designed
elements often does not equate to 100% with no residual capacity.
Therefore, this might give an indication of potential reusable elements if the elements
are investigated through a non-destructive test, which can identify the elements’ mate-
rial properties and reinforcement layout, which can then be used to derive a theoretical
bearing capacity.
For all cases, it is seen that none of the walls can be reused. This is due to the fact that
the results from the FEM analysis gives misleading results of the applied moments to the
wall. It has not been possible to model an eccentricity along the top of the wall with a
connection to the slab only. Therefore, loads from slabs have been delivered directly in
the centerline of the wall, yielding no moments.
More precise modeling of the static system of the donor structure could yield more realistic
estimations of the moment and thereby the bearing capacity.
However, in Figure 6.5 the actions on all walls in the recipient structure are plotted against
the failure envelope of a 200mm thick wall with minimum reinforcement (of today’s stan-
dards), which has been determined by the BEF wall calculations module [59].
It is seen that every combination of [N,M] lies within the failure envelope by a large margin,
therefore, it is expected that by identification of the reinforcement and concrete strength
by non-destructive testing, the wall elements can be evaluated as sufficient for reuse in
some cases when the utilization from shear also is accounted for.
Another crucial factor for the result regarding the reuse of the walls is the fact that the
recipient structure is 12m higher than the donor structure, and that it has half the number
72
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:81==
Figure 6.5: Design actions on walls in the ”Today” scenario from the recipient structure
plotted against the failure envelope of a wall with thickness 200mm and minimum rein-
forcement k8/250 b.s. b.d., c = 40mm, fck = 20MPa, fyk = 500MPa, L = 4000mm
obtained by [59].
of stabilizing walls in the plan. The higher building gives a characteristic peak velocity
pressure of 0.83 kN/m2 compared to the 0.66 kN/m2 of the donor structure.
As the dimensions of the perimeter of the two buildings are equal, the aforementioned
condition leads to significantly larger shear forces acting on the walls, which again troubles
the verification of the walls in a new context.
As direct reuse of the in situ cast walls already is troublesome due to practical and logistical
challenges, inspiration from the solutions presented in [60] might be a good alternative,
even though this might equate more to a mix of recycling and reuse.
The solution uses the reclaimed in situ cast concrete block in a bracing system, and sup-
plements with additional reinforcement, which takes tension and compression forces as
indicated in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Stabilizing system using existing blocks of in situ cast concrete walls in a
bracing system, taken from [60].
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
73
==PAGE:82==
6.4
Required information
As a result of the process of generating the analytical model and the evaluation algo-
rithm, the specific information needed to carry out this method has been identified. The
information is listed in Table 6.6.
Table 6.6: Needed information to perform the method.
Property
How to identify
Implementation/comment
IFC of donor structure
Element ID
IFC element GUID or custom naming
IFC element property
Element type
Visual inspection or drawings
IFC element type
Element geometry
Visual inspection or drawings
IFC representation and IfcMaterial-
ProfileSet
Element material
Visual inspection, drawings or test
IFC material
Material density
Table value or test
Property of IFC material
Material strength class
Drawings or test
Needed input for FEM-Design, not
needed for FEM method in general
Loading on elements
Building documentation and norms
Custom IfcPropertySet related to el-
ements / dead load, superimposed
dead load, live load and snow load
Loading on building
Building documentation and norms
Custom IfcPropertySet related to
IfcBuilding
Load combinations
Building documentation and norms
Custom IfcPropertySet related to
IfcBuilding
Load configurations
Building documentation and norms
Manually establishing worst case
load configurations
Element connections
Visual inspection or drawings
Implementation of eccentricity of
connections as well as degrees of
freedom with FEM-Design API
Support conditions
Visual inspection or drawings
Implementation of support condi-
tions with Grasshopper and FEM-
Design API
Floor diaphragms
Visual inspection or drawings
Implementation of floor diaphragm
with FEM-Design API based on
building geometry
IFC of recipient structure
Element ID
GUID or custom naming
IFC element property
Element geometry
Visual inspection or drawings
IFC representation and IfcMaterial-
ProfileSet
Element design actions
Design calculations
IFC element property set
The calculation tool FEM-Design relies on the material and section information already en-
coded into its database. If a general FEM element tool was to be implemented additional
information as listed in Table 6.7 are crucial to include on the elements.
Table 6.7: Additional information for general use of FEM to perform the method.
Property
How to identify
E-modulus
Table value or test
Moment of inertia
Drawings or calculations
Poisson’s ratio
Table value or test
Shear-modulus
Table value or test
74
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:83==
7
Discussion
Even though this method presents reasonable results for documenting the reusability of
structural concrete elements, sources of errors and pitfalls are likely to occur, especially
if it is to be applied in a real case.
In terms of structural and static considerations, it is crucial that the static system of the
donor structure is modeled correctly. Wrong assumptions in this regard will yield a wrong
distribution of section forces and thereby the derived bearing capacities. Determination
of a correct static system can in some cases be hard to do by visual inspections, and
construction drawings must therefore be highlighted as an important source for this iden-
tification.
The same goes for the correct identification of live loads, which in the current norm ranges
from a characteristic value of 1.5 kN/m2 (residence) to 7.5 kN/m2 (storage areas). It is
crucial to note that there can be a difference in the load applied from the actual use and
the design use. If the design use can not be identified, a conservative estimate of the
characteristic live load from the actual use should be made by engineering judgement.
The method presented here is based on calculations following the current norms. To en-
sure consistency between the loads that the donor structure should be able to withstand
and the loads applied in the analytical model, previous design codes or building docu-
mentation should be consulted. From this, the applied loads in the analytical model and
design standards should be adjusted accordingly. To cover uncertainty in this area, fur-
ther development of the method might include additional safety by implementation of a
probabilistic design approach [61], which can indicate a reasonable expected load on the
structure.
Presumably, today’s demands for structural safety are more conservative and comprehen-
sive than compared to the ones of the 1960s, when many concrete structures were con-
structed. As reclaimed elements might not satisfy the criteria of current design codes, a
guideline for actions on upgrading the element and documenting the reclaimed elements’
bearing capacity is needed. This method does not take this into account, which indicates
that it should be supported by other investigation methods such as non-destructive testing.
Additionally, it is possible in the industry today not to follow the norms directly. As an
example, reduced wind loads can be obtained by wind tunnel experiments. It would then
be faulty to apply the loads based on the current norm and conclude that elements of a
donor structure would be able to withstand these. Further development of this method
might include a more realistic modeling of the wind load, and also conservatively applying
the wind pressure as a function of the height of the building. However, if the peak velocity
pressure has been reduced due to wind tunnel testing, the level of documentation of the
structure is likely so extensive that the bearing capacity of structural elements can be read
off directly.
Another source of error in this method is that the chosen distribution of forces to the
stabilizing walls is based on a rigid diaphragm action. It is possible for a structural engineer
to determine and validate another distribution of the wind loads to the stabilizing system
of a structure. This would result in the fact that the structure is not designed for the
distribution of horizontal loads that is applied through this method, and thereby, a faulty
estimation of the bearing capacity of the stabilizing system in the donor structure is made.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
75
==PAGE:84==
The focus of this method is on the design of the ultimate limit state (ULS) of the structure.
However, to fulfill the structural criteria of a new structure serviceability limit state (SLS)
and accidental limit state (ALS) should be verified as well. This includes the design of
deformations, vibrations, and resistance in the event of a fire or collision.
The deformation behavior of structural elements depends on their stiffness and any po-
tential camber, which cannot be estimated using this method. However, if the ULS load
in a donor structure is larger than in a recipient structure (which is the case for reusable
elements), it is likely that this is also true for the SLS loads. This can, however, lead to
trouble in some cases if the camber of the element is too large compared to the SLS load
that is going to be applied in the recipient structure, or if there are other criteria for the
deflection in the recipient structure.
Handling of elements exposed to fire in a recipient structure might be troublesome due
to the fact that the criteria for the duration of the fire resistance might change. This will
have a significant impact on the reusability of the elements. Reused elements can be
fire-protected, but this leads to a larger material use, which contradicts the idea of directly
reusing the structural elements.
ALS also covers collision loads, which might be more uncertain to determine if the ele-
ments have been designed for. One should therefore be careful reusing structural ele-
ments based on collision loads, and in this case, carry out a thorough examination of the
structural element through other testing methods that can identify the bearing capacity.
Even though the execution of the structural elements can be verified through non-
destructive tests as GPR, a problem with the method presented here is that it relies on the
fact that a previous structural engineer has performed the design correctly. The method
is based on the fact that the structure should be able to withstand a given design load,
but it is not certain that this is true if any mistakes have been made in the design. These
mistakes might never be realized if the structure has not been loaded till failure.
Therefore, it is recommended that this method should be supported by non-destructive
testing methods on a large sample of the structure and that some elements are tested in
a full-scale load test to verify their bearing capacities. This method might, however, be a
fast way of scanning structures and finding an estimation of the minimum bearing capacity
of the structural elements without any costly investigations, especially if automation of the
method is optimized.
It is very uncommon that structures are designed to have utilization of 100%. The method
presented here assumes that this is the fact. To overcome this, test cases should be per-
formed. After many years of experience with this method, it might be possible to identify
the common residual capacities which is generally found in specific types of structures.
A conservative level of a fictitious residual bearing capacity might then be determined.
This is similar to the fact that a renovation project in Denmark may result in an increase
of the loads of 5% (threshold of insignificance) without the need for any verification of the
bearing capacities of the structure [62].
The calculation method for this project is FEM. Together with Python, IfcOpenShell and
Grasshopper with the FEM-Design API, this delivers quick and automated results. How-
ever, the method could also be carried out with hand calculations, which might be prefer-
able for small and simple structures. Hand calculations do, however, for the most part,
feature idealized and simplified support conditions.
With the use of FEM the stiffness of the structural elements is crucial to obtain a reliable
76
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:85==
load distribution.
The calculation tool FEM-Design chosen for this project also features an auto design func-
tion, which determines a sufficient reinforcement layout of the elements based on ULS.
By making assumptions about the material properties, this could provide an indication of
the expected stiffness of the elements. However, it must be highlighted that the stiffness
of an element is often based on deflection and vibration design in SLS load combinations.
From Figure 4.24a it is seen that the distribution of load using FEM does not result in the
expected section forces.
The observed error is highlighted by the sensitivity study in Section 4.4, where it is con-
cluded that the stiffness of the structural elements has an influence on the distribution of
loads in a statically indeterminate system. To overcome this, a structural engineer could
investigate if it is possible to break the donor structure down into small statically determi-
nate systems, which can be calculated without the need of FEM calculation methods. This
could be used in projects where specific elements in a structure are selected for reuse.
In the sensitivity study, a relative error from the obtained values for the bending moments
affecting beams of -10.30% to +14.21% is seen. This might lead to further development
of the use of FEM in this method where a variation of stiffnesses is applied to elements to
determine how sensitive the results are to different magnitudes of stiffnesses. This could
be used to determine a more conservative estimation of the section forces that affect a
given element.
This underlines the importance of correctly modeling the static system, emphasizing that
the complexity of FEM models can be difficult to manage compared to hand calculations.
The FEM model does not take eccentricities from slabs on walls into account, which un-
derestimates the applied moment on the walls. The same goes for the moment around the
other principal axis of the columns, inducing bi-axial bending in the column. Investigation
of this should be included in further work on the use of the calculation tool.
Another downside to making use of the current chosen calculation tool FEM-Design, is
that it is not open source, which might reduce the future development of the tool. In this
project, information embedded in the IFC file of the donor structure is based on a format
that specifically suits the Grasshopper FEM-Design API. To generalize the method open
source FEM tools such as the Python library OpenSeesPy [63] could be utilized.
For the current state of the development of this method, an ideal IFC file for the donor
structure has been used, where columns and beams meet perfectly at a point. It fea-
tures structural elements which is placed such that transformation into a FEM model is
manageable even though this would not align with current industry best practices for BIM
modeling. Further development of transforming an IFC file into a structural analysis model
might be crucial for the automation of the process. However, it is possible that this is not
necessary in a real-life case, as there at this time, properly are only a small number of
IFC models for the potential donor structures out there.
If the IFC of the donor structure is to be built up when starting a project utilizing the ap-
proach presented here, it might be preferable with a workflow where the structural analysis
model is built up separately without the direct import from the IFC model, as this could
ensure clear separation between the geometrical and the analytical model of the structure.
At the current state of this tool, information regarding the structural analysis model, such
as connections, support conditions and eccentricities, is not stored in the IFC model,
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
77
==PAGE:86==
which could be investigated in further works. Otherwise, development of an interface for
modeling an IfcStructuralAnalysisModel will be necessary, or SAF (Structural Analysis
Format)[64] could be implemented.
Another focus for the development could be the determination of a standardized way of
embedding the bearing capacities of a physical structural element into the corresponding
IFC element, as this facilitates the reuse of the element in the future.
Additional future work could include creating an algorithm that determines all necessary
load configurations, as the ones manually made in Section 3.6.1. This will enable compre-
hensive calculations such as the ones performed for the recipient structure. This would
allow for a fast and automatic scan of two structures and find reuse matches.
Further development of the evaluation algorithm could also look for potential matches,
where columns serve as beams and vice versa, based on the obtained bearing capacities
(also applicable to walls and slabs).
Even though this project is based on the reuse of concrete structures, the method pre-
sented here can also be expanded to steel and wood structures, whose material properties
and integrity might be less troublesome to assess.
Additionally, the parametric and automatic setup of this project can be utilized to generate
many different variations of a new structure. This concept can help design new structures
based on the characteristics of an identified donor structure.
Finally, it is recommended to test this method in a real-life case, where the bearing ca-
pacities obtained by this method are evaluated against full-scale load tests of elements
from an obsolete structure.
78
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:87==
8
Conclusion
The primary aim of this study was to develop a methodology to systematize the reuse of
structural elements by determining and storing their bearing capacities. This resulted in
a digital workflow including Python programming, IFC and FEM analysis.
By the investigation presented in this thesis, it can be concluded that the IFC of a donor
structure can support structural analysis if it includes material, geometrical, and loading
data. This was implemented by utilizing custom IFC property sets, resulting in a list of
required information to perform this method (provided in Section 6.4).
Additionally, transformation of IFC to a structural analysis model can be automated by a
Python script, where IFC data is exported in data tables interpretable by Rhino Grasshop-
per that, via the FEM-Design API, creates a structural analysis model in FEM-Design.
By exporting the obtained results of section forces, minimum design actions on the el-
ements can be obtained, acting as minimum bearing capacities. For vertical structural
members (columns and walls), the interaction between normal force and bending mo-
ment can be used to establish a failure envelope for grouped elements. These results
can then be embedded in the respective IFC elements by a custom property set.
By a sensitivity study of a case it was concluded that the stiffnesses of the structural
members in FEM have a significant influence on the load distribution, and thereby the
obtained section forces for the elements.
Additionally, it was shown that the evaluation of a structural element’s reusability in a
recipient structure can be performed based on a developed algorithm. For the presented
case, the algorithm showcased varied results based on different calculation scenarios.
From this investigation, it was concluded that a variation of the variable load of ±20% had
an impact on the amount of elements that could be reused.
In conclusion, the developed methodology provides an alternative approach to establish-
ing minimum bearing capacities. Storage of bearing capacities using IFC adds great value
to the reusability of the elements and enables automation through digital tools. However,
the use of FEM shows significant differences in results based on stiffnesses, which should
be subjected to further investigations. Additionally, real-life tests are needed in order to
verify the method’s reliability in real-life applications.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
79
==PAGE:88==
80
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Tim Kildeborg Jensen. [Online; accessed May 5, 2025]. 2022. URL: https://smuc.
dk/galleri/byggeproces/byggefotos.
[2]
Paris Agreement. “Paris agreement”. In: report of the conference of the parties to
the United Nations framework convention on climate change (21st session, 2015:
Paris). Retrived December. Vol. 4. 2017. HeinOnline. 2015, p. 2.
[3]
UNFCCC. The Paris Agreement. URL: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-
paris-agreement. (accessed: 2025.01.13).
[4]
World Meteorological Organization (WMO). WMO confirms 2024 as warmest year
on record at about 1.55°C above pre-industrial level. URL: https://wmo.int/news/
media-centre/wmo-confirms-2024-warmest-year-record-about-155degc-above-pre-
industrial-level. (accessed: 2025.01.14).
[5]
L. F. Cabeza et al. 2022: Buildings. In IPCC, 2022: Climate Change 2022: Mitiga-
tion of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change[P.R. Shukla, J. Skea,
R. Slade, A. Al Khourdajie, R. van Diemen, D. McCollum, M. Pathak, S. Some, P.
Vyas, R. Fradera, M. Belkacemi, A. Hasija, G. Lisboa, S. Luz, J. Malley, (eds.)].
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA. DOI: 10.1017/9781009157926.011. URL:
https://www.iea.org/reports/2018-global-status-report.
[6]
Robbie M. Andrew. Global CO2 emissions from cement production. URL: https:
//essd.copernicus.org/articles/10/195/2018/essd- 10- 195- 2018.pdf. (accessed:
2025.01.14).
[7]
Majbritt Skov (Deloitte) and Ida Marie Steinbring Rasmussen (Deloitte). Selektiv
nedrivning i byggebranchen. Samfundsøkonomisk konsekvensanalyse. Miljøpro-
jekt nr. 2186. (Sum of values in Tabel 30). 2022. URL: https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/
publikationer/2022/02/978-87-7038-354-7.pdf. (accessed: 2025.01.13).
[8]
Taavi Dettenborn, Juha Forsman, and Leena Korkiala-Tanttu. “Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers - Construction Materials”. In: vol. 170. ICE Publishing
collections are provided by Emerald Publishing, 2017, pp. 273–280.
[9]
Landager Jonas Vistesen. Genanvendelse af knust beton i nye, betonkonstruk-
tioner. Miljøprojekt nr. 2186. 2018. URL: https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/
2018/08/978-87-93710-69-6.pdf. (accessed: 2025.01.14).
[10]
ismwaste.co.uk. What is the Waste Hierarchy? URL: https://ismwaste.co.uk/help/
what-is-the-waste-hierarchy. (accessed: 2025.01.15).
[11]
CEN/TC 250 Structural Eurocodes. Eurocode – Basis of structural design. Tech.
rep. DS/EN 1990:2007. Danish Standards Association, 2007.
[12]
volunteers. IFcOpenShell. Version 0.8.0. URL: https://ifcopenshell.org/.
[13]
StruSoft. FEM-Design 23 Student. Version 23.00.006. URL: https://strusoft.com/
software/3d-structural-analysis-software-fem-design/.
[14]
Robert McNeel & associates. Rhino - Rhinoceros 3D. Version 8.18.25100.11001.
URL: https://www.rhino3d.com/.
[15]
Microsoft. Excel. URL: https://www.microsoft.com/da- dk/microsoft- 365/excel?
market=dk.
[16]
ChatGPT. Model: GPT-4o. Accessed: 2025-01-06. URL: chatgpt.com.
[17]
buildingSMART International. Industry Foundation Classes (IFC). URL: https://
www.buildingsmart.org/standards/bsi-standards/industry-foundation-classes/#learn-
more. (accessed: 2025.05.07).
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
81
==PAGE:90==
[18]
buildingSMART International. Introduction - Architecture. URL: https://ifc43-docs.
standards.buildingsmart.org/IFC/RELEASE/IFC4x3/HTML/content/introduction.
htm. (accessed: 2025.05.07).
[19]
Frederik Jønsson Madsen. DropBox folder with attachments. Accessed: 2025-06-
06. URL: https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/bxpzxk6ri1b2lmkbmyrlj/Attachments-
Master-thesis-S183666.zip?rlkey=53pvvuso52cnqjvjtsvvsbq2q&st=5mrzmasj&dl=0.
[20]
Beton Element Foreningen. Beregningsprogrammer. URL: https : / / www .
danskindustri . dk / medlemsforeninger / foreningssites / dansk - beton / betonelement -
foreningen/teknikogdesign/statik/beregningsmoduler. (accessed: 2025.04.23).
[21]
Julie Devènes, Maléna Bastien-Masse, and Corentin Fivet. “Reusability assess-
ment of reinforced concrete components prior to deconstruction from obsolete build-
ings”. In: Journal of Building Engineering 84 (2024), p. 108584. ISSN: 2352-7102.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2024.108584. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2352710224001529.
[22]
Célia Küpfer, Maléna Bastien-Masse, and Corentin Fivet. “Reuse of concrete com-
ponents in new construction projects: Critical review of 77 circular precedents”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production 383 (2023), p. 135235. ISSN: 0959-6526. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.135235. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0959652622048090.
[23]
Mats Eklund et al. “The conditions and constraints for using reused materials in
building projects”. In: Deconstruction and Materials Reuse, CIB Publication 287
(2003), pp. 248–259.
[24]
Bill Addis. Building with reclaimed components and materials: a design handbook
for reuse and recycling. Routledge, 2012.
[25]
Recreate. ReCreate. URL: https://recreate-project.eu/. (accessed: 2025.05.06).
[26]
Jan Brütting et al. “Re: Crete–reuse of concrete elements in new structures: A foot-
bridge prototype”. In: Structures and Architecture. A Viable Urban Perspective?
CRC Press, 2022, pp. 643–650.
[27]
Teknologisk Institut. 50 år gamle betonelementer får nyt liv i Gellerup. URL: https:
//www.teknologisk.dk/ydelser/50-aar-gamle-betonelementer-faar-nyt-liv-i-gellerup/
46392. (accessed: 2025.05.06).
[28]
J Devènes et al. “Low-tech methods for the reuse of reinforced concrete struc-
tural elements”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2600.19 (Nov. 2023),
p. 192005. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2600/19/192005. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/1742-6596/2600/19/192005.
[29]
Interreg FCRBE. Review of Existing Pre-demolition Tools, Policies, Resources for
Identifying, Quantifying and Organizing the Reclamation of Reusable Elements.
2019.
[30]
T Smeyers, M Deweerdt, and M Mertens. “Reuse toolkit-The Reclamation Audit”.
In: Interreg NWE (2022).
[31]
LBV Merkblatt. “FertigteileWiederverwendung von Fertigteilen aus Beton”. In: Stahl-
und Spannbeton [Code of practice for reuse of precast elements made of concrete,
reinforced and prestressed concrete], Landesmt für Bauen und Verkehr des Landes
Brandenburg (2012).
[32]
Standard Norge. Norwegian Standard for hollow core slabs for reuse – NS 3682.
URL: https://standard.no/en/sectors/byggevarer/norwegian-standard-for-hollow-
core-slabs-for-reuse--ns-3682/. (accessed: 2025.05.06).
[33]
Dansk Standard. DS 11990:2024: Structural appraisal of existing constructions.
Tech. rep. DS 11990:2024. Accessed: January 2025. Copenhagen, Denmark:
Dansk Standards Association, 2024.
82
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:91==
[34]
Lisbeth M. Ottosen (DTU SUSTAIN (Project leader)) Kathrine Hagemann Snabe
(LENDAGER) Karoline Fogh Gustafsson (LENDAGER) Ditte Lysgaard Vind
(LENDAGER). “Enabling business by reuse of basic building components”. In:
STRUCTURAL REUSE. 2023.
[35]
Marcel Vullings, Simon Wijte, and Satu Huuhka. Guidelines for a BIM-aided pre-
deconstruction audit. 2022. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.13828691. URL: https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.13828691.
[36]
Katja Irene Møller Thygesen Alexander Mollan Bohn Christiansen Karoline Fogh
Gustafsson and Serkan Karatosun. “Guidelines for reuse assessment of structural
concrete elements”. unpublished. N.D.
[37]
DS/S-19000.
Common rules for precast concrete products. Tech. rep. DS/EN
13369:2023. Danish Standards Association, 2023.
[38]
Foundation Pro. Save Time and Money with Ground Penetrating Radar Technology
(GPR). URL: https://foundationpro.com/2020/06/08/save-time-and-money-with-
ground-penetrating-radar-technology-gpr-2/. (accessed: 2025.05.06).
[39]
Smart Test Solutions. CONCRETE BLOCK SAMPLING AND TESTING. URL: https:
//smarttestaudit.ie/blog/index.php?controller=post&action=view&id_post=17.
(accessed: 2025.05.06).
[40]
BETON consulting Engineers. How to evaluate concrete core strengths. URL: https:
//www.betonconsultingeng.com/how- to- evaluate- concrete- core- strengths/. (ac-
cessed: 2025.05.06).
[41]
D. Breysse. “3 - Deterioration processes in reinforced concrete: an overview”. In:
Non-Destructive Evaluation of Reinforced Concrete Structures. Ed. by Christiane
Maierhofer, Hans-Wolf Reinhardt, and Gerd Dobmann. Vol. 1. Woodhead Publish-
ing Series in Civil and Structural Engineering. Woodhead Publishing, 2010, pp. 28–
56. ISBN: 978-1-84569-560-6. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1533/9781845699536.1.28.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781845695606500039.
[42]
The Concrete Society. Alkali-silica reaction. URL: https://www.concrete.org.uk/
fingertips-nuggets.asp?cmd=display&id=674. (accessed: 2025.05.07).
[43]
Bygnings- og boligregistret. BBR. URL: https : / / bbr . dk / forside. (accessed:
2025.05.07).
[44]
Kianwee Chen. Advanced IfcOpenShell - Advanced 2 - creating a simple wall.
URL: https://github.com/timmcginley/41934/blob/main/Examples/IfcOpenShell/
Advanced.md. (accessed: 2025.05.08).
[45]
chakkree. Test to create ifcGrid by ifcOpenShell. URL: https://forum.freecad.org/
viewtopic.php?t=15582. (accessed: 2025.05.08).
[46]
Coen.
[IfcOpenShell][BlenderBIM]
Creating
an
Ifc-
Grid,IfcBuildingStorey,IfcSlab,IfcWall
and
youtube
demo.
URL:
https : / /
community . osarch . org / discussion / 1061 / ifcopenshell - blenderbim - creating - an -
ifcgrid-ifcbuildingstorey-ifcslab-ifcwall-and-youtube-demo. (accessed: 2025.05.08).
[47]
buildingSMART International. 8.15.3.20 IfcRectangleProfileDef. URL: https : / /
ifc43 - docs . standards . buildingsmart . org / IFC / RELEASE / IFC4x3 / HTML / lexical /
IfcRectangleProfileDef.htm#Figure-8.15.3.20.A-Rectangle-profile.
[48]
CEN/TC 250 Structural Eurocodes. Eurocode 1: Actions on structures – Part 1-1:
General actions – Densities, self-weight, imposed loads for buildings. Tech. rep.
DS/EN 1991-1-1. Danish Standards Association, 2007.
[49]
DS/S-19000. National Annex to Eurocode 1: Actions on structures – Part 1-1: Gen-
eral actions – Densities, self-weight, imposed loads for buildings. Tech. rep. DS/EN
1991-1-2 DK NA:2024. Social- og boligstyrrelsen, 2024.
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
83
==PAGE:92==
[50]
CEN/TC 250 Structural Eurocodes. Eurocode 1 – Actions on structures – Part 1-3:
General actions – Snow loads. Tech. rep. DS/EN 1991-1-3:2007. Danish Standards
Association, 2007.
[51]
DS/S-19000. National Annex to Eurocode 1: Actions on structures – Part 1-3: Gen-
eral actions – Snow loads. Tech. rep. DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2024. Danish Stan-
dards Association, 2024.
[52]
CEN/TC 250 Structural Eurocodes. Eurocode 1: Actions on structures – Part 1-4:
General actions – Wind actions. Tech. rep. DS/EN 1991-1-4:2007. Danish Stan-
dards Association, 2007.
[53]
DS/S-19000. National Annex to Eurocode 1: Actions on structures – Part 1-4: Gen-
eral actions – Wind actions. Tech. rep. DS/EN 1991-1-4 DK NA:2024. Social- og
boligstyrrelsen, 2024.
[54]
Spæncom. Xtrumax Huldæk - Bærevnetabel EX 18. URL: https://spaencom.dk/
media/1653/ex18.pdf. (accessed: 2025.04.08).
[55]
Frederik Jønsson Madsen. Wind_load.py. URL: https://github.com/FrederikJM/
BIManalyst_g_28/tree/main/A3. (accessed: 2025.05.08).
[56]
DS/S-19000. National Annex to Eurocode 0: Basis of structural design. Tech. rep.
DS/EN 1990 DK NA:2024. Danish Standards Association, 2024.
[57]
The SciPy community. SciPy. URL: https://scipy.org/.
[58]
JF Jensen. Betonelementbyggeriers statik. Polyteknisk Forlag, Lyngby, 2010. ISBN:
978-87-502-0995-9.
[59]
Beton Element Foreningen. Beregningsprogrammer. URL: https : / / www .
danskindustri . dk / medlemsforeninger / foreningssites / dansk - beton / betonelement -
foreningen/teknikogdesign/statik/beregningsmoduler. (accessed: 2025.05.21).
[60]
N. Widmer, Maléna Bastien-Masse, and Corentin Fivet. “Building structures made
of reused cut reinforced concrete slabs and walls: A case study”. In: June 2023,
pp. 172–179. ISBN: 9781003323020. DOI: 10.1201/9781003323020-18.
[61]
R.C. Lanzafame. Risk and Reliability for Engineers. English. TU Delft OPEN Interac-
tive Textbook. Netherlands: TU Delft OPEN Publishing, 2024. DOI: 10.59490/tb.89.
URL: https://interactivetextbooks.tudelft.nl/risk-reliability/intro.html.
[62]
Bent Feddersen Niels-Jørgen Aagaard. SBi-anvisning 271: Dokumentation og kon-
trol af bærende konstruktioner. Tech. rep. SBi-anvisning 271. SBi Forlag, Aalborg
Universitet, 2020.
[63]
Silvia Mazzoni. OpenSeesPy. URL: https : / / openseespydoc . readthedocs . io / en /
latest/.
[64]
SCIA by ALLPLAN. Structural Analysis Format, SAF. URL: https://www.scia.net/
en/innovations/structural-analysis-format-saf.
84
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:93==
A
Python classes
1
class Column:
2
def __init__(self, ifc_file , base_point , height , width, g_si, q, s, storey
, Name, material_set):
3
self.ifc_column = None
4
self.ifc_file = ifc_file
5
self.base_point = base_point
6
self.height = height
7
self.width = width
8
self.storey = storey
9
self.Name = Name
10
self.material_set = material_set
11
self.context = self.ifc_file.by_type("
IfcGeometricRepresentationContext")[0]
12
self.density = material_set.MaterialProfiles[0].Material.HasProperties
[0][2][0][2][0]
13
self.g = -width*width*self.density/100
14
self.g_si = g_si
15
self.q = q
16
self.s = s
Listing A.1: Initialization of Python class for column object
1
class Beam:
2
def __init__(self, ifc_file , base_point , length , width, height , storey ,
g_si, q, s, Name, material_set):
3
self.ifc_beam = None
4
self.ifc_file = ifc_file
5
self.base_point = base_point
6
self.height = height
7
self.width = width
8
self.length = length
9
self.storey = storey
10
self.Name = Name
11
self.context = self.ifc_file.by_type("
IfcGeometricRepresentationContext")[0]
12
self.density = material_set.MaterialProfiles[0].Material.HasProperties
[0][2][0][2][0]
13
self.g = -self.width*self.height*self.density/100
14
self.g_si = g_si
15
self.q = q
16
self.s = s
17
self.material_set = material_set
Listing A.2: Initialization of Python class for beam object
1
class Slab:
2
def __init__(self,ifc_file , base_point , width, length , height , storey , g,
g_si, qA, qB, qC, s, Name, material_set):
3
self.ifc_slab = None
4
self.ifc_file = ifc_file
5
self.base_point= base_point
6
self.width = width
7
self.length = length
8
self.height = height
9
self.storey = storey
10
self.Name = Name
11
self.material_set = material_set
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
85
==PAGE:94==
12
self.context = self.ifc_file.by_type("
IfcGeometricRepresentationContext")[0]
13
self.density = material_set.MaterialConstituents[0][2].HasProperties
[0][2][0][2][0]
14
self.g = g
15
self.g_si = g_si
16
self.qA = qA
17
self.qB = qB
18
self.qC = qC
19
self.s = s
Listing A.3: Initialization of Python class for slab object
1
class Wall:
2
def __init__(self,ifc_file , base_point , width, length , height , storey ,
g_si, q, s, Name, wall_dir , material_set):
3
self.ifc_wall = None
4
self.ifc_file = ifc_file
5
self.base_point= base_point
6
self.height = height
7
self.storey = storey
8
self.Name = Name
9
self.material_set = material_set
10
self.context = self.ifc_file.by_type("
IfcGeometricRepresentationContext")[0]
11
self.width = width
12
self.length = length
13
self.wall_dir = wall_dir
14
self.density = material_set.MaterialConstituents[0][2].HasProperties
[0][2][0][2][0]
15
self.g = -self.width*self.density/100
16
self.g_si = g_si
17
self.q = q
18
self.s = s
Listing A.4: Initialization of Python class for wall object
86
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:95==
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
87
==PAGE:96==
B
Grasshopper script
88
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
==PAGE:97==
Study of static reconfiguration of existing construction via BIM
89
==PAGE:98==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
