==PAGE:1==
DTU Health Tech
Technical University of Denmark
T-Cells and Cancer
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s Thesis
Identification of Immunogenic RSV Peptides and
Characterization of RSV-Specific CD8+ T cells
JULY 2nd 2025
s203576
Maria Christine Lebeck Poulsen
s204589
Sarah Ree Lindholdt
Supervisors:
Postdoc Marcus G¨oransson
Assistant Professor Mohammad Kadivar
Professor Sine Reker Hadrup
==PAGE:2==
Declaration of Authorship
We declare that this thesis is our own work and has not been submitted elsewhere. We have acknowledged
all sources and cited the work of others where appropriate. The thesis was conducted in compliance with
DTU’s code of honor.
Authors:
s203576
Maria Christine Lebeck Poulsen
MSc Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
s204589
Sarah Ree Lindholdt
MSc Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Supervisors:
Primary Contact Person: Postdoc Marcus G¨oransson
Department of Health Technology
mgor@dtu.dk
Main Supervisor: Assistant Professor Mohammad Kadivar
Department of Health Technology
mokad@dtu.dk
Main Supervisor: Professor Sine Reker Hadrup
Department of Health Technology
sirha@dtu.dk
Project Period: January 2nd 2025 - July 2nd 2025
ECTS: 35 points
i
==PAGE:3==
List of Abbreviations
Ab
Antibody
APC
Antigen-presenting cell
BC
Buffy Coat
BV
Brilliant Violet™
C
Constant
CDR
Complimentary Determining Region
CTLs
Cytotoxic T cells
D
Diversity
DC
Dendrtic Cell
DMSO
Dimethyl sulfoxide
DN
Double Negative
DP
Double Positive
D0
Non-expanded sample, day 0
D14
Peptide-stimulated expansion after 14 days
D14 DMSO
DMSO controlled expansion after 14 days
ER
Endoplasmic reticulum
F
Fusion protein
FACS
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
FasL
Fas Ligand
FBS
Fetal bovine serum
FITC
Fluorescein isothiocyanate
FSC-A
Forward scatter
FSC-A
Forward scatter area
FSC-H
Forward scatter height
G
Attachment protein
HLA
Human leukocyte antigen
HLA-I
Human leukocyte antigen Class I
HS
Human Serum
ICS
Intracellular cytokine staining
IEDB
Immune Epitope Database
IFN
Interferon
IL-2
Interleukin-2
IL-7
Interleukin-7
IL-15
Interleukin-15
ITAM
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif
ii
==PAGE:4==
J
Joining
L
Polymerase protein
LRTI
Lower respiratory tract infection
M
Matrix protein
MHC
Major histocompatibility complex
N
Nucleoprotein
NIR
near-infrared
NS1
Non-structural protein 1
NS2
Non-structural protein 2
P
Phosphoprotein
PAMP
Pathogen-associated Molecular Pattern
PBS
Phosphate-buffered saline
PBMCs
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
PE
Phycoerythrin
PFA
paraformaldehyde
pHLA
Peptide Human Leukocyte Antigen histocompatibility complex
pHLA-I
Peptide Human Leukocyte Antigen histocompatibility complex class I
pMHC
Peptide major histocompatibility complex
PRR
Pattern Recognition Receptor
RPM
Revolutions Per Minute
RSV
Respiratory syncytial virus
SA
Streptavidin
SSI
Statens Serum Institut
SSC
Side scatter
SSC-A
Side scatter area
SSC-H
Side scatter height
SH
Small hydrophobic protein
TAP
Transporters associated with antigen processing
TCM
Central Memory CD8+ T Cells
TCR
T Cell Receptor
TEM
Effector memory CD8+ T cells
TEMRA
Terminal effector CD8+ T cells
TNaive
Na¨ıve CD8+ T cells
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
UV
Ultraviolet
V
Variable
iii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was executed in collaboration with the T-Cells and Cancer research group from the
Department of Health Technology at the Technical University of Denmark. It was conducted as the final
prerequisite for obtaining the Master of Science Degree in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering. The the-
sis represents 35 ECTS points and was carried out from January 2025 to July 2025 under supervision from
Postdoc Marcus G¨oransson, Assistant Professor Mohammad Kadivar, and Professor Sine Reker Hadrup.
This project focused on respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) because of a shared interest in immunology, specif-
ically in the immune system’s response to viral infections. Due to the limited therapeutic options for RSV
treatments, investigating T cell responses to RSV-derived peptides was essential for future therapy devel-
opments. To conduct this investigation, the project consisted mainly of laboratory work, spanning from
January to May, followed by subsequent data processing and scientific writing in June. Collectively, this
project allowed us to explore immunological techniques in greater depth and enhance our understanding
of the scientific research process.
All figures presented in the thesis were generated in Biorender.com. For coding used in data process-
ing, open AI was used as a supportive tool. All contents and data are self-generated and produced inde-
pendently of AI tools. The laboratory work, data processing, and scientific writing of the thesis were a
collaborative effort between both authors, Sarah Ree Lindholdt and Maria C. Lebeck Poulsen, who both
contributed equally to all parts.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank everyone who have supported and contributed to this project. We want to express
our sincerest thanks to Marcus G¨oransson who has consistently been available and guided us through ex-
tensive laboratory work and data processing. We are especially thankful for the insightful discussions and
feedback he has provided throughout the entire project. In addition to the academic support, Marcus has
been encouraging, patient, and genuinely interested in our personal and academic development. Marcus
has made this thesis project not only educational, but also personally rewarding through many memorable
moments. Additionally, we would like to thank Mohammad Kadivar and Sine Reker Hadrup for the oppor-
tunity of joining the T-Cells and Cancer research group. We would like to sincerely thank Mohammad for
his valuable guidance and assistance with the statistical analyses throughout this Master’s thesis project.
Both Mohammad and Sine are inspirational and motivating, and we are deeply grateful for the sharing
of your expertise. Thank you for including us in several group meetings where we have been introduced
to other ongoing projects within the research group, providing us with valuable scientific insights. Lastly,
many thanks to Postdoc Signe Koggersbøl Skadborg, Marcus, and the rest of the REACT group, for sharing
valuable data, forming the foundation of the research presented in this thesis. This project has provided us
with valuable professional experience in experiment planning, data analysis, and scientific writing, along
with supported personal growth through the collaboration with the research group.
v
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Lower respiratory tract infections caused by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) remain one of the leading
causes of hospitalizations, with high mortality rates worldwide. Current treatments are limited, highlight-
ing the need for novel immunological targets to inform the development of preventative and therapeutic
strategies. CD8+ T cells are known to provide durable and long-lasting immunity, making them a relevant
focus for the investigation presented in this thesis, which aimed to identify immunogenic RSV-peptides
and characterize RSV-specific CD8+ T cells. To achieve this, a combination of pHLA tetramer technology,
in vitro expansion, phenotypic analysis, and intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) was performed. Through
the use of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from four healthy donors, representing seven common hu-
man leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I alleles, an RSV peptide library was screened to identify the most
recognized peptides. Following expansion, the frequency of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells increased sub-
stantially, improving detection of these populations. The expanded cells predominantly exhibited an effec-
tor memory phenotype, indicating functional maturation. Furthermore, ICS revealed which RSV peptides
elicited strong IFN-γ and TNF-α responses, indicating functionality upon peptide stimulation. Collectively,
the findings presented in this thesis demonstrate that the experimental strategy can successfully be used to
identify viral peptides with immunogenic potential and provide detailed characteristics of the RSV-specific
CD8+ T cells. This establishes a robust platform for future investigations, with the aim of expanding the
peptide screening to support RSV vaccine or therapeutic development.
vi
==PAGE:8==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
RSV Structure and Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
The Immune System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
T Cell Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
HLA Class I Molecules and Their Role in RSV Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
CD8+ T Cell Activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.4
CD8+ T Cell Memory Differentiation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
In vitro Expansion of PBMCs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
pHLA Tetramer Technology for Detection of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells
. . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
Intracellular Cytokine Staining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.6
Flow Cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Project Aims and Objectives
14
3
Materials and Methods
15
3.1
Initial Screening of RSV-Peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Donor Material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
PBMC Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Production of Fluorescently-labeled pHLA Tetramers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
pMHC Tetramer and Fluorochrome-Conjugated Antibody Staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
Phenotypic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.8
Intracellular Cytokine Staining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.9
Flow Cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.10 Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.10.1 Combinatorial pHLA Tetramer Staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.10.2 Phenotype Staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.10.3 ICS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.10.4 Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:9==
4
Results
27
4.1
70 Highly Prevalent RSV Peptides Identified
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Four Healthy Donors Covered All HLA Alleles for the Investigation Cohort . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Confirming the Specificity of the Combinatorial Tetramer Panel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
PBMCs Proliferated Significantly Following an In Vitro Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Expansion Amplified and Revealed Undetectable RSV-Recognizing CD8+ T Cells . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Expanded CD8+ T cells Shift from a Na¨ıve to Effector Memory Phenotype . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7
RSV Peptides Induce IFN-γ and TNF-α Production in CD8+ T Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Discussion
43
5.1
RSV-Peptide Library Screened in Four Healthy Donors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Expansion of PBMCs and Tetramer Staining of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T Cells . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Phenotype and Functional Profiling of CD8+ T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Potential of Immunogenic RSV Peptides in Future RSV Immunotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Conclusion
49
References
50
A Supplementary Figures
53
A.1 70 RSV Peptide Library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2 10 Peptides used for Panel Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.3 Tetramer Staining of HLA-A-restricted RSV Peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.4 Tetramer Staining of HLA-B-restricted RSV Peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.5 Comparison of Tetramer+-Population Frequencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.6 RSV-peptides Recognized by CD8+ T Cells On Day 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.7 CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8+ T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.8 Subtype Distribution of CD8+ T cells for all HLA Alleles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.9 CD95 Expression of CD8+ T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.10 pHLA Tetramer Staining for Phenotypic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.11 CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of RSV-Recognizing CD8+ T Cells . . . . . . .
82
A.12 Subtype Distribution of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells for all HLA Alleles . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.13 Intracellular Cytokine Staining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) remain one of the leading causes of hospitalizations worldwide,
with high mortality rates. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is one of the leading causes of LRTIs, partic-
ularly affecting vulnerable groups, including infants, elderly, and immunocompromised individuals. In
2019, RSV caused around 33 million LRTIs in children younger than five years, resulting in 3.6 million hos-
pitalizations and approximately 101,400 deaths globally [6]. Despite extensive research, no widely effective
T cell-based immunotherapy or vaccine is available due to the limited understanding of the immune re-
sponse to RSV [31]. Moreover, as current treatments are mainly supportive, this emphasizes the need for
novel therapeutic targets for improved treatments options. CD8+ T cells have been shown to play a crucial
role in viral clearance and long-term protection, making it relevant to investigate the function of CD8+ T
cells in RSV infections. Moreover, only few experimentally confirmed RSV-specific CD8+ T cell epitopes
are seen in the Immune Epitope Database (IEDB), highlighting the importance of identifying new immuno-
genic peptides. This information could provide valuable insights into the immune response to RSV and
future therapy strategies [40].
This thesis explores and characterizes RSV-specific CD8+ T cell responses in four healthy donors and iden-
tifies which RSV-derived peptides are recognized in the donors. To achieve this, both phenotypic and
functional analyses were conducted, providing insight into how the immune system detects and responds
to RSV infections. The study further examines the phenotypic profiles of CD8+ T cells before and after in
vitro expansion and evaluates peptide-specific responses across various human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
alleles using peptide-HLA(pHLA)-tetramer technology and intracellular cytokine staining (ICS). Collec-
tively, these findings aim to confirm the applicability of the experimental strategy to expand the knowledge
of RSV-specific CD8+ T cell responses and support future development of T cell-based therapies.
1.1
Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)
From its discovery in chimpanzees in 1956, RSV remains the most common viral cause of LRTI in children
under five years. RSV transmits primarily through respiratory droplets from an infected person or through
direct contact with infected individuals or with RSV-contaminated surfaces. Approximately 80% of all
LRTIs in infants are due to RSV, which occur primarily between two and three months of age. Recently,
RSV has also emerged as an increasing burden among the elderly and immunocompromised individuals,
highlighting its importance not only in the pediatric but also in geriatric populations, both of which typ-
ically have weaker immune systems. Generally, the burden of RSV infections increases with decreasing
temperatures, as this allows for increased RSV stability, host susceptibility, and activation of potentially
dormant viruses. The clinical manifestations caused by RSV can range from the usual mild to moderate
common cold symptoms, to more severe inflammations, including bronchiolitis, pharyngitis, and rhinitis
in infants. For elderly and immunocompromised individuals, symptoms may be similar to those of infants,
but worsening of chronic conditions may also occur. In most cases, RSV infections are self-limited and only
1
==PAGE:11==
symptom management is necessary. However, in more severe cases, both infants, elderly, and immunocom-
promised individuals can require hospitalization for supportive care, consisting mainly of oxygen therapy,
mechanical ventilation, and intravenous fluids [21]. Re-infections often occur as immunity against RSV is
not long-lived. Moreover, current RSV therapy options are limited with side effects and high costs. Overall,
the limited RSV knowledge, high disease burden, and minimal treatment options emphasize the need to
improve the understanding of RSV pathogenesis for the development of novel RSV therapies [7].
1.1.1
RSV Structure and Proteins
Understanding RSV pathogenesis requires insight into how the virus enters the host and initiates cellular
infection. RSV belongs to the Orthopneumovirus genus within the Pneumoviridae family. It is an enveloped
virus with a single-stranded, non-segmented, negative sense RNA genome, composed of 15,222 nucleotides
and 10 genes encoding 11 different proteins (Figure 1) [28].
Figure 1: RSV genome composed of 15,222 nucleotides and 10 genes encoding 11 proteins.
The 11 different structural and non-structural proteins all play an important role in host cell entry, viral
replication, and immune evasion. RSV is divided into two antigenic subgroups, RSV-A and RSV-B, based on
differences in protein sequences. The functions of each protein, along with their sequence similarity across
the two subgroups, are summarized in Table 1 [11]. Among the 11 proteins, the RSV envelope contains
three major transmembrane surface proteins; the fusion protein (F), the attachment glycoprotein (G), and
the small hydrophobic (SH) protein, which all facilitate virus-host interactions and control the initial phases
of infection [11]. The G protein functions as an attachment protein that targets ciliated epithelial cells in the
respiratory tract. It is the least conserved protein among the two strains (53% identity) due to its immediate
exposure to the immune system. The attachment function of the G protein is achieved through binding to
surface molecules of host epithelial cells, which localize the virus to the target cell. This attachment allows
for membrane fusion, which is mediated by the F protein. Generally, the F protein is highly conserved
2
==PAGE:12==
among different RSV isolates from both subgroups, with amino acid sequence identities of 89% or higher
[11]. The function of the SH transmembrane protein is not fully understood, but it is suggested to play a
role in modulating the host immune response by acting as a viroporin, inhibiting TNF-α signaling. This
helps RSV evade the immune response and reduces apoptosis of infected cells [11].
Table 1: Summary of the functions of each RSV protein and amino acid identity (%) between RSV-A and RSV-B.
Protein
Function
Identity (%)
Fusion protein (F)
Mediates the fusion of the virus with the host cell membrane, allowing viral entry.
89
Attachment protein (G)
Responsible for viral attachment to host cell surface, initiating the infection process.
53
Small hydrophobic protein
(SH)
Inhibits the action of TNF-α and alters the permeability of host cell membranes.
76
Nucleoprotein (N)
Binds to the viral RNA to form the nucleocapsid, protecting the virus’ genetic
material.
96
Phosphoprotein (P)
Part of the viral replication complex along with N and L proteins, participating in
viral replication.
91
Polymerase protein (L)
Possesses RNA polymerase activity, responsible for synthesis and replication of viral
RNA.
93
Matrix protein (M)
Binds to the replication complex and plays a role in viral replication.
91
Matrix protein M2-1
Participates in virus assembly and budding; may regulate viral RNA synthesis.
92
Matrix protein M2-2
Involved in viral replication and transcription; may regulate RNA synthesis
efficiency.
72
Non-structural protein 1
(NS1)
Regulates viral replication and infection processes.
87
Non-structural protein 2
(NS2)
Modulates host immune responses and may also assist in viral replication.
92
Furthermore, RSV encodes two non-structural proteins, NS1 and NS2, which are involved in suppressing
antiviral host immune responses. This is accomplished by interfering with the interferon-dependent sig-
naling pathway and inhibiting the production of antiviral interferons, allowing RSV to replicate undetected
[10]. The nucleoprotein (N) encapsulates the viral genome and is a part of the ribonucleoprotein complex.
This protein protects the viral RNA from recognition and degradation by the host immune system. More-
over, it plays a crucial role in mRNA transcription, RNA replication, and virus assembly by supporting
the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (L protein) and its co-factor (P protein) [42]. The L protein is
the largest protein of RSV, consisting of 6578 nucleotides and is highly conserved among the two subtypes
(93%) [11]. It encodes an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, crucial for the transcription and replication of
the viral genome. In addition to its polymerase activity, the L protein also has capping, methylation, and
polyadenylation functions, enabling its production of mature, translatable viral mRNAs. Phosphoprotein
(P) functions as a co-factor working in close association with the L protein, stabilizing and guiding the
polymerase complex to the nucleocapsid [10]. The M2 gene produces two overlapping proteins, M2-1 and
M2-2. The M2-1 is a membrane protein that helps RSV make its RNA by supporting the viral replication
3
==PAGE:13==
process and is essential for making full viral RNA copies. Conversely, M2-2 controls RSV activity by re-
ducing RNA production and increasing genome replication. It helps the virus switch from making viral
proteins to copying its genetic material inside infected cells. This balance is important for the virus to repli-
cate and assembly properly [5]. Lastly, the RSV matrix protein (M) is part of the inner envelope and plays
a role in early infection. Here, the M protein is transported into the nucleus by the host nuclear transport
proteins, inhibiting the host cell transcription and avoiding potential suppression of viral transcription in
the cytoplasm. Additionally, the M protein contributes to suppressing host gene expression, likely aiding
in immune evasion [17]. Ultimately, RSV infects host respiratory cells by attaching to the surface of the cells
and entering through membrane fusion. Once the virus is inside the cells, it releases its genetic material into
the cell’s cytoplasm and uses the host cells’ mechanisms to produce its components within viral inclusion
bodies in the cytoplasm of the respiratory epithelial cells. This results in replicated RSV genomes and new
viral proteins. After replication, the viral particles are assembled and released from the host cell, spreading
the infection further [32].
1.2
The Immune System
When the immune system detects a pathogen, such as RSV, it initiates a rapid response by activating im-
mune cells to protect the host from infection. The immune system responds through two lines of defense,
the innate and adaptive immune system. The innate immune response is the first line of defense and in-
cludes macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), natural killer cells, and granulocytes, all of which react rapidly
and non-specifically. Both these immune cells and non-immune cells, such as epithelial cells, express pat-
tern recognition receptors (PRRs) that recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). PAMPs
are pathogen-derived components that are not normally present in the host and acts as signals to activate
immune cells through PRR engagement. When the PRRs on immune cells bind to PAMPs, phagocytosis
and apoptosis are induced. In addition, pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines are produced to re-
cruit other immune cells to the site of infection. Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as DCs, encounter
antigens through the engulfment of the pathogen itself or infected cells through endocytosis. These DCs act
as a link between the innate and adaptive immune response, by presenting the antigens on major histocom-
patibility (MHC) complexes on their surface and activating T cells. Unlike the innate immune system, the
adaptive immune system is specific as it develops over time, and provides long-lasting protection against
pathogens. The adaptive immune system is mediated by B and T cells, which recognize non-self antigens
through specialized receptors to eliminate the pathogen or pathogen-infected cells. These are both lympho-
cytes and considered peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) together with monocytes. When B cells
recognize antigens, they become activated and differentiate into plasma cells. These secrete antibodies that
bind and neutralize pathogens. Conversely, T cells are stimulated to either differentiate into CD8+ cells or
CD4+ T cells, which play a role in the killing of infected cells and mediating the activity of the immune
response, respectively [27]. This thesis focuses on CD8+ T cell responses, which will be examined in more
detail in the following sections.
4
==PAGE:14==
1.2.1
T Cell Development
CD8+ T cells play an important role in clearing viral infections by targeting intracellular pathogens and
providing long-term immunity. To generate CD8+ T cells, stem cells undergo multiple stages, including
development, activation, and memory formation. T cell development occurs mainly in the thymus and en-
sures that T cells are capable of recognizing antigens presented by MHC complexes. The T cell development
begins with hematopoietic stem cells, in the bone marrow, from which lymphoid progenitors arise. These
migrate via the blood to the thymus, where the cells undergo multiple development stages: double negative
(DN), double positive (DP), and single positive. Initially, the cells are DN thymocytes as they lack T cell re-
ceptors (TCRs) and both CD8 and CD4 surface markers. During the DN stage, the thymocytes can commit
to either the αβ or γδ T cell lineage, depending on the outcome of TCR gene rearrangement. In this thesis,
only αβ cells are described, as the focus is on CD8+ T cells. In the DN stage, a V(D)J recombination process
generates TCRs through random gene rearrangement of variable (V), constant (C), joining (J), and diversity
(D) gene segments. The α-chain consists of V and J, whereas the β-chain consists of V, D, and J. The gene
segments are randomly recombined to form a unique β-chain. If the rearrangement creates a functional
β-chain, it is expressed on the cell surface in a complex with an α-chain, preT-α, forming a pre-TCR [44].
Figure 2: The TCRs on T cells consist of variable
(V), constant (C), and transmembrane regions.
Within the V regions, CDRs form the
antigen-binding site. The co-stimulatory molecules,
CD8 and CD3, stabilize the TCR.
The pre-TCR delivers signals to stop further TCRβ rearrange-
ment and initiates thymocyte proliferation, while upregulat-
ing both the CD4 and CD8 co-receptors. This results in the
thymocytes now expressing functional pre-TCR and both CD4
and CD8, which transitions them to the DP stage. In this stage,
the rearrangement of the α-chain begins, and if a functional
α-chain is produced, it associates with the β-chain, forming
a complete TCRαβ (Figure 2) [44].
The complete TCR is a
membrane-bound protein now consisting of two polypeptide
chains, α and β, where each chain has one V, C, and transmem-
brane region. Within each V region, three loops, known as
the complementary determining regions (CDR1, CDR2, and
CDR3), constitute the antigen-binding site. Together, all six
CDRs are involved in the recognition and binding of pMHC
complexes. CDR1 and CDR2 interact with the MHC molecule
while CDR3 is hypervariable and interacts with the bound
peptide [43]. Due to this hypervariablity, the TCR can change conformations, enabling it to recognize a
range of peptide-MHCs (pMHCs). However, when a TCR binds to a specific pMHC complex, the chances
of this TCR binding structurally unrelated pMHC decreases substantially. Moreover, the TCRs are closely
associated with the CD3 complex and CD8 co-stimulatory molecules (Figure 2) [35]. After generating com-
plete TCRs, these undergo selection processes. A positive selection process ensures that the TCR is capable
of recognizing self-MHC molecules, while a negative selection ensures elimination of thymocytes that bind
5
==PAGE:15==
too strongly to self-peptides. From the selection, the surviving cells will mature into either CD4+ or CD8+,
depending on which of the classes of MHC molecules their TCR recognizes. This results in mature T cells,
which then leave the thymus to circulate in secondary lymphoid organs, including the lymph nodes and
spleen. These cells are na¨ıve T cells as they have not yet encountered their specific antigen [44]. Once
RSV infects the respiratory epithelium, it triggers an immune response that activates the T cells with TCRs
specific to the viral peptides.
1.2.2
HLA Class I Molecules and Their Role in RSV Infection
RSV initially infects the ciliated epithelial cells of the upper respiratory tract. From there, the virus spreads
between epithelial cells, enabling infection of the lower respiratory tract [40]. As RSV replicates inside the
epithelial cells, the viral peptides are considered internal as these are synthesized within host cells. Once
inside the cell, the RSV components, including viral RNA, and surface F and G proteins, are fragmented
and presented on the surface of infected cells through MHC class I (MHC-I). In addition to the presentation
of intracellular peptides, DCs can take up infected or dying cells and present extracellular peptides on
MHC-I to CD8+ T cells through cross-presentation [36]. The MHC molecules, also called HLAs in humans,
are expressed on all nucleated cells [16]. HLAs are polymorphic molecules, capable of presenting a wide
range of peptides to CD8+ T cells. The HLA class I (HLA-I) molecule consists of two chains, a large heavy
chain and a light chain called β2-microglobulin. The heavy chain anchors the HLA-I to the cell membrane
and folds into three domains: α1, α2, and α3. The α1 and α2 create a groove on the upper surface of the
HLA-I molecule, forming the peptide-binding site where antigenic peptides of 8-10 amino acids can bind.
The β2-microglobulin contributes as a fourth domain of HLA-I and provides structural stability to the
complex (Figure 3) [16]. The HLA-I complexes are divided into three different subgroups, A, B, and C,
based on sequence variations. Among all subtypes, there is significant molecular diversity and the amount
of defined HLA-I alleles is consistently increasing, with more than 26,000 different molecules being defined.
The frequency of different HLA alleles varies across different ethnic and geographic populations, however
some alleles are generally more common than others, represented in databases such as Allelefrequencies.net
[39].
6
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3: Antigen uptake and presentation on HLA-class I molecules by infected cells or antigen presenting cells. 1) RSV
proteins are taken up and ubiquinated. 2) RSV proteins are processed into peptides by the proteasome. 3) RSV peptides are
transported into endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) via the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP). 4) Peptides are
loaded onto the HLA-I complex and it is folded stably. 5) pMHC is packed into vesicles and transported to the cell surface. 6)
HLA-I is expressed on the cell surface. HLA class I molecule consists of a heavy chain (α) and light chain (β), where α1 and α2
form the peptide-binding site. HLA-class I molecules are anchored to the membranes of all nucleated cells.
To allow HLA-I molecules to present RSV peptides from the cytosol to CD8+ T cells, the RSV proteins must
be processed into smaller fragments via the uniquitin-proteasome pathway. In this pathway, the proteins
are ubiquinated and tagged for degradation by the proteasome, creating smaller peptide fragments (8-10
amino acids). These peptides are then transported into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by transporters
associated with antigen processing (TAP). Inside the ER, chaperones (calreticulin and ERp57) and tapasin
ensure that high-affinity peptides are loaded on the HLA-I molecule and support proper folding. Once a
peptide is bound and the HLA molecule is folded correctly, the stable pHLA-I complex detaches from TAP,
is packed into vesicles, and transported through the Golgi apparatus to reach the cell surface for CD8+ T
cell recognition (Figure 3) [16].
7
==PAGE:17==
1.2.3
CD8+ T Cell Activation
Once RSV-derived peptides are loaded onto the HLA-I molecules and presented on the surface of infected
cells and DCs, they can be recognized by CD8+ T cells. However, na¨ıve CD8+ T cells (TNaive) must first
be activated within secondary lymphoid tissues before they can execute their effector functions at the site
of infection. For this to occur, the DCs migrate from the lungs to the lymphoid tissues, where they present
pHLA-I complexes to TNaive. This interaction initiates T cell activation through the delivery of three essen-
tial signals (Figure 4).
Figure 4: The three signals needed for T cell activation. Signal 1: Antigen recognition, where the T cell recognizes and binds to
the peptide presented by the MHC-class I molecule on an antigen-presenting cell (APC), such as dendritic cells. Signal 2:
Receptor-ligand interaction, usually between CD28 on the T cell and the CD80/CD86 on the APC. Signal 3: Cytokine signaling,
where APCs secrete cytokines (e.g. IL-2, type 1 interferons) to determine the type of T cell response.
The antigen presentation serves as the first signal in CD8+ T cell activation and occurs through the binding
of the TCR to the pHLA-I on the APCs, such as DCs [15]. The binding interaction of TCR to the pHLA is sta-
bilized by the CD8 co-receptor, which binds to a conserved region of the HLA-I molecule. The cytoplasmic
tails of CD8 bind and recruit the Lck kinase, which phosphorylates immunoreceptor tyrosine-based acti-
vation motifs (ITAMs) in the cytoplasmic tails of each CD3 chain. This initiates the intracellular signaling
cascade, necessary for T cell activation [43]. In addition to the antigen presentation, the APCs provide a co-
stimulatory signal to the TNaive. This occurs through an interaction between CD80/CD86, on the surface of
DCs, and CD28 expressed on T cells which is critical for the activation and survival of CD8+ T cells. These
CD80/CD86 co-stimulatory molecules on DCs are upregulated following infection. Finally, the DCs deliver
a third signal through cytokine production, such as interleukin-2 (IL-2) and type I interferons, to support
the proliferation, survival, and differentiation of the TNaive [14]. This drives a differentiation of the TNaive
to become cytotoxic effector CD8+ T cells (CTLs). These cells migrate to the site of infection, the lungs,
to initiate a killing response which occurs through three different pathways (Figure 5). One pathway con-
sists of the secretion of perforin to form pores in the membrane of infected cells. This allows for cytotoxic
granules, containing granzymes, to enter the infected cell and induce apoptosis [8]. Another pathway is the
8
==PAGE:18==
Figure 5: Illustration of CD8+ T cells’ three killing
mechanisms: Perforing-granzyme pathway, FasL-Fas pathway,
and cytokine-mediated pathway.
FasL-mediated mechanism,
where Fas ligands
(FasL/CD95L) on CTLs bind to Fas (CD95) on
the surface of infected cells, initiating caspase-
mediated apoptosis. The CD95 is a death receptor
and is upregulated on multiple cells, both infected
and activated T cells, to trigger apoptosis when
bound to FasL, clearing infections and preventing
an overactivated immune system [46]. Lastly, CTLs
also release pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as
IFN-γ and TNF-α, to indirectly mediate apopto-
sis [15]. IFN-γ enhances the expression of HLA-I
molecules on infected and surrounding cells, im-
proving peptide-presentation and enabling more
effective recognition of infected cells by CD8+ T cells. TNF-α helps kill infected cells by binding to recep-
tors, mediating apoptotic signals. Moreover, it recruits immune cells to the site of infection. Collectively, all
three mechanisms contribute to viral clearance of RSV [1].
1.2.4
CD8+ T Cell Memory Differentiation
After the infection is cleared, most of the activated CD8+ T cells themselves undergo apoptosis to pre-
vent an overactive immune system and tissue damage. A small population survives and becomes mem-
ory CD8+ T cells. These memory subtypes persist in the body and provide faster and more effective re-
sponses upon re-exposure to RSV [40]. These memory CD8+ T cell subtypes vary in their expression of
surface markers, localization, and functional capacities (Table 2). The expression of the CCR7 (CD197) and
CD45RA/CD45RO markers distinguishes the different subtypes from each other. CCR7 is a chemokine
receptor involved in homing of T cells to the lymph nodes. The CD45RA/CD45RO are isoforms of CD45,
which change as a result of T cell activation and differentiation. After activation, the isoform changes to
the short isoform, CD45RO, to regulate the TCR signaling. TNaive express both CCR7 and the long CD45
isoform, CD45RA, as they have not yet been activated and reside in the lymph nodes [9].
9
==PAGE:19==
Table 2: Overview of three main CD8+ T cell memory subtypes: Central memory, effector memory, and terminal
effector based on surface marker expression (CCR7 and CD45RA) and function.
CD8+ T cell Subtype
Surface Markers
Location
Function
Central memory (TCM)
CCR7+, CD45RA–
Lymph nodes, blood
High proliferative capacity;
rapidly respond upon re-exposure
Effector memory (TEM)
CCR7–, CD45RA–
Blood, non-lymphoid tissues
Immediate effector functions:
cytokine production and cytotoxicity
Terminal effector (TEMRA)
CCR7–, CD45RA+
Blood
Strong cytotoxic activity;
low proliferative potential
A proportion of the remaining CD8+ T cells will become central memory cells (TCM) that circulate in the
lymph nodes and blood. These cells express CCR7, allowing them to home to the lymph nodes. They
have high proliferation capacity and can rapidly expand and differentiate into effector cells upon RSV re-
exposure. When the TCM become effector memory CD8+ T cells (TEM), a downregulation or loss of CCR7
occurs, resulting in these cells circulating in the blood and non-lymphoid tissues. The TEM are primed to
mediate effector functions, such as cytokine production, without further differentiation [40]. Lastly, the
terminal effector CD8+ T cells (TEMRA) express CD45RA, circulate in the blood, and are terminally differ-
entiated, resulting in limited proliferation potential. However, these cells have strong effector functions
through granzyme production [23, 29]. Collectively, the amount and functionality of all RSV-specific mem-
ory CD8+ T cell populations decrease over time, resulting in weakened immune response upon re-exposure
[40].
1.3
In vitro Expansion of PBMCs
As the memory CD8+ T cell populations decrease over time, amplification of these populations may be
needed to characterize their antigen-specificity. To achieve this amplification, a PBMC sample can be ex-
panded in vitro to promote the proliferation of T cell populations. This is done through the addition of
exogenous and synthetic peptides (8-10 amino acids) which can be loaded directly onto HLA-I molecules
on professional APCs in the PBMC sample. This loading enables the presentation of the peptide to CD8+ T
cells, creating the first activation signal. To enhance activation, an antibody that binds to CD28 (anti-CD28)
can also be used in the in vitro expansion to mimic the second, co-stimulatory activation signal. To further
promote the survival, proliferation, and differentiation of the T cells, cytokines such as IL-2, interleukin-7
(IL-7), and interleukin-15 (IL-15) are added to mimic the third activation signal [12]. The added cytokines do
not only support the survival and proliferation of the T cells, but also prime the T cells independently of the
TCR stimulation. IL-7 has been shown to induce phenotypic changes in TNaive by upregulating molecules
associated with T cell activation, such as CD95. This upregulation gives rise to an activated-like phenotype
of TNaive, even though they are not fully activated in the absence of TCR engagement [26]. Collectively,
10
==PAGE:20==
the peptides, cytokines, and co-stimulatory signals provide optimal conditions for T cell activation and ex-
pansion. This allows for enrichment of peptide-specific CD8+ T cells for enhanced detection and further
analysis.
1.4
pHLA Tetramer Technology for Detection of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells
From amplified CD8+ T cells, tools such as pHLA tetramer technology are valuable for the detection and
analysis of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cell populations. This technology is one of the preferred methods
for detecting antigen-specific T cells and exploits the specific interaction between a TCR and its respective
pHLA complex. In vivo, the affinity of the TCR:pHLA interaction can be low, however, when using multiple
pHLA complexes in vitro, e.g. in a tetrameric conformation, the avidity of this interaction increases. This
enhances the likelihood of a TCR:pHLA interaction to occur, allowing for improved detection. For the
generation of pHLA tetramers, a production of biotinylated HLA-I monomers is needed [30]. Most HLA
complexes are unstable without peptide-loading, making a peptide-binding crucial for stability. This is
the reason for synthesizing HLA monomers loaded with ultraviolet (UV)-sensitive HLA ligands that can
be cleaved while bound to the HLA molecule without compromising the structural integrity of the HLA
itself. Upon exposure to UV light, the bound peptide is cleaved, producing fragments that are too short
to maintain stable binding within the pHLA-I complex, causing the peptide to dissociate. As a result, the
HLA-I complex becomes conformationally unstable, allowing the introduction and binding of new peptides
of interest into the empty HLA groove [37] (Figure 6).
Figure 6: UV-mediated peptide exchange using biotinylated HLA monomers, UV-sensitive peptides, and desired RSV peptides.
Through UV light exposure, the UV-sensitive peptide is cleaved into smaller fragments, causing it to dissociate and allowing for
binding of desired peptides. This establishes the pHLA complex.
From the generated pHLA complexes with the desired peptides, these are then used to prepare pHLA
tetramers for the detection of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells. The tetramerization occurs through the addi-
tion of fluorescently-conjugated streptavidins (SAs), which have four biotin-binding sites. This allows for
the binding of four pHLA complexes, creating a tetramer conformation. The fluroscently-conjugated SAs
enable detection of the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells using flow cytometry.
11
==PAGE:21==
Figure 7: Tetramerization of pHLA complexes from the addition of streptavidin-conjugated fluorochromes. The streptavidin
allows for the binding of four pMHC complexes through its biotinylation. For combinatorial encoding, two
streptavidin-conjugated fluorochromes, e.g. PE and APC, are used for labeling of each pMHC complex.
For the detection of multiple T cell specificities in a single sample, combinatorial tetramer encoding can
be used. Combinatorial encoding is achieved by using multiple fluorochromes for the same pHLA, com-
bined to form unique fluorochrome-combinations (Figure 7) [30]. After generating the fluorescently-labeled
pHLA tetramers, these are used for the staining of CD8+ T cells to identify RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells.
When staining T cells, different conditions are required to ensure efficient staining. By adding a protein
kinase inhibitor, such as dasatinib, the staining conditions improve. Dasatinib inhibits the internalization
of TCRs, resulting in increased levels of TCRs on the T cell surface. This increases the chances of identifying
T cells with low TCR:pHLA affinity [24]. After treating the T cells with dasatinib, tetramers can bind more
effectively to TCRs. Moreover, fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies (Abs) can be used simultaneously for
labeling of surface markers, enabling precise identification and characterization of the target population.
Staining of surface markers with Abs is a widely used technique to identify target cell populations. This
technique is based on the principle that Abs bind specifically to antigens, such as surface markers on dif-
ferent cells, to exclude or include specific population. To make these interactions visible in flow cytometry,
the Abs are conjugated to fluorochromes [34]. In addition to the identification of specific populations,
near-infrared (NIR) viability dyes are used to selectively stain cells with compromised membranes, allow-
ing for exclusion of dead cells. These dyes can only enter dying cells with permeated membranes, where
they bind to intracellular amines, resulting in dying cells becoming fluorescent with NIR [33]. Collectively,
these staining techniques provide precise tools for the identification and characterization of specific T cell
populations based on peptide recognition and surface markers.
1.5
Intracellular Cytokine Staining
Aside from staining surface markers to identify cell populations, a characterization of the functionality of
the cells can also be evaluated through staining of intracellular components. Such components include
cytokines that can be stained using the ICS technique. This enables the detection of cytokine produc-
tion, particularly TNF-α and IFN-γ, within the CD8+ T cells to gain insight into the effector function of
these cells. These cytokines are secreted early in infection and directly indicate that the T cells respond to
12
==PAGE:22==
the peptides and are functionally active. ICS allows for the measurement of the production of these cy-
tokines in response to peptide stimulation, by trapping the cytokines inside the cells [2]. To perform ICS,
an initial stimulation with peptides will induce the intracellular production of these cytokines within the
RSV-specific T cells population. To ensure that the cytokines are not secreted from the target population,
protein transport inhibitors are added to prevent cytokine release. This is achieved using Brefeldin A (e.g.
GolgiPlug™) and Monensin (e.g. GolgiStop™) to block protein transport from the ER to golgi and to disrupt
golgi function, respectively. To preserve the cell structure, a fixation buffer is used, together with a perme-
abilization buffer, allowing the antibodies to enter the cell and stain the cytokines. Intracellular staining
of these cytokines is often combined with tetramers and staining of phenotypic markers to investigate the
characteristics of RSV-specific CD8+ T cells using flow cytometry.
1.6
Flow Cytometry
For the simultaneous detection of multiple morphological and molecular characteristics of individual cells,
flow cytometry can be used. This tool uses lasers to analyze light scattering and fluorochromes bound to
cells. The morphological properties of the cells include cell size and granularity, which are determined
based on the two different light scattering detectors, forward (FSC) and side scatter (SSC), respectively.
In addition to detecting morphological features, flow cytometry can detect tetramer+ cells and antibody
markers by passing individual cells labeled with fluorescent tetramers and antibodies through the flow
cytometer’s set of lasers. The fluorochromes emit light at specific wavelengths, which sensors capture and
measure. This allows for identification and quantification of cells based on their antigen recognition and
surface marker expression. Compensation is essential for analyzing multiple fluorochromes simultaneously
to reduce interference and improve accuracy. Some fluorochromes have broader emission spectra, which
can spill into other channels. This spillover is reduced when using compensation [3].
13
==PAGE:23==
2
Project Aims and Objectives
RSV represents one of the leading causes of LRTIs, causing major global health challenges. Currently, RSV
treatments remain limited, highlighting the need for identifying novel therapeutic targets. Studies have
demonstrated that CD8+ T cells can mediate antiviral and long-lasting immunity, making them promising
candidates for the development of prophylactic and therapeutic RSV therapies. The development of these
therapeutics is the primary motivation behind this investigation. To support this goal, it is essential to
identify immunogenic peptides and functionally active CD8+ T cells. This thesis comprises an investigation
cohort, designed to screen 70 RSV peptides across four donors to evaluate their immunogenic potential
and assess the responding CD8+ T cell populations. This is achieved through the use of pHLA tetramer
technology and phenotypic and functional analyses in samples from four healthy donors, representing
seven HLA class I alleles. Furthermore, the experimental findings aim to demonstrate the applicability of
this experimental strategy for identifying immunogenic peptides and characterizing RSV-specific CD8+ T
cells. To achieve these aims, a set of different objectives are established:
• Generate an RSV peptide library based on prevalence and estimated frequency from initial peptide
screening
• Confirm multi-color flow cytometry panel for tetramer and phenotypic analyses
• Expand RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells from healthy donor PBMC samples
• Generate pHLA tetramers to detect RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells before and after expansion
• Determine the phenotypic profile of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells through surface marker staining
• Investigate the functionality of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells using intracellular cytokine staining
• Evaluate experimental findings to infer the immune profile of RSV-specific CD8+ T cells.
To address these objectives, several experiments were conducted (Figure 8), followed by an analysis and
discussion of the results, presented in the following sections of this thesis.
Figure 8: Illustration of the experimential workflow for this Master’s Thesis, spanning from January 2025 to July 2025.
14
==PAGE:24==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Initial Screening of RSV-Peptides
The initial screening, conducted within the research group, generated a peptide library based on RSV DNA
isolated from 11 RSV-infected patients (6 RSV strain A patients and 7 RSV strain B patients) from Statens
Serum Institut (SSI). The DNA was translated into protein sequences and categorized into the 11 different
RSV proteins by SSI. Strong binding 8-11mer RSV peptides (EL-rank <0.5) were identified across 12 HLA
alleles using NetMHCpan 4.1 [45]. The 12 HLA alleles were selected to represent the most common HLA al-
leles within the European population, using the IEDB Population Coverage tool [19]. Additionally, 14 RSV-
peptides from IEDB [18] were included in the screening, based on EL-rank scores. For underrepresented
HLA alleles and proteins, peptides with the lowest EL-rank (EL-rank <2) were included to approximate the
median number of peptides across all proteins for all HLA alleles. From this, a peptide library was created,
containing 1791 RSV-peptides. Subsequently, this was used for a DNA-labeled pMHC multimer screening
of PBMC samples from 54 healthy individuals, who were pre-selected to express a minimum of one of the
selected HLA alleles. All samples were stained with HLA-matched multimers using the multimer library
screening method and barracoda software, described in Bentzen, 2016 [4]. From these data, the prevalence
and estimated frequency of peptide-recognizing CD8+ T cells were calculated across donor samples, using
the RStudio tool.
3.2
Peptides
From the peptide library generated in the initial screening, a refined peptide library of 70 peptides was
established for the investigation cohort presented in this thesis. This library was created from the 10 most
prevalent peptides for seven common HLA alleles (Supplementary Figure A.1). In cases where multiple
peptides exhibited the same prevalence at the cutoff, the estimated frequency was used to prioritize and
include the peptides with the highest frequency. Furthermore, if multiple peptides had similar amino acid
sequences, only the one with the highest prevalence and estimated frequency was chosen. All peptides
were synthesized and purchased from Synpeptide LTD.
3.3
Donor Material
Blood samples from healthy donors were obtained from the blood bank at Rigshopspitalet (Copenhagen),
and later used for the isolation of PBMCs. The PBMCs were isolated from heparinized blood through den-
sity centrifugation in Leucosep tubes pre-filled with Lymphoprep™(Axis-Shield PoC, #1114544). The blood
was diluted using phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) wash buffer and subsequently centrifuged, resulting in
the formation of a buffy coat (BC) layer. This layer was collected and washed in PBS wash buffer, followed
by cell counting using the NucleoCounter® NC-200™. The cells were resuspended in a sterile freezing
15
==PAGE:25==
medium consisting of 90% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Biowest, #S181H-500) and 10% dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) (Merck, #D8418) and divided into cryo vials, resulting in a final concentration of 10·106 viable cells
per ml in each vial. These PBMC samples were assigned a unique identifier in the format BCXXX. The BC
samples were stored at -80° C overnight and then moved to a nitrogen tank at -180° C after 24 hours. All
BC samples were HLA-typed by an external company.
3.4
PBMC Expansion
Four BC samples were selected (BC467, BC461, BC457, BC450), covering the seven HLA alleles used in
this investigation cohort, and expanded in vitro for 14 days. For each HLA allele, approximately 2.5 · 106
cells were used for the expansion. On day 0 (D0), all BC samples were thawed and washed twice in R10,
consisting of RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco, #61870-010) with 10% FBS (Biowest, #S181H-500). The expansion
was divided into two conditions for each HLA allele, one stimulated with ∼10 µM HLA-restricted 10-
peptide pool (D14), while the other served as a DMSO control (D14 DMSO) (Figure 9). Two 24-well plates
were used, one for the HLA-A and HLA-B alleles each. The 10-peptide-pool was prepared by combining 1
µl of each peptide and diluting with 90 µl of complete media (Table 3), resulting in a 1:100 ratio per peptide.
Approximately 5 · 106 cells for each HLA were resuspended in 1 mL complete media (Table 3) and split
into the two conditions, corresponding to 500 µl in each well. The complete media consisted of X-vivo®15,
human serum (HS), and cytokines (IL-2, IL-7, IL-15) (Table 3). The remaining cells for each HLA were
refrozen and later used for D0 tetramer staining. Along with the complete media and peptides, 2 µg/ml of
anti-CD28 was also added on D0.
Table 3: Composition of the culture media used for CD8+ T cell in vitro expansion. Each component represent a
certain percentage of the total media volume. The catalog number along with the supplier and stock concentration of
each component is stated.
Concentration
Component
Catalog No.
Supplier
Stock Concentration
—
X-VIVO®15
02-05-3Q
Lonza
—
5%
Human Serum
H3667
Sigma-Aldrich
—
50 U/ml
IL-2
200-02-250UG
Fisher Scientific
400,000 U/mL
25 ng/ml
IL-7
200-07-10UG
Fisher Scientific
10,000 ng/mL
25 ng/ml
IL-15
200-15-50UG
Fisher Scientific
100,000 ng/mL
16
==PAGE:26==
Figure 9: Illustration of D0 expansion workflow and plate layout. One BC sample was split into two equal proportions, one for
D0 staining, and the other for in vitro expansion. The expansion sample was further split to achieve 2.5 ·106 cells for
peptide-stimulated expansion and a DMSO expansion control. For the expansion, a growth medium was used, consisting of IL-2,
IL-7, IL-15, anti-CD28 (on day 0 only), X-vivo, and human serum.
On day 3, 500 µl complete media was added on top of the 500 µl in each well, resulting in a total volume of
1 mL in each well. On day 7, each well was split into two wells by transferring half of the volume (500 µl)
into a new well (Figure 10). After the transfer, 500 µl complete medium was added to a total volume of 1
mL in each well.
Figure 10: 24-well plate layout of cell expansion at day 7. Each well is split into two wells for each HLA allele, increasing the
volume to facilitate cell proliferation. Each well has a total volume of 1 mL.
On day 10, 500 µl of the complete medium was removed from the top of each well. The remaining 500 µl
was mixed and transferred to a 12-well plate. An additional 1.5 mL of the complete medium was added
to each well, resulting in a final volume of 2 mL. During the 14-day expansion, cell cultures were routinely
monitored using a microscope (40x magnification), allowing visualization of cell proliferation. On day
14, the cells were harvested, washed twice in R10, and counted using the NucleoCounter® NC-200™. For
cryopreservation, cells were resuspended in a solution containing 90% FBS (Biowest, #S181H-500) and 10%
DMSO (Merck, #D8418), with a final concentration of ∼10 · 106 cells per ml. The vials were frozen at -80°
C until thawed for D14 and D14 DMSO stainings.
17
==PAGE:27==
3.5
Production of Fluorescently-labeled pHLA Tetramers
Pre-made biotinylated HLA monomers were used to generate pHLA complexes. This was achieved using
direct peptide loading for A*02:01 and A*24:02 or via UV-mediated peptide exchange for the remaining
alleles (A*01:01, A*03:01, B*07:02, B*08:01, and B*15:01) [37]. PBS was used for dilution of both the HLA
monomers and peptides with concentrations of 200 µg/ml and 400 µM prior to UV exchange, respectively.
This ensured a monomer and peptide concentration of 100 µg/ml and 200 µM, respectively, after UV ex-
change. These concentrations corresponded to a ratio of 100:1 of peptides to monomers. Equal amounts,
1:1, of HLA monomer and its respective peptides were mixed and exposed to UV light for 1 hour in the
CAMAG UV Cabinet 3. Following the UV exchange, the pHLAs were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 3300
revolutions per minute (RPM), resulting in precipitation of unfolded HLAs and peptide aggregates, leading
to the supernatant containing the correctly folded pHLAs [37].
PBMC samples from the three conditions (D0, D14, D14 DMSO) were analyzed using combinatorial tetramer
staining. A multi-color flow cytometry panel, consisting of five different SA-conjugated fluorochromes, was
determined based on previous data within the research group. These five SA-conjugated fluorochromes
(Figure 4) were used in combinatorial encoding to label individual pHLAs. By combining the fluorochromes
pairwise, 10 different combinations were generated. Prior to using the panel to generate the RSV-specific
tetramers, the panel was tested on an arbitrary BC (BC442) using a mix of peptides with known and un-
known responses along with a rare peptide (V41) (Supplementary A.2). This panel testing was conducted
using the methods described in the following sections.
Each unique pHLA tetramer combination was generated by dividing it into two portions, allowing each
specificity to be stained with two different SA-conjugated fluorochromes. 9.02 µl (stock conc. of 0.2 mg/ml)
or 18.04 µl (stock conc. of 0.1 mg/ml) of SA-conjugated fluorochromes were used for 100 µl pHLA monomer
and incubated for 30 minutes at 4° C, allowing tetramerization (Figure 4).
Table 4: Overview of streptavidin (SA)-conjugated fluorochromes used for pHLA tetramer production. Catalog
number, supplier, and stock concentration for each SA-conjugated fluorochrome are stated.
SA-Conjugated Fluorochrome
Catalog No.
Stock Concentration
Supplier
SA-PE
405204
0.2 mg/mL
BioLegend
SA-APC
405243
0.1 mg/mL
BioLegend
SA-BV421
563259
0.1 mg/mL
BD Biosciences
SA-BV786
563858
0.1 mg/mL
BD Biosciences
SA-PerCP-eFluor™710
46-4317-82
0.2 mg/mL
eBioscience
After incubation, D-biotin (Avidity, #F0820, stock conc. 500 µM) was added at a final concentration of 25
µM to block any free binding sites, followed by incubation at 4° C for 20 minutes. Each pHLA tetramer
was mixed with a freezing buffer (0.5% bovine serum albumin and 5% glycerol) and stored at -20°C until
further use.
18
==PAGE:28==
3.6
pMHC Tetramer and Fluorochrome-Conjugated Antibody Staining
All BC samples, for the three conditions, were stained with pHLA tetramers and fluorochrome-conjugated
Abs for lineage markers. Prior to cell staining, pHLA tetramer mixtures were made for each peptide in a
ratio of either 1:1 or 2:1, depending on the fluorochrome. In cases where dim and bright fluorochromes
were paired, these were combined in a 2:1 ratio, of the dim and bright fluorochromes, respectively. In the
case where either two dim or two bright flurochromes were paired, a 1:1 combination ratio was used. This
created 10 pHLA tetramer combinations for each HLA allele. Subsequently, 1 µl from each of the 10 pHLA
tetramer mixtures was combined to create a final tetramer pool for each HLA allele. This pool contained
all 10 HLA-restricted peptides, with each peptide being represented by two distinct fluorochromes (Figure
11). Lastly, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer was added to a final staining volume of 60 µl.
Figure 11: Plate layout showing the production of the tetramer pool for HLA-A*01:01 combining 10 peptides, each labeled with
two distinct fluorochromes. The combinations were made from combining single-fluorochrome pHLA tetramers into pairs (row
C). From row C, 1 µl of each combination was transferred to a 10 pHLA tetramer pool well.
The pHLA tetramer pools were used for the staining of D0, D14, and D14 DMSO samples for each HLA
allele. 5 · 106 PBMCs from each condition for each HLA allele were thawed and washed twice in R10,
and then in FACS. Cells were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1500 RPM and the supernatant was discarded,
followed by the addition of dasatinib (final concentration of 50 nM) onto the pellets. The cells were sub-
sequently stained with the tetramer pools to a total volume of 80 µl and incubated for 30 minutes at room
temperature in the dark. After incubation, cells were mixed with a lineage marker Ab mixture (Table 5).
19
==PAGE:29==
Table 5: Components of the lineage marker antibody mixture used for surface staining in the pHLA tetramer
experiments and their corresponding dilutions. All FITC-conjugated antibodies represent a dump channel. Catalog
number, clone, and supplier for each fluorochrome are stated.
Marker
Fluorochrome Catalog No.
Clone
Supplier
Final Dilution
CD8
BV480
566121
RPA-T8
BD Biosciences
1:50
CD4
FITC
345768
SK3
BD Biosciences
1:80
CD14
FITC
345784
MϕP9
BD Biosciences
1:32
CD16
FITC
335035
NKP-15
BD Biosciences
1:64
CD19
FITC
345776
4G7
BD Biosciences
1:16
CD40
FITC
555588
5C3
BD Biosciences
1:40
The CD8 marker was stained using a BV480-conjugated Ab and a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) -
conjugated Ab dump mix, binding to CD4, CD14, CD16, CD19 and CD40 to exclude non-target cell types
(Figure 11). Additionally, to exclude dead cells, the PBMCs were also stained with NIR (Invitrogen, #L34976
A), in a final dilution of 1:1000 per stain. Following the staining, the cells were incubated for 30 minutes at
4° C. The cells were then washed twice in FACS and fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight. Within
24 hours, cells were washed twice in FACS, resuspended, and acquired on the LSRFortessa™instrument
(BD Biosciences).
3.7
Phenotypic Analysis
For staining of surface markers, a range of different fluorochrome-conjugated Abs were used. The ratios
of the fluorochromes were determined based on previous titration data within the research group. The
phenotypic staining was performed according to the method described in Section 3.6, however using the
dilutions stated in Table 6.
Table 6: Fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies used for surface marker staining in the phenotypic analysis. Antibody
refers to the fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies. The catalog number, clone, and final dilution for each
fluorochrome-conjugated antibody is stated as well.
Surface Marker
Fluorochrome
Catalog No.
Clone
Supplier
Antibody Dilution
CD3
BV786
563800
SK7
BD Biosciences
1:20
CD4
PE-Cy™7
560649
RPA-T4
BD Biosciences
1:100
CD8
BV480
566121
RPA-T8
BD Biosciences
1:50
CD45RA
BV711
563733
HI100
BD Biosciences
1:50
CCR7 (CD197)
FITC
353216
G043H7
BioLegend
1:20
CD95
BUV395
740306
DX2
BD Biosciences
1:40
20
==PAGE:30==
Only the two most recognized peptides were included in the phenotypic analysis due to limited available
material. The phenotypic staining was conducted on CD8+ T cells for all HLA alleles, except B*15:01, due to
a lack of material. New pHLA tetramers were produced for these 12 peptides, following the same method
as previously used (Section 3.5). For these tetramers, only the PE- and APC SA-conjugated fluorochromes
were used, as each well only contained one pHLA tetramer per staining. The phenotypic and tetramer
stainings were done for approximately 2.5 · 106 million cells for each peptide in the three conditions (D0,
D14, D14 DMSO).
3.8
Intracellular Cytokine Staining
ICS was performed on all BC samples for each HLA-A allele in the D14 and D14 DMSO conditions. These
BC samples were thawed, washed twice in R10, and resuspended in X-vivo®15 (Lonza, #02-053Q) + 5% HS
(Merck, #H3667). For each HLA allele, the cells were divided into four wells, each containing 100 µl resting
media with 1.5 · 106 cells for individual ICS stimulations. Each sample was stimulated with either a single
peptide (the most recognized HLA-restricted peptide at D14) or a 10-peptide pool. Corresponding DMSO
controls were included for both the single peptide and peptide pool stimulation. Additionally, one well
with 1.5 · 106 cells of BC467 D14 DMSO was used for the positive control.
Figure 12: Excerpt of plate layout used for intracellular cytokine staining, for the two conditions (D14 and D14 DMSO) for one
HLA allele. Identical plate layouts were used for all HLA-A alleles. The D14 and D14 DMSO condition for each HLA allele was
stimulated with a single peptide and a 10-peptide pool along with DMSO controls for these. A positive control was included.
All cells rested overnight at 37° C. After ∼16 hours, the cells were stimulated with either a single peptide
or a 10-peptide pool, both diluted in a final ratio of 1:100 in resting media. The same dilution was used for
their corresponding DMSO control. From these mixes, 1 µl was added to the corresponding wells. After
adding the peptides or DMSO dilutions, the cells incubated for 2 hours at 37° C. After incubation, 100 µl of
a stimulation mix (Table 7) was added to the corresponding wells, and incubated for 4 hours at 37° C.
21
==PAGE:31==
Table 7: Composition of the solution used for ICS.
Catalog number, supplier, and dilutions of each component are stated.
Component
Catalog No.
Supplier
Positive Control
Peptide / Negative Wells
GolgiPlug™
51-2301KZ
BD Biosciences
–
1:500
GolgiStop™
51-2092KZ
BD Biosciences
–
1:500
Leukocyte Activation Cocktail
550583
BD Biosciences
1:250
–
X-vivo®15 + 5% Human Serum
–
–
Diluent
Diluent
After the 4-hour incubation, the cells were washed twice in FACS buffer. A staining of surface markers was
then done by adding 80 µl of a surface staining mix (Table 8) to all wells, followed by a 30 minute incubation
at 4° C in the dark.
Table 8: Fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies and reagents used for staining of surface markers and intracellular
cytokines, IFN-γ and TNF-α. Catalog number and volume of each fluorochrome-conjugated antibody and reagent
are stated. *Each component of the dump channel is stated in Table 5.
Fluorochrome
Marker
Surface Marker Mix
ICS Mix
Catalog No.
FITC
Dump*
1:4.4
–
-
BV480
CD8
1:40
–
566121
NIR
Live/Dead
1:800
–
L34976 A
APC
IFN-γ
–
1:12
341117
BUV395
TNF-α
–
1:12
563996
FACS Buffer
–
Diluent
–
–
10X Perm. Buffer
–
–
Diluent
00-8333-56
After incubation, cells were washed twice in FACS buffer, resuspended in fixation buffer (Invitrogen #00-
8222-49), and incubated overnight at 4° C in the dark. After ∼16 hours, cells were centrifuged at 1500
RPM for 5 minutes to discard the fixation buffer. The cells were then washed twice in 1X permeabilization
buffer. After the wash, 30 µl of the ICS solution (Table 8) was added to each well, followed by an incubation
of 30 minutes at 4° C in the dark. Cells were then washed twice in 1X permeabilization buffer and then
resuspended in FACS buffer for analysis using LSRFortessa™flow cytometry.
3.9
Flow Cytometry
All BC samples were run on the LSRFortessa™instrument, controlled by the BD FACSDiva™Software. Be-
fore running the samples on the BD LSRFortessa™instrument, compensation was performed to correct for
potential spillover between the fluorochromes used in the pHLA tetramer panel and Ab stainings. This was
achieved through the generation of multiple compensation beads, simulating all the used SA-conjugated-
and Ab-conjugated fluorochromes. Additionally, beads simulating the NIR staining were also generated,
22
==PAGE:32==
along with a separate control containing beads only. Besides the fluorochromes, four components were
used when making the compensation beads (Table 9).
Table 9: Components used for the compensation beads. Catalog number and supplier for each component is stated.
Component
Catalog No.
Supplier
OneComp eBeads™
01-1111-42
Invitrogen
ArC™Reactive Beads
A10346 A
Invitrogen
ArC™Negative Beads
A10346 B
Invitrogen
Biotin Mouse Anti-human CD8
555365
BD Biosciences
For all compensation beads, except the live/dead control, one drop of OneComp eBeads was added per
FACS tube. For the live/dead tube, CompReactive beads were used (stainable with NIR). For the SA-
conjuagted fluorochrome tubes, 2 µl of biotin-conjugated Ab was added and incubated at 4° C for 30 min-
utes. After incubation, one drop of ArC negative beads (unstainable with NIR) and 1 µl of NIR dye were
added to the live/dead tube (Table 9). Additionally, 1 µl of the appropriate SA-conjugated fluorochromes
(PE, APC, BV421, BV786, and PerCP-eFluor™710) at 0.1 mg/ml were added to their respective tubes. For
the Ab-conjugated fluorochromes (BV480, FITC, BV786, BV711, BUV395, APC, PE-Cy™7), 1 µl was added
per tube and incubated at 4° C for 30 minutes. After incubation, all tubes were washed twice in FACS buffer
(PBS for live/dead beads) and run on the flow cytometer for compensation and calibration.
3.10
Data Processing
Flow cytometry data was analyzed using the FlowJo software (version 10.10.0) and visualized using Graph-
Pad Prism version 10.4.2. To identify and analyze the CD8+ T cells from the PBMC samples, a stepwise
gating strategy was used to exclude dead cells, doublets, and non-relevant cell populations (Figure 13). For
all experiments, the number of CD8+ T cells was normalized across all three conditions for each HLA allele
to ensure comparability.
23
==PAGE:33==
Figure 13: Initial gating strategy used to identify lymphocytes, single cells, and live cells. Lymphocytes are isolated by gating
out the cells with intermediate FSC-A and SSC-A. Single cells are identified by plotting FSC-W vs. FSC-H and gating for the
horizontal population. Live cells are isolated using NIR vs. SSC-A and gating for the NIR negative population. Frequencies of
cells within each gate are indicated in percentages of the parent population.
Initially, gating was done on FSC-Area (A) vs. SSC-A to isolate lymphocytes. To eliminate doublets, a
singlet gate was made using FSC-width (W) vs. FSC-height (H), showing the singlet cells in a horizontal
trend along the FSC-H axis. Additionally, live cells were gated, using NIR vs. SSC-A, where the live cells
corresponded to the NIR negative population. From this, different gating strategies were applied for the
different experiments.
3.10.1
Combinatorial pHLA Tetramer Staining
For the combinatorial pHLA tetramer staining experiments, the next step in the gating strategy was to iden-
tify the CD8+ population and exclude other cell populations for all three conditions. The CD8+ population
corresponded to the FITC−/BV480+ population.
Figure 14: Gating strategy for identifying pHLA tetramer+ populations. The CD8+ population (gray) is identified by isolating
the BV480+/FITC−population. A single-color positive gate is made for each SA-conjugated fluorochrome (APC, BV421, BV786,
PE, and PerCP-eFluor™710) using the color vs. SSC-A. From these positive gates, a ”NOT gate” is made for each SA-conjugated
fluorochrome. A tetramer−(tet−) (red) gate is made from the five ”NOT gates”. ”AND gates” are made for each color
combination to create 10 different color combinations from the five colors. pHLA tetramer+ populations are then identified by
plotting each color against each other (blue).
From the CD8+ T cells, all single colors were gated one by one, and a corresponding ”Not Gate” was made
24
==PAGE:34==
for all individual colors. For all different color combinations, an ”And Gate” was made, containing each
color combination and a negative gate for the remaining colors. Moreover, an ”And Gate” was made for the
tetramer-negative (tetramer−) populations. These different gates were used to make overlay plots for all
combinations (tetramer−, CD8+, each color combination), where each axis represented one fluorochrome
in the combination. Double pHLA tetramer-positive (tetramer+) populations would be seen as double
positives (blue) in the plot (Figure 14).
3.10.2
Phenotype Staining
From the live cells, the phenotype was analyzed for all three conditions by initially isolating the CD3+ cell
(BV786+/Pe-Cy™7−) population, from which the CD8+ T cells (BV480+/Pe-Cy™7−) were isolated. From
the CD8+ T cells, the tetramer+ populations were identified (APC+/PE+), seen as the double-positive
population expanding from the negative population (Figure 15).
Figure 15: Gating strategy for phenotype experiment. First, the CD3+ population (BV786+) was isolated. Next, the CD8+
(BV480+/Pe-Cy7−) population was isolated. From the CD8+ population, CCR7 vs CD45RA was plotted, dividing the
population into four subgroups: TNaive (CCR7+/CD45RA+), TEMRA (CCR7−/CD45RA+), TEM (CCR7−/CD45RA−), and
TCM (CCR7+/CD45RA−). Moreover, the CD8+ population was divided into two populations based on their CD95 expression:
CD95+ and CD95−. Lastly, from the CD8+ population, the tetramer+ population was identified (APC+/PE+)
Moreover, the expression of different phenotypic markers on the CD8+ T cells was investigated. This was
based on CCR7 and CD45RA expression (corresponding to FITC and BV711, respectively), dividing the
population into four subtypes: TNaive (CCR7+/CD45RA+), TEMRA (CCR7−/CD45RA+), TEM (CCR7−/CD45RA−),
and TCM (CCR7+/CD45RA−). Additionally, from the CD8+ T cells, a separate plot was made to identify
CD95+ (BUV395+) and CD95−(BUV395−) populations (Figure 15).
25
==PAGE:35==
3.10.3
ICS
The gating for ICS was conducted on the live cell population previously identified, starting with the iden-
tification of CD8+ T cells (FITC−/BV480+).
Figure 16: Gating strategy for identifying IFN-γ+/TNF-α+ RSV-specific CD8+ T cells. First, the CD8+ population
(FITC−/BV480+) (gray) was isolated. Then IFN-γ (APC) vs. TNF-α (BUV395) was plotted to identify four populations based
on the expression of these two cytokines. These gates were made based on the positive control, and then subsequently applied to all
other samples.
From the CD8+ T cells, the positive control was used to define subsequent gates, distinguishing IFN-γ
(APC) and TNF-α (BUV395) positive and negative subsets. This gate was then applied to all the HLA-A
samples, identifying IFN-γ+/TNF-α+ (APC+/BUV395+) populations.
3.10.4
Statistical Analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism (version 10.4.2). For comparisons involv-
ing more than two groups, either a one-way ANOVA or the non-parametric Friedman test was applied,
depending on the data distribution and experimental design. When comparing two groups, multiple com-
parison post-hoc tests were conducted without correction for multiple testing. Statistical significance was
indicated as follows: P < 0.05 (*), P < 0.01 (**), P < 0.001 (***), and P < 0.0001 (****).
26
==PAGE:36==
4
Results
4.1
70 Highly Prevalent RSV Peptides Identified
Figure 17: Distribution of the 70 RSV-derived
peptides across the 11 RSV proteins. No P-derived
peptides were included in the peptide library.
Based on the initial screening, 12 HLA-I alleles were found to
be most prevalent in the European population. From these,
four HLA-A alleles (A*01:01, A*02:01, A*03:01, A*24:02) and
three HLA-B alleles (B*07:02, B*08:01, B*15:01) were selected
for the investigation cohort. Moreover, from the initial screen-
ing of 1791 RSV peptides, a refined peptide library was es-
tablished for the investigation cohort presented in this thesis.
These peptides were selected based on highest prevalence and
estimated frequency. The library included 10 peptides for each
HLA allele, resulting in a total of 70 different RSV peptides
(Supplementary A.1), all of which were derived from the 11
RSV proteins. The majority of the peptides (n = 38) originated
from the L-protein (Figure 17). The remaining peptides were divided among the other RSV proteins in
smaller fractions, with F-, M-, and SH-proteins representing 6, 5, and 5 peptides, respectively. The M2-1,
M2-2, and G proteins contributed with only two peptides each. Although peptides derived from the P-
protein were part of the initial screening, no P-peptides were included in the peptide library due to low
prevalence. The refined peptide library was further screened in four healthy donors in the investigation
cohort to identify the most recognized peptides.
4.2
Four Healthy Donors Covered All HLA Alleles for the Investigation Cohort
Table 10: Four buffy coats (BCs) selected
to cover the seven HLA alleles.
Buffy Coat
HLA Allele
BC467
HLA-A*01:01
BC467
HLA-A*02:01
BC461
HLA-A*03:01
BC457
HLA-A*24:02
BC467
HLA-B*07:02
BC461
HLA-B*08:01
BC450
HLA-B*15:01
For the identification and characterization of RSV-recognizing
CD8+ T cells, four BC samples were chosen based on HLA-
matching (Table 10).
All BC samples were from healthy
donors and had unknown RSV exposure history.
This re-
flected a real world population segment, where individuals
typically are unaware of potential RSV exposure. All BC sam-
ples were stained using combinatorial tetramer technology, al-
lowing for detection of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells.
27
==PAGE:37==
4.3
Confirming the Specificity of the Combinatorial Tetramer Panel
The fluorochromes used for the combinatorial tetramer panel were determined based on internal data from
the research group and included five different SA-conjugated fluorochromes paired in 10 different unique
combinations (Table 11).
Table 11: Combinatorial matrix setup using five selected fluorochromes (PE, APC, BV421, BV786, and
PerCP-eFluor™710) to generate 10 unique color combinations.
PE
APC
BV421
BV786
PerCP-eFluor™710
PE
–
✓
✓
✓
✓
APC
–
✓
✓
✓
BV421
–
✓
✓
BV786
–
✓
PerCP-eFluor™710
–
Before applying this panel for the combinatorial tetramer staining in the investigation cohort, it was tested
on BC442 using a pool of 10 different peptides (Supplementary Figures A.2) with known and unknown
responses, along with a rare peptide (V41), to confirm the sensitivity of the panel. Moreover, it was tested
whether the panel showed a clear separation between the tetramer+ and tetramer−populations.
Figure 18: Validation of multi-color flow cytometry panel using combinatorial tetramer staining to ensure sensitivity and
accurate detection of antigen-recognizing CD8+ T cells. BC442 was stained using 10 different pHLA tetramers, representing
known (V3, V6, V10) and unknown responses, along with a rare peptide (V41).
The data generated in this panel test (Figure 18) verified that the combinatorial tetramer panel was capable
of detecting previously identified pHLA recognitions (V3, V6, V10) in BC442. Additionally, no tetramer+
populations were observed for the rare peptide (V41), suggesting minimal nonspecific binding. Collec-
tively, these data highlight that the panel is capable of showing a clear distinction between positive and
negative populations, while confirming the general sensitivity of the panel.
28
==PAGE:38==
4.4
PBMCs Proliferated Significantly Following an In Vitro Expansion
The validated combinatorial tetramer panel was used to stain the BC samples in three different condi-
tions, D0, D14, and D14 DMSO. To obtain these conditions, a 14-day in vitro expansion was performed
for all HLA alleles, either in presence of peptides or DMSO only, as a control. This was done as low fre-
quencies of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells were expected, since the donors were healthy individuals with
unknown RSV exposure. Therefore, the expansion aimed to increase the chances of detecting these low-
frequency populations. Throughout the 14 day period, the expansion was monitored regularly, generating
microscopy images (40X magnification) that confirmed cell proliferation through the formation of dark and
dense colonies that increased in size over time (Figure 19).
Figure 19: Microscope images (40x magnification) visualizing PBMC colonies from day 0 to day 14 for HLA-A*01:01 (BC467)
and HLA-B*08:01 (BC467). Colony sizes increase during expansion, indicating cell proliferation.
To further confirm cell proliferation, all BC samples were counted prior to and following the 14-day in vitro
expansion (Table 12). Overall, all HLA samples expand from 2-2.5 ·106 cells per well to 14-23 ·106 cells
per well. From statistical analysis data (Figure 20), it is seen that the peptide-stimulated expansion (D14)
is significant with P<0.01 (**) or P<0.001 (***) for all HLA samples. Moreover, significant cell expansion
(P<0.001 (***)) is also observed for the DMSO control. Generally, for all samples, this significant increase
corresponds to a 6.17- to 9.71-fold increase in total cell numbers (Figure 20).
29
==PAGE:39==
Figure 20: Expansion fold increase from D0 to D14 and D14 DMSO for each HLA allele. A*01:01 (blue), A*02:01 (green),
A*03:01 (red), A*24:02 (purple), B*07:02 (orange), B*08:01 (cyan), B*15:01 (pink). Each condition is represented on the x-axis
and the absolute number of cells (x106) is presented on the y-axis. Statistical significance is indicated as follows: P<0.01 (**) and
P<0.001 (***).
For the HLA-B alleles, the DMSO controls show a higher expansion increase (6.21-9.83 fold) than the
peptide-stimulated cultures, suggesting that the culture medium alone effectively induced PBMC prolif-
eration. For the peptide-stimulated expansion, the cell numbers increase by a 6.17- to 7.5-fold. Across
all samples, a high cell viability (>89%) is observed, indicating healthy cell growth and optimal cultur-
ing environment (Table 12). Moreover, the increase in cell diameter, observed for all samples, indicates a
proliferation of cells, as growth in cell size is necessary for this proliferation [20].
Table 12: Overview of cell viability, counts, and cell diameter for day 0, day 14, and day 14 DMSO. Values are in
×106 cells/ml per expansion well.
Parameter
BC467 (A*01:01)
BC467 (A*02:01)
BC461 (A*03:01)
BC457 (A*24:02)
D0
D14
DMSO
D0
D14
DMSO
D0
D14
DMSO
D0
D14
DMSO
Viability (%)
95
96.8
96
95
96
96.6
97
96.4
97.1
97.5
97.9
97.1
Live (×106)
2.67
20.4
19.2
2.67
17.49
18.27
2.05
16.065
16.8
2.43
23.6
21.3
Cell diameter (µm)
9.5
10.6
10.7
9.5
10.6
10.6
9.5
10.7
10.5
9.8
10.3
10.3
Parameter
BC461 (B*07:02)
BC467 (B*08:01)
BC450 (B*15:01)
D0
D14
DMSO
D0
D14
DMSO
D0
D14
DMSO
Viability (%)
98
95.5
96.8
98
95.1
92.8
92.8
91.3
89.6
Live (×106)
2
15
19.65
2.11
14.75
17.55
2.35
14.5
14.6
Cell diameter (µm)
9.5
10.5
10.4
9.5
10.4
10.4
9.5
11.5
10.9
Overall, the expansion data demonstrate that PBMCs were significantly expanded by six- to tenfold through
cytokine stimulation and optimal culturing conditions, with and without peptide-stimulation. However,
from the expansion alone, it is not possible to determine the RSV specificity of the proliferated PBMCs, as
30
==PAGE:40==
both peptide-stimulated and DMSO controls show similar proliferation. This made it relevant to stain all
samples using pHLA tetramers to identify the specificity of the donor samples before and after expansion.
4.5
Expansion Amplified and Revealed Undetectable RSV-Recognizing CD8+ T Cells
Together with the expanded PBMCs, corresponding D0 PBMCs were examined to identify potential RSV-
recognizing CD8+ T cells through combinatorial tetramer staining.
Based on data from the tetramer-
stainings for D14, the two most recognized A*01:01-restricted peptides are p1576 and p0001, with tetramer+
population frequencies seen in Figure 21.A and 21.C. The double-positive populations (blue) represent the
tetramer+ population, with these frequencies indicating which peptides are most frequently recognized in
BC467. The D0 frequencies of tetramer+ populations for p1576 and p0001 were 0.021% and 0.02%, respec-
tively. Notably, at D14, these frequencies increase to 7.38% and 4.19%, corresponding to a 351-fold and
210-fold increase, respectively. In contrast to D14, the D14 DMSO tetramer+ populations remain low for
both peptides (0.014% and 0.013%) after expansion. A comparison of tetramer+ population frequencies
across all three conditions is clearly illustrated in Figure 21.B and 21.D, and visualizes the high increase at
D14. Generally, the difference observed between D14 and D14 DMSO tetramer+ populations indicate a suc-
cessful selective expansion of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells upon peptide stimulation. RSV-recognizing
populations for the remaining peptides for all HLA-A alleles are found in Supplementary Figures A.3.
Figure 21: The two most recognized RSV-peptides restricted to HLA-A*01:01. All frequencies of tetramer+ population (blue)
within the CD8+ T cells (grey) are noted in the corner of each plot, for all three conditions. The tetramer negative population is
shown in red as well. A) Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for D0 (0.021%), D14 (7.83%), and D14 DMSO (0.014%) are
shown for p1576 in BC467. B) Comparison of tetramer+ populations for all conditions, visualized in a bar plot for p1576. C)
Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for D0 (0.02%), D14 (4.19%), and D14 DMSO (0.013%) are shown for p0001 in BC467
D) Comparison of tetramer+ populations for all conditions, visualized in a bar plot for p0001.
31
==PAGE:41==
Based on frequencies for all 10 A*01:01-restricted peptides (donor BC467), an overview was made to com-
pare these frequencies for the three conditions (Figure 22). These data suggest that p1576, p0001, p0037,
and p1730 are the most frequently recognized peptides after peptide-stimulated expansion, compared to
other peptides, such as p0094 and p1727, which are less frequently recognized by the donor. Notably,
p1727 is not recognized on D0 or in the DMSO control, however, after the peptide-stimulated expansion, a
detectable tetramer+ population emerges. This demonstrates the ability of the expansion method to prolif-
erate functional, recognizing CD8+ T cells. Additionally, some peptides (p1678, p1409, p1277) show low or
no tetramer+ frequency before and after expansion, indicating exhaustion or little or no recognition by the
donor.
Figure 22: Bar plots showing the frequencies of RSV-specific CD8+ T cells per 236,233 CD8+ T cells in donor BC467 for each
HLA-A*01:01-restricted peptide. The x-axis represents each peptide, while the y-axis is a logarithmic scale, showing the frequency
of recognizing CD8+ T cells for each peptide. Includes frequencies for Day 0 (no expansion, Day 14 (peptide-expanded), and Day
14 (DMSO control).
According to additional tetramer staining data for the other HLA alleles, the two most recognized B*08:01-
restricted peptides are p0884 and p0899, represented in Figure 23. These data show that p0884 induces
an RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cell frequency of 1.94% on D14, compared to a frequency of 0.0059% on D0,
corresponding to a 329-fold increase. Moreover, p0899 induces an RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cell frequency
of 0.16% on D14, in comparison to a frequency of 0.0043% on D0, correlating to a 37-fold increase. For both
peptides, the frequency of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells at D14 DMSO remains low or absent, which is the
general trend observed for all HLA alleles. RSV-recognizing populations for the remaining peptides for all
HLA-B alleles are found in Supplementary Figures A.4.
32
==PAGE:42==
Figure 23: The two most recognized HLA-B*08:01-restricted RSV-peptides in donor BC467. Frequencies of tetramer+
population (blue), within the CD8+ T cells (grey), are seen for all three conditions, along with the tetramer−population (red). A)
Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for D0 (0.0059%), D14 (1.94%), and D14 DMSO (0.012%) for p0884.. B) Comparison of
tetramer+ populations for all conditions (p0884). C) Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for D0 (0.0043%), D14 (0.16%), and
D14 DMSO (0.0%) for p0899. D) Comparison of tetramer+ populations for all conditions (p0899).
Figure 24 shows an overview of all 10 HLA-B*08:01-restricted RSV-peptides and their corresponding RSV-
recognizing CD8+ T cell frequencies. These data show that p0884 and p0899 are the most frequently rec-
ognized peptides in this donor. For p0819, no tetramer+ populations are present at D0, however at D14
a frequency of 0.0016% tetramer+ cells occurs. For p1593, a lower frequency of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T
cells is observed after expansion compared to D0, suggesting that these RSV-specific CD8+ T cells were
non-functional.
33
==PAGE:43==
Figure 24: Bar plots showing the frequencies of RSV-specific CD8+ T cells per 114,145 CD8+ T cells in donor BC467 for each
HLA-B*08:01-restricted peptide. Includes frequencies for Day 0 (no expansion, Day 14 (peptide-expanded), and Day 14 (DMSO
control).
Overall, the data show a strong increase in frequency of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells for multiple peptides
at D14, indicating that the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cell are functional and capable of proliferate upon pep-
tide stimulation. For peptides p1750 and p1595, no tetramer+ populations are detected for all three condi-
tions.
Figure 25: Frequencies of RSV-recognizing
CD8+ T cells for all 70 peptides on D0, D14 and
D14 DMSO. Statistical analysis by Friedman test
with multiple comparisons. Significance: P < 0.05
(*) and P < 0.01 (**) ; ns: not significant.
This implies that the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cell popula-
tions are too small to be detected or that these peptides are
not recognized by the donor’s CD8+ T cells. For the remain-
ing HLA-B alleles, equivalent data are seen in Supplementary
Figures A.4. For all HLA-A and B-alleles, a general trend ob-
served among all 70 peptides is the increase in frequencies of
RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells on D14 compared to very low
frequencies observed at D0. For the majority of the screened
peptides, the frequencies of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells
for D0 and D14 DMSO are similar. Collectively, from pHLA
tetramer staining using all 70 RSV peptides, statistical analysis
(Figure 25) reveals that the tetramer+ populations expanded
significantly from D0 to D14 (P< 0.01 (**)). A smaller, yet sta-
tistically significant difference was observed between D14 and
the DMSO control (P< 0.05 (*)), while no significant difference
was seen between D0 and D14–DMSO (ns). These data sup-
port that the expansion of tetramer+ CD8+ T cells is driven
by peptide-specific stimulation rather than general in vitro culture conditions. Based on data from the
tetramer-staining, 19 out of the 70 screened peptides were recognized on D14 (Figure 26 and Supplemen-
tary Figures A.6). No B*15:01-restricted peptides were recognized in the tested donor (BC450). The peptides
34
==PAGE:44==
that are not recognized on D0 and then subsequently recognized on D14, likely caused proliferation of the
peptide-recognizing CD8+ T cells, making these detectable after expansion. Peptides that are recognized
on both D0 and D14 suggest pre-existing memory CD8+ T cell populations in the donors.
Figure 26: A) Visualization of RSV peptides recognized by CD8+ T cells on D14 for all HLA alleles, except
B*15:01. Frequencies of recognizing CD8+ T cells are stated on top of each bar. B) Frequencies of RSV-recognizing
CD8+ T cells before and after 14-day in vitro expansion. Friedman test with multiple comparison. Statistical
significance is indicated as follows: P < 0.0001 (****) and no significance (ns). Data are shown in log scale.
Collectively, for all 19 recognized peptides, a significant increase (P<0.0001 (****)) in tetramer+ CD8+ T cells
is observed on D14 after expansion, compared to both D0 and D14 DMSO samples (Figure 26). Moreover, no
significant (ns) change was observed between D0 and D14 DMSO, indicating that the increase in tetramer+
CD8+ T cells is peptide driven. Peptides inducing the two highest D14 frequencies for each HLA allele
(Supplementary Figure A.5) were used for the phenotypic analysis (Table 13).
Table 13: Most and second most recognized RSV peptides for each of the six HLA alleles on day 14, and their origin
from the 11 RSV proteins (stated in parentheses).
Peptide Rank
A*01:01
A*02:01
A*03:01
A*24:02
B*07:02
B*08:01
Most recognized
p1576 (M)
p0144 (NS2)
p0333 (L)
p0644 (N)
p0728 (F)
p0884 (N)
Second most recognized
p0001 (M)
p0208 (L)
p0524 (M2-1)
p0621 (L)
p0742 (L)
p0899 (L)
4.6
Expanded CD8+ T cells Shift from a Na¨ıve to Effector Memory Phenotype
HLA-B*15:01 was excluded from the phenotypic analysis due to lack of material. The 12 most recognized
RSV peptides (Table 13) were used to phenotypically characterize T cells through the staining of three
specific surface markers (CCR7, CD45RA, and CD95), along with staining of lineage markers for CD3 and
CD8. This enabled profiling of the differentiation and memory status of the CD8+ T cells and the RSV-
recognizing CD8+ T cells. Based on the CCR7 and CD45RA expression, all samples were divided into four
35
==PAGE:45==
different CD8+ T cell subtypes (Table 2). The RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells were identified using PE and
APC tetramers. For A*01:01 in BC467, the subtypes of the CD8+ T cells for all three conditions are shown
in Figure 27. Equivalent data are seen for the remaining HLA alleles in Supplementary Figures A.7.
Figure 27: Subtype identification of CD8+ T cells through staining with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies binding to CCR7
and CD45RA surface markers before and after 14-day expansion. Plots showing CCR7 plotted against CD45RA, visualizing four
quadrants each corresponding to a CD8+ T cell subtype. Frequencies of CD8+ T cells in each subtype are stated.
Additionally, the CD95 marker was stained for all BC samples, resulting in a fifth subtype, based on all
three surface markers: CCR7+/CD45RA+/CD95+. Data from this staining reveal the differentiation and
activation status of the CD8+ T cells (Figure 28). For the D0 BC samples, over half of the population
is CD95−, all of which are TNaive, reflecting that these lack or have low expression of the Fas receptor.
However, another proportion of the TNaive cells are CD95+ on D0, suggesting that these may be in the early
differentiation phase. As these cells are positive for all three markers, they are not a part of the true TNaive,
but makes up the fifth subtype.
Figure 28: CD95 expression for all CD8+ T cell subset types for all three conditions:
TNaive (red), TEM (purple), TEMRA (salmon), and TCM (green).
Following the 14-day expansion, with and without peptide-stimulation, 100% of the CD8+ T cells express
CD95, suggesting a shift towards a differentiated and activated phase. This shift of the TNaive indicates that
36
==PAGE:46==
the in vitro expansion induced activation through cytokines. Generally, this is observed for all HLA alleles
(Supplementary Figure A.9).
From the phenotypic data for all BC samples, a general phenotypic shift is observed after expansion (Fig-
ure 29 and Supplementary Figures A.8). Overall, for all D0 samples, the majority of the CD8+ T cells are
CCR7+/CD45RA++/CD95−(>48%) corresponding to TNaive, indicating that these are in a non-activated
state. A smaller fraction of the D0 samples are CCR7−/CD45RA+/CD95+ (8.45-18.8%) and CCR7−/CD45RA−
/CD95+ (17-24.7%), corresponding to TEMRA and TEM, respectively. After the 14-day expansion, a shift
from dominating TNaive populations to dominating TEM populations is observed for both D14 and D14
DMSO. For the peptide-stimulated D14, the high frequency of TEM (>50.9%) indicates that the cells are dif-
ferentiated by the peptides and culture medium, while the high frequency (>57%) of TEM in D14 DMSO,
suggests that the expansion culture medium itself induced proliferation (Figure 27).
Figure 29: Bar plots of CD8+ T cell subtypes, before and after expansion based on expression of CCR7, CD45RA, and CD95:
TNaive (blue), TEMRA (green), TEM (salmon), TCM (red), and CCR7+/CD45RA+/CD95+ (light blue). Frequencies of each
subtype for one of the most recognized peptide for each HLA allele are visualized through bar plots.
Aside from determining the subtype and activated phase of the CD8+ T cells, the RSV-recognizing CD8+
T cells were identified and the subtype of these were determined for each condition. This was achieved
through an APC- and PE-tetramer-staining using the two most recognized peptides for each HLA allele.
From the tetramer staining, it was possible to confirm the tetramer+ populations seen from the previous
combinatorial staining (Figure 30). Data from the APC and PE tetramer staining for the remaining samples
are shown in Supplementary Figure A.10.
37
==PAGE:47==
Figure 30: Staining of p0001 specific CD8+ T cells using PE and APC streptavidin-conjugated tetramers for all three
conditions (day 0, day 14, and day 14 DMSO). All frequencies of tetramer+ populations (blue) within the CD8+ T cells (gray)
are noted in the corner of each plot, for all three conditions. The tetramer−population is shown in red as well.
Figure 31 illustrates the subtype identification of p0001-recognizing CD8+ T cells for all three conditions.
Equivalent data for the remaining peptides for each HLA allele are shown in A.11.
Figure 31: Subtype identification of p0001-specific CD8+ T cells for all three conditions (day 0, day 14, and day 14 DMSO).
Gray numbers represent the frequency of each subtype within all CD8+ T cells. Blue numbers represent the percentage of the
subtypes within the RSV-specific CD8+ T cells.
These data show only a small RSV-recognizing population on D0. The majority of this population (54.5%)
consists of TCM, suggesting that this donor has previously been exposed to RSV. A smaller fraction (22.7%)
of the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells are undifferentiated as they remain as a TNaive population. Generally,
for all D0 HLA alleles (Supplementary Figures A.11), the RSV-recognizing populations show no distinct
pattern among the selected peptides. Here, the small RSV-recognizing populations are more or less evenly
distributed across all subtypes, resulting in no phenotype dominating (Figure 32). Following the peptide-
stimulated expansion, the amount of tetramer+ CD8+ T cells for all samples increases substantially, and
almost all are TEM indicated by a loss or downregulation of the CCR7 expression. This shift in phenotype
is visualized in Figure 32 and highlights that almost all specific cells have been activated during the peptide-
stimulated
38
==PAGE:48==
Figure 32: Subtype distribution of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T
cells across all HLA alleles, based on the two most recognized
peptides per allele. Data represent pooled frequencies for each
expansion condition.
expansion.
For the DMSO controlled expansion,
the specific population is much smaller, but the ma-
jority of the specific cells have also shifted to TEM,
however to a smaller degree (Figure 32). The shift
towards TEM, after expansion, is observed for the
majority of all HLA alleles, except for the p0899-
recognizing CD8+ T cell populations in B*08:01
(Figure 33). After expansion, the p0899-recognizing
CD8+ T cell population is divided mainly between
TEMRA (D14: 32.5%, D14 DMSO: 38.5%) and TEM
(D14: 54.4%, D14 DMSO: 47.5%). This fraction of
TEM is substantially higher than the fraction ob-
served for the RSV-recognizing populations in all
other HLA alleles.
Figure 33: Subtype identification of p0899-specific CD8+ T cells for all three conditions (day 0, day 14, and day 14 DMSO).
Gray numbers represent the frequency of each subtype within all CD8+ T cells. Blue numbers represent the percentage of the
subtypes within the RSV-specific CD8+ T cells.
After determining the phenotype distribution of the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells, across the three condi-
tions, the functionality of these cells was investigated through ICS.
39
==PAGE:49==
4.7
RSV Peptides Induce IFN-γ and TNF-α Production in CD8+ T Cells
Figure 34: Positive control for ICS.
ICS was performed to asses the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells’ ability
to produce IFN-γ and TNF-α cytokines, upon peptide-stimulation, by
using DMSO controls for comparison. The ICS was performed on the
four HLA-A alleles, using one of the most recognized peptides per al-
lele, along with a pool of the 10 HLA-A-restricted peptides for stimula-
tion. The peptide-stimulated and DMSO controlled ICS was performed
on both D14 and D14 DMSO samples. A positive control was used to
define the cytokine gates applied for all samples (Figure 34). Data seen
in Figure 35 A.1, show that the p0001-stimulated ICS induces a clear cy-
tokine response, corresponding to 1.96% of the peptide-expanded CD8+ T cells producing IFN-γ and TNF-
α. Moreover, data from the DMSO control, seen in Figure 35 A.2 show a low IFN-γ+/TNF-α+ background
activation of 0.040%. Additionally, data from the DMSO-expansion (Figure 35 A.3), show that after a stim-
ulated with p0001, a low cytokine response was observed in comparison to DMSO controlled expansion.
(Figure 35 A.4) showing IFN-γ+, TNF-α+ of 0.026%. This is summarized in Figure 35 A.5, highlighting
that the peptide-stimulated expansion was RSV-specific, which was required for the functional response
observed in ICS.
Figure 35: Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) in BC467 (HLA-A*01:01), stimulated with p0001 and corresponding DMSO
controls. The x-axis represents the IFN-γ production and the y-axis represents the TNF-α production. A.1) Shows the
p0001-stimulated ISC for the day 14 peptide-stimulated expansion sample. A.2) Shows the DMSO control for the single-peptide
stimulated ICS day 14 peptide-stimulated expansion sample. A.3) Shows the p0001-stimulated ICS for the DMSO-controlled
expansion. A.4) Shows the DMSO-controlled ICS for the DMSO-controlled expansion. A.5) Shows the frequency of IFN-γ+,
TNF-α+ for the p0001-stimulated and DMSO-controlled ICS the peptide-stimulated expansion.
40
==PAGE:50==
From the 10-peptide-stimulated ICS data, a strong functional response (7.15%) of CD8+ T cells producing
both IFN-γ and TNF-α is observed (Figure 36 A.1). This high frequency represents an accumulation of all
RSV-specific CD8+ T cells capable of responding to one of the 10 peptides. Moreover, data from the DMSO
controls show very low frequency of the IFN-γ and TNF-α producing CD8+ T cells (Figure 36 A.2, A.3, A.4).
This reveals that the cytokine production was only observed upon peptide-stimulation for the D14 sample
(A.1). This confirmed that the CD8+ T cells recognizing the RSV peptides for A*01:01 were functional after
in vitro peptide-stimulated expansion. For all ICS stimulations, a proportion of single-positive IFN-γ CD8+
T cells was observed.
Figure 36: Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) in BC467 (HLA-A*01:01), stimulated with 10 peptide pool and corresponding
DMSO controls. The x-axis represents the IFN-γ production and the y-axis represents the TNF-α production. A.1) Shows the
p0001-stimulated ISC for the day 14 peptide-stimulated expansion sample. A.2) Shows the DMSO control for the single-peptide
stimulated ICS day 14 peptide-stimulated expansion sample. A.3) shows the 10-peptide stimulated ICS for the DMSO-controlled
expansion. A.4) Shows the DMSO-controlled ICS for the DMSO-controlled expansion. A.5) Shows the frequency of IFN-γ+,
TNF-α+ for the 10-peptide-stimulated and DMSO-controlled ICS the peptide-stimulated expansion.
The ICS data for the remaining HLA alleles are seen in Supplementary Figure A.13. Generally, this trend
was observed for both A*01:01 and A*02:01, however, a lower frequency of IFN-γ and TNF-α producing
CD8+ T cells was seen for A*03:01 (Figure 37) and A*24:02 for both single-stimulated and pool-stimulated
ICS.
41
==PAGE:51==
Figure 37: Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) for D14 samples of BC461 (HLA-A*03:01), stimulated with p0333 and 10
peptide pool along with corresponding DMSO controls. The x-axis represents the IFN-γ production and the y-axis represents the
TNF-α production. A.1) Shows the p0333-stimulated ISC. A.2) Shows the DMSO control for the p0333-stimulated ICS. A.3)
Shows the 10-peptides-stimulated ICS. A.4) Shows the 10 -peptide DMSO-controlled ICS.
Furthermore, data show lower frequencies of IFN-γ+/TNF-α+, in both p0333-stimulated (0.063%) and 10-
peptide-stimulated (0.22%) ICS compared to p0001. These frequencies are slightly higher than the ones
observed for the DMSO controls, indicating moderate cytokine production from the p0333-specific CD8+
T cells. Again, a higher frequency of IFN-γ+ and TNF-α+ CD8+ producing T cells is observed for the 10-
peptide stimulated ICS, reflecting the accumulation of responses to all 10 individual peptides. Compared
to the A*01:01-restricted peptides, the A*03:01-restricted peptides generally induce a lower cytokine pro-
duction. Overall, the ICS data revealed that CD8+ T cells produce IFN-γ and TNF-α upon RSV peptide
stimulation in varying degrees.
42
==PAGE:52==
5
Discussion
RSV remains a major cause of severe respiratory illness in infants, elderly, and immunocompromised indi-
viduals [6]. Despite this global RSV burden, the understanding of the immune response to RSV infections
remains limited. Antibody responses have been extensively studied, whereas the use of T cells in RSV treat-
ments is currently non-existing. Current RSV therapeutics are mainly prophylactic and focus on prevention
through monoclonal antibodies or vaccines that stimulate antibody production [6]. However, in cases of
infection, where RSV infects host cells, antibodies have been shown to have limited effects. Moreover, the
only treatment option for RSV is one antiviral drug, but it has shown limited efficacy and safety concerns
[6]. This highlights the need for developing new and improved therapeutic and preventative strategies
against RSV. Substantial research has shown that CD8+ T cells play a crucial role in limiting viral replica-
tion and providing long-term immunity [40]. Shifting the focus to T cell-based RSV treatments opens up
new possibilities of targeting the intracellular virus, in contrast to previous therapeutics. Therefore, this
study aims to identify RSV peptides with immunogenic potential and investigate the phenotype and func-
tionality of RSV-specific CD8+ T cells using combinatorial tetramer staining and functionality assays.
Highly-recognized peptides were identified from the RSV-derived peptide library, based on their recogni-
tion by CD8+ T cells in four healthy donors. Using these peptides for stimulation in vitro expansion, it
was possible to proliferate and differentiate functional RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells+. RSV-specific CD8+
T cells were phenotypically and functionally characterized. Upon peptide recognition, the CD8+ T cells
shifted from TNaive to TEM along with upregulated the CD95 expression, and produced IFN-γ and TNF-α,
indicating effective activation and functional responsiveness to RSV peptides.
5.1
RSV-Peptide Library Screened in Four Healthy Donors
This thesis screened 70 RSV peptides, restricted to seven different HLA alleles, and revealed that 19 of these
peptides (Figure 26) could be recognized by CD8+ T cells based on tetramer+ populations across the four
tested donors. Since the RSV-peptide library was based on highest prevalence and estimated frequency,
the probability of identifying potential RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cell populations in random individuals
increased. Moreover, RSV is a very widespread virus that most individuals will encounter during their life-
time [21], increasing the probability of healthy donors having RSV memory CD8+ T cells. From screening
the peptides in healthy donors, data show that the most recognized RSV peptides derived mainly from the
L, M, and N proteins, suggesting that these are relevant immunogenic targets of RSV. However, as the pep-
tide library mainly consisted of L-derived peptides (n = 38), the chances of identifying T cells recognizing
these peptides was inherently higher. This peptide distribution may have biased the detection toward L-
specific responses, potentially underrespresenting peptides derived from the other proteins. Nonetheless,
given the L-protein’s critical role, it may still be relevant to target this. The L-protein consists of an RNA-
dependent RNA polymerase, which drives the RNA transcription and replication, making the L-protein an
43
==PAGE:53==
ideal target [7]. Additionally, the L-protein is an ideal target as it is expressed early in infection, allowing
the CD8+ T cells to detect and eliminate infected cells before RSV has replicated extensively. This early
immune recognition can lead to a reduction in virus spread and limit disease severity [7]. Other RSV pro-
teins, such as the G-protein, are exposed to the immune system and experience higher mutation pressure
to evade immune recognition [11]. Conversely, the L protein is an internal protein, which tends to be more
conserved among the RSV strains (93%, Table 1) as it is not initially exposed to the immune system [11].
The conservation of the L-protein across all RSV strains makes it a suitable target as the therapy will have
broader coverage among the RSV strains. Along with the L-protein, the M- and N-proteins are essential
for viral replication and assembly, respectively, and are conserved (91%, 96%, respectively (Table 1)) among
RSV strains, making all three proteins ideal targets [11]. Findings from this thesis highlights the immuno-
genic potential of M-derived peptides, such as A*01:01-restricted p0001, in donor BC467. Data show that
this peptide is recognized by CD8+ T cells from the screened donor, suggesting that the donors’ CD8+ T
cells have TCRs specific for this peptide. For targeting of the L- and N- protein, the p0208 (L) and p0884
(N) peptides also showed CD8+ T cell recognition in BC467, restricted to A*02:01 and B*08:01, respectively.
Conversely, one donor representing the B*15:01 allele was screened using 10 B*15:01-restricted RSV pep-
tides, but no RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells were observed, potentially due to a lack of prior RSV exposure
or the CD8+ T cells fo this donor lacking TCRs specific to the selected pHLAs. This highlights the need
for screening extended peptide libraries in a larger donor cohort to determine recognized peptides and
fully characterize the immune response against RSV. Hence, before proceeding with any of the identified
recognized peptides, additional studies are necessary to confirm whether these peptides are recognized in
healthy donor cohorts and in individuals naturally infected with RSV. The larger healthy cohort should be
based on individuals that were not included in the initial screening to generate more data and generalize
the findings. This will moreover confirm that the observed responses are consistent and not donor-specific.
Additionally, by increasing the donor sample size, the immunogenicity of these peptides could be deter-
mined, and additional immunogenic peptides could be revealed, increasing the library of potential RSV
targets. Moreover, samples from healthy donors serve as a proof-of-concept, but patient samples are re-
quired to validate and confirm that the findings are clinically relevant and applicable [38]. Screening the
identified recognized peptides in patient samples is critical to confirm that these peptides are relevant in
natural RSV infections. This would confirm the peptides’ immunogenicity and reveal which peptides stim-
ulate the strongest immune response, making these especially relevant for use in novel therapies.
5.2
Expansion of PBMCs and Tetramer Staining of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T Cells
The majority of the investigation cohort was based on combinatorial pHLA-tetramer staining of RSV-
recognizing CD8+ T cells, using five fluorochromes in 10 unique combinations. The combinatorial tetramer
staining method allowed for parallel and high-throughput detection of multiple peptides and RSV-recognizing
CD8+ T cell populations with high specificity. Besides this, the use of 10 unique fluorochrome combina-
tions, for each RSV peptide, reduces the occurrence of non-specific tetramer binding, as only the binding
44
==PAGE:54==
of the specific pHLA combination will show the dual-positive signal. This improves the accuracy of the
method compared to single-staining methods. However, a limitation of combinatorial encoding is the man-
ual gating strategy used in FlowJo. Since the gates are made manually, this introduces a level of subjec-
tivity and variability between the samples in the different conditions. This is especially relevant for the
peptides labeled with PerCP-eFluor™710, as this fluorochrome is more unstable due to its susceptibility
to degradation [13], causing smearing of the populations. This makes it challenging to distinguish be-
tween positive and negative populations, thus introducing a gating bias. To overcome this limitation, it
could have been optimal to have a positive control for each fluorochrome to standardize the gating of the
single-positive populations. Another factor to consider when analyzing the data is the appearance of two
distinct tetramer+ populations, which may be caused by cross-reactivity as one peptide can bind to mul-
tiple T cell clones with different affinities. This could lead to varying intensity signals, creating separation
between multiple T cell clone populations [22]. This could potentially explain the two tetramer+ popula-
tions observed, e.g., for p0644 and p0333. Moreover, when staining T cells with dual-colored tetramers, a
characteristic diagonal distribution of the tetramer+ T cells was observed in the flow cytometer plots. This
is due to T cells expressing varying amounts of TCRs, and with varying affinities, causing the tetramer+
populations to occur as a diagonal rather than a round cluster. In general, the more a T cell binds both
tetramers, the further it shifts along the diagonal in the plot. This high-avidity of CD8+ T cells may also be
important to consider when determining the most efficient T cells for viral clearance, as studies have shown
that high-avidity T cells may be 1,000-fold more effective in viral clearance, compared to low-avidity T cells,
with the same epitope specificity [22]. Additionally, when using multiple fluorochromes in the same sam-
ple, precise compensation is necessary to reduce potential spillovers into other channels. Even with proper
compensation, there is a small chance of misclassifications of the fluorochrome-positive populations when
doing combinatorial tetramer stainings [13].
Overall, the combinatorial tetramer technology allowed for the detection of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells
with high precision, before and after a 14-day in vitro PBMC expansion. Results from the pHLA tetramer
staining generally show no or low frequency of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells before expansion and an
increase in frequencies of these cells after expansion. The low frequencies before expansion could be due
to the low levels of RSV-specific memory CD8+ T cells, unless recent RSV re-exposure, thus resulting in
no or little RSV-recognition on D0. This potentially affects the identification of the most recognized RSV-
peptides, as no RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cell populations would appear before expansion. For both the
peptide-stimulated and DMSO controlled expansion, an increase in cell count was observed, reflecting the
proliferation capabilities of the expansion conditions. Despite the similar total cell number after expan-
sion, only the peptide-stimulated samples show a significant increase in the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells,
which confirms that peptide recognition through TCR stimulation was necessary for selective proliferation
of the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells. In some cases, RSV-recognizing populations did not increase after
expansion, suggesting no RSV-specific proliferation. This could be due to the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T
45
==PAGE:55==
cells observed on D0 being exhausted and not capable of further proliferation.
5.3
Phenotype and Functional Profiling of CD8+ T cells
After identifying the most recognized RSV peptides, PE-APC tetramers were used to confirm these re-
sponses for the two most recognized peptides for each HLA allele. Moreover, the CD8+ T cells and RSV-
recognizing CD8+ T cells were categorized into four subtypes, based on their expression of CCR7 and
CD45RA before and after expansion. For all HLA alleles, a general trend was observed for CD8+ T cells
at D0, where the majority of the populations were TNaive. However, for the smaller RSV-recognizing pop-
ulations at D0, a less clear trend was observed. These populations were generally divided among all four
subtypes, with no subtype dominating. This reflects a natural, diverse immune memory profile including a
combination of TNaive, memory, and effector subtypes, all based on the donors’ RSV exposure history. After
stimulation, the RSV-recognizing population shifts towards an TEM subtype due to the activation signals
during expansion. Generally, for all CD8+ T cell populations, a shift from TNaive on D0 to TEM on D14 and
D14 DMSO was observed. For D14, this shift is caused by the combination of peptide and cytokine stimula-
tion during the in vitro expansion, causing the T cells to downregulate the CCR7 and CD45RA expression.
This pushes them towards an effector memory phenotype, enabling them to leave the lymph nodes and
migrate to the site of infection [9, 40]. For the D14 DMSO, the same trend is observed, suggesting the
capability of the cytokines to cause this shift. Aside from CCR7 and CD45RA staining, the CD95 surface
marker was also stained, allowing for a characterization of the cells’ differentiation and activation status.
A general trend is observed for D0 vs D14. At D0, most of the TNaive (CCR7+/CD45RA+) do not express
CD95, however, a smaller fraction of the CCR7+/CD45RA+ do express CD95, resulting in a fifth subtype:
CCR7+/CD45RA+/CD95+. After the in vitro expansion, all CD8+ T cells express CD95. This upregulation
of CD95 is caused by activation through cytokines and TCR engagement during expansion [15].
Collectively, the staining of CCR7, CD45RA, and CD95 provided an in depth phenotypic characteriza-
tion of the RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells. However, these results did not reveal the functionality of the
RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells. To analyze the functionality, ICS was performed to determine if the RSV-
recognizing CD8+ T cells could produce IFN-γ and TNF-α upon peptide stimulation, which would confirm
their direct response to the RSV peptides. The ICS was performed for the four HLA-A alleles using one of
the most recognized peptides along with their HLA-restricted 10-peptide pool and DMSO controls. The
ICS data show that the CD8+ T cells only produce both cytokines upon peptide-stimulation, while little to
no production is observed for all the DMSO controls. This comparison confirms that an antigen-specific
activation is required to induce cytokine production, indicating that all the cytokine-producing CD8+ T
cells are RSV-specific [15]. To further confirm this observation and optimize the ICS data, tetramer staining
could be applied to identify the location of the tetramer+ populations in the plot, helping to determine what
proportion of the cytokine-producing cells are RSV-specific. Generally, a production of IFN-γ was observed
46
==PAGE:56==
for all samples, including the DMSO controls. This likely reflects non-specific activation following the in
vitro expansion. The use of cytokines throughout the expansion may lead to some cells producing IFN-γ
even without peptide stimulation. Moreover, the data revealed that some peptides induced a strong cy-
tokine production, while others induced weaker cytokine production. This variation in cytokine responses,
following stimulation with the different RSV peptides, likely reflects differences in immunogenicity and
epitope recognition within the CD8+ T cell population. Some peptides, e.g., p0001, elicit strong production
of TNF-α and IFN-γ, suggesting that this peptide may contain immunogenic epitopes that effectively acti-
vate RSV-specific CD8+ T cells. In contrast, peptides that induce less cytokine production may reflect less
immunogenic epitopes. As the RSV-specific CD8+ T cells showed functionality during expansion and ICS,
it could be relevant to investigate the other cytotoxic functions of these T cells. These cells could mediate
cytotoxicity through perforin- and granzyme-dependent killing or through the FasL-Fas pathway [1]. To in-
vestigate whether these cells potentially exert other cytotoxic functions, staining of degranulation markers,
such as CD107a, could reveal if the cells are releasing cytotoxic granules, as it is upregulated on the surface
of the T cells when they kill through this pathway [25]. Additionally, a staining of FasL on the CD8+ T
cells could be used to investigate whether this surface marker is expressed upon peptide stimulation. FasL
is upregulated on activated CD8+ T cells, enabling them to induce apoptosis in Fas-expressing target cells
[46]. By detecting FasL on RSV-specific CD8+ T cells, it could reveal if these cells are functional through this
pathway. Altogether, this highlights the importance of selecting the most immunogenic peptides based on
all cytotoxic functions when designing vaccines or immunotherapy to ensure optimized T cell responses.
5.4
Potential of Immunogenic RSV Peptides in Future RSV Immunotherapy
Understanding which RSV peptides elicit strong cytokine responses provides valuable insight for the devel-
opment of targeted RSV immunotherapy and vaccines. By focusing on immunogenic epitopes that activate
effector CD8+ T cells to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines, future strategies can be designed to enhance
protective and long-lasting immunity against RSV. This identification of immunogenic peptides can guide
the selection of optimal peptides to improve vaccine efficacy and develop personalized T cell based ther-
apies against RSV. A future approach to immunotherapy could include using the methods described in
this thesis to screen larger peptides libraries in larger, diverse donor cohorts, including samples from both
acutely infected and healthy individuals. After identifying RSV-specific CD8+ T cells in both healthy and
patient samples, the cells could be sorted and their TCR could be sequenced, allowing for comparison be-
tween TCRs from hospitalized and non-hospitalized individuals. This could reveal protective TCR profiles
associated with the most effective RSV clearance, which could be utilized in the design of TCR-engineered
T cell therapies. This therapy would benefit elderly, infants, or immunocompromised patients with long-
lasting and recurrent RSV infections, but would likely require pre-manufactured, off-the-shelf RSV-specific
CD8+ T cells. However, this therapy will potentially be too slow, complex, and risky for most acute RSV
infections, making it relevant to consider vaccine options instead.
47
==PAGE:57==
The development of an RSV epitope-based CD8+ T cell vaccine targeting immunogenic peptides would
prime the immune system in advance, allowing for a more rapid response upon RSV infection [23]. Addi-
tionally, vaccines are not personalized, resulting in these being more scalable, economical, and accessible
[41]. The vaccine would be based on an identification of immunogenic RSV peptides that are capable of
producing pro-inflammatory cytokines. From these, the immunogenic epitopes have to be determined.
Then, by combining different HLA-restricted epitopes to create a vaccine, it could be possible to match
multiple HLA types and elicit a broad immune response across a diverse population. Moreover, a T cell-
based vaccine for neonates can be beneficial as T cells are present at birth and capable of responding to
peptides, resulting in more robust and long-lasting immunity in neonates. By targeting conserved RSV
proteins through T cell immunity, limited disease severity can be obtained as early recognition and clear-
ance of infected cells in neonates is enabled. This makes T cell-based vaccines a promising strategy, as RSV
is an acute infection and rapid recognition is crucial for neonates to survive [47].
48
==PAGE:58==
6
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to identify RSV peptides that elicit CD8+ T cell responses and characterize the RSV-
specific CD8+ T cells in four healthy donors, representing seven HLA-I alleles. This thesis combined in
vitro expansion, pHLA tetramer technology, phenotypic profiling, and ICS to characterize RSV-specific
CD8+ T cells and their pro-inflammatory potential when stimulated with RSV peptides.
Following in vitro expansion, 19 RSV-derived peptides from the 70 peptide library, were recognized by RSV-
specific CD8+ T cells in different frequencies. For the low-frequency populations, the expansion enhanced
detection due to a significant increase in cell numbers. This increase was observed for both DMSO controls
and peptide-stimulated samples, proliferating from 2 ·106 to over 14·106 cells per sample, with the increase
in the control indicating that the proliferation was cytokine-driven. Moreover, from the tetramer staining
and phenotypic analysis, data revealed that the expansion of RSV-specific CD8+ T cell population occurred
exclusively in peptide-stimulated samples, indicating the necessity of antigen-specific stimulation for se-
lective amplification of RSV-specific CD8+ T cells. From the phenotypic analysis of these RSV-recognizing
CD8+ T cells, a clear dominance in TEM (CCR7+/CD45RA+) was observed after expansion, all expressing
CD95. This shift is consistent with an antigen-experienced phenotype, highlighting the ability of the expan-
sion to proliferate functional RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells. Moreover, all CD8+ T cell subtypes expressed
CD95 after expansion, highlighting that the expansion activated the cells and induced an activated-like
phenotype for the TNaive through cytokine-stimulation. Additionally, ICS demonstrated the ability of the
RSV-specific CD8+ T cells to produce IFN-γ and TNF-α in response to RSV peptide stimulation. In re-
sponse to the majority of the peptides, a strong production of both cytokines was observed, confirming the
functionality of the expanded T cells.
Collectively, the findings from this cohort support the applicability of the experimental strategy for iden-
tifying a larger library of immunogenic peptides. Moreover, the findings also contribute to a deeper un-
derstanding of the RSV immune response and may contribute to future vaccine design strategies. While
the study was restricted by its limited donor cohort size, it established a platform for further exploration
of RSV-peptides and T cell responses in RSV-infections. Altogether, continued research is warranted to
expand the library of immunogenic peptides and their potential in clinical applications along with an en-
hanced understanding of the CD8+ T cell-mediated immune response to RSV.
49
==PAGE:59==
References
[1]
Andersen, Mads H et al. “Cytotoxic T Cells”. In: Elsevier (Jan. 2006). DOI: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700001.
[2]
Badovinac, Vladimir P et al. “Intracellular staining for TNF and IFN- detects different frequencies of
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells”. In: Elsevier (2000). DOI: 10.1016/S0022-1759(00)00153-8.
[3]
Bajgelman, Marcio C et al. “Principles and applications of flow cytometry”. In: Academic Press (2019).
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-816548-5.00008-3.
[4]
Bentzen, Amalie K et al. “Large-scale detection of antigen-specific T cells using peptide-MHC-I mul-
timers labeled with DNA barcodes”. In: Nat Biotechnol (Aug. 2016). DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3662.
[5]
Bermingham, Alison et al. “The M2–2 protein of human respiratory syncytial virus is a regulatory
factor involved in the balance between RNA replication and transcription”. In: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. (Sept. 1999). DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.20.11259.
[6]
Bonneux, Brecht et al. “Direct-acting antivirals for RSV treatment, a review”. In: Nat Biotechnol (Sept.
2024). DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2024.105948.
[7]
Bonneux, Brecht et al. “Insights in the RSV L polymerase function and structure”. In: sciencedirect 133
(May 2025). DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2025.106148.
[8]
Brown, Dennis et al. “Apoptosis”. In: Elsevir (2014). DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386454-3.00242-6.
[9]
Caccamo, Nadia et al. “Atypical Human Effector/Memory CD4+ T Cells With a Naive-Like Pheno-
type”. In: Front. Immunol. (Dec. 2018). DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02832.
[10]
Cadena-Cruz, Christian et al. “Respiratory syncytial virus entry mechanism in host cells: A general
overview”. In: Wiley (Aug. 2023). DOI: 10.1111/mmi.15133.
[11]
Collins, Peter L et al. “Respiratory Syncytial Virus: Virology, Reverse Genetics, and Pathogenesis of
Disease”. In: Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. (Mar. 2016). DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-38919-1_1.
[12]
Coppola, Canaan et al. “Investigation of the Impact from IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15 on the Growth and
Signaling of Activated CD4+ T Cells”. In: Int. J. Mol. Sci. (Sept. 2020). DOI: 10.3390/ijms21217814.
[13]
Drescher, Hannah et al. “Flow Cytometry: A Blessing and a Curse”. In: Biomedicines. (Nov. 2021). DOI:
10.3390/biomedicines9111613.
[14]
Esensten, Jonathan H et al. “CD28 Costimulation: From Mechanism to Therapy”. In: ScienceDirect
(Apr. 2016). DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2016.04.020.
[15]
Gambadauro, Antonella W et al. “Immune Response to Respiratory Viral Infections”. In: International
Journal of Molecular Sciences (June 2024). DOI: 10.3390/ijms25116178.
[16]
Hewitt, Eric W et al. “The MHC class I antigen presentation pathway: strategies for viral immune
evasion”. In: Immunology. (Oct. 2003). DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.2003.01738.x.
50
==PAGE:60==
[17]
Hu, MengJie et al. “Respiratory Syncytial Virus Matrix Protein Is Sufficient and Necessary to Remodel
Host Mitochondria in Infection”. In: Cells. (May 2023). DOI: 10.3390/cells12091311.
[18]
Immune Epitope Database (IEDB). Immune Epitope Database. https://www.iedb.org/. Accessed:
2025-06-27.
[19]
Immune Epitope Database (IEDB). Population Coverage Tool. http://tools.iedb.org/population/.
Accessed: 2025-06-27.
[20]
Iritani, Brian M et al. “Modulation of T-lymphocyte development, growth and cell size by the Myc
antagonist and transcriptional repressor Mad1”. In: EMBO J (Sept. 2002). DOI: 10 . 1093 / emboj /
cdf492.
[21]
Kaler, Jasndeep E et al. “Respiratory Syncytial Virus: A Comprehensive Review of Transmission,
Pathophysiology, and Manifestation”. In: Cureus (Mar. 2023). DOI: 10.7759/cureus.36342.
[22]
Kedzierska, Katherine et al. “Contribution of T cell receptor affinity to overall avidity for virus-
specific CD8+ T cell responses”. In: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. (Aug. 2005). DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
0504851102.
[23]
Lier, Rene et al. “Human CD8+ T-cell differentiation in response to viruses”. In: Nat Rev Immunol.
(Dec. 2003). DOI: 10.1038/nri1254.
[24]
Lissina, Anna et al. “Protein kinase inhibitors substantially improve the physical detection of T-cells
with peptide-MHC tetramers”. In: Elsevir (Jan. 2009). DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2008.09.014.
[25]
Lorenzo-Herrero, Seila et al. “CD107a Degranulation Assay to Evaluate Immune Cell Antitumor Ac-
tivity”. In: Methods Mol Biol. (2019). DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-8885-3_7.
[26]
Managlia, Elizabeth Z et al. “Interleukin-7 signalling is sufficient to phenotypically and functionally
prime human CD4+ na¨ıve T cells”. In: Immunology. (Mar. 2005). DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2004.
02089.x.
[27]
Marshall, Jean S et al. “An introduction to immunology and immunopathology”. In: Allergy, Asthma
Clinical Immunology (Sept. 2018). DOI: 10.1186/s13223-018-0278-1.
[28]
Martin-Vicente, Maria et al. “Early innate immune response triggered by the human respiratory syn-
cytial virus and its regulation by ubiquitination/deubiquitination processes”. In: J Biomed Sci. (Feb.
2022). DOI: 10.1111/mmi.15133.
[29]
Milner, Justin et al. “Delineation of a molecularly distinct terminally differentiated memory CD8 T
cell population”. In: Front. Immunol. (Sept. 2020). DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2008571117.
[30]
Newell, Evan W et al. “Simultaneous detection of many T-cell specificities using combinatorial tetramer
staining”. In: Nature Methods. (June 2009). DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1344.
[31]
Nguyen-Van-Tam, Jonathan et al. “Burden of respiratory syncytial virus infection in older and high-
risk adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the evidence from developed countries”. In:
European Respiratory Review (Nov. 2022). DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0105-2022.
51
==PAGE:61==
[32]
Parsons, Emily L et al. “Development of innate and adaptive immunity to RSV in young children”.
In: Cytokine. (June 2024). DOI: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2024.104824.
[33]
Perfetto, Stephen P et al. “Amine-Reactive Dyes for Dead Cell Discrimination in Fixed Samples”. In:
Curr. Protoc. Cytom. (July 2010). DOI: 10.1002/0471142956.cy0934s53.
[34]
Perfetto, Stephen P et al. “Flow Cytometry: An Overview”. In: Curr Protoc Immunol. (Feb. 2018). DOI:
10.1002/cpim.40.
[35]
Petrova, Galina et al. “Cross-Reactivity of T Cells and Its Role in the Immune System”. In: Crit Rev
Immunol. (Mar. 2012). DOI: 10.1615/critrevimmunol.v32.i4.50.
[36]
Ritz, Ulrike et al. “The Transporter Associated With Antigen Processing (TAP): Structural Integrity,
Expression, Function, and Its Clinical Relevance”. In: Molecular Medicine (Mar. 2001). DOI: 10.1007/
BF03401948.
[37]
Rodenko, Boris et al. “Generation of peptide–MHC class I complexes through UV-mediated ligand
exchange”. In: Nat Protoc. (Aug. 2006). DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2006.121.
[38]
Salaun, Bruno et al. “T cells, more than antibodies, may prevent symptoms developing from respira-
tory syncytial virus infections in older adults”. In: Front. Immunol. (Oct. 2023). DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.
2023.1260146.
[39]
Sanchez-Mazas, Alicia et al. “The most frequent HLA alleles around the world: A fundamental syn-
opsis”. In: Elsevier (June 2024). DOI: 10.1016/j.beha.2024.101559.
[40]
Schmidt, Megan E et al. “Cytokines and CD8 T cell immunity during respiratory syncytial virus
infection”. In: Cytokine. (July 2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2018.07.012.
[41]
Song, Xin et al. “T-Cell Epitope-Based Vaccines: A Promising Strategy for Prevention of Infectious
Diseases”. In: Vaccines (Basel). (Oct. 2024). DOI: 10.3390/vaccines12101181.
[42]
SreeRupa, Challa et al. “Mechanism of Action for Respiratory Syncytial Virus Inhibitor RSV604”. In:
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. (Jan. 2015). DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04119-14.
[43]
Srinivasan, Shreyaa et al. “Structure, function, and immunomodulation of the CD8 co-receptor”. In:
Front. Immunol. (Aug. 2024). DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1412513.
[44]
Sun, Lina et al. “T cells in health and disease”. In: Sig Transduct Target Ther (June 2023). DOI: 10.1038/
s41392-023-01471-y.
[45]
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) Health Tech. NetMHCpan-4.1 Server. https://services.
healthtech.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCpan-4.1/. Accessed: 2025-06-27.
[46]
Yajima, Toshiki et al. “Fas/FasL signaling is critical for the survival of exhausted antigen-specific
CD8+ T cells during tumor immune response”. In: Elsevier (Mar. 2019). DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.
2019.01.014.
[47]
Zhang, Jie et al. “Neonates Mount Robust and Protective Adult-Like CD8+-T-Cell Responses to DNA
Vaccines”. In: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. (Dec. 2002). DOI: 10.1128/JVI.76.23.11911-11919.2002.
52
==PAGE:62==
A
Supplementary Figures
A.1
70 RSV Peptide Library
Figure 38: Peptide library containing 70 RSV-derived peptides, based on the 10 most prevalent peptides for each of
the seven HLA alleles. Peptides are selected based on data from an initial peptide screening of 1791 peptides.
Overview includes amino acid sequence, peptide ID, origin of protein, prevalence, and estimated frequency. The
p1576 and p0884 peptides are predicted from the IEDB database, while the remaining peptides are SSI predicted.
53
==PAGE:63==
A.2
10 Peptides used for Panel Verification
Table 14: Overview of the 10 peptides used for panel validation. All peptides are HLA-A*02:01-restricted. The
peptide IDs, expected CD8+ T Cell recognition, and origin of each peptide is stated. ”Yes” refers to peptides that were
tested in donor BC442 and were recognized by the CD8+ T cells. ”Unknown” refers to peptides not previously tested
in the donor. ”No” refers to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-derived peptide, which is not typically
recognized by healthy donors.
Peptide
Expected Recognition
Origin
V3
Yes
Influenza virus
V5
Unknown
Epstein–Barr virus
V6
Yes
Epstein–Barr virus
V10
Yes
Epstein–Barr virus
V13
Unknown
Cytomegalovirus
V16
Unknown
Epstein–Barr virus
V24
Unknown
Cytomegalovirus
V41
No
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
MART-1
Unknown
Melanocytes/melanoma cells
PTPRN1
Unknown
Autoantigen in Type 1 Diabetes
54
==PAGE:64==
A.3
Tetramer Staining of HLA-A-restricted RSV Peptides
HLA-A*01:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC467 
A
p1678
p1759
p0037
p0094
p1730
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
0.0
0.0
0.0013
APC
BV786
APC
BV421
BV421
PE
BV421
BV786
PE
BV786
0.0017
0.00085
0.0042
0.012
0.38
0.016
0.0034
0.07
0.035
0.0025
0.24
0.00042
55
==PAGE:65==
HLA-A*01:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC467 
B
p1409
p1277
p1727
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
APC
PerCP
APC
PE
BV421
PerCP
0.0
0.0
0.002
0.0
0.0
0.00042
0.0
0.0025
0.0
Figure 39: HLA-A*01:01-restricted RSV peptides in donor BC467. Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for the
three conditions (D0, D14, D14 DMSO) are stated and compared in bar plots.
56
==PAGE:66==
HLA-A*02:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC467 
A
p0144
p0193
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p1595
p0263
p0250
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0025
0.37
0.001
0.0005
0.0025
0.0005
0.0005
0.001
0.0
0.0015
APC
BV786
APC
BV421
PE
PerCP
BV421
PE
BV786
PerCP
0.0005
57
==PAGE:67==
HLA-A*02:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC467 
B
p0212
p0245
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p0208
p0188
p0153
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.013
0.0025
0.0015
0.017
0.0005
0.049
0.0015
0.013
0.0005
0.0005
BV421
BV786
BV786
PE
APC
PerCP
APC
PE
BV421
PerCP
Figure 40: HLA-A*02:01-restricted RSV peptides in donor BC467. Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for the
three conditions (D0, D14, D14 DMSO) are stated and compared in bar plots.
58
==PAGE:68==
HLA-A*03:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC461 
A
p0463
p0524
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p0528
p0461
p1403
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.00874
0.00656
0.0022
0.0022
0.0022
APC
BV421
PE
PerCP
BV421
PE
BV786
PerCP
APC
BV786
0.0022
0.0022
0.0022
59
==PAGE:69==
HLA-A*03:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC461 
B
p0333
p0518
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p0415
p0538
p0314
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
BV421
BV786
BV786
PE
APC
PerCP
APC
PE
BV421
PerCP
0.0022
0.0022
0.31
0.16
0.0022
Figure 41: HLA-A*03:01-restricted RSV peptides in donor BC461. Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for the
three conditions (D0, D14, D14 DMSO) are stated and compared in bar plots.
60
==PAGE:70==
HLA-A*24:02-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC457 
A
p1613
p0673
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p0628
p0618
p1317
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
APC
BV421
PE
PerCP
BV421
PE
BV786
PerCP
APC
BV786
0.00092
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0023
0.00046
0.00046
0.00092
0.0014
61
==PAGE:71==
HLA-A*24:02-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC457 
B
p0644
p0614
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p0621
p1327
p0609
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
BV421
BV786
BV786
PE
APC
PerCP
APC
PE
BV421
PerCP
0.0037
0.03
0.0069
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.00046
0.0092
0.00046
0.0
0.0
0.00183
0.0
0.0
0.00046
Figure 42: HLA-A*24:02-restricted RSV peptides in donor BC457. Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for the
three conditions (D0, D14, D14 DMSO) are stated and compared in bar plots.
62
==PAGE:72==
A.4
Tetramer Staining of HLA-B-restricted RSV Peptides
HLA-B*07:02-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC461 
A
p0776
p0802
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p1661
p1740
p0790
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
APC
BV786
APC
BV421
PE
PerCP
BV786
PerCP
BV786
PE
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.00526
63
==PAGE:73==
HLA-B*07:02-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC461 
B
p0751
p1676
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p1729
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
APC
PerCP
APC
PE
BV421
PerCP
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0018
0.00088
p0728
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
BV421
PE
p0742
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
BV421
BV786
0.44
0.0
0.00087
0.23
0.0
0.00087
Figure 43: HLA-A*07:02-restricted RSV peptides in donor BC461. Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for the
three conditions (D0, D14, D14 DMSO) are stated and compared in bar plots.
64
==PAGE:74==
HLA-B*08:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC467 
A
p1723
p1691
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p1750
p1372
p0908
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
APC
BV421
APC
BV786
APC
PE
APC
PerCP
BV421
PE
0.00054
0.0
0.0048
0.00054
0.011
0.0064
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.00054
0.00054
0.0011
0.0
0.00054
0.0054
65
==PAGE:75==
HLA-B*08:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC467 
B
p1593
p0819
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p1595
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
BV421
PerCP
BV786
PE
BV786
PerCP
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0016
0.0011
0.008
0.0011
0.0038
Figure 44: HLA-A*08:01-restricted RSV peptides in donor BC467. Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for the
three conditions (D0, D14, D14 DMSO) are stated and compared in bar plots.
66
==PAGE:76==
HLA-B*15:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC450 
A
p1409
p0998
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p1653
p1403
p1005
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
APC
BV786
APC
BV421
APC
PE
APC
PerCP
BV421
BV786
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0039
0.0053
67
==PAGE:77==
HLA-B*15:01-Restricted Peptide Recognition by CD8+ T cells in Donor BC450 
B
p1712
p1724
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
p1275
p0964
p0976
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
PE
BV421
PE
BV786
PerCP
BV421
PerCP
BV786
PerCP
PE
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Figure 45: HLA-A*15:01-restricted RSV peptides in donor BC450. Frequencies of tetramer+ populations for the
three conditions (D0, D14, D14 DMSO) are stated and compared in bar plots.
68
==PAGE:78==
A.5
Comparison of Tetramer+-Population Frequencies
A
B
C
69
==PAGE:79==
D
E
Figure 46: Bar plots showing the peptide-recognizing CD8+ T cell populations for each peptide for all HLA alleles
for all three conditions. Day 0 is shown in light gray, day 14 is shown in blue, and day 14 DMSO control is shown
in dark gray. x-axis show the 10 HLA-restricted peptides tested for recognition and y-axis show the frequency of
RSV-recognixing CD8+ T cells in log scale.
70
==PAGE:80==
A.6
RSV-peptides Recognized by CD8+ T Cells On Day 14
Table 15: Overview of 19 RSV peptides, eliciting a CD8+ T cell response on D14 across six of the seven HLA alleles.
A*01:01
A*02:01
A*03:01
A*24:02
Peptide
D0
D14
Peptide
D0
D14
Peptide
D0
D14
Peptide
D0
D14
p1576
Yes
Yes
p0144
No
Yes
p0524
Yes
Yes
p0644
Yes
Yes
p0001
Yes
Yes
p0212
No
Yes
p0333
No
Yes
p0621
No
Yes
p0037
Yes
Yes
p0208
No
Yes
p0094
No
Yes
p0245
No
Yes
p1730
Yes
Yes
p0188
Yes
Yes
B*07:02
B*08:01
Peptide
D0
D14
Peptide
D0
D14
p0728
No
Yes
p1691
No
Yes
p0742
No
Yes
p0884
Yes
Yes
p0899
Yes
Yes
71
==PAGE:81==
A.7
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8+ T cells
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*01:01) (p1576)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Sybtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*02:01) (p0144)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*02:01) (p0208)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-A*03:01) (p0333)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
72
==PAGE:82==
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-A*03:01) (p0524)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC457 (HLA-A*24:02) (p0621)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC457 (HLA-A*24:02) (p0644)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-B*07:02) (p0728)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
73
==PAGE:83==
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-B*07:01) (p0742)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-B*08:01) (p0899)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-B*08:01) (p0884)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
Figure 47: CCR7/CD45RA-based subtype identification of CD8+ T cells on D0, D14, and D14 DMSO.
CCR7+/CD45RA+: TNaive, CCR7+/CD45RA−: TCM, CCR7−/CD45RA+: TEMRA, CCR7−/CD45RA+: TEM.
74
==PAGE:84==
A.8
Subtype Distribution of CD8+ T cells for all HLA Alleles
Figure 48: Barplots showing the CD8+ subtypes, before and after expansion based on expression of CCR7,
CD45RA, and CD95: TNaive (blue), TEMRA (green), TEM (salmon), TCM (red), and CCR7+/CD45RA+/CD95+
(light blue). Frequencies of each subtype for the second most recognized peptide for each HLA allele are visualized
along with the change of TNaive into memory CD8+ T cells after expansion. This general trend is observed among all
HLA alleles.
75
==PAGE:85==
A.9
CD95 Expression of CD8+ T cells
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*01:01) (p1576) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*02:01) (p0144) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*02:01) (p0208) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-A*03:01) (p0333) 
76
==PAGE:86==
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*03:01) (p0524) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC457 (HLA-A*24:02) (p0621) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC457 (HLA-A*24:02) (p0644) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-B*07:02) (p0728) 
77
==PAGE:87==
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-B*07:02) (p0742) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-B*08:01) (p0884) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
CD95 Expression for Naïve vs. Memory Phenotype in CD8+ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-B*08:01) (p0899) 
Figure 49: CD95 expression for all CD8+ T cell subset types: TNaive (red), TEM (purple), TEMRA (salmon), and
TCM (green), for all three conditions.
78
==PAGE:88==
A.10
pHLA Tetramer Staining for Phenotypic Analysis
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p1576-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-A*01:01) (BC467) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0144-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-A*02:01) (BC467) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0208-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-A*02:01) (BC467) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0524-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-A*03:01) (BC461) 
79
==PAGE:89==
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0333-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-A*03:01) (BC461) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0644-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-A*24:02) (BC457) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0621-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-A*24:02) (BC457) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0728-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-B*07:02) (BC461) 
80
==PAGE:90==
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0524-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-B*07:02) (BC461)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0884-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-B*08:01) (BC467) 
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
pHLA APC+PE Tetramer Staining of p0884-Specific CD8+ T Cells (HLA-B*08:01) (BC467)
Figure 50: PE and APC pHLA tetramer staining of CD8+ T cells for D0, D14, and D14 DMSO. pHLA tetramers
were made from the two most recognized peptides on D14 for all HLA-alleles, except HLA-B*15:01 (due to lack of
material).
81
==PAGE:91==
A.11
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtype Identification of RSV-Recognizing CD8+ T Cells
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*01:01) (p0001)
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
11.9
57.2
21.9
8.98
13.9
13.8
68.2
4.03
14.1
21.4
59.9
4.56
12.6
56.5
23
0
7.71
10.1
0
14.6
0
71.2
4.11
12.2
24.7
0
57.8
0
5.29
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
12.6
56.5
23.6
7.35
14.1
13.5
68.7
3.62
15
21.7
59
4.21
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
13.4
0
55.8
23.2
0
7.6
9.82
14.7
71.3
4.14
12.4
24.8
0
57.3
5.46
9.09
22.7
54.5
13.6
1.09
0.056
1.24
97.7
20
13.3
20
46.7
19
4.76
42.9
33.3
0.28
0.039
0.96
98.7
14.3
21.4
7.14
57.1
28.6
14.3
57.1
99.8
0.25
33.3
66.7
83.3
16.7
45.5
36.4
9.09
9.09
50
25
25
Number of CD8+ T cells: 92,955
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*01:01) (p1576)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 92,955
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*02:01) (p0144)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 145,253
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-A*02:01) (p0208)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 145,253
82
==PAGE:92==
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
17.8
48.9
23
0
10.2
18
0
24.3
0
50.9
6.88
11.5
12.7
68.9
6.94
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
18.8
48.7
23
0
9.58
18.5
23.8
0
51.5
0
6.16
11.5
0
12.7
0
70.2
0
5.66
33.3
55.6
11.1
89.3
10.7
83.9
6.45
9.68
0
43.2
51.4
5.41
66.7
33.3
100
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
18
0
24.3
0
0.078
50.9
0.068
6.88
1.87
0
8.83
0
0
85.3
0
4.03
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
16.1
0
59.8
0
0
17
0
7.14
1.95
0
13.5
0
80.2
0
4.32
1.67
0
8.93
0
0
84.8
0
4.63
89.3
10.7
0
0
100
2.07
0
12.2
81.5
0
4.26
50
50
15.8
58.5
0
0
18.6
7.1
50
50
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-A*03:01) (p0333)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 63,217
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-A*03:01) (p0524)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 63,217
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC457 (HLA-A*24:02) (p0621)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 54,390
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC457 (HLA-A*24:02) (p0644)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 54,390
83
==PAGE:93==
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
14.2
0
51.9
23.3
0
10.6
11.5
16.2
67.7
4.6
12.9
16.9
0
0
66
0
4.11
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
14.9
0
52.1
0
0
22.7
0
10.3
11.3
16.3
68.2
4.32
12.8
0
17.3
0
65.9
0
4.01
50
50
90
7.58
2.13
0.24
100
87.7
5.16
6.75
0.4
0
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
9.31
57.3
24.7
8.75
9.48
20.1
63.4
7.04
10.3
25.2
57
7.6
D0 – No expansion
D14 – Peptide-expanded
D14 – DMSO control
8.45
0
57.5
24.4
9.63
9.2
20.3
63.2
7.23
8.73
23.3
60.6
7.38
34.6
19.2
11.5
34.6
95.3
3.43
0.32
0.99
96.3
2.36
9.68
1.31
57.1
28.6
14.3
54.4
5.26
32.5
7.89
47.5
4.92
38.5
9.02
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-B*07:01) (p0728)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 80,781
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC461 (HLA-B*07:01) (p0742)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 80,781
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-B*08:01) (p0884)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 174,255
CCR7/CD45RA-Based Subtypes Identification of tetramer+ CD8⁺ T Cells in Donor BC467 (HLA-B*08:01) (p0899)
Number of CD8+ T cells: 174,255
Figure 51: Subtype identification of RSV-recognizing CD8+ populations based on CCR7 and CD45RA expression:
TNaive (CCR7+/CD45RA+), TCM (CCR7+/CD45RA−), TEMRA (CCR7−/CD45RA+), and TEM
(CCR7−/CD45RA+), for all three conditions for all HLA alleles.
84
==PAGE:94==
A.12
Subtype Distribution of RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells for all HLA Alleles
Figure 52: Barplots showing the CD8+ subtypes for RSV-recognizing CD8+ T cells, before and after expansion
based on expression of CCR7, CD45RA, and CD95: TNaive (blue), TEMRA (green), TEM (salmon), TCM (red), and
CCR7+/CD45RA+/CD95+ (light blue). Frequencies of each subtype for the recognized peptides for each HLA allele
are visualized along with the change of TNaive into memory CD8+ T cells after expansion. This general trend is
observed among all HLA alleles.
85
==PAGE:95==
A.13
Intracellular Cytokine Staining
86
==PAGE:96==
87
==PAGE:97==
Figure 53: Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) of both peptide-stimulated (D14) and DMSO controlled (D14
DMSO) expansion samples. ICS was performed using single peptide-stimulation and 10-peptide-pool stimulation,
with corresponding DMSO controls. ICS was stimulated with one of the most recognized peptides. Comparison of
TNF-α+/TNF-γ+ populations between peptide-stimulated and DMSO controlled ICS are illustrated in bar plots.
ICS was done for only HLA-A alleles.
88
