==PAGE:1==
The possibilities and limitations of liquid
phase 3D electron diffraction
Master Thesis
DTU Chemistry
Department of Chemistry
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Marta Katarzyna Przybyl
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemistry, Kemitorvet, 206, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den-
mark
www.kemi.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at National Centre for Nano Fabrication
and Characterization and Department of Chemistry, at the Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of solid state chemistry
and transmission electron microscopy.
Marta Katarzyna Przybyl - s232948
Signature
Date
ii
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project explores the potential of conducting 3D electron diffraction in the liquid-phase,
with a focus on Zeolitic Imidazole Framework 8, a porous material known for its wide
range of applications. The project studies the structural changes in ZIF-8 caused by
beam-induced damage of crystals suspended in a solvent, using transmission electron mi-
croscopy and electron diffraction. This includes assessing the beam dose rates required
to collect high-completeness diffraction data without destroying the crystalline structure,
as well as investigating the timescale of the amorphization process. Additionally, the col-
lected data were compared with previous studies of ZIF-8 beam damage conducted on
dry samples.
Liquid-phase 3DED has not yet been extensively described in the literature, making this
project a significant step toward understanding the possibilities and limitations of this tech-
nique. By targeting a porous and beam-sensitive material such as ZIF-8, the final findings
of the project can be later used to develop strategies for reducing beam damage in fu-
ture liquid-phase electron microscopy studies, particularly those involving porous metal-
organic frameworks or small organic compounds like pharmaceuticals.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank to my supervisor, Kristian Speranza Molhave for his guidance, as well
as the rest of the Molecular Windows group at DTU Nanolab and the Insight Chips team for
helpful suggestions and technical support. I would particularly like to thank Joakim Lajer
for his ongoing assistance with experiments, data analysis, and insightful discussions
while doing jigsaw puzzles.
I would like to thank Kasper Steen Pedersen and Mariusz Kubus from DTU Chemistry
for access to the Rigaku Synergy-ED and their support regarding the chemical side of the
project. Moreover, I appreciate Mariusz Kubus’s contribution to the ZIF-C crystal structure
refinement.
This thesis was prepared with the assistance of generative AI tools, specifically ChatGPT
and Perplexity, which were utilized for grammar and stylistic corrections, as well as for the
identification of suitable references. The author takes full responsibility for the accuracy
and integrity of the data, analysis, and conclusions, regardless of the use of AI-assisted
tools.
iv
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:7==
List of abbreviations
APV
Arbejdspladsvurdering
BF
Bright Field
CCDC
Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre
cRED
continuos Rotation Electron Diffraction
CIF
Crystallographic Information Format
DF
Dark Field
DP
Diffraction Pattern
DLS
Dynamic Light Scattering
ED
Electron Diffraction
HRTEM
High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy
LC-TEM
Liquid Cell Transmission Electron Microscopy
LP
Liquid Phase
MOF
Metal Organic Framework
RANSAC
Random Sample Consensus
RED
Rotation Electron Diffraction
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscopy
SAED
Selected Area Electron Diffraction
SOD
Sodalite
TRITC
Tetramethylrhodamine Isothiocyanate
TEM
Transmission Electron Microscopy/Microscope
XRD
X-Ray Diffraction
ZIF
Zeolitic Imidazole Framework
3DED
Three-Dimensional Electron Diffraction
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement and research goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Transmission electron microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Liquid phase transmission electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
How to investigate crystalline structure of solids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Metal Organic Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2
Methodology
19
2.1
Nano Channel chips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.2
ZIF-8 synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.3
Image and diffraction patterns acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3
Results and discussion
30
3.1
Sample preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2
Electron diffraction studies and data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.3
Liquid phase 3DED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4
Conclusion
50
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
55
A.1 Python code for beam-damage analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
vi
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a powerful technique that uses high-energy
electrons and their wave-particle duality to image thin samples with a much higher spatial
resolution than most of the other microscopy techniques [1]. Electron diffraction (ED)
is an analogous technique to X-ray diffraction (XRD), however electrons are known to
have much stronger interactions with the sample than X-rays, allowing smaller samples
to be used and good signal-to-noise ratio, but also introducing the higher risk of radiation
damage [1]. Additionally, obtaining both image and diffraction pattern from the same
volume element allows the combination of direct and reciprocal space information, which
could be beneficial for diffraction data analysis.
For the past few years, there is a strong movement to develop techniques allowing imaging
samples in liquid under transmission electron microscope. One of the main advantages of
that approach is the possibility to observe the chemical interactions in real time at almost
atomic resolution. In real life, many chemical interactions in fields such as medicine or
catalysis occur in the liquid phase, therefore there is a need to assess how the structural
properties of compounds change during these interactions. Novel liquid phase electron
microscopy techniques allow for the in-situ inspection of samples dispersed in liquid in
a microscope, supporting the characterization of chemical compounds, that cannot form
stable crystals outside of the solvent, e.g. pharmaceuticals [2], [3].
There are several examples of applying electron diffraction to samples dispersed in liquid
in the literature [4], [5]. Introducing a liquid phase (LP) sample into the high vacuum
present inside a TEM is usually done using dedicated liquid cells with thin, electron-
transparent membranes, that can withstand the pressure difference between the liquid
and the vacuum. Several types of liquid cells are commercially available, for example
clamped chips or thin graphene blister cells [3]. DTU-based start-up called Insight Chips
proposed another design of a microfluidic liquid cell that mitigates the previous trade-off
between flow control and imaging with atomic resolution. The Nano Channel chips pro-
duced by the company have very thin electron-transparent SiN membranes with etched
20-3000 nanometre high channels, allowing high-resolution imaging, mixing in the field of
view, and flow control. Additionally, the TEM holder designated for the chips allows α-tilt
around ±30◦, which is sufficient to collect reliable 3D electron diffraction (3DED) data and
resolve the crystal structure [6].
It is known that porous and organic materials, mostly constructed from light elements,
are subjected to higher beam damage than metallic and inorganic samples [1], [7]. Ad-
ditionally, due to radiolysis of the solvent, crystals dispersed in liquid are generally more
beam sensitive than those in dry state. It is however possible to collect electron diffraction
data from crystallites dispersed in liquids, as shown for ZIF-8 crystals suspended in wa-
ter and dimethylformamide in clamped chips by Gianneschi et al. [8]. Zeolitic Imidazole
Framework 8 (ZIF-8) is a compound isomorphic with zeolites, widely studied due to its
porosity, chemical stability and potential applications in CO2 capture, gas separation or
catalytic processes [7], [9]–[11]. The broad range of possible applications of ZIFs result
in extensive studies of their crystalline structure both with X-rays and electrons, making
the investigation of ZIF–electron interactions and beam damage mechanisms for these
porous materials of significant interest.
It is possible to collect three-dimensional electron diffraction data in a typical transmis-
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
1
==PAGE:10==
sion electron microscope, i.e. collecting diffraction patterns along different crystal lattice
planes, by changing the orientation of the sample during the measurement. Acquired
DPs can be later merged into a complete dataset of diffraction intensity peaks, covering
up to 90% of reciprocal space, which allows for resolving the crystal structure with high
precision [6]. One of the most used techniques for 3DED data collection is continuous
rotational electron diffraction (cRED), utilizing continuous rotation of the TEM holder (and
therefore the sample) during diffraction data collection.
1.1
Problem statement and research goals
Imaging crystalline samples in liquid using transmission electron microscopy poses sev-
eral challenges. Firstly, contributions from the amorphous membrane of the chip and the
solvent itself are present in all images and diffraction patterns obtained from the sample.
Secondly, samples dispersed in liquid are said to be more beam-sensitive due to the neg-
ative effects of radiolysis of the solvent on the sample’s crystallinity. Additionally, porous
materials and pharmaceuticals composed of lighter atoms (and usually non-conductive)
are more sensitive to electron beam damage than, for example, metallic nanoparticles,
due to excessive heating caused by inelastic scattering [1].
Additionally, flow experiments using liquid cell platforms, such as those from Insight Chips,
are often characterized by a high degree of variability and sensitivity to subtle changes in
experimental conditions. Factors such as chip assembly, membrane integrity, pressure
fluctuations and channels geometry can lead to unpredictable flow behaviour, making re-
producibility a significant challenge in these systems. Despite those challenges, liquid cell
experiments are invaluable, as they enable real-time and high-resolution observation of
dynamic processes of materials and biological systems in their native, liquid environment.
The main goal of the project was to acquire 3D electron diffraction data in liquid phase
for ZIF-8, assessing the beam dose rates required to obtain diffraction patterns without
destroying the crystalline structure, as well as the timescale of the amorphization process
at different dose rates. To succeed with 3D electron diffraction, a reliable protocol was
needed for in-situ crystallization of ZIF-8 inside nanochannels, resulting in well-dispersed
single crystals present within the chip. To evaluate the mechanism of amorphization of
ZIF-8 in liquid phase and compare it with the one proposed for dry samples, reliable data
analysis methods for electron diffraction patterns were tested and discussed.
1.1.1
Thesis outline
The first chapter of the thesis introduces the scientific background of the project, dis-
cussing the crystalline structure of chemical compounds in general, transmission electron
microscopy, the prerequisites for obtaining electron diffraction patterns, as well as metal-
organic framework compounds and their physical and chemical properties. The second
chapter presents the project methodology. In the third chapter, all project results are pre-
sented and discussed in more detail. The final chapter summarizes the most important
conclusions and proposes future research directions.
1.2
Transmission electron microscopy
The concept of imaging matter using electrons, using their wave-particle duality, was a
transformative breakthrough in microscopy. Although the theoretical foundation for elec-
tron diffraction and imaging was laid by Louis de Broglie’s hypothesis of matter waves
in the 1920s, the practical realization of electron-based imaging awaited the pioneering
work of Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll. Despite not being aware of de Broglie’s work, Ruska
was deeply intrigued by the resolving power made possible by the small size of elec-
trons. His motivation stemmed from the quest to surpass the resolution limits of optical
2
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:11==
microscopes, which are constrained by the wavelength of visible light. In 1931, Ruska
and Knoll constructed the first transmission electron microscope, replacing optical lenses
with magnetic “electron lenses”. Their initial prototype achieved only modest magnifica-
tion (around 14x), but it demonstrated the feasibility of electron microscopy and inspired
rapid advancements. By 1933, Ruska had developed a TEM with a resolution superior to
that of the best optical microscopes, which can be seen in the Figure 1.1, and by 1939,
commercial TEMs were available, revolutionizing many areas of science. In recognition
of his foundational contributions, Ernst Ruska was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in
1986. Today, TEM is a key tool for studying materials at the atomic level, allowing sci-
entists to observe the structure and composition of materials with incredible detail. The
main advantage of the electron microscope is its ability to quickly change the focal length
of electromagnetic lenses, enabling easy magnification adjustment.
Figure 1.1: First two-stage electron microscope magnifying higher than the ligth micro-
scope, figure reprinted from The development of the electron microscope and of electron
microscopy, Nobel Lecture by E. Ruska (1986) [12].
Despite its high magnification and nearly atomic resolution, transmission electron mi-
croscopy has several limitations. The area imaged by TEM is extremely small compared
to the size of the TEM grid, making it less suitable for studying large regions. Addition-
ally, TEM requires extremely thin specimen samples, ideally below 100 nm in thickness,
to allow transmission of electrons through the sample [1]. As electrons pass through the
sample, they are diffracted by the atomic structure, providing detailed information about
the sample’s crystallography and microstructure. However, if the specimen is too thick,
multiple scattering events become significant, resulting in a reduction of signal’s intensity.
Moreover, the intense electron irradiation focused on a small sample volume increases
the risk of beam-induced damage, which will be further discussed in Section 1.2.2.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
3
==PAGE:12==
1.2.1
Resolution and contrast mechanisms
Resolution δ in a typical visible light microscope can be described using Rayleigh criterion:
δ = 0.61λ
µ sin β ,
(1.1)
where λ is the wavelength of irradiation, µ is the refractive index of the medium and β is
a semi-angle of collection. The denominator is often called the numerical aperture. For
TEM we can postulate similar expression given by
δ = 1.22λ
β
.
(1.2)
In typical transmission electron microscope electrons are travelling with the speed signif-
icant in comparison to the speed of light, therefore we need to take relativistic effects into
consideration. Kinetic energy of electrons can be then written as
Ek = (γ −1)m0c2,
(1.3)
where γ is the Lorentz factor and m0c2 = 511 keV is the electron’s resting mass. Relativistic
wavelength of the electrons can be therefore written as
λ =
h
√
2meeU(1 +
eU
2m0c2 )
.
(1.4)
Using Eq. 1.4 one can calculate the wavelength of the electrons, which are accelerated
with 200 kV voltage (typical accelerating voltage in a TEM is between 100 and 300 kV).
The relativistic wavelength of the electrons at this accelerating voltage will be equal to
2.51 pm, allowing for high spatial resolution and imaging at atomic scale.
The achievable TEM resolution however, is not limited exclusively by the wavelength of
the electrons, lens aberrations play a critical role as well. They can be split into three
main categories: spherical aberrations, chromatic aberrations, and astigmatism. Spheri-
cal aberration arises from inhomogeneity in the lens’s focusing power, causing electrons
farther from the optical axis to be focused more strongly than those closer to the axis.
Chromatic aberration stems from the difference in the lens’s focusing strength depend-
ing on electrons’ energies, while astigmatism is a difference in lens’s focal length for two
perpendicular directions, causing part of the image to be in focus, while other parts are
out of focus. Non-uniform magnification can also occur, mainly due to the projector lens
imperfections. Corrective strategies include the use of specific apertures to reduce aber-
rations and improve resolution, though this comes at the cost of reduced beam intensity
[1]. Aberration-corrected TEMs are available but remain relatively uncommon due to their
high cost.
The nature of the electrons, i.e. its low mass and negative charge, makes it easy to
manipulate them. Electrons are attracted by the positively charged atom nucleus, while
simultaneously repulsed by other electrons in the sample, the electrostatic interactions
are therefore the main cause of the electron scattering - the principal process allowing
the contrast formation in the transmission electron microscope.
As the samples for TEM imaging need to be extremely thin, some electrons pass through
the specimen unaffected, while others are scattered. The scattering cross-section, which
depends on atomic radius and other factors, determines the likelihood of interaction. The
total scattering cross-section decreases as electron energy increases, meaning electrons
4
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.2: Ray diagrams for bright field mode and SAED mode in transmission electron
microscope, figure reprinted from Transmission Electron Microscopy: Physics of Image
Formation 5th Edition by L. Reimer and H. Kohl (2008).
accelerated at 300 kV experience less scattering, while travelling the same distance, than
those accelerated at 100 kV. Higher-density regions of the specimen scatter more than
lower-density regions. The average distance an electron travels between interactions with
the sample is called the mean free path, which will be discussed in Section 1.2.2. If the
mean free path is known for a specific material, it can be used to estimate the maximum
sample thickness, to reduce multiple scattering events.
As the degree of electron transparency of a sample is determined by the extent of electron–
specimen interactions, increased interactions usually result in better image contrast, mean-
ing that heavier atoms in the sample will cause more scattering, creating better contrast
(so-called mass thickness contrast). In general, however, we are mostly interested in the
electrons that are scattered only about a small angle from the optical axis (incident elec-
trons direction), as they give us information about the internal structure of the specimen,
as well as some information about the chemistry of the sample [1]. Different forms of
electron scattering can be summarized visually as illustrated in the Figure 1.3.
1.2.2
Elastic scattering
Elastic scattering occurs when electrons interact with the atoms in a specimen without
any loss of kinetic energy. Additionally, we can classify the scattering events based on
their coherence. Coherent scattering takes place when scattered electron waves remain
in phase with each other and usually occurs when the scattering happens elastically on a
thin and highly crystalline sample [1]. Incoherent scattering occurs when the phase rela-
tionship between electron waves is lost, which is typical for inelastic scattering (scattering
involving energy exchange between incident electrons and the sample).
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
5
==PAGE:14==
We can recognize the nature of the scattering event based on the angular distribution of
scattered electrons. Forward scattering refers to electrons scattered by less than 90◦,
while backscattering involves scattering angles higher than 90◦. Elastic scattering is usu-
ally coherent and occurs at relatively low angles, i.e. <5◦. Carter et al. define the limit of
3◦as a maximum angle at which elastically scattered electrons are still coherent. Inelastic
scattering is almost always incoherent and generally occurs at very low angles (<1◦) [1].
Figure 1.3: Different forms of electron scattering on a thin specimen sample, SEs = sec-
ondary electrons, figure reprinted from Transmission Electron Microscopy: Textbook for
materials science by D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter (2009) [1].
Elastically scattered electrons are the major source of contrast in TEM images and ac-
count for most of the intensity in the diffraction patterns. Elastic interactions of electrons
from the incident beam with electrons from outer shells of the atoms, produce small-angle
deviations. Intensity of those interactions is highly sensitive to atomic arrangement within
the sample, which is fundamental for electron diffraction and high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy, where the wave nature of electrons needs to be considered.
A key parameter describing the probability of these scattering events is the scattering
cross-section σ, which can be thought of as an effective area that quantifies how likely it is
for an electron to scatter, when it encounters a specific atom in the material. This concept
provides a quantitative link between the likelihood of individual electron-atom scattering
event and measurable material’s properties, such as the mean free path. Mean-free path
λ describes the average distance travelled by the electron between interactions within the
material:
λ =
A
NAσρ,
(1.5)
where A is the atomic weight, NA is the Avogadro’s number and ρ is the density of the
material. It is therefore clear, that light atoms scatter electrons less, allowing for greater
penetration of the sample. This is consistent with the fact, that support material commonly
used in TEM grids is amorphous carbon, which based on its lack of crystalline structure
and light atomic weight is nearly completely electron-transparent.
As sample thickness increases, the probability of backscattering rises, and fewer elec-
trons are scattered forward. Multiple scattering events also become more likely, resulting
6
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:15==
in greater angular deviations. For thin specimen, it is often assumed that only single scat-
tering events occur (kinematical approximation), for thicker samples however, multiple
scattering events need to be considered (dynamical scattering). The greater the number
of scattering events, the more difficult it is to interpret the images and diffraction patterns.
1.2.3
Inelastic scattering
Inelastically scattered electrons carry the chemical and electronic information about the
specimen. Inelastic scattering events are best understood by considering particle nature
of the electrons, as these interactions often involve discrete energy transfer between the
incident electron and the sample. The inelastic scattering processes can result in gener-
ation of characteristic X-rays or secondary electrons among others.
Significant inelastic processes include:
• Radiolysis, i.e. breaking of the chemical bonds due to inelastic energy transfer,
particularly significant in organic compounds,
• Knock-on displacement, which is a displacement of an atom in the crystal lattice,
creating a point defect, or sputtering (when the displaced atom is ejected from the
specimen surface),
• Plasmon excitation, i.e. oscillations of electron density in the specimen, giving rise
to Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy (EELS),
• Specimen heating, due to lattice vibrations.
Inelastic scattering processes are especially significant in liquid phase TEM experiments.
As electrons pass through not only the sample but also the electron-transparent mem-
brane and the intervening liquid layer, they encounter numerous opportunities for inelas-
tic interactions. One of the most critical consequences is the radiolysis of the solvent:
solvent molecules are highly susceptible to ionization by the electron beam, leading to
the formation of reactive radicals. These radicals can alter the local chemistry, desta-
bilize crystals suspended in the liquid, and even initiate unwanted reactions. Radiolysis
also promotes the formation of gas bubbles, which can cause the membrane to bulge or,
in severe cases, lead to the unsealing of the liquid cell chip. Charging of insulating SiN
membranes is another concern, as it can generate local electric fields that induce unin-
tended movement of particles or liquids within the cell, further complicating experimental
observations.
1.3
Liquid phase transmission electron microscopy
The high-vacuum environment inside the a TEM presents a significant challenge for imag-
ing samples dispersed in liquid. Strong electrons-matter interactions are essential for high
signal-to-noise ratio characteristic for TEM imaging, but are also a reason for the require-
ment of high-vacuum inside a TEM column. The presence of any gas molecules (such
as water vapour from the specimen, or residual air components) can cause the scattering
of the electron beam, resulting in beam broadening and reduced coherence of electrons.
That is why, historically, transmission electron microscopy was limited to solid or dried
samples. However, the ability to observe the chemical compounds in their native envi-
ronment (namely in solvent) has been a strong drive for developing liquid phase trans-
mission electron microscopy techniques, allowing for observation of chemical processes
mechanisms at nearly atomic resolution.
The concept of imaging wet samples using electron microscopy was first proposed in 1934
by L. Marton [13], just a few years after the first transmission electron microscope has
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
7
==PAGE:16==
been developed, however the first realization of that idea was achieved by I. M. Abrams
and J. W. McBain in 1944 [14]. In 1970s silicon nitride electron-transparent membranes
were first introduced, though these early designs faced challenges like limited resolution
due to membrane thickness [15].
Due to advances of thin membrane fabrication methods and microfluidics, liquid cell elec-
tron microscopy is rapidly evolving since early 2000s, allowing for studying dynamic pro-
cesses in liquids with high spatial resolution. The first graphene blister liquid cells were
introduced in 2012, allowing high-resolution imaging of nanocrystals [16] after ex-situ as-
sembly, and flow-capable liquid cells was first demonstrated by de Jonge and Peckys in
2009 [17].
One of the most widely adopted solutions for imaging liquid phase samples in TEM is
the use of microfabricated chips with electron-transparent membranes. These chips are
available in various designs, categorized mostly based on the material used for cell ”win-
dows”, such as silicon nitride or graphene. Different liquid cell designs are tailored for
specific experiments, some enable in-situ liquid flow during imaging, while others must
be assembled and sealed beforehand [3].
Although liquid cell TEM (LC-TEM) is a revolutionary technique, it presents a few chal-
lenges as well. The sample is dispersed in a thin layer of liquid and enclosed by membrane
windows, which increases electron scattering, worsening the spatial resolution compared
to conventional TEM imaging. Pressure differences across membrane can cause liquid
thickness variations, further complicating high-resolution imaging [15]. High-energy elec-
tron beam can also cause so-called radiolytic bubbles formation inside the liquid cell, po-
tentially altering the sample’s chemistry [3], [18], [19]. Moreover, sample is not stationary
and its constant movement can cause blurring and worsening of the imaging resolution.
Additionally, advanced liquid cells require precise microfabrication and assembly, rais-
ing concerns about the reliability and reproducibility of the results, especially comparing
different cell designs [3].
1.3.1
Diffusion controlled mixing
The ability of initiate and monitor chemical reactions is one of the major advantages of
liquid cell transmission electron microscopy. To fully interpret these observations, un-
derstanding underlying mechanisms of mass transport are essential. Interactions in the
liquid cell can be driven either by convection (liquid flow) or diffusion (concentration gra-
dient). However, due to narrow dimensions of liquid cells, especially the ones provided
by Insight Chips and used in this project, diffusion is typically the dominant mechanism
for mixing [20]. Nano Channel chips contain both micrometer-size bypass channels and
smaller nanochannels. The bypass channels allow for the rapid flow with high flow speed
and low flow resistance, while nanochannels ensure that mixing in the field of view is pri-
marily driven by diffusion. The rectangular geometry of the channels and difference in
channel dimensions directly influence flow resistance, mixing timescale and uniformity of
liquid layer [3], [20].
The relationship between applied pressure, channel dimensions and flow speed in the
channels is described by Hagen-Poiseuille equation, adapted for rectangular channels.
As channel dimensions decrease, hydraulic resistance increases and flow speed de-
creases, enabling diffusion to be the main mechanism of mixing. This is particularly useful
for studing processes strongly dependent on diffusion, such as nucleation, crystallization
or self-assembly [21], [22]. However, accurate moddeling and prediction of mixing dy-
namics is still challenging, numerical modelling tools like COMSOL Multiphysics depend
8
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:17==
heavily on the chip dimensions, making it extremely computationally demanding to simu-
late the whole liquid cell [20].
Another significant challenge for microfluidic liquid cells lays in bubble formation. As the
assembly of the setup is usually done in ambient conditions, trapped air bubbles can
dramatically increase hydraulic resistance in the channels and disrupt the flow [20].
Despite these challenges, liquid cell TEM’s popularity is increasing due the possibility to
visualize mixing and chemical reactions in-situ at nearly atomic resolution [3], [21], [22].
It is also possible to integrate other stimuli like electrical or thermal fields into the liquid
cells, which opens the door for new in-situ TEM experiments.
1.4
How to investigate crystalline structure of solids
All crystalline materials consist of atoms, ions, or molecules, arranged periodically in an
ordered way in three-dimensional space. The internal structure of a solid has a significant
impact on its chemical behaviour as well as macroscopic properties (mechanical, thermal,
electrical etc.) [23]. Understanding the structure-properties relation is essential for the
design of novel chemical compounds, with enhanced targeted properties. Fortunately,
there are well-established methods to investigate the microscopic structural features of
solids, with diffraction-based techniques being among the most commonly used. These
techniques, which include X-ray, neutron, and electron diffraction, allow scientists to de-
termine atomic arrangements, identify crystal symmetry, and characterize defects within
materials. The application of concepts such as Bragg’s law, Miller indices, unit cells, and
Bravais lattices is fundamental for interpreting diffraction data and linking microstructural
features to macroscopic material behaviour [24].
1.4.1
Unit cell, Bravais lattice
A unit cell is the smallest repeating unit of a crystal lattice that retains the full symmetry
and chemical composition of the entire crystal. By translating the unit cell in all three
dimensions, one can generate the macroscopic structure of the crystal. The unit cell is
commonly described using edge lengths (a, b and c), taken along the x, y and z axes
respectively, and the angles between those edges: α (between y and z), β (between x
and z), and γ (between x and y) as illustrated in the Figure 1.4. The macroscopic facets of
a crystal often reflect its internal symmetry and periodicity, as these properties are dictated
by the unit cell’s geometry.
Figure 1.4: Definition of unit cell dimensions and angles, figure reprinted from Solid State
Chemistry: An Introduction, 4th Edition by L. E. Smart and E. A. Moore (2016) [24].
There are many possible ways to choose a unit cell based on the three-dimensional ar-
rangement of atoms. The preferred choice is the smallest possible unit cell, known as
the primitive cell, that can be repeated by simple translation in space, without involving
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
9
==PAGE:18==
mirroring or rotation. Beyond translational symmetry, the unit cell may also contain ad-
ditional symmetry elements, such as mirror planes, rotation axes, or inversion centers,
which further define the crystal’s overall symmetry [24].
Based on the unit cell parameters and the set of symmetry operations present, each unit
cell can be categorized as one of the 14 distinct lattice types (7 crystal systems are illus-
trated in the Figure 1.5, however taking into considerations cell centring, one can obtain all
14) first described by Auguste Bravais in the 19th century. Each Bravais lattice represents
a unique way of periodically arranging lattice points in three-dimensional space so that the
environment, including both geometric arrangement and local chemical surroundings, is
the same at every lattice point [24].
Figure 1.5: Unit cell of the 7 crystal systems, figure reprinted from Solid State Chemistry:
An Introduction, 4th Edition by L. E. Smart and E. A. Moore (2016) [24].
1.4.2
Miller indices
To describe the orientation of crystal planes within the lattice, it is common to use Miller
indices. Miller indices are a set of three integers (hkl) that uniquely identify crystallographic
planes (and directions) in a crystal lattice (Figure 1.6). They are essential for relating the
geometry of the lattice to diffraction patterns and for calculating inter-planar distances.
The assignment of Miller indices involves determining the intercepts of a plane with the
crystallographic axes, taking their reciprocals, and converting those values to the smallest
set of integers by eliminating any fractions. This standardized notation allows scientists to
communicate unambiguously about crystal planes and to interpret diffraction data, which
is crucial for understanding material structure and properties. Miller indices provide a
mathematical description of lattice planes, enabling quantitative analysis and comparison
across different crystal systems.
1.4.3
Bragg’s law and diffraction prerequisites
Diffraction techniques, such as X-ray and electron diffraction, are fundamental tools for
crystal structure determination, relying on the fact that the distance between atoms in
a crystalline material is of the same order of magnitude as the wavelength of X-rays or
electrons. When a crystalline material is exposed to a beam of X-rays or electrons, the
incident waves interact with the periodic array of atoms, resulting in constructive or de-
structive interference, which produces the characteristic diffraction pattern. The positions
and intensities of the resulting reflections are directly related to the arrangement of atoms
10
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.6: Miller indices for planes shown in the figure are respectively a) hkl = 100, b)
hkl = 200, c) hkl = 111, figure reprinted from Solid State Chemistry: An Introduction, 4th
Edition by L. E. Smart and E. A. Moore (2016) [24].
within the unit cell and the symmetry of the crystal lattice.
To understand the diffraction process, one can consider two parallel crystal planes and a
beam incoming at a specific angle. As the beam interacts with the atoms (both electron
waves and X-rays are diffracted by atoms, though the interaction mechanisms differ), it
is reflected at the same angle as the incident beam. This process can be schematically
illustrated as two rays reflecting off successive planes (Figure 1.7).
Figure 1.7: Illustration of the Bragg’s Law, figure reprinted from Transmission Electron
Microscopy: Textbook for materials science by D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter (2009) [1].
The Bragg condition for constructive interference is given by:
nλ = 2d sin(θ),
(1.6)
where n is an integer, λ is the electron wavelength, d is the spacing between crystal
planes, and θ is the scattering angle. By analysing these interference patterns, one can
extract crucial information about the lattice parameters, atomic positions, and symmetry
elements present in the structure.
The assignment of Miller indices to the observed reflections allows for the calculation of
inter-planar spacings, which are key for identifying the geometry of the unit cell. In many
cases, the presence or absence of specific reflections (systematic absences) provides di-
rect evidence for certain symmetry elements within the crystal. This approach is essential
in modern crystallography and materials science for elucidating the atomic structure of
advanced materials [25].
1.4.4
Reciprocal space
Reciprocal space is a mathematical construct that serves as the Fourier transform of the
real (direct) space crystal lattice. Reciprocal lattice vector is defined by basis vectors
that are orthogonal to specific planes in the direct lattice, and it is fundamental for inter-
preting diffraction experiments such as X-ray or electron diffraction. In reciprocal space,
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
11
==PAGE:20==
each point represents a set of crystal planes defined by their Miller indices (hkl) and three
reciprocal space lattice vectors:
ghkl = ha∗+ kb∗+ lc∗.
(1.7)
The reciprocal space lattice vectors can be described as:
a∗= b × c
Ω,
(1.8)
where Ωis the unit cell volume, by definition Ω= a ·(b×c). Each reciprocal space vector
is orthogonal to the plane formed by other two reciprocal space vectors, meaning
a∗· a∗= 1 and a∗· b∗= 0 and a∗· c∗= 0.
(1.9)
The relationship between interplanar spacing d and length of reciprocal space vector can
be written as:
dhkl =
1
|ghkl|,
(1.10)
where
g2
hkl =
1
d2
hkl
= h2a∗2k2b∗2 + l2c∗2 + 2klb∗c∗cos(α∗) + 2hla∗c∗cos(β∗) + 2hka∗b∗cos(γ∗).
(1.11)
For each crystal system, knowing the angles between crystal axes, one can derive the
specific relationship between the interplanar distance and the length of the corresponding
reciprocal space vector. This relationship is crucial because the position of each point
in reciprocal space directly corresponds to a specific set of crystal planes in real space.
Therefore, reciprocal space is essential for understanding how diffraction patterns arise
from the periodic arrangement of atoms in a crystal, as it provides a mathematical frame-
work for predicting the locations and intensities of diffraction spots.
The Ewald sphere is a key geometric tool in crystallography, used to visualize the con-
ditions under which diffraction will occur. It is constructed in reciprocal space and has a
radius equal to the inverse of the wavelength of the incident beam radiation 1
λ.
Diffraction is observed when the Ewald sphere intersects a point of the reciprocal lat-
tice, corresponding to a specific set of crystal planes, which satisfy the Bragg’s condition
(Figure 1.8). This approach allows researchers to predict and interpret the positions of
reflections in a diffraction pattern based on the crystal’s orientation and the wavelength of
the probe.
1.4.5
Structure factor
The structure factor, often denoted as F(hkl), is a fundamental concept in crystallography
that quantifies the amplitude and phase of the wave diffracted by a specific set of crystal
planes defined by Miller indices (hkl). It mathematically describes how the arrangement
of atoms within the unit cell influences the resulting diffraction pattern. The structure
factor is essential for determining atomic positions and electron density within crystals,
as it directly connects the real-space atomic arrangement to the observed intensities in
reciprocal space.
The crystals are periodic and all periodic functions can be described by Fourier series,
e.g. sum of sine and cosine functions. In crystallography, each term in the Fourier series
corresponds to a structure factor, representing the contribution of a specific set of crystal
planes to the diffraction pattern. The structure factor is therefore the Fourier transform
12
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:21==
Figure 1.8: Ewald sphere illustration, vector kl represents the wave vector of the incident
wave, figure reprinted from Transmission Electron Microscopy: Textbook for materials
science by D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter (2009) [1].
of the scattering density (electron density for X-rays, electrostatic potential for electrons)
within the unit cell [25]. To obtain a three-dimensional map of electron densities or electro-
static potential and thus resolve the crystal structure, one needs both the amplitude and
the phase of the structure factors. However, only the amplitudes are directly measured in
diffraction experiments, leading to the well-known “phase problem” in crystallography.
Fourier transform can be written in a general form as
F(k) =
∞
∫
−∞
f(x) e−i2πkxdx,
(1.12)
where x is the variable (usually time or position) and k is the frequency. Since the Fourier
transform produces a complex number, it can be written as the multiplication of the am-
plitude |F(k)| and phase ϕ(k):
F(k) = |F(k)|eiϕ(k),
(1.13)
where the phase is dependent on the frequency k. The structure factor of a crystal will be
defined as:
F(hkl) =
N
∑
j=1
fj(hkl)e2π(hxj+kyj+lzj),
(1.14)
where fj(hkl) is the atomic scattering factor for atom j and the summation is done for
every atom in the respective compound. The atomic scattering factor can be understood
as the description of a scattering power of an atom. In short, structure factor determines
whether constructive or destructive interference occurs for a given set of planes, influ-
encing the intensity of diffraction spots. The relationship between intensity of a diffraction
spot to a structure factor can be written as:
I(hkl) ∼|F(hkl)|2.
(1.15)
Structure factors are used to calculate electron density maps, which reveal the positions
of atoms within the unit cell. They are crucial for iterative refinement of crystal structures,
where experimental and calculated structure factors are compared to improve the accu-
racy of atomic models.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
13
==PAGE:22==
While diffraction experiments directly measure the intensities of structure factors (their
amplitudes |F(hkl)|), the phase information ϕ(hkl) is not directly accessible. This chal-
lenge is known as the ”phase problem” and to overcome it, crystallographers employ var-
ious techniques like direct methods (statistical and probabilistic approaches to estimate
phases, commonly used for small-molecule crystallography), molecular replacement (if a
similar structure is known, its phases can be used as a starting point to solve the struc-
ture of interest), or iterative refinement (combining experimental data with model-based
phase estimates, often used in electron crystallography) [26]–[28]. These methods enable
researchers to recover the missing phase information, making it possible to reconstruct
accurate atomic models from diffraction data.
1.4.6
Systematic absences
Certain structure factors may be equal to zero due to crystal symmetry, leading to sys-
tematic absences in the diffraction pattern. These absences occur when the arrangement
of atoms in the crystal, combined with lattice centering or the presence of specific sym-
metry elements such as glide planes or screw axes, causes complete destructive inter-
ference for particular reflections. As a result, certain spots (reflections) are missing from
the diffraction pattern, and their absence follows predictable rules determined by the crys-
tal’s symmetry. By analysing these systematic absences, crystallographers can identify
the type of lattice centering and the symmetry elements present, which are essential for
determining the crystal’s space group. This makes systematic absences a powerful tool
in crystal structure determination.
1.4.7
Electron diffraction
Electrons interact far more strongly with matter than X-rays due to their charge, en-
abling electrostatic (Coulomb) interactions with both atomic nuclei and surrounding elec-
tron clouds. In contrast, X-rays primarily interact via electromagnetic fields, resulting in
much weaker scattering per atom [25]. This enhanced interaction strength allows elec-
tron beams to produce detectable signals from extremely small sample volumes, typically
106 times smaller than those required for conventional XRD, making electron diffraction
particularly valuable for studying nanoscale materials [29].
The wavelength of electrons in laboratory settings is typically much shorter than that of
X-rays (2.51 pm for 200 kV), except for synchrotron sources where X-ray wavelengths
can become comparable [1], [30]. Shorter wavelengths mean that the Ewald sphere,
a geometric tool used to visualize diffraction conditions, is almost flat for electron diffrac-
tion. As a result, a single zone-axis diffraction pattern in transmission electron microscopy
provides a nearly undistorted view of a reciprocal lattice plane, allowing straightforward
indexing and accurate determination of unit cell parameters, often with sub-Ångstrom
precision [25]. Elastic electron scattering can be treated analogously to X-ray scattering,
allowing Bragg’s Law to be used for describing diffraction from crystal planes. This means
that the positions of spots in electron diffraction patterns directly reflect the periodicity of
the crystal lattice, just as in X-ray diffraction. However, in addition to elastically scattered
electrons, inelastically scattered electrons also contribute to the diffraction pattern. Their
signal however, is typically visible as a diffuse background around the sharp diffraction
peaks rather than forming discrete reflections [1].
For that reason, in electron diffraction data analysis, the primary focus is on the positions of
the diffraction spots rather than their intensities. Electrons can undergo multiple scattering
events within the sample, leading to dynamical effects that complicate the interpretation
of spot intensities, similarly to the situation in powder X-ray diffraction, where intensity
analysis is also limited by sample effects [31], [32]. If the crystal is sufficiently thin, the
14
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:23==
diffraction pattern is more likely to arise from kinematical (single-scattering) conditions,
enabling accurate determination of the unit cell with precision often better than 0.2 Å
[1]. One needs to remember that dynamical diffraction effects can significantly influence
the observed pattern. Therefore, these effects must be carefully considered for accurate
structure determination and are a distinguishing feature of electron diffraction compared
to X-ray diffraction [1], [33].
1.4.8
3D electron diffraction
Each diffraction pattern collected in a TEM represents a two-dimensional projection of the
three-dimensional crystal structure. To fully resolve the atomic arrangement, it is there-
fore necessary to collect multiple diffraction patterns from different crystal orientations and
merge them into a three-dimensional dataset. This is typically achieved in by systemati-
cally tilting the crystal and recording diffraction patterns at each tilt.
Several methods are available for collecting three-dimensional electron diffraction data,
the most common being rotation electron diffraction, continuous rotation electron diffrac-
tion, and convergent beam electron diffraction (CBED). RED involves collecting data at
discrete tilt steps, while in cRED the crystal is rotated continuously during acquisition,
which helps ensure a more complete sampling of reciprocal space, reducing the likeli-
hood of missing important reflections between discrete tilt steps.
A single off-zone diffraction pattern is insufficient for reliable structure determination, but
with the angular relationships between multiple patterns, the entire dataset can be re-
constructed into a 3D volume. This allows determination of unit cell parameters, extinc-
tion rules, and reflection intensities using dedicated software like REDp developed by Xi-
aodong Zou’s group [34]. The typical tilt range of a TEM goniometer is about ±40 degrees,
which limits reciprocal space coverage. However, recent studies have demonstrated that
it is possible to solve crystal structures from individual 3D electron diffraction datasets with
completeness as low as 44%, still achieving high precision in the atomic model [6]. Data
resolution in 3DED can be better than one Ångstrom, and the technique is applicable to
single crystals even within polyphasic mixtures [35]. Currently, 3D electron diffraction is
most reliable for simple, non-beam-sensitive crystalline compounds. However, ongoing
developments in sample preparation, data collection strategies, and data processing al-
gorithms are rapidly expanding the applicability of this technique to more complex and
sensitive materials [36]. A range of software tools are available to assist with the analy-
sis and reconstruction of 3D electron diffraction datasets, facilitating both integration and
phasing of the data [34], [37].
1.4.9
Artifacts in diffraction patterns
Dynamical diffraction effects in electron diffraction can significantly alter the appearance
of Bragg peaks in the diffraction pattern. Although the most frequently observed effect
is an increase of diffused background around sharp Bragg reflections, dynamical effects
can also lead to the appearance of additional peaks, such as those that are forbidden
by the crystal’s symmetry under kinematical conditions. As sample thickness increases,
the intensity of individual Bragg peaks become enhanced due to multiple scattering ef-
fect, while the direct beam intensity decreases. This results in redistribution of intensity,
complicating the quantitative analysis of relative peak intensities [25], [38].
Spurious intensities in diffraction patterns refer to peaks or intensity features that do not
correspond to the actual crystal structure of the sample, but arise from experimental arti-
facts, detector noise or data processing errors. These intensities can overlap with genuine
Bragg reflections, complicating the automatic peak finding and assignment. To mitigate
those challenges, recent methodological advancements focus on careful background cor-
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
15
==PAGE:24==
rection and cross-validation of the diffraction patterns against theoretically predicted pat-
terns, improving the reliability of structural analysis [39], [40].
Other electron diffraction artifacts can arise from astigmatism (diffraction spots splitting),
chromatic aberration (blurring of diffraction spots) and spherical aberration (features ap-
pear shifted from their true positions) [1], [41].
1.5
Metal Organic Frameworks
MOFs are a class of crystalline organic-inorganic hybrid materials consisting of metal
ions (or clusters) and organic linkers, forming one-, two- or three-dimensional networks.
Their highly porous structure and large internal surface area allow for broad range of
applications, including gas storage and separation, catalysis, drug delivery and chemical
sensing among others [42]–[45].
High porosity and the presence of light elements in the organic linkers of MOFs pose a sig-
nificant challenge for their characterization with the use of electron microscopy. MOFs are
highly sensitive to negative effects of electron beam irradiation, which causes structural
damage and loss of their crystallinity when exposed to high cumulative beam doses [7],
[46]. While other techniques, like XRD, solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),
infrared (IR) and UV-Vis spectroscopies, have been employed for MOFs characterization,
those methods lack the spatial resolution to characterize their crystalline structure, pore
sizes and possible defects at the atomic scale [47], [48]. Despite the challenges, the char-
acterization of electron-sensitive materials remains a rapidly advancing area of research
[49].
1.5.1
Zeolitic Imidazole Framework 8
Zeolitic Imidazole Framework 8 (ZIF-8) is a MOF consisting of ZnN4 tetrahedra (each
zinc atom bonding to four 2-methylimidazole molecules) forming a variety of polymorphs,
i.e. structures with identical chemical composition but different network topology. The
formation of specific polymorphs can be controlled by adjusting the synthesis conditions,
such as temperature, solvent, and reactant concentrations [50]. Highly porous structure
and easy synthesis of ZIF-8 makes this compound a prototype for MOF studies relevant
for a variety of applications [7], [9]–[11].
The most commonly observed crystal structure of ZIF-8 is sodalite structure, which crystal-
lizes in the cubic space group I¯43m (no. 217) and features relatively large pore apertures
of approximately 3.4 Å (CCDC: 864310) [51]. The SOD structure is generally considered
the kinetic product of ZIF-8 synthesis, while the thermodynamicly favoured product is the
diamondoid dia(Zn) topology, consisting of stacked, flat crystals with a diamond-like mor-
phology [50]. The dia(Zn) structure is more likely to form when low imidazole to zinc ratio
is used during the synthesis [50]. Diamondoid polymorph is crystallizing in the monoclinic
space group P21/c (no. 14) (CCDC: 783838) [52].
Different crystalline structures have been identified for ZIFs containing encapsulated guest
species. For example, encapsulation of biocomposites yielded a new polymorph, de-
scribed as ZIF-C, which crystallizes in the orthorhombic Pba2 space group (no. 32) with
lattice parameters: a = 10.510(2), b = 12.234(2), c = 4.6660(9) and all angles equal to
90◦(CCDC: 1979160) [36].
Additionally, the literature describes several other ZIF-8 crystal structures, including the
layered ZIF-L, kasenite (ksa), and others, each with distinct topologies and formation
conditions [50].
16
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:25==
Figure 1.9: Dia(Zn) structure of ZIF-8, CCDC 783838. Zinc atoms shown in grey, nitrogen
atoms in light purple, carbon atoms in brown and hydrogen in light pink.
Figure 1.10: SOD structure of ZIF-8, CCDC 864310. Zinc atoms shown in grey, nitrogen
atoms in light purple, carbon atoms in brown, hydrogen in light pink and oxygen atoms in
red.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 1.11: ZIF-C structure with encapsulated BSA, CCDC 1979160. Zinc atoms shown
in grey, nitrogen atoms in light purple, carbon atoms in brown, hydrogen in light pink and
oxygen atoms in red.
1.5.2
Beam-induced amorphization of ZIF-8
As electrons are form of ionizing radiation, each incident electron can alter the chemistry
and have a negative effect on crystallinity of the sample. Due to inelastic scattering,
introduced in Section 1.2.3, among other effects, beam-sensitive crystals gradually lose
their crystallinity during TEM imaging and diffraction patterns acquisition. Therefore, it
is essential to minimize the impact of electron irradiation on the sample. One effective
strategy is the use of cryo-electron microscopy, which reduces radiation damage caused
by sample’s heating.
Additionally, for each material, a critical dose can be defined as the electron dose (number
of electrons per unit area) that a beam-sensitive material can tolerate, before significant
structural or chemical changes occur. To ensure that the critical dose is not exceeded, it
is necessary to monitor the cumulative beam dose, i.e. total electron dose accumulated
in the illuminated area of the sample, during observation.
Electron diffraction studies of ZIF-8 have provided insight into the mechanism of struc-
tural degradation under beam exposure. By monitoring the fading and displacement of
diffraction peak intensities as a function of cumulative beam dose, Jinschek et al. demon-
strated that high-index planes, such as (431) Bragg planes, are more susceptible to beam-
induced amorphozation than low-index planes [7]. In the SOD ZIF-8 structure, high-index
planes correspond to pore apertures, which are more sensitive to Zn-N bond breaking
due to their role in defining the porosity of the material. Although the authors reported
significant fading of diffraction peaks, the critical dose for ZIF-8 was found the be rela-
tively high (11.4 e−/Å2 for (431) Bragg planes and 35.6 e−/Å2 for (110) planes), allowing
for structural determination of ZIF-8 under low-dose conditions. However, it is important
to note that different ZIF-8 polymorphs may exhibit varying sensitivity to electron beam
irradiation.
18
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:27==
2
Methodology
This chapter provides an overview of the experimental and analytical methods employed
throughout the project to fulfil all the steps on the journey from substrates preparation,
to ZIF-8 crystallization protocol, diffraction data collection and finally, crystal structure re-
finement. The methodology begins with a detailed description of the Nano Channel Chips
from Insight Chips, including their geometry and design, fabrication process overview, and
the various holders and setups developed for liquid cell experiments. The possibilities
offered by the chips for in-situ studies are explored, covering also the optical characteri-
zation of chemical changes happening inside the nanochannels.
The chapter outlines the step-by-step protocol established for controlled flow experiments,
including the development of the experimental setup and the optimization of the in-situ
crystallization process. Both in-situ and ex-situ syntheses of ZIF-8 crystals are described,
with dynamic light scattering and bright-field TEM imaging employed to assess the size
distribution of the synthesized particles.
Subsequent sections introduce the key instrumentation used for electron diffraction ex-
periments, including the Tecnai T20 transmission electron microscope and the Rigaku
XtaLAB Synergy-ED electron diffractometer. Essential concepts such as image acqui-
sition, beam dose management and tilt of the sample are covered, as well as practical
considerations for high-quality data collection. The chapter further details the advantages
of the Rigaku microscope and the use of CrystBox software, among others, for diffraction
pattern analysis. Calibration of diffraction patterns is also discussed.
Finally, the collection and analysis of three-dimensional electron diffraction patterns is
described, particularly the subsequent steps for obtaining high-completeness data and
crystal structure refinement with the use of Olex2 software. The methodology framework
forms the foundation for all analyses and results discussed in the following chapters.
2.1
Nano Channel chips
Nano Channel chips are designed specifically for liquid cell experiments, allowing for quick
sample preparation and high-resolution imaging of liquid samples inside the transmission
electron microscope. Each chip incorporates two microchannel bypasses, that are con-
trolled individually, allowing rapid liquid exchange and precise flow management. The
middle part of the chip includes the network of nanochannels, suspended in SiN mem-
brane, with the height of 20-3000 nm, allowing for imaging very thin and well-defined
layers of liquid. This electron-transparent ’window’ creates the opportunity to directly ob-
serve mixing and sample dynamics in liquid in the field of view. The channels’ layout
is customizable (Figure 2.2), for this project chips with increased dead volume were se-
lected as the crystallization process is strongly controlled by diffusion of zinc ions and
2-methylimidazole molecules.
The fabrication process begins with dry etching the micro- and nanochannels into a silicon
wafer. Thin SiN film is then deposited on the wafer, followed by optional aluminium oxide
AlOx coating for enhanced chemical resistance. The second membrane is prepared by
coating an unetched silicon wafer with thin SiN film. Two wafers are then precisely aligned
and bonded, closing the chip structure. The final step involves opening the observation
window and inlets/outlets using KOH etching. The nanochannels are kept clean during
the transportation by keeping the inlets sealed until the opening by the user, just before
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.1: The design of a nanochannel chip, including four inlets/outlets on the bottom
and electron transparent window in the middle. Bypass microchannels are shown to high-
light the flow possibilities. Figure taken from Insight Chips materials.
the experiments. Although inner part of the chip is kept sealed, residual chemicals may
remain on the chip, potentially influencing the observation of chemical processes.
Figure 2.2: The chips are easily customizable, allowing the user to choose the most de-
sirable geometry for the specific purpose. In the figure BF images of different chips’ ge-
ometries were illustrated.
Specialized holders, also produced by Insight Chips, are available for different types of
microscopies (TEM, SEM and optical microscopy). The holders used for TEM imaging
can facilitate in-situ liquid flow or heating, allowing for broad range of experiments to be
conducted. Sample TEM flow holder is shown in Figure 2.3, each inlet and outlet is sealed
with an o-ring when the chip is screwed to the holder, ensuring that liquid mixing occurs
entirely within the channels, as well as preventing the leakage, so that the high-vacuum
environment in the microscope is preserved.
20
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.3: Dedicated holder for the Nano Channel chips, figure taken from Insight Chips
materials.
2.1.1
Optical characterization of the chips
Optical characterization of the chips can be done by observation of refractive index change,
as the visible light passes through different materials within the chip structure and the
sample suspended inside the channels. One can visualize how light is refracted at inter-
faces between materials by constructing the ray diagram, as shown in the Figure 2.4. The
appearance of the nanochannels in bright-field optical microscope varies, depending on
whether they are filled with air or a solvent, as well as on their height and SiN membrane
thickness. For various membrane thicknesses and refractive indexes of solvents, colour
maps were constructed, and the sample colour map is shown in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.4: Ray diagram for refraction on different part of the chips.
Changes in refractive index, that can be observed as colour variations in the chip in BF op-
tical microscopy, can indicate the change of the pressure inside the nanochannels. These
pressure changes (associated with the change in the channel height) can be caused
by chemical processes happening inside the nanochannels, like crystallization. In this
project, water was used as the primary solvent. The refractive index of water is known to
be dependent on the temperature and the wavelength of illumination, however the com-
monly accepted value for room temperature is 1.33 [53]. The changes of channels’ colour
in BF optical microscopy also corresponds to driving pressure changes. Although the dif-
ference between applied pressure of 100 mbar and 500 mbar will not cause visible mem-
brane bulging (distinct colour change), applying higher pressures, such as those above
1 bar, results in a pronounced optical changes. The chips are robust and the membrane
can withstand pressures as high as 5-6 bars, however, in this project, lower driving pres-
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
21
==PAGE:30==
sures were selected to minimize the effect of flow on the diffusion-driven crystallization
process.
Figure 2.5: Colour maps for nanochannels filled with air (on the left) or water (on the right),
the colour depends on the SiN membrane thickness as well.
The chips used in this project were categorized as 2nd sort during quality control, meaning
they were fully functional for experimental purposes, however exhibited minor fabrication
residues or fabrication errors. Therefore, the chips were precisely assessed before each
experiment using optical microscopy to confirm that the channels are empty and not col-
lapsed, there are no impurities on top of the inlet openings, as well as the overall structural
integrity of the chip is preserved. A channel height of approximately 200 nm was selected
for all experiments as a compromise between providing sufficient space for MOF crystals
to develop their full structure and enabling high-resolution imaging during TEM analysis.
Two optical microscopes were used for characterization of the chips as well as preparatory
experiments: Olympus BX51 and Olympus BX61 (with exchangeable filter cubes). For
Rhodamine B experiments, a TRITC filter cube (excitation: 560 nm, emission: 575nm)
was used, as it aligns with Rhodamine B emission peak (567 nm) [54]. The concentration
of the Rhodamine B solution was 3 mM.
The use of colour maps is summarized in the Figure 2.6. The channel height for the chip
in the image was 180 nm and water was used as a solvent (refractive index 1.33). Based
on the colours in the chip one can postulate that the dead-end channel in the bottom
bulged, the colour difference between the crystals and the solvent without crystals is also
significant. While these changes are visible to the naked eye, to ensure that the postulates
about the chemical processes are correct, technique with higher resolving power needs
to be used (e.g. TEM).
2.1.2
Flow setup
To assemble the experimental setup, a chip with the desired geometry and channel height
was chosen and the inlets and outlets were punctured using a thin wire or a needle.
Depending on the experimental protocol, the chip was either placed in the holder and
screwed on tightly or prepared for the experiment by drop-casting respective solution in
22
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.6: Illustration of how to use the colour map, knowing the height of the chip (180
nm) and refractive index of water (1.33). ZIF-8 refrctive index is 1.38 . The colour map
shown here assumes membrane thickness of 20 nm.
two out of four inlets, and then placed in the holder. Plastic tubes were used to connect
the chip to the pressure controller and fluid reservoirs, driving pressure was set and con-
trolled using a Fluigent Flow EZ 1000 mbar controller. For the optical experiments the
SEM/optical holder from Insight Chips was used, as shown in the Fig. 2.7. The SEM
holder allows BF and DF imaging, as well as transmission view in the optical microscope.
For TEM experiments, dedicated 4-inlet flow control holder was used, depending on the
microscope either TFS- or JEOL-compatible. These TEM holders usually allow for ± 30◦
tilt inside the microscope, as the silicon surrounding the chip’s window blocks the view at
higher tilt angles. the TEM setup is illustrated in the Figure 2.8.
SEM/optical holder was cleaned with milliQ water in between experiments and left to dry,
ensuring that the leftover water from the holder tubes will not be forced into to chip by
capillary forces. TEM holder was cleaned with MilliQ water after each experiment as well.
After the chip was chosen, prepared and placed in the TEM holder, the holder was then
tested for vacuum safety using Pfeifer Vacuum HiCube vacuum pump. The holder was
considered safe for TEM use when the pressure value measured by the pump was below
10−5 hPa, within 5 minutes of pumping. If this requirement was not met, the chip was
exchanged for a new one or adjusted, and the holder was tested again. Is some cases,
even after passing the vacuum test, introducing the TEM holder into the Compustage of
Tecnai T20 caused instability of the vacuum inside the microscope column. When this
occured, the holder was removed, the chip was exchanged or adjusted, and the vacuum
test performed again.
2.2
ZIF-8 synthesis
All solutions used for in-situ experiments were prepared in the chemical laboratory. Chem-
icals were acquired from Sigma Aldrich and stored in a chemical cabinet. They were
handled under the fume hood, wearing protective gear (glasses, lab coat and gloves) at
all times. Powders were weighted using a laboratory scale, moreover, milliQ water was
used as a solvent and the respective amounts were measured using graduated cylinder or
automatic pipette. The chemical safety was assessed based on SDS documents found
in Kemibrug.dk, the APV for the solutions preparation was written up and accepted by
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.7: Figure illustrates the SEM/optical holder, with respective inlets and outlets.
Blue stoppers can be used to seal the liquid inside the tubes, creating an additional reser-
voir of reagent solution, though they were not used in every experiment. A small glass
container serves as an outlet for liquid waste, and an additional hole in the top was punc-
tured to prevent pressure build-up that could force the liquid back into the chip.
DTU Nanolab’s responsible. Apart from milliQ water, only two chemical compounds were
used throughout the project: 2-Methylimidazole (CAS: 693-98-1) and zinc acetate (CAS:
557-34-6).
2.2.1
Solution preparation
Two 2-methylimidazole solutions were prepared by weighing 0.33 g and 1.31 g of 2-
methylimidazole powder, for 0.4 M and 1.6 M solutions respectively. Powders were then
dissolved in 10 mL of milliQ water, placed in a glass beaker on a hot plate and heated to
30◦, to assure complete dissolution of powder. Afterwards both solution were left to cool
to room temperature and placed in a tightly closed Falcon tubes. Zinc acetate solution
was prepared by weighing 0.44 g of powder and dissolving it in 10 mL of milliQ water, as
the zinc acetate is highly soluble in water, no heating was required to assure solution’s
homogeneity. Before each use for experiments, solutions were sonicated for 10 minutes
using sonicator bath.
2.2.2
Nanocrystals synthesis
Nanocrystals synthesis followed two different protocols (A and B). In the synthesis A, 2
mL of 0.2 M zinc acetate solution was placed on a magnetic stirrer in a glass beaker.
Magnetic bar was placed inside the beaker and stirring at 250 rpm initiated. Then, 2 mL
of 0.4 M 2-methylimidazole water solution was added. After 2, 5 and 10 minutes 10 µL
of the reaction solution was drawn and dispersed in 0.9 mL of water in DLS cuvettes or
Eppendorfs.
Synthesis B followed the same steps, however the 2-methylimidazole solution concentra-
tion was equal to 1.6 M. Both syntheses were conducted based on literature, suggesting
that imidazole:zinc acetate ratio and reaction time control the size of the ZIF-8 crystals
[55]. For this project, particle size below 200 nm was desired.
24
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.8: Liquid cell TEM experiment setup in Tecnai T20. Two Fluigent Flow EZ con-
trollers are used as two different liquids were pushed into separate bypasses, allowing
the liquids to meet only inside the nanochannels.
2.2.3
Crystals size analysis
DLS was employed to determine the size distribution of ZIF-8 nanocrystals samples. DLS
measures fluctuations of scattered monochromatic light (typically from a laser source)
caused by particles movement. As the smaller particles move more rapidly, fluctuations
of scattered light are faster, while larger particles move more slowly, causing slower light
fluctuations. The technique is said to be sensitive for particle sizes ranging approximately
from 1 nm to micrometers in diameter [56]. To validate the DLS results, the crystals’ sizes
were also analysed using BF TEM imaging. The dispersed solution was drop-casted onto
a copper TEM grid (coated with holey carbon amorphous film), left to dry, and then placed
in a single tilt static holder. The diameter of each ZIF-8 nanocrystal was measured directly
from images using Fiji.
2.3
Image and diffraction patterns acquisition
Transmission electron microscopy enables straightforward collection of electron diffrac-
tion patterns, that are essential for characterization of crystalline structure of materials.
In a conventional TEM, a single diffraction pattern is acquired in a diffraction mode of
the microscope, resulting in a two-dimensional array of diffraction spots, arranged in a
symmetric fashion.
The positions and intensities of diffraction spots provide direct information about the crys-
tal structure of the specimen. The spatial arrangement of the spots is determined by the
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
25
==PAGE:34==
geometry of the crystal lattice, while the distances from the central spot are inversely
related to the real space lattice parameters. By measuring those distances and compar-
ing them to known crystallographic data, one can deduce lattice parameters, as well as
symmetry elements present in the crystal’s unit cell. However, a single diffraction pattern
samples only one zone axis (crystal orientation), therefore is not sufficient for compre-
hensive structural analysis, especially if the material exhibits polymorphism or posses
complex crystallographic features.
To achieve a more complete characterization, it is necessary to probe bigger part of the
reciprocal space, and the easiest way to achieve that is by collecting diffraction patterns
for more than one zone axis. By systematically varying the sample’s orientation, different
orientations (and reflections) will be accessed. Consequently, the higher the accessible
tilt range, the better reciprocal space coverage, enhancing the reliability of structure iden-
tification. A primary limitation in reciprocal space sampling arises from the restricted tilt
range of the TEM specimen holder. Tilt range of Insight Chips holders is restricted by the
silicon wedge, present around the transparent window of the chip, effectively limiting the
reciprocal space coverage, however the problem is common for other holders as well. It
is frequent, that some areas of the reciprocal space remain inaccessible, as shown in the
Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Incomplete reciprocal space sampling is usually referred to as a ’missing
wedge’ problem, describing the wedge-shaped gap in the collected data. Figure reprinted
from Three-Dimensional Electron Diffraction for Structural Analysis of Beam-Sensitive
Metal-Organic Frameworks [57].
2.3.1
Tecnai T20 G2 (S)TEM
For the TEM imaging, Tecnai T20 G2 (S)TEM from Thermo Fisher Scientific was used,
operating at an accelerating voltage 200 kV and equipped with a thermionic LaB6 electron
gun. Bright-field images and electron diffraction patterns were acquired utilizing TVIPS
XF416 CMOS 4K camera and the corresponding dedicated software. Instrument align-
ment was carried out using the fluorescent screen, which also provided screen current
measurements. The flow setup was prepared as described in Section 1.2.3. Beam dose
rate was monitored via the microscope software, with the typical values for Tecnai system
ranging from 0.1 to 10 e−/Å2s.
To minimize cumulative electron dose during imaging, spot size 5 was occasionally se-
lected, as opposed to more commonly used spot size 3. Adjusting the spot size alters the
26
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:35==
electron beam current: increasing the spot size reduces the beam current and, conse-
quently, lowers the number of electron delivered to the specimen. During crystallization
in the in-situ experiments, the electron beam was blanked to prevent beam-induced ef-
fects on crystal formation. For beam-damage studies, the beam remained unblanked in
diffraction mode.
For the 3D electron diffraction data collection, sample tilt was adjusted manually. To en-
sure that the crystal remained within the field of view (limited by SAED aperture) during
higher tilt ranges, diffraction mode was temporarily disabled every five frames and BF
image of the crystal was acquired to verify its position. Tilt series were typically collected
from -10◦to +10◦in 1◦increments, with all adjustments performed manually, making the
process time-consuming. Additionally, after several hours of imaging, sample drift during
tilting and data acquisition became a significant challenge.
2.3.2
Rigaku XtaLAB Synergy-ED
During the project, I also collected liquid-phase 3DED data using Rigaku XtaLAB Synergy-
ED, located at the Electron Crystallography facility at DTU Chemistry. This instrument is
specifically designed for 3DED data collection and operates at accelerating voltage of
200 kV. Compared to the Tecnai T20 microscope at DTU Nanolab, 3DED experiments
done in the Rigaku are significantly less time-consuming. Rigaku Synergy-ED employs
continuous rotation electron diffraction, and the tilt range can be specified by the user,
however the data collection is run automatically by the dedicated software.
One of the advantages of the Rigaku microscope is its specialized imaging mode, com-
bining BF view of the sample with a diffraction overlay. This view enables simultaneous
visualization of features that generate contrast in BF, while exhibiting diffraction, which
turned out to be particularly useful for ZIF-8 crystals dispersed in the Nano Channel chip.
Another major benefit of Rigaku instrument is its exceptionally low beam dose rate, which
is typically a few orders of magnitude lower than in conventional TEM, ideal for porous
and beam-sensitive materials imaging, as it minimizes the radiation damage. However,
because of this, the contrast in the BF view is also significantly reduced, making finding
the crystals in the nanochannels challenging. Additionally, the Rigaku instrument allows
for the use of very narrow beam diameter, enabling selective illumination of individual
crystals, which helps minimizing the contribution of solvent in liquid-phase experiments,
improving data quality and accurate data analysis.
2.4
Data analysis
2.4.1
Beam damage analysis
As ZIF-8 is a porous material, evaluating its sensitivity to beam irradiation is crucial. To
assess the fading or shift of diffraction peaks intensities in patterns acquired over time,
a custom Python code was developed. The code and its application will be discussed in
detail in the Results chapter.
2.4.2
Structure match
All images were processed using Fiji software. For optical and microscopy images, pixel
size calibration was established using a standard calibration sample. For each image,
scale bar was added during processing. For electron diffraction patterns, pixel size cal-
ibration was performed using the known diameter of the amorphous background ring or
known d-spacing in silicon edge diffraction pattern, as the microscope-reported pixel val-
ues found in metadata were determined to be inaccurate.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
27
==PAGE:36==
Quantitative diffraction pattern analysis was performed using specialized software CryT-
Box [58], which allows user to load a CIF file, that will be used as a reference structure,
and performs the following steps:
• Image preprocessing, to enhance the contrast and reduce the noise,
• Beam centre detection using intensity-based algorithms,
• Spots detection,
• Lattice parameters determination, which uses RANSAC algorithm to fit the detected
reflections to a reciprocal space lattice,
• Reflections indexing,
• Calculation of inter-planar spacings and angles.
Software then compares found reflections to the theoretically predicted ones, calculated
based on the uploaded CIF file, provides the answer to the question, if the experimental
data match the loaded crystal structure and suggests which zone axis the reflections come
from.
As mentioned before, knowing the lattice parameters of a desired crystal structure, one
can predict how the diffraction pattern along a specific zone axis will look like, using the
tools of single crystal diffraction pattern simulations like for example ReciPro [59]. As
the CrytBox software suggests the zone axis from which the experimental pattern might
come from, this simulated pattern for the same zone axis can be compared to the ex-
perimental data. This approach however requires prior knowledge of the expected crystal
structure. As the project focused on ZIF-8 structure, each experimentally acquired pattern
was compared to two most common ZIF-8 structures: dia(Zn) and SOD.
2.4.3
Calibration of diffraction patterns
To assure the right calibration of diffraction patterns, silicon from the chip’s wedge or the
ring from the amorphous SiN membrane can be used as calibration materials. Diffraction
pattern of pure silicon can be easily modelled and compared with the experimental DP
to assess, which reflections are visible in the acquired pattern. Diffraction pattern of the
silicon wedge was collected (Figure 2.10a), and the distance between the beam centre
and the peak on the top left corner of the image (corresponding to 220 reflection) was
measured in pixels. This distance is known to be 7.314 1/nm, and the pixel size can be
calculated by comparing the length of the measured distance in pixels to this value in
1/nm. Diffraction pattern of the amorphous SiN membrane exhibits two concentric rings
and the radius of outer most ring (7.726 1/nm) is known from the TEM measurements,
calibrated on the standard calibration sample. Therefore, each diffraction pattern including
SiN amorphous membrane contribution, can be easily calibrated by measuring the radius
of outermost ring in pixels and correlated to the known radius in 1/nm.
2.4.4
Crystal structure refinement from 3DED dataset
The workflow for 3DED data analysis is as follows: the set of 2D patterns is merged
into a 3D reciprocal space map, based on the angular relation in between frames, each
reflection in the reciprocal space is characterized by its position in 3D space and intensity.
Then, beam centre is identified and the whole reciprocal space is searched, looking for
periodicity and symmetry in three-dimensional distribution of reflections. The diffraction
patterns are then analysed using auto-indexing algorithms, which assign Miller indices to
the reflections and determine the unit cell parameters. These parameters are compared
28
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:37==
(a) Experimental diffraction pattern of silicon
wedge.
(b) Experimental diffraction pattern of SiN amor-
phous membrane.
Figure 2.10: Calibration of the diffraction patterns can be done using materials, which
crystalline or amorphous structure is commonly known, so they can be treated as calibra-
tion standards.
against the standard Bravais lattices to identify the lattice type matching the experimental
data.
The software proposes the best crystal structure match listing CCDC references, and
then, the data is saved as a list of hkl indices and intensities for each peak. Using for ex-
ample Olex2 [60], one can try to determine the initial atom arrangement from the file. The
intensities help with initial electron density map calculation and the positions for atoms in
the structure are suggested. Then the refinement process is performed iteratively: ad-
justing the atomic positions, occupancies and thermal parameters, until the fit parameters
(e.g. R-factors) reach acceptable values. At this stage, dynamical scattering corrections
can be also applied.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
29
==PAGE:38==
3
Results and discussion
This chapter presents the systematic development and optimization of an in-situ flow pro-
tocol, for reliably obtaining well dispersed single ZIF-8 crystals within the Nano Channel
chip. The initial phase of the project involved a series of preparatory experiments, con-
ducted during a special course that was completed last semester, where I gained hands-
on experience in handling the liquid cell chips and performed numerous flow experiments
under an optical microscope. By testing the protocol previously established by the groups
members, I explored the influence of zinc acetate concentration on the crystallization pro-
cess, and observed that the resulting crystals were highly beam-sensitive under electron
beam illumination. Therefore, further optimization of the protocol was needed. To better
understand mixing dynamics within the chips, experiments with the use of rhodamine B
solution and fluorescence microscopy were conducted, enabling real-time visualization
of reagent distribution within the chip. Based on the timescale for thorough mixing of
the reagents, that I saw in rhodamine experiments, the protocol for in-situ mixing of zinc
acetate and 2-methylimidazole was established and tested in both optical and electron
microscope. Despite the fact, that these optical experiments did not reveal significant
refractive index changes, subsequent TEM analysis confirmed the presence of crystals
inside the chip, although neither single crystals nor strongly diffracting. The potential
of nano-sized ZIF-8 crystals synthesis was explored, for ex-situ sample preparation and
trapping the crystals inside a specially designed trapping chip. Subsequent experiments
yielded unexpected and complex results, highlighting the challenges of visualization of
beam-sensitive materials. Ultimately, by revisiting and modifying the initial protocol, I
established a reproducible method for in-situ ZIF-8 crystal growth. This optimized pro-
tocol enabled the successful formation of single ZIF-8 crystals within the chips, suitable
for high-quality 3DED data collection, both in the Tecnai T20 and in the Rigaku XtaLAB
Synergy-ED electron diffractometer, marking a significant achievement in the pursuit of
reliable in-situ crystallization and structural analysis with the use of electron diffraction.
3.1
Sample preparation
3.1.1
Previous experiments
As a preparation for this project, I completed a short special course, during which I began
developing a reliable protocol for in-situ crystallization of ZIF-8, adapting the existing APV.
The original protocol utilized a mixture of 2.8 M 2-methylimidazole with ferritin and a 40
mM solution of zinc acetate. In this approach, the imidazole-ferritin solution was drop-
casted into top two inlets of the chip as shown in the Figure 3.1, which was then mounted
in the holder, and zinc acetate solution was subsequently flowed through the bypass on
the bottom side the chip to initiate nucleation.
Since ferritin was not required for my studies, the protocol was modified accordingly, main-
taining the 2.8 M concentration of 2-methylimidazole solution and systematically varying
the concentration of Zn(OAc)2 from 10 to 80 mM to investigate the effect of its concentra-
tion on the nucleation process. The most crystals were observed in the channels when
using the zinc acetate concentrations of 0.02M, 0.04M and 0.06M. The holder was thor-
oughly cleaned between each experiment, however for the liquid to be seen in the outlet
tube in every case, the driving pressure varied from 300 mbar to 500 mbar. The flow of
zinc acetate solution was maintained for 2 minutes each time, and then stopped. The
chip was left undisturbed for 10-15 minutes to allow for crystals formation. After the flow
30
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.1: Schematic representation of the initial protocol, assuming that the bypasses
in the chip are oriented horizontally, like in the Figure 2.1. Firstly, one of the reagents
is drop-casted into the top two inlets, then chip is mounted into the holder and second
reagent is introduced to the bottom bypass.
was stopped, the inlet and outlet tube remained open (not sealed with stoppers), and
as a result, liquid could freely move inside the tubes, effectively acting as a reservoir of
zinc acetate solution. For the mentioned concentrations, a substantial number of crystals
formed in each chip, as can be seen in Figure 3.2. In contrast, at 0.01 M concentration of
zinc acetate, colour changes in the chip were observed after much longer period (approx.
30 minutes) and were not as pronounced. As the concentration of 2-methylimidazole
was quite high, control test was performed by drop-casting the imidazole solution into
the chip with all inlets punctured. The chip was then left for 30 minutes to test, whether
the imidazole will precipitate as the chip dries out due to its high concentration, but no
colour changes were observed in that timescale, suggesting that the crystals forming in
the channels need to come from diffusive mixing of both reagents.
(a) 0.04 M
(b) 0.06 M
Figure 3.2: Images acquired in the optical microscope for two different zinc acetate con-
centrations after 15 minutes. In the image on the right, crystals were observed in the ’in-
verted christmas three’ on the right, although the colour changes are not as pronounced
as in the left image.
The experiment was subsequently repeated in the TEM, to take advantage of its supe-
rior resolving power, as compared to the optical microscope. The experiment was per-
formed using the same conditions and concentrations as before, i.e. 2.8 M solution of
2-methylimidazole and 0.06 M solution of zinc acetate. The beam was blanked after the
alignment procedure was completed, to assure that the solutions are not subjected to
the beam irradiation before the crystallization process. Once again, 2-methylimidazole
solution was drop-casted into two top inlets and zinc acetate was flowed into the bottom
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
31
==PAGE:40==
bypass for 2 minutes at 300 mbar driving pressure. Then, the chip was left undisturbed for
30 minutes. Although some BF TEM images were acquired, and single, well-dispersed
crystals were found in the chip, the crystals proved to be extremely beam sensitive and
almost immediate dissolution/degradation was observed. Although the exact beam dose
rate was not known for this experiment, usual spot size 3 was used. This highlighted the
need to further adapt the protocol and monitor beam dose rates during TEM imaging.
(a) A set of seemingly single crystals, dispersed
in the solvent.
(b) Radiolytic bubble formed due to beam-
induced radiolysis.
Figure 3.3: Bright field images acquired in the TEM after 30 minutes of crystallization.
3.1.2
in-situ mixing
To investigate diffusion-controlled processes within the chips, experiments were con-
ducted using rhodamine B solution and fluorescence filter cubes in one of the optical
microscopes. This approach allows real-time visualization of mixing dynamics across dif-
ferent chip geometries. The flow setup for the experiment cosnisted of a SEM/optical
holder, milliQ water, 3mM rhodamine B solution and a chip with ’mixing’ geometry from
batch B22W1. The chip’s inlets were punctured and the chip was mounted into the holder.
First, water was flowed through both bypasses, and the flow was inverted twice, to elimi-
nate any air bubbles.
Next, the stoppers on tubes were closed, sealing remaining water in the top bypass and
inlet and outlet tubes. The second water container was exchanged for the rhodamine B
solution and the solution was flowed though the bottom bypass, using driving pressure
of 100 mbar. The mixing process was observed through the camera mounted on the mi-
croscope, using a TRITC filter cube. Because of this acquisition setup, water was not
visible in the nanochannels, as the red fluorescence of rhodamine solution was respon-
sible for the contrast in the video. Rhodamine was first observed in the nanochannels
after 2 minutes, and the whole chip was filled with fluorescent solution after 4 minutes.
Then, the rhodamine flow was stopped and the solution once again exchanged for water,
to assess the timescale of removing the rhodamine from nanochannels, using water flow
through the bottom bypass (the same in which the rhodamine was flowed in). Top bypass
remained sealed. The fluorescence signal faded completely after 10 minutes of water
flow at 100 mbar.
When mixing zinc acetate and 2-methylimidazole solutions on a glass slide, immediate
32
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:41==
precipitation of ZIF-8 was observed under the optical microscope. Therefore, flowing both
those solutions through the same tubes and bypass was considered not feasible, as it may
result in crystals formation inside the the bypass, irreversibly blocking the flow and further
diffusion of the ions. For this reason, the flow protocol used for rhodamine experiments
was adjusted to the ZIF-8 precipitation, by adding an additional step of air flow (to clean
out the bypass from remaining reagent) before exchanging the solution from zinc acetate
to 2-methylimidazole. First, zinc acetate solution was flowed into both bypasses for a
few minutes, assuring that the whole chip was filled with zinc acetate. Subsequently, two
experimental variants were tested: one in which the top bypass was sealed, and another
where zinc acetate flow was maintained, while air was flowing through the bottom bypass.
Both experimental variants are illustrated in the Figures 3.4 and 3.5. Blue stoppers were
used to seal the zinc solution inside the tubes and top bypass, as can be seen in the Figure
2.7, providing enough volume for diffusion, while preventing too much liquid movement.
Figure 3.4: First variant of the in-situ mixing protocol, x shows when the stoppers on the
inlet/outlet tubes were closed.
In the first variant, illustrated in the Figure 3.5, zinc acetate solution was continuously
flowing through the top bypass, while air was flushed through the bottom bypass, to en-
sure that the nanochannels remained filled with zinc acetate, while the bottom bypass
was emptied. Once the air flow was stopped, the flow of zinc acetate was stopped as
well, by closing the blue stoppers, sealing small volume of zinc acetate solution in the
tubes and the top bypass. The empty container, used to flow in air into the bottom by-
pass, was exchanged for an Eppendorf with 2-methylimidazole solution. The imidazole
solution flow through the bottom bypass was maintained for 2-3 minutes, in line with pre-
vious successful drop-casting experiments, as well as the time that rhodamine needed
to appear in the nanochannels. This experiment was conducted for two different sets of
reagents concentrations: 0.06 M Zn(OAc)2 and 2.8 M 2-methylimidazole, as well as 0.2
M Zn(OAc)2 and 1.6 M 2-methylimidazole. The latter ratio was selected based on the
literature reports, indicating that smaller sized crystals are forming when using 1:8 ratio of
concentrations [55]. The lower imidazole concentration (1.6 M instead of 2.8 M), as well
as 1:8 ratio of Zn2+ to imidazole, were used in all subsequent flow experiments. For both
concentration ratios, no significant changes in refractive index were observed under the
optical microscope within the following 15–30 minutes.
In the second variant, the zinc acetate bypass (top one) was sealed off before introducing
the air to the bottom bypass, ensuring that the zinc solution is not pushed out of the chip
by the air flow. The concentrations used in the experiment were 0.2 M zinc acetate and
1.6 M 2-methylimidazole. As in previous variant, no optical changes were observed under
optical microscope, but the experiment was repeated in the TEM, to check if it was the
resolving power of the optical microscope that was limiting the crystallization observation.
In the TEM, crystals were indeed observed within the chip, although they were relatively
few in number and appeared as weakly diffracting single crystals or polycrystalline ag-
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.5: Second variant of the in-situ mixing protocol, x shows when the stoppers on
the inlet/outlet tubes were closed.
glomerates, complicating their structural characterization. Energy-dispersive X-ray spec-
troscopy (EDX) analysis revealed a higher concentration of zinc within the particles, com-
pared to the surrounding channel (Figure 3.7). As no optical images were acquired for
in-situ mixing experiments and no strongly diffracting crystals were found in the TEM,
other approaches to in-situ crystallization were explored.
(a) Polycrystalline agglomerate found in the
channel after 15 minutes.
(b) Single, weakly diffracting crystal, stable
during few minutes of beam illumination.
Figure 3.6: BF TEM images acquired when the second variant of the in-situ mixing pro-
tocol was tested.
3.1.3
Traps
Trapping Nano Channel Chips consist of channels, that vary in thickness, forming a really
thin ’trap’ region in the middle. The nano-sized crystals, dispersed in liquid, can be there-
fore flowed into one of the inlets, through the top bypass, and by not allowing the liquid to
escape through the same bypass, liquid is forced through the nanochannels, as shown in
the Figure 3.8. Particles are trapped in the nanochannel, as the trap dimensions do not
allow them to diffuse further, on the other hand, as long as the liquid is flowing into the
chip, particles cannot diffuse in the opposite direction either. This setup creates creates
the perfect opportunity for particles characterization.
Trapping chips are well-suited for studying crystalline samples, prepared ex-situ, that
can be dispersed in liquid. However, this approach requires reliable nano-sized crystals
34
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.7: EDX spectrum of crystals agglomerate found in the chip, signal was normal-
ized based on the silicon peak around 1.7 keV from the membrane.
preparation methods. As a general guideline, the crystal dimensions should be lower than
half of the nanochannel’s height, meaning that for channels used in this project (100-200
nm), crystals around 50 nm in diameter are required.
Figure 3.8: Schematic representation of the trapping chip, arrows show liquid flow direc-
tion.
As mentioned previously, mixing zinc acetate and 2-methylimidazole solutions (1:8 ratio
of concentrations) on a glass slide resulted in immediate precipitation and agglomeration
into larger particles. Crystals ranging from 5 to 50 µm formed within a minute of mixing,
and larger structures developed over time, as observed under optical microscope. To
determine whether smaller crystals (below 1 µm) are also formed in the reaction or if
the agglomeration can be stopped, the same two solutions were mixed in an Eppendorf
tube and centrifuged. The supernatant was drop-casted onto a glass slide and examined
under the optical microscope. No visible crystals were observed at the bottom of the
Eppendorf tube after centrifugation, suggesting that any crystals that formed after mixing,
were too small to scatter the visible light. While crystals present in the supernatant were
again found to be micron-sized, they did not agglomerate further. After leaving the mixed
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
35
==PAGE:44==
solution in the Eppendorf tube for a weekend, it became milky, indicating the formation of
a large number of bigger crystals.
To confirm the formation of ZIF-8, the crystal suspension was diluted, and bright-field TEM
images were acquired. Three distinct TEM grids were prepared:
• 1st grid: 5 µL of the original crystal suspension was dispersed in 2 mL of water and
drop-cast directly onto the grid,
• 2nd grid: after dispersing the crystals in water as in the first sample, the obtained
solution was filtered through a 200 nm filter, and the filtrate was drop-casted onto
the grid,
• 3rd grid: after dispersing the crystals in water as in the first sample, the solution
was sonicated for 10 minutes using sonication bath, centrifuged at [x rpm], and the
supernatant was drop-casted onto the grid.
Crystals were observed on all three grids, prompting further structural characterization
and particle size analysis to determine whether any of the preparation methods yielded
crystals small enough to be used in trapping chips. On the second and third grids, some
crystals were found to have the right size and appeared promising, but their crystallinity
needed to be verified before considering those samples for trapping experiments. BF
images of the grids and crystal size distributions are shown in Figures 3.9, 3.10 and 3.11.
Figure 3.9: BF images of the crystals found on the 1st TEM grid, later characterized as
dia(Zn). Crystal size distribution is also illustrated.
Figure 3.10: BF images of crystals found on the 2nd TEM grid, after filtering the initial
sample through 200 nm filter. Crystal size distribution is also illustrated.
36
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.11: BF images of crystals found on the 3rd grid and their crystal size distribution.
The grids were then analysed using the Rigaku electron diffractometer. Only the first grid,
containing large, micron-sized crystals, produced diffraction patterns suitable for complete
structural analysis. None of the smaller particles, found on grids 2 and 3, diffracted suf-
ficiently to allow for crystal structure determination, although they remained stable under
beam illumination during both the Tecnai T20 and Rigaku imaging. For the large crystals
from grid one, the 3DED data, collected over the tilt range between -60◦and 60◦, matched
the dia(Zn) structure of ZIF-8, consistent with literature reports that this is the thermody-
namic product of the reaction [61]. The software identified the structure as OFERUN01
(Angew. Chem. 2011, 50, 672, Qi Shi) [62].
After these preliminary experiments, I had the idea of mixing zinc acetate and 2-methyl-
imidazole solutions as they flowed into the chip. By relying on the flow to slow down the
nucleation process, this approach would allow newly formed crystals to enter the trap-
ping chip and nanochannels before they grew too large. However, in practice, crystal
agglomeration occurred too rapidly. The SEM/optical holder, in which this experiment
was conducted, became completely clogged, making this approach impractical for further
experiments.
Since several different approaches were attempted without significant progress, develop-
ing a reliable method for ex-situ synthesis of nano-sized ZIF-8 crystals became a promis-
ing direction. Size-controlled ZIF-8 synthesis was found in the literature and followed
during subsequent experiments [55]. The initial syntheses were carried out at DTU Chem-
istry. The procedure closely followed the literature, with the exception of using water as
the solvent instead of methanol, both for convenience and because water is also a com-
monly used solvent for ZIF-8 synthesis. Although the original protocol recommends using
an ice bath to further reduce crystal size, the reactions were performed at room temper-
ature to further simplify the process.
The synthesis conditions were selected based on the reported temporal evolutions of
ZIF-8 particle sizes, that can be seen in Figure 3.12. Lower concentrations of zinc ac-
etate are associated with reduced nucleation rates and consequently larger particle sizes,
while higher concentrations (0.1–0.2 M) favour rapid nucleation, yielding smaller crystals,
as particle growth competes with new particles nucleation. The referenced study also
demonstrated that a 1:8 reactant ratio (zinc acetate : 2-methylimidazole) produces ZIF-8
crystals with higher reaction yields and their sizes are predominantly below 200 nm, with
a significant fraction below 100 nm. Additionally, another publication described a rapid,
room-temperature water-based synthesis yielding crystals as small as 50 nm in just 5 min-
utes [63], suggesting that the choice of water as a solvent was feasible for the synthesis.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.12:
Dependence of the particle size on reaction time and the ratio of 2-
methylimidazole and zinc cations concentrations. Figures reprinted from ’Synthesis and
size control of zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8): From the perspective of reaction
kinetics and thermodynamics of nucleation’ [55].
The synthesis was conducted for two variants of concentration ratios, to check, whether
the results will follow the trends described in the paper and illustrated in the Figure 3.12
[55]. Dynamic light scattering was employed to determine the resulting crystal sizes. After
each synthesis, the crystals were dispersed in water and immediately analyzed by DLS.
Dilution was done in a similar fashion to the samples analysed on the TEM grids: 10
µL of the reaction solution was dispersed in 0.9 mL of water in the DLS cuvette. The
first synthesis variant (0.2 M zinc acetate and 0.4 M imidazole) produced inconsistent
results, prompting multiple measurements of the same sample. Full report from DLS
measurements can be found in the Table 3.1.
Although the DLS measurements for synthesis 2 appeared more reliable, their accuracy
for such small particles remains uncertain, especially as one of the measurements done
on the sample from synthesis 1, 10 min suggested 12.4% of crystals population to be
around 0.1 nm, which is well below the instrument’s detection capabilities. The synthesis
was repeated few weeks later and the sample from the resulting reaction mixture was
prepared as before, by drawing 20 µL of reaction mixture and diluting it to a total vol-
ume of 2 mL with water. The solution was later drop-casted onto a TEM grid, to asses
the crystals sizes utilizing BF TEM imaging. While some agglomeration of crystals was
evident, the crystals observed on the grid ranged from 30-100 nm, with singular bigger
particles present, and many appeared to cluster at specific points on the amorphous film,
indicating agglomeration. BF image of this sample can be seen in the Figure 3.13. This
emphasize the importance of sonicating the sample before trapping experiments, to break
up the agglomerates. The overall quality of the sample was promising and I decided to
proceed with the trapping experiments.
Finally, the trapping experiment was carried out using 1st sort chip from batch B34W1,
featuring a channel height of 182 nm. All inlets of the chip were punctured, however the
freshly prepared crystal suspension (20 µL of reaction solution, diluted to a total volume
of 2 mL) was forced through the chip cornerwise, as illustrated in the Figure 3.8. Given
the presence of a significant population of crystals below 50–60 nm in the sample, it was
anticipated that crystals would be observed within the nanochannels and indeed some
particles were detected. This experiment was conducted in Titan E-Cell 80-300ST envi-
ronmental TEM, operated at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV, with the beam dose rate of
38
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:47==
Sample
Z-average [nm]
Peak mean intensity [nm] (percentage)
Synthesis 1, 2 min
4954
7.4 (100%)
3007
249.0 (100%)
6134
0 (0%)
4254
738.3 (100%)
Synthesis 1, 5 min
4574
226.2 (100%)
5006
309.8 (100%)
Synthesis 1, 10 min
3605
639.1 (100%)
3475
518.5 (100%)
Synthesis 2, 2 min
184.2
33.1 (62.9%), 126.6 (24.8%), 0.1 (12.4%)
94.21
32.5 (58.8%), 60.9 (20.7%), 203.8 (20.5%)
Synthesis 2, 5 min
140.6
46.8 (64.3%), 164.4 (35.7%)
128.0
44.5 (63.3%), 193.6 (34.7%)
Synthesis 2, 10 min
170.0
53.7 (60.8%), 220.7 (39.2%)
151.5
73.0 (51.3%), 314.5 (29.1%), 39.0 (19.6%)
Standard 100 nm
108.4
108.5 (100%)
111.3
112.4 (100%)
Table 3.1: Z-average and peak mean intensity values are shown for two synthesis variants
and a 100 nm standard. Samples were collected from both reactions at several time points
to monitor the temporal evolution of crystal sizes. Each row represents a distinct DLS
measurement, meaning that the first sample was measured 4 times, due to inconsistent
results.
1.49 e−/Å2s. The higher accelerating voltage (compared to Tecnai T20) was expected to
mitigate some radiolysis effects, but several beam-induced effects were still observed, as
shown in Figure 3.14. Initially, beam illumination appeared to promote crystallization, but
over time, the formed particles started to fade away, indicating a slow loss of crystallinity
under beam illumination. BF images with timestamps and cumulative beam dose can be
seen in the Figure 3.14.
3.1.4
Back to the initial protocol
Since the in-situ mixing experiments yielded limited success and the trapping of the crys-
tals produced unpredictable results, I returned to the initial protocol, where 2-methylimidazole
solution is drop-casted into the top two inlets of the chip and zinc acetate solution is flowed
through the bottom bypass. Previously conducted experiments were promising, as the
crystals appeared in the chip in 90% of the cases. However, the concentrations of so-
lutions were adjusted, based on findings suggesting that 1:8 Zn2+ to 2-methylimidazole
is the optimal ratio. I first tested this revised protocol using optical microscopy. The re-
sults demonstrated that, even in chips with minimal dead volume, a substantial number of
crystals are forming within the nanochannels. This observation confirmed the effective-
ness of the new concentration ratio and the protocol’s suitability for further experiments.
However, the extent of crystal formation was so high that it limited the feasibility of ex-situ
chip preparation. Crystals formed so rapidly, that after just a few hours, the channels
became completely filled, resulting in a polycrystalline sample that could not be easily
characterized by electron diffraction, as can be seen in the Figure 3.16.
Given the excessive crystal formation observed during ex-situ preparation, in-situ crys-
tallization within the microscope was pursued, as the protocol appeared reliable and the
new concentrations were expected to yield beam-stable crystals. The final procedure in-
volved puncturing all inlets of the chip, drop-casting 1.6 M solution of 2-methylimidazole
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.13: BF TEM image of nanocrystals obtained during synthesis.
in two top inlets of the chip and mounting the chip onto the TEM holder. Then, 0.2 M zinc
acetate solution was flowed through the bottom bypass for 2 minutes at 300 mbar. If the
experiment is performed in TEM, during zinc acetate introduction and crystallization, the
electron beam was be blanked. After stopping zinc acetate flow, the sample was left to
react for 15-20 minutes, this time without sealing the inlet and outlet tubes with stoppers.
This approach resulted in the formation of a few single crystals within the chip, which
were sufficiently stable to allow for electron diffraction pattern collection at different tilts.
To allow for 3DED data collection, crystals were expected to be stable during few minutes
of beam illumination and it was true for the crystals found in the chip, while testing the
final protocol in Tecnai T20. Crystals and their diffraction patterns are presented in the
Figures 3.17 and 3.18. Therefore, the protocol was considered suitable for experiments
in the Rigaku electron diffractometer.
3.2
Electron diffraction studies and data analysis
Two-dimensional electron diffraction patterns are easy to collect in any conventional TEM,
making them a common tool for analysing the crystal structure use of TEM specimens.
However, each 2D diffraction pattern represents only a projection of the reciprocal lattice
along a single zone axis, providing limited structural information. As a result, crucial struc-
tural details may be missing, and distinguishing between similar or polymorphic phases
can be ambiguous. This problem becomes even more pronounced in polycrystalline sam-
ples, where overlapping reflections from differently orientated crystals can complicate or
prevent accurate indexing. Additionally, 2D diffraction patterns are highly sensitive to
crystal orientation, and without collecting data from multiple directions, the resulting struc-
tural information is incomplete. Other challenges during diffraction patterns acquisition in-
clude potential radiation damage to beam-sensitive materials, dynamic scattering effects
in thicker samples, and the lack of direct phase information, all of which further limit the
reliability of crystal structure determination from a single 2D electron diffraction pattern.
3.2.1
2D pattern analysis with CrystBox and python
Diffraction patterns were collected during each liquid cell TEM experimentto confirm sin-
gle crystal formation, meaning that not many single-crystal patterns were acquired. For
the purpose of structure analysis, the best pattern (Figure 3.18b) was uploaded to CrysT-
40
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.14: Time series of the beam-induced crystallization and amorphization, relative
time and cumulated beam dose can be seen for each frame.
Box software and analysed to see if it matches one of two different ZIF-8 polymorphs:
SOD structure and dia(Zn). D-spacings in the experimental image, found using CrystBox
software, were: 1.1940, 2.235, 1.145 and 2.271 1/nm. For the Dia(Zn) the zone axis
on which the diffraction pattern matched the best was found to be (0 -1 0), which was
then modelled using ReciPro and found to look similar to the experimental diffraction data
(Figure 3.19).
For theoretically predicted diffraction pattern of dia(Zn) structure, the shortest distances
were measured to be: 0.597 1/nm (100 reflection), 1.194 1/nm (200 reflection), 1.362 1/nm
(10-2 reflection) and 1.416 1/nm (002 reflection). For SOD structure, CrysTBox software
matched the pattern with the (203) zone axis, and the shortest distances in the modelled
diffraction pattern (Figure 3.20) for that zone axis were: 1.813 1/nm (0-20 reflection), 2.212
1/nm (-3-12 reflection), 2.365 1/nm (040 reflection) and 2.773 1/nm (-3-32 reflection).
For dia(Zn) structure, reflection 200 shows a good match with one of the values found
by CrysTBox software, however for the SOD structure reflection -3-12 is also in good
agreement. According to CrysTBox software, the experimental data seem to match both
ZIF-8 structures, however for more detailed crystal structure analysis, more diffraction
patterns along different zone axes need to be collected.
3.2.2
Assessing beam damage of ZIF-8
For all crystals synthesized in-situ (except in the very first experiment), the acquired
diffraction patterns did not exhibit visible peaks fading or displacement. To quantitively
assess, whether diffraction peaks were shifting, loosing intensity or undergoing other
changes, a Python script was developed based on the scikit-ued image analysis doc-
umentation. The workflow is as follows: the diffraction pattern is loaded into the script,
and a mask for the beam stopper is applied by thresholding the signal intensity (beam
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.15: B31W5 chip with visible crystals, forming in the straight channels.
(a) Polycrystalline sample inside the channel. (b) Diffraction pattern acquired from the sample.
Figure 3.16: BF image and DP collected for the sample prepared ex-situ using the new
version of the initial protocol.
stopper appears significantly darker than any other region of the image). Then, the cen-
tre of the beam is recognized using autocenter function from the skued package. The
correct pixel size is applied, and the radial intensity profile of the pattern is plotted. By
repeating these steps for each image in a time series, it is possible to monitor changes
in the radial intensity profile over time. The first image is used as a reference frame, and
relative time in seconds is calculated using time of acquisition, that stored in the image
metadata.
It should be noted, that each diffraction pattern acquired for crystals inside the chip con-
tains a contribution from the amorphous membrane, which might obscure diffraction peaks
in the radial intensity profile. To address this problem, an additional background subtrac-
tion step was considered. A polynomial fit was tested to model and subtract the amor-
phous background from the radial intensity profile, aiming to enhance the visibility of small
diffraction peaks. However, the fit parameters resulted in overfitting and the introduction
of artifacts, such as negative intensity values, because the polynomial model did not ad-
42
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:51==
(a) Single crystal with facets.
(b) Its diffraction pattern.
Figure 3.17: On the left, one of the single crystals found in the chip during final in-situ
protocol testing is shown. The crystal’s facets are clearly visible, although the peaks in
the diffraction pattern (on the right) do not appear fully sharp.
equately represent the amorphous background.
Alternative background correction methods can be explored, such as applying Gaussian
blur to the radial intensity profile to smooth out larger features. Subtracting this blurred
profile could help isolating the sharp diffraction peaks and observe their shift or intensity
fading in time. However, due to time constrains, reliable background correction was not
completed during this project. The polynomial fit was initially chosen because the radial
intensity profile appeared polynomial in nature, but was proved far from ideal.
Figure 3.21 shows the evolution of the radial intensity profile change for ZIF-8 crystal
diffraction pattern (the one illustrated in the Figure 3.18b). ZIF-8 crystals synthesized after
developing the reliable protocol were found to be relatively stable, even without applying
special low-dose techniques. Therefore, for ZIF-8 crystal, the observation timescale was
likely not long enough to observe significant changes in the radial intensity profile, as
shown in the Figure 3.21. The blue line represents the first frame and appears to be
slightly shifted compared to subsequent frames, which might be a result of minor pattern
drift during acquisition. The exact beam dose rate for this specific experiment is unknown,
as the value provided by the microscope software (0.13 e−/Å2s) is not realistic, but the
typical spot size 3 setting in the Tecnai T20 was used.
3.3
Liquid phase 3DED
3.3.1
Tecnai T20 G2 (S)TEM
To obtain three-dimensional electron diffraction data using Tecnai T20, the sample tilt
needs to be manually adjusted between each diffraction pattern acquisition, which can
be accomplished in one of two ways. The first approach involves locating the eucentric
focus on a promising crystal, then switching to diffraction mode, and collecting a pattern
after each tilt adjustment, without verifying if the crystal remains in the field of view. This
method risks introducing artifacts to the data, as additional crystal may enter the field of
view, but also ensures that the diffraction patterns are collected in the exact same settings.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) Another single crystal.
(b) Its diffraction pattern.
Figure 3.18: The second single crystal (BF image on the left) found in the chip produced
a high-quality diffraction pattern (on the right).
The second approach is to switch back the BF imaging after each tilt change to confirm
that the crystal is still well positioned, however frequent switching in between modes can
introduce slight drift between diffraction patterns, due to mechanical adjustment. In this
project, both approaches were tested. 3DED data were collected on the Tecnai T20 over a
limited tilt range, as this manual process is time-consuming and the resulting data quality
is not optimal. Collected datasets were subsequently merged and analysed using REDp
software [34]. Spot size 5 was used, to make sure crystals are stable enough to withstand
3DED data collection, causing the contrast in BF images to be suboptimal, however, the
beam dose rate was sufficiently low, at approximately 0.7 e−/Å2s.
The experiment followed the final established protocol: drop-casting 2-methylimidazole
(1.6 M) into the two top inlets of the chip, and flowing the zinc acetate solution (0.2 M)
through the bottom bypass for 3 minutes at 500 mbar pressure. Higher driving pressure
was used (500 instead of 300 mbar) as the zinc acetate solution was reluctant to flow
into the chip at lower pressure value, suggesting that the holder might not have been
thoroughly cleaned prior to the experiment. The alignment of the microscope was done
using the corner of the chip’s window to ensure that no channels were exposed to the
beam, then the beam was blanked throughout the liquid flow and crystallization period.
No flow was observed in the outlet tube after 3 minutes, suggesting that the membrane
may have bulged or cracked, allowing liquid to escape. After 15 minutes of crystallization
period, the beam was unblanked to inspect the membrane. Small crack was found in
one corner of the chip, but fortunately zinc acetate solution had successfully filled the
nanochannels, as evidenced by the numerous crystals present in the chip.
Tilt range for the first dataset was from -20◦to +10◦, with a step size of 1◦. The crystal
produced well-defined diffraction peaks, however, based on the contrast observed in the
BF image, it appears that the nanochannel may have dried out. A small crack was found
in the membrane, therefore it is possible that this particular channel was no longer filled
with liquid. The unit cell parameters determined by REDp software were: a = 19.344
Å, b = 19.177 Å, c = 2.422 Å, with angles α = 88.71◦, β = 91.48◦and γ = 166.73◦and
the unit cell matched to the reflections can be seen in the Figure 3.22. These values
44
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.19: Theoretically predicted diffraction pattern of dia(Zn) structure along (0-10)
zone axis.
do not correspond to any of the expected ZIF-8 structures. It is also possible that the c
parameter was incorrectly assigned, as the limited tilt range resulted in reduced reliability
and completeness of the data. Furthermore, since the channels have one extremely small
dimension (height of the channels of the chip was about 200 nm), data corresponding to
this direction are likely to be the least reliable. BF images of the crystals used for 3DED
data collection can be found in the Appendix. For the first crystal, data were acquired
by switching between BF and diffraction modes, to ensure that the crystal remained in
the field of view. Although the crystal stayed in the field of view, the presence of other
crystalline structures in close proximity may have contributed additional reflections to the
diffraction data, potentially influencing the accuracy of the structural analysis.
The second set of diffraction patterns was collected in the tilt range from -10◦to +10◦,
with a step size of 1◦. The determined unit cell parameters were: a = 27.529 Å, b =
4.551 AA , c = 4.383 Åand angles α = 93.85◦, β = 79.64◦and γ = 99.14◦and the unit
cell matched to the reflections can be seen in the Figure 3.23. Notably, two of the three
unit cell parameters (b and c) are much smaller than those typically observed for different
ZIF-8 polymorphs. The presence of two unusually small lattice parameters may suggest
incorrect indexing, possibly due to limited sampling of reciprocal space. For this dataset,
only 3 BF images were acquired, one every 10◦to minimize the effect of switching between
BF and diffraction mode.
Third dataset was also acquired over a tilt range from -10◦to +10◦, with a step size of 1◦.
In this case, all diffraction patterns were collected consecutively without switching back to
the BF mode between tilts. The crystal appeared to be suspended in water, as indicated
by the poor contrast observed in BF image, nevertheless, the diffraction peaks were well-
defined. The determined unit cell parameters were: a = 4.935 Å, b = 4.197 AA , c =
20.076 Åand angles α = 90.00◦, β = 90.00◦and γ = 104.22◦and the unit cell matched to
the reflections can be seen in the Figure 3.24. Once again, two of three lattice parameters
(a and b) are significantly smaller than the third, suggesting that the crystal packing might
be influenced by the geometry and confinement of the nanochannels.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.20: Theoretically predicted diffraction pattern of SOD structure along (203) zone
axis.
3.3.2
Rigaku XtaLAB Synergy-ED
For the experiments conducted in Rigaku microscope, 2nd chips from batch B31W6 were
used, with the channel height 194 nm. The experiment was performed twice, as the first
attempt was not fully successful, although the same protocol was followed in both cases.
In the initial experiment, the driving pressure was inadvertently set to 1000 mbar. Despite
the high pressure (higher than in the original protocol), the liquid was not observed in
the outlet tube. The flow was maintained for a few more minutes, while the tubes were
monitored. After stopping the flow, the chip was left undisturbed for 15 minutes to allow
for crystallization. A few crystals were subsequently found in the chip, but only two of
them exhibited diffraction. 3DED data were collected from both of them. For the first
crystal, data were acquired over a tilt range from -40◦to +30◦, including 140 frames (one
frame per 0.5◦), with an exposure time of 1 second per degree. After merging the data and
performing peak hunting, the software suggested a unit cell corresponding to P21/c space
group, with parameters: a = 4.36 Å, b = 5.6 Å, c = 19.6 Å and angles α = 90◦, β = 90◦and γ
= 90◦. This unit cell showed a high percentage match with dihydrouracil (CSD: DHURAC
01). None of the chemicals that might have crystallized in the chip (including various
ZIF-8 polymorphs, zinc acetate or 2-methylimidazole) crystallize in the unit cell matching
these parameters. Therefore, the suggested match was most likely incorrect. For the
second crystal, the unit cell parameters matched to the reflections were not physically
reasonable. During this experiment, the beam dose rate was 3.5E-3 e−/Å2s, which is
almost 1000 lower than the dose used in Tecnai T20. As a result, no beam-induced
damage was expected or observed. However, low dose rate made it more challenging to
locate crystals in the chip, due to reduced contrast in BF mode.
The experiment was repeated because of the initial flow issues, possibly affecting the crys-
tallization process. Another 2nd sort chip from batch B31W6 was selected, this time with
a geometry that included more dead-volume. The same experimental protocol was fol-
lowed, and once again, the driving pressure was set to 1000 mbar, The chip was mounted
in the holder in reverse orientation so that the zinc solution was introduced to the chip using
clean inlet/outlet tubes. This time, flow in the outlet tube was observed almost immediately
46
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.21: Stacked radial intensity profiles for ZIF8 crystal diffraction pattern, acquired
as a time series. An offset between profiles was applied in the y direction to improve
clarity of the plot.
after the pressure was set on the flow controller, indicating that there was no clogging or
crystallization in the bypass. The flow was maintained for 5 minutes and then chip was
left undisturbed for 15 minutes. Due to the low contrast, dual-view mode displaiying both
BF image and diffraction pattern was used to locate crystals in the chip. Using this ap-
proach, one strongly diffracting crystal was found. The 3DED data were collected in the
tilt range from -30◦to +30 ◦, with the total of 120 frames acquired, corresponding to the in-
tegrated angle per frame of 0.5◦. After merging the frames and performing peak hunting,
the software suggested a high percentage match with the BSA@ZIF-C structure (Pba2
space group, CSD: XADNUP) [36]. This dataset was subsequently refined using Olex2
to obtain a crystal structure. No other crystals were found in the second chip, possibly
due to setting the wrong value of the driving pressure. As the flow speed in the bypass in-
creases, less ions are diffusing into the nanochannels, effectively decreasing the chances
for crystallization to happen.
3.3.3
Crystal structure refinement
A list of hkl indices for each peak found in the 3DED dataset, together with their intensities,
can be loaded into Olex2 and the initial atomic positions are reconstructed, based on
those reflections. Then, atom type is assigned to each position and initial least-squares
refinement cycle is run. At the beginning, all atoms are refined isotropically, meaning
that the atom displacement in each direction is assumed equal This might not be true for
heavier atoms, therefore subsequently atoms are refined anisotropically. After hydrogen
atoms are assigned to the structure, additional adjustments and refinement cycles can
be run in alteration. The structure is considered as fully resolved, when the refinement
indicators stabilize and exhibit acceptably low values. Then, crystallographic information
format (CIF) file can be generated. Crystal structure, resolved from the liquid phase 3DED
experiment, is shown in the Figure 3.25. Table including the refinement parameters, can
be found in the Appendix, Table A.1.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.22: First manually collected 3DED dataset from Tecnai T20.
Figure 3.23: Second manually collected 3DED dataset from Tecnai T20.
48
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.24: Third manually collected 3DED dataset from Tecnai T20.
Figure 3.25: Crystal structure resolved from liquid phase 3DED dataset, zinc atoms shown
in grey, nitrogen atoms in light purple, carbon atoms in brown, hydrogen in light pink and
oxygen atoms in red.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
49
==PAGE:58==
4
Conclusion
This project demonstrated the feasibility of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction for charac-
terization of ZIF-8 crystals, suspended in water. A reliable in situ crystallization protocol
was developed, resulting in obtaining nanocrystals that exhibited greater beam stability
than anticipated, enabling successful 3DED data collection and structure refinement.
Despite these advances, several limitations were identified, including the variability of
the experimental results, that is a common challenge reported in liquid phase and in situ
electron diffraction studies. Future research could focus on elucidating the mechanisms
of beam-induced damage, particularly the role of solvent radiolysis. Comparative studies
using alternative solvents like methanol or dimethylformamide are recommended to as-
sess the impact of solvent choice on radiolysis and crystal stability. Further optimization of
the in situ mixing protocol and nanocrystal trapping methods could enhance single-crystal
yield and experimental consistency.
Overall, this work demonstrates the potential of liquid-phase 3DED for real-time obser-
vation of molecular dynamics in porous materials, paving the way for new insights into
chemical processes relevant to catalysis, gas storage and separation, drug delivery, and
the broader applications of metal-organic frameworks.
50
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter, Transmission Electron Microscopy. Springer US,
2009.
[2]
M. N. Yesibolati, S. Laganá, S. Kadkhodazadeh, et al., “Electron inelastic mean free
path in water,” Nanoscale, vol. 12, pp. 20 649–20 657, 40 2020.
[3]
S. Pu, C. Gong, and A. W. Robertson, “Liquid cell transmission electron microscopy
and its applications,” Royal Society Open Science, vol. 7, p. 191 204, 1 2020.
[4]
O. M. Karakulina, A. Demortière, W. Dachraoui, A. M. Abakumov, and J. Hader-
mann, “In Situ Electron Diffraction Tomography Using a Liquid-Electrochemical Trans-
mission Electron Microscopy Cell for Crystal Structure Determination of Cathode
Materials for Li-Ion batteries,” Nano Letters, vol. 18, pp. 6286–6291, 10 2018.
[5]
Y. Ling, T. Sun, L. Guo, et al., “Atomic-level structural responsiveness to environ-
mental conditions from 3D electron diffraction,” Nature Communications, vol. 13,
p. 6625, 2022.
[6]
M. Ge, T. Yang, Y. Wang, et al., “On the completeness of three-dimensional elec-
tron diffraction data for structural analysis of metal–organic frameworks,” Faraday
Discussions, vol. 231, pp. 66–80, 2021.
[7]
P. Banerjee, K. L. Kollmannsberger, R. A. Fischer, and J. R. Jinschek, “Mechanism
of electron-beam-induced structural degradation in zif-8 and its electron dose toler-
ance,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, vol. 128, pp. 10 440–10 451, 48 2024.
[8]
K. Gnanasekaran, N. D. Rosenmann, R. dos Reis, and N. C. Gianneschi, “Extent
of Radiolytic Damage from Liquid Cell TEM Experiments on Metal–Organic Frame-
works via Post-Mortem 4D-STEM,” Nano Letters, vol. 24, pp. 10 161–10 168, 33
2024.
[9]
Z. Lai, “Development of ZIF-8 membranes: Opportunities and challenges for com-
mercial applications,” Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering, vol. 20, pp. 78–85,
2018.
[10]
Q. Wang, Y. Sun, S. Li, P. Zhang, and Q. Yao, “Synthesis and modification of ZIF-8
and its application in drug delivery and tumor therapy,” en, RSC Advances, vol. 10,
pp. 37 600–37 620, 62 2020.
[11]
H. Dai, X. Yuan, L. Jiang, et al., “Recent advances on ZIF-8 composites for adsorp-
tion and photocatalytic wastewater pollutant removal: Fabrication, applications and
perspective,” Coordination Chemistry Reviews, vol. 441, p. 213 985, 2021.
[12]
E. Ruska, Electron microscope and the foundation of electron microscopy, Nobel
Lecture, 1986.
[13]
L. Marton, “Electron microscopy of biological objects,” Physical Review, vol. 46,
pp. 527–528, 6 1934.
[14]
I. M. Abrams and J. W. McBain, “A closed cell for electron microscopy,” Science,
vol. 100, pp. 273–274, 2595 1944.
[15]
N. de Jonge and F. M. Ross, “Electron microscopy of specimens in liquid,” Nature
Nanotechnology, vol. 6, pp. 695–704, 11 2011.
[16]
J. M. Yuk, J. Park, P. Ercius, et al., “High-resolution EM of colloidal nanocrystal
growth using graphene liquid cells,” Science, vol. 336, pp. 61–64, 6077 2012.
[17]
N. de Jonge, D. B. Peckys, G. J. Kremers, and D. W. Piston, “Electron microscopy
of whole cells in liquid with nanometer resolution,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, vol. 106, pp. 2159–2164, 7 2009.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
51
==PAGE:60==
[18]
N. M. Schneider, M. M. Norton, B. J. Mendel, J. M. Grogan, F. M. Ross, and H. H.
Bau, “Electron–water interactions and implications for liquid cell electron microscopy,”
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 118, pp. 22 373–22 382, 38 2014.
[19]
J. Lee, D. Nicholls, N. D. Browning, and B. L. Mehdi, “Controlling radiolysis chem-
istry on the nanoscale in liquid cell scanning transmission electron microscopy,”
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, vol. 23, pp. 17 766–17 773, 33 2021.
[20]
S. Merkens, C. Tollan, G. De Salvo, et al., “Toward sub-second solution exchange
dynamics in flow reactors for liquid-phase transmission electron microscopy,” Na-
ture Communications, vol. 15, p. 2522, 1 2024.
[21]
W. Dachraoui, D. Keller, T. R. Henninen, O. J. Ashton, and R. Erni, “Atomic mech-
anisms of nanocrystallization via cluster-clouds in solution studied by liquid-phase
scanning transmission electron microscopy,” Nano Letters, vol. 21, pp. 2861–2869,
7 2021.
[22]
G. Ummethala, R. Jada, S. Dutta-Gupta, et al., “Real-time visualisation of fast nanoscale
processes during liquid reagent mixing by liquid cell transmission electron microscopy,”
Communications Chemistry, vol. 8, p. 8, 1 2025.
[23]
A. R. West, Solid State Chemistry and its Applications (2nd Edition). John Wiley
Sons, 2022.
[24]
L. E. Smart and E. A. Moore, Solid State Chemistry: An Introduction, Fourth Edition,
4th ed. CRC Press, 2016.
[25]
X. Zou, S. Hovmöller, and P. Oleynikov, Electron crystallography: electron microscopy
and electron diffraction (International Union of Crystallography texts on crystallog-
raphy). Oxford University Press, 2016.
[26]
C. J. Gilmore, “Direct methods and protein crystallography at low resolution,” Acta
Crystallographica Section D: Structural Biology, vol. 56, pp. 1205–1214, 10 2000.
[27]
G. Scapin, “Molecular replacement then and now,” Acta Crystallographica Section
D: Structural Biology, vol. 69, pp. 2266–2275, 11 2013.
[28]
M. J. Barnett, R. P. Millane, and R. L. Kingston, “Analysis of crystallographic phase
retrieval using iterative projection algorithms,” Acta Crystallographica Section D:
Structural Biology, vol. 80, pp. 800–818, 11 2024.
[29]
A. Ponce, J. A. Aguilar, J. Tate, and M. J. Yacamán, “Advances in the electron
diffraction characterization of atomic clusters and nanoparticles,” Nanoscale Ad-
vances, vol. 3, pp. 311–325, 2 2021.
[30]
W. Paszkowicz, M. Knapp, C. Baehtz, et al., “Synchrotron X-ray wavelength cali-
bration using a diamond internal standard: Application to low-temperature thermal-
expansion studies,” Journal of Alloys and Compounds, Proceedings of the Euro-
pean Materials Research Society Fall Meeting, Symposium B, vol. 382, pp. 107–
111, 1 2004.
[31]
B. Mendis, “Modelling dynamical 3D electron diffraction intensities. II. The role of
inelastic scattering,” Acta Crystallographica Section A: Foundations and Advances,
vol. 80, pp. 178–188, 2 2024.
[32]
K. El-Sayed and Z. K. Heiba, “Quantitative phase analysis from X-ray powder diffrac-
tion data using a two-stage method,” Powder Diffraction, vol. 9, pp. 246–249, 4
1994.
[33]
P. B. Klar, Y. Krysiak, H. Xu, et al., “Accurate structure models and absolute con-
figuration determination using dynamical effects in continuous-rotation 3D electron
diffraction data,” Nature Chemistry, vol. 15, pp. 848–855, 6 2023.
[34]
W. Wan, J. Sun, J. Su, S. Hovmöller, and X. Zou, “Three-dimensional rotation elec-
tron diffraction: Software RED for automated data collection and data processing,”
Journal of Applied Crystallography, vol. 46, pp. 1863–1873, 6 2013.
52
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:61==
[35]
M. Gemmi, E. Mugnaioli, T. E. Gorelik, et al., “3D Electron Diffraction: The Nanocrys-
tallography Revolution,” ACS Central Science, vol. 5, pp. 1315–1329, 8 2019.
[36]
Z. Huang, M. Ge, F. Carraro, C. Doonan, P. Falcaro, and X. Zou, “Can 3d elec-
tron diffraction provide accurate atomic structures of metal–organic frameworks?”
Faraday Discussions, vol. 225, pp. 118–132, 2021.
[37]
M. Aragon, S. E. J. Bowman, C.-H. Chen, et al., “Applying 3D ED/MicroED work-
flows toward the next frontiers,” Acta Crystallographica Section C: Structural Chem-
istry, vol. 80, pp. 179–189, 6 2024.
[38]
P. Oleynikov, S. Hovmöller, and X. Zou, “Precession electron diffraction: Observed
and calculated intensities,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 107, pp. 523–533, 6 2007.
[39]
R. Bücker, P. Hogan-Lamarre, and R. J. D. Miller, “Serial Electron Diffraction Data
Processing With diffractem and CrystFEL,” Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences, vol. 8,
2021.
[40]
F. Scattarella, L. De Caro, D. Siliqi, and E. Carlino, “Effective pattern intensity arti-
facts treatment for electron diffractive imaging,” Crystals, vol. 7, 7 2017.
[41]
Z. Czigány and V. K. Kis, “Acquisition and evaluation procedure to improve the
accuracy of SAED,” Microscopy Research and Technique, vol. 86, p. 144, 2 2022.
[42]
V. F. Yusuf, N. I. Malek, and S. K. Kailasa, “Review on metal–organic framework
classification, synthetic approaches, and influencing factors: Applications in energy,
drug delivery, and wastewater treatment,” ACS Omega, vol. 7, pp. 44 507–44 531,
49 2022.
[43]
A. E. Baumann, D. A. Burns, B. Liu, and V. S. Thoi, “Metal-organic framework func-
tionalization and design strategies for advanced electrochemical energy storage
devices,” Communications Chemistry, vol. 2, pp. 1–14, 1 2019.
[44]
L. Jimenez-Lopez, R. Morales Ospino, L. G. de Araujo, A. Celzard, and V. Fierro,
“Latest developments in the synthesis of metal–organic frameworks and their hy-
brids for hydrogen storage,” Nanoscale, vol. 17, pp. 6390–6413, 11 2025.
[45]
D. S. R. Khafaga, M. T. El-Morsy, H. Faried, et al., “Metal–organic frameworks in
drug delivery: Engineering versatile platforms for therapeutic applications,” RSC
Advances, vol. 14, pp. 30 201–30 229, 41 2024.
[46]
Q. Chen, C. Dwyer, G. Sheng, et al., “Imaging Beam-Sensitive Materials by Electron
Microscopy,” Advanced Materials, vol. 32, p. 1 907 619, 16 2020.
[47]
L. Liu, D. Zhang, Y. Zhu, and Y. Han, “Bulk and local structures of metal–organic
frameworks unravelled by high-resolution electron microscopy,” Communications
Chemistry, vol. 3, p. 99, 1 2020.
[48]
R. E. Sikma, K. S. Butler, D. J. Vogel, J. A. Harvey, and D. F. Sava Gallis, “Quest
for Multifunctionality: Current Progress in the Characterization of Heterometallic
Metal–Organic Frameworks,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 146,
pp. 5715–5734, 9 2024.
[49]
Z. Zhan, Y. Liu, W. Wang, G. Du, S. Cai, and P. Wang, “Atomic-level imaging of
beam-sensitive COFs and MOFs by low-dose electron microscopy,” Nanoscale
Horizons, vol. 9, pp. 900–933, 6 2024.
[50]
A. R. Talosig, F. Wang, J. T. Mulvey, et al., “Understanding the Nucleation and
Growth of ZIF-8 Polymorphs,” Crystal Growth & Design, vol. 24, pp. 4136–4142, 10
2024.
[51]
W. Morris, C. J. Stevens, R. E. Taylor, C. Dybowski, O. M. Yaghi, and M. A. Garcia-
Garibay, “NMR and X-ray Study Revealing the Rigidity of Zeolitic Imidazolate Frame-
works,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 116, pp. 13 307–13 312, 24 2012.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
53
==PAGE:62==
[52]
Q. Shi, Z. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, and J. Dong, “Synthesis of ZIF-8 and ZIF-67 by
Steam-Assisted Conversion and an Investigation of Their Tribological Behaviors,”
Angewandte Chemie International Edition, vol. 50, pp. 672–675, 3 2011.
[53]
A. N. Bashkatov and E. A. Genina, “Water refractive index in dependence on tem-
perature and wavelength: A simple approximation,” Proceedings of SPIE, vol. 5068,
pp. 393–395, 2003.
[54]
AAT Bioquest, Inc. “Quest graph™spectrum [rhodamine b].” Accessed: 2025-06-
14. (Jun. 2025), [Online]. Available: https://www.aatbio.com/fluorescence-excitation-
emission-spectrum-graph-viewer/rhodamine_b.
[55]
J. J. Beh, J. K. Lim, E. P. Ng, and B. S. Ooi, “Synthesis and size control of zeolitic
imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8): From the perspective of reaction kinetics and ther-
modynamics of nucleation,” Materials Chemistry and Physics, vol. 216, pp. 393–
401, 2018.
[56]
Z. Jia, J. Li, L. Gao, D. Yang, and A. Kanaev, “Dynamic Light Scattering: A Powerful
Tool for In Situ Nanoparticle Sizing,” Colloids and Interfaces, vol. 7, p. 15, 1 2023.
[57]
M. Ge, X. Zou, and Z. Huang, “Three-dimensional electron diffraction for structural
analysis of beam-sensitive metal-organic frameworks,” Crystals, vol. 11, 3 2021.
[58]
M. Klinger, “More features, more tools, more CrysTBox,” Journal of Applied Crys-
tallography, vol. 50, pp. 1226–1234, 4 2017.
[59]
Y. Seto and M. Ohtsuka, “ReciPro: Free and open-source multipurpose crystallo-
graphic software integrating a crystal model database and viewer, diffraction and
microscopy simulators, and diffraction data analysis tools,” Journal of Applied Crys-
tallography, vol. 55, pp. 397–410, 2 2022.
[60]
O. V. Dolomanov, L. J. Bourhis, R. J. Gildea, J. A. K. Howard, and H. Puschmann,
“Olex2: A complete structure solution, refinement and analysis program,” Journal
of Applied Crystallography, vol. 42, pp. 339–341, 2009.
[61]
E. Balog, G. Varga, Á. Kukovecz, et al., “Polymorph Selection of Zeolitic Imidazolate
Frameworks via Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control,” Crystal Growth & Design,
vol. 22, pp. 4268–4276, 7 2022.
[62]
Q. Shi, Z. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, and J. Dong, “Synthesis of ZIF-8 and ZIF-67 by
Steam-Assisted Conversion and an Investigation of Their Tribological Behaviors,”
Angewandte Chemie International Edition, vol. 50, pp. 672–675, 3 2011.
[63]
Y. Pan, Y. Liu, G. Zeng, L. Zhao, and Z. Lai, “Rapid synthesis of zeolitic imidazolate
framework-8 (zif-8) nanocrystals in an aqueous system,” Chemical Communica-
tions, vol. 47, pp. 2071–2073, 7 2011.
54
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
Python code for beam-damage analysis
1
import glob
2
from skued import diffread , autocenter , auto_masking , azimuthal_average
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
from hyperspy.api import load
5
from datetime import datetime
6
7
# File path
8
file_paths = sorted(glob.glob("Image_series_path.dm3"))
9
10
11
# Pixel size in 1/nm
12
pixel_size = 0.0266497
13
14
# Extract acquisition times
15
acquisition_times = []
16
for file_path in file_paths:
17
try:
18
s = load(file_path , lazy=True)
19
date_str = s.metadata['General']['date']
# 'YYYY-MM-DD'
20
time_str = s.metadata['General']['time']
# 'HH:MM:SS'
21
dt = datetime.strptime(f"{date_str} {time_str}", "%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
22
acquisition_times.append(dt)
23
except Exception as e:
24
print(f"Could not extract time from {file_path}: {e}")
25
acquisition_times.append(None)
26
27
# Relative times [s]
28
time_0 = next(t for t in acquisition_times if t is not None)
29
relative_times = [(t - time_0).total_seconds() if t else None for t in
acquisition_times]
30
31
# Plot full radial intensity profiles
32
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8, 6))
33
34
# If needed , plot with the offset
35
offset = 60
36
37
for i, file_path in enumerate(file_paths):
38
im = diffread(file_path)
39
mask = auto_masking(im, threshold=0.1) # threshold allows masking the beam
stopper and dark corners of the image
40
xc, yc = autocenter(im, mask=mask) # Center is found in the masked image
41
radius , intensity = azimuthal_average(im, (xc, yc), mask=mask) # Radial
intensity profile computation
42
radius = radius * pixel_size
# Radius [1/nm]
43
44
# Stacking
45
intensity_shifted = intensity + i * offset
46
47
time_label = f"{relative_times[i]:.1f} s" if relative_times[i] is not None
else "Unknown time"
48
ax.plot(radius, intensity_shifted , label=time_label)
49
50
ax.set_xlabel("Radius (1/nm)")
51
ax.set_ylabel("Intensity (a.u.)")
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
55
==PAGE:64==
52
ax.set_title("Radial intensity profiles over time")
53
ax.grid(True)
54
ax.legend(fontsize=7)
55
fig.tight_layout()
56
plt.show()
Listing A.1: Python script for plotting radial intensity profiles from time series of images.
Figure A.1: Manual 3DED in Tecnai T20: crystal on which the first dataset was acquired.
Figure A.2: Manual 3DED in Tecnai T20: crystal on which the second dataset was ac-
quired.
56
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.3: Manual 3DED in Tecnai T20: crystal on which the third dataset was acquired.
Figure A.4: 3DED in Rigaku: snapshot of the crystal at -30◦. Even though the contrast
in the BF image is not significant, the crystal exhibited strong diffraction, resulting in suc-
cessful crystal structure refinement.
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
57
==PAGE:66==
Empirical formula
C9H10N4O3Zn2
Formula weight
352.98
Temperature/K
298.15
Crystal system
orthorhombic
Space group
Pba2
a/Å
10.574(4)
b/Å
12.209(7)
c/Å
4.680(12)
α/◦
90
β/◦
90
γ/◦
90
Volume/Å3
604.2(15)
Z
2
ρcalc/ g
cm3
1.940
µ/mm−1
0.000
F(000)
108.0
Radiation
λ = 0.0251
2Θ range for data collection/◦
0.18 to 1.794
Index ranges
-13 ≤h ≤13, -14 ≤k ≤14, -4 ≤l ≤4
Reflections collected
1506
Independent reflections
788 [Rint = 0.1422, Rsigma = 0.2291]
Data/restraints/parameters
788/1/85
Goodness-of-fit on F2
1.404
Final R indexes [I>=2σ (I)]
R1 = 0.1598, wR2 = 0.3529
Final R indexes [all data]
R1 = 0.2351, wR2 = 0.3803
Table A.1: Refinement parameters for the ZIF-C structure resolved using LP-3DED data.
58
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
==PAGE:67==
The possibilities and limitations of liquid phase 3D electron diffraction
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, 206
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.kemi.dtu.dk
