==PAGE:1==
Machine Learning and Rotational Invari-
ance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR
Imaging
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffu-
sion MR Imaging
Master Thesis
June, 2025
30 ECTS
By
Mette Breuning Nielsen
Supervisor
Marco Pizzolato, Associate Professor, DTU
Co-supervisor
Thina Lundsgaard Thøgersen, PhD Student, DTU
Collaborator
Sara Sedlar, Research Engineer, Inria
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Visual Computing, De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng. This thesis was carried out from January 27th to June 27th, 2025, and corresponds
30 ECTS points.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of brain anatomy, diffu-
sion of water, principles of Diffusion-Weighted Magnetic Resonance imaging (DW-MRI)
acquired on spheres, and fundamental concepts behind Machine Learning (ML).
Mette Breuning Nielsen - s174152
Signature
Date
ii
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Estimating microstructural properties such as diffusivities and Axonal Signal Fraction
(ASF) in the brain has shown as a biomarker for brain disorders and axonal damage.
These changes alter the brain anatomy and affects axonal diffusion, which can be mea-
sured by DW-MRI. ML models have demonstrated promising performance for accurately
estimating these properties, potentially improving the understanding of diseases and how
they change over time. In the following project, the spherical Convolutional Neural Net-
work (CNN) Fourier_S2_zonal, proposed by Sedlar et al.[1], was trained on synthetic
data and evaluated on both synthetic and real DW-MRI data from a single subject in the
Human Connectome Project (HCP) Adult Diffusion database. The model was trained to
estimate ASF and diffusivities (λ∥and λ⊥) from rotational invariant features acquired on
spherical shells with high b-values. Performance of the model was compared against a
baseline Random Forest (RF) Regressor model.
On synthetic test data, the Fourier_S2_zonal model outperformed the RF model across
all performance metrics, achieving an R2 value of 0.8357 for λ∥and 0.9012 for ASF in
White Matter (WM), compared to 0.7798 and 0.6543, respectively, for the RF model.
However, when evaluated on real data, the model exhibited a tendency to overestimate
the diffusivities. Specifically, for λ⊥in Gray Matter (GM), which was likely caused by
residual partial volume effect, which introduces a bias that increases predictions of λ⊥.[2]
In contrast, the model outperformed the RF model on predicting ASF values on real data,
displaying great contrast between tissue types (WM, GM and Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF))
and structures in the predicted ASF maps.
Despite promising results, several limitations were identified in this project, which may
reduce the ability of both models to accurately estimate microstructural properties. Specif-
ically the synthetic training data did not reflect the full range of ASF values in ground
truth labels, resulting in lower ASF predictions made by the RF model and accounting
for this bias will improve predictions.
However, the Fourier_S2_zonal model demon-
strated great ASF estimation despite the limited amount of training data containing high
ASF values. Additionally, the use of Sigmoid activation function in the final layer of the
Fully Convolutional Network (FCN), scaled predictions between 0 and 1, which caused a
boundary effect, particular noticeable for diffusivity predictions.
These findings highlights the ability of the Fourier_S2_zonal model to extract informa-
tion from rotational invariant features and accurately estimate microstructural properties.
Future work should focus on limiting the bias introduced in the data so that it reflect
realistic tissue composition and further testing the model on clinical data to test if it is
capable of estimating properties when tissue anatomically changes.
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Marco Pizzolato, my supervisor, for
proposing this project and for sparking a deeper interest in the field of diffusion MRI. I
especially thank him for the support, valuable insights and the constructive feedback he
has provided throughout this project, which has been especially motivating and greatly
enhanced my understand of complex theory. I also appreciate his availability and quick
responses, which has helped me stay on track and make constant progress. I would also like
to express my sincere gratitude to Thina Lundsgaard Thøgersen, my co-supervisor, who
generously provided the data used in this project and offered valuable support throughout.
Her willingness to help, weather clarifying concepts or assistance with technical issues, is
deeply appreciated. I would also like to thank Sara Sedlar, co-creator of the spherical model
used in this project, who later joined the project to assist with adapting and training the
network on my data. Her valuable insights helped me to an overall understanding of the
work.
Lastly, I would like to sincerely thank my friends and family who have supported me
throughout this journey and provided encouragement, motivation and patience every step
of the way.
iv
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Brain structure and function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Diffusion MRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Estimation of Axonal diffusivties and Axonal Signal Fraction
. . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methods
15
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Fourier_S2_zonal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Random forest regressor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results
21
4.1
Training, validation and test performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Synthetic diffusivities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Real diffusivities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Synthetic ASF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Real ASF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Discussion
35
5.1
Model training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Diffusivities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Axonal Signal Fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Future directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
42
A Appendix
45
B Appendix
46
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Acronyms
Adam
Adaptive Moment Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
ASF
Axonal Signal Fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
ADC
Apparent Diffusion Coeﬀicient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
CNS
Central Nervous System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
CSF
Cerebrospinal Fluid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
dODF Diffusion Orientation Distribution Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
DSG
Diffusion Sensitizing Gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
DTI
Diffusion Tensor Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
DW-MRI Diffusion-Weighted Magnetic Resonance imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
FCN
Fully Convolutional Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
fODF
Fiber Orientation Distribution Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
GM
Gray Matter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
HARDI High Angular Resolution Diffusion Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
HCP
Human Connectome Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
MAE
Mean Absolute Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
MSE
Mean Squared Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
ML
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
ODF
Orientation Density Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
PDF
Probability Distribution Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
PGSE
Pulsed Gradient Spin Echo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
PNS
Peripheral Nervous System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
RF
Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
SH
Spherical Harmonics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
TE
Echo Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
TR
Repetition Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
WM
White Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
vi
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
DW-MRI is proven to be a high quality medical imaging technique, particularly effective
for visualizing characteristics in microstructural brain anatomy, utilizing movement of
water molecules.
Since the brain consist mainly of neurons, diffusion of water occurs
along the axons giving rise to axonal diffusion imaging. Estimating the axonal diffusivities
can be a biomarker for brain diseases related to neurons, such as e.g. multiple sclerosis
where demyelination of neurons occur, changing diffusion patterns in the brain. Accurate
estimation of the diffusivities in the brain can improve early detection of onset.
A study done by Aung et al.[3] using Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) demonstrated that
axial and radial diffusivities (λ∥and λ⊥, respectively) serve as a biomarker for neuronal
tissue damage. In the case of acute axonal injury, λ∥typically decreases, reflecting axonal
damage. However, in the case of chronic axonal diseases, the effects of λ∥diminish over
time, likely due to complications of cellular infiltrations, gliosis and or inflammation. In
contrast, an increase in λ⊥showed a correlation between diseases associated with demyeli-
nation, making it a good biomarker for WM pathology. Similarly, a study by Budde et
al.[4] used DTI to investigate the relationship between axial diffusivity and axonal injury
in the spinal cord. They found a strong correlation between decreased λ∥and axonal dam-
age. In contrast, the correlation between λ⊥and axonal injury was less consistent. While
λ⊥increased in some regions, λ∥proved to be a more specific and noninvasive biomarker
of axonal damage.
In general ML models have proven very useful for automatic parameter estimation, which
is also the case for estimating axonal diffusivities in the brain. A study by Tatekawa et
al.[5] utilized a deep learning model based on U-Net architecture within an image-to-image
translation, to generate DTI from DW-MRI scans acquired with only three gradient direc-
tions. From the generated tensors, axial diffusivity maps were derived. The study found
that λ∥estimated by the model generally showed lower values than those from the original
data. However, the authors suggested that incorporating more gradient directions might
improve model performance, leading to more accurate prediction.
In the following project, the spherical CNN proposed by Sedlar et al.[1] is used to predict
ASF and the axonal diffuivities parallel (λ∥) and perpendicular (λ⊥) to the orientation
of axons. The model is trained on DW-MRI data acquired using multiple spherical shells
collected at strong diffusion weightings, or high b-values, which allows the separation of
the intra-axonal signal from the extra-axonal one. Additionally, the spherical signals are
acquired using higher number of diffusion gradient directions, which according to Tatekawa
et al.[5], may enhance the accuracy of diffusivity predictions. The results are evaluated
and compared to a currently available method that predicts diffusivities and ASF using a
RF regressor model.
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
1
==PAGE:10==
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
This chapter presents theory of the project and highlights the basis of biological properties
as well as technical aspects which methods and results are based on.
First, anatomy
as well an neuron structure of the brain is described, followed by a description of how
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and DW-MRI is acquired. Next, concepts behind
calculating diffusivities and ASF are described and lastly, the model proposed in this
project is presented.
2.1
Brain structure and function
The brain is a complex organ that processes information received from both external and
internal stimuli. It is composed of four major regions; brainstem, cerebellum, diencephalon
and cerebrum as shown on Figure 2.1. Each region is responsible for processing specific
types of stimuli related to its functions. The brainstem is the connecting link between the
spinal cord and the remaining regions of the brain, and it regulates vital functions such as
heart rate, respiration and blood pressure. Attached to the brainstem is the cerebellum,
which is responsible for coordinating fine motor skills and maintaining balance.
The
diencephalon consists of three components; thalamus, epithalamus and hypothalamus,
and is located between the cerebrum and the brainstem.
Its main responsibilities are
contributing to the regulation of emotions, processing sensory information and maintaining
homeostasis. Lastly, the cerebrum is the largest of the four regions and is divided into two
hemispheres, left and right. It consists of many folds which contribute to increasing the
surface area of the cerebral cortex. The cerebrum can furthermore be divided into four
lobes; the frontal lobe, temporal lobe, parietal lobe and occipital lobe, each responsible
for different neurological functions in the body.[6]
Figure 2.1: Sagittal view of the brain and its major regions. Image source [7, Fig. 2.2, p.
34]
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
3
==PAGE:12==
The nervous system in the human body is divided into two main parts; the Central Nervous
System (CNS) and the Peripheral Nervous System (PNS). CNS is composed of the brain
and spinal cord, while PNS is composed of all the neurons residing outside of CNS. PNS is
responsible for collecting and transmitting information to and from CNS, where the signal
may be ignored, evaluated more extensively or trigger a reflex.[6]
2.1.1
Neuronal structure and function
Neurons consists of three components; the cell body, dendrites and axons. The cell body
contains the nucleus where organelles are stored and protein production is regulated.
Dendrites are mostly an extension of the cell body that branches out to connect with
neighboring cells where they receive information and pass it on towards the cell body.
The axon extends from the axon hillock which is located between the cell body and the
axon. The axon has a uniform diameter and an elongated shape that varies in length from
a couple of millimeters to over a meter depending on the location of the neuron.[6] The
elongated shape of axons forms hollow, cylindrical tubes that has a high water content
(approximately 90% of the axonal volume), which provide a pathway for diffusion of
water.[8] At the end of the axon the synaptic terminals are located, which are responsible
for passing on information to other neurons.[6] Figure 2.2 illustrate the structure of a
neuron including its components.
Figure 2.2: Neuron structure and its components. Image source: [9, Fig. 44.1, chap. 44]
In general, the structure of neurons varies significantly. The position of the cell body
as well as the amount of dendrites and synaptic terminals can differ between neuron
types.
Neurons in CNS mostly consists of multipolar neurons featuring one axon and
many dendrites, as the one illustrated on Figure 2.2. When a neuron receives a signal, it
undergoes depolarization. If the depolarization reaches a specific threshold at the axon
hillock the neuron fires an action potential. Action potentials follows the principal of all-or-
none, meaning they occur if the threshold is reached. The action potential travel down the
axon until it reaches the synaptic terminals where neurotransmitters are released and the
information is passed on to other neurons. Most axons are wrapped in an insulated layer of
myelin sheets, formed by Schwann cells or oligodendrocytes in PNS and CNS, respectively.
The myelin sheets greatly increases conductivity leading to faster transmission of the action
potential.[6]
2.1.2
White matter, gray matter, and CSF
The organization of neurons within CNS gives rise to two distinct structures; GM and
WM.
GM consists primarily of dendrites, neuronal cell body and contains very little
myelin. In contrast, WM consists mainly of bundles of axons orientated parallel to each
4
==PAGE:13==
other. These axons are wrapped in myelin which gives WM its characteristic white color as
seen on Figure 2.3.[6] GM is found in both the brain and the spinal cord. In the cerebrum,
GM is located in two main areas; the outer region, called the cortex, which surrounds
the WM, and the inner region, known as nuclei. The cortical region of GM is involved in
controlling both sensory and motor activity. In the spinal cord GM is found in the inner
region, where it has a butterfly structure. Similarly, WM is present in both the brain and
spinal cord. In the cerebrum WM is located in the inner areas of the brain beneath the
GM. In contrast, in the spinal cord the WM surrounds the butterfly shaped GM.[10]
Figure 2.3: Coronal view of the brain illustrating the location of ventricles, GM and WM.
Image source: [11, Fig. 1.1, p. 2]
The CNS is protected by CSF, which surrounds both brain and spinal cord, acting as
cushion that absorbs shocks. In addition to protecting CNS, CSF supplies the brain with
essential nutrients and helps remove waste products.
At the center of the brain, four
hollow ventricles are located, all which are filled with CSF. The ventricles can be seen on
Figure 2.3.[6]
2.2
Diffusion MRI
DW-MRI is an imaging technique that sensitizes MRI to movement of water molecules.
This is done by applying Diffusion Sensitizing Gradient (DSG)s within spin-echo sequences,
resulting in attenuation of the signal, which reflects the degree of diffusion in tissue.
2.2.1
Principles of diffusion
Diffusion is the random movement of particles in a medium due to thermal collision. This
movements is known as Brownian motion. Diffusion can be characterized by a diffusion
coeﬀicient, which depends on properties of both the medium and the particles.[12] For
spherical particles, the diffusion is described by the Stokes-Einsteins equation, given by:
D = kBT
6πηr
(2.1)
where D is the diffusion coeﬀicient, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute
temperature, η is the dynamic viscosity of the medium and r is the radius of the parti-
cle.[13] There are different kinds of diffusion: isotopic, anisotropic and restricted diffusion.
Isotropic diffusion occurs when particles move equally in all directions, resulting in a net
movement equal to zero. Anisotropic diffusion describes the diffusion of particles that
move longer distances in one direction due to structural barriers that restrict movement.
5
==PAGE:14==
This is observed in neurons, where water molecules diffuse more easily along the axon
than across it, due to the boundary created by the myelinated axon membrane. Lastly,
restricted diffusion refers to a situation where barriers or objects limits the movement of
particles, such as within cell bodies or perpendicularly to the axonal axis.[12]
Assuming that diffusion can be described by a Gaussian probability of water displacements,
the movement of particles in three dimensions can be described using a diffusion tensor,
defined as:
D =


Dxx
Dxy
Dxz
Dyx
Dyy
Dyz
Dzx
Dzy
Dzz


(2.2)
where, each element in the tensor represents the diffusion in the x, y and z direction. For
isotropic diffusion, the diagonal elements of the diffusion tensor are equal, and the non
diagonal elements are equal to zero. This results in a spherical representation of diffusion,
indicating that diffusion occurs equally in all directions. In contrast, the tensor compo-
nents for anisotropic diffusion differ, leading to an ellipsoidal representation of diffusion
that reflects greater diffusion in certain directions.[12]
2.2.2
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MRI is a non-invasive imaging technique that produces high-resolution, high-contrast im-
ages by combining strong magnetic fields, radio frequency pulses and spacial encoding
gradients to reconstruct detailed images of soft tissue. It is widely considered the ideal
medical imaging modality due to its high image quality and minimal associated risks.[14]
MRI exploits the abundance of positively charged hydrogen nuclei in the human body,
primarily due to its high water content. Each hydrogen nucleus consists of a single proton,
giving it an odd atomic number. As a result, it has an angular momentum referred to as
spin, which generate a microscopic magnetic field. In general the nuclei are spinning in
random orientations, resulting in a net magnetization of zero, as each individual spin can-
cel each others out. However, when an external magnetic field B0 is applied to a nuclear
spin system, each nucleus aligns either parallel or antiparallel to the field. Most nuclei
align parallel to the B0, corresponding to the low energy state, resulting in a slightly larger
amount of spins in this direction. This imbalance creates a small net magnetization along
the magnetic field, denoted M.[14] Furthermore, each nucleus in the magnetic field begins
to precess around the direction of B0 at a frequency known as the Larmor frequency,
which is given by the following equation:
v0 = γB0
(2.3)
where, v0 is the Larmor frequency given in hertz [Hz], γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and
B0 is the magnitude of the magnetic field along (conventionally) the z-axis.[14] From this
equation, it is clear that the Larmor frequency increases with the strength of the magnetic
field. This leads to stronger MRI signals and improve image quality, due to increase in
signal to noise ratio. Following the alignment of the nuclei along B0, a radio frequency
pulse can be applied along the x-axis (a 90◦pulse), generating a secondary magnetic field
B1 perpendicular to B0. This field excites the spin system by tipping the magnetization
vector M from the longitudinal (z) axis towards the transverse (xy) plane, illustrated on
Figure 2.4a. When the radio frequency pulse is turned off, the B1 field is removed, and
the spin system is again only influenced by the B0 field. As a result, the nuclei begin
to precess around the z-axis and gradually realign with the B0 field through a relaxation
6
==PAGE:15==
(a) Rotating frame
(b) Laboratory frame
Figure 2.4: Visual interpretation of the magnetization vector M motion when a π/2 pulse
it applied. Image source: [15, Fig. 2.6, p. 14]
process, as illustrated on 2.4b. The time between emitted exciting radio frequency pulses
is known as Repetition Time (TR).[14]
During the relaxation process, as nuclei return to their original orientation along the z-
axis, they emit radio frequency signals. These signals are detected over time as the system
regains or loses magnetization at different rates across tissue types. The contrast in an MRI
image is primarily created by differences in relaxation times, which vary between tissues
due to their physiological properties. There are two main types of relaxation processes:
longitudinal relaxation (T1) and transverse relaxation (T2). Transverse relaxation, also
known as spin-spin relaxation, describes the decay of transverse magnetization caused
by interactions between neighboring spins. These interactions lead to dephasing of the
spins in the transverse plane, resulting in loss of signal, which follows an exponential
decay of signal strength |Mxt(t)| over time, illustrated on the right images in Figure 2.5
and 2.6.
Longitudinal relaxation, also known as spin-lattice relaxation, describes the
recovery of longitudinal magnetization Mz(t) over time, following a rising exponential
curve, illustrated on the left images in Figure 2.5 and 2.6. Like T2, the T1 relaxation time
contributes to the contrast in theMRI image. T1 relaxation is generally slower than T2
relaxation because it does not involve spin-spin interactions.[14]
Figure 2.5: Longitudinal Mz and transverse Mxy relaxation visualized over time of a T1
weighted image, with short TR and short Echo Time (TE). Image source: [16, Fig. 2.9]
In addition to T2 relaxation, transverse magnetization also decay due to inhomogeneities
in the magnetic field, also known as T ∗
2 relaxation. These inhomogeneities causes some
spins to precess slightly faster and others slower than the Larmor frequency, resulting
in dephasing of spins in the transverse plane. To compensate for this dephasing, a 180◦
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.6: Longitudinal Mz and transverse Mxy relaxation visualized over time of a T2
weighted image, with long TR and long TE. Image source: [16, Fig. 2.10]
pulse is applied, which effectively inverts the spin system around the x-axis causing the
leading spins to become the lagging, and vice verse. As time progresses, the spins begin
to re-phase, forming a spin echo when all spins are in phase again. The time it takes for
the spin echo to occur is known as TE, with a 180◦pulse applied at TE/2.[14]
By adjusting TE and TR, the contribution form T1 and T2 relaxation can be controlled by
either reducing or enhancing the signals creating the contrast in MRI images. Since TR
affects the longitudinal relaxation, a long TR allows almost full recovery of Mz, reducing T1
contrast. Contrary, a short TR limits the recovery, enhancing the T1 contrast. Similarly,
TE affects the transverse relaxation, where long TE allows more T2 decay, increasing T2
contrast in MRI images whereas a short TE reduces the T2 effects. Thus, a short TR and
short TE results in T1 weighted images, as illustrated in 2.5, while a long TR and long
TE results in T2 weighted images, as shown in 2.6.[14]
Spatial encoding
When radio frequency signals are received, it is essential to determine their spatial position
in order to reconstruct the MRI image. This is achieved by using spatial encoding gradients
that allow the signal to be located in three dimensions. To select a slice, a slice detection
gradient gz is applied along the z-axis, creating a linear variation in the B0 field along this
axis. As previously mentioned, the Larmor frequency depends on the magnetic field (see
Equation 2.3), so spins now precess at different frequencies along the z-axis. By applying
a 90◦radio frequency pulse with the a specific frequency, only frequencies matching these
will be exited, allowing a slice to be selected. However, since all exited spins within the
slice are in phase, a phase encoding gradient gy is briefly applied after the 90◦pulse and
before the 180◦pulse, creating a phase shift among spins in the y direction. Finally, a
frequency encoding gradient gx is applied along the x-axis during signal acquisition at time
TE. This gradient causes a change in spins along the x direction to precess at different
frequencies. Together these three gradients facilitates the location of the signal, which is
needed to reconstruct the MRI image.[14]
2.2.3
Diffusion weighted MRI (DW-MRI)
DW-MRI is generated by combining T2 relaxation and DSGs, which are much stronger
than the spatial encoding gradients. After flipping the spins into the transverse plane using
the 90◦radio frequency pulse, the first DSG is applied causing a change in the precession
of the spins along the chosen direction x, y or z. This causes a change in precession of the
hydrogen atoms along the DSG direction and a frequency difference based on the gradient.
8
==PAGE:17==
Moving nuclei causes a change in frequency which induces a change in phase. Since T2 is the
measurement of loss of signal in the transverse plane due to dephasing, moving hydrogen
atoms further contributes to the dephasing, resulting in further reduction of the transverse
magnetization and signal loss. Hydrogen atoms that are restricted and therefore do not
move as much, are still out of phase with each other along the DSG however organized.
The 180◦radio frequency pulse is then applied, creating the spin echo, followed by the
application of a second DSG. Because spins have been flipped 180◦the second applied
DSG is equal and opposite to the initial DSG. Meaning that stationary spins experience
and equal an opposite DSG, which allows a re-phasing of spins causing a larger signal
when sampling. On the contrary moving spins will not experience an equal and opposite
DSG since they have changed location. This causes a loss of signal which represents the
degree of diffusion along the direction of the DSG.[1] This sampling technique is known
as Pulsed Gradient Spin Echo (PGSE) and is visualized on Figure 2.7 with the gradient
application.
Figure 2.7: PGSE sequence also known as Stejskal and Tanner acquisition sequence in
DW-MRI. The blue elements are the applied DSGs which are necessary for measuring
diffusion. Image source: [17, Fig. 4.4, p. 47] (Images was cropped and reduced to make
it smaller)
The duration and strength of the DSG as well as the time between the application of the
DSGs is what is known as the b-value. The larger the duration and strength of the DSG as
well as the time between application the larger the b-value and the more loss of signal.[1]
The attenuation of the signal in the DW-MRI image follows the Stejskal-Tanner equation:
S = S0 · e−bD
(2.4)
where, S is the diffusion weighted image, S0 is the T2 image before diffusion (b = 0), b is
the b-value given by b = γ2G2δ2(∆−δ
3), which describes the signals diffusion weighting,
and D is the Apparent Diffusion Coeﬀicient (ADC). Since diffusion occurs in all directions,
multiple ADCs must be determined along multiple gradient directions in order to create
the total representation of the diffusion in just one voxel. For each voxel in the image, a
9
==PAGE:18==
diffusion tensor shown in equation 2.2 is estimated from sampled measurement in q-space,
essentially showcasing the direction of diffusion in each voxel.[1]
This imaging technique is known as DTI. The diffusion tensors would have an elongates
ellipsoidal shape if all axons within the voxel was orientated the same way. Even though
axons within WM typically lies in bundles they also experience crossing, bending and
kissing.[18] If two axons are crossing this would create a diffusion tensor shaped as a disk,
and direction of the axons would be impossible to determine using DTI.
2.2.4
Diffusion MRI acquired spheres
To address the limitations of DTI, an imaging technique known as High Angular Resolu-
tion Diffusion Imaging (HARDI) is introduced, which captures complex structures within
human tissue. DW-MRI acquired with HARDI obtains many diffusion coeﬀicients mea-
sured in q-space distributed on spheres. The term q-space referes to the fact that the
many PGSEs with the same b-value and the same q-value, where q = γgδ (recall that
b-value can be changed in different ways), are acquired along different directions. This al-
lows for a better reconstruction of the diffusion patterns, forming a diffusion shape known
as q-ball. However, HARDI acquisition is usually performed on a singular sphere, which
limits the ability to capture the full diffusion in brain tissue due to diffusion from other
factors than just the axons. To overcome this, multi-shell imaging techniques can be per-
formed. Multi-shell DW-MRI is sampled over multiple b-values allowing more knowledge
of spacial diffusion in human brain tissue. Shells sampled at lower b-values are sensitive
to unrestricted diffusion which often occurs fast. Shells sampled on higher b-values reflect
more anisotropic and/or restricted diffusion. By combining multiple shells, models are
able to distinguish between intra-axonal, extra-axonal and isotropic components making
it ideal for investigating microstructural properties in axons.[1] A visual interpretation of
multi-shell acquisition is shown on Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Illustration of sampling point in q-space over two shells. Image source: [19]
Introducing multi-shell DW-MRI allows for more mathematical complex signal model-
ing, than DTI. DW-MRI signals acquired from spheres are real and exhibits antipodally
symmetry.[1] A signal on a shell can be represented as:
S(b, n) =
L
X
l=0,even
l
X
m=−l
clm(b)Y m
l (n)
(2.5)
10
==PAGE:19==
where, s : S2 →R, n is the diffusion gradient direction, Y m
l (·) is the real spherical
harmonics and clm(·) is the spherical harmonic coeﬀicients. Spherical Harmonics (SH) are
basis functions which are defined on the surface of a sphere. Because the DW-MRI signals
are real and exhibits antipodal symmetry, s(n) = s(−n), only SH basis functions that
exhibits the same symmetry are used, resulting in only SH with even degree l.[1]
Orientation distribution function
To describe the diffusion process in DW-MRI, Orientation Density Function (ODF) are
used, which represents the probability of water diffusion in each direction within a voxel.
When estimated using Diffusion Orientation Distribution Function (dODF)s derived from
q-ball imaging, based on HARDI acquisition, the resulting distribution can struggle to
distinguish between axon bundles with smaller angular separation.
This can leads to
multiple nearby bundles being estimated as a single direction. To address this limitation,
the Fiber Orientation Distribution Function (fODF) is used. Unlike dODF, the fODF is
more directly related to the fiber orientation than the diffusion process. This provides a
more accurate estimate of the axonal direction within a voxel. A visual representation of
dODF and fODF can be seen on Figure 2.9, left and right respectively.[1]
The fODF is essentially a spherical Probability Distribution Function (PDF) that describes
the probability of an axon being oriented in a given direction. It is computed through
a spherical deconvolution of the directional DW-MRI single/multi-shell signal with a re-
sponse function, where the response function is modeled for a single axon bundle.[1]
Figure 2.9: A visual representation of dODF left and fODF right. Image source: [20, Fig.
5, p. 5], image was cropped to leave out text.
Rotational invariance
DW-MRI signals are rotationally equivariant with respect to the microstructural proper-
ties from which they are measured.[1] A function f : S2 →R is said to be rotationally
equivariant if
Q(f(r)) = f(Qr)
(2.6)
where, Q ∈SO(3) is a rotational matrix given in 3D, and r ∈R3 is a point on the
sphere.[1]
A case of rotationally equivariance is known as rotational invariance. Which is a math-
ematical term that describes how properties remains the same when rotated. A function
f : S2 →R is said to be rotational invariant if
f(r) = f(Qr)
(2.7)
11
==PAGE:20==
for all Q ∈SO(3) and r ∈R3.[1] DW-MRI signals acquired on spheres are not themselves
rotational invariant, as the measured signals depend on the orientation given by gradient
directions.
However, tissue properties estimated from these DW-MRI signals such as
diffusivites (parallel and perpendicular), are rotational invariant, since they reflect the
magnitude of diffusion along directions, regardless of the orientation of the gradients.
Therefore, it is essential that machine learning models used to estimate these properties
do not rely on the orientation of the input. Models such as these should learn to estimate
microstructural properties regardless of they are oriented.
In practice, the rotational
invariant features are extracted by projecting the signal on the antipodally symmetric
SH.[1]
2.3
Estimation of Axonal diffusivties and Axonal Signal
Fraction
Following Pizzolato et al. [2], the axonal diffusivities can be estimated from two-shell
DW-MRI signals collected at high b-value shells. In particular, each signal’s shell can be
expanded as
S(b, n) =
L
X
l=0,even
l
X
m=−l
clm(b)Y m
l (n)
(2.8)
where, n is the diffusion gradient direction, Y m
l (·) are the real SHs and clm(·) are the SH
coeﬀicients. The SH coeﬀicients of the expansion can be estimated by further expanding
the fODF in SH resulting in an equation for SH coeﬀicients for both shells given by:
clm(b2) = c′
lm C2πe−b2λ⊥Ψl
 b2[λ∥−λ⊥]

(2.9)
clm(b1) = c′
lm C2πe−b1λ⊥Ψl
 b1[λ∥−λ⊥]

(2.10)
where, c′
lm represents SH coeﬀicients of the fODF expansion, C is a constant that accounts
for the volume fraction of axons inside the voxel and their T2 relaxation, Ψl are zonal
functions of order l (see appendix of [2]), λ∥and λ⊥are the sought diffusivities. From these
SH coeﬀicients, zonal ratios can be computed. Zonal ratios are the rotational invariant
features that quantify the contributions of different angular components of the signal
across SH degrees l. For two shells b1 and b2, the zonal harmonic ratios can be expressed
as described in Thøgersen et al.[21]:
αl(b1, b2, λ∥, λ⊥) :=
s
Θl(b1)
Θl(b2) =
e(b2−b1)λ⊥Ψl
 b1[λ∥−λ⊥]

Ψl
 b2[λ∥−λ⊥]


(2.11)
where, αl are zonal ratios and the l-band power spectra is given by:
Θl(b) =
l
X
m=−l
clm(b)2
(2.12)
From Equation 2.11 and 2.12 it can be seen that the only variables that are unknown are
the diffusivities λ∥and λ⊥, which can then be calculated.
Estimating the microstructural properties such as volume of axons within a voxel can
be done by calculating the ASF, which reflects the proportion of signal originating from
12
==PAGE:21==
axons. By obtaining the diffusivities ASF can be calculates as:
ASF =
C
S(0)
(2.13)
where, S(0) is the signal obtained with no diffusion at b = 0. C can be estimated by
inverting the formula for the spherical mean, which is given by:
¯S(b) = Ce−bλ⊥
√π
2
erf
q
b(λ∥−λ⊥)

q
b(λ∥−λ⊥)
(2.14)
as described in Thøgersen et al.[21]. By training a model on DW-MRI data, it is possible
to estimate microstructural parameters such as diffusivities and ASF directly from the
signal. The model should be able to handle rotational invariant features and solve the
math by itself.
2.4
Model architecture
The model investigated in this project is that proposed by Sedlar and colleagues [1], and
is visualized in Figure 2.10. It consists of denoising layers, S2 convolutional layers, layers
with non-linearity and pooling and, lastly, fully connected layers that take as input the
rotational invariant power spectrum features.
After the denoising layer and after the
application of non-linearity the rotational invariant power spectrum are concatenated and
handed to the fully connected layers in the end.
Figure 2.10: Fourier_S2_zonal model. Image source: [1, Fig. 5.2, p. 81]
2.4.1
Denoising layer
The denoising layer is introduced as s(n) = ReLU((I+λWn)s(n−1)), where I is the identity
matrix, W are the trainable weights, the parameter λ ensures that the matrix (I + λW)
does not vary too much from the identity matrix and s is the input signal.[1].
13
==PAGE:22==
2.4.2
Convolutional layers
The convolutional layers are implemented entirely in the Fourier domain with zonal ker-
nels, where estimation of SH coeﬀicients is done using real SH basis functions and orthonor-
malized using either the Gram-Schmidt method, or following the conventional method but
with the optional addition of Laplace-Beltrami regularization.
The convolutional layers layer linearly combines the SH coeﬀicients of the input signal.[1]
For each degree l ∈{0, 2, . . . , L}, where L is the is the maximal SH degree given by
L + 1, (L + 1)2, the convolution is given by:
ˆzn,i
l
=
(P
j ˆcn−1,j
l
ˆwn,j,i
l
,
if l ̸= 0
P
j ˆcn−1,j
0
ˆwn,j,i
0
+ ˆbn,i
0 ,
if l = 0
(2.15)
where, ˆwn,j,i
l
is a zonal harmonic coeﬀicient of the convolutional kernel in the nth layer,
for the input channel j and the output channel i, ˆbn,i
0
is the bias term. ˆzn,i
l
and ˆcn−1,j
l
are
the vectors containing output and input SH coeﬀicients of l degree, input channel j and
output channel i, respectively.[1]
2.4.3
Non-linearity and Pooling
The non-linearity is rotationally equivariant and ensures that the structure of the S2 fea-
ture maps is preserved across layers, thereby maintaining the equivariance throughout the
entire network, including the learned representations. Pooling is performed by discarding
high frequency spectral components of degree higher than l ≤Ln, where Ln is output
bandwidth of layer n. This operation reduces the resolution of the feature maps while
preserving the equivariant structure of the signals.[1]
2.4.4
The rotational invariant features
The rotational invariant features extracted after the non-linear layers, along with frag-
ments of the input signals, are concatenated to form a joined feature representation. This
combined feature vector is then fed to a FCN, which performs the final interference.[1]
14
==PAGE:23==
3
Methods
In this chapter, the methods used for data acquisition and model training is presented. The
modifications made to adapt the spherical model to specific data and target predictions is
described in detail. Furthermore, the architecture and structure of the current available
RF regressor model is outlined, as this model will be used for evaluating the performance
of the proposed spherical model.
3.1
Data
For training and testing the model performance, three different datasets were provided:
synthetic training data, synthetic test data and real data. For the synthetic data, ground
truth labels for both diffusivities and ASF were generated.
3.1.1
Real signals
Real DW-MRI data used in this project is collected for a single subject from the HCP
Adult Diffusion database. Scans were created using a Siemens 3T MAGNETOM Skyra
scanner with a 64 channel brain coil. Specific acquisition parameters are provided in Table
3.1. The data contains 40 volumes at b = 0 and four shells each with different amounts of
gradient diffusion directions: 64 for b = 1000 and b = 3000, 128 for b = 5000 and 256 for
b = 10.000.[22]
Table 3.1: DW-MRI acquisition parameters from the HCP Adult Diffusion database.[22]
Parameter
Value
Sequence
Spin-echo EPI
TR/TE [ms]
8800 / 57
δ / ∆[ms]
12.9 / 21.8
FOV [mm]
210 × 210
Matrix
140 × 140
Slices
96 slices, 1.5mm thick, 1.5 mm isotropic voxel size
iPAT
3
Echo spacing [ms]
0.63
Bandwidth [Hz/Px]
1984
Phase Partial Fourier
6/8
b-values [s/mm2]
1000, 3000, 5000, 10.000
Total acquisition time
89 mins
In addition a binary MASK file containing only voxels within the brain and an acquisition
scheme file was provided.
The scheme file contains the diffusion gradients, TE, TR,
diffusion shell number, b-values and other parameters.
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
15
==PAGE:24==
Preprocessing of real signals
The MASK file was used to extract only the signals from within the brain to eliminate
voxels that did not belong to WM, GM or CSF. This result 379299 DW-MRI real signals
that the model can test on.
Each signal are voxel wise normalized with the average
of the 40 b = 0 values in order to remove variations in intensities due to T2-weighting
and inhomogeneities in the field.[23] Signals received form high b-values (b = 5000 and
b = 10.000) are then extracted and saved in a npy file for model testing. Data was already
preprocessed according to [2].
3.1.2
Synthetic signals
Synthetic DW-MRI data was generated using a multi compartment model based on the
acquisition parameters defined in the HCP scheme file. The Dmipy library [24] was used
to simulate both isotropic and anisotropic diffusion in WM, GM and CSF. For WM, a
G2Zeppelin compartment model was used to simulate both intra and extra axonal diffusion,
represented using SHs of order up to l = 12. GM and CSF compartments were modeled
using a G1Ball compartment, simulating isotropic diffusion.
For each voxel, parameters such as diffusivites, T2 relaxation times, and tissue volume
fraction were sampled from plausible biophysical ranges. Table 3.2 shows the ranges for
λ∥and λ⊥used during simulation.
Table 3.2: Biophysical diffusivity parameter ranges for both λ∥and λ⊥used for simulating
synthetic data.
Diffusivites
Range [mm2/s]
λ∥
[0, 0.003]
λ⊥
[0, 0.00005]
The synthetic training set, was sampled using a symmetric WM, GM and CSF Dirichlet
distribution [1, 1, 1], to simulate realistic compositional variability across voxels and con-
sisted of 1.000.000 signals. The synthetic test set consist of three datasets containing only
one of the three tissue types WM, GM and CSF, each with 20.000 signals.
fODFs were sampled from the real HCP data using SH coeﬀicients, filtered to include
only high b-values (b = 5000 [s/mm2] and b = 10.000 [s/mm2]). The simulated DW-MRI
signals were generated by combining the weighted compartment signals modeled with T2
relaxation and then normalized with respect to b = 0 signal. To simulate realistic signal-to-
noise ratio, gaussian noise was added to both signals and ground truth. In addition, several
features were computed for each signal: the spherical mean, variance, SH coeﬀicients, and
power spectrum.
Preprocessing of synthetic signals
As part of preprocessing the synthetic datasets, all samples with a spherical mean less
than zero was removed, as these values are not realistic.
Additionally, the synthetic
training dataset was reduced to 100.000 signals to decrease computational load during
training. It was then split into two subsets: 80% for training and 20% for validation.
Since the RF model does not utilize validation data during training, the validation subset
was repurposed for testing, enabling a fair comparison between the two models.
The
diffusivities are measured in units of [mm2/s], resulting in very small values. To improve
numerical stability during training, λ∥and λ⊥were scaled by a factor of 1010 and 1012,
16
==PAGE:25==
respectively. The Fourier_S2_zonal model required additional preprocessing, as it expects
predicted labels to be between 0 and 1. Therefore, the labels were normalized by a factor
of 30 and 50 for λ∥and λ⊥, respectively. These normalization values were based on the
biophysical diffusivity ranges shown in Table 3.2.
3.2
Fourier_S2_zonal
The model Fourier_S2_zonal described in Section 2.4 was adopted for learning and pre-
dicting diffusivities and ASF from various DW-MRI datasets.
This model was chosen
due to its rotational equvariant architecture, which is particularly important for predict-
ing microstrucural properties form diffusion signals acquired on spherical shells, where
preserving directional structure and invariance is essential.
3.2.1
Model architecture
The architecture of the Fourier_S2_zonal model projects gradient directions from each
shell into the SH domain using Laplace-Beltrami regularized inversion. The denoising layer
included in the model architecture in (Figure 2.10) was not utilized, as data was acquired
with large amount of gradient directions per shell, eliminating the need for additional
denoising.
The network consist of three spectral convolutional layers operating in S2 domains. These
layers progressively reduces the spectral resolution by using bandwidths specified as:
layers_L = [8, 4, 2, 0]. The features extracted after the non-linear layers (and pooling)
are passed to the final FCN, which is structured as:
Dense(128) →ReLU
Dense(64) →ReLU
Dense(32) →ReLU
Dense(3) →Sigmoid
where, the final Sigmoid activation was added to restrict predictions to be between [0, 1],
which reflects normalized ground truth diffusivites. Omitting both the normalization and
the Sigmoid activation caused the model to occasionally predict arbitrarily large diffusivity
estimates.
3.2.2
Training setup
The Fourier_S2_zonal model was trained with an initial learning rate at 1 ∗10−4 and a
batch size of 256. During validation, the batch size was increased by a fourfold, resulting
in a batch size of 1024. This is done to improve memory eﬀiciency and reduce validation
time. Training was done for 150 epochs, with two input channels (shells) and three output
features per voxel [λ∥, λ⊥, ASF], respectively.
To encourage a stable convergence, the
learning rate was decreased to a fifth of the original value when training reached the 50th
epoch and again by a tenth fold of the original value at the 100th epoch.
The model was optimized using the Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) optimizer with
the specified learning rate.
This adaptive optimizer is very robust and helps improve
convergence. The Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss function was used during training.
This loss function evaluates the average squared difference, which means it emphasizes
17
==PAGE:26==
larger errors. The MSE is defined by:
MSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∥yi −ˆyi∥2 = 1
N
N
X
i=1
d
X
j=1
(yij −ˆyij)2
(3.1)
where, N is the number of samples, yij is the ground truth, ˆyij is the predicted value, and
d is the dimension of the target vector which in this case is d = 3.
3.2.3
Evaluation
Model performance was evaluated using both MSE and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). As
mentioned MSE emphasizes larger errors, whereas MAE evaluates the average absolute
difference, which provides a more interpretable measurement of average error. The MAE
is defined by:
MAE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∥yi −ˆyi∥1 = 1
N
N
X
i=1
d
X
j=1
|yij −ˆyij|
(3.2)
The model achieving the lowest validation MSE score during training was selected and its
weights were saved for testing on both synthetic and real DW-MRI data.
3.2.4
Post-processing
During preprocessing for the Fourier_S2_zonal model, the diffusivities λ∥and λ⊥were
first scaled by factors of 1010 and 1012, respectively.
They were then normalized by
factors of 30 and 50, respectively. During post-processing these transformations were re-
versed. To enable fair comparison between the two models, MSE, MAE and R2 score
were calculated before reversing the initial scaling factor of 1010 and 1012. However, for
the Fourier_S2_zonal model, the additional normalization was reversed prior to metric
computation, ensuring consistency when evaluating the models.
3.3
Random forest regressor
A RF regressor was evaluated on the same DW-MRI data as the Fourier_S2_zonal
model and serves as a baseline for evaluating the performance of the Fourier_S2_zonal
model. The RF regressor was implemented using the RandomForestRegressor class from
scikit-learn, and trained to predict the microstructureal properties [λ∥, λ⊥, ASF].
3.3.1
Feature estimation
The RF model requires features calculated from the SHs of the DW-MRI signal. Specif-
ically, the root-square l-band power spectra ratios (zonal ratios) consisting of 7 features,
the root-square l-band spectra (power spectra) consisting of 7 features, and the spherical
means averaged over all b0-values with 2 features. These features computed from the SH
coeﬀicients which were fitted to the DW-MRI signals. The features from both shells are
concatenated into a vector and consist of a total amount of 16 features. Before training,
the features were standardized using StandardScaler, ensuring zero mean and variance
one across the entire training set.
18
==PAGE:27==
3.3.2
Model Configuration
The RF regressor was configured using the following hyperparameters:
• Number of trees (n_estimators): 200
• Maximum tree depth (max_depth): 25
• Minimum samples to split an internal node (min_samples_split): 5
• Minimum samples per leaf node (min_samples_leaf): 3
• Bootstrap: True
• Out-of-bag error: True
• Criterion: friedman_mse
After training, both the model and the fitted feature scalar was saved for testing on both
synthetic and real DW-MRI data.
3.3.3
Post-processing
Post-processing of the results from the RF model consists of rescaling the predictions as
well as the ground truth labels with a the reversed scaling factor 10−10 and 10−12, for
λ∥and λ⊥, respectively. Again to ensure fair comparability this was done after metric
computation (MSE, MAE and R2).
19
==PAGE:28==
20
==PAGE:29==
4
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained from the analysis of the Fourier_S2_zonal and
RF models, carried out in Python. The first section reports performance measurements
collected during training and testing on synthetic data. The following section illustrates
how each model predicts diffusivities compared to ground truth labels, and includes pre-
dictions on real data. Finally, the predicted ASF values are presented for both synthetic
data with known ground truth labels and real data.
4.1
Training, validation and test performance
The performance of the Fourier_S2_zonal model during training is shown in Figure 4.1.
The curve flattens out after approximately the 50th epoch, and no significant increase in
validation error is observed. The optimal model was achieved at epoch 149.
Figure 4.1: Validation MSE measured on diffusivities and ASF during training over 150
epochs.
The performance of both the RF and the Fourier_S2_zonal models are evaluated on
synthetic training and test sets, where ground truth labels are known. The total evaluation
metrics MSE, MAE and R2 score are reported across all three labels in Table 4.1 for both
models. Examining the results in detail, both models achieve their best performance on the
WM test set across all measured performance metrics. Furthermore, the Fourier_S2_zonal
model consistently outperforms the RF model across all metrics and tissue types, achieving
the highest R2 scores and the lowest MSE and MAE values.
The performance metrics presented in Table 4.1 represents results across all predicted
parameters and therefore does not reveal the accuracy for individual predictions.
To
address this, individual performance measurements across the three labels are estimated
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 4.1: Total performance measurements on RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models mea-
sured on training data and synthetic test sets for WM, GM and CSF.
Random Forest Regressor
Data
MSE
MAE
R2
Train
59.5972
4.7905
0.5626
WM
20.3877
2.5008
0.7381
GM
75.3369
5.6386
0.4360
CSF
71.7413
5.4546
0.4442
Fourier_S2_zonal
Data
MSE
MAE
R2
Train
53.7537
4.3365
0.6385
WM
18.3344
2.1384
0.8426
GM
69.3937
5.2042
0.4984
CSF
66.5332
5.0923
0.5192
in Table 4.2 and 4.3 for RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models, respectively, across the train,
WM, GM and CSF synthetic datasets.
Overall, both models achieve good results when estimating ASF and parameters in WM tis-
sue, but they struggle to accurately estimate λ⊥in GM and CSF. The Fourier_S2_zonal
model outperforms the RF model across all individual parameters, achieving higher R2
scores and lower MSE and MAE values for both diffusivities and ASF. Notably, are the
high R2 values for ASF in all tissue types, with values 0.9012 for WM, 0.8798 for GM and
0.8854 for CSF, compared to 0.6543, 0.8498 and 0.8071, respectively for the RF model.
Table 4.2: Performance measurements of d⊥, d∥and ASF individually from Random Forest
Regressor model measured on training data and synthetic test sets for WM, GM and CSF.
Train
WM
GM
CSF
(λ∥)
(λ⊥)
ASF
(λ∥)
(λ⊥)
ASF
(λ∥)
(λ⊥)
ASF
(λ∥)
(λ⊥)
ASF
MSE
38.750
140.04
0.0014
15.435
45.722
0.0064
48.644
177.37
0.0005
46.842
168.38
0.0004
MAE
4.8409
9.5103
0.0201
2.6380
4.8129
0.0514
5.7176
11.183
0.0150
5.5559
10.795
0.0126
R2
0.4563
0.3263
0.9053
0.7798
0.7800
0.6543
0.3077
0.1505
0.8498
0.3344
0.1910
0.8071
Table 4.3: Performance measurements of d⊥, d∥and ASF individually from model mea-
sured on training data and synthetic test sets for WM, GM and CSF.
Train
WM
GM
CSF
(λ∥)
(λ⊥)
ASF
(λ∥)
(λ⊥)
ASF
(λ∥)
(λ⊥)
ASF
(λ∥)
(λ⊥)
ASF
MSE
30.925
130.34
0.0003
11.520
43.486
0.0018
41.034
167.16
0.0004
39.221
160.39
0.0002
MAE
4.0164
8.9819
0.0112
1.9780
4.4155
0.0216
4.9221
10.678
0.0123
4.8099
10.459
0.0084
R2
0.5633
0.3751
0.9772
0.8357
0.7908
0.9012
0.4160
0.1994
0.8798
0.4427
0.2294
0.8854
4.2
Synthetic diffusivities
This section presents the predicted diffusivities across the synthetic test sets for all three
tissue types, estimated by both the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models.
4.2.1
Cloud plots of predictions
To assess how accurately the models predict diffusivities, scatter plots of predicted values
vs.
ground truth labels are shown for both the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models in
Figure 4.2 and 4.3, respectively. Each plot include the identity line which yield the optimal
prediction curve. Visual inspection of the scatter plots shows that predictions made by
the Fourier_S2_zonal model lie closer to the identity line, particularly when considering
predictions around 0 and 3 · 10−9 for λ∥, and 0 and 5 · 10−11 for λ⊥. In particular, the
spread of predicted values for lower WM λ∥values are significantly closer to the identity
line for the Fourier_S2_zonal model. Furthermore, the R2 scores, calculated individually
22
==PAGE:31==
for each scatter plot using real unit values, are higher for the Fourier_S2_zonal model
across all of the scatter plots.
Figure 4.2: Scatterplot of λ∥and λ⊥RF predictions over ground truth for synthetic test
data (WM, GM and CSF) plotted together with a identity line.
Figure 4.3: Scatterplot of λ∥and λ⊥Fourier_S2_zonal predictions over ground truth for
synthetic test data (WM, GM and CSF) plotted together with a identity line.
Further examination of predictions made by the Fourier_S2_zonal model reveals two
distinguishable horizontal lines in WM, one at 3.0 · 10−9 for λ∥and another at 0 for λ⊥.
Additionally, two less prominent lines are observed at 0 for λ∥and 5 · 10−11 for λ⊥. The
horizontal lines for 3 · 10−9 for λ∥also appears in predictions for GM and CSF, although
it is much less pronounced here.
23
==PAGE:32==
To investigate why some predictions in WM are predicted to 3.0 · 10−9 for λ∥or 0 for λ⊥,
an analysis of parameters used to simulate the synthetic data was conducted. Specifically,
λ∥values predicted as 1 (corresponding to 3.0 · 10−9 before rescaling), but with ground
truth values not equal to 1, were extracted. Their density distribution can be seen on top
of the ground truth density distribution for all λ∥values in Figure 4.4. The distributions
for all simulation related parameters shows general good alignment with ground truth.
However, small spikes corresponding to values predicted as 1 appear at the tail ends of
the spherical mean distribution for both b-values.
Figure 4.4: Density distribution for λ∥values predicted as 1, shown on top of the density
distribution of all simulation related parameters (sphvvar = spherical variance, sphm =
spherical mean, evf = extra-axonal volume fraction, fwf = free water fraction, gmf = GM
fraction, ivf = intra axonal volume fraction and wmf = WM fraction). The distribution
are plotted within the 1st and 99th percentile across the two distributions.
4.2.2
Distribution of predictions
Examining the distribution of the diffusivities predicted on the synthetic test sets, it
is observed that predictions for isotropic diffusion (GM and CSF) are centered around
approximately 1.7 · 10−9 for λ∥and 2.5 · 10−11 for λ⊥, in both models, as shown on Figure
4.5 and 4.6 for the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal predictions, respectively. These predicted
distributions do not align with the uniform distribution of the ground truth diffusivities.
For the predicted λ∥values in GM and CSF produced by the Fourier_S2_zonal model,
the distribution peak is lower, and predictions are more spread out, resulting in a closer
fit to the ground truth distribution compared to the RF model. In contrast, for λ⊥, the
24
==PAGE:33==
Fourier_S2_zonal model exhibits larger peaks than predictions made by the RF model
however, these peaks also appears narrower.
Figure 4.5: Distribution of predicted diffusivity values (blue) plotted together with the
ground truth (orange) distribution of the diffusivities for the synthetic test sets (WM, GM
and CSF) obtained using the RF model. The distribution are plotted within the 1st and
99th percentile across the two distributions.
Figure 4.6: Distribution of predicted diffusivity values (blue) plotted together with the
ground truth (orange) distribution of the diffusivities for the synthetic test sets (WM,
GM and CSF) obtained using the Fourier_S2_zonal model. The distribution are plotted
within the 1st and 99th percentile across the two distributions.
The predicted distribution of diffusivities for anisotropic diffusion (WM) more closely
resembles the uniform ground truth distribution for both models. Predictions made by
25
==PAGE:34==
the Fourier_S2_zonal are almost identical to ground truth, while predictions made by the
RF model produces more predictions towards the higher end of the range. However, both
models show a lack of estimate of the highest ground truth values for both λ∥and λ⊥.
4.2.3
Error of predictions
To assess how closely the predictions align with ground truth diffusivities, predictions are
classified into three groups: predictions exceeding 10% above ground truth are labeled
over (blue), predictions exceeding 10% under ground truth are labeled under (orange),
and predictions within ±10% of ground truth are considered acceptable and labeled ok
(green). Figure 4.7 and 4.8 illustrates these classifications for λ∥and λ⊥across the three
tissue types for the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models, respectively.
The Figures show that the total number for accepted predictions for λ∥is generally higher
than for λ⊥across all tissue types. Additionally, the number of accepted predictions is
significantly higher in WM compared to GM and CSF and generally yields a broader
acceptance of values in WM. Both models show less accepted predictions for the lower
and higher values for both diffusivities in GM and CSF, however, Fourier_S2_zonal show
a slightly larger acceptance of these smaller λ∥values. Additionally, the models show that
the amount of accepted predictions for GM and CSF peaks at the center of the ground
truth distribution, and that predictions for WM λ⊥looks fairly similar across the two
models. Overall there is an equal amount of distributions predicted over and under for
both diffusivities across all tissue types.
Figure 4.7: Error prediction of diffusivities made by the RF model. Predictions exceeding
10% above the ground truth value are classified as over (blue), predictions exceeding
10% under the ground truth value are classified as under (orange), and the rest of the
predictions are accepted, and classified as ok (green). The total ground truth distribution
is represented as all (black).
26
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.8: Error prediction of diffusivities made by the Fourier_S2_zonal model. Pre-
dictions exceeding 10% above the ground truth value are classified as over (orange), pre-
dictions exceeding 10% under the ground truth value are classified as under (blue), and
the rest of the predictions are accepted, and classified as ok (green). The total ground
truth distribution is represented as all (black).
4.3
Real diffusivities
This section presents the predicted diffusivities on a real dataset containing all three tissue
types, estimated by both the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models.
4.3.1
Distribution of predictions
Figure 4.9 and 4.10 show the distribution of diffusivities estimated on real data by the RF
and Fourier_S2_zonal models, respectively. The predictions from the RF model exhibit
sharp and narrow peaks centered around 1.3·10−9 for λ∥and 2.5·10−11 for λ⊥. In addition,
it is seen that the model does not predict that many diffusivities and the lower and at
the higher end. In contrast, the distribution predicted by the Fourier_S2_zonal model
have broader predictions for both diffusivities. The ∥predictions show a greater amount
of predictions at 1.6 · 10−9 and an additional peak at the higher values. Furthermore, the
predictions for λ⊥are right skewed, showing a substantial amount of estimated values at
the edge of the higher end of the distribution.
4.3.2
Diffusivities on brain maps
Each voxel for the predicted diffusivities were translated back to their original location in
the brain to visualize the voxelwise diffusion of the brain. The results from the RF and
Fourier_S2_zonal models are visualized in Figure 4.11 and 4.12, respectively. The overall
magnitude of diffusion in both λ∥and λ⊥contributes to the structural contrast in the
images, enabling the distinction between WM, GM and CSF structures. It is observed
that both models predict higher λ∥diffusion in WM compared to the surrounding clearly
visualizing where WM are present in the brain. Notably, the Fourier_S2_zonal model
produces higher λ∥in WM than the RF model, however with less structures.
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.9: Distribution of diffusivities (λ∥and λ⊥) predicted with the RF model with
real data.
Figure 4.10: Distribution of diffusivities (λ∥and λ⊥) predicted with the Fourier_S2_zonal
model with real data.
Overall, the Fourier_S2_zonal model predicts higher λ∥values for voxels located within
WM and GM, and lower values for voxels in CSF, when compared to the RF model.
The RF model show to have more predicted values in the center of the scale, however it
shows more structure in the predicted λ∥WM values, compared to the Fourier_S2_zonal
model. The predicted λ⊥values from the Fourier_S2_zonal model show very high values
in GM, with almost no perpendicular diffusion in the rest of the brain, except for small
regions adjacent to the ventricles. The predictions of CSF in the ventricles does not show
a change in perpendicular diffusion, compared to the diffusion in WM. In contrast, the λ⊥
predictions from the RF model are notably lower in GM, though still higher than those
observed in WM and CSF. All three tissue types are clear in the image.
Diffusion maps for λ∥and λ⊥obtained on different slices of the real data can be seen in
Appendix A for both models.
4.4
Synthetic ASF
This section presents predicted ASF across the synthetic test sets for all three tissue types,
estimated by both the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models.
4.4.1
Cloud plots of predictions
To asses the accuracy of both models performance in predicting ASF values, scatter plots
comparing the predictions to ground truth labels for both the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal
models are shown in Figure 4.13 and 4.14, respectively. The Fourier_S2_zonal model
demonstrates a higher accuracy in WM, where predicted values more closely follows the
28
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.11: Diffusion maps for λ∥(left) and λ⊥(right) predicted by the RF model.
Figure 4.12: Diffusion maps for λ∥(left) and λ⊥(right) predicted by the Fourier_S2_zonal
model.
29
==PAGE:38==
identity line. In contrast, the RF model exhibits a downward bias in WM, where the
higher ground truth labels show a tendency to be estimated lower than their actual values,
resulting in a slightly curved spread of the point cloud. Additionally, for CSF, the RF
model exhibits an upward trend in the point cloud for the predictions, particularly for the
higher values. Interestingly, it seen that the R2 score for the predictions in acgm and CSF
are higher than its predictions in WM. The predictions for the Fourier_S2_zonal model
in GM and CSF show generally good alignment with the identity line. Furthermore, the
prediction from the Fourier_S2_zonal model display a distinctive horizontal line near 0,
which deviates significantly from the identity line.
Figure 4.13: Scatterplot of ASF predictions obtained with the RF model, over ground
truth for synthetic test data, plotted together with a identity line.
Figure 4.14: Scatterplot of ASF predictions obtained with the Fourier_S2_zonal model,
over ground truth for synthetic test data, plotted together with a identity line.
4.4.2
Distribution of predictions
The distribution of predicted ASF values, along with ground truth distribution across
all tissue types, are shown in Figure 4.15 and 4.16 for the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal
models, respectively. Overall, both models produce predicted distributions that reasonably
align with the ground truth distribution across all tissue types. However, the RF model
underestimates high ASF values in WM, depicting no predictions exceeding approximately
0.6. In contrast the estimated distribution from Fourier_S2_zonal model in WM, more
closely align with the ground truth, covering nearly the entire distribution.
For GM
andCSF, both models show similar estimated distributions, though the Fourier_S2_zonal
model exhibits higher counts of predictions near the lower end of the ASF range. However,
it still fails to capture the lowest ground truth values in these tissue types.
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.15: Distribution of predicted ASF values (blue) shown together with ground
truth ASF (orange) distribution for synthetic test sets obtained by the RF model. The
distribution are plotted within the 1st and 99th percentile across the two distributions.
Figure 4.16: Distribution of predicted ASF values (blue) shown together with ground
truth ASF (orange) distribution for synthetic test sets obtained by the Fourier_S2_zonal
model. The distribution are plotted within the 1st and 99th percentile across the two
distributions.
4.4.3
Error of predictions
Assessing the precision on the ASF prediction, error plots are made again showing predic-
tions exceeding 10% above ground truth are labeled over (blue), predictions exceeding 10%
under ground truth are labeled under (orange), and predictions within ±10% of ground
truth are considered acceptable and labeled ok (green). Error plots are illustrated on 4.17
and 4.18 for the RF and the Fourier_S2_zonal models, respectively.
The Figures illustrates that most ASF predictions made by the Fourier_S2_zonal model
in WM fall within the accepted 10% range, with relatively few estimates exceeding bellow
or above the 10% range. In contrast, the RF model show a considerable amount of fewer
accepted predictions in WM, with a notably amount of estimates predicted under their
actual value. For predictions in GM and CSF, the amount of accepted, overestimated and
underestimated values appear fairly similar across both models. However, a considerable
amount of predictions are overestimated at the lower end of the ASF range.
This is
reflected by the blue bar at the beginning of the distribution.
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.17: Error prediction of ASF made by the RF model. Predictions exceeding 10%
above the ground truth value are classified as over (blue), predictions exceeding 10% under
the ground truth value are classified as under (orange), and the rest of the predictions are
accepted, and classified as ok (green). The total ground truth distribution is represented
as all (black)
Figure 4.18: Error prediction of ASF made by the Fourier_S2_zonal model. Predictions
exceeding 10% above the ground truth value are classified as over (blue), predictions
exceeding 10% under the ground truth value are classified as under (orange), and the
rest of the predictions are accepted, and classified as ok (green). The total ground truth
distribution is represented as all (black)
4.5
Real ASF
This section presents predicted ASF on a real dataset containing all three tissue types,
estimated by both the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models.
4.5.1
Distribution of predictions
The distribution of predicted ASF values on real data are shown in Figure 4.19a and 4.16
for the RF and Fourier_S2_zonal models, respectively. The distributions are predicted
on the entire data, which contains signals form all tissue types. The RF model predicts
ASF values within a narrow, left skewed range, with the majority of predictions clustered
at the lower end of the distribution. In addition, very few predictions are estimated above
approximately 0.25. In contrast, the Fourier_S2_zonal model estimates a broader range
of ASF predictions, extending all the way up to 1. Furthermore, the distribution exhibits
three distinct peaks at approximately 0, 0.2 and 0.7.
The first two peaks are higher
32
==PAGE:41==
and more sharply defined than the third, which appears broader and more spread out.
Additionally, few prediction exceeds 0.8.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.19: Distribution of ASF predicted with the RF (left) and Fourier_S2_zonal
model on real data.
4.5.2
ASF on brain maps
Each voxel for the predicted ASF were translated back to its original location in the brain
to visualize the voxelwise ASF distribution of the brain. The results from the RF and
Fourier_S2_zonal models are visualized in Figure 4.20a and 4.20b, respectively. Due to
lower ASF values predicted by the RF model, the ASF maps were computed manually
using the predicted RF diffusivity values. The resulting ASF map is illustrated on Figure
4.20c.
From the Figures, it is seen that ASF predictions made by the RF model are generally lower
across most of the brain regions comparing to those estimated by the Fourier_S2_zonal
model. In the RF estimations, GM and CSF exhibits similar intensities, while WM appears
only slightly brighter, particularly within the central region of the brain. In contrast, the
Fourier_S2_zonal model estimations appear in a much broader intensity range, with
distinct higher ASF values in WM, particularly in the central region, and greater contrast
revealing smaller variations. Additionally, GM intensities appear lower than WM values,
however brighter than values of CSF. Overall, both models obtain highest ASF values
in WM and lowest in CSF (e.g. inside ventricles). The ASF map calculated from the
predicted diffusivities of the RF model exhibit a much broader intensity range than the
ASF map directly predicted by the RF model, and appear much more comparable to the
predicted map produced by the Fourier_S2_zonal model. Specifically, it shows higher
values in WM regions and greater contrast in GM and CSF.
ASF maps obtained on different slices of the real data can be seen in Appendix B for both
models including the calculated ASF maps.
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) Random Forest Regressor
(b) Fourier_S2_zonal
(c) Random Forest Regressor
Figure 4.20: Predicted ASF maps on a real brain obtained with the RF (a) and the
Fourier_S2_zonal (b) model and the calculated ASF map from diffusivities obtained by
the RF model (c).
34
==PAGE:43==
5
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results presented in the previous chapter. The first three sec-
tions interpret the models ability to estimate microstructural properties of diffusion for
λ∥, λ⊥and ASF. Next, the limitations of the models will be discussed in detail. Lastly,
considerations of future directions are evaluated.
5.1
Model training
The training curve of the Fourier_S2_zonal model (Figure 4.1) indicates early conver-
gence, with the validation loss plateauing after approximately the 50th epoch. This suggest
that the model is able to effectively learn features from the training data. The small fluc-
tuations diminish after the reduction of the learning rate, indicating that the model does
not overfit. Furthermore, the flattening of the curve suggest that the model convergence
is reached relatively early, and that training beyond 100 epochs only provides minimal im-
provements. This implies that introducing early stopping could be beneficial in reducing
computational cost without effecting the predictions.
5.2
Diffusivities
The examination of axonal diffusivities, λ∥and λ⊥, is central for assessing the performance
of the Fourier_S2_zonal model relative to the established RF method. These parameters
provide important insights into microstructural diffusion of the brain, particularly in WM,
where axons are more densely packed leading to increased directional diffusion along the
axons. Both models showed considerably better performance in WM than in other tissue
types, as expected, however the Fourier_S2_zonal model consistently achieved higher R2
scores and lower MSE and MAE values across all synthetic test sets as seen in Table 4.2
and 4.3. Suggesting that the models ability to learn rotationally invariant features from
DW-MRI signals is better than from feature based models such as the RF model, that
takes the zonal ratios, power spectra and the spherical means as input.
The notably high accuracy for both models in WM can be associated with the high presence
of anisotropic diffusion, providing the models with more directional diffusion based inputs,
making it easier for the model to learn underlying patterns in the data. Additionally,
Figure 4.3 illustrated the Fourier_S2_zonal model’s ability to more accurately estimate
smaller λ∥values, as reflected by the predicted scatters, which lies closer to the identity
line. This contributes to the improved performance metrics of λ∥in WM.
In contrast, the reduced accuracy observed in GM and CSF for both models likely origi-
nates form the less structured, isotropic diffusion, which occurs in all directions, making
it more diﬀicult for the models to learn patterns in tissues like these. Though the models
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
35
==PAGE:44==
struggles in GM and CSF, the Fourier_S2_zonal model appears more capable of captur-
ing the extremely small and large values (Figure 4.2, 4.3, 4.5 and 4.6), particularly for
λ⊥. This slight improvement in capturing a wider spread of predictions suggests a more
generalized model. However, it still strongly shows a tendency to predict values near the
center of the distribution, similar to what is observed in the RF predictions illustrated in
Figure 4.5 and 4.6. This observed distribution is most likely the cause of the low R2 score
and the higher MSE and MAE values for diffusivities in GM and CSF.
5.2.1
Diffusivities predictions on real data
Testing the models on synthetic data, produced overall similar tendency, with some vari-
ations in the predicted diffusivities. While scatter plots, distributions plots and the error
plots varied slightly between models, their general patterns remained consistent with each
other. In contrast, testing on real data revealed more noticeable differences. The his-
tograms in Figure 4.9 and 4.10 were profoundly different between the two models. The
RF model continued to show a strong tendency to predict values close to the center of
the distribution for both diffusivities, resembling the distribution found in GM and CSF
for the synthetic data (Figure 4.5).
This suggest that the RF model may struggle to
recognize WM regions in the brain and has diﬀiculty distinguishing between tissue types
in real data. Ideally, the predicted distribution on real data should reflect a mixture of
the distributions obtained in Figure 4.5 and 4.6 across all tissue types for each model. In
particular, the values predicted from WM should contribute to reducing the peak and pro-
ducing a broader distribution overall. This effect is seen for the λ∥distribution predicted
by the Fourier_S2_zonal model in Figure 4.10, where the peak is much less prominent
with a wider distribution, indicating that the model is more sensitive to predicting λ∥
in real WM.
However, the distribution also demonstrated an increase in estimates at
the higher end, indicating that the model overestimates the parallel diffusivities in real
data. This tendency is also seen for the λ⊥distribution on real data, where estimates
were right skewed, suggesting that the Fourier_S2_zonal model overall have a tendency
to overestimate diffusivities.
These higher predictions of diffusivities were clearly visible on the diffusion maps for both
λ∥and λ⊥in Figure 4.12. The higher predicted λ∥values observed on the histogram
corresponded to diffusivities estimated in WM on the diffusion map, which should be
higher than the surrounding tissue. However, the predictions seem to be very high for all
voxels in WM suggesting that the model has a hard time distinguishing between higher
parallel diffusion rates within different voxels.
Additionally, the higher predictions for λ⊥were located in GM. These estimates relates to
theory since GM contains high amount of cell bodies with more restricted perpendicular
diffusion than within WM. However, the predictions are still very high, indicating that
the model might have a boundary issue and tend to predict diffusivities to the higher end.
This tendency to overestimate λ⊥is consistent with findings from the study by Pizzolato et
al., (2023)[2], which pointed out that residual partial volume effect for GM can introduce
a bias, leading to overestimation of perpendicular diffusion by up to 35%.
Comparing the results from the Fourier_S2_zonal to the RF model, it was seen that the
RF model predictions are much lower for both diffusivities on the diffusion maps in Figure
4.11. The values for λ∥show a more nuanced diffusion in WM indicating that this model
is better at distinguishing between small variability in the signals of higher diffusion rates.
The estimates of λ⊥are also much lower, compared to the Fourier_S2_zonal model. From
the distribution of predictions, two distinct peaks were visible. One which correspond to
36
==PAGE:45==
the perpendicular anisotropic diffusion and another corresponding to the perpendicular
isotropic diffusion on the diffusion maps. The lower peak is shown in the brain as the WM
region and the peak with higher perpendicular diffusion is shown as GM and CSF.
Although both models exhibits similar performance metrics on synthetic data, their pre-
dictive behavior diverges significantly when applied on real data. This suggests that while
the Fourier_S2_zonal model performs better under controlled conditions, it may not be
able to generalize real life scenarios. In contrast, the RF model appears to better capture
the variability in diffusion parameters, potentially providing a more reliable interpretation
of the microstructural properties in real data. This highlight that the use of synthetic data
for training may oversimplify the variability in real data, also discussed in a study done
by Alexander et al., (2017)[25].
5.3
Axonal Signal Fraction
The examination of ASF provides insights into the prevalence of axons within each voxel
and serves as indicators of microstructural neuron density in the brain. Both models overall
achieved considerably higher accuracy when estimating ASF compared to diffusivities.
Notably, the Fourier_S2_zonal model continued to consistently outperform the RF model
across all synthetic test sets, achieving an R2 score of 0.9012 in WM, compared to 0.6543
for the RF model. Interestingly, the RF model performed best in GM and CSF, where
ASF is much lower, suggesting it may struggle to accurately estimate higher ASF values,
particularly in WM.
In contrast, the Fourier_S2_zonal model demonstrates a more robust performance across
all tissue types despite the skewed distribution. The scatter plots (Figure 4.14) revealed
better alignment with the identity line, especially in WM, indicating that this model
better captures the characteristic signal patterns associated with each tissue type. On
the contrary, the RF scatter plots revealed a downward and an upward bias in WM
and CSF, respectively, suggesting that the RF model generalizes toward the GM values.
Indicating that the model generalizes predictions towards the center of the distribution
during training, likely caused by a bias introduced in the training data.
The distribution plots (Figure 4.15) further reinforced these findings.
The RF model
had a tendency to underestimate ASF values in WM, while the Fourier_S2_zonal model
more closely aligned with the ground truth distribution. Although both models exhibited
overestimation of lower ASF values in GM and CSF, the effect was more significant for the
Fourier_S2_zonal model. This suggest that while the model generalizes better predictions
overall, it still had a slight tendency to overestimate the lowest values, a pattern also
observed in the RF model, though less significant. This pattern was confirmed in the error
distribution plots (Figure 4.18 and 4.17), which showed that both models overestimated
the lower ASF values in GM and CSF. This may stem from a reduction in signal-to-noise
ratio in the simulated data, where noise potentially has a larger effect on smaller values.
Additionally, the RF model underestimated large amount of ASF values in WM, further
illustrating the tendency to predict values towards the center of the distribution.
5.3.1
Axonal Signal Fraction predictions on real data
While synthetic data provide a controlled environment for evaluating model performance,
real data have higher variability and noise in the signals. Testing the models performance
on real data is therefore crucial to evaluate their performance. The ASF distributions
predicted by the two models on real data (Figure 4.19a and 4.19b), revealed notably
37
==PAGE:46==
differences.
The RF distribution was left skewed, predicting more ASF values toward
the lower end, consistently with observations found from the synthetic data, indicating
that the model struggles to differentiate between tissue types due to a bias. In contrast,
the distribution for the Fourier_S2_zonal model displayed three distinctive peaks, likely
corresponding to each tissue type: CSF, GM and WM. This broader distribution, suggest
that the model better distinguishes between tissue types and predicts ASF more accurately
in real data, compared to the RF model.
These differences were evaluated on ASF maps of the brain on Figure 4.20. The ASF map
from the RF model appeared darker overall, illustrating lower ASF estimates. Further
it showed little to no distinction between GM and CSF values. This differs from what
is expected, as GM still contains some axons whereas CSF contains non. In contrast,
the Fourier_S2_zonal model effectively captured the contrast between the three tissue
types, conforming that the three peaks observed in the distribution plot correspond to
CSF, GM and WM. The ASF map clearly display darker regions where CSF is present,
both surrounding the brain and within the ventricles. Additionally, the model captured
variability within the WM region, suggesting that the ASF estimates are not affected
by the boundary effect observed in the predictions for diffusivities and overall produces
accurate estimations.
To better understand the lower ASF predictions made by the RF model, an ASF map was
calculated using the predicted diffusivities from the model. Interestingly, this calculated
map exhibited a much broader range and more realistic values, closer to the predictions
made by the Fourier_S2_zonal model. This suggests that the issue lies in the ground truth
labels for ASF, since the model is fully capable of predicting the diffusivities required for
calculating the ASF values.
When inspecting the distribution of the ASF values (Figure 4.15), it is seen that the
distributions across all tissue types no longer followed a uniform distribution as was the
case for the diffusivities.
This introduces a bias in the data which affect predictions
towards the lower values. Upon realizing this issue, a new dataset was generated with a
more uniform distribution of ground truth ASF values, which significantly improved the
performance of the RF model. Interestingly, the non-uniform distribution did not appear
to affect the Fourier_S2_zonal model, which was still capable of capturing these values.
5.4
Limitations
There are several limitations to this project that may affect both the results and the
ability of the model to generalize data, limiting the robustness. One limitation concerns
the architecture of the Fourier_S2_zonal model. The model was implemented as described
in previous work, only introducing smaller changes, meaning extensive testing and tuning
of hyperparameters was not explored. It is possible that by changing configurations such
as the depth of the layers in the FCN and its size could improve the performance of the
model and more accurately estimate mirostructural properties in real tissue. In addition,
altering the activation function could improve the network further.
This leads to another limitation, which concerns the Sigmoid activation function intro-
duced in the final layer of the FCN, restricting predictions to a [0, 1] range. While this
constraint aligns well with the predictions of ASF values, which naturally consists within
this range, it introduced problems when estimating the diffusivities. The ground truth
diffusivities required normalization based on known physiological proprieties, but this
application did not remove the arbitrary large predictions, it rather scaled them to a re-
38
==PAGE:47==
latable size, leading these predictions to cluster near extreme values. This was visible
on the scatter plots (Figure 4.3 and 4.14), where horizontal lines emerged around 0 and
1 or the corresponding values after scaling. These predictions were far away from their
ground truth values, which likely reduced the performance metrics to some degree and the
ability to accurately estimate variables on unseen data. This is most likely the case for
the large predictions estimated on the real data. Although, there might be a correlation
between these predictions and the spherical variance, the root of the problem have not
been determined.
The generation of the training data also introduces limitations. The synthetic data set
used a Dirichlet distribution [1, 1, 1], ensuring equal representations of all tissue types
within the data. However, this distribution does not reflect the true distribution found
in brain tissue. As a result, the model may have a bias towards learning features from
isotropic diffusion, limiting the ability to generalize data.
This imbalance potentially
could be a contributing factor of explaining the overall overestimated λ∥values from the
Fourier_S2_zonal model, which had a tendency to overestimate these values even in
WM regions where barely any contrast was observed. Additionally, the training data was
reduced to 10% of its original size to lower computational load and minimize training time.
However, this reduction may have altered the proportions of each tissue type defined in the
original Dirichlet distribution, potentially leading to an even larger underrepresentation
of anisotropic diffusion in the training data.
Another limitation concerns the distribution of the ground truth ASF values.
While
the diffusivities were sampled from a uniform distribution, allowing the model to learn
equally across the full range of values, the ASF values followed a more skewed distribution.
Specifically, ASF in WM resembled a Chi-square distribution, whereas ASF values in GM
and CSF were closer to an exponential distribution. This imbalance introduces a bias
towards the lower values during training, and had a large impact on the ASF predictions
made by the RF model.
5.5
Future directions
The limitations described above highlights several areas for improvement in the model
architecture, data generation and the training process. Addressing these limitations in
future work could lead to more robust generalized models for estimating microstructural
properties from DW-MRI.
An important direction is to generate synthetic data with more realistic tissue propor-
tions, reflecting the actual distribution of WM, GM and CSF in the brain. Additional,
future datasets should contain uniformly distributed ground truth labels across the entire
range of values, which would avoid the bias which was introduced in this project during
training.
Further, training should be done on the entire training data, so the models
had more data to learn from. It would further be interesting to investigate how much
data is needed to improve accuracy and limit errors when testing on real data. Further
exploration of the Fourier_S2_zonal model architecture is another direction which would
be interesting. Investigating various model structures, including adjusting the layers in
the FCN, modifying parameters and different activation functions, could reveal structures
which performs better for estimating the microstructural properties such as diffusivities
and ASF in the brain. Furthermore, tuning hyperparameters such as the learning-rate, or
implementing an adaptive learning-rate, could lead to faster convergence. Since the model
reaches converges relatively fast, implementing early stopping could be beneficial to avoid
39
==PAGE:48==
unnecessary training time and prevent overfitting.
Another direction for future work, is to investigate and try to better understand the
extreme predictions observed in the scatter plots for the Fourier_S2_zonal model (Figure
4.3 and 4.14), where some of the predictions accumulated around the 0 and 1 boundary
introduced by the Sigmoid function. Further analysis of these cases could help discover the
reason for these predictions and if they had something to do with the Sigmoid activation
function or if it was a bias introduced by the training dataset. Accounting for these outliers
is important to create a robust model which leads to accurate predictions also on real data.
An exciting future direction would be to evaluate the model on patients with neurological
brain disorders, such as multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease or stroke patients. These
conditions alter the brain anatomy causing a change in the axonal diffusion, which is mea-
surable with DW-MRI. Other studies have linked diffusivities and ASF to be indicators
of brain diseases, such as the study done by Canales-Rodríguez et al.,(2023)[26], which
demonstrates widespread abnormalities in ASF and perpendicular diffusivity in patients
with bipolar disorder. This project was evaluated using synthetic and real data form a
healthy subject to asses the ability of the model to capture microstructural properties in
real life scenarios. A more accurate and robust model could detect and quantify changes
in the brain. Potentially enabling earlier diagnosis and better evaluation of disease pro-
gression.
Finally, the entire Fourier_S2_zonal model is implemented in tensorflow, and converting
it to PyTorch could offer a more flexible model, making it easier to experiment with
architectural modifications and even adding on extensions.
40
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
This project was conducted with the aim of training the Fourier_S2_zonal model on
rotationally invariant features to accurately estimate microstructural properties within
the brain, specifically diffusivities and ASF. The performance of the model was compared
to an existing method using an RF Regressor. On synthetic training and test dataset, the
Fourier_S2_zonal model outperformed the RF model across all evaluation metrics and
reached an R2 score at 0.8357 for λ∥and 0.9012 for ASF in WM, compared to 0.7798 and
0.6543, respectively for the RF model. However when applying the model to real data, the
model showed a tendency to overestimate diffusivities, resulting in little to no structural
contrast in WM regions for λ∥. Additionally, it predicted high λ⊥values in GM, likely
due to residual partial volume effects, which can bias predictions of perpendicular diffusion
higher than their actual value. These elevated predictions appeared at the boundary of
the introduced Sigmoid activation function in the final layer, suggesting it might introduce
a boundary effect. In contrast, the RF model showed a tendency to predict values near
the center of the intensity distribution but was able to more accurately capture the details
in WM for λ∥and create reasonable contrast in the λ⊥maps.
For ASF predictions, the Fourier_S2_zonal model consistently outperformed the RF
model on both synthetic and real data. It produced ASF maps with high contrast and
accurate estimates across all tissue types, consistent with theoretic expectations. This
indicates that the high accuracy observed on synthetic data translated well to the real
data, demonstrating the model’s ability to generalize. In contrast, the RF model showed
a tendency to predict low ASF values across the entire brain, including in WM, where
higher ASF values are expected due to the higher axonal density. Calculating the ASF
values using the predicted diffusivities from the RF model, revealed that the cause of the
low predictions stems from the ground truth labels of ASF. Further inspection made it
clear that unlike the diffusivity labels, which followed a uniform distribution, the ASF la-
bels were skewed towards the lower values. This imbalance limited the exposure of higher
ASF values, reducing the ability of the RF model to accurately capture the full range. A
new data was generated which confirmed that the non-uniform distribution was the root
of the problem. These findings suggest that while the Fourier_S2_zonal model is capable
of capturing deeper tissue specific information, further refinement of the model is needed
for improving the diffusivity estimation. However, the significantly better performance
of predicting ASF values regardless of the ground truth distribution, suggests that the
model is capable of estimating microstructural properties in the brain. Further the model
showed great performance in synthetic test sets, which suggest that reducing bias in the
training data will improve the performance of estimating diffusivities in real data.
This project demonstrated, the potential of using ML models trained on rotationally in-
variant features to accurately estimate microstructural properties in the brain, particularly
ASF and diffusivities (λ∥and λ⊥).
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
41
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[1]
Sara Sedlar. “Domain Specific Convolutional Neural Networks for dMRI and M/EEG
Signal Analysis”. English. NNT: 2022COAZ4106, tel-03946862v2. PhD thesis. Uni-
versité Côte d’Azur, 2022. url: https://theses.hal.science/tel-03946862v2.
[2]
Marco Pizzolato et al. “Axial and radial axonal diffusivities and radii from single
encoding strongly diffusion-weighted MRI”. In: Medical Image Analysis 86 (2023),
p. 102767.
[3]
Win Y. Aung, S. Mar, and Terri L. Benzinger. “Diffusion tensor MRI as a biomarker
in axonal and myelin damage”. In: Imaging in Medicine 5.5 (2013), pp. 427–440. doi:
10.2217/iim.13.49.
[4]
Matthew D Budde et al. “Axial diffusivity is the primary correlate of axonal injury in
the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis spinal cord: a quantitative pixelwise
analysis”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 29.9 (2009), pp. 2805–2813. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.4605-08.2009.
[5]
Hiroyuki Tatekawa, Daiju Ueda, Hirotaka Takita, et al. “Deep learning-based diffu-
sion tensor image generation model: a proof-of-concept study”. In: Scientific Reports
14.1 (2024), p. 2911. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-53278-8. url: https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41598-024-53278-8.
[6]
Cinnamon VanPutte, Jennifer Regan, and Andrew Russo. Seeley’s Essentials of
Anatomy and Physiology. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2011. Chap. 8.
[7]
Kostas N. Fountoulakis. The Human Connectome: How the Brain Works. Springer,
2022. isbn: 978-3-031-10351-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-10351-3. url: https://link.
springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-031-10351-3.
[8]
Richard M. LoPachin, Carolyn M. Castiglia, and Albert J. Saubermann. “Elemental
composition and water content of myelinated axons and glial cells in rat central
nervous system”. In: Brain Research 549.2 (1991), pp. 253–259. issn: 0006-8993.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(91)90465-8. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0006899391904658.
[9]
David Chambers, Christopher Huang, and Gareth Matthews. “Neuronal Structure
and Function”. In: Basic Physiology for Anaesthetists. Cambridge University Press,
2019. Chap. 44, pp. 189–191.
[10]
RJ Mackenzie. Gray Matter vs. White Matter. Accessed: May 29, 2025. 2019. url:
https://www.technologynetworks.com/neuroscience/articles/gray-matter-vs-white-
matter-322973.
[11]
Thijs Dhollander. “Accounting for Complex Structure in Diffusion Weighted Imaging
Data using Volume Fraction Representations”. PhD thesis. Apr. 2014. doi: 10.13140/
2.1.3800.2563.
[12]
Denis Le Bihan et al. “Diffusion tensor imaging: Concepts and applications”. In:
Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging 13.4 (2001), pp. 534–546. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1002/jmri.1076. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/jmri.
1076. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jmri.1076.
42
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
==PAGE:51==
[13]
NanoTemper Technologies. The Stokes–Einstein Equation. NanoTemper support ar-
ticle. Accessed: June 19, 2025, from. n.d. url: https://support.nanotempertech.com/
hc/enus/articles/23851436308625-The-Stokes-Einstein-Equation.
[14]
Jerry L. Prince and Jonathan M. Links. Medical Imaging Signals and Systems. 2nd.
Pearson Prentice Hall Bioengineering, 2015. isbn: 978-0-13-214518-3.
[15]
Yusuf Bhagat. “Diffusion Tensor Imaging of the Human Brain”. PhD thesis. Aug.
2007. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.1.3814.5042.
[16]
Optimizing the Breast MRI Protocol. https://radiologykey.com/optimizing-the-breast-
mri-protocol/. Accessed: May 31, 2025.
[17]
Emmanuel Caruyer. “IRM de diffusion du Q-space : Acquisition et pré-traitements”.
French. Medical Imaging. Thèse de doctorat. France: Université Nice Sophia An-
tipolis, 2012. url: https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-00750144.
[18]
Xincheng Wang, Shuolun Wang, and Maria A. Holland. “Axonal tension contributes
to consistent fold placement”. In: Soft Matter 20.14 (2024), pp. 3053–3065. doi:
10.1039/D4SM00129J. url: https://doi.org/10.1039/D4SM00129J.
[19]
Emmanuel Caruyer et al. “Design of multishell sampling schemes with uniform cov-
erage in diffusion MRI”. In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 69.6 (2013), pp. 1534–
1540. doi: 10.1002/mrm.24736. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mrm.24736.
[20]
Flavio Dell’Acqua and J.-Donald Tournier. “Modelling White Matter with Spherical
Deconvolution: How and Why?” In: NMR in Biomedicine 32.4 (2019). Epub 16
August 2018, e3945. doi: 10.1002/nbm.3945.
[21]
Thina L. Thøgersen, Tim B. Dyrby, and Marco Pizzolato. “Axonal fraction imaging
on clinical and preclinical dMRI PGSE data”. In: Annual meeting of the International
Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine (ISMRM) Abstract #3471. 2024.
[22]
Massachusetts General Hospital–USC Human Connectome Project. MGH Adult Dif-
fusion Data Acquisition Details. Human Connectome Project. Accessed: June 9,
2025. n.d. url: https : / / www . humanconnectome . org / study / hcp - young - adult /
document/mgh-adult-diffusion-data-acquisition-details.
[23]
MRtrix3 Development Team. Global intensity normalisation. Accessed: June 9, 2025.
MRtrix3 Documentation. url: https://mrtrix.readthedocs.io/en/latest/concepts/
global_intensity_normalisation.html.
[24]
Rutger HJ Fick, Demian Wassermann, and Rachid Deriche. “The Dmipy toolbox:
Diffusion MRI multi-compartment modeling and microstructure recovery made easy”.
In: Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 13 (2019), p. 64. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2019.00064.
[25]
Daniel C. Alexander et al. “Imaging brain microstructure with diffusion MRI: prac-
ticality and applications”. In: NMR in Biomedicine 32.4 (Apr. 2019). Epub 2017 Nov
29, e3841. issn: 1099-1492. doi: 10.1002/nbm.3841.
[26]
E. J. Canales-Rodríguez et al. “Widespread intra-axonal signal fraction abnormali-
ties in bipolar disorder from multicompartment diffusion MRI: Sensitivity to diagno-
sis, association with clinical features and pharmacologic treatment”. In: Human Brain
Mapping 44.12 (2023). Epub 2023 Jun 26, pp. 4605–4622. doi: 10.1002/hbm.26405.
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/hbm.26405.
43
==PAGE:52==
44
==PAGE:53==
A
Appendix
A.0.1
Random Forest Regressor diffusivity Maps
(a) Slice 50
(b) Slice 60
Figure A.1: Diffusion maps for λ∥and λ⊥predicted by the RF model.
A.0.2
Fourier_S2_zonal diffusivity Maps
(a) Slice 50
(b) Slice 60
Figure A.2: Diffusion maps for λ∥and λ⊥predicted by the Fourier_S2_zonal model.
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
45
==PAGE:54==
B
Appendix
B.0.1
Random Forest Regressor ASF maps
(a)
(b)
Figure B.1: ASF prediction maps for two different slices with the RF model.
B.0.2
Fourier_S2_zonal ASF maps
(a)
(b)
Figure B.2: ASF prediction maps for two different slices with the Fourier_S2_zonal model.
46
Machine Learning and Rotational Invariance for Brain Microstructure Diffusion MR Imaging
==PAGE:55==
B.0.3
Calculated Random Forest Regressor ASF maps
(a)
(b)
Figure B.3: Calculated ASF maps for two different slices using the diffusivities predicted
from the RF model.
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk/
