==PAGE:1==
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis
Treatment Train
Benjamin Schneider ­ 184383
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Institut for Miljø­ og Ressourceteknologi
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis concludes my master’s degree in Environmental Engineering at the Danish
Technological University (Danmarks Tekniske Universitet ­ DTU). The thesis is 30 ECTS
points, and the work presented was carried out in 5 months from end of February 2025
to end of June 2025. The work was done at the the Department of Environmental and
Resource Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
The main supervisor of this project was Professor Philipp Mayer, while Senior Researcher
Heidi Birch and PhD Candidate Clara Benedikte Mader Lade were co­supervisors. The
thesis was done in the context of project number 113834 pertaining to the investigation of
environmental issues related to the production and use of biochar.
Benjamin Schneider ­ s1843836
Signature
Date
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
iii
27th June 2025
==PAGE:4==
Declaration of Use of Artificial Intelligence
In this thesis, the generative artificial intelligence tool ChatGPT by OpenAI was employed
to enhance the language by correcting grammar, restructuring sentences and paragraphs,
and varying vocabulary. All subject­specific knowledge was independently researched,
the results were obtained through my own laboratory experiments and subsequent anal­
ysis performed by the laboratory technician, and all discussion points and conclusions
were developed by myself.
iv
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are synthetic chemicals known for their en­
vironmental persistence and potential accumulation in waste streams such as wastewa­
ter. In wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), PFAS can sorb to sewage sludge (SS),
which becomes problematic when the sludge is used as fertilizer. Pyrolysis of SS pro­
duces biochar (BC), which is a carbon­rich material. The Danish Ministry of Climate,
Energy, and Utilities has identified biochar as a key tool in achieving climate neutrality
by 2045. Due to its increased surface area and carbon content, BC may enhance sorp­
tion of organic contaminants, while pyrolysis may also degrade some PFAS. This thesis
investigates PFAS concentrations in leachates from SS and BC, characterizes PFAS in
WWTP inlet water and pyrolysis scrubber water, and evaluates the effect of pyrolysis on
PFAS sorption using distribution coefficients (KD). Twenty­three PFAS were analyzed.
A batch leaching experiment assessed native PFAS release from SS and BC. Additional
samples were collected from the WWTP inlet (WW), mixed scrubber water (MS), and py­
rolysis scrubber water (PS) to evaluate the fate of PFAS across the treatment train. A
batch sorption experiment was conducted to compare KD values between SS and BC.
Leachate concentrations ranged from 0.0009–0.0112 μg/L in SS and 0.0002–0.0027 μg/L
in BC. PFHxS was most abundant in SS leachate, while PFBA dominated BC leachate.
PFPeA was most concentrated in WW and MS, and PFHxA in PS. PFBA was nearly ab­
sent in SS leachate and showed low sorption to sludge, suggesting it bypasses sludge
retention. However, its presence in PS suggests potential short­chain PFAS formation
during pyrolysis. For most PFAS, KD values increased by 1­2 orders of magnitude as a
result of pyrolysis, ranging from 23.4–134 (SS) to 13.2–2080 (BC). Long­chained PFAS
had higher KD than shorter­chain PFAS, and PFSA sorbed more than PFCA. Overall,
pyrolysis reduced PFAS leaching and substantially enhanced sorption capacity.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
v
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my thesis supervisors Philipp Mayer,
Heidi Birch and Clara Benedikte Mader Lade, whose expertise, know­how, support and
feedback provided me with the best possible foundations to complete this master’s the­
sis. I would like to thank Philipp for raising my interest in priority organic pollutants in his
course 12238 in the spring of 2024, his subsequent suggestion to follow the biochar spe­
cial course in autumn 2024 and finally integrating me into project 113834 by enabling me
to write my thesis with him as main­supervisor. I would also like to thank Heidi for her help
in defining experimental specifications and countless suggestions of how to statistically
evaluate results. A special thank you belongs to Clara for her incredible patience in the
lab, keeping me motivated at all times and always being available for questions, of which
there were plenty.
I also thank the amazing lab technicians Mikael Olsson and Frederikke Hansen for being
so helpful with the sample analyis and for assisting me during SPE.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and friends for their support throughout my studies
and especially during this thesis, which has helped me to stay on track and never loose
focus.
vi
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
Table 1: Abbreviations and their full terms.
Abbreviation
Full Term
6:2 FTS
6:2 fluorotelomersulfonic acid
BC
biochar
BMF
biomagnification factor
DL
desolvation line
DOC
dissolved organic carbon
EQS
environmental quality standard
ESI
electrospray ionization
EU
European Union
FCM
Food Contact Materials
FTS
fluorotelomersulfonic acid
HPLC
high­performance liquid chromatography
ITRC
Interstate Technology & Regulatory Council
KD
distribution coefficient
LC­MS/MS
liquid chromatography­tandem mass spectrometry
MRM
multiple reaction monitoring
MS
mixed scrubber water
PFAA
perfluoroalkyl acids
PFCA
perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids
PFSA
perfluoroalkyl sulfonic acids
PFBA
perfluorobutanoic acid
PFBS
perfluorobutanesulfonic acid
PFDA
perfluorodecanoic acid
PFDS
perfluorodecanesulfonic acid
PFDoDA
perfluorododecanoic acid
PFDoDS
perfluorododecanesulfonic acid
PFHpA
perfluoroheptanoic acid
PFHpS
perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid
PFHxA
perfluorohexanoic acid
PFHxS
perfluorohexanesulfonic acid
PFNA
perfluorononanoic acid
PFNS
perfluorononanesulfonic acid
PFOA
perfluorooctanoic acid
PFOSA
perfluorooctanesulfonamide
PFOS
perfluorooctanesulfonic acid
PFPeA
perfluoropentanoic acid
PFPeS
perfluoropentanesulfonic acid
PFTeDA
perfluorotetradecanoic acid
PFTrDA
perfluorotridecanoic acid
PFTrDS
perfluorotridecanesulfonic acid
PFUnDA
perfluoroundecanoic acid
PFUnDS
perfluoroundecanesulfonic acid
PP
polypropylene
PS
pyrolysis scrubber water
QL
quantification limit
QS
quantification standard
RSD
relative standard deviation
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
vii
==PAGE:8==
Table 1 (continued)
Abbreviation
Full Term
SPE
solid­phase extraction
SS
sewage sludge
TULAC
textiles, upholstery, leather, apparel and carpets
WW
wastewater
WWTP
wastewater treatment plant
viii
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background Theory
2
2.1
PFAS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Sewage Sludge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Pyrolysis of Sludge to Biochar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Sorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Aim and Hypotheses
12
4
Methods
13
4.1
Fårevejle WWTP and Pyrolysis Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Sampling and Storage of Native Sludge and Biochar . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Determination of Dry Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4
Experiment 1: Leaching of Native 23 PFAS from Biochar and Sewage Sludge 14
4.5
Additional Measurements: Aqueous Concentrations of 23 PFAS in WWTP
Inlet and Pyrolysis Scrubber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.6
Experiment 2: Effect of Pyrolysis on PFAS Sorption Behavior in Sewage
Sludge and Biochar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.7
Analytical Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.8
Quality Control/Quality Assurance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.9
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Results
23
5.1
Data Usability of Leaching Experiment and Additional Measurements
. . . 23
5.2
Results: Leaching Experiment and Additional Measurements . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Data Usability of Sorption Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
Results of Sorption Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Discussion
30
6.1
Reasons for Limited Data Usability for some PFAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2
Native Concentrations in Treatment Train . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.3
Increased Sorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
41
A Appendix
47
A.1 Quantification Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.2 MRM Transitions and Retention Times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.3 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
A.4 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a large group of man­made chemicals
used in numerous industrial and consumer products due to their unique physicochemical
properties, including thermal stability, chemical resistance, and surfactant behavior. Well­
known examples include PTFE, discovered by Dr. Plunkett in 1938, commercialized under
the trade name Teflon and used in non­stick pans, water repellent clothing and various
other applications [1].
These same physicochemical properties, however, make PFAS extremely persistent in
the environment and lead to global distribution via long­range transport mechanisms [2,
3]. Due to their bioaccumulative potential and links to serious health effects such as
carcinogenicity and endocrine disruption, PFAS as a group have come under increased
legislative scrutiny. Various PFAS have thus been listed under the Stockholm Convention
on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) [4, 5].
Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) represent major conduits through which PFAS
enter the environment. Conventional WWTPs are not designed to eliminate PFAS, and
these substances are frequently detected in both effluents and sewage sludge. In particu­
lar, many PFAS tend to sorb to sewage sludge during treatment [4]. Sludge has historically
been applied to agricultural fields as a nutrient­rich fertilizer, but its contamination with per­
sistent organic pollutants, including PFAS, poses a risk of leaching into groundwater and
uptake by crops [4].
In response to these environmental challenges, pyrolysis of sludge to biochar has emerged
as a promising treatment method.
Various organic pollutants, including some PFAS,
show high removal rates when comparing biochar to sludge [6]. Furthermore, the Danish
Ministry of Climate, Energy, and Utilities has identified pyrolysis and its primary prod­
uct biochar as a key strategy for achieving climate goals through carbon sequestration
[7]. Biochar is produced by thermochemically decomposing organic materials such as
sewage sludge under oxygen­limited conditions (e.g., 650 °C for 20 minutes), resulting in
a carbon­rich solid characterized by high stability, increased surface area, and enhanced
sorption capacity [8, 9]. However, there is increasing concern that thermal treatment may
transform PFAS into shorter­chain, more mobile compounds that persist in scrubber water
and could be released to the receiving water body by WWTPs [4, 10].
It is crucial to determine if pyrolysis of sewage sludge to biochar reduces PFAS leaching
and increases sorption in order to address concerns over the risk associated with agricul­
tural application of biochar instead of sludge. Moreover, pyrolysis may not fully eliminate
PFAS but instead lead to formation of more mobile, short­chain PFAS, hence there is
a need for a more holistic evaluation of PFAS behaviour across a WWTP and pyrolysis
treatment train.
This thesis investigates the fate of PFAS across an integrated treatment train comprising a
full­scale WWTP and adjacent pyrolysis plant. The following chapters presents a detailed
theoretical background on PFAS, sewage sludge, pyrolysis, and sorption mechanisms,
followed by the aim of this project, the methodological approach, the results, a discussion
and a conclusion
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Background Theory
2.1
PFAS
Per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of synthetic chemicals used in
many industrial and consumer products because of their unique physicochemical proper­
ties, including high chemical and thermal stability, and surfactant nature. However, PFAS
also have potential for long­range transport and are extremely persistent in the environ­
ment due to the strength of the C­F bond, resulting in their widespread occurrence [2, 3].
Moreover, they are known to have adverse effects on humans and the environment. This
has led to great concerns and ultimately, some individual PFAS have been adopted to the
Stockholm Convention list of Priority Organic Pollutants (POP) [4, 5].
2.1.1
Definition and physicochemical properties
PFAS are defined as a group of 5000 to 10000 individual synthetic chemicals containing
at least one fully fluorinated methyl (­CF3) or methylene (­CF2­) group, which form the
tail of the compound, and a head consisting of a functional group [11, 12] that may be
charged. Both the tail length and the type of head play important roles in sorption be­
haviour, as will be described in more detail in 2.4.3. Within this large group of chemicals,
perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAA) are some of the least complex PFAS [12]. PFAA are the most
commonly analyzed PFAS within environmental research and drive legislation [12]. They
are sometimes referred to as terminal PFAS since they can be formed by both biotic and
abiotic degradation of other PFAS (precursors), but are themselves not degradable in the
environment [12]. The main PFAA subgroups are perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids (PFCA)
and perfluoroalkyl sulfonic acids (PFSA), distinguishable by their head, which consists of
either a carboxylate (PFCA) or sulfonate (PFSA) functional group [12].
It is important to note that for both PFCA and PFSA, naming conventions take into account
every carbon atom (C) in a PFAS molecule, including the C found in the head of PFCA.
This leads to different tail lengths for compounds named similarly in both groups, such as
PFOA (total C: 8 and tail length: 7) and PFOS (total c: 8 and tail length: 8). Chemically,
PFOA would be more analogous to PFHpS (total c: 7 and tail length: 7) [12].
Commonly, PFAS are grouped into long­chain (PFCA: C≥8, PFSA: C≥6), short­chain
(PFCA: C≤7, PFSA: C≤5) and ultrashort­chain (C<4) [12, 13].
For the scope of this thesis, 23 individual PFAS were analysed, grouped in table 2.1. They
include PFCA and PFSA (or precursors thereof), and form, among others, the basis for
regulatory limits in Denmark (see 2.1.7). PFOSA and 6:2 FTS are precursors that may
degrade into PFOS and PFHxA, respectively.
2
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:13==
Table 2.1: PFAS22 substances classification
PFAS Name
CAS number
Functional Group
Number of C
Chain Length
PFBA (perfluorobutanoic acid)
375­22­4
PFCA
4
Short­chain
PFPeA (perfluoropentanoic acid)
2706­90­3
PFCA
5
Short­chain
PFHxA (perfluorohexanoic acid)
307­24­4
PFCA
6
Short­chain
PFHpA (perfluoroheptanoic acid)
375­85­9
PFCA
7
Short­chain
PFOA (perfluorooctanoic acid)
335­67­1
PFCA
8
Long­chain
PFNA (perfluorononanoic acid)
375­95­1
PFCA
9
Long­chain
PFDA (perfluorodecanoic acid)
335­76­2
PFCA
10
Long­chain
PFUnDA (perfluoroundecanoic acid)
2058­94­8
PFCA
11
Long­chain
PFDoDA (perfluorododecanoic acid)
307­55­1
PFCA
12
Long­chain
PFTrDA (perfluorotridecanoic acid)
72629­94­8
PFCA
13
Long­chain
PFTeDA (perfluorotetradecanoic acid acid)
376­06­7
PFCA
14
Long­chain
PFBS (perfluorobutanesulfonic acid)
375­73­5
PFSA
4
Short­chain
PFPeS (perfluoropentanesulfonic acid)
2706­91­4
PFSA
5
Short­chain
PFHxS (perfluorohexanesulfonic acid)
355­46­4
PFSA
6
Long­chain
PFHpS (perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid)
375­92­8
PFSA
7
Long­chain
PFOS (perfluorooctanesulfonic acid)
1763­23­1
PFSA
8
Long­chain
PFNS (perfluorononanesulfonic acid)
68259­12­1
PFSA
9
Long­chain
PFDS (perfluorodecanesulfonic acid)
335­77­3
PFSA
10
Long­chain
PFUnDS (perfluoroundecanesulfonic acid)
749786­16­1
PFSA
11
Long­chain
PFDoDS (perfluorododecanesulfonic acid)
79780­39­5
PFSA
12
Long­chain
PFTrDS (perfluorotridecanesulfonic acid)
791563­89­8
PFSA
13
Long­chain
PFOSA (perfluorooctanesulfonamide)
754­91­6
PFSA­Precursor
8
–
6:2 FTS (6:2 fluorotelomersulfonic acid)
27619­97­2
PFCA­Precursor
8
–
2.1.2
Historical Use and Production Volumes
PFAS were first introduced in the 1940s and have since been used in a variety of indus­
trial and consumer products [4]. Although physicochemical properties vary depending on
the compound in question, many PFAS share unique traits including surfactancy, water
and oil repellency and heat resistance, making PFAS suitable to be used in firefighting
applications, food packaging, non­stick cookware, as well as textiles, upholstery, leather,
apparel and carpets (commonly referred to as TULAC) [14, 15, 16]. PFOA was the PFCA
manufactured in the largest quantity, mainly as an emulsifier in the production of Teflon
[17].
Globally, cumulative PFAS emissions are expected to be at least 46 000 t [14]. In a recent
flow analysis of PFAS, the Danish environmental agency (Miljøstyrelsen) concluded that
the total PFAA input into the Danish society is 370 t / y, with 66 % derived from TULAC
applications [16]. Furthermore, Miljøstyrelsen estimates an annual release of 294 kg from
WWTP.
2.1.3
PFAS in Waste Streams
Due to their widespread use, PFAS can be detected in many waste streams, including
solid waste, electronic waste, manure, wastewater and sewage sludge [4, 18]. Wastewa­
ter treatment plants (WWTP) act as important sources where PFAS leave anthropogenic
systems and are released to the environment [11]. Both conventional and alternative
PFAS have been detected in WWTP effluents at concentrations above 100 ng/L [11, 18].
Moreover, a variety of PFAS can be found in sewage sludge, with concentrations up to
7300 ng/g dw [11, 19]. Lastly, when sludge is further treated by pyrolysis, PFAS can oc­
cur in the pyrolysis scrubber water [4]. These findings indicate that WWTP secondary
biological treatment units do not fully remove PFAS from wastewater.
2.1.4
Environmental Fate
PFAS are highly persistent in the environment, due to the same physicochemical proper­
ties that enable them to be used in this wide number of applications. They resist biological,
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
3
==PAGE:14==
chemical and thermal degradation [20, 21]. At common environmental pH, many PFAS
are present in their anionic form, increasing water solubility and allowing for migration
through soils and transport via water. Consequently, PFAS are not only found near direct
contamination sources but are also widely distributed in surface waters, groundwater, and
even the atmosphere [22, 17, 23, 24]. Their global spread reaches both the arctic and
antarctic ecosystems and the Tibetan plateau, as well as having infiltrated biota such as
microorganisms, plants, and animals (including humans) [11, 20, 23, 25]. Studies point
to short­chain PFAS having greater potential for water transport but bioaccumulate less
than long­chain PFAS [22, 25]. Long­chain PFAS also tend to be retained more on soil
and sediment particles [22].
2.1.5
Bioaccumulation and Biomagnification
PFAS exhibit high protein­binding affinity, contributing to their bioaccumulation in organ­
isms and biomagnification through food webs [26]. Long­chain PFAS, such as PFOS, are
particularly prone to these processes. In apex predators like polar bears, PFOS concen­
trations in the liver have been reported up to 3270 ng/g ww [27]. A biomagnification factor
(BMF) of 30 has been observed between seals and polar bears, underscoring the potential
for trophic transfer [27]. Maternal transfer also plays a significant role, with offspring often
accumulating higher PFAS concentrations than adults [27]. These mechanisms increase
exposure risk across multiple life stages and trophic levels.
2.1.6
Ecotoxicity and Human Health Impacts
PFAS exposure is associated with a range of adverse effects in both wildlife and humans.
In animals, high body burdens have been linked to reproductive toxicity, immunosup­
pression, and endocrine disruption [27]. In humans, PFAS are recognized as potential
endocrine disruptors and contribute to reproductive dysfunction and male infertility [22].
Other reported effects include developmental toxicity, neurotoxicity, and genetic damage
[11, 22]. Epidemiological studies have associated PFAS exposure with thyroid dysfunc­
tion, liver and kidney diseases, metabolic disorders, and disrupted lipid metabolism—
leading to conditions such as non­alcoholic fatty liver disease and hyperlipidemia [11, 22].
Reflecting growing concern, tolerable weekly intake levels for PFOS have been lowered
to 13 ng/kg bw/week by the European Food Safety Authority [27].
2.1.7
Legislation
PFAS are the subject of increasing regulatory scrutiny due to their persistence, toxicity,
and widespread environmental occurrence. Regulatory actions have been initiated under
several frameworks, including the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollu­
tants, which listed PFOS in 2009 and PFOA in 2019 for restriction or elimination [28]. At
the European level, the REACH regulation framework, through a joint proposal by Den­
mark, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Norway, led to a broad PFAS restriction
dossier submitted to ECHA in 2023 [16]. Denmark is among the most proactive countries,
planning a national PFAS action plan from 2024 onward [16].
As of November 2024, Denmark has adopted binding and advisory environmental quality
standards (EQS) for several matrices. These include a drinking water limit of 0.002 µg/L
for the sum of four PFAS (PFOA, PFOS, PFNA, PFHxS), and 0.1 µg/L for the sum of 22
PFAS [29]. Equivalent limits apply to groundwater. For sewage sludge, advisory threshold
values are 0.01 mg/kg dw for the sum of 4 PFAS and 0.4 mg/kg dw for the sum of 22 PFAS
[29]. At the EU level, the Drinking Water Directive (2020/2184) sets a parametric value of
0.50 µg/L for total PFAS and 0.10 µg/L for a targeted list of 20 PFAS [30, 28]. On a global
scale, the United States has proposed some of the strictest individual PFAS thresholds,
such as 0.004 µg/L for both PFOS and PFOA [30]. National and international limits are
summarized in table 2.2.
4
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:15==
Despite regional differences, regulatory convergence is evident in the trend toward lower
threshold values and expanded compound coverage. However, implementation chal­
lenges remain, especially regarding the monitoring of precursor compounds and poly­
meric PFAS, which are not always included in routine environmental assessments [16].
Table 2.2: Selected PFAS Environmental Limit Values in Denmark, EU, and Worldwide
Region
Matrix
PFAS Group / Compound
Limit Value
Denmark
Drinking water
Sum of 4 PFAS (PFOA, PFOS, PFNA, PFHxS)
0.002 µg/L
Denmark
Drinking water
Sum of 22 PFAS
0.1 µg/L
Denmark
Sewage sludge
Sum of 4 PFAS
0.01 mg/kg dw
Denmark
Sewage sludge
Sum of 22 PFAS
0.4 mg/kg dw
EU
Drinking water
Total PFAS (unspecified)
0.50 µg/L
EU
Drinking water
Sum of 20 specified PFAS
0.10 µg/L
USA
Drinking water
PFOS, PFOA (individually)
0.004 µg/L
USA
Drinking water
PFNA, PFHxS
0.001 µg/L
Canada
Drinking water
Total PFAS
0.030 µg/L
2.2
Sewage Sludge
2.2.1
WWTP ­ Current state of affairs
Currently, most urban wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in the EU operate through a
multi­stage process consisting of primary, secondary, and, in many cases, tertiary treat­
ment. Primary treatment involves physical or chemical processes to remove suspended
solids and reduce organic load [31, Art. 2(11)]. Secondary treatment typically consists
of biological processes to degrade biodegradable organic matter and remove nutrients,
especially by removing nitrogen via nitrification and denitrification. Biological treatment re­
sults in the generation of sludge as a by­product [31, Art. 2(12)]. Tertiary treatment further
targets the removal of nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus to combat eutrophication
in receiving water bodies [31, Art. 2(13)]. This combination of treatments significantly re­
duces organic pollutants and nutrient loads; however, it is insufficient for removing emerg­
ing contaminants such as pharmaceuticals, PFAS, and microplastics, which can still be
detected in effluents [31, Rec. 18, 28]. As a result, the EU Wastewater Directive intro­
duces a mandatory quaternary treatment step for large WWTPs (≥150,000 p.e.) and risk­
based implementation in smaller agglomerations, aiming to remove a broad spectrum of
organic micropollutants [31, Rec. 18]. In parallel, sludge management policies are being
restructured to enhance phosphorus recovery and control micropollutant contamination,
particularly when sludge is reused in agriculture [31, Rec. 42].
2.2.2
Sewage Sludge Characteristics
Sewage sludge is a heterogeneous byproduct of wastewater treatment processes, typi­
cally composed of a complex mixture of organic matter, inorganic compounds, nutrients,
trace metals, and pathogenic microorganisms [32, 33, 34, 35]. Its moisture content is high,
ranging from 80–99% by weight, while the dry fraction contains substantial proportions of
volatile matter (up to 77.5% wt), ash (up to 76.5% wt), and fixed carbon (up to 12.7% wt),
depending on the sludge type and treatment stage [32, 34]. Elemental analysis reveals
carbon (19.4–49.3%), hydrogen (3.2–7.3%), oxygen (15.2–56.3%), nitrogen (3.6–9.3%),
and sulfur (0.5–3.2%) on a dry weight basis [32]. Sludge is also rich in nutrients, with
nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations reaching up to 7.2% and 9.2% dry weight, re­
spectively [32, 33]. Additionally, it commonly contains trace metals such as Cu, Zn, Ni,
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Fate of municipal sewage sludge in Denmark, taken from Jensen et al. [38]
Figure 2.2: Fraction of sludge used in agriculture for various countries and EU, taken from
Balkrishna et al. [39]
Pb, Cr, and Cd, with concentrations typically up to 0.3% w/w [34, 33, 35]. These compo­
sitional attributes are strongly influenced by the characteristics of the incoming wastew­
ater, the specific treatment processes applied, and temporal variability [33, 35]. Beyond
inorganic pollutants, sewage sludge can also harbor a range of persistent organic con­
taminants, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), pharmaceuticals, and PFAS [32].
2.2.3
Sludge Volumes
The global production of municipal sewage sludge is estimated to be around 45 million
tons (in 2017) [36], of which the EU produces 12 million tons [37]. Given that regulatory
restrictions pertaining to wastewater treatment as well as the human population are ex­
pected to rise, these production volumes are predicted to increase [36]. Between 1994
and 2002, danish sludge production decreased from 170,000 to 140,000 tons dw [38].
2.2.4
Fate of Sludge
In Denmark, sludge has traditionally been disposed of in three different ways: 1) used
as a fertilizer on agricultural fields, 2) landfilled or 3) incinerated [38]. The fraction of
agriculturally used sludge has decreased slightly from 1995 to 2001 and was estimated to
6
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:17==
be 66%. Although there are no recent data, this is nevertheless in line with other findings
for developed nations such as Japan, the US, or the EU average, as can be seen in figure
2.2.
Sewage sludge is valued as a soil amendment in agriculture, particularly in organic farm­
ing, due to its content of essential macronutrients—nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and
potassium (K)—and micronutrients like iron (Fe), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), and manganese
[39]. Although its nitrogen and phosphorus levels are lower than those in conventional
fertilizers, sewage sludge provides a slow­release nutrient profile that reduces leaching
and promotes sustained soil fertility[39]. Its high organic matter content also improves
soil structure, water retention, and microbial activity, making it beneficial for long­term soil
health[39].
However, sludge application has come under increased scrutiny due to the accumulation
of heavy metals such as cadmium, lead, and mercury, which can harm crops and enter
the food chain, as well as the presence of pathogens, residual pharmaceuticals as well
as PFAS that may affect soil microbiomes and human health[39, 11].
2.2.5
Fate of PFAS in WWTP and Sludge
The partitioning of PFAS between sludge and the aqueous phase of the wastewater is
determined by the KD [18]. As such, long­chain PFAS tend to sorb to sludge while short­
chain PFAS are more mobile and remain in the wastewater [11, 18]. Furthermore, WWTPs
can pose major sources of PFAS air polluton when short­chain PFAS are emitted during
the aeration process [11]. Lastly, precursors may be biotransformed to terminal PFAA
within the biological treatment [18].
2.3
Pyrolysis of Sludge to Biochar
2.3.1
Pyrolysis definition
Pyrolysis entails the thermochemical decomposition of biomass in the absence of oxygen
at temperatures of 200­900 °C [40], [41], resulting in biochar, bio­oils and gaseous prod­
ucts (such as syngas) depending on the feedstock and operational conditions [42]. While
biochar is intended for environmental management applications, syngas is often used for
electricity generation and bio­oils may be suitable for low­grade heating or can be treated
further to be used as a diesel substitue [43]. Pyrolysis is typically distinguished by the
biomass residence time and temperature in the reactor, resulting in 3 subclasses: slow
pyrolysis (100­1000 °C for several minutes up to hours), intermediate pyrolysis ( 500°C
for 10­20 s) and fast pyrolysis (300 ­ 1000 °C for less than 2 s) [40, 42]. While fast pyrol­
ysis favours the production of bio­oils [40], intermediate and slow pyrolysis shift the yield
towards biochar.
2.3.2
Biochar properties and factors affecting them
Biochar is a solid, carbon­rich material produced through pyrolysis and, like charcoal,
contains fused aromatic ring structures [42]. Compared to its feedstock, biochar typically
has a higher carbon content and a fundamentally altered organic carbon structure [42].
During pyrolysis, hydrogen and oxygen are depleted while fused aromatic rings form,
resulting in a more stable, aromatic matrix. Additionally, biochar is often enriched with
phosphorus and various metals [42]. However, its specific physicochemical properties
vary significantly depending on the feedstock and production conditions [44].
Among the production processes’ most important parameters is the pyrolysis temperature.
Increasing it typically results in biochars with higher surface area and higher porosity [34,
40, 44], due to increased thermal destruction of pore blocking substances [45]. Agrafioti
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
7
==PAGE:18==
et al. reported a 4­fold increase in surface area when comparing biochars made at 300°C
and 500°C, while Ahmad et al. found that the pore volume was 2.5 times higher for a tem­
perature of 700°C compared to 400°C. An increase in aromaticity and thus the generation
of micro­ and mesopores has been attributed to the higher surface area [34].
With regards to C content, findings differ. For biochars derived from lignocellulosic feed­
stocks (such as wood or grass), an increase in pyrolysis temperature typically results
in higher carbon content, as reported by Ahmad et al. and Agrafioti et al. [40, 34]. In
contrast, sewage sludge biochars tend to exhibit lower carbon contents at higher temper­
atures [40]. Ash content also increases with pyrolysis temperature [40]. In sludge biochar,
the ash content is comparatively high, suggesting high mineral content [40]. At the same
time, increasing pyrolysis temperature decreases the biochar yield [34, 40, 46]. Com­
pared to activated carbon or wood­derived biochar, sludge biochar typically has lower
carbon content, surface area and porosity [47]. Therefore, it is clear that the preferred py­
rolysis parameters, as well as feedstock, depend on the intended application of biochar.
2.3.3
Biochar benefits
Organic contaminant removal and Sanitation
As described in Section 2.2.2, municipal sewage sludge and other feedstocks may contain
a vast array of organic contaminants in varying concentrations [6]. In a 2021 evaluation
of the potential of pyrolysis to remove organic contaminants from sewage sludge, Buss
showed high removal rates for pharmaceuticals, PAHs, petroleum hydrocarbons, as well
as other persistent organic pollutants (POP) such as dioxins, furans and PFOA and PFOS
[6]. It should be noted however, that in addition to feedstock, the pyrolysis process itself
can be a source of several contaminants, especially PAHs, volatile organic compounds
(VOCs), and dioxins and furans [48]. However, for most biochars, these compounds are
strongly sorbed, rendering them not bio­available and pose therefore only a very limited
risk to the environment [42].
While sewage sludge may contain high concentrations of pathogens and is thus a difficult
waste to manage [34, 49], pathogens in the resulting biochar are thermally destroyed
during the pyrolysis process [49, 32]. Biochar is thus a sanitized, more safe to handle
product.
Climate change
Biochar mitigates climate change by storing carbon in soil, providing green energy, de­
creasing nutrient loss and enhancing crop yield [42, 43]. When biomass is pyrolyzed,
much of its carbon becomes chemically recalcitrant, resisting microbial breakdown for
centuries. This stability allows long­term CO2 sequestration by removing carbon from the
fast cycle [42]. Sustainable biochar use could offset up to 12 % of global CO2­equivalent
emissions annually [43]. Beyond storing carbon, biochar reduces emissions of potent
GHGs. It can lower nitrous oxide (N2O) by improving nitrogen use efficiency and limiting
nitrification and denitrification [42]. In flooded soils, such as rice paddies, it also sup­
presses methane (CH4) emissions by improving aeration and altering microbial dynam­
ics [42, 43]. Biochar also supports climate goals by enhancing soil health. It improves
structure, nutrient retention, and water­holding capacity, promoting greater plant growth
and further carbon fixation [42]. Nevertheless, the climate benefits of biochar depend on
context. Factors such as feedstock, pyrolysis conditions, and application environment
influence net GHG outcomes. In some cases, energy use or emissions from biochar
production may offset climate gains. Field data remain limited, and the complexity of
soil–biochar–climate interactions challenges accurate modeling and verification [42]. In
conclusion, biochar, when used sustainably, is a promising climate mitigation tool through
its carbon storage, emissions reductions, and soil benefits [42, 43].
8
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:19==
Fertilizer Properties
In the context of phosphorus scarcity [50], biochar has received special attention as a
sustainable fertilizer [51]. Biochar feedstocks such as sewage sludge, can contain vary­
ing amounts of P which may persist in the biochar after pyrolysis, enabling it to act as
a P source ([51]). Moreover, biochar may have a beneficial effect on the P nutrient cy­
cle, where it can enhance the plant availability of P already present in the soil before its
application ([42], [52]). While nutrients such as P, as well as potassium, calcium or mag­
nesium are enriched in the biochar with increasing pyrolysis temperature, nitrogen is lost
at temperatures around 550°C [53].
Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy, and Utilities Strategy and Action Plan for
Pyrolysis
Denmark’s Strategy and Action Plan for Pyrolysis (2024) outlines a national framework to
support the upscaling of pyrolysis technology as a carbon removal method, particularly
through the production and application of biochar in agriculture. The plan positions py­
rolysis as a key contributor to achieving Denmark’s climate neutrality target by 2045 by
enabling long­term carbon storage in soils and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from
the land­use sector. Alongside its climate ambitions, the strategy emphasizes the impor­
tance of evaluating environmental risks associated with pyrolysis products. Specifically, it
highlights the need for scientific investigation into the formation, content, and degradation
of environmentally harmful substances in biochar, thereby underscoring the relevance of
assessing PFAS leaching and sorption dynamics as part of broader pollution risk evalua­
tions [7].
2.4
Sorption
In aquatic environments and aqueous porous media, sorption and desorption are phenom­
ena governing the mass transfer of substances between a solid and a fluid (gas or liquid)
phase [54]. Understanding the sorption behaviour of PFAS on solids such as biochar or
sewage sludge can help predicting PFAS retention in the environment where these solids
should be introduced, and where the presence of water (for example in the form of rainfall)
may induce desorption and subsequent leaching of these compounds.
2.4.1
Desorption/Leaching
Desorption is the process by which previously sorbed compounds are released from solid
surfaces back into the surrounding environment [55]. Desorption can occur from sor­
bent materials such as organic matter or biochar initially capture chemicals such as PFAS
through physical and chemical interactions. Desorption is closely related to sorption, as
both involve the exchange of compounds between solid and liquid phases. However,
desorption may not always be a simple reversal of sorption due to phenomena such as
hysteresis, where PFAS are more strongly retained within the sorbent structure than dur­
ing initial uptake [56]. This can be attributed to factors such as diffusion into micropores,
time­dependent binding, or irreversible chemical interactions, resulting in reduced mobility
and potential long­term retention of PFAS in environmental matrices [56].
Leaching is a process related to (de)sorption but focuses on the transport of contaminants
from a source, instead of describing contaminant release. In environmental systems,
leaching can occur following rainfall and contaminate surrounding soils or groundwater
[55]. Regarding the application of sludge to soils, PFAS leaching involves vertical move­
ment from the surface into deeper soil layers [57]. In this thesis, leachate refers to the
aqueous solution that has remained in contact with a sorbent long enough to reach chem­
ical equilibrium, allowing PFAS to desorb into it.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
9
==PAGE:20==
2.4.2
KD­Values
The distribution coefficient KD is an important parameter for evaluating the sorption be­
tween PFAS and sorbents such as sludge or biochar [18]. It is defined as the ratio between
a compound’s total equilibrium concentration in the solid phase (cs) and in the aqueous
phase (Cw):
KD = cs
cw [58].
Thus, the higher the KD value of a compound to a certain sorbent, the higher the equi­
librium concentration in the sorbent, which ultimately indicates greater sorption. While
KD assumes a linear sorption and is valid at lower, environmentally relevant concentra­
tions, non­linear sorption can be described by another distribution coefficient KF , which
is based Freundlich isotherm using a correction factor for non­linearity.
Distribution coefficients such as KD are only valid for the specific system in which they
have been determined, hence a great variation in the literature could be found.
2.4.3
Sorption Mechanisms for PFAS to Organic Matter
Previous research has suggested that high surface area, porosity, carbon content and
aromaticity are important for sorption of organic contaminants [47, 20, 21]. High sur­
face area and porosity lead to an increased number of sorption sites and affect sorption
to biochar positively [21]. Literature investigating sorption mechanisms between PFAS
and biochar or sludge specifically is scarce, whereas mobility of PFAS in soil systems
has been widely discussed ([20, 22]). While biochar and soil differ in composition, they
share several physicochemical properties—such as the presence of organic matter, sur­
face functional groups, and porosity that influence PFAS sorption. Therefore, it is reason­
able to assume that sorption mechanisms identified in soils may also apply to biochar,
provided that matrix­specific characteristics are carefully considered. With regards to the
fate of PFAS in soil systems, Bolan et al further stress the importance of the characteristics
(chain length and solubility) of the PFAS compound in question, as well as environmen­
tal factors such as pH [20]. In the context of this thesis, sorption refers to any individual
mechanism, or combinations thereof, without differentiating between them, as only the
overall sorption capacity is deemed significant for evaluating the sorption/leaching po­
tential of PFAS to biochar. Nonetheless, it is crucial to understand these mechanisms as
well as factors affecting them in order to interpret results and discuss eventual differences
between KD­values. In the following sections, the main sorption mechanisms governing
PFAS sorption to organic material are described.
Electrostatic Interactions
PFCAs and PFSAs have very low pKa values (PFCAs<1.6; PFSAs<0.3), and are as such
present in anionic form in most environmental media (4<pH<9) [22]. Thus, electrostatic
attraction occurs between the anionic functional head and positively charged media [22].
However, since biochar surfaces are generally negatively charged [42], direct electro­
static attraction is unlikely. Instead, cation bridging—an alternative form of electrostatic
interaction—must be considered.
This mechanism entails divalent positively charged
cations (Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+) which form a bridge between negatively charged media and
PFAS [22, 25]. This mechanism in particular seems likely due to the high ash content
in sludge biochars, as discussed in 2.3.2, which in turn suggests the presence of these
cations.
Electrostatic interactions dominate for short­chain PFAS due to shorter molecular stretch­
ing distances [22]. Changes in ionic strength and pH affect electrostatic interactions,
especially if pH is higher than the point of zero charge of the sorbent which then leads
10
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:21==
to to electrostatic repulsion [25]. The presence of inorganic anions such as Cl−leads to
competition with PFAS for sorption sites [25].
Hydrophobic Interactions
Hydrophobic interactions play a key role in the binding of PFAS to hydrophobic media [22],
and are the main mechanism governing long­chain PFAS sorption [20]. The low polariz­
ability of F atoms is responsible for the hydrophobic properties of PFAS [22]. Longer­chain
PFAS sorb stronger to hydrophobic material as hydrophobicity increases with increasing
C­F chain length [25, 22, 57, 21]. PFSA are more hydrophobic than PFCA due to their
larger molecular size [57], and tend to sorb stronger to soil and sediment. Higher carbon
contents in the sorbent favour hydrophobic interactions in soils, although aromacity has
been found to better predict PFAS sorption to biochars, since the electron dense π −π
regions from aromatic carbon structures play a major role in this mechanism [21].
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
11
==PAGE:22==
3
Aim and Hypotheses
While sewage sludge may present with significant PFAS concentrations, pyrolysis shows
promising signs for removal from as well as increased sorption to biochar. The main aims
of this master project are therefore to:
1. Determine PFAS concentrations in the leachate of sewage sludge and biochar.
2. Characterize PFAS concentrations in the WWTP inlet and the pyrolysis scrubber
water.
3. Investigate the effect of pyrolysis on KD­values for PFAS sorption.
The hypothses are that pyrolytic conversion of WWTP sludge to biochar markedly:
1. Reduces concentration in the matrix.
2. Increases KD­values.
3. Dramatically reduces Leaching.
Furthermore, it is hypothesized that:
4. Biochar leaching might be lower than relevant EQS, pointing to low environmental
risks associated with the use of biochar as agricultural amendments.
5. Pyrolysis could lead to problem shifting by not inducing full PFAS mineralization but
transformation to shorter­chain species ending up in the scrubber water.
12
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:23==
4
Methods
4.1
Fårevejle WWTP and Pyrolysis Plant
Odserred Municipality is located in the north­western part of Sjælland (Denmark), con­
sisting of around 32 600 inhabitants living in approximately 16 400 households [59]. The
municipality’s wastewater is managed by 9 wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), whose
sewage sludge is stabilized and mechanically dewatered, resulting in a dry matter content
of around 20 % [60]. 4500 tons of dewatered sludge per year are transported in closed
truck containers to the pyrolysis plant adjacent to the Fårevejle WWTP. The sludge is then
periodically fed via conveyor belt to the pyrolysis plant’s 0.6 m3 buffer tank. From there, it
is first continously received by a steamdrying unit and further dried at 200°C for 2 hours.
The dried sludge is finally heated in the pyrolysis oven at 650 °C for 20 minutes [61], re­
sulting in pyrolysis gas and biochar. The overall residence time inside the pyrolysis plant
is 3 hours.
4.2
Sampling and Storage of Native Sludge and Biochar
Samples of sewage sludge (SS) and biochar (BC) were obtained at the Fårevejle sludge
treatment plant and initially collected in food­grade polypropylene buckets. Samples were
then transferred to air­tight glass containers in which they remained until being used for
the experiments. As described in 4.1, the retention time of dewatered sludge in the contin­
uously operating steam­drying and pyrolysis system is approximately 3 hours. To ensure
that the BC samples were produced from the same batch of sludge as the SS samples,
i.e. to obtain matched samples, the BC was collected 3 hours after the SS. This approach
minimizes the effect of variations in sludge composition and enables a more accurate
comparison between the properties and contamination of the feedstock and the resulting
biochar.
Furthermore, wastewater (WW) samples from the inlet to the biological treatment of the
WWTP were taken, as well as from two types of scrubber water: one originating solely
from the pyrolysis scrubber (PS), and another consisting of a mixture of pyrolysis and
steam­drying scrubber water (MS). WW, PS and MS samples were stored in 1L food­
grade PP bottles.
The first experiment was due to begin the day after sample collection, therefore BC sam­
ples were initially stored in a refrigerator, while SS samples were frozen and later thawed
prior to experimentation to facilitate dewaterability, as is further described in section 4.4.
Due to the chemical persistence of PFAS, degradation during storage at moderate tem­
peratures was not considered a significant concern. Consequently, it was not deemed
necessary to keep the samples frozen at all times, for example when experimental pro­
cedures required lab work spanning over more than one day. Instead, refrigeration at 8
°C was employed primarily to prevent biological decay of the sludge. Other experimen­
tal procedures were planned to occur several weeks after collecting the samples. In this
period, both BC and SS samples were stored in a freezer at ­ 18 °C.
4.3
Determination of Dry Weights
To ensure valid comparisons, sorption experiments required equal dry weights of biochar
and sewage sludge. Ten aluminum dishes were weighed using a precision balance (Wdish)
and loaded with approximately 5g wet mass—five with biochar and five with sludge, then
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
13
==PAGE:24==
weighed again (Wwetsorbent+dish) The dishes were dried overnight at 105°C to remove
moisture. The next morning, they were cooled in a desiccator to prevent reabsorption,
then reweighed (Wdrysorbent+dish) to finally calculate the dry mass content of each sorbent
as follows:
DC =
Wdrysorbent+dish−Wdish
Wwetsorbent+dish
.
The results revealed average water contents of 82.6% (83%) and 31.8% (32%) in the
sludge and biochar, respectively.
4.4
Experiment 1: Leaching of Native 23 PFAS from Biochar
and Sewage Sludge
The objective of this experiment was to address the effect of pyrolysis on the leaching
potential of PFAS from sewage sludge and biochar by determining the native aqueous
concentrations of 23 PFAS in sewage sludge (SS) and biochar (BC) leachate. Prelimi­
nary testing of water equilibrated with SS and BC from the Fårevejle treatment train yielded
concentrations below the quantification limit (QL). Therefore, solid­phase extraction (SPE)
was incorporated to up­concentrate potential PFAS in the aqueous phase. The experi­
mental procedure followed four main steps: (1) Establishing equilibrium between sorbent
and water, (2) separating the aqueous phase, (3) performing SPE, and (4) chemically
analyzing the extracts. Equal mass­ratios of dry sorbent to water were used for SS and
BC (see Table 4.3) to allow for comparative evaluation. Each SPE run required 50 mL
of aqueous sample solution per triplicate, which determined the necessary volumes and
number of replicates throughout the procedure. For both the BC and SS setups, two
blank samples consisting of only milli­Q water were prepared and subjected to the full
experimental procedure.
4.4.1
Step 1: Establishing Equilibrium Between Sorbent and Water
SS:
As determined in 4.3, the sludge had a water content of 83%. Instead of adding water to
the wet sludge and allowing equilibrium to form between the added water and the sludge,
the water already present in the wet sludge was used directly as the leaching solution. This
approach significantly simplified the experimental setup by reducing the total suspension
volume (wet sludge only vs. wet sludge plus added water) and increasing the dry­mass­
to­water ratio. Importantly, since the biochar (BC) dry mass­to­water ratio had to match
that of the sewage sludge (SS), minimizing the water content—and thus the dilution—
on the SS side allowed the BC experiments to be carried out with smaller sample sizes.
This helped avoid a substantial increase in the number of test vials required for the BC
experiments. Furthermore, the sludge water was deemed to have been in contact with
the sludge solid matrix for a sufficient amount of time for equilibrium to be assumed.
A clean and dry 50 mL clear conical plastic (polypropylene) centrifuge tube was weighed,
and 40 g of wet SS were weighed with the value noted. Considering the sludge water
content of 83%, this was equivalent to 7 g of dry sludge and 33 g of water.
BC: To match the dry mass­ratio used in the SS setup, 10.22 g of wet BC (equivalent to
7 g of dry BC) were combined with 30 g of milli­Q water in each of 9 polypropylene (PE)
50 mL vials (3 vials per SPE replicate). It is important to note that the 3 g of water already
present in the wet BC were considered so that together with the added water, 33 g of
water would be present in a vial. These were placed on a roller in a 10°C room for 168
hours. This duration was assumed to allow sufficient time for equilibrium to be established
between BC and water.
14
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:25==
4.4.2
Step 2: Separation of the Aqueous Phase
After equilibrium: SS: A first attempt to centrifuge the refrigerated sludge to access water
yielded an insufficient volume. To improve yield, the SS was frozen overnight and thawed
prior to centrifugation, since sludge dewaterability increases significantly when it has been
frozen beforehand , as shown by Hu et al. [62].
Centrifugation was performed at 4000 RPM and 24°C for 10 minutes. 30 mL of sample
solution was extracted using a 5 mL pipette and distributed into 6 fresh vials (2 per trip­
licate). In total, 18 (6 vials per SPE replicate) SS vials were prepared to fulfill volume
requirements and provide contingency.
BC: Following centrifugation under the same conditions (4000 RPM, 24°C, 10 min), ap­
proximately 25 mL of sample solution per vial was recovered. The sample solution was
then transferred into 6 fresh vials (2 per triplicate), each now containing around 35 mL.
All aqueous solutions were stored in a freezer at –18°C until SPE.
4.4.3
Steps 3 and 4: Solid­Phase Extraction (SPE) and Chemical Analysis
SPE procedures and the chemical analysis methods are described in section 4.7.
4.5
Additional Measurements: Aqueous Concentrations of
23 PFAS in WWTP Inlet and Pyrolysis Scrubber
As described in 4.1, wastewater (WW) and two kinds of scrubber water samples (mixed
scrubber MS and pyrolysis scrubber PS) were taken to cover the full treatment train. Aque­
ous PFAS concentrations were assumed to be below QL if directly injected into the analyt­
ical instrument, thus SPE was performed on these samples too, following the procedure
described in section 4.7.1.
4.6
Experiment 2: Effect of Pyrolysis on PFAS Sorption
Behavior in Sewage Sludge and Biochar
The aim of the experiment was to determine KD values of sorption of 23 PFAS to sewage
sludge and biochar and evaluate possible changes in KD due to pyrolysis of sludge to
biochar. By varying solid­to­liquid phase ratios across several orders of magnitude, the
experimental design aimed to capture a broad range of KD values.
4.6.1
Experimental Setup
For each sorbent (SS and BC), five cleaned, food­grade 1 L polypropylene (PP) bottles
were prepared. Each bottle was filled with Milli­Q water spiked with a mixture of 23 PFAS
to achieve a target aqueous concentration of 1 µg/L. The intended water volume per bottle
was 600 mL. For the two highest phase ratios, the inherent water content of the sorbents
was accounted for when calculating the Milli­Q water mass to be added. For the three
lower phase ratios, the sorbents’ water content was considered negligible and therefore
ignored. To capture a reference for the initial aqueous PFAS concentration, triplicate 1
mL aliquots of the spiked water (before sorbent addition) were collected from each bottle
and stored in 2 mL polypropylene vials. The weight of each bottle containing water and
PFAS spike was also recorded. Subsequently, varying masses of wet sludge or biochar—
corresponding to defined dry masses—were added to the respective bottles to achieve the
intended phase ratios (see Table 4.1). For high­precision dosing at low phase ratios (down
to 20–30 mg of dry sorbent), a separate metal tray was used as a weighing intermediary.
The mass of the empty tray was recorded before adding the wet sorbent, and the mass of
the tray post­transfer was used to quantify any residue, especially relevant for SS, which
tended to adhere to the tray. the working principle of this experiment is schematically
represented in Figure 4.1.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Schematic representation of working principle of the sorption experiment.
First, bottles filled with milli­Q water are spiked with 23 PFAS (1). Then, varying masses of
either biochar or sewage sludge are added to the bottles, leading to different phase­ratios
(2). Finally, after equilibration (2 weeks), higher phase­ratios lead to more sorption and
lower relative aqueous PFAS concentrations (3).
4.6.2
Equilibration and Sample Processing
Table 4.1: Mass ratios and phase ratios used in Experiment 1 for sewage sludge and
biochar
Bottle #
Contents
Sorbent Added (g)
Dry Mass Sorbent (g)
Water via Sorbent (g)
MilliQ Added (g)
Phase Ratio (1/x)
1
sludge
345.500
60.117
285.383
314.910
1/10
2
sludge
34.329
5.973
28.356
571.020
1/100
3
sludge
3.535
0.615
2.920
599.630
1/1,000
4
sludge
0.363
0.063
0.300
599.480
1/10,000
5
sludge
0.038
0.007
0.031
599.980
1/100,000
6
biochar
87.949
59.981
27.968
571.600
1/10
7
biochar
8.810
6.008
2.802
599.840
1/100
8
biochar
0.879
0.600
0.280
599.610
1/1,000
9
biochar
0.086
0.059
0.0280
601.460
1/10,000
10
biochar
0.021
0.014
0.007
600.630
2/100,000
Once sorbents were added, all bottles were sealed and placed on a horizontal shaker
at 130 RPM in a temperature­controlled room at 10°C for 2 weeks. This duration was
considered sufficient for achieving equilibrium. Following equilibration, each bottle was
sampled in triplicate. For each replicate, 20 mL of the aqueous phase were pipetted into
three clean, dry 50 mL conical centrifuge tubes (polypropylene). These were centrifuged
at 3200 RPM for 6 minutes to separate the solid phase. After centrifugation, 1 mL aliquots
of the supernatant were transferred into 2 mL polypropylene vials and stored for subse­
quent chemical analysis. A blank bottle and a a spiked control were also prepared and
subjected to the same experimental procedure. All samples were finally analyzed follow­
ing the analytical methods outlined in section 4.7.
16
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:27==
4.7
Analytical Methods
4.7.1
Solid­Phase Extraction (SPE)
Prior to instrumental analysis, samples were subjected to solid­phase extraction (SPE) us­
ing mixed­mode graphitized carbon black/weak­anion exchange cartridges (Oasis GCB/WAX,
50 mg / 200 mg / 6 mL, Waters Corp). Cartridges were conditioned sequentially with
15 mL of 1% ammonia in methanol followed by 5 mL of 0.3 M formic acid. Subsequently,
1000 mL of each water sample was loaded at a flow rate of 5 mL/min. After sample
loading, the cartridges were washed with 10 mL Milli­Q water and vacuum­dried. Elution
of PFAS was carried out using 10 mL of 0.1 M formic acid in methanol, followed by 1%
ammonia in methanol. The combined eluates were evaporated to near dryness under a
gentle nitrogen stream and reconstituted in 1 mL of methanol:water (50:50, v/v) prior to
analysis.
4.7.2
LC­MS/MS Analysis
PFAS were quantified using a Shimadzu LCMS­8045 system equipped with a Luna Omega
PS C18 reversed­phase column (2.1 × 50 mm, 1.6 µm, 100 Å; Phenomenex) and a Zorbax
Eclipse Plus C18 guard column (2.1 × 5 mm, 1.8 µm; Agilent Technologies). Chromato­
graphic separation was achieved with a binary mobile phase consisting of (A) 10 mM
ammonium acetate at pH 4 in water and (B) 95% methanol with 10 mM ammonium ac­
etate at pH 4. The gradient program was as follows: 80% A for 0.5 min, ramped to 30% B
in 1.5 min, to 90% B in 5 min, then to 100% B in 0.5 min, held for 1.5 min, followed by
3 minutes of column re­equilibration. The flow rate was maintained at 0.7 mL/min, with
a column oven temperature of 40 °C. A delay column (4.6 × 50 mm, 3 µm; Eclipse Plus
C18, Agilent Technologies) was placed between the pump and injector. Injection volume
was 20 µL at 5 µL/s. The total run­time per sample was 12.1 minutes.
A post­injection needle wash with 100% acetonitrile was used to clean the exterior of the
injection needle.
4.7.3
Mass Spectrometric Detection
Detection was performed using electrospray ionization (ESI) in negative mode. The inter­
face voltage was set to –1 kV. The interface temperature was 190 °C, with a nebulizer gas
flow of 3 L/min, a heating gas flow of 15 L/min, and a desolvation line (DL) temperature
of 200 °C. The desolvation temperature was 337 °C and the drying gas flow was 5 L/min.
Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) mode was used, with compound­specific parameters
such as collision energy, dwell time, and Q1/Q3 pre­bias voltages optimized individually.
A full list of MRM transitions and retention times is included in the appendix in section A.2.
4.7.4
Data Processing
Data acquisition and processing were carried out using LabSolutions Insight software
(Shimadzu). Peak integration was initially performed automatically using the i­Peak Finder
algorithm with a valley­to­height ratio of 5% and smoothing applied. All peak integrations
were manually verified and corrected when necessary. Retention times for all analytes
were validated automatically with a maximum allowable deviation of ±5% from the ex­
pected retention time.
4.8
Quality Control/Quality Assurance
Quality Control/Quality Assurance (QC/QA) measures were implemented to ensure an­
alytical accuracy and reproducibility, and identify and minimize contamination. Further­
more, data quality assessment is defined in this section.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
17
==PAGE:28==
4.8.1
Sample Preparation
Interactions such as contamination by or sorption to the materials used for taking, han­
dling and storage of samples were minimized as much as feasibility allowed. For instance,
food­grade PP was the material chosen for the buckets used in collecting the biochar and
sewage sludge as well as for the bottles within the spiking experiment. PP was also the
material of the 50 mL vials used in the leaching experiment and for centrifugation occur­
ring in both the leaching and sorption experiments. PP was used as it is frequently by
the US Environmental Protection Agency used in method 1633 on PFAS analysis using
(high­performance) liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectrom­
etry (MS/MS).
Furthermore, laboratory surfaces, as well as reusable tools such as spoons, tweezers
or metal trays, and all of the containers (except the single­use lab­grade PP vials) were
cleaned with ethanol before each experiment.
4.8.2
Replicates
Leaching Experiment
The leaching experiment was conducted in experimental triplicates, i.e. the SPE was run
in triplicate, where one sample per SPE run was later analyzed. As described in Section
4.4, this meant preparing 6 (BC) to 9 (S) experimental vials.
Sorption Experiment
The sorption experiment was conducted in sampling triplicates rather than experimental
triplicates, as setting up three bottles per phase­ratio and sorbent­type was deemed not
feasible within the constraints of laboratory space, time and scale of the experiment. As
such, the reference water concentration at the start of the experiment and the concentra­
tion after sorbent treatment were both taken in triplicates.
Additional measurements of the wastewater, mixed scrubber water and pyrolysis scrubber
water were also conducted in sample triplicates.
4.8.3
Blanks and Spiked Controls
Blanks underwent all experimental and analytical steps to quantify background contami­
nation from labware, reagents, or the analytical system.
Leaching Experiment:
Since the experimental set­up differed for BC and SS, duplicate blanks were included for
each. Furthermore, a supplementary blank, as well as a control spiked was included in
each SPE run.
Sorption Experiment:
One milliQ bottle was included in this experiment, which otherwise underwent the same
experimental procedure as the bottles containing sorbent and spiking solution, including
taking triplicate samples both at the start and at the end of the experiment. Additionally,
a control bottle was set­up, which similarly to the blank bottle contained water, but was
also spiked. This was done to evaluate whether PFAS are lost from the aqueous solution.
Again, triplicate samples were taken at the start and end of the experiment.
Additional Measurements:
Similarly to the leaching experiment, a blank was included in each SPE run. However, no
other blanks were set­up for the wastewater, mixed scrubber water and pyrolysis scrubber,
since these samples were not subjected to any experimental procedure.
4.8.4
Analysis Order
Analysis was done following an ascending order of predicted aqueous concentrations, to
limit sample­to­sample carryover.
18
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:29==
Leaching Experiment
First, the experimental blanks (2 SS and 2 BC) were measured, followed by the BC sam­
ples and the SS samples. Lastly, the SPE blank and control were analyzed.
Additional Measurements
First, WW samples were measured, followed MS and PS samples, as it was assumed
that higher PFAS concentrations would be found in scrubber water than in wastewater.
Lastly, the SPE blank and control were analyzed.
Sorption Experiment
Triplicate relative concentrations were calculated by dividing the concentration measured
at the end of the experiment by that at the start for each replicate, as detailed in Section
4.9.3. To reduce systematic error, the replicate pairs comprising start and end samples
for a single relative concentration were analyzed sequentially.
The analysis began with a blank replicate pair, followed by a control replicate pair. A total
of three such blank­control blocks were distributed throughout the analytical sequence:
one at the start, one positioned between the two sorbent types (after BC and before SS
analysis), and one at the end of the run.
With regards to sorbent type, BC samples were processed before SS samples. Within
each sorbent category, samples with the highest phase ratios were run first, followed by
those with lower ratios.
4.8.5
Quantification
Quantification was performed using 8­point calibration curves in the range of 0.02 to
5 µg/L, using commercial PFAS calibration mixes (PFAS Mixture Food Testing EU 2022/1431,
LGC Standards). Isotope­labelled internal standards were added to each sample (Method
8327 Surrogate Spiking Mixture, CIL), and used for quantification via isotope dilution.
Quality assurance was ensured through analysis of quality control standards from a differ­
ent commercial mix (PFAS Mixture 151, LGC Standards). Instrument performance was
monitored using blanks (Milli­Q water + internal standards) and drift controls (calibration
standards analyzed periodically throughout the run sequence).
The quantification limit (QL) was given by the instrument and varies for the individual
PFAS in question. A full list of QL can be found in the Appendix in Table A.1. Sample
values below QL are indicated as <QL in the data.
4.8.6
Minimizing Spiking Inacuracies
Sorption Experiment
Relative concentrations were defined as the ratio of the treated concentration (at the end of
the experiment, i.e. 2 weeks) to the reference concentration (at the start of the experiment,
i.e t=0). This minimized the effect of inaccuracies while spiking, since only the decrease
in concentration relative to the start concentration is considered.
4.8.7
Criteria for further using data
Leaching Experiment and Additional Measurements:
The criteria for accepting sample data for quantitative and qualitative discussions were:
• 1) Sample data > QL
• 2) Sample data > 2· blanks
• 3) PFAS was analyzable in sorbent leachate
If criterion 1) was not met, no quantifiable leaching was detected in that sample. Data
from a PFAS not meeting criterion 2) did not lead to outright discarding of said PFAS from
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
19
==PAGE:30==
further use in results or discussion, since the factor of 2 is an arbitrary choice. In these
cases, the data was further analyzed and other influences pointing to the likeliness of valid
data were also considered, such as the scale of deviation from this factor of 2, or if the
blank was contaminated. For criterion 3), if data was marked as not­analyzed (n.a), then
leaching of the PFAS in question from the specific sorbent could not be assessed.
Sorption Experiment:
The criteria for accepting sample data were:
• 1) Concentration of blanks < 5% of target spike concentration (1 µg/L)
• 2) Concentration of spiked control at t=0 > 0.5 µg/L
• 3) Concentration of spiked control at t = 2 weeks > 0.7 · concentration of spiked
control at t = 0 weeks
• 4) Concentration of any sample < 3 µg/L
Criterion 1) aimed to evaluate whether the experimental system was significantly affected
by background concentration or contaminated otherwise. Criterion 2) aimed at evalutating
whether the PFAS was present in the spike. 0.5 µg/L is an arbitrary cut­off, and served
thus as an initial threshold to further investigate the data if this criterion was not met.
Criterion 3) was used to investigate PFAS loss after 2 weeks. If it was not met, the data
was further analyzed to determine the extend of loss. If the compound was fully lost after
2 weeks (Concentration of spiked control at t = 2 weeks QL), then it was discarded from
further analysis. However, if it was still present in reasonably large enough amounts, data
was still used, as further outlined in section 4.9.3. Criterion 4) served to eliminate data
outliers.
Furthermore, the relative standard deviation (RSD) of the relative concentrations was
calculated by:
RSD = STD
mean
, where STD is the standard deviation crel and mean is the mean rcrel. As a next step,
mean RSD of the various PFAS in a given bottle were calculated and compared to the
RSD of individual PFAS. If RSDPFASX > 2 · meanRSD, then this compound was further
analyzed and results were evaluated more carefully due to large variation in the data.
However, this did not mean that data was automatically discarded.
4.8.8
Deviations and Corrections
leaching Experiment
Regarding the leaching experiment, if for a given PFAS, values of both BC and SS tripli­
cates were below QL, the compound was in its entirety deemed to not have been present
in the water in quantifiable amounts, and was not further represented on figures or dis­
cussed. If all triplicates for a given sorbent (BC or SS) were below QL, the compound was
deemed to have not leached from the sorbent in question. However, if only one or two of
the triplicates were below QL and other data quality requirements were fulfilled, then the
<QL values were transformed into 0.5 x QL to allow for calculation of mean.
If a PFAS in a sample could not be analyzed (marked as n.a. in the data), then the whole
PFAS was discarded from further data treatment, analysis and discussion.
Sorption Experiment
No deviations or corrections were applied for the sorption experiment.
20
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:31==
4.9
Data Analysis
This section introduces the various software tools for data analysis, as well as the equa­
tions used on the raw data.
4.9.1
Softwares
Microsoft Excel (v. 16.98) was used to store raw data and perform initial data screening
and treatment. This included outlier detection, application of data validation criteria for the
leaching experiment, and calculation of relative standard deviations (RSD) for the sorption
experiment.
Python (v. 3.11.13), operated within the open­source integrated development environment
Spyder (v. 6.0.7), was used to process the large sorption dataset (over 1,500 data points).
Tasks included applying data validation criteria, calculating relative concentrations and
associated statistics (mean and standard deviation), and generating several customized
visualizations.
GraphPad Prism (v. 10.5) was used to perform non­linear regression analyses for esti­
mating distribution coefficients (KD) from the sorption experiment. It was also employed
in the creation of selected figures.
4.9.2
Leaching Experiment
Determination of Leachate Concentration
Analyses were performed on 1 mL of sample extract obtained via SPE, and the instrument
response was reported in nanograms (ng). As a result, the raw data reflected PFAS
concentrations in the concentrated SPE eluate, not in the original leachate sample. To
back­calculate the actual concentration in the original leachate (cleachate), the following
equation was used:
cleachate = cdata
VSP E [ ng·mL−1
mL·mL−1 ],
where cdata is the measured concentration in the SPE eluate and VSPE is the effective
sample volume processed per milliliter of SPE extract. This calculation corrects for the
pre­concentration factor introduced during sample preparation and yields the true PFAS
concentration in the BC or SS leachate.
Statistical Analysis for Leaching Experiment
To assess whether leaching of individual PFAS compounds differed significantly between
BC and sewage sludge SS, statistical comparisons were performed compound by com­
pound using either a parametric or non­parametric test depending on the distribution of
the data.
For each PFAS compound, data from the BC and SS groups were extracted and tested
for normality using the Shapiro–Wilk test, provided each group had at least three valid
replicates. If both BC and SS datasets for a compound were normally distributed (p >
0.05), an independent samples t­test was used to test the null hypothesis that SS leaches
equal or less PFAS than BC. If normality was not met for either group, a Mann–Whitney
U test was applied instead. In both cases, a one­sided test was used with the alternative
hypothesis that SS leaches more than BC. Statistical significance was set at α = 0.05.
4.9.3
Sorption Experiment
KD Determination by non­linear regression for Sorption Experiment
To estimate distribution coefficients (KD) for individual PFAS, non­linear regression was
performed using GraphPad Prism. The analysis was based on relative concentrations,
calculated for each replicate pair as the ratio between the aqueous PFAS concentration
after sorption equilibrium and the initial concentration before sorbent addition:
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
21
==PAGE:32==
crel = ctreated
cref
,
where ctreated represents the aqueous concentration in a replicate after the equilibrium
time of 2 weeks has passed, and cref represents the reference aqueous concentration
before sorbent addition at t=0. For each PFAS, the mean and standard deviation of crel
were computed across triplicates, and plotted as Y­values against the corresponding solid­
to­liquid phase ratio (PR) on the X­axis. The following model was fitted via non­linear
regression:
crel =
1
1+KD·PR
, where KD was the parameter to be estimated. Regression was performed using Graph­
Pad’s non­linear regression module, with weighting by 1/Y 2. An initial KD estimate of
100 was used as the starting point.
For PFAS that showed losses in control samples over time but otherwise fulfilling data
requirements, an adjusted model accounting for compound loss was applied:
crel =
TOP
1+KD·PR
, where TOP represents the maximum relative concentration at PR = 0 and was treated
as an additional fitted parameter (initial guess: 0.8). This modification allows a better fit
when container sorption affects PFAS levels independently of the sorbent.
For both PFAS with and without loss over time, the non linear regression yielded KD
values. 95% confidence intervals were given too, although occasionally the software
failed to estimate one of the interval boundaries.
Statistical Analysis for Sorption Experiment
Statistical Analysis was done by comparing 95% confidence intervals of the estimated KD
values. No overlap indicated statistically different sorption, be that comparing sorption of
the same PFAS to SS and BC, or comparing different PFAS to either BC or SS.
22
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:33==
5
Results
5.1
Data Usability of Leaching Experiment and Additional
Measurements
5.1.1
Interferences and No PFAS Quantifiable in Leachate and Additional
Measurements
The leaching experiment data revealed six distinct cases regarding the quantifiability of
PFAS concentrations in leachates from biochar (BC) and sewage sludge (SS):
• Case A: Quantifiable concentrations in both BC and SS leachates
– PFBA, PFBS, PFHxA, PFHpA, 6:2 FTS, PFOA
• Case B: Quantifiable in one leachate, below the quantification limit (QL) in the other
– PFHxS, PFNA, PFDA
• Case C: Below QL in both leachates
– PFPeS, PFHpS, PFNS, PFNS
• Case D: Not analyzable (n.a.) in one leachate, below QL in the other
– PFOS, PFUnDA, PFDoDA, PFUnDS, PFTrDS
• Case E: n.a. in one leachate, quantifiable in the other
– PFPeA
• Case F: n.a. in both leachates
– PFOSA, PFDoDS, PFTrDA, PFTeDA
Only PFAS falling under cases A and B were used for direct comparison of leaching poten­
tial between the two sorbents. Case C was interpreted as indicating no detectable leach­
ing from either material. Cases D and E allowed for limited, sorbent­specific assessment
of leaching behavior. In case F, no conclusions about leaching could be drawn.
Concomitantly, the analysis of the wastewater and two kinds of scrubber waters revealed
three cases regarding data quantifiability.
• Case A: Quantifiable concentrations in all samples
– PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHpA, 6:2 FTS, PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, PFDoDA
• Case C: Below QL in all samples
– PFOS, PFNS, PFDS, PFUnDA, PFTrDS
• Case F: n.a. in all samples
– PFBS, PFPS, PFHxS, PFHpS, PFOSA, PFDoDS, PFTrDA, PFTeDA, PFUnDS
A fourth, distinct case emerged for PFBA, where quantifiable concentrations were deter­
mined in all samples except for one n.a. PS sample. As a result, PFBA results need to
be evaluated more carefully.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
23
==PAGE:34==
5.1.2
Sample Outliers
The SS blank 1 measurement, which was also the first sample analyzed, showed signif­
icantly elevated concentrations across many PFAS and appeared to be an outlier. This
was likely due to contamination of the analytical instruments from a preceding analysis.
SS blank 1 was therefore excluded from the dataset. As a result, the comparison between
SS leachate concentrations and the remaining SS blank 2 must be interpreted cautiously.
Relying on a single blank measurement reduces the robustness of the c > 2 × blank cri­
terion, as random fluctuations, instrument noise, or occasional contamination may have
a disproportionate effect on signal evaluation.
A similar issue occured for the first measurements of the additional measurements subset,
where the wastewater 1 sample (WW1) showed significantly elevated concentrations and
was therefore excluded from the dataset.
5.1.3
Evaluating Signal Strength
The leaching experiment and additional measurements yielded concentrations without
interferences and non sub­QL data (for at least one of the samples) for several PFAS.
To evaluate if the mean of these sample concentrations can be considered above QL as
well as being different from background concentrations/contamination, ratios with the QL
and the mean blank concentrations (in the case of the leaching experiment results) or
SPE blank (in the case of the additional measurements) were calculated, as described in
Section 4.8.7.
Leaching experiment signal strengths are summarized in Table 5.1, where sample to QL
or blank ratios highlighted in bold represent signals deemed distinct from QL and blank.
Additional measurements signal strenghts are listed in Table 5.2.
Table 5.1: Leachate PFAS concentration signal evaluation for BC and SS based on blank
and QL ratio thresholds. Bold values indicate the clear presence of a signal, while values
in italics indicate a likely signal. Values < QL were not indicated in signal evaluation and
are shown as < QL.
Compound
BC / Blank
BC / QL
SS / Blank
SS / QL
PFBA
2.3
2.7
0.9
1.0
PFBS
1.8
0.9
5.5
2.4
PFHxA
4.2
3.1
31.7
31.7
PFHpA
2.4
4.4
1.92
11.0
PFHxS
< QL
75.0
32.0
6:2 FTS
< QL
< QL
4.0
5.1
PFOA
1.8
1.8
24.7
24.6
PFNA
< QL
< QL
16.0
7.1
PFDA
< QL
< QL
53.3
22.8
Detected in leachates:
PFHxA had signals in both leachates. PFHpA had a signal in BC leachate, while just
falling short in the SS leachate concentration/blank ratio. The deviations was only 4%
and therefore PFHpA is deemed to have a likely signal in SS leachate. PFOA had a
signal in SS leachate, while just falling short in the BC leachate concentration/blank ratio.
The deviations was only 10% and therefore PFHpA is deemed to have a likely signal in
BC leachate.
PFBA exceeded both blank and QL thresholds in BC leachate, confirming a signal. In SS
leachate, PFBA remained below both thresholds and was not considered a detection.
24
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:35==
PFBS showed a signal in SS leachate but remained below both thresholds in BC leachate.
PFHxS, 6:2 FTS, PFNA, and PFDA were detected in SS leachate only. None of these
compounds were detected in BC leachate, with all replicates falling below QL.
Table 5.2: Wastewater (WW), mixed scrubber water (MS) and pyrolysis scrubber water
(PS) PFAS concentration signal evaluation for BC and SS based on blank and QL ratio
thresholds. Bold values indicate the clear presence of a signal, while values in italics
indicate a likely signal.
Compound
WW / Blank
WW / QL
MS / Blank
MS / QL
PS / Blank
PS / QL
PFBA
0.7
9.3
0.5
6.7
1.8
24.5
PFPeA
4.8
24.5
7.6
38.9
4.2
21.8
PFHxA
4.5
16.0
6.8
24.0
9.3
33.7
PFHpA
0.4
8.1
0.5
10.6
0.6
12.3
6:2 FTS
1.6
5.5
1.0
3.4
0.9
3.3
PFOA
5.2
12.2
7.9
18.9
9.4
22.9
PFNA
2.4
2.8
3.2
3.7
2.1
2.5
PFDA
2.0
2.3
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.8
PFDoDA
11.1
11.2
9.6
9.7
10.8
12.1
Detected in water samples (WW, MS, PS):
PFPeA, PFHxA, PFOA, PFNA, PFDA and PFDoDA were detected in all water samples.
PFHpA and 6:2 FTS did not meet the blank threshold in neither WW, MS nor PS. PFHpA
had a high blank concentration of over 10 times QL.
PFBA did also not meet the blank threshold in WW, MS and PS, however deviated only
10 % in PS. It should be noted that one of the WW triplicates yielded an n.a. result, and
the mean WW concentration was thus calculated based on the remaining two replicates.
It can thus not conclusively be determined if PFBA could be detected in WW or not. PFBA
had a high blank concentration of over 10 times QL.
5.2
Results: Leaching Experiment and Additional
Measurements
5.2.1
Leaching Experiment
9 PFAS yielded qunatifiable concentrations in at least one of the leachates. SS leachate
concentrations range from 0.0009 to 0.0112 µg/L, while the range for the BC samples is
0.0002 ­ 0.0027 µg/L. The highest water concentration (0.0112 µg/L) could be found for
PFHxS in SS leachate. Other relatively high concentrations were detected in the SS sam­
ples for PFHxA (0.0111 µg/L), PFOA (0.0086 µg/L) and PFDA (0.0080 µg/L). The highest
concentrations in BC leachate were found for PFBA (0.0027 µg/L), PFBS (0.0018 µg/L)
and PFHpA (0.0017 µg/L). For PFAS where both SS and BC leachate were quantifiable,
SS to BC ratios ranged from 0.4 to 11.8, with the highest ratios found for PFOA (11.8) and
PFHxA (9.0).
The mean water concentrations of the SS/BC samples and their respective standard de­
viations are illustrated in 5.1 and show that 3 PFAS (PFHxA, PFHpA and PFOA) leach
statistically significantly more from SS than from BC. Moreover, leaching from SS occurs
for 4 other PFAS (PFHxS, 6:2 FTS, PFNA and PFDA), but is either not statistically differ­
ent from BC samples or leaching from BC could not be determined due to BC data being
< QL.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1: Mean PFAS concentrations (µg/L) in BC and SS leachaes, with standard
deviations. Red horizontal dashed lines indicate compound­specific QL. Green and blue
horizontal dashed lines indicate compound­specific EQS in drinking water (PFNA and
PFHxS: 0.001 µg/L, PFAO: 0.004 µg/L). Statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) are
marked with an asterisk.
5.2.2
Additional Measurements
The mean water concentrations and standard deviations in WW, MS, and PS are listed
in Table A.9 in the appendix. PFPeA has the highest concentration in WW and MS with
0.0090 and 0.0143 µg/L, respectively. In PS, the highest concentration was for PFHxA
(0.012 µg/L).
5.2.3
Statistical Comparison Between BC and SS in Leaching Experiment
Table 5.3 summarizes the compounds tested, the type of test applied, mean leachate
concentrations per group, and whether the difference was statistically significant.
Table 5.3: Summary of statistical comparison between SS and BC leachate concentra­
tions for individual PFAS compounds.
Compound
BC Mean (µg/L)
SS Mean (µg/L)
BC Normal?
SS Normal?
Test Used
p­value
Significant (p<0.05)
PFBA
0.0027
0.0009
Yes
Yes
t­test
0.994
No
PFBS
0.0018
0.0041
No
Yes
Mann–Whitney
0.329
No
PFHxA
0.0012
0.0111
Yes
Yes
t­test
0.002
Yes
PFHpA
0.0018
0.0039
Yes
Yes
t­test
0.030
Yes
PFHxS
< QL
0.0113
Yes
6:2 FTS
0.0004
0.0018
No
Yes
Mann–Whitney
0.092
No
PFOA
0.0007
0.0086
Yes
Yes
t­test
0.018
Yes
PFNA
< QL
0.0250
Yes
PFDA
< QL
0.0080
Yes
5.3
Data Usability of Sorption Experiment
5.3.1
PFAS not present in Spike or lost after 2 weeks
Multiple PFAS showed concentrations near QL in the spiked control reference samples,
meaning they were most likely not present in the spiking solution, and were excluded
from further analysis and discussion. For other PFAS, although present in the spiked
control reference samples, concentrations after 2 weeks dropped to near QL levels. This
suggests that these PFAS were somehow lost from the aqueous phase (for example by
sorbing to the bottle), thus not enabling the evaluation of sorption to BC/SS. Also these
26
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:37==
PFAS were excluded from further analysis and discussion.
Data of the following 12 PFAS met the quality requirements: 6:2 FTS, PFBA, PFBS,
PFDA, PFHpA, PFHpS, PFHxA, PFHxS, PFNA, PFOA, PFPeA and PFPS. Of these,
PFDA, PFHpS and PFNA did exhibit contaminant loss in the control, however deemed
moderate enough to allow for adapted non­linear regression fitting as previously described
in section 4.9.3.
5.3.2
Sample Outliers
Some replicate measurements (either in the reference or treated) showed concentrations
that were more than 3 times higher than the targeted spike concentration of 1 µg/L and
were thus excluded from further data treatment, along with their paired replicate. These
can be found in the appendix A.
5.3.3
RSD and Goodness of Fit of Non­linear Regression
The quality and reproducibility of the experimental data were evaluated through replicate
analysis and RSD. Most compounds exhibited RSDs below 25%, with many under 15%,
indicating a high degree of precision in sample handling and measurement. 6:2­FTS had
higher RSD in 3 of the 5 biochar bottles. Bottle number 6, referring to the highest biochar
phase­ratio, exhibited higher RSD for 6:2­FTS, PFBS and PFHpS (104 %, 92 %, and 61
%,respectively), indicating higher variability for these PFAS this bottle. A full table of RSD
is provided in the appendix A.12.
Nonlinear regression models were fitted to the experimental data, and the goodness of fit
was assessed using several criteria: the coefficient of determination (R2), the weighted
residual sum of squares (WSS, weighted by 1/c2
rel), and the standard error of estimate
(Sy.x). The median R2 for SS data was 0.9777, indicating an excellent overall fit. In
contrast, the median R2 for BC data was 0.9001, still indicative of a good fit but with greater
variability across compounds. These results suggest that the nonlinear regression model
captured the sorption behavior more reliably for SS than for BC. For the majority of PFAS
compounds, the models achieved R2 values greater than 0.95, WSS(1/Y 2) values below
0.05, and Sy.x values below 0.1, supporting a strong agreement between the models and
the observed data.
Specifically, strong agreement between model and data was observed for PFPeA, PFHpS,
PFHxS, PFHxA, PFNA, PFBA, PFHpA, and PFOA, all of which demonstrated high R2
values and low residual errors. The data for these compounds were both precise and
well­described by the nonlinear regression models. In contrast, a poor fit was observed
for PFBS. In this case, the R2 value fell below 0.85 and residual errors were higher, in­
dicating a weaker model representation of the data. These deviations may reflect in­
creased variability in experimental handling or limitations in the model’s ability to capture
the compound­specific behavior under the given conditions.
A full table of goodness of fit indicators is provided in the appendix in section A.13.
5.4
Results of Sorption Experiment
5.4.1
Relative Concentrations as a Function of Phase Ratios
Data requirements were met for 12 PFAS, enabling the plotting of their relative concen­
trations as a function of phase ratio and subsequent nonlinear regression analysis.
PFHxA and PFHpS showed very good model fit to the data and their crel are plotted vs
PR in Figure 5.2. R2
BC of PFHxA and PFHpS were 0.981 and 0.996, respectively, while
R2
SS were 0.984 and 0.979. Besides their good model fit to the data, these two PFAS are
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.2: PFHxA and PFHpS relative concentrations (with STD) vs phase ratio. PFHxA
was fitted with the model without loss, PFHpS was fitted with the loss model.
Figure 5.3: PFBA relative concentrations (with STD) vs phase ratio, fitted with model
without loss.
chosen in this section due to being fitted by the two different models: PFHxA was fitted
with the model for no PFAS loss in the control, while the model for loss in the control came
to use for PFHpS.
PFHxA showed no decrease in relative concentration in BC bottles for the first three lowest
PR, then begins to decrease with the two highest PR. Meanwhile, the relative concentra­
tion in the SS bottles only started to decrease with the highest PR. At PR 0.01 and 0.1,
PFHxA mean relative concentrations were 2.6 and 6.3 times higher in SS than in BC
bottles.
Similarly, PFHpS relative concentrations in both BC and SS bottles remained constant,
then started to drop off at higher PR. For BC, this began at the third highest PR, while
for SS, this happened only at the second highest PR. At PR 0.01 and 0.1, PFHxA mean
relative concentrations were between 20 and 40 times higher in SS than in BC bottles.
Although the PFBA fitted curve appears lower for SS than for BC, crel standard deviations
in both sorbents exhibit overlap, as shown in Figure 5.3.
From a qualitative point of view, the remaining 9 PFAS exhibited similar behaviour as
PFHxA and PFHpS, i.e. the relative concentration began to drop earlier for BC than for
SS. Their figures can be found in the appendix in Section A.4.1.
28
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:39==
5.4.2
KD Values
The non­linear regression of 12 PFAS yielded KD values and 95% confidence intervals
for sorption to both BC and SS. These 24 KD are listed in ??. It should be noted that
GraphPad failed to calculate a complete confidence interval for several PFAS. Estimated
KD values for these should therefore be interpreted with caution. 11 PFAS exhibit statis­
tically higher distribution coefficients (KD) to BC than to SS, while no statistical difference
can be observed for PFBA. Moreover, best­fit BC KD are generally around one order of
magnitude higher than SS, with PFPS, PFHxS and PFBS showing 1.8, 1.7 and 1.6 orders
of magnitude larger KD.
BC exhibited the highest KD values, namely for PFHxS (2078), PFHpS (1360) and PFPS
(1216). The lowes KD were found for sorption to both sorbents for PFBA (SS: 23.43 and
BC: 13.21), as well as for PFPeA sorption to SS (4.767).
Table 5.4: Distribution coefficients (KD) for PFAS sorption to SS and BC. Log10 Shift de­
scribes the order of magnitude increase in best­fit KD when comparing BC to SS. Negative
Log10 Shift indicates lowes best­fit KD.
PFAS
KD SS (L · kg−1
dw) (95% CI)
KD BC (L · kg−1
dw) (95% CI)
Log10 Shift
PFCA
PFBA
23.4 (12.1–33.8)
13.2 (7.46–18.9)
­0.2
PFPeA
4.77 (3.51–6.01)
56.4 (39.8–72.7)
1.1
PFHxA
12.8 (9.33–16.2)
143 (102–184)
1.0
PFHpA
22.7 (15.5–29.6)
208 (35.5–317)
1.0
PFOA
50.8 (32.8–68.0)
782 (171–1140)
1.2
PFNA
117 (78.0–162)
747 (–2030)
0.8
PFDA
47.6 (22.1–82.0)
757 (–3560)
1.2
PFSA
PFBS
8.51 (0.398–16.4)
348 (228–461)
1.6
PFHpS
134 (53.2–327)
1360 (827–2260)
1.0
PFHxS
46.3 (33.3–59.0)
2080 (–3310)
1.7
PFPeS
18.5 (6.33–29.4)
1216 (243–1860)
1.8
6:2 FTS
51.5 (32.2–68.6)
964 (–1790)
1.3
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
29
==PAGE:40==
6
Discussion
6.1
Reasons for Limited Data Usability for some PFAS
Of the 23 PFAS analyzed in BC and SS leachates, concentrations of 9 PFAS were quan­
tifiable and had a signal differing from QL and blank. A further 4 PFAS were below QL in
all sanples compounds. 10 PFAS were not analyzed (n.a.) in at least one of the leachates.
Similarly, the additional measurements of wastewater (WW) and scrubber waters (MS and
PS) yielded quantifiable results for 9 PFAS, of which 3 PFAS had a signal not differing
from blank concentrations. A further 5 PFAS presented with concentrations below QL
in all samples of WW, MS and PS. 9 PFAS could not be analyzed in at least one of the
samples.
Similarly, the sorption experiment yielded usable data for 12 PFAS, while 11 could not be
utilized for KD determination.
The following sections aim to discuss the reasons for limited data usability.
6.1.1
Interferences in Sludge Leachate and Additional Measurements
Analysis
Several PFAS analytes, particularly the longest­chain compounds (e.g., PFUdA, PFOSA,
PFDoA, PFDoDS, PFTrDA, PFTeDA, PFUnDS, PFTrDS), as well as PFPeA and PFOS,
exhibited analytical interferences resulting in n.a. values. These interferences are likely
due to strong matrix effects and co­eluting compounds in sludge leachate, wastewater
and scrubber water, which can distort or suppress signal during electrospray ionization.
Long­chain PFAS are more prone to sorption and may exhibit greater retention or peak
tailing, complicating integration.
For PFPeA and PFOS, the interference might be linked to their elution within chromato­
graphic regions, which can be crowded with other matrix compounds like humic sub­
stances, surfactants, or other co­extracted organics. These co­eluting compounds can
interfere with the PFAS signal, either by overlapping with the peak, distorting its shape, or
causing ion suppression during electrospray ionization. In the case of PFOS, the presence
of both branched and linear isomers can further complicate detection and integration, es­
pecially if there is background noise in that region. Overall, the likelihood of interference
seems to depend both on PFAS chain length and on how each compound behaves in the
sample matrix during separation and detection.
6.1.2
PFAS Not Present in Spike or Loss After 2 Weeks in Spiked
Experiment Controls
For the sorption experiment, several long­chain PFAS (PFTrDS, PFTrDA, PFTeDA, PF­
DoDS) could not be detected in the reference sample of the control bottle. This could
either mean that 1) these PFAS were not included in the spiking solution, or that 2) they
immediately sorbed to the bottle due to their higher hydrophobicity. As the reference
sample was taken shortly after spiking, 2) seems particularly unlikely.
Other PFAS could be detected in the control reference but were lost after 2 weeks. Again,
these included mostly longer­chain PFAS. In this case, it is assumed that these PFAS
sorbed to the bottle, indicating that PP may not be a suitable material for long­chain PFAS
sorption experiments, which has also been pointed out by Cao et al. [63].
30
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.1: Mean PFAS concentrations (µg/L) and STD across the WWTP and pyrolysis
treatment train, with standard deviations.
6.2
Native Concentrations in Treatment Train
6.2.1
Treatment Train
The full WWTP and pyrolysis treatment train could be assessed for 4 PFAS where con­
centrations could be addequately measured for both the leaching experiment and the
additional measurements. These are illustrated in Figure 6.1.
6.2.2
Leaching Behavior from Sewage Sludge and Biochar
A clear distinction emerged between PFAS leaching from sewage sludge SS and from
biochar BC. Statistically significantly higher leaching was observed exclusively from SS
samples, with PFHxA, PFHpA, and PFOA showing significantly higher concentrations in
SS leachate compared to BC (Figure 5.1). Furthermore, PFHxS, PFNA and PFDA show
leaching from SS while no leaching could be reported for BC. SS leachate concentrations
were up to 11.8 times higher than BC values for compounds where both were quantifi­
able. For instance, PFHxA and PFOA showed SS/BC concentration ratios of 9.0 and
11.9, respectively. In contrast, none of the PFAS measured in BC leachate differed signif­
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
31
==PAGE:42==
icantly from SS. This highlights the limited leachability of PFAS from BC under the tested
conditions.
The length of the PFAS chain played an important role in the leaching behavior. Longer­
chain PFAS such as PFNA and PFDA were only detectable in SS leachate, not in BC,
suggesting that these compounds either (1) do not persist through pyrolysis or (2) become
more tightly bound within the BC matrix. 1) appears to be an unsatisfactory explanation,
as the thermal stability of PFAS has been found to increase with chain length [2], and
thus 2) seems to be the more likely reason for the lack of long­chain PFAS detection in
BC leachate. In contrast, short­chain PFAS such as PFBA and PFHxA were present in
both SS and BC leachate, albeit at much lower concentrations in the latter. This trend
aligns with previous findings suggesting that short­chain PFAS are more mobile, while
longer­chain compounds exhibit stronger sorption.
These results point to pyrolysis of sewage sludge leading to a dual benefit in PFAS man­
agement: (1) a reduction in native PFAS concentrations, and (2) an increase in sorption
capacity or immobilization, leading to lower leaching potential. However, it remains un­
clear whether the reduced leachability from BC results solely from improved sorption or
is also due to lower starting concentrations. Future work should therefore aim to resolve
this ambiguity by analyzing matrix concentrations of both biochar and sludge.
6.2.3
PFAS Distribution Along the Treatment Train
The analysis of PFAS concentrations across the full WWTP and pyrolysis treatment train
offers additional insight into compound­specific behavior (Figure 6.1). A comparison of
WW and SS leachate indicates that certain PFAS may preferentially accumulate in sludge.
For instance, PFOA, PFHxA, PFNA and PFDA were found at higher concentrations in SS
leachate than in WW, suggesting possible sorption to or accumulation within sludge during
treatment.
Moreover, PFOA and PFHxA showed higher PS MS concentrations compared to WW.
This could again point to PFAS accumulation in sludge. Pyrolysis and subsequent (partial)
PFAS removal during pyrolysis could then lead to a higher pyrolysis scrubber water as well
as mixed scrubber water concentration than in the biological treatment influent. Future
work could include mass­balance based comparisons between WWTP effluent, biological
treatment influent and scrubber waters.
When comparing scrubber waters (MS and PS), PFNA exhibited higher concentrations in
MS than PS. This may imply that some PFNA may already volatilize or be removed during
drying. However, this pattern was not consistent across all compounds; for PFHxA and
PFOA, concentrations were similar or slightly higher in PS. This could indicate compound­
specific volatility or retention characteristics during steam­drying.
Special attention should be placed on the behaviour of PFBA across the treatment train,
illustrated in Figure 6.2. PFBA is a short­chain and mobile PFAS and had a mean SS
leachate concentration below QL (comprised of 2 < QL and one quantifiable measure­
ment). Nevertheless, the highest PFBA concentrations can be found in PS. This may
point to thermal degradation of longer­chain PFAS leading to PFBA formation, which as
a small­chain, mobile PFAS would be washed away with the scrubber water or sorb to
the biochar. This would also explain the measurable concentration in BC leachate. Since
the scrubber waters are reintroduced into the WWTP for treatment and there is an ap­
parent lack of sorption to sludge, pyrolysis may be a PFBA source rather than a solution
of pollution. However, it should be noted that the PFBA concentration in the blank was
elevated, thereby not allowing for meaningful interpretation of concentrations in WW and
32
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.2: Left: Mean PFBA concentrations (µg/L) in sludge leachate (SS), pyrolysis
scrubber water (PS) and biochar leachate (BC). Right: Ball­and­Stick 3­D representation
of a PFBA molecule, from PubChem [64].
MS, which would give a fuller picture. Furthermore, the mean PFBA concentration in PS
was derived from 2 rather than 3 values (due to n.a. in one replicate). As a result, replicate
variability has a greater effect on this mean. Furthermore, as mentioned in Section 5.1.3,
due to the elevated bank concentration, the PS/blank ratio fell just below the threshold
factor of 2 (ratio: 1.8), suggesting that the measured concentration likely differed from the
background level, although the possibility that it did not cannot be ruled out.
To sum up, there are indicators pointing to possible PFBA formation as a result of pyrol­
ysis, in which case a WWTP and pyrolysis treatment train could be considered a source
rather than a sink of PFAS. However the data is inconclusive, and more scrubber water
samples and improved blank handling could help to evaluate the degree of PFBA for­
mation during pyrolysis and subsequent release to the environment in further studies.
Moreover, if PFBA formation is confirmed, then source strength should be determined by
evaluating PFBA loads stemming from pyrolysis scrubber water.
Although BC appears to be relatively PFAS­poor and exhibits minimal leaching, this does
not confirm that it is free from PFAS. The reduced leachate concentrations may result from
strong sorption within the carbonized matrix, low native concentrations, or a combination
of both.
If PFAS from PS and MS are continuously returned to the WWTP, and subsequently sorb
to sludge in addition to the PFAS from the biological treatment inlet , then the PFAS con­
tent of both SS and ultimately BC may increase over time. Therefore, without additional
removal or treatment of scrubber water, pyrolysis systems could risk acting as PFAS con­
centrators rather than terminators.
6.2.4
Comparing to Environmental Limits
Figure 5.1 shows that PFOA, PFHxS and PFNA concentrations in SS all surpass the US
EPA drinking water limit, indicating the risk for drinking water contamination if this sludge
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
33
==PAGE:44==
would be applied to agricultural fields.
Similarly, the Danish EPA lists drinking water EQS for the sum of 4 PFAS (PFOA, PFOS,
PFNA and PFHxS) as as well as the sum of 22 PFAS, as described in Section 2.1.7. The
sums of mean BC and SS leachate concentrations for relevant PFAS are listed in Table
6.1
Table 6.1: Comparison of summed PFAS concentrations in SS and BC leachates to EQS
values
EQS 22 PFAS (µg/L)
EQS 4 PFAS (µg/L)
0.10
0.002
22PFASSS (µg/L)
22PFASBC (µg/L)
4PFASSS (µg/L)
4PFASBC (µg/L)
0.05
0.01
0.022
0.001
While the danish EQS for the sum of 22 PFAS is not reached for both leachates, SS
leachate surpasses this limit for the sum of 4 PFAS, again pointing to potential drinking
water contamination from sludge leaching following agricultural field application.
Moreover, various PFAS exhibited interferences in the sludge leachate analysis. For these
compounds, no mean leachate concentrations could be calculated, which were as a con­
sequence also not included in the total concentration of 4 and 22 PFAS. Therefore, the
true total PFAS concentration may be significantly higher in sludge leachate, further in­
creasing risk. Future studies should thus aim to obtain data for these excluded PFAS.
It should however be noted that leachate PFAS concentrations do not directly reflect the
final concentration in groundwater/drinking water, as dilution would most likely mitigate the
level of contamination. Nevertheless, it is not unconceivable that in a worst case scenario,
such as a low aquifer water volume and repeatedly very high volumes of applied sludge,
PFAS contamination may exceed the US or danish limits.
6.2.5
Implications and Outlook
Together, these findings suggest that pyrolysis is an effective tool for reducing PFAS leach­
ability from WWTP waste streams but that its benefits are potentially offset by the forma­
tion of more mobile PFAS. BC shows minimal PFAS leaching and may be suitable for
land application or further use, while sewage sludge shows considerable leaching, sur­
passing EQS. However, the fate of PFAS in scrubber waters must be carefully managed
to avoid unintentional recirculation and enrichment within the treatment system. Future
system designs should therefore consider scrubber water treatment as an essential step
in breaking the PFAS cycle.
6.3
Increased Sorption
Figure 6.3 shows the estimated best­fit BC KD plotted against SS KD of 12 PFAS, in­
cluding confidence intervals (CI). A PFAS that would be placed on the identity line would
exhibit equal sorption to BC and SS. Pyrolysis of sewage sludge to biochar induces there­
fore a clear increase in sorption. This can be observed for all of the analyzed 12 PFAS,
except PFBA, as these are found to the left of the identity line. Moreover, since the mag­
nitude shift of increased sorption lies between 0.8 and 1.8 (see table 5.4), hypothesis 1)
can be considered confirmed for PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, PFBS,
PFHpS, PFHxS, PFPS and 6:2 FTS.
The increase in sorption after pyrolysis could be due to several factors. Biochar has a
34
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.3: BC KD of 12 PFAS plotted against SS KD
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
35
==PAGE:46==
greater organic carbon content, which in turn results in more hydrophobic interactions be­
tween the biochar material and the PFAS tail. Furthermore, pyrolysis increases aromatic­
ity, which has been confirmed as having a positive effect on PFAS sorption to biochars in
study by Fabregat­Palau et al. [21]. Moreover, as porosity and surface area increase as
an effect of pyrolysis, the total area where sorption mechanisms may occur (i.e sorption
sites) is larger.
Table 6.2: Distribution coefficients (KD) for selected PFAS sorption to BC, compared to
values obtained from Krahn et al. [47]
PFAS
KD BC (95% CI)
KF SSBC1 (± STD)
KF SSBC2 (± STD)
PFPeA
56.4 (39.8–72.7)
12,600 ± 22
—
PFHxA
143 (102–184)
63,100 ± 14
2000 ± 26
PFHpA
208 (35.5–317)
955,000 ± 30
46,800 ± 14
PFOA
782 (171–1,140)
537 ± 11
132 ± 11
PFNA
747 (–2,030)
776,000 ± 11
214,000 ± 11
PFDA
757 (–3,560)
1,000,000 ± 12
407,000 ± 11
Krahn et al. investigated PFAS sorption to sewage sludge biochars [47], and their re­
sults, along with those from the present thesis, are summarized in Table 6.2. Notably, the
biochars studied by Krahn et al. exhibited dramatically higher PFAS sorption capacities,
with distribution coefficients values exceeding those in this thesis by two to three orders
of magnitude.
The markedly lower KD values obtained in this study, compared to those reported by
Krahn et al. [47], may be attributed to a combination of methodological and analytical
differences.
One of the most likely explanations for the dramatically higher KD values reported by
Krahn et al. (2023) compared to this study lies in the difference in biochar particle size.
While their biochar was finely milled and sieved to <1 mm, the biochar used in this study
was coarse and used as received from the pyrolysis plant. A finer biochar enhances
surface accessibility and thus sorption efficiency, leading to higher KD values.
Secondly, it is possible that equilibrium was not fully reached in the present experiment.
While Krahn et al. conducted equilibration at 23°C with end­over­end tumbling and high­
speed orbital shaking (160 RPM), this experiment used a lower temperature of 10°C and
gentler agitation (130 RPM), which may have slowed down sorption kinetics for biochar.
Particularly, the lack of end­over­end tumbling could have let to some biochar particles
adhering to the bottle wall while not being not fully submerged and thus not in contact
with the spiked solution.
Thirdly, the absence of a filtration step in this experiment may have led to elevated levels
of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the aqueous phase, which can occupy pores and
compete with PFAS for adsorption sites [65].
In terms of analytical procedures, Krahn et al. employed solid­phase extraction (SPE) prior
to LC­MS/MS analysis, which likely improved their quantification accuracy at low aqueous
concentrations by reducing matrix effects and pre­concentrating analytes.
Additionally, they spiked their samples over four orders of magnitude in concentration (up
to several mg/L), allowing them to resolve isotherms across a wide range of conditions,
36
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:47==
whereas this study used a single low­level spike (1 µg/L) and relied on phase ratio variation
to estimate KD.
Taken together, these differences suggest that Krahn et al.’s experimental setup was op­
timized for high­resolution KD determination, while the present study prioritized environ­
mental relevance. Future experiments could improve KD accuracy by using finer biochar
particles, increasing equilibration temperature and mixing intensity, filtering samples to
reduce DOC interference, and incorporating SPE for better analytical sensitivity.
6.3.1
Role of Chain Length and Functional Group
Sorption varied considerably for the 12 PFAS, with KD values ranging from 4.8 to 2078
(SS and BC both included in this range). As outlined in section 2.4.3, the length of the
fluorinated tail as well as the type of head play major roles in PFAS sorption. To investigate
if these relationships could be confirmed with this experiment, PFAS were grouped by their
functional group (PFCA, PFSA and 6:2 FTS) and their corresponding KD were plotted as
a function of chain length in figure 6.4.
With regard to functional groups, PFSA generally exhibited stronger sorption to biochar
(BC) than their PFCA counterparts of the same chain length, with the exception of chain
length 7 (PFOA and PFHpS), where overlapping confidence intervals (CIs) indicate no
statistically significant difference in sorption. For sorption to sewage sludge (SS), best­fit
distribution coefficients also suggest greater sorption for PFSA compared to PFCA. How­
ever, statistically significant differences were only observed at chain length 6 (PFHpA and
PFHxS), where non­overlapping CIs indicate stronger sorption for PFHxS. The sorption
of 6:2 FTS to SS was not statistically different from that of either PFHpA or PFHxS, as
reflected by overlapping CIs.
When comparing the same compounds with regard to BC sorption, no CI overlap was
observed among PFHpA, PFHxS, and 6:2 FTS. However, because no lower CI boundary
could be computed for PFHxS and 6:2 FTS, it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions
about whether 6:2 FTS sorbs differently from either PFHpA or PFHxS.
As discussed in Section 2.4.3, stronger PFSA sorption can be attributed to the higher hy­
drophobicity of sulfonic acid groups, which enhance sorption to organic­rich media such
as soil and sediment. Biochar and sewage sludge, like soils and sediments, are het­
erogeneous materials containing organic matter and mineral phases. It is therefore not
surprising that the relative sorption behaviour of PFSAs and PFCAs observed here mir­
rors that reported for environmental solids, with PFSAs showing greater affinity across
comparable chain lengths.
To further interpret the observed trend of increasing sorption with PFAS chain length, a
Pearson correlation analysis was performed between perfluorinated carbon chain length
and log KD values. For sorption to BC, a strong and statistically significant correlation
was found for PFCAs (r = 0.944, p = 0.0014), indicating that longer­chain carboxylates
sorbed more strongly. In contrast, the correlation for PFSA was moderate (r = 0.789)
and not statistically significant (p = 0.211), possibly due to the smaller number of com­
pounds or greater variability in sulfonate behavior. When evaluating sorption to SS, the
opposite pattern was observed: PFSA showed a statistically significant correlation with
chain length (r = 0.998, p = 0.0025), while the PFCA group exhibited a moderate, non­
significant correlation (r = 0.735, p = 0.0597). These findings suggest that while chain
length influences sorption across both sorbents, the strength and significance of this rela­
tionship depend on both the sorbent material and PFAS functional group. The enhanced
sorption of longer­chain PFSAs to SS may reflect stronger hydrophobic interactions and
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.4: SS and BC KD as a function of PFAS chain length
sulfonate­specific affinity for organic matter commonly found in sewage sludge.
It is important to note, however, that these observations are based on best­fit distribution
coefficients and do not account for uncertainty expressed through their 95% confidence
intervals; as such, functional group or chain length relationships should be interpreted
with caution. Still, the consistent trend of increasing sorption with chain length for PFCAs
on biochar, where PFNA and PFDA sorb more strongly than PFBA and PFPeA, aligns
well with previous findings in the literature [21]. The notably weak sorption of PFBA to
both BC and SS (see Section 5.4.2) further underscores the high mobility of short­chain
PFAS and their limited interaction with solid sorbents.
38
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:49==
7
Conclusion
This thesis explored the fate of per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) during pyrol­
ysis of sewage sludge and evaluated the effects of converting sludge into biochar on the
leaching potential of these persistent contaminants. A combination of laboratory leach­
ing experiments and targeted PFAS analysis was employed to examine the concentra­
tion profiles across sludge and biochar leachates and various aqueous matrices, such as
wastewater and scrubber waters. Furthermore, sorption experiments were conducted to
evaluate the increase of PFAS sorption due to pyroylsis of sludge to biochar.
The results of the leaching experiment revealed that, although biochar leached some
PFAS, the mean concentrations were generally lower than those from sewage sludge
by up to one order of magnitude. This suggests that pyrolysis has a combined effect of
removing some PFAS from the matrix and increasing sorption to the matrix for unremoved
PFAS. PFAS chain length plays a major role as short­chain PFAS such as PFBA, PFBS
and PFHpA (4 ≤C ≤8) leached from both biochar and sludge, while longer­chain PFAS
leached exclusively from SS. In some cases, sludge leachate surpassed drinking water
EQS, while biochar leachate remained consistently below limits.
Moreover, the treatment train analysis highlights the complex, compound­specific behav­
ior of PFAS across wastewater and pyrolysis processes. Several PFAS, including PFOA,
PFHxA, and PFDA, appear to accumulate in sludge, suggesting sorption or enrichment
during biological treatment. Notably, PFBA’s absence in sludge yet high concentration
in PS suggests it may be formed during pyrolysis rather than removed, underscoring the
potential for short­chain PFAS generation from thermal degradation of longer­chain pre­
cursors. Furthermore, while biochar shows relatively low leachate concentrations, this
may reflect strong sorption rather than absence of PFAS, and continued recycling of PS
and MS without effective PFAS destruction could gradually increase PFAS loads in the
system.
Together, these findings suggest that pyrolysis is an effective tool for reducing PFAS leach­
ability from WWTP waste streams but that its benefits are potentially offset by the forma­
tion of more mobile PFAS. BC shows minimal PFAS leaching and may be suitable for
land application or further use, while sewage sludge shows considerable leaching, sur­
passing EQS. However, the fate of PFAS in scrubber waters must be carefully managed
to avoid unintentional recirculation and enrichment within the treatment system. Future
system designs should therefore consider scrubber water treatment as an essential step
in breaking the PFAS cycle.
The results of the sorption experiment proved that KD value determination of PFAS sorb­
ing to sludge or biochar is possible by varying the sorbent dry­mass to water ratio while
keeping the initial spiking concentration constant, although the experimental set­up could
be improved to avoid KD underestimation. Moreover, the experiment confirmed the hy­
pothesis that the pyrolytic conversion of sewage sludge to biochar, along with its asso­
ciated physicochemical changes, leads to an increase in KD by one order of magnitude
for biochar compared to sludge for most quantifiable PFAS. It can therefore be concluded
that biochar is a much stronger sorbent than sewage sludge. Moreover, a pattern of in­
creased sorption with increasing PFAS chain length, as well as the role of the functional
group, could be identified and was linked to hydrophobic interactions, confirming findings
in the literature.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
39
==PAGE:50==
The fate of PFAS across a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) and pyrolysis treatment
train reveals two conclusions. First, pyrolysis substantially reduces PFAS leaching in
biochar compared to its sewage sludge feedstock, despite the potential formation of short­
chain PFAS. Second, even if PFAS are not fully degraded during pyrolysis, their sorption
to biochar is markedly stronger than to sludge. Therefore, from a PFAS contamination
standpoint, the application of biochar to agricultural fields is demonstrably safer than the
use of sewage sludge. This finding reinforces the Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy, and
Utilities’ ambition to promote pyrolysis technology for long­term carbon storage, particu­
larly in agriculture, and to support Denmark’s broader climate goals.
40
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Hongxiang Teng. “Overview of the Development of the Fluoropolymer Industry”. In:
Applied Sciences 2.2 (2012), pp. 496–512. ISSN: 2076­3417. URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/2076-3417/2/2/496.
[2]
Grace K. Longendyke, Sebica Katel, and Yuxin Wang. “PFAS fate and destruction
mechanisms during thermal treatment: a comprehensive review”. In: Environ. Sci.:
Processes Impacts 24 (2 2022), pp. 196–208. DOI: 10.1039/D1EM00465D. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D1EM00465D.
[3]
Amélie Ritscher et al. “Zürich Statement on Future Actions on Per­ and Polyfluo­
roalkyl Substances (PFASs)”. In: Environmental Health Perspectives 126.8 (2018),
p. 084502. DOI: 10.1289/EHP4158. URL: https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP4158.
[4]
Erlend Sørmo et al. “The decomposition and emission factors of a wide range of
PFAS in diverse, contaminated organic waste fractions undergoing dry pyrolysis”.
In: Journal of Hazardous Materials 454 (2023), p. 131447. ISSN: 0304­3894. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2023.131447. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0304389423007306.
[5]
P. Guerra et al. “Parameters affecting the formation of perfluoroalkyl acids during
wastewater treatment”. In: Journal of Hazardous Materials 272 (2014), pp. 148–
154. ISSN: 0304­3894. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.03.016. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304389414001927.
[6]
Wolfram Buss. “Pyrolysis Solves the Issue of Organic Contaminants in Sewage
Sludge while Retaining Carbon—Making the Case for Sewage Sludge Treatment
via Pyrolysis”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 9.30 (2021), pp. 10048–
10053. DOI: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c03651. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.1c03651. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c03651.
[7]
Energi­ og Forsyningsministeriet Klima­. Strategi og arbejdsprogram for pyrolyse.
Tech. rep. Klima­, Energi­ og Forsyningsministeriet, 2024.
[8]
Paulina Godlewska, Yong Sik Ok, and Patryk Oleszczuk. “The dark side of black
gold: Ecotoxicological aspects of biochar and biochar­amended soils”. In: Journal
of Hazardous Materials 403 (2021), p. 123833. ISSN: 0304­3894. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123833. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0304389420318227.
[9]
Taísa Andrade Barbosa et al. “Biochar from sewage sludge: Effect of pyrolysis on
functional properties and pollutants fate”. In: Environmental Quality Management
34.1 (2024), e22192. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/tqem.22192. URL: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/tqem.22192.
[10]
Anushka Garg et al. “Treatment technologies for removal of per­ and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) in biosolids”. In: Chemical Engineering Journal 453 (2023),
p. 139964. ISSN: 1385­8947. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2022.139964.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1385894722054444.
[11]
Ting Zhou et al. “Occurrence, fate, and remediation for per­ and polyfluoroalkyl sub­
stances (PFAS) in sewage sludge: A comprehensive review”. In: Journal of Haz­
ardous Materials 466 (2024), p. 133637. ISSN: 0304­3894. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.133637. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0304389424002164.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
41
==PAGE:52==
[12]
ITRC (Interstate Technology & Regulatory Council). PFAS Technical and Regulatory
Guidance Document and Fact Sheets PFAS­1. Accessed: 2025­03­27. Washington,
D.C., 2023. URL: https://pfas-1.itrcweb.org/.
[13]
Swadhina P. Lenka, Melanie Kah, and Lokesh P. Padhye. “Losses of Ultrashort­ and
Short­Chain PFAS to Polypropylene Materials”. In: ACS ES&T Water 3.8 (2023),
pp. 2700–2706. DOI: 10.1021/acsestwater.3c00191. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsestwater.3c00191. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsestwater.3c00191.
[14]
Gwynn R. Johnson. “PFAS in soil and groundwater following historical land appli­
cation of biosolids”. In: Water Research 211 (2022), p. 118035. ISSN: 0043­1354.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.118035. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S004313542101229X.
[15]
Arabela Ramírez Carnero et al. “Presence of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Sub­
stances (PFAS) in Food Contact Materials (FCM) and Its Migration to Food”. In:
Foods 10.7 (2021). ISSN: 2304­8158. DOI: 10.3390/foods10071443. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2304-8158/10/7/1443.
[16]
Danish Ministry of the Environment. Substance Flow Analysis of PFAS. Tech. rep.
Accessed: 2025­03­27. Ministry of the Environment, Denmark, Feb. 2024. URL:
https://mim.dk/media/ae3o5ayj/substance-flow-analysis-of-pfas-20-feb.pdf.
[17]
Magnus Land et al. “What is the effect of phasing out long­chain per­ and polyfluo­
roalkyl substances on the concentrations of perfluoroalkyl acids and their precursors
in the environment? A systematic review”. In: Environmental Evidence 7.1 (2018),
p. 4. DOI: 10.1186/s13750-017-0114-y. URL: https://environmentalevidencejournal.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13750-017-0114-y.
[18]
Swadhina Priyadarshini Lenka, Melanie Kah, and Lokesh P. Padhye. “A review of
the occurrence, transformation, and removal of poly­ and perfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS) in wastewater treatment plants”. In: Water Research 199 (2021), p. 117187.
ISSN: 0043­1354. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.117187. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0043135421003857.
[19]
S.Y. Wee and A.Z. Aris. “Revisiting the “forever chemicals”, PFOA and PFOS expo­
sure in drinking water”. In: npj Clean Water 6 (2023), p. 57. DOI: 10.1038/s41545-
023-00274-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41545-023-00274-6.
[20]
Nanthi Bolan et al. “Remediation of poly­ and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)
contaminated soils – To mobilize or to immobilize or to degrade?” In: Journal of
Hazardous Materials 401 (2021), p. 123892. ISSN: 0304­3894. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123892. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0304389420318811.
[21]
Joel Fabregat­Palau, Miquel Vidal, and Anna Rigol. “Examining sorption of perfluo­
roalkyl substances (PFAS) in biochars and other carbon­rich materials”. In: Chemo­
sphere 302 (2022), p. 134733. ISSN: 0045­6535. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2022.134733. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0045653522012267.
[22]
Hui Li et al. “Transport behavior difference and transport model of long­ and short­
chain per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances in underground environmental media: A
review”. In: Environmental Pollution 327 (2023), p. 121579. ISSN: 0269­7491. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2023.121579. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S026974912300581X.
[23]
Ian T. Cousins et al. “Outside the Safe Operating Space of a New Planetary Bound­
ary for Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS)”. In: Environmental Science
& Technology 56.16 (2022). PMID: 35916421, pp. 11172–11179. DOI: 10.1021/
42
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:53==
acs.est.2c02765. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c02765. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c02765.
[24]
J. H. Johansson et al. “Global transport of perfluoroalkyl acids via sea spray aerosol”.
In: Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts 21 (4 2019), pp. 635–649. DOI: 10 . 1039 /
C8EM00525G. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C8EM00525G.
[25]
Erica Gagliano et al. “Removal of poly­ and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from
water by adsorption: Role of PFAS chain length, effect of organic matter and chal­
lenges in adsorbent regeneration”. In: Water Research 171 (2020), p. 115381. ISSN:
0043­1354. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.115381. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0043135419311558.
[26]
Hans Brunn, Gerhard Arnold, Wolfgang Körner, et al. “PFAS: forever chemicals—
persistent, bioaccumulative and mobile. Reviewing the status and the need for their
phase out and remediation of contaminated sites”. In: Environmental Sciences Eu­
rope 35.1 (2023), p. 20. DOI: 10.1186/s12302-023-00721-8. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1186/s12302-023-00721-8.
[27]
Yu Chen et al. “Occurrence, profiles, and ecotoxicity of poly­ and perfluoroalkyl sub­
stances and their alternatives in global apex predators: A critical review”. In: Journal
of Environmental Sciences 109 (2021), pp. 219–236. ISSN: 1001­0742. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jes.2021.03.036. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1001074221001212.
[28]
D. Ackerman Grunfeld, D. Gilbert, J. Hou, et al. “Underestimated burden of per­ and
polyfluoroalkyl substances in global surface waters and groundwaters”. In: Nature
Geoscience 17 (2024), pp. 340–346. DOI: 10.1038/s41561- 024- 01402- 8. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-024-01402-8.
[29]
Miljøstyrelsen. Grænseværdier for PFAS i miljøet. da. https://mst.dk. Senest op­
dateret: 05. november 2024. Indeholder gældende og vejledende grænseværdier
for PFAS i drikkevand, jord, grundvand, slam, badevand, overfladevand og biota i
Danmark. Nov. 2024.
[30]
Consolato Schiavone and Chiara Portesi. “PFAS: A Review of the State of the Art,
from Legislation to Analytical Approaches and Toxicological Aspects for Assessing
Contamination in Food and Environment and Related Risks”. In: Applied Sciences
13.11 (2023). ISSN: 2076­3417. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/11/
6696.
[31]
Directive (EU) 2024/3019 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27
November 2024 concerning urban wastewater treatment (recast). http : / / data .
europa.eu/eli/dir/2024/3019/oj. Official Journal of the European Union, L 3019,
12 December 2024. Nov. 2024.
[32]
Vincenzo Pelagalli et al. “Pyrolysis of municipal sewage sludge: challenges, op­
portunities and new valorization routes for biochar, bio­oil, and pyrolysis gas”. In:
Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol. 10 (10 2024), pp. 2282–2312. DOI: 10.1039/
D4EW00278D. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D4EW00278D.
[33]
R.P. Singh and M. Agrawal. “Potential benefits and risks of land application of sewage
sludge”. In: Waste Management 28.2 (2008), pp. 347–358. ISSN: 0956­053X. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2006.12.010. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0956053X07000141.
[34]
Evita Agrafioti et al. “Biochar production by sewage sludge pyrolysis”. In: Journal
of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 101 (2013), pp. 72–78. ISSN: 0165­2370. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaap.2013.02.010. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0165237013000454.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
43
==PAGE:54==
[35]
S. Rangabhashiyam et al. “Sewage sludge­derived biochar for the adsorptive re­
moval of wastewater pollutants: A critical review”. In: Environmental Pollution 293
(2022), p. 118581. ISSN: 0269­7491. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.
118581. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749121021631.
[36]
Abdulmoseen Segun Giwa et al. “Advances in sewage sludge application and treat­
ment: Process integration of plasma pyrolysis and anaerobic digestion with the re­
source recovery”. In: Heliyon 9.9 (2023), e19765. ISSN: 2405­8440. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e19765. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2405844023069736.
[37]
Monika Dubey et al. “Occurrence, fate, and persistence of emerging micropollutants
in sewage sludge treatment”. In: Environmental Pollution 273 (2021), p. 116515.
ISSN: 0269­7491. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.116515. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749121000932.
[38]
John Jensen and Svend­Erik Jepsen. “The production, use and quality of sewage
sludge in Denmark”. In: Waste Management 25.3 (2005), pp. 239–247. ISSN: 0956­
053X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2004.08.011. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0956053X04001801.
[39]
Acharya Balkrishna et al. “Potential use of sewage sludge as fertilizer in organic
farming”. In: Cleaner Waste Systems 10 (2025), p. 100245. ISSN: 2772­9125. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clwas.2025.100245. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2772912525000430.
[40]
Mahtab Ahmad et al. “Biochar as a sorbent for contaminant management in soil and
water: A review”. In: Chemosphere 99 (2014), pp. 19–33. ISSN: 0045­6535. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.10.071. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0045653513015051.
[41]
Ayhan Demirbaş and Gönenç Arin. “An overview of biomass pyrolysis”. In: Energy
Sources 24.5 (2002). Cited by: 687, pp. 471–482. DOI: 10.1080/00908310252889979.
URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-0036572551&doi=10.
1080%2f00908310252889979&partnerID=40&md5=a2e104f81edb51a717c856fcb432c78c.
[42]
Johannes Lehmann and Stephen Joseph, eds. Biochar for Environmental Man­
agement: Science, Technology and Implementation. 3rd ed. Routledge, 2024. DOI:
10.4324/9781003297673. URL: https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003297673.
[43]
Dominic Woolf et al. “Sustainable biochar to mitigate global climate change”. In:
Nature Communications 1 (2010), p. 56. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms1053. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1053.
[44]
Tao Xie et al. “Characteristics and Applications of Biochar for Environmental Re­
mediation: A Review”. In: Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technol­
ogy 45.9 (2015), pp. 939–969. DOI: 10.1080/10643389.2014.924180. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2014.924180.
[45]
Anna Tomczyk, Zofia Sokołowska, and Piotr Boguta. “Biochar physicochemical prop­
erties: pyrolysis temperature and feedstock kind effects”. In: Reviews in Environ­
mental Science and Bio/Technology 19.1 (2020), pp. 191–215. DOI: 10 . 1007 /
s11157-020-09523-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11157-020-09523-3.
[46]
Manoj Tripathi, J.N. Sahu, and P. Ganesan. “Effect of process parameters on pro­
duction of biochar from biomass waste through pyrolysis: A review”. In: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 55 (2016), pp. 467–481. ISSN: 1364­0321. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.122. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1364032115012010.
[47]
Katinka M. Krahn et al. “Sewage sludge biochars as effective PFAS­sorbents”. In:
Journal of Hazardous Materials 445 (2023), p. 130449. ISSN: 0304­3894. DOI:
44
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:55==
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2022.130449. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0304389422022439.
[48]
Huawen Han et al. “Contaminants in biochar and suggested mitigation measures – a
review”. In: Chemical Engineering Journal 429 (2022), p. 132287. ISSN: 1385­8947.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.132287. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1385894721038663.
[49]
Eben D. Thoma et al. “Pyrolysis processing of PFAS­impacted biosolids, a pilot
study”. In: Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 72.4 (2022). PMID:
34870569, pp. 309–318. DOI: 10.1080/10962247.2021.2009935. eprint: https://doi.
org/10.1080/10962247.2021.2009935. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2021.
2009935.
[50]
James Cooper et al. “The future distribution and production of global phosphate
rock reserves”. In: Resources, Conservation and Recycling 57 (Dec. 2011), pp. 78–
86. ISSN: 0921­3449. DOI: 10.1016/J.RESCONREC.2011.09.009.
[51]
Hanzhi Zhang et al. “Roles of biochar in improving phosphorus availability in soils:
A phosphate adsorbent and a source of available phosphorus”. In: Geoderma 276
(Aug. 2016), pp. 1–6. ISSN: 0016­7061. DOI: 10.1016/J.GEODERMA.2016.04.020.
[52]
Marta Marcińczyk and Patryk Oleszczuk. “Biochar and engineered biochar as slow­
and controlled­release fertilizers”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 339 (Mar. 2022),
p. 130685. ISSN: 0959­6526. DOI: 10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2022.130685.
[53]
James A. Ippolito et al. “Feedstock choice, pyrolysis temperature and type influence
biochar characteristics: a comprehensive meta­data analysis review”. In: Biochar
2.4 (Dec. 2020), pp. 421–438. ISSN: 25247867. DOI: 10.1007/S42773-020-00067-
X/TABLES/6. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s42773-020-00067-x.
[54]
G. Limousin et al. “Sorption isotherms: A review on physical bases, modeling and
measurement”. In: Applied Geochemistry 22.2 (2007), pp. 249–275. ISSN: 0883­
2927. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeochem.2006.09.010. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883292706002629.
[55]
D. A. Navarro, S. S. Kabiri, K. Bowles, et al. “Review on Methods for Assessing and
Predicting Leaching of PFAS from Solid Matrices”. In: Current Pollution Reports 10
(2024), pp. 628–647. DOI: 10.1007/s40726-024-00326-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s40726-024-00326-6.
[56]
Fan Chen et al. “Removal of per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances by activated hy­
drochar derived from food waste: Sorption performance and desorption hysteresis”.
In: Environmental Pollution 340 (2024), p. 122820. ISSN: 0269­7491. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2023.122820. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0269749123018225.
[57]
X. Lyu et al. “Per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in subsurface environ­
ments: Occurrence, fate, transport, and research prospect”. In: Reviews of Geo­
physics 60.4 (2022), e2021RG000765. DOI: 10.1029/2021RG000765. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1029/2021RG000765.
[58]
Junho Jeon et al. “Effects of salinity and organic matter on the partitioning of perflu­
oroalkyl acid (PFAs) to clay particles”. In: J. Environ. Monit. 13 (6 2011), pp. 1803–
1810. DOI: 10.1039/C0EM00791A. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C0EM00791A.
[59]
Odsherred Kommune. Nøgletal. Accessed: 2025­03­12. 2024. URL: https://www.
odsherred.dk/da/foelge-politik-og-udvikling/okonomi-og-resultater/noegletal/.
[60]
Odsherred Kommune. Spildevandsplan 2025­35. Accessed: 2025­03­12. 2025. URL:
https://odsherred.dkplan.dk/plan/22#/7500.
[61]
AquaGreen. Sustainable Biomass Treatment Technology. Accessed: 2025­03­12.
2022. URL: https://aquagreen.dk/technology/.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
45
==PAGE:56==
[62]
Kai Hu et al. “Conditioning of wastewater sludge using freezing and thawing: Role of
curing”. In: Water Research 45.18 (2011), pp. 5969–5976. ISSN: 0043­1354. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.08.064. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0043135411005161.
[63]
Jiefei Cao and Feng Xiao. “Interactions of per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances with
polypropylene plastic and borosilicate glass: Resolving key uncertainties for accu­
rate analysis”. In: Journal of Hazardous Materials Advances 16 (2024), p. 100463.
ISSN: 2772­4166. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . hazadv . 2024 . 100463. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2772416624000640.
[64]
National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubChem Compound Summary for
CID 9777, Perfluorobutyric acid. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Perfluorobutyric-acid. Retrieved June 27, 2025. 2025.
[65]
Fatemeh Asadi Zeidabadi, Ehsan Banayan Esfahani, and Madjid Mohseni. “Effects
of water matrix on per­ and poly­fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) treatment: Physical­
separation and degradation processes – A review”. In: Journal of Hazardous Ma­
terials Advances 10 (2023), p. 100322. ISSN: 2772­4166. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.hazadv.2023.100322. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2772416623000931.
46
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
A.1
Quantification Limits
Table A.1: Quantification Limits (QL) of PFAS compounds in ng
PFBA
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFPS
PFHpA
PFHxS
6:2 FTS
PFOA
PFHpS
PFNA
PFOS
0.05
0.02
0.10
0.02
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
PFNS
PFDA
PFDS
PFUdA
PFOSA
PFDoA
PFDoDS
PFTrDA
PFTeDA
PFUnDS
PFTrDS
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.05
A.2
MRM Transitions and Retention Times
Table A.2: MRM transitions and retention time ranges for PFAS compounds.
Compound
Type
CE (V)
Polarity
Transition (m/z)
RT Range (min)
AMPR
MRM
­36
+
485.00>85.05
5.800–6.600
NTAmP
MRM
­39
+
499.00>60.05
5.800–6.700
6 2 FTAB
MRM
­32
+
571.20>104.20
6.300–7.000
PFBA 13C3
MRM
9
–
215.90>172.10
1.200–2.500
PFBA
MRM
9
–
212.90>169.00
1.200–2.500
PFPeA
MRM
8
–
263.10>219.00
3.700–4.800
PFPeA 13C5
MRM
8
–
267.90>223.00
3.700–4.900
PFBS 13C4
MRM
31
–
303.00>98.90
4.100–4.700
PFBS
MRM
30
–
298.90>99.00
4.100–4.700
FBSA
MRM
26
–
297.90>78.05
5.000–5.800
PFPS
MRM
37
–
349.00>99.00
5.300–6.000
PFHxA 13C6
MRM
10
–
318.50>274.10
5.400–6.200
PFHxA
MRM
9
–
312.90>269.00
5.400–6.200
PFHpA 13C7
MRM
17
–
370.00>172.00
6.100–6.900
PFHpA
MRM
18
–
363.00>169.00
6.100–6.900
PFHxS 13C6
MRM
51
–
405.00>80.00
6.100–6.900
PFHxS
MRM
50
–
399.00>80.00
6.100–6.900
62 FTS
MRM
23
–
427.00>407.00
6.450–7.250
62 FTS C2, D4
MRM
26
–
433.00>412.00
6.450–7.250
FHxSA
MRM
31
–
397.50>77.95
6.500–7.100
PFHpS
MRM
43
–
449.00>99.00
6.550–7.350
PFOA
MRM
10
–
413.00>369.00
6.600–7.400
PFOA C13
MRM
12
–
421.00>376.00
6.600–7.400
PFOS
MRM
52
–
498.80>80.00
6.900–7.700
PFOS C13
MRM
44
–
507.00>99.00
6.900–7.700
PFNA 13C9
MRM
12
–
472.00>427.00
7.000–7.800
PFNA
MRM
11
–
463.00>418.90
7.000–7.800
82 FTS
MRM
28
–
526.80>506.80
7.000–8.200
PFNS
MRM
52
–
548.80>98.90
7.220–8.000
PFDA 13C9
MRM
12
–
522.00>477.00
7.300–8.100
PFDA
MRM
12
–
513.00>468.90
7.300–8.100
PFOSA 13C8
MRM
39
–
506.00>78.00
7.300–8.100
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
47
==PAGE:58==
Compound
Type
CE (V)
Polarity
Transition (m/z)
RT Range (min)
PFOSA
MRM
39
–
498.00>78.00
7.300–8.100
PFDS
MRM
53
–
598.90>80.00
7.500–8.300
PFUdA 13C
MRM
14
–
572.00>528.00
7.600–8.400
PFuDA
MRM
12
–
562.90>519.00
7.600–8.400
PFUnDS
MRM
55
–
648.90>80.00
7.750–8.550
PFDoA 13C12
MRM
13
–
625.00>580.10
7.800–8.600
PFDoA
MRM
11
–
613.00>569.00
7.800–8.600
PFDoDS
MRM
54
–
698.90>80.00
7.950–8.750
PFTrDA
MRM
13
–
663.00>619.00
8.100–8.800
PFTrDS
MRM
55
–
748.90>80.00
8.120–8.900
PFTeDA 13C2
MRM
15
–
715.00>669.90
8.200–9.000
PFTeDA
MRM
15
–
713.10>669.00
8.200–9.000
A.3
Results
48
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:59==
A.3.1
Raw Data Leaching Experiment
RAW DATA
PFBA
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFPS
PFHpA
PFHxS
6:2 FTS
PFOA
PFHpS
PFNA
PFOS
Sample
Concentration [ng/L]
Blank 2 SS
0.071
<QL
<0.1
0.077
<QL
0.137
<QL
0.030
0.023
<QL
<QL
<QL
Blank 1 BC
0.066
<QL
<0.1
0.025
<QL
0.057
<QL
<QL
0.037
<QL
<QL
<QL
Blank 2 BC
0.071
<QL
<0.1
<0.02
<QL
0.029
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
BC 1
0.129
0.039
0.174
0.047
<QL
0.109
<QL
0.042
0.067
<QL
<QL
<QL
BC 2
0.157
<QL
<0.1
0.127
<QL
0.130
<QL
<QL
0.032
<QL
<QL
<QL
BC 3
0.115
<QL
<0.1
<0.02
<QL
0.024
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
SS 1
0.067
n.a
<0.1
0.856
<QL
0.261
0.431
0.125
0.643
<QL
0.212
n.a
SS 2
<QL
n.a
0.299
0.517
<QL
0.187
0.567
0.022
0.303
<QL
0.087
n.a
SS 3
<QL
n.a
0.316
0.548
<QL
0.220
0.859
0.151
0.525
<QL
0.136
n.a
SPE Blank
0.063
<QL
0.125
<0.02
<QL
0.052
<QL
0.023
<0.02
<QL
<QL
<QL
SPE Standard
0.736
0.725
1.872
0.693
0.763
0.685
0.797
<0.02
0.692
0.706
0.678
0.700
Table A.3: Measured concentrations (ng/L) in SPE samples of blanks, biochar, sludge.
RAW DATA
PFNS
PFDA
PFDS
PFUdA
PFOSA
PFDoA
PFDoDS
PFTrDA
PFTeDA
PFUnDS
PFTrDS
Sample
Concentration [ng/L]
Blank 2 SS
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
n.a
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
Blank 1 BC
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
n.a
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
Blank 2 BC
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
n.a
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
BC 1
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
n.a
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
BC 2
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
n.a
<QL
n.a
n.a
n.a
<QL
<QL
BC 3
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
n.a
<QL
n.a
n.a
n.a
<QL
<QL
SS 1
<QL
0.842
<QL
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
SS 2
<QL
0.189
<QL
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
SS 3
<QL
0.381
<QL
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
SPE Blank
<QL
<QL
<QL
<QL
n.a
<QL
n.a
n.a
n.a
<QL
<QL
SPE Standard
0.632
0.608
0.283
0.662
n.a
0.842
1.649
3.600
1.093
0.175
0.175
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
49
==PAGE:60==
A.3.2
Mean Concentrations from Leaching Experiment
Sample
PFBA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFHpA
Blank SS
0.0011 ± 0.0000
0.0007 ± 0.0000
0.0011 ± 0.0000
0.0020 ± 0.0000
Blank BC
0.0011 ± 0.0001
0.0010 ± 0.0000
0.0003 ± 0.0002
0.0007 ± 0.0003
Mean SS (µg/L)
0.0009 ± 0.0002
0.0041 ± 0.0008
0.0111 ± 0.0021
0.0039 ± 0.0006
Mean BC (µg/L)
0.0027 ± 0.0004
0.0018 ± 0.0024
0.0012 ± 0.0012
0.0017 ± 0.0011
Table A.5: Mean PFAS concentrations (ug/L) and standard deviations in blank and BC/SS leachates.
Sample
PFHxS
6:2 FTS
PFOA
PFNA
PFDA
Blank SS
0.0001 ± 0.0000
0.0004 ± 0.0000
0.0003 ± 0.0000
0.0001 ± 0.0000
0.0001 ± 0.0000
Blank BC
0.0002 ± 0.0000
0.0001 ± 0.0000
0.0004 ± 0.0003
0.0002 ± 0.0000
0.0002 ± 0.0000
Mean SS (µg/L)
0.0112 ± 0.0054
0.0018 ± 0.0013
0.0086 ± 0.0028
0.0025 ± 0.0009
0.0080 ± 0.0048
Mean BC (µg/L)
0.0002 ± 0.0000
0.0004 ± 0.0004
0.0007 ± 0.0006
0.0002 ± 0.0000
0.0002 ± 0.0000
Table A.6: Mean PFAS concentrations (ug/L) and standard deviations in blank and BC/SS leachates.
50
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:61==
A.3.3
Raw Data Additional Measurements
RAW DATA
QL (ng)
0.050
0.020
0.100
0.020
0.050
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
PFBA
PFPeA
PFBS
PFHxA
PFPS
PFHpA
PFHxS
6:2 FTS
PFOA
PFHpS
PFNA
PFOS
wastewater 2
0.248
0.582
n.a
0.370
n.a
0.162
2.604
0.068
0.232
n.a
0.064
22.000
wastewater 3
0.682
0.398
n.a
0.271
n.a
0.161
2.645
0.152
0.257
n.a
0.048
< 0.02
mixed scrubber water 1
0.238
0.777
n.a
0.473
n.a
0.226
n.a
0.067
0.348
n.a
0.075
< 0.02
mixed scrubber water 2
0.305
0.602
n.a
0.461
n.a
0.187
n.a
0.057
0.309
n.a
0.069
< 0.02
mixed scrubber water 3
0.470
0.957
n.a
0.507
n.a
0.223
n.a
0.077
0.479
n.a
0.077
n.a
pyrolysis scrubber water 1
1.181
0.531
n.a
0.619
n.a
0.236
n.a
0.060
0.453
n.a
0.049
< 0.02
pyrolysis scrubber water 2
n.a
0.368
n.a
0.648
n.a
0.207
n.a
0.050
0.444
n.a
0.054
< 0.02
pyrolysis scrubber water 3
1.272
0.411
n.a
0.758
n.a
0.295
n.a
0.089
0.478
n.a
0.049
< 0.02
blank
0.616
0.095
n.a
0.065
n.a
0.393
n.a
0.064
0.044
n.a
0.022
< 0.02
spiked blank
2.742
2.385
1.730
2.036
2.777
2.014
2.694
6.166
2.264
2.289
2.353
1.827
Table A.7: PFAS raw concentration data up to PFOS in various water samples.
RAW DATA
QL (ng)
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.020
0.050
0.020
0.020
0.020
1.000
PFNS
PFDA
PFDS
PFUdA
PFOSA
PFDoA
PFDoDS
PFTrDA
PFTeDA
PFUnDS
PFTrDS
wastewater 2
< 0.02
0.083
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
< 0.02
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
wastewater 3
< 0.02
< 0.02
< 0.02
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
0.436
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
mixed scrubber water 1
< 0.02
0.059
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
< 0.02
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
mixed scrubber water 2
< 0.02
0.035
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
0.559
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
mixed scrubber water 3
< 0.02
0.052
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
< 0.02
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
pyrolysis scrubber water 1
< 0.02
0.064
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
0.330
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
pyrolysis scrubber water 2
< 0.02
0.039
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
< 0.02
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
pyrolysis scrubber water 3
< 0.02
0.066
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
0.389
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
blank
< 0.02
< 0.02
< 0.02
< 0.02
n.a
< 0.02
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
spiked blank
1.440
2.155
0.721
2.279
n.a
0.486
n.a
n.a
n.a
n.a
< 1
Table A.8: PFAS raw concentration data from PFNS to PFTrDS in various water samples.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
51
==PAGE:62==
A.3.4
Mean Concentrations from Additional Measurements
Table A.9: Mean PFAS concentrations (µg/L) in wastewater (WW), mixed scrubber water (MS) and pyrolysis scrubber water (PS) with standard
deviations
Sample
PFBA
PFHxA
PFHpA
6.2 FTS
PFOA
PFNA
PFDA
WW
0.00896
±
0.00662
0.0059 ±
0.00068
0.00301
±
0.00031
0.0021 ±
0.00132
0.00457
±
0.00081
0.00103
± 9.23E­
05
0.00081
±
0.00087
MS
0.00617
±
0.00162
0.00892
±
0.00041
0.00393
±
0.00036
0.00124
± 9.11E­
05
0.00696
±
0.00092
0.00137
± 8.21E­
05
0.00090
±
0.00022
PS
0.02192
±
0.00050
0.01218
±
0.00060
0.00443
±
0.00058
0.00119
±
0.00030
0.00829
±
0.00023
0.00092
± 8.24E­
05
0.00101
±
0.00026
52
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:63==
A.3.5
Mean Relative Concentrations of Sorption Experiment
Sample
6:2 FTS
PFBA
PFBS
PFDA
PFHpA
PFHpS
PFHxA
PFHxS
PFNA
PFOA
PFOS
Mean crel in BC 10
1.1848
0.8657
0.7438
0.4684
0.9614
0.7711
0.9834
0.9329
0.8899
1.0190
0.5416
Mean crel in BC 9
0.4421
0.8893
0.8908
0.4115
0.7529
0.7329
0.7831
0.8490
0.6827
0.7819
0.5410
Mean crel in BC 8
0.9734
1.0338
0.8153
0.2234
0.7821
0.3505
0.9188
0.5797
0.4429
0.6191
0.1583
Mean crel in BC 7
0.0579
0.9058
0.2411
0.0151
0.1696
0.0119
0.3781
0.0204
0.0287
0.0581
0.0116
Mean crel in BC 6
0.0097
0.4282
0.0256
0.0094
0.0621
0.0020
0.0683
0.0048
0.0169
0.0177
0.0028
Mean crel in SS 5
0.9216
1.0689
0.9841
0.2520
1.0269
0.6547
1.0045
0.8944
0.7160
0.8853
0.4678
Mean crel in SS 4
0.9246
1.0465
1.1702
0.2129
0.9535
0.7492
0.9818
1.0024
0.7320
0.9842
0.2651
Mean crel in SS 3
0.9558
0.9590
0.8185
0.2461
0.9353
0.6095
0.9795
0.8405
0.6492
0.8213
0.3165
Mean crel in SS 2
0.7809
0.9809
1.0922
0.1293
0.9268
0.2931
0.9802
0.7318
0.3870
0.7462
0.1118
Mean crel in SS 1
0.1505
0.2820
0.5245
0.0429
0.2946
0.0805
0.4282
0.1738
0.0543
0.1573
0.0866
Table A.10: Mean crel values from 6:2 FTS to PFOS in biochar (BC) and sewage sludge (SS) bottles.
Sample
PFPS
PFPeA
Phase­ratios
Mean crel in BC 10
0.9387
0.9998
2.40E­05
Mean crel in BC 9
0.9016
0.8170
9.80E­05
Mean crel in BC 8
0.7267
0.9479
9.99E­04
Mean crel in BC 7
0.0552
0.6819
9.97E­03
Mean crel in BC 6
0.0075
0.1465
1.00E­01
Mean crel in SS 5
0.9537
1.0420
1.10E­05
Mean crel in SS 4
1.0627
1.0146
1.05E­04
Mean crel in SS 3
0.9175
0.9875
1.02E­03
Mean crel in SS 2
1.0659
0.9937
9.97E­03
Mean crel in SS 1
0.3294
0.6730
1.00E­01
Table A.11: Mean crel values from PFPS to PFPeA and phase­ratios corresponding to the bottles.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
53
==PAGE:64==
A.3.6
RSD in sorption experiment
Sample
6:2 FTS
PFBA
PFBS
PFDA
PFHpA
PFHpS
PFHxA
PFHxS
PFNA
PFOA
PFOS
PFPS
PFPeA
RSD BC 10
0.5578
0.1153
0.1073
0.3672
0.2616
0.3778
0.2768
0.3149
0.0647
0.1394
0.5739
0.3689
0.0396
RSD BC 9
0.3365
0.1733
0.1871
0.2360
0.1335
0.0561
0.1439
0.0898
0.1460
0.0800
0.2505
0.1088
0.0631
RSD BC 8
0.2933
0.1244
0.1286
0.1075
0.1182
0.1648
0.1044
0.0821
0.0845
0.1198
0.0301
0.1519
0.1135
RSD BC 7
0.3780
0.1691
0.5385
0.1320
0.0338
0.3652
0.0064
0.7124
0.0428
0.0489
0.3604
0.7098
0.0355
RSD BC 6
1.0488
0.1115
0.9150
0.1427
0.2616
0.6084
0.1286
0.4837
0.1146
0.0300
0.2569
0.3331
0.1260
RSD SS 5
0.2482
0.0329
0.1658
0.0995
0.2456
0.0608
0.2224
0.0564
0.0796
0.0334
0.3403
0.0455
0.0606
RSD SS 4
0.6448
0.0426
0.3235
0.2344
0.0481
0.1216
0.0711
0.0655
0.1005
0.1099
0.8671
0.0809
0.0778
RSD SS 3
0.2708
0.0861
0.2525
0.2697
0.0903
0.1206
0.0723
0.0627
0.0650
0.0881
0.5224
0.0928
0.0494
RSD SS 2
0.3605
0.0769
0.2581
0.2346
0.2225
0.2806
0.2157
0.1295
0.0779
0.1440
0.5031
0.1970
0.1291
RSD SS 1
0.2086
0.8941
0.1593
0.1339
0.0562
0.4889
0.0644
0.2951
0.1654
0.0363
0.4263
0.2949
0.1088
Table A.12: Relative standard deviation (RSD) of PFAS compounds in biochar (BC) and sewage sludge (SS) bottles.
54
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:65==
A.3.7
Goodness of Fit for non­linear Regression
Parameter
PFPS
PFHpA
6:2 FTS
PFBA
PFPeA
PFNA
PFBS
PFHpS
PFOA
PFHxS
PFHxA
PFDA
R2 BC
0.9059
0.8085
0.7648
0.9456
0.9841
0.6998
0.9726
0.9955
0.8523
0.8227
0.9807
0.6772
R2 SS
0.9376
0.9826
0.9801
0.9683
0.9769
0.9929
0.8216
0.9793
0.9777
0.9849
0.9837
0.9716
Degrees of Freedom BC
4
4
4
4
4
3
4
3
4
4
4
3
Degrees of Freedom SS
4
4
4
4
4
3
4
3
4
4
4
3
Weighted SS (1/YBC)
0.4555
0.4119
1.2930
0.03287
0.03685
0.9015
0.09148
0.002477
0.4404
0.9253
0.05403
0.9494
Weighted SS (1/YSS)
0.08307
0.02445
0.04944
0.05476
0.003763
0.02307
0.09499
0.00651
0.04883
0.03069
0.01198
0.06209
Sy.x BC
0.3375
0.3209
0.5686
0.09065
0.09598
0.5482
0.1512
0.02873
0.3318
0.4810
0.1162
0.5626
Sy.x SS
0.1441
0.07819
0.1112
0.1170
0.03067
0.0877
0.1541
0.04658
0.1105
0.08759
0.05473
0.1439
Table A.13: Statistical regression parameters for PFAS compounds in BC and SS samples.
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
55
==PAGE:66==
A.4
Results
A.4.1
All Non­linear Regression Graphs Sorption Experiment
Relative Concentrations vs PR
56
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.1: Enter Caption
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.2: Enter Caption
58
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
==PAGE:69==
The fate of PFAS in a WWTP and Pyrolysis Treatment Train
59
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
