==PAGE:1==
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Vasileios Moschou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Elek­
trovej, Building 322, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the embedded systems and deep
learning.
Vasileios Moschou – s222566
Name
Date: July 1, 2025
Date
ii
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Deploying deep learning models on resource­constrained embedded platforms requires
careful trade­offs between model accuracy, memory footprint, and computational effi­
ciency. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has emerged as a popular approach for auto­
matically designing lightweight and high­performing models—particularly for TinyML ap­
plications targeting microcontrollers. However, a major limitation of NAS is its high com­
putational cost and slow search process, which makes it impractical for rapid prototyping
or iterative development in embedded settings. This work aims to accelerate the NAS
process, enabling faster discovery of efficient models optimized for ultra­low­power.
To effectively explore the search space, a Genetic Algorithm is employed, utilizing genetic
operations such as mutation and crossover. By investigating the original pipeline for creat­
ing, evaluating, and deploying neural network models, this work analyzes the total compu­
tational cost associated with each stage. To reduce this cost, targeted optimizations were
introduced throughout the pipeline—before (e.g., Memory­Aware­Filtering, RankNet), dur­
ing(e.g., cosine learning rate, performance or early stopping), and after(e.g., post­training
quantization with calibration) training—resulting in a restructured and more efficient pro­
cess. In addition to direct optimizations, accurate proxy mechanisms were incorporated
to bypass certain stages of the pipeline, thereby avoiding unnecessary time consumption.
To serve as a structural backbone for the Neural Architecture Search (NAS) process,
a custom convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture, named TakuNet, was devel­
oped. TakuNet offers a carefully designed structure composed of well­chosen layers and
operations that guide the generation of efficient and deployable models. To assess the
deployability of the proposed models under realistic conditions, the Arduino Nano 33 BLE
Sense Rev2 was selected as the target deployment environment. This choice enables
direct measurement of real­world metrics such as energy consumption and memory us­
age, providing practical insights beyond theoretical analysis. By grounding the evaluation
in actual hardware constraints, the study aims to bridge the gap between simulated per­
formance and real­life behavior.
The proposed approach was evaluated through multiple NAS runs under strict hardware
and time constraints. Results show that, within a fixed time budget, our method con­
sistently discovers higher­quality, memory­efficient models compared to standard NAS
pipelines. Moreover, the use of training­efficient strategies and predictive modeling sig­
nificantly reduces the time needed to reach similar levels of performance, highlighting the
effectiveness of our framework for practical TinyML deployment.
Keywords: Neural Architecture Search, TinyML, CNN, Surrogate Models, RankNet,
Resource­Constrained Inference, AutoML, Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Vasileios Moschou, MSc Computer Science, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Xenofon Fafoutis,Professor,Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Thesis Supervisor
iv
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background & Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Embedded Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Introduction to Neural Architecture Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Thesis Structure
13
4
Methodology and Tools
14
4.1
Hardware and Software Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Deployment Environment
21
5.1
Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2 Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Deployment Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.4
Evaluation on Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Architecture
26
6.1
Overview of TakuNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.2
Modular Building Blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.3
Enhancements in TakuNet Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7
Optimizations of NAS Algorithm
37
7.1
Memory Estimation and Memory­Aware­Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.2
Selection Strategies: Tournament Selection and RankNet . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.3
Speed­Up in Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7.4
Post training Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8
Performance Analysis
52
8.1
Memory­Aware­Filtering Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
8.2
RankNet Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
8.3
Early Stoppage Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.4
Performance Stop Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
8.5
Learning Rate Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
8.6
Combined Optimization Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8.7
Post­Training Quantization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
9
Conclusion
68
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
v
==PAGE:7==
10 Future Work
70
10.1 Suggested improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
10.2 Generalization to Other Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
10.3 Application to Diverse Network Architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
10.4 Expansion of Search Space and Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
10.5 Evaluation in Unsupervised and Self­supervised Settings
. . . . . . . . . . 72
A Appendix
73
Bibliography
74
vi
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background & Motivation
The rapid expansion of the Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystem has led to widespread
deployment of embedded devices equipped with sensors and low­power microcontrollers.
These devices are expected to operate continuously in energy­ and memory­constrained
environments, often disconnected from cloud services. Offloading raw sensor data to
centralized servers for processing introduces latency, energy costs, and privacy risks.
This has sparked significant interest in Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML)—a field that
focuses on running neural networks entirely on­device.
TinyML enables applications such as on­device speech recognition, gesture detection,
and image classification, especially in always­on sensors, wearables, and smart home
devices. To make this feasible, researchers have developed compact and efficient deep
learning model architectures tailored to edge hardware. MobileNets, for example, lever­
age depthwise separable convolutions to build lightweight convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) that perform well on mobile vision tasks—such as image classification, object de­
tection, or augmented reality—while maintaining low computational cost [1]. EfficientNet
extends the idea of designing efficient CNNs by introducing compound scaling, a princi­
pled method that simultaneously scales a model’s depth (number of layers), width (number
of channels per layer), and input resolution in a balanced way. Rather than scaling these
dimensions arbitrarily or independently, compound scaling uses a fixed set of coefficients
to uniformly allocate available computational resources across all three dimensions. This
results in models that achieve better accuracy and efficiency trade­offs across a range of
resource constraints, making EfficientNet well­suited for deployment on both mobile and
server­class devices [2].
Other techniques such as network pruning and quantization further improve model effi­
ciency by compressing neural networks without significantly sacrificing accuracy. Net­
work pruning works by identifying and removing weights or neurons that contribute little to
the model’s output, thereby reducing the overall number of parameters and computational
operations. Quantization, on the other hand, reduces the precision of numerical represen­
tations (e.g., converting 32­bit floating­point weights to 8­bit integers), which decreases
memory usage and speeds up inference, especially on hardware with limited floating­point
support. Combined, these strategies play a crucial role in advancing resource­efficient
deep learning, making it feasible to run complex models on smartphones, IoT devices,
and other edge platforms with constrained computational and energy budgets [3].
Despite these advances, TinyML deployments face tight hardware limits. For example,
the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2 has only 256 KB of RAM and 1 MB of flash memory.
Under such constraints, even a quantized MobileNet­V2 may exceed available memory.
These conditions demand highly compact architectures and efficient inference libraries
optimized for microcontrollers.
While hand­designed architectures have led to significant advancements, the process of
manually crafting efficient neural networks is both time­consuming and labor­intensive, of­
ten requiring deep expertise and extensive trial­and­error. Despite the progress achieved
through expert intuition, manually designed models can still be suboptimal, especially
when targeting constrained environments. To address this challenge, Neural Architecture
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
1
==PAGE:9==
Search (NAS) was introduced as an automated approach to discover high­performing ar­
chitectures by systematically exploring large design spaces [4]. NAS has been shown
to produce models that match or even surpass human­designed architectures on bench­
marks such as CIFAR­10 and CIFAR­100. However, while NAS reduces the burden on
human designers, it often incurs a high computational cost, making it impractical for many
real­world scenarios without further optimization.
1.2
Problem Statement
Despite its ability to automate neural network design and reduce reliance on expert knowl­
edge, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) remains highly computationally expensive.
For example, Liu et al.
used a reinforcement learning–based NAS framework to de­
sign a model for CIFAR­10, requiring 28 days of computation on 800 GPUs [4]. Such
computational demands make NAS inaccessible to most researchers and wholly unsuit­
able for deployment on­device. Moreover, most NAS frameworks are not designed to
be hardware­aware; they do not account for the strict memory, latency, and energy con­
straints of microcontroller­class devices.
These limitations motivate the need to make NAS both efficient and hardware­aware.
This thesis addresses two central research questions:
1. How can we drastically accelerate NAS, making it computationally feasible for
small­scale research and practical deployment?
2. How can we incorporate hardware­awareness into the NAS process, ensuring
that discovered architectures meet strict constraints in terms of memory, latency,
and computational budget?
To tackle these challenges, we explore novel strategies—such as lightweight evaluation
proxies and search space constraints—that reduce redundant computation, guide the
search more intelligently, and generate architectures suitable for real­world embedded
platforms. By developing a streamlined and constrained NAS pipeline, this work con­
tributes toward making automated model design both feasible and practical for TinyML
applications.
1.3
Scope
This thesis defines a deliberate and well­contained scope, focusing on a specific applica­
tion area, methodological approach, and deployment context. The following subsections
outline the boundaries of the work in terms of dataset choice, search methodology, hard­
ware platform, performance metrics, and acknowledged limitations.
1.3.1
Dataset Used
This work focuses on an image classification task using the CIFAR­100 dataset. All experi­
ments and evaluations are conducted on CIFAR­100, which serves solely as a benchmark
problem to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed NAS framework. Importantly, the
goal of this work is not to optimize for a specific dataset, but rather to design and evaluate
a general, resource­aware NAS framework suitable for embedded deployment. As such,
testing on similar datasets would offer limited additional insight into the contributions of
this work. For that reason, no experiments were conducted on alternative datasets such
as CIFAR­10 or ImageNet. CIFAR­100, with its relatively high complexity (100 classes)
and manageable size, offers a sufficiently challenging yet tractable test case for validating
the performance and efficiency of the proposed approach.
2
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:10==
1.3.2
Neural Architecture Search Methodology
This research employs a custom Genetic Algorithm (GA) as the sole strategy for Neu­
ral Architecture Search (NAS). This evolutionary approach defines the methodological
scope of the study: all proposed optimizations, evaluations, and observations are made
in the context of GA­based search. Alternative NAS techniques—such as reinforcement
learning­based controllers or differentiable NAS methods—are not implemented or eval­
uated. While these methods may be discussed in the literature review to provide context,
no comparative analysis is performed.
The objective of this work is not to develop novel reinforcement learning strategies or
gradient­based NAS algorithms, but to investigate how a GA­driven NAS framework can
be significantly accelerated and adapted for deployment on resource­constrained em­
bedded platforms. As such, the focus remains entirely on improving the efficiency and
practicality of evolutionary NAS under real­world constraints.
1.3.3
Embedded Deployment Focus
The resulting neural network models are optimized for deployment on microcontroller­
based platforms, with the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2 serving as the primary ref­
erence device for evaluation. This board, featuring an Arm Cortex­M4F MCU running at
64 MHz with 1 MB flash and 256 KB RAM [5], exemplifies the type of resource­constrained
embedded hardware targeted in this work. All optimization techniques—such as model
quantization and compression—were designed with embedded memory constraints in
mind. After quantization, a custom algorithm estimates the model’s memory footprint to
ensure it fits within the target device’s available resources. Although deployment experi­
ments were carried out specifically on the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2, the devel­
oped code and methodology are designed to be portable across similar embedded plat­
forms. Standard embedded ML toolchains, such as TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers,
were used for inference, ensuring broad applicability beyond the specific hardware refer­
ence. By focusing the deployment on a single, well­characterized device, the research
enables consistent evaluation under known resource constraints, while retaining gener­
alizability to other comparable microcontroller­based systems. More in­depth information
about the microcontroller and its deployment environment can be found in Chapter 5.
1.3.4
Performance Metrics
This research defines a clear set of metrics to evaluate both the quality and practical
viability of the neural network models generated through the NAS process. These metrics
are chosen to align closely with the constraints and goals of deploying deep learning
models on ultra­low­power embedded systems. The metrics are considered at two key
stages of the workflow:
• During the NAS process, to guide architecture selection and pruning via predictive
models and constraint checks.
• After deployment on Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2, to validate actual on­device
behavior and efficiency.
The primary performance metrics are the following:
Memory usage
Memory efficiency is assessed in two dimensions:
• Static memory usage (Flash): This includes the size of the compiled model binary
(weights, parameters, and code) stored in the microcontroller’s non­volatile flash
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
3
==PAGE:11==
memory. The total must remain under the 1MB limit of the Arduino Nano 33 BLE
Sense Rev2.
• Runtime memory usage (RAM): This includes memory used during inference (acti­
vations, buffers, stack, and heap). Since the target device only has 256KB of RAM,
models must be sufficiently compact to run within this tight constraint. Excessive
RAM usage can lead to runtime errors or unpredictable behavior.
Classification accuracy
Although the focus is on efficiency, model accuracy on the CIFAR­100 dataset remains
a key metric. The objective is to maintain as high accuracy as possible while minimizing
model complexity. This trade­off between performance and resource usage is at the core
of this thesis, and all evaluated architectures are measured for their top­1 classification
accuracy on a held­out test set.
Energy Consumption
Energy efficiency is a critical concern for embedded systems, where power budgets are
often extremely limited. In this work, direct power measurements were successfully per­
formed to quantify energy consumption, using appropriate tools to capture metrics such
as power draw (in milliwatts) and energy usage (in joules). These measurements enabled
a rigorous, hardware­level evaluation of model efficiency.
Notably, this work takes a step further by actively incorporating energy consumption into
the model evaluation and selection process. This energy­aware approach is relatively
novel in the context of NAS for embedded devices, where energy is often overlooked.
By aligning design choices—such as minimizing model size, computation, and memory
access—with real­world energy measurements, this work contributes to the development
of truly deployment­ready, energy­efficient models.
1.3.5
Limitations and Exclusions
While this study aims to address key challenges in resource­efficient Neural Architecture
Search (NAS), certain aspects fall outside its scope due to practical constraints:
On­Device Training
This work does not include training neural networks directly on the embedded device. All
architecture search and model training are conducted on conventional computing plat­
forms. The microcontroller—specifically, the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2—is used
solely for deploying pre­trained models and evaluating their on­device inference perfor­
mance. On­device training is excluded and considered outside of this research scope.
1.3.6
Summary
By focusing on these well­defined and measurable performance metrics, this work en­
sures that the proposed NAS framework and the resulting models are not only theoretically
sound but also practically deployable. The approach emphasizes real­world constraints,
which are often overlooked in academic work, thereby bridging the gap between deep
learning research and embedded systems deployment.
4
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Embedded Systems
Embedded systems are specialized computing systems designed to perform dedicated
functions within a larger device or system, often subject to real­time operational con­
straints. Unlike general­purpose computers, embedded systems are typically built around
microcontroller units (MCUs)—single integrated chips that include a processor, memory,
and interfaces—allowing them to be highly compact and task­specific.
These systems are characterized by limited resources in terms of processing power,
memory, and storage.
Moreover, they must often meet strict real­time requirements,
meaning they must respond to events or sensor inputs within fixed deadlines to ensure
correct overall system behavior [6].
Because many embedded devices run on battery or have tight power budgets, energy
efficiency is a paramount concern. They are designed to operate with minimal power
consumption—often on the order of milliwatts or less—while still performing their intended
functions.
In summary, embedded systems—particularly those based on microcontrollers—are de­
signed to prioritize reliability, minimal memory usage, and energy efficiency over raw
computational performance. Their architectures are optimized for executing specific, well­
defined tasks under strict resource constraints, favoring low power consumption, compact
form factors, and operational simplicity rather than high­throughput processing. These
characteristics make embedded systems ideal for applications where responsiveness,
longevity, and resource­aware operation are more critical than general­purpose comput­
ing power. As a result, they are widely used in modern electronics, including household
appliances, wearable devices, automotive control units, and industrial sensors.
A typical microcontroller­based embedded device might run at only a few tens of mega­
hertz and have memory on the order of kilobytes to a few hundred kilobytes. For example,
the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2 is a representative edge microcontroller platform
that features a 32­bit Arm Cortex­M4 CPU running at 64 MHz, with 1 MB of flash storage
and only 256 KB of RAM.
These modest specifications underscore the severe resource constraints under which em­
bedded devices operate. Real­time control loops and signal processing tasks are com­
monly handled on such hardware, but running computationally intensive algorithms (like
deep neural networks) is challenging without special optimization.
In many cases, embedded software must be carefully implemented in C/C++ or even as­
sembly, and may run bare­metal or with a lightweight real­time operating system (RTOS),
to meet the timing and memory limitations [6]. Furthermore, because the device may
be deployed in an unattended environment on a small power source, strategies for
conserving energy—such as duty cycling, low­power sleep modes, and efficient use of
peripherals—are crucial.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
5
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Introduction to Neural Architecture Search
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a core component of Automated Machine Learn­
ing (AutoML) that focuses on systematically exploring neural network design spaces to
identify optimal architectures [7].
A typical NAS framework can be described along three fundamental dimensions [7]:
• Search Space: The set of allowable operations, layer types, connections, and ar­
chitectural motifs that define possible candidate networks.
• Search Strategy: The algorithm used to explore the search space, such as evolu­
tionary algorithms, reinforcement learning, or gradient­based methods.
• Performance Estimation: The mechanism for evaluating candidate models, en­
abling the search algorithm to prioritize promising architectures in subsequent iter­
ations.
This structured view of NAS provides a foundation for designing diverse and extensi­
ble systems. The following sections provide a comprehensive overview of prominent
NAS methodologies—including black­box search, differentiable approaches, and weight­
sharing techniques—with a focus on analyzing their respective advantages, limitations,
and applicability in the context of resource­constrained deployment scenarios.
2.2.1
Default NAS: Black­Box Approach
The default form of NAS is commonly referred to as black­box NAS, where the archi­
tecture search is formulated as a discrete, non­differentiable optimization problem. In
this paradigm, the search algorithm treats each candidate architecture as an indivisible
unit—without access to its internal structure. Each model is trained independently and
evaluated solely based on a predefined fitness function, such as accuracy, inference la­
tency, or model size.
Popular search strategies for black­box NAS include reinforcement learning (RL), evolu­
tionary algorithms (EA), and Bayesian optimization [8]. These methods work by sampling
and evaluating entire architectures, and then using performance feedback to guide future
exploration.
Advantages:
• Flexible and expressive: can handle arbitrary architectures and constraints (e.g.,
latency, energy, memory).
• Supports any performance metric, not limited to differentiable objectives.
Disadvantages:
• Extremely computationally expensive; early approaches required thousands of GPU
days [9].
Due to the significant computational burden associated with black­box NAS, various opti­
mization strategies have been proposed to improve its efficiency while maintaining com­
petitive performance. Among the most prominent are DARTS (Differentiable Architecture
Search) and Supernet­based NAS methods. Both approaches aim to reduce the cost
of architecture evaluation by introducing weight­sharing mechanisms, allowing multiple
candidate architectures to be trained and assessed within a unified framework.
6
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:14==
2.2.2
Optimization Technique 1: Differentiable NAS (DARTS)
DARTS (Differentiable ARchiTecture Search) addresses the limitations of discrete NAS
by relaxing the search space into a continuous domain through the introduction of dif­
ferentiable architecture parameters [9]. Rather than evaluating individual architectures
independently, DARTS constructs a single over­parameterized supernet that includes all
candidate operations at each layer or edge. Each operation oi, parameterized by its own
weights wi, is assigned a continuous architecture weight αi that reflects its relative impor­
tance:
y =
m
∑
i=1
αi oi(x; wi),
αi ≥0,
m
∑
i=1
αi = 1
(2.1)
This formulation enables gradient­based optimization over both:
• The standard network weights wi (e.g., convolution filters within each operation oi),
and
• The architecture weights αi that govern the contribution of each operation.
Each operation oi typically corresponds to a primitive building block selected from a prede­
fined set—such as standard convolution, depthwise separable convolution, max pooling,
average pooling, skip connection, or zero operation (i.e., no connection). These candi­
date operations are applied in parallel to the same input x during the forward pass of the
supernet. Their individual outputs are then combined through a weighted sum, where the
weights αi are learnable parameters that indicate the relative importance of each opera­
tion.
This soft selection mechanism allows the model to explore multiple architectural choices
simultaneously in a differentiable manner, enabling efficient optimization via standard gra­
dient descent. Once training is complete, the supernet is discretized by selecting, for each
layer, the operation with the highest corresponding αi, thereby yielding a final, deployable
architecture.
What DARTS Does (Simplified):
• Builds a supernet with all possible operations active via softmax weights.
• Learns both model parameters and architecture jointly via gradient descent.
• After training, selects the most likely operation per layer (argmax of α).
Strengths:
• Much faster than black­box NAS (orders of magnitude fewer evaluations).
• Enables efficient gradient­based architecture search.
Limitations:
• Only works for differentiable and pre­defined search spaces.
• Cannot easily incorporate hard hardware constraints (e.g., RAM/Flash).
• Often suffers from optimization instability and performance collapse [10].
• Requires retraining the final architecture after discretization.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
7
==PAGE:15==
2.2.3
Optimization Technique 2: Supernet­Based NAS
Supernet­based NAS techniques such as Once­for­All [11] and BigNAS [12] train a sin­
gle, unified supernet that includes all candidate subarchitectures. Unlike DARTS, which
mixes all operations during each forward pass, these methods activate only one sub­
network at a time during training. Subnetworks share weights where applicable, making
training efficient.
What Supernet­Based NAS Does:
• Trains one large supernet that includes all subnetworks.
• At each training step, samples and trains a single subnetwork (one path).
• After training, subarchitectures can be extracted and evaluated without retraining.
Key Techniques:
• Weight sharing: Subnets inherit trained weights from the supernet.
• Progressive shrinking: Trains large subnets first, then adapts to smaller ones (e.g.,
lower width or depth).
Strengths:
• Extremely fast subnet evaluation — no need to retrain.
• Naturally supports hardware­aware search (latency, RAM, Flash).
• Subnet evaluation is realistic, since only one op is active at a time.
Limitations:
• Requires careful training to ensure fair weight sharing.
• Subnets may suffer from gradient interference; performance may not fully match
retrained models.
• Fine­tuning may be required for deployment­quality accuracy.
2.2.4
Thesis NAS Approach
In this work, we adopt a black­box NAS approach based on a Genetic Algorithm (GA)
to optimize neural network architectures. This strategy offers several advantages that
align closely with the objectives of this thesis:
• It enables the direct integration of hard deployment constraints such as RAM and
Flash memory usage.
• It allows for the evaluation of fully instantiated models using custom estimators,
rather than relying on proxies or shared weights.
• It supports an unconstrained and highly flexible search space, free from the limita­
tions of differentiability or predefined operation sets.
The decision not to adopt DARTS stems primarily from its inability to accurately estimate
memory usage during the search process—a critical limitation for this research, which
focuses on deployment to hardware with strict resource constraints. Although DARTS is
efficient, it optimizes architectures in a differentiable space and relies on retraining after
discretization, which can introduce discrepancies between search­time and deployment­
time performance.
8
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:16==
Supernet­based NAS methods were also excluded due to their reliance on weight sharing
across subnetworks. While this allows for efficient training, it can lead to unreliable per­
formance estimates, as the accuracy of a subnetwork trained within a supernet may not
reflect its true capability when trained independently. Moreover, since this work explores
a novel performance prediction (e.g., via RankNet; see Section 7.2.2 for more details) re­
lying on weight­shared estimates is less justifiable when alternative, training­free ranking
mechanisms can provide accurate relative comparisons between candidate architectures.
Overall, the GA­based black­box NAS framework adopted in this thesis offers a robust
balance between search flexibility, hardware­awareness, and deployment realism, mak­
ing it particularly suitable for discovering efficient neural networks tailored to resource­
constrained embedded systems.
2.3
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
In recent years, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have emerged as powerful tools in
the field of machine learning, particularly in applications involving complex and high­
dimensional data [13]. Inspired by the structure and function of the human brain, these
networks are capable of learning intricate patterns and relationships from raw input data
through a process known as representation learning [14]. Among the various architec­
tures developed, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have proven to be especially
effective in handling tasks related to image recognition, classification, and computer vi­
sion [15, 16]. CNNs are a class of deep learning models specifically designed to process
data with a grid­like topology, such as 2­dimensional (2D) images. Unlike traditional fully
connected neural networks, where each neuron is connected to every neuron in the pre­
vious layer, CNNs exploit the spatial structure of image data through local connections,
shared weights, and translation invariance. [16].
2.3.1
CNN Architecture
A typical Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture can be divided into two primary
components: feature extraction and classification.
Feature Extraction:
The feature extraction stage in a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) typically includes
the following components:
• Convolutional Layers: These layers apply a set of learnable filters (kernels) across
the spatial dimensions of the input. Each filter detects specific patterns, such as
edges, corners, or textures, by performing local dot products between the filter and
regions of the input. The result is a set of feature maps that encode localized visual
information.
• Activation Functions: After convolution, a non­linear activation function is applied
element­wise to the feature maps. A commonly used activation is the Rectified
Linear Unit (ReLU), which introduces non­linearity into the network and enables it
to learn complex, non­linear mappings between inputs and outputs.
• Pooling Layers: Also known as subsampling or downsampling layers, pooling lay­
ers (e.g., max pooling) reduce the spatial resolution of feature maps. This decreases
computational complexity and helps the network become invariant to small transla­
tions in the input. Pooling layers retain the most salient features while discarding
less important details.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
9
==PAGE:17==
Classification:
After several convolutional and pooling stages, the network transitions to the classification
component. At this stage, the extracted feature maps are either flattened or aggregated
using techniques such as Global Average Pooling, and passed to one or more fully con­
nected (dense) layers.
These final layers are responsible for interpreting the high­level features and performing
the actual classification task. The network typically concludes with a dense output layer
or a global average pooling layer that produces a vector of class scores or probabilities,
often using a softmax activation in the case of multi­class classification.
2.3.2
CNNs for Image Classification
CNNs provide several advantages for image classification tasks such as CIFAR­100.
They eliminate the need for manual feature engineering by learning complex features
directly from data. Their hierarchical feature learning and parameter sharing allow for
effective generalization across the image domain.
These properties have enabled CNNs to achieve state­of­the­art accuracy on standard
benchmarks such as CIFAR­10/100 and ImageNet.
Prominent CNN architectures—
including VGG, ResNet, and MobileNet—have demonstrated that increasing network
depth and complexity can improve accuracy. However, this often comes at the cost of
higher computational and memory demands, which is problematic for deployment on em­
bedded systems.
This tension between accuracy and resource constraints motivates efforts to optimize
CNNs for embedded environments, seeking models that maintain performance while min­
imizing resource usage.
2.3.3
Key Advantages of CNNs
CNNs offer several advantages over traditional machine learning models in the context of
image processing:
• Automatic Feature Extraction: CNNs eliminate the need for manual feature engi­
neering by automatically learning relevant features from the data during training.
• Parameter Efficiency: Through the use of shared weights and local connectivity,
CNNs significantly reduce the number of parameters, improving training efficiency
and reducing the risk of overfitting.
• Translation Invariance: Because of the convolutional architecture and pooling lay­
ers, CNNs are naturally invariant to small translations, rotations, and distortions in
the input data.
• Hierarchical Feature Learning: CNNs are capable of learning features at multiple
levels of abstraction, from simple edges to complex objects.
10
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:18==
2.3.4
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) and CNN Optimization
The architecture of a CNN—including layer types, filter sizes, optimizers, number of chan­
nels, and depth—directly affects both accuracy and computational cost. Designing op­
timal CNNs under such constraints is a challenging task. Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) offers a solution by automating the exploration of possible architectures to find
high­performing models under specific requirements [17].
NAS can incorporate such constraints into its search objective, enabling the discovery
of CNN architectures that are suitable for deployment on resource­constrained platforms.
Recent research, including projects like MCUNet, has shown that NAS can generate com­
pact and efficient CNNs that retain high classification accuracy while fitting within tight
hardware budgets. [17].
These automatically discovered architectures have demonstrated success on vision tasks
like CIFAR­100, operating effectively on low­power microcontroller­class devices.
2.3.5
TakuNet
In this thesis, we adopted TakuNet—a lightweight convolutional neural network architec­
ture originally proposed for real­time aerial image classification in emergency response
scenarios [18]. TakuNet was explicitly designed to operate efficiently on embedded sys­
tems such as the NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano and Raspberry Pi, while achieving high ac­
curacy on aerial datasets like AIDER and AIDERv2.
The original TakuNet architecture employs depth­wise separable convolutions and an
early downsampling stem to reduce spatial dimensions in the initial layers, significantly
lowering computational complexity. It also integrates dense connections for improved
gradient flow and convergence, grouped point­wise convolutions to reduce parameter
count, and Global Response Normalization (GRN) to enhance feature diversity and con­
trast. Furthermore, the model is trained using half­precision floating point (FP16), which
improves compatibility with hardware accelerators like NVIDIA TensorRT.
In this work, we adopted TakuNet as a baseline architecture and design template due to
its promising trade­off between accuracy, parameter count, and computational efficiency.
Although the original implementation demonstrated competitive performance when com­
pared to other state­of­the­art models (see Table 2.1), it also exhibited significantly lower
resource demands in terms of memory and computation. This makes it particularly well­
suited for deployment on microcontroller­class embedded devices, where resource con­
straints are a critical design consideration.
Building upon the efficiency and suitability of this architecture, we adopted TakuNet as
the CNN for our experiments. We then applied a Neural Architecture Search (NAS) al­
gorithm to explore and identify the best possible architectural configuration tailored specif­
ically to our target dataset.
In addition, we integrated several enhancement techniques aimed at improving general­
ization and validation accuracy. Further architectural details and optimization strategies
are discussed in Chapter 6.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
11
==PAGE:19==
Model
Parameters
Model Size (MB)
F1­score
FLOPS
VGG16 [19]
14,840,133
59.36
0.601
17.62G
ResNet50 [20]
23,518,277
94.07
0.917
4.83G
SqueezeNet [21]
737,989
2.95
0.890
845.38M
EfficientNet B0 [2]
4,013,953
15.66
0.905
479.68M
MobileNetV2 [22]
2,203,277
8.92
0.930
71.82M
MobileNetV3 [23]
4,208,437
16.08
0.915
206.22M
ShuffleNet [24]
1,258,729
5.03
0.908
176.82M
EmergencyNet [25]
90,963
0.360
0.896
77.34M
TinyEmergencyNet [26]
39,334
0.160
0.895
36.30M
TakuNetfp16
37,685
0.15
0.943
35.93M
Table 2.1: Comparison of model parameters, size, F1­score, and FLOPs on AIDER
dataset.
12
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:20==
3
Thesis Structure
This thesis presents a series of optimization strategies aimed at accelerating Neural Ar­
chitecture Search (NAS) in the context of resource­constrained deployment. While the
proposed methods are evaluated using the TakuNet architecture and the Arduino Nano
33 BLE Sense Rev2, these choices serve solely as proof­of­concept. The optimizations
are not specific to this platform or architecture—they are designed to be generalizable
and adaptable. However, they are platform­aware: they rely on knowledge of key hard­
ware characteristics such as available RAM and Flash memory, but do not depend on any
particular microcontroller or neural network design.
The primary objective of this work is to reduce the time and computational effort required
to evaluate and select high­performing models for embedded systems, without compro­
mising model quality. To achieve this, we introduce a set of optimization techniques that
operate at different stages of the model development pipeline. Specifically, we categorize
our contributions into three phases:
• Pre­training optimizations: Techniques that estimate key metrics or prioritize
promising candidates before training begins, reducing the number of models that
need full evaluation.
• In­training optimizations: Methods applied during training to accelerate conver­
gence, improve generalization, and avoid unnecessary computation.
• Post­training optimizations: Procedures applied after training to refine model se­
lection, ensure deployment feasibility, and reduce validation overhead.
To guide the reader through the thesis:
• Chapter 4 presents the methodology, tools, and frameworks used to develop and
evaluate the proposed approach. It details the original experimental pipeline of the
Genetic Algorithm employed for Neural Architecture Search (NAS) targeting micro­
controllers, analyzes the time cost of each stage in the process, and introduces a
novel architecture designed to accelerate each step of the pipeline.
• Chapters 5 and 6 detail the deployment environment and baseline model architec­
ture used as a reference throughout this work. The deployment chapter 5 outlines
the hardware constraints and operating conditions relevant to embedded inference,
while the chapter 6 presents the structure and characteristics of the TakuNet model
used as the foundation for optimizations. Together, these chapters motivate the
design space and constraints targeted by our proposed methodology.
• Chapters 7 and 8 provide an in­depth presentation of the proposed optimization
techniques of each pipeline step, covering their implementation details as well as
their quantitative impact on the performance and efficiency of the Neural Architec­
ture Search process.
This chapter sets the stage for the rest of the thesis by outlining the problem space, intro­
ducing the core contributions, and preparing the reader for the detailed discussions that
follow.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
13
==PAGE:21==
4
Methodology and Tools
4.1
Hardware and Software Tools
The methodology used in this work integrates machine learning frameworks with a target
embedded hardware platform to enable the development, deployment, and evaluation of
efficient neural networks. Our experimental setup relies on a combination of software tools
for model design, training, and inference, alongside hardware components for deployment
and energy measurement. Below, we detail the key tools and platforms used throughout
the pipeline, including TensorFlow and Keras for model development, Nordic’s Power
Profiler Kit II for energy profiling, and TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers for deployment
on embedded devices.
TensorFlow and Keras
We built and trained all neural networks using TensorFlow (version 2.18) with the Keras
API. The TakuNetModel class is a Keras Model under the hood, composed of standard
Keras layers such as Conv2D, DepthwiseConv2D, and Dense. This choice provided high­
level flexibility in defining arbitrary model architectures.
Training was performed on a workstation with GPU support, The GPU used in our exper­
iments was the Tesla V100 SXM2 32GB. In addition, we used auxiliary Python libraries:
scikit-learn for computing evaluation metrics (precision, recall, F1­score), and pandas
for logging results. The genetic algorithm are also implemented in Python using NumPy
and TensorFlow. This entire experimentation framework runs on DTU’s HPC.
Power Profiler Kit II
The Power Profiler Kit II (PPK2) from Nordic Semiconductor was used to both power
the Arduino Nano BLE 33 Sense and measure its current consumption during inference.
The PPK2 was operated in source meter mode, supplying a constant voltage while si­
multaneously recording the current draw over time. This setup enabled reliable and high­
resolution profiling of the power usage associated with different model configurations de­
ployed on the device.
The collected current data, combined with the inference time, was used to estimate the
total energy consumption for each model. This allowed for a practical evaluation of the
trade­offs between model accuracy, size, and energy efficiency [27].
TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers
To enable deployment of the trained models to the resource­constrained microcontroller,
we utilized TensorFlow Lite. Specifically, the trained models were first converted to the
TensorFlow Lite FlatBuffer format and then deployed using TensorFlow Lite for Microcon­
trollers (TFLite Micro).
TFLite Micro is a highly optimized inference engine tailored for memory­limited embedded
systems. It supports only a subset of TensorFlow operations, which guided our model
design to include only operators compatible with this runtime.
14
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:22==
4.2
System Architecture
When applying Neural Architecture Search (NAS) to microcontroller deployment, the
workflow typically follows a specific pipeline, illustrated in Figure 4.1.
During each iteration of the NAS process, a candidate neural network model is generated.
This model is trained and evaluated on the validation dataset. Then, it is converted into a
TensorFlow Lite (.tflite) format and subsequently into a C header file. This conversion
is necessary to enable deployment on the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2
It is important to note that the .tflite version of a model may not behave identically to its
original Keras counterpart. This discrepancy is primarily caused by the conversion pro­
cess, which often includes optimizations such as quantization, operator fusion, and other
graph transformations designed to reduce model size and improve inference efficiency
on embedded hardware.
Among these, quantization is the most impactful. It involves converting the original 32­
bit floating­point weights and activations into lower precision formats such as int8 or
float16, depending on the chosen quantization scheme. Each format offers different
trade­offs:
• Full Integer Quantization (int8): Converts all weights and activations to 8­bit in­
tegers. This significantly reduces memory and computational requirements and is
supported by most microcontrollers. However, it can introduce approximation errors
due to reduced numerical precision.
• Float16 Quantization: Converts weights to 16­bit floating point values while typi­
cally leaving activations in float32. It provides a balance between reduced model
size and higher numerical fidelity but requires hardware support for float16 infer­
ence.
Therefore, it is essential to re­evaluate the model’s accuracy after conversion to con­
firm that the .tflite version performs similarly to the original model. In practice, when
using full integer quantization with a properly selected representative dataset, the accu­
racy loss is often negligible [28].
After post­conversion validation, the model is deployed to the microcontroller, where key
hardware­related metrics such as RAM usage, Flash memory, and energy consumption
are measured. These hardware measurements are incorporated into the model’s over­
all fitness evaluation, guiding the NAS algorithm toward architectures that are not only
accurate but also resource­efficient.
This process is iteratively repeated using an evolutionary algorithm until a predefined
time limit is reached. Upon termination, the best models are presented as a Pareto front,
representing the trade­off between competing objectives such as predictive accuracy and
hardware efficiency.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.1: Typical NAS pipeline used in this thesis for deploying candidate models on
microcontrollers. Each candidate model is fully trained, converted, and deployed to collect
performance metrics.
16
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:24==
4.2.1
Pipeline Overview
The NAS­based deployment pipeline consists of the following key stages, each of which
plays a vital role in identifying high­performing and resource­efficient models.
These
stages are aligned with the flowchart shown in Figure 4.1.
Step 1: Define Model Architecture and Search Space
The first step of the pipeline involves defining the model architecture and the associated
search space. In this work, we use a custom neural network architecture, TakuNet. This
architecture is parameterized to allow variation in its design, enabling it to adapt to different
structural configurations.
The search space is defined as the set of all permissible values for key architectural pa­
rameters, including the number of layers, filter sizes, kernel dimensions, activation func­
tions, and other relevant hyperparameters. These options are encoded in a structured
.json file that serves as the formal definition of the search space.
Step 2: Create Model and Train
In each iteration of the NAS process, a specific combination of architectural parameters is
sampled from the predefined search space. These parameters are applied to instantiate a
concrete variant of the TakuNet model, effectively customizing the network structure. The
resulting model represents a candidate solution whose performance will be assessed to
guide the search process.
This stage includes the core operations of training and evaluation. Each candidate model
is trained from scratch on the CIFAR­100 dataset using TensorFlow 2.18.0, with GPU
acceleration enabled where available. The training loop tracks both training accuracy
and validation accuracy to monitor learning progress.
The NAS algorithm used in this work is a custom genetic algorithm (GA), which main­
tains a population of candidate models.
For each generation, it applies evolutionary
operations—selection, crossover, and mutation—to produce new architectural configu­
rations:
• Selection: Top­performing models are chosen based on a fitness function that com­
bines classification accuracy and hardware efficiency.
• Crossover: Architectural traits from selected parent models are combined to create
new offspring models.
• Mutation: Random changes are introduced to certain parameters (e.g., filter sizes,
number of layers) to maintain diversity and explore the search space.
Step 3: Prepare Model for Embedded Device
Once a trained model has been selected as a candidate for deployment, it must be con­
verted into a format suitable for execution on resource­constrained microcontroller. This
involves two main steps: quantizing the model and converting it into a C­compatible for­
mat.
First, the Keras model is converted to the TensorFlow Lite format using full integer quan­
tization. This step reduces the model size and ensures compatibility with inference en­
gines such as TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers (TFLite Micro). All computations are
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
17
==PAGE:25==
constrained to 8­bit integers, and both input and output tensors are explicitly cast to uint8
to match microcontroller requirements.
After quantization, the resulting .tflite model is transformed into a C­style header file
containing a byte array. This is necessary because microcontrollers lack traditional file
systems; instead, the model must be compiled directly into the firmware. The generated
header defines the model as a static array and includes its length, allowing it to be linked
into the Arduino project at compile time.
This preparation step ensures that models trained in a high­level framework can be exe­
cuted efficiently on ultra­low­power embedded hardware.
Step 4: Deploy Model to Microcontroller
After the model has been converted and packaged into a compatible format, the final step
is deployment to the target microcontroller. This involves integrating the generated .h
header file—containing the quantized TFLite model—into an Arduino sketch.
The Arduino sketch, described in detail in Section 5.3, is responsible for initializing the
TFLite Micro interpreter, loading the model, preprocessing input data, running inference,
and interpreting the output predictions.
This deployment process enables full on­device evaluation, allowing us to measure real­
world inference behavior, including memory usage and energy consumption.
These
hardware­level metrics are essential for validating whether the model meets the con­
straints of the embedded platform and for feeding accurate feedback into the NAS loop.
Step 5: Evaluate Model Loop
Once the model has been deployed to the microcontroller, a set of key performance met­
rics is collected to evaluate its suitability for embedded deployment. These include clas­
sification accuracy, RAM usage, Flash memory footprint, and energy consumption during
inference.
The collected metrics are then passed back into the NAS framework, enabling multi­
objective comparison of candidate architectures. This approach ensures that model se­
lection is not solely driven by validation accuracy, but also by practical deployment factors
that directly impact real­world usability on resource­constrained hardware.
Based on these evaluations, the NAS algorithm updates its population by favoring archi­
tectures that strike a better balance between accuracy and efficiency. New candidate
models are derived from the best­performing ones using evolutionary operations such as
crossover and mutation, and the evaluation cycle continues. This iterative loop repeats
until the predefined time or resource budget is exhausted, at which point the process
terminates and the final set of Pareto­optimal models is returned.
18
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:26==
4.2.2
Timing of the Processes
To achieve satisfactory performance, the training process typically requires at least 70
epochs, which takes approximately 20 to 30 minutes, depending on the model architec­
ture and size. The subsequent conversion and quantization steps typically take between
17 and 30 seconds per model, including both the conversion process and the evaluation of
the model’s accuracy. Model deployment—including compilation, tensor allocation, and
inference execution (detailed further in Chapter 5)—requires approximately 3 minutes.
Since the measurement of hardware metrics (such as RAM, Flash, and energy consump­
tion) is integrated into the deployment step, its overhead is considered negligible.
These values provide useful insight into where optimization efforts should be focused.
In particular, reducing the time required for training is crucial for increasing the number
of models that can be evaluated within a given time frame. This, in turn, enhances the
effectiveness of the NAS process by allowing a broader exploration of the search space,
thereby increasing the likelihood of discovering high­performing architectures.
To address these limitations, several workflow optimizations were introduced. These are
discussed in the following subsection.
4.2.3
Optimized Version
Given the timing constraints outlined above, several workflow optimizations were intro­
duced to increase the efficiency of the NAS process and reduce the time and computa­
tional cost associated with model evaluation.
• Training Time Reduction: Training was one of the most time­consuming steps in
the pipeline. To reduce its impact, we introduced strategies such as early stop­
ping based on validation accuracy and the use of training­time proxies. These ap­
proaches allowed us to identify underperforming models earlier in the process and
avoid unnecessary training.
• Proxy­Based Evaluation: Instead of fully deploying every candidate model, we de­
veloped lightweight proxy models that estimate hardware­related metrics—such as
memory usage and inference time—based solely on architectural parameters. This
allowed us to quickly filter out infeasible candidates without performing full conver­
sion and deployment.
• Selective Conversion: Since only a small number of models are expected to be
Pareto­optimal, we avoided converting every trained model into the TFLite format.
Instead, only those that showed strong potential in early evaluation were converted
and prepared for deployment, saving both conversion time and system resources.
• Robust Quantization Pipeline: To ensure that the quantized version of a model
closely mirrors the original in terms of performance, we applied consistent quantiza­
tion schemes and used well­calibrated representative datasets. This allowed us to
rely on post­training accuracy estimates and limit the need for repeated on­device
validation.
By introducing these optimizations, we significantly reduced the number of models that
needed to go through the full pipeline—from training to deployment—while still ensuring
the quality and hardware feasibility of the final set of candidate models. A visual overview
of this improved process is shown in Figure 4.2.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.2: Improved NAS pipeline with early evaluation, proxy­based filtering, and re­
duced deployment load, allowing more efficient exploration of the search space.
20
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:28==
5
Deployment Environment
5.1
Description
In this thesis, we focus on designing neural network architectures that are suitable for
deployment on resource­constrained microcontrollers. To ground our work in practical,
real­world conditions, we use the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2 as a representa­
tive reference platform. This board features an Arm Cortex­M4 CPU with limited RAM
and Flash memory, making it a meaningful example of the challenges encountered in
edge deployment scenarios. Our goal is to demonstrate that lightweight, well­structured
models—optimized via Neural Architecture Search (NAS)—can achieve strong perfor­
mance while remaining compatible with low­power embedded devices.
Figure 5.1: Example of an Arduino Nano family microcontroller board. Modern TinyML
deployments target devices like the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2, which feature
low­power CPUs but only on the order of a few hundred kilobytes of SRAM and a few
megabytes of flash memory.
5.2
Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2 Specifications
The Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2 is a compact, low­power board designed for em­
bedded AI applications. The following are the key technical specifications:
• Processor: 64 MHz Arm Cortex­M4 CPU with FPU
• RAM: 256 KB
• Flash Memory: 1 MB
• Connectivity: Bluetooth 5.0 Low Energy
• Sensors: 9­axis IMU, microphone, temperature, humidity, pressure, color, gesture
• Power Consumption: Extremely low, suitable for battery­powered deployments
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
21
==PAGE:29==
Due to these hardware constraints, deploying deep learning models on this device re­
quires careful optimization of memory usage and computational complexity.
The model itself—meaning the weights and the compiled operations—is stored in the non­
volatile Flash memory. Therefore, the total model size must not exceed the available 1
MB of Flash. In contrast, RAM is volatile and used at runtime to store intermediate tensors,
activations, input/output buffers, and temporary computation data. During inference, a
structure known as the tensor arena is allocated in RAM to support these operations.
This arena must be statically pre­allocated and sized conservatively to avoid memory
allocation failures, while still allowing the model to run effectively.
Understanding the difference between these two memory types is crucial:
• Flash memory retains data after power­off and is used to store the model and pro­
gram code.
• RAM is cleared on reboot and is used dynamically during inference for data pro­
cessing.
Given the limited 256 KB of RAM, a large portion must be reserved for the tensor arena.
This requires balancing model complexity with available runtime memory. Optimizing both
Flash and RAM usage is essential to ensure the model fits within the constraints of the
device and executes reliably.
5.3
Deployment Process
To deploy the quantized TensorFlow Lite (TFLite) model on the device, a C++ sketch is
written in the Arduino IDE. This sketch integrates TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers
(TFLM) and includes logic to load the model, allocate memory, run inference, and output
results.
The critical components of this deployment are:
• Tensor Arena: A statically allocated memory buffer used by the TensorFlow Lite
for Microcontrollers (TFLM) runtime to manage all intermediate tensors during infer­
ence. This includes activations, input/output buffers, and temporary layer­specific
data. Unlike dynamic memory allocation, which is often unsupported or discouraged
in embedded environments, the tensor arena must be pre­allocated at compile time
and aligned (typically to 16 bytes) to meet the performance and alignment require­
ments of CMSIS­NN kernels.
The exact memory requirements of the tensor arena cannot be determined analyti­
cally in advance, as they depend on both the model architecture and runtime tensor
operations. A practical approach is to first determine the total available RAM on
the microcontroller, subtract any system and runtime overhead, and allocate the
remaining memory to the tensor arena. When the device is dedicated solely to run­
ning the model, maximizing the tensor arena size allows for the deployment of more
complex architectures while avoiding runtime allocation failures.
In our experiments, the tensor arena was allocated using the **maximum available
RAM** of the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2, after accounting for system over­
head. This ensured that the largest possible memory space was reserved for model
inference, enabling the evaluation of more expressive candidate architectures dur­
ing the NAS process.
22
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:30==
If a model requires more memory than what the tensor arena can provide—due to
its size or internal tensor complexity—the deployment will fail at runtime with an al­
location error. Specifically, the TFLM runtime will be unable to initialize necessary
buffers, resulting in execution failure or a hard fault. This makes it critical to accu­
rately estimate memory requirements during the NAS process and discard models
that exceed the deployable memory threshold before attempting deployment.
• Operation Resolver and CMSIS­NN Integration: The OpResolver in TensorFlow
Lite for Microcontrollers (TFLM) is a key component that acts as a registry linking
high­level operations defined in the model—such as CONV_2D, RELU, or SOFTMAX—
to their corresponding low­level implementations. These low­level implementations
are the concrete functions that carry out the underlying computations of each oper­
ation.
In performance­critical deployments on ARM Cortex­M microcontrollers, these im­
plementations are typically sourced from the CMSIS­NN library. CMSIS­NN (Cor­
tex Microcontroller Software Interface Standard ­ Neural Network) is a collection of
highly optimized C functions developed by Arm, specifically designed to accelerate
neural network inference on Cortex­M CPUs. It includes efficient kernels for core
operations like convolution, activation, pooling, and fully connected layers. These
kernels leverage the hardware’s SIMD ( Single Instruction, Multiple Data ) instruc­
tions and memory access patterns to minimize latency and power consumption.
For
example,
a
high­level
CONV_2D
operation
may
be
resolved
to
the
arm_depthwise_conv_opt
kernel
provided
by
CMSIS­NN.
This
mapping
is
handled transparently by the OpResolver, which ensures the model runs efficiently
on the target hardware.
Since all operator implementations are stored in the microcontroller’s Flash memory,
it is important to include only those operations actually required for inference. To
avoid unnecessary memory overhead, we use MicroMutableOpResolver instead of
AllOpsResolver. The MicroMutableOpResolver allows us to explicitly register only
the operators our model uses, resulting in a smaller binary size and more efficient
memory usage—critical for resource­constrained environments.
• Model Data (.h File): The model data represents a fully quantized neural network
in the TensorFlow Lite format. It encapsulates all the essential components of the
model, including its architecture (layers and operations), weights, biases, and quan­
tization parameters such as scale factors and zero points. These values are orga­
nized in a flat binary format and embedded in the sketch as a constant array stored
in Flash memory.
During execution, this data is interpreted by the TensorFlow Lite runtime to recon­
struct the model’s internal structure. Each layer—such as convolution, activation,
pooling, or softmax—is defined by its configuration and parameters within this bi­
nary blob. The interpreter reads and parses this data to initialize tensors, allocate
memory, and schedule operations for inference. Thus, the model data acts as the
blueprint and numerical foundation of the entire inference process.
• Input Data: Instead of acquiring real­time data from sensors, the deployment sketch
uses a predefined test image included in the source file image_data.h. This image
is typically represented as a const uint8_t[] array, and it is embedded into the
binary at compile time. As a result, it is stored in the device’s non­volatile Flash
memory.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
23
==PAGE:31==
At runtime, the pixel values from this array—already quantized and formatted to
match the model’s input requirements (e.g., shape, datatype, and scale)—are
copied into the input tensor buffer obtained from interpreter.input(0).
This
buffer is part of the tensor arena, which resides in RAM. The copying is performed
explicitly in a loop or via a call to memcpy, for example:
1
for (int i = 0; i < 3072; i++) {
2
input->data.uint8[i] = IMAGE_NAME[i];
3
}
Listing 5.1: Copying input image data ( test image ) from Flash to RAM input tensor
This means that although the test image consumes Flash memory, it does oc­
cupy RAM from the Tensor Arena during inference. Specifically, the input tensor
consumes a portion of the tensor arena, which also holds all intermediate activa­
tions, output tensors, and temporary buffers required by the model. For example, a
32×32×3 image with 8­bit quantization requires exactly 3,072 bytes (3 KB) of RAM
during inference.
This memory footprint must be considered when allocating the tensor arena. If the
input tensor, combined with the rest of the model’s memory requirements, exceeds
the available RAM, the inference will fail due to insufficient space. Therefore, even
for a predefined input, its RAM usage at runtime directly affects deployment feasi­
bility on memory­constrained microcontrollers.
• Interpreter: The tflite::MicroInterpreter is the central inference engine re­
sponsible for executing the model on the microcontroller. It manages the parsing of
the model structure, handles memory for all tensors, and coordinates the execution
flow of operations layer by layer. It is initialized with four key inputs: the model, an
operation resolver, a pre­allocated tensor arena, and the arena size.
Before inference can begin, the interpreter must call AllocateTensors(), which
analyzes the model architecture and allocates memory for all input, output, and
intermediate tensors within the arena. Once tensors are prepared and inputs are
loaded, inference is triggered by calling Invoke(), which executes each layer in
sequence and writes the final predictions to the output tensor.
• Inference Execution: Once the input data has been copied into the input tensor
and memory has been allocated via AllocateTensors(), the interpreter executes
the model by calling interpreter.Invoke(). This function runs the full inference
pipeline, layer by layer, using the model loaded in memory and the pre­allocated
tensor arena.
After inference, the result is stored in the output tensor, which can be accessed us­
ing interpreter.output(0). This tensor typically contains the model’s predicted
output, such as class probabilities or regression values, depending on the task.
The output represents a probability distribution over classes. The values are read
from the output tensor and printed to the serial monitor using Serial.print() and
Serial.println() for inspection. This setup allows the user to verify model predic­
tions on the predefined test input without requiring any external output hardware.
24
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:32==
1
if (interpreter.Invoke() != kTfLiteOk) {
2
Serial.println("Inference failed!");
3
return;
4
}
5
6
// Access output tensor
7
TfLiteTensor* output = interpreter.output(0);
8
for (int i = 0; i < output->dims->data[1]; i++) {
9
Serial.print("Class ");
10
Serial.print(i);
11
Serial.print(": ");
12
Serial.println(output->data.uint8[i]);
13
}
Listing 5.2: Running inference and printing the result to the serial monitor
This logic bridges the trained model and the embedded runtime, enabling low­power,
real­time inference directly on the microcontroller without cloud connectivity or additional
hardware support. The modularity of the setup allows easy substitution of input sources
or model variants, making it ideal for rapid prototyping and benchmarking.
5.4
Evaluation on Device
Once deployed, the TFLite model is evaluated directly on the Arduino to assess:
• Inference Latency: Time required for a single prediction.
• RAM & Flash Usage: Ensuring the model fits within RAM and Flash constrains.
• Prediction: We also verify that the model correctly predicts the given input image,
even though the accuracy of the quantized TFLite model has already been evaluated
in the development environment.
• Power: The microcontroller is powered with a stable 3.3 V supply provided by the
PPK2 in source meter mode. During a single inference, the PPK2 records the cur­
rent draw over time, allowing precise measurement of the power consumption and
computation of the total energy used for one inference cycle.
Testing was performed using real inputs and logs captured via serial communication to
measure performance.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
25
==PAGE:33==
6
Architecture
This chapter presents the architectural design of the proposed model, TakuNet, devel­
oped to support fast and memory­efficient neural architecture search (NAS), particularly
for embedded and resource­constrained environments. TakuNet is a lightweight convo­
lutional neural network originally designed for efficient real­time inference on resource­
constrained platforms [18]. The core design goal of TakuNet is to minimize the number of
parameters and computational cost without significantly sacrificing accuracy.
This architecture has been used as a template because, according to recent studies, it
requires significantly fewer parameters for a given dataset compared to other common
architectures such as SqueezeNet and MobileNet [18]. This makes it more feasible to
develop a model that fits within our deployment environment.
This architecture is used throughout the NAS algorithm with the goal of identifying the
optimal hyperparameters and optimizers for each layer. In this thesis, no additional lay­
ers are introduced; instead, only the layers parameters are tuned. This decision was
driven primarily by the limited time budget available for the NAS process, which was con­
strained to a few hours of execution. Expanding the search space to include architectural
changes—such as adding new layers—would have significantly increased the complexity
and duration of the search. Additionally, introducing extra layers could risk generating
models that exceed the resource limits of the target embedded device. For the avail­
able search time, exploring a wide range of parameters within a fixed architecture was
considered both computationally feasible and sufficiently challenging.
We begin with an overview of the high­level components of TakuNet, followed by a detailed
breakdown of its internal building blocks. Additionally, we discuss the model’s memory­
aware design, training­time regularization strategies, and how it integrates with a NAS
framework. Finally, we explain the deployment process and analyze key performance
metrics, including floating point operations (FLOPs), memory footprint, and quantized
model accuracy.
6.1
Overview of TakuNet
This work introduces an enhanced version of the architecture, specifically adapted for
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) optimization. In the original TakuNet study, both the
network architecture and the optimization function were determined through manual trial­
and­error, which may not yield optimal results across different datasets. Rather than re­
lying on a fixed architecture tailored to a specific dataset, our approach treats the model
parameters as tunable hyperparameters. These are automatically evolved to maximize
performance while adhering to the constraints of embedded systems.
The goal is to integrate architectural efficiency, automated design exploration via NAS,
and hardware­aware optimization to develop a deep learning model that is both highly
deployable and energy­efficient.
An illustration of our Architecture can be depicted in Figure 6.1
26
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:34==
6.2
Modular Building Blocks
To promote reusability, clarity, and deployment efficiency, the architecture is structured
around a set of modular building blocks. Each block is designed to perform a well­
defined function—such as normalization, feature extraction, or activation shaping—while
remaining compatible with the resource constraints of embedded devices. The following
subsections describe these building blocks in detail.
6.2.1
Normalization Block
A core component used throughout the proposed architecture is the Normalization
Block. It plays a critical role in preparing activations for both stable training and efficient
deployment on low­precision hardware.
Specifically, this block standardizes the outputs of convolutional layers and ensures that
the resulting activations are well­suited for quantization.
The Normalization Block consists of the following layers:
• Batch Normalization: This layer is applied immediately after the convolutional op­
eration. Its primary purpose is to normalize the intermediate activations by adjusting
and scaling them such that they have zero mean and unit variance across the mini­
batch. This normalization mitigates the issue of internal covariate shift, where the
distribution of inputs to each layer changes during training, thus destabilizing the
learning process. By maintaining consistent activation distributions, Batch Normal­
ization allows the network to use higher learning rates, accelerates convergence,
and provides a mild regularization effect that can reduce the need for other forms of
regularization such as dropout [29].
The operation is typically defined as:
ˆxi = xi −µB
√
σ2
B + ϵ
,
yi = γˆxi + β
where xi is the activation for sample i in the mini­batch B, µB and σ2
B are the batch
mean and variance, ϵ is a small constant for numerical stability, and γ, β are learn­
able scale and shift parameters.
Example: For a mini­batch of convolution outputs x = [−1, 3, 7, 9], we compute the
mean µ = 4.5 and variance σ2 = 14.75. The normalized values are then:
ˆx =
[−1 −4.5
√
14.75 , 3 −4.5
√
14.75, 7 −4.5
√
14.75, 9 −4.5
√
14.75
]
≈[−1.43, −0.39, 0.65, 1.17]
This example illustrates how Batch Normalization transforms the raw activations into
a distribution with mean 0 and variance 1, enabling faster and more stable learning.
• ReLU6 Activation: Following normalization, a ReLU6 non­linearity is applied. This
is a variant of the standard ReLU function that caps the output at 6. By limiting
the activation range to [0, 6], ReLU6 enhances robustness to activation outliers and
facilitates quantization­aware training. On devices with limited numerical precision
(e.g., 8­bit microcontrollers), this bounded range leads to more accurate and efficient
quantization [1].
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
27
==PAGE:35==
The ReLU6 function is defined as:
ReLU6(x) = min(max(0, x), 6)
Example:
Consider the outputs from a previous Batch Normalization layer:
[−2.1, 0.5, 4.3, 6.7, 9.0]. Applying ReLU6 yields:
ReLU6([−2.1, 0.5, 4.3, 6.7, 9.0]) = [0, 0.5, 4.3, 6.0, 6.0]
This example shows how ReLU6 clips all negative values to zero and caps all val­
ues above 6, maintaining the output within a range that is well­suited for fixed­point
representation in low­precision hardware.
6.2.2
Stem Block
The Stem Block of the proposed architecture serves as the initial processing unit, tasked
with transforming raw input images into a compact, information­rich feature representation
while significantly reducing computational complexity.
• The block begins with a standard Conv2D layer that applies a set of learnable filters
to the input. Each filter is a small three­dimensional kernel (e.g., 3×3×3 for an RGB
image with 3 channels), which slides over the spatial dimensions of the input (e.g.,
32×32). At each location, it performs an element­wise multiplication between the
kernel weights and the corresponding input patch, followed by a summation (i.e., a
dot product). This operation produces a single value in the output feature map. By
repeating this across all spatial positions, the kernel generates a 2D feature map
that emphasizes specific patterns such as edges, corners, or textures. When multi­
ple filters are used (e.g., 40), each with independently trainable weights, the output
consists of multiple such feature maps stacked along the channel axis, thereby in­
creasing the depth of the representation.
• The kernel_size parameter defines the spatial coverage of each filter — for exam­
ple, a 3 × 3 kernel operates over a local 3 × 3 region of the input. The stride deter­
mines how far the filter moves at each step during the convolution; a stride greater
than 1 results in downsampling, reducing the spatial dimensions (height and width)
of the output. The padding option (typically set to either “same” or “valid”) controls
whether the input is padded with zeros around the border. “Same” padding pre­
serves spatial dimensions (up to rounding), while “valid” padding applies no padding
and thus produces a smaller output.
• For example, given an input image of shape (32, 32, 3) (height, width, channels),
applying a Conv2D layer with 40 filters, each of size 3 × 3, a stride of 2, and “same”
padding, results in an output of shape (16, 16, 40). Each of the 40 filters learns
to extract different features from the input during training, transforming the original
3­channel image into a more expressive 40­channel feature representation. This
representation not only captures richer visual semantics but also reduces spatial
resolution in a controlled manner, contributing to computational efficiency.
• The output of the full Conv2D layer is then passed through the previously discussed
Normalization Block to ensure standardized activations suitable for subsequent pro­
cessing and quantization.
The use of a standard convolutional layer followed by normalization ensures that the
Stem Block effectively extracts low­level visual features while maintaining stable and
28
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:36==
quantization­friendly activations. It is essential to use a Full Convolution Layer with a
stride > 1, as the first layer of our Network, as processes all input channels together (e.g.,
RGB). In addition, starting with DWConv might lead to weak gradients or poor early fea­
ture learning, especially on small datasets like CIFAR­100.A single full Conv2D gives a
denser representation, stabilizing the early stages of training [1]
6.2.3
Taku Block
The Taku Block serves as the principal feature extraction module within the TakuNet
architecture. It is specifically designed for efficient and progressive spatial feature refine­
ment, while maintaining an extremely lightweight footprint—making it ideal for deployment
in resource­constrained embedded systems.
Unlike conventional convolutional blocks that rely on computationally expensive standard
convolutions (Conv2D), the Taku Block exclusively leverages Depthwise Convolution
(DWConv) layers. These layers operate on each input channel independently, signifi­
cantly reducing both the number of parameters and the number of floating­point opera­
tions (FLOPs) compared to full convolutions, while still preserving spatial feature learning
capabilities.
The internal structure of the Taku Block consists of the following key components:
• Depthwise Convolution: Unlike standard convolution, which applies a single filter
across all input channels simultaneously (mixing spatial and cross­channel infor­
mation), Depthwise Convolution operates by applying a distinct spatial filter to each
input channel independently.
Given an input tensor with C channels, Depthwise Convolution uses C separate
filters—each of size k × k—one per channel ( Total Parameters: k × k × C ). This
results in a significant reduction in the number of parameters and computational
operations compared to traditional convolutions, which would require k × k × C × N
parameters for N output channels.
The main purpose of Depthwise Convolution is to extract spatial features (e.g.,
edges, corners, textures) within each channel independently, without performing
any cross­channel mixing. This spatial filtering is particularly useful in the early and
intermediate stages of lightweight architectures, where reducing computational cost
is critical for real­time or embedded deployment.
Tip for intuition: Imagine the input image is a cat. Each input channel represents
a different filtered version of that image — one might emphasize texture, another
might capture color gradients, and another might highlight edges. Depthwise Con­
volution applies a unique spatial filter to each channel independently, like assigning
a specialist to analyze specific parts of the cat: one filter might focus on detecting
whiskers, another on ear contours, and another on the tail. None of these filters
share information directly with the others, which keeps the computation light and
efficient while still capturing meaningful spatial details.
Overall, Depthwise Convolution enables spatial learning at low cost, making it ideal
for embedded and real­time deep learning applications.
• Normalization Block
• Skip Connection (Residual Addition): Skip connections, also known as residual
connections, are a key feature introduced in ResNet [30]. In this design, the output
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
29
==PAGE:37==
of a series of operations (e.g., convolutions, activations) is added element wise to
the original input of the block. This yields an output of the form:
Output = F(x) + x
where F(x) is the learned transformation and x is the original input.
This technique offers several critical advantages:
– Facilitates Gradient Flow: During backpropagation, gradients can pass di­
rectly through the shortcut (+x) without getting diminished. This helps reduce
the vanishing gradient problem in very deep networks.
– Easier to Learn Identity Mappings: If the optimal output is similar to the input,
the network can simply learn F(x) ≈0, effectively making the block skip itself.
This is much easier than learning an identity mapping from scratch.
– Preserves Input Information: Important features in the input—such as edges
or textures—can propagate to deeper layers without being lost, which can im­
prove overall representational power.
– Enables Deeper Architectures: Without residual connections, training net­
works with dozens or even hundreds of layers is extremely difficult due to opti­
mization challenges. Residual connections make this not only feasible but also
stable.
Practical Analogy
Think of it like writing a report where you keep a copy of your original draft and add
comments or corrections (F(x)) on top of it. Instead of rewriting everything from
scratch, you retain the core idea (x) and just refine it. If your edits (F(x)) are not
useful, you can simply ignore them, preserving the original version.
By integrating these components, the Taku Block balances efficiency and performance,
making it a powerful building block for modern lightweight convolutional neural networks.
6.2.4
Downsampler Block
The DownSampler block in TakuNet is designed for efficient feature transformation with
minimal computational overhead, particularly important after the Depthwise Convolution
layers used in preceding blocks. It employs a **grouped pointwise convolution**, dynam­
ically adjusting the number of groups based on both the input/output channels and the
network depth. Specifically, the number of groups is computed as the nearest valid inte­
ger to:
⌊Input_Channel + Output_Channel
stages number
⌋
Here, Input_Channel refers to the output of the previous DownSampler or the initial stem
block, while Output_Channel corresponds to the output of the last TakuBlock. This dy­
namic grouping ensures both divisibility and computational efficiency.
A kernel size of 1 × 1 is used in the grouped convolution, making it a pointwise operation
that linearly projects feature channels at each spatial location. This enables channel­wise
feature interaction without spatial correlation, maintaining resolution while significantly
reducing computation [31]. If the input channels cannot be evenly divided, the block falls
back to a standard pointwise convolution (i.e., groups = 1), ensuring robustness.
30
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:38==
The DownSampler block contains the following layers, in order:
• Grouped Pointwise Convolution (1×1): This layer is designed to be both efficient
and flexible. Instead of connecting every input channel to every output channel (as
in a standard pointwise convolution), the channels are split into smaller groups. The
convolution is then applied separately within each group. This reduces the number
of computations and parameters, making it faster and more suitable for embedded
devices.
The number of groups is chosen automatically based on the number of input/output
channels and the network’s depth, aiming to maintain a good trade­off between
performance and efficiency.
If the input channels can’t be evenly split into groups, the layer simply switches to
a regular pointwise convolution (i.e., without groups), so the model always works
correctly regardless of the input size.
• Normalization Block
• Pooling Layer:
– Max Pooling is applied during the earlier stages of the network to perform ag­
gressive spatial downsampling. It selects the maximum value from small local
regions (typically 2×2 patches), effectively halving both the height and width of
the feature map when using a stride of 2. This results in a 75% reduction in the
number of spatial elements (e.g., 32 × 32 →16 × 16), which in turn reduces the
computational load for subsequent layers by up to 4× per stage. Beyond reduc­
ing memory and FLOPs, it also preserves only the most salient features—like
edges or corners—helping the network learn robust low­level representations
with minimal overhead.
– Average Pooling is used in the final stage to produce a smoother, generalized
spatial representation of the feature map. Conceptually, Average Pooling slides
a small window (e.g., 2 × 2) across the spatial dimensions of the input feature
map and replaces each window with the average of its values. Unlike Max
Pooling, which retains only the strongest activation in each region, Average
Pooling captures the overall trend or intensity level across that region.
This operation serves as a form of spatial smoothing: it diminishes the influence
of outliers and noisy activations while retaining a more balanced view of the
learned features. As a result, the model develops a more holistic understanding
of the input, which is particularly beneficial in the final stages where high­level
semantic features (like “cat­ness” or “airplane­ness”) are dominant.
Like Max Pooling, Average Pooling also reduces the spatial dimensions. For
example, applying a 2×2 window with a stride of 2 on an 8×8 feature map will
reduce it to 4 × 4, effectively cutting the spatial resolution by 75%. This reduc­
tion significantly decreases the number of computations and memory usage
for subsequent layers (e.g., dense classifiers), while still preserving meaning­
ful abstracted information. This not only reduces the risk of overfitting, but also
improves inference efficiency on resource­constrained devices.
• Layer Normalization: applied at the end of the DownSampler block to improve the
robustness and stability of activations. Unlike Batch Normalization, which computes
statistics across a batch of samples, Layer Normalization normalizes the activations
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
31
==PAGE:39==
within each individual sample by computing the mean and variance across its feature
dimensions. This makes it highly effective in real­time or embedded environments,
where batch sizes are small or even equal to one. By keeping the activations well­
scaled and centered, Layer Normalization ensures that the following layers receive
inputs in a stable range, reducing sensitivity to input shifts and enhancing general­
ization, especially under deployment constraints.
6.2.5
Refiner Block
The Refiner block serves as the final stage of the TakuNet architecture. It takes as
input the output tensor of the final DownSampler block, which typically has a significantly
reduced spatial dimension but enriched channel­wise features. The goal of the Refiner
is to perform final feature distillation and produce class probabilities through a softmax
layer.
The block is composed of the following steps:
• Depthwise Convolution: A spatial depthwise convolution is applied to refine lo­
cal feature responses while maintaining channel­wise separation. This operation
enables low­cost spatial filtering tailored to each feature channel independently.
• Batch Normalization: This layer stabilizes training and accelerates convergence
by normalizing the feature distributions after convolution. It ensures that the scale
of the activations remains consistent.
• Global Average Pooling (GAP): This operation collapses the spatial dimensions by
computing the average activation for each channel. The result is a compact feature
vector that summarizes global information across the entire spatial domain.
• Dense Layer with Softmax Activation: The final layer is a fully connected Dense
layer with as many units as the number of output classes. A softmax activation is
applied to produce normalized class probabilities, which form the model’s prediction.
This block acts as the final decision­making stage of the network. By combining spa­
tially aware filtering, global summarization, and regularization, the Refiner ensures that
the most relevant features are passed to the classifier. Its lightweight design and careful
placement of dropout layers make it especially suitable for resource­constrained environ­
ments where both accuracy and efficiency are critical.
Figure 6.1: TakuNet model architecture
6.3
Enhancements in TakuNet Model
While the initial versions of TakuNet achieved high training accuracy across several
datasets, this performance often did not fully translate to improved test accuracy, sug­
gesting a degree of overfitting. Overfitting occurs when a model learns to perform excep­
tionally well on training data but fails to generalize to unseen examples. This behavior
is particularly problematic in the context of Neural Architecture Search (NAS), where ar­
chitectures are selected based on validation performance, and in embedded deployment
scenarios, where robustness and reliability are critical [32].
32
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:40==
To address these challenges and make the architecture more robust across diverse
datasets, we integrated several training­time optimization techniques into the TakuNet de­
sign. Specifically, we introduced an Adaptive Dropout mechanism and applied Stochastic
Weight Averaging (SWA) during training. These methods are designed to reduce over­
fitting, improve generalization, and support convergence of the NAS algorithm toward
architectures that perform reliably under real­world conditions.
The remainder of this section describes each enhancement in detail, including the motiva­
tion behind its inclusion, the design decisions made, and its relevance to the deployment
of resource­efficient neural networks.
6.3.1
Adaptive Dropout
A key contribution of this work is the integration of an Adaptive Dropout mechanism, de­
signed to dynamically adjust the dropout rate during training. Traditional dropout applies
a fixed probability of deactivating neurons to prevent overfitting. While such fixed rates
can be optimized through techniques like Neural Architecture Search (NAS), they remain
static throughout training and may not fully account for the evolving nature of overfitting.
In contrast, the proposed Adaptive Dropout mechanism provides a more flexible and re­
sponsive approach, adjusting the dropout rate based on observed training behavior and
delivering improved regularization over time.
The Adaptive Dropout mechanism in TakuNet addresses this limitation by treating dropout
as a dynamic process. Each Adaptive Dropout layer begins with a low dropout rate and
increases it only when overfitting is detected—specifically, when the training accuracy
significantly exceeds the validation accuracy over a sustained period. Importantly, dropout
is not applied during the initial training epochs. This design choice is motivated by the
observation that overfitting is unlikely to occur early in training, and applying a high dropout
rate too soon could inhibit effective learning by removing useful signals prematurely.
This behavior is implemented using a custom callback that monitors training metrics and
incrementally raises the dropout rate for selected layers, subject to layer­specific limits.
As a result, the network maintains high learning capacity in the early stages while pro­
gressively introducing regularization only when necessary.
Placement of Dropout Layers.
Dropout is strategically applied in the following parts of
the architecture:
• Stem Block: This initial layer extracts low­level features from the input. Applying a
strong dropout at this early stage can disrupt the learning of foundational patterns,
potentially degrading the performance of the entire network. Therefore, only a mild
or delayed dropout is applied here to avoid suppressing essential signal propagation
while still promoting generalization from the outset.
• Taku Blocks (Main Stages): These depthwise convolutional blocks form the core
of the architecture and are repeated multiple times. Dropout in these layers is more
heavily used because they contain most of the model’s representational capacity
and are more prone to memorization. Since they are deeper in the network, they
tend to accumulate overfitting more readily, making them ideal candidates for adap­
tive regularization.
• Refiner Block: This final stage performs global feature aggregation and classifica­
tion. Due to its dense connectivity and proximity to the output layer, it is particularly
sensitive to overfitting. Therefore, dropout here typically starts with a higher rate
and may increase more aggressively if overfitting is detected.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
33
==PAGE:41==
Layer­Specific Behavior.
Not all layers benefit equally from dropout. For instance,
early convolutional layers (like those in the stem block) are less likely to overfit, so they
receive smaller dropout increments and have lower maximum limits. Conversely, later
layers—especially those with dense or global receptive fields—are more prone to overfit­
ting and thus are configured with higher initial dropout rates and greater allowed increases.
This design mimics the intuition that deeper layers encode more abstract (and potentially
dataset­specific) features, and hence require stronger regularization.
Deployment Considerations.
Once training is complete, all Adaptive Dropout layers
are ”frozen” into standard Dropout layers with fixed rates. This makes the architecture
compatible with deterministic inference pipelines, such as TFLite conversion and deploy­
ment to low­power embedded systems.
Benefits.
The Adaptive Dropout mechanism improves generalization without extensive
manual tuning and makes the model more robust across datasets. It also ensures that
the resulting model remains compact, efficient, and deployable on resource­constrained
hardware platforms.
6.3.2
Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA)
To further increase the generalization of the model and reduce the risk of overfitting, we
introduced Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA) during the final phase of training. SWA
is a training­time optimization technique that improves the final model by averaging the
weights from multiple points along the training trajectory. Rather than relying solely on the
weights of the best epoch, SWA computes a simple arithmetic average of model weights
collected over several training steps toward the end of training.
The model is initially trained using standard Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), a widely
used optimization algorithm that updates model parameters by moving in the direction
of the negative gradient of the loss function with respect to the weights. While SGD is
effective at minimizing loss, it may converge to sharp minima—regions in the weight space
where small changes in the input or model parameters can cause large fluctuations in the
output.
The motivation behind SWA lies in the geometry of the loss landscape. As illustrated in
Figure 6.2, sharp minima are steep and narrow, leading to poor generalization on unseen
data. In contrast, flatter minima are wider and more robust, associated with better general­
ization. SWA improves generalization by averaging model weights from different training
steps near the end of training, which tends to shift the solution toward flatter regions in
the loss surface [33].
Mathematically, if θi denotes the model weights at the end of epoch i, and K is the number
of such epochs, SWA computes the averaged weights as:
θSWA = 1
K
K
∑
i=1
θi
This procedure can be seen as forming an implicit ensemble of models, but with the key
advantage that it results in a single averaged model with no additional inference­time cost.
34
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:42==
This is especially relevant in the context of embedded systems, where computational
and memory resources are limited. SWA delivers generalization improvements without
increasing the number of parameters or the inference time, making it a highly attractive
strategy for resource­constrained environments.
Empirical studies [33] have shown that SWA can consistently outperform standard
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in terms of test accuracy, especially when used in con­
junction with learning rate schedules such as cyclical learning rates. In our experiments,
SWA was applied during the final phase of training.
In most cases, the weights produced by Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA) indeed out­
performed those of the original model in terms of validation accuracy. To ensure robust­
ness in cases where SWA does not yield a better­performing model, we implemented a
safeguard in our code: an explicit condition checks whether the SWA­averaged model
achieves superior validation accuracy; if not, the model reverts to the best­performing
weights obtained during standard training.
This mechanism guarantees that the final
model selection always reflects the optimal result. Moreover, SWA has the potential to
help models reach improved performance in fewer training epochs, thereby accelerat­
ing the convergence of our Neural Architecture Search (NAS) algorithm and reducing the
overall computational cost of the search process. A comparison of models before and
after applying SWA is shown in Table 6.1, illustrating how SWA can yield performance
gains while ensuring fallback to the best result when needed.
Model
Train Accuracy
Test Accuracy
SWA Accuracy
TakuNet_Init_3
0.5965
0.5195
0.5189
TakuNet_Init_4
0.6748
0.5641
0.5727
Table 6.1: Comparison of model performance before and after applying SWA
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.2: Visualization of sharp vs. flat minima in the loss landscape. Standard SGD
may converge to sharp minima that are sensitive to perturbations. SWA averages weights
across training steps, encouraging convergence to flatter regions that generalize better.
36
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:44==
7
Optimizations of NAS Algorithm
While black­box Neural Architecture Search (NAS), as described in the Section 2.2, offers
a highly flexible and effective framework for discovering high­performing models, it is also
notoriously resource­intensive and time­consuming. These limitations make it challenging
to apply in real­world scenarios, particularly on constrained hardware as many discovered
models will not be compatible to most microcontrollers. In this chapter, we present a set of
optimization strategies aimed at enhancing the efficiency of black­box neural architecture
search (NAS), with a particular focus on accelerating model evaluations and reducing
overall search time—while maintaining the quality of the resulting architectures.
7.1
Memory Estimation and Memory­Aware­Filtering
As previously discussed, one of the most significant challenges in this work was designing
neural network architectures that fit within the strict memory constraints of the microcon­
troller deployment environment. Initially, the process involved generating an architecture,
training it, and attempting deployment—only to discover that the model exceeded the
hardware limitations.
This trial­and­error approach proved inefficient and was quickly abandoned. To address
this, we developed a memory estimation mechanism capable of predicting the resource
consumption of a model based solely on its architectural configuration. This allowed us
to pre­screen candidate models (Memory­Aware­Filtering) and discard those unlikely to
meet the deployment constraints, thereby accelerating the NAS process and conserving
computational resources.
In addition, based on these memory estimations, we were able to predict secondary met­
rics such as inference time and energy consumption—values that previously required the
model to be deployed in order to be measured. This advancement further streamlined the
design and evaluation process.
To successfully deploy our neural network on the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2, we
must account for the device’s limited usable memory resources—approximately 256KB
of RAM and 1MB of Flash, though a portion of this is reserved for system operations,
runtime overhead, and supporting libraries. As a result, the effective memory available
for model deployment is lower than the hardware maximum. Any model that exceeds
these practical limits is considered undeployable, regardless of its theoretical accuracy or
performance.
While the most accurate way to measure memory usage is by compiling and deploying
each model onto the microcontroller to observe its actual runtime behavior, this process is
highly time­consuming and significantly reduces the number of models that can be evalu­
ated within a given time frame. This is particularly, impractical when evaluating thousands
of candidate architectures during Neural Architecture Search (NAS). Consequently, there
is a critical need for fast and reliable approximation methods capable of predicting RAM
and Flash consumption without requiring actual deployment.
Based on prior research [34], [35] , we make reasonable assumptions to model memory
consumption:
• RAM usage is estimated by analyzing activation tensor sizes during inference, consid­
ering their lifetimes and potential coexistence.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
37
==PAGE:45==
• Flash usage is initially approximated from the number of model parameters.
These assumptions allow us to perform fast memory estimations with reasonable accu­
racy, enabling effective filtering and prioritization of architectures before committing to the
costly deployment step. To improve the quality of these estimates, empirical data was
collected and regression models were trained to correct for systematic biases in the naive
estimators. The resulting tools are embedded in the module, ensuring that only deploy­
able models are selected for further optimization
To fully understand the capabilities and resource limitations of our device, we conducted
experimental analysis to identify the sources of memory overhead. This overhead arises
from several essential components required for model execution and embedded function­
ality:
• Flash Memory Overhead: In addition to the model weights and logic—stored in
a .h file converted from a .tflite model and consuming the majority of board’s
memory, additional consumption arises from:
– CMSIS­NN / Inference Functions: Optimized functions responsible for
executing the neural network layers
(e.g., arm_nn_softmax_common, arm_depthwise_conv_opt, etc.) are stored in
Flash memory. The more complex the model (i.e., more layers or operations),
the more Flash these functions consume.
– Arduino Sketch Code: To deploy the model on the board, a sketch code is
used that includes constant variables, initialized pointers, additional libraries,
static variables, and runtime logic.
– Embedded Input Data: Input data used for testing (e.g., sample images) is
stored as const arrays in Flash.
• RAM Overhead: Beyond the Tensor Arena—which is allocated specifically for in­
termediate buffers during inference—several other components consume RAM:
– Main Stack (~32 KB): Reserved for function calls, local variables, and handling
interrupts. This ensures safe execution across diverse runtime scenarios.
– Standard Library Buffers:
* impure_data (~2 KB) and __malloc_av_ (~41 KB): Internal allocations
used by the newlib C library for dynamic memory and standard I/O han­
dling.
– System Threads and OS Buffers:
* os_timer_thread_stack: Allocated for RTOS timer handling and related
system threads.
– Peripheral and Communication Buffers:
* Buffers used by _SerialUSB, I2C interfaces (Wire, Wire1), and other hard­
ware drivers consume variable RAM depending on their initialization.
– Static Objects and Runtime Metadata:
* Instances like _ZZ5setupE8resolver and static variables declared in the
sketch occupy RAM during execution.
38
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:46==
– Interrupt Handlers and Background Tasks: RAM is also consumed by inter­
rupt service routines (e.g., for BLE events, sensor data polling) and background
OS tasks.
Empirical measurements during deployment revealed that, in addition to the model’s foot­
print, the following are typical overheads:
• Flash Usage: Approximately 200–210 KB, depending on model complexity, the
size of embedded data (e.g., input arrays), and the libraries included in the compiled
sketch.
• RAM Overhead: Approximately 45–50 KB is consumed by system components,
including the main stack, standard library buffers, RTOS threads, communication
drivers, and runtime metadata. The remaining RAM is available for the Tensor Arena
used by TensorFlow Lite Micro.
7.1.1
Flash Memory Estimation
Estimating the amount of flash memory needed to deploy a neural network model on a
microcontroller is a crucial step in the development of edge computing applications, es­
pecially in environments where resources such as memory and processing power are
severely limited. Flash memory, typically used as read­only memory (ROM), must store
the model’s parameters, which include the weights and biases of the neural network.
These parameters define the behavior of the model and are essential for its operation
during inference. A widely used method to estimate the flash memory requirement is to
calculate the total storage needed for all the model’s parameters. This involves sum­
ming up the memory footprint of each weight and bias, which are usually represented as
floating­point or fixed­point numbers. By understanding the total number of parameters
and their respective data types, developers can make an informed estimate of the memory
space required for storing the model on a microcontroller. [36].
This method is fast and easy to compute, but it doesn’t accurately reflect the size of a fully
converted .tflite model due to additional overhead such as:
• Quantization calibration parameters
• Padding and alignment used in FlatBuffer format [37]
The initial estimation function used the following logic:
Estimated Flash (KB) = Total Parameters × Data Type Size (Bytes)
1024
This approach uses the count_params() method from Keras and assumes a constant
multiplier depending on data type. In our case, the model has been quantized to use the
int8 data type, reducing each parameter to 1 byte.
While efficient, this method consistently underestimates the actual size of the TFLite
model. As a result, it may allow the training of models that exceed the deployment environ­
ment’s memory constraints, potentially leading to wasted time and resources on models
that ultimately cannot be deployed.
To verify the actual size, a dataset of real models was collected. Each model was:
1. Built using Keras
2. Converted to TFLite with full integer quantization
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
39
==PAGE:47==
3. Measured for actual file size in kilobytes
The results showed a consistent gap between the estimated and actual sizes, motivating
the use of a correction model.
We applied a simple linear regression model to learn the relationship between the esti­
mated flash (params­based) and the actual flash (TFLite file size):
Corrected Flash Estimate = a · Estimated Flash + b
Using a dataset of paired values, we trained the regression model and obtained the fol­
lowing parameters:
TFLite Size ≈1.1577 · Estimate + 66.10
This model was saved using joblib and can be reused to instantly predict corrected flash
estimates without invoking the TFLite converter.
Figure 7.1: Linear regression fit between estimated and true TFLite flash sizes.
Although the sample­based estimation is generally close to the actual deployment be­
havior, in cases where a model approaches the Flash memory limits, it is advisable to
perform an early conversion to the .tflite format. This allows verification that the model
fits within the memory constraints before proceeding with full training. The workflow con­
sists of first converting the untrained Keras model to a TFLite version to ensure feasibility,
then continuing with the regular training of the original Keras model, followed by conver­
sion and deployment as usual.
Although this process introduces a small time overhead—typically just a few seconds—it
is negligible compared to the cost of fully training a model, only to later discover it can­
not be deployed due to memory constraints. Conducting an early Flash feasibility check
thus serves as a valuable safeguard, helping to avoid unnecessary training and conserve
computational resources.
40
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:48==
7.1.2
Ram Memory Estimation
During inference, each layer produces intermediate activation tensors that occupy RAM.
However, not all intermediate tensors exist in memory at once – their lifetimes are limited
to when they are being computed and used. A naive approach (not reusing any buffer)
would allocate a separate buffer for every intermediate tensor but this can lead to a huge
memory footprint. [34]
The key insight is that we can estimate the peak RAM usage by analyzing the sizes of
activation tensors and understanding which ones coexist at runtime. Typically, the peak
memory occurs at a layer where the largest combination of activations must be stored
simultaneously. For sequential models (simple chains), this often boils down to the input
and output of a single layer – once a layer’s output is produced, the previous activations
can be released. [35]
A simplified but effective heuristic is to assume that the input and output tensors of each
layer represent the concurrent memory needed during the computation of that layer, and
take the maximum over all layers [34].
However, layers such as Concatenate introduce memory persistence, requiring previous
activations to remain allocated until the merge operation completes. This forces multiple
tensors to coexist in memory simultaneously, leading to overlapping memory demands.
As a result, the real peak RAM usage can substantially exceed the simple input­output
memory estimation.
As illustrated in Figure 6.1, our model architecture is organized into three main stages:
• Stem Block
• TakuStages Block
• Refiner Block
The Stem Block and Refiner Block consist of consecutive layers without any additions
or skip connections. Consequently, estimating the peak RAM usage for these blocks is
straightforward—it corresponds to the maximum RAM required by any single layer within
the block.
In contrast, each TakuStage includes residual operations, which require special con­
sideration in memory estimation. Specifically, when performing concatenation or skip­
connection, all input tensors must be available in memory at the same time to compute the
output. This increases the peak memory footprint compared to purely sequential opera­
tions. To accurately account for this, we compute the peak RAM usage for each TakuStage
by identifying the maximum cumulative memory required across all active feature maps at
any point in time. Let Ai denote the activation size of layer i, and let Live(t) represent the
set of layers whose outputs must remain in memory at time step t. Then, the maximum
RAM usage is given by:
MaxRAM = max
t

∑
i∈Live(t)
Ai


where
Live(t) = {i | output of layer i is still needed for a future operation at time t}
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
41
==PAGE:49==
This formulation ensures that memory is only released after all dependencies have con­
sumed the relevant activations.
To estimate the total maximum RAM required by the entire model, we take the maximum
RAM usage from each of the three blocks and select the largest among them:
RAMmax = max
(
RAMStem, RAMTakuStages, RAMRefiner
)
(7.1)
Although the RAM estimation closely aligns with the actual measured usage, it still tends
to slightly underestimate total memory consumption due to persistent memory effects dis­
cussed earlier.
To better capture this discrepancy, we applied a similar approach as in Section 7.1.1, cre­
ating a linear regression model between the Estimated and Measured RAM values. The
resulting line—referred to as LinearRAM—reveals a consistent pattern in the mismatch,
suggesting that a correction factor can be reliably modeled.
Figure 7.2: Linear regression fit between estimated and true RAM consumption.
7.1.3
Energy Consumption Estimation
Energy estimation is one of the most important aspects when deploying neural networks
on microcontrollers, especially in power­constrained environments. The total energy con­
sumed during a single inference can be expressed as:
E = V ·
tm
∑
t=0
I(t) · ∆t
where E is the energy in joules, V is the supply voltage (assumed constant), I(t) is the
instantaneous current at time t, and tm is the duration of the inference.
In this work, the supply voltage was fixed at 3.3 V using the Power Profiler Kit II. Figure 7.3
shows the measured current profile during a sequence of inference operations on the
Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2.
42
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:50==
Figure 7.3: The current consumption observed during repeated model inference opera­
tions, with peaks corresponding to the active computation phases.
As illustrated, the current remains relatively low during idle periods and exhibits distinct
peaks during inference, where the processor becomes active.
These peaks typically
reach values around 10–15 mA, while the baseline current hovers around 3–4 mA.
This behavior reflects the nature of the microcontroller’s operation: the Cortex­M4 CPU
periodically wakes from low­power states to execute inference computations, then returns
to idle. The CPU frequency—typically around 64 MHz on the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense
Rev2—determines how fast each instruction is executed. A higher frequency means that
computations are completed faster, but it also implies more switching activity in the silicon,
which increases instantaneous current draw.
However, our measurements show that the peak current is mostly determined by the
processor architecture and workload type, and not by the specific neural network model.
Consequently, the current profile I(t) remains relatively unchanged between models. The
main variable that affects energy consumption is the inference time tm, which varies de­
pending on the model’s size and complexity.
Therefore, minimizing inference time directly contributes to energy savings, making it a
key optimization objective in resource­constrained embedded AI applications.
7.1.4
Inference Time Estimation
Inference time refers to the duration a trained model requires to process an input and
produce an output — essentially, the latency of a single forward­pass computation. In the
context of embedded systems, inference time is a key metric, as it directly impacts both
the responsiveness and energy consumption of a deployed model.
One important observation is that inference time is strongly influenced by the model’s
memory (RAM) usage.
On microcontrollers, where memory and computational bandwidth are both constrained,
models that consume more RAM typically involve larger weight matrices or more exten­
sive intermediate tensor storage. These factors increase the volume of memory access
operations and place greater demand on the processor, resulting in longer inference du­
rations.
Studies confirm that optimizing memory usage tends to speed up inference. For example,
using fused in­place operations to reduce peak RAM footprint by about 1.6 × yielded a
1.2–2× faster inference execution in a TinyML context [38]. Similarly, an embedded ML
framework that lowered memory usage by 31% achieved a remarkable 92% reduction in
inference latency compared to a less memory­efficient baseline [38].
Those assumptions were confirmed after our test, finding a Linear corelation between the
estimated Ram ( and as a result the Measured RAM ) of the model and the inference time
needed to produce the result.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 7.4: Linear Corelation between RAM and Ιnference time.
7.2
Selection Strategies: Tournament Selection and RankNet
Once new models are generated in each generation of the Genetic Algorithm (GA), a
critical step follows: determining which models should be selected as parents for the next
generation. This selection process directly impacts the algorithm’s ability to converge
efficiently toward optimal solutions, while avoiding pitfalls such as premature convergence
or stagnation.
In this section, we explore two approaches designed to address this challenge: Tourna­
ment Selection, a traditional yet effective evolutionary strategy, and RankNet, a neural
network­based ranking model. Each method tackles the problem of model evaluation
and selection from a distinct perspective—Tournament Selection emphasizes simplicity
and the preservation of diversity, while RankNet focuses on accelerating the selection
process through learned preference prediction. The roles, mechanisms, and trade­offs of
both strategies are discussed in detail below.
7.2.1
Tournament Selection
Tournament Selection (TS) is a commonly used genetic selection operator in evolutionary
algorithms. It addresses the fundamental challenge of balancing selective pressure to­
ward high­fitness individuals with the maintenance of population diversity, which is crucial
for avoiding premature convergence.
In TS, a small subset of individuals is chosen uniformly at random from the population,
and the fittest among them is selected as a parent [39]. This process is repeated until the
desired number of parents is selected. The number of individuals in each group, known as
the tournament size k, directly controls the selection pressure: a larger k favors the fittest
individuals more strongly, while a smaller k introduces more randomness and promotes
diversity.
Unlike elitist strategies that always select the top­performing individuals, TS introduces a
probabilistic component. Occasionally, sub­optimal individuals can win a tournament and
propagate their genetic material, which helps maintain genetic diversity and encourages
exploration of the search space [39]. This stochasticity is particularly important in avoiding
44
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:52==
overfitting and escaping local optima [40].
Moreover, TS is computationally efficient and highly amenable to parallelization. It does
not require sorting or cumulative fitness calculations, making it attractive for large­scale
or real­time applications.
By maintaining a diverse gene pool and enabling exploration across multiple promising
regions of the search space, TS helps evolutionary algorithms discover robust and gener­
alizable solutions. In the context of neural architecture search, this translates to architec­
tures that generalize better across datasets and tasks, rather than overfitting to a single
performance metric.
7.2.2
RankNet
In our initial approach, we fully trained all candidate models before applying Tournament
Selection (TS) to compare their performance. The top­performing models were then se­
lected to form the next generation. However, through experimentation, we observed that
this strategy was highly time­consuming, particularly because a large number of models
were eventually discarded after evaluation. This inefficiency motivated us to introduce
RankNet, a predictive model designed to estimate the relative performance of candidate
architectures without requiring any training. By leveraging RankNet, we aimed to ac­
celerate the selection process by prioritizing the most promising models early on, thus
significantly reducing computational overhead.
RankNet is a pairwise ranking model originally developed for learning­to­rank tasks (e.g.
search result ranking). It uses a shared neural network to map each input (here, an
architecture embedding) to a score, then models the probability that one item is better
than another by a sigmoid on the score difference [41].
A key enabler for RankNet in NAS is a fixed­length embedding of each architecture
that captures its structure. Recent works use graph­based embeddings; for example,
Graph2Vec treats a neural network’s computational DAG as a “document” of rooted sub­
graphs (analogous to words) and learns a vector representation such that architectures
with similar subgraph patterns are mapped close together in embedding space [41].
Unlike graph­based embedding methods such as Graph2Vec, which represent neural
architectures as graphs and require complex graph encoders to learn latent representa­
tions, our approach utilizes a lightweight, handcrafted embedding specifically tailored
to our NAS search space. This decision was motivated by the need for interpretability,
computational efficiency, and tight integration with predictive models such as RankNet.
Each architecture is represented as a fixed­size vector constructed from structured, nor­
malized parameters extracted directly from its configuration. The embedding comprises:
• Normalized architectural hyperparameters, including:
– The number of filters, kernel sizes, and strides from the convolutional and
depthwise convolutional layers across the stem, stages, and refiner blocks.
– The number of stages and blocks, controlling the architecture’s depth and gran­
ularity.
– Downsampling parameters such as pooling size and stride, which influence
spatial resolution.
• One­hot encoded optimizer choices (SGD or AdamW), allowing the model to also
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
45
==PAGE:53==
capture training­related configurations. This enables RankNet to infer which opti­
mizer might better suit the architecture or dataset.
All numerical features are normalized to ensure that they lie on similar scales, improv­
ing the learning behavior of the predictive model. While simpler than graph­based em­
beddings, this handcrafted vector (of length 15) effectively captures both structural and
training­related characteristics. It provides RankNet with a compact yet expressive input
for estimating the relative performance of candidate architectures, without requiring full
model training or complex processing.
Once the models are embedded, a RankNet model is trained on a set of fully evaluated
networks. Rather than regressing absolute accuracy values, RankNet learns to predict
*relative* performance: given a pair of architecture embeddings, it estimates the proba­
bility that one outperforms the other. The model itself uses a shared 3­layer MLP (64 →
32 →16 units) to process each architecture embedding. A sigmoid output predicts the
probability that one model outperforms another, given their embedding difference:
P(xi ≻xj) = σ(f(xi) −f(xj)),
(7.2)
where f(x) is the shared MLP’s score for embedding x. Training uses binary cross­
entropy loss on pairs of fully evaluated models.This strategy is advantageous because
modeling relative fitness is often more robust and data efficient than predicting absolute
scores.
To avoid computational overhead and ensure fair comparison across runs, we train
RankNet only once using the fully evaluated models from the initial population. This
snapshot provides diverse training signals while ensuring consistency.
1. One­Time Training: RankNet is trained only once at the beginning of the search
process. This decision is primarily driven by efficiency: repeated retraining would
introduce significant computational overhead. By limiting training to a single round
on the initial population, we reduce runtime while still providing useful ranking guid­
ance.
2. Active Correction: During tournament selection, if RankNet favors an untrained
model over a trained one, we train the untrained model and compare their true per­
formance. If RankNet’s prediction was incorrect, we retain the better­performing
model and use the misprediction as a penalty signal for RankNet—effectively up­
dating its training data to reflect this mistake in the next retraining cycle.
Although RankNet requires pairwise comparisons to learn, it does not demand a large
number of individual models. Even with a relatively small initial population (e.g., 6­10
models), we can generate a quadratic number of pairs (up to O(n2)), greatly expanding
the effective size of our training dataset. In our implementation, we construct all pos­
sible pairs from the initial population. This step is computationally cheap and does not
introduce any noticeable latency in the training pipeline.
Pair Generation Algorithm :
Let x be the number of fully evaluated models in the initial
population. The total number of unique unordered model pairs that can be generated is:
Number of Pairs =
(x
2
)
= x(x −1)
2
46
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:54==
This approach enables RankNet to learn from a rich set of comparisons, even when the
initial number of fully trained models is relatively small. By generating all possible pairs,
we achieve data­efficient training without introducing computational overhead. In doing
so, our design strikes a careful balance between efficiency and generalization: RankNet
helps avoid the costly full training of weak candidates during selection, while preserving
fair, one­time evaluation behavior that aligns with real­world deployment constraints.
7.3
Speed­Up in Training
After a model is selected—either from the initial population or through tournament
selection—it must be trained to convergence to accurately assess its performance. How­
ever, given the potentially large number of candidate architectures evaluated throughout
the search process, the cumulative training cost can become a significant bottleneck.
To address this challenge, we implemented a series of optimization strategies designed to
reduce training time while still supporting reliable comparisons between candidate mod­
els. Instead of fully training every architecture, we perform partial training to a degree
sufficient for accurate performance estimation. This enables us to identify and fully train
only the most promising candidates—those on the Pareto front—thereby substantially re­
ducing computational overhead without sacrificing the quality of the final model selection.
7.3.1
Performance STOP
To reduce training costs in Neural Architecture Search (NAS), we introduce two early
stopping criteria based on the validation performance trajectory of candidate architec­
tures. These rules enable the early termination of unpromising models, thereby conserv­
ing computational resources without significantly affecting selection quality..
Let A(t) denote the validation accuracy at epoch t, and let T be the total number of epochs.
We define two criteria:
• Diminishing­returns rule: Training is stopped if, within a continuous window of
length αT epochs (where α ∈(0, 1)), the relative improvement in validation accuracy
is less than a threshold ϵ. Formally, define a window [t, t + αT], and stop training if:
A(t + αT) −A(t)
A(t)
< ϵ
This rule captures cases of strongly diminishing returns, where continued training
yields minimal gains. If the model has not shown meaningful progress during this
window, it is reasonable to assume that the remaining training budget will have lim­
ited impact.
• No­improvement rule: Training is halted if the validation accuracy does not im­
prove for a fixed number of consecutive epochs, denoted τ. That is, for τ epochs:
A(t) ≤A(t −1) ≤· · · ≤A(t −τ)
This acts as a safeguard for detecting early stagnation, even before the diminishing­
returns window is reached.
These complementary criteria allow for the early termination of under­performing models
based on either slow progress or complete stagnation. Empirical evaluations across var­
ious NAS runs with different training budgets (e.g., 30, 50, 70 epochs) revealed that this
strategy consistently reduces training time without degrading the fidelity of model selec­
tion. Inspired by recent NAS literature advocating for efficient search via performance­
based early stopping [42], we incorporated both rules into our pipeline.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
47
==PAGE:55==
The specific values for the parameters τ, α, and ϵ are critical in balancing the trade­off
between accelerating training and avoiding the misranking of high­performing models.
Instead of selecting these values arbitrarily, we conduct a comprehensive grid search to
identify configurations that provide an optimal balance between efficiency and reliabil­
ity. This empirical tuning ensures that our early stopping criteria remain robust across
repeated runs with the same training budget.
7.3.2
Early Stopping
Extensive research has shown that the early stages of training in convolutional neural net­
works (CNNs) play a disproportionately important role in shaping a model’s final perfor­
mance. In particular, the initial epochs often establish the core representational capacity
of the network and largely determine its generalization behavior.
A notable study on “critical learning periods” reports that “the first few epochs are critical
for the creation of strong connections,” which “do not appear to change during additional
training” [43]. The authors conclude that this early phase is central to the learning process
and heavily influences the model’s final outcome. Empirically, this translates to much of
a CNN’s eventual validation accuracy being attained early in training, with subsequent
epochs providing only marginal improvements.
Figure 7.5 illustrates this phenomenon for several TakuNet models. The normalized vali­
dation accuracy curves reveal that:
• By epoch 5 out of 30 (just
5
30 × 100 = 16.7% of the total training time), each model
achieves approximately 70% of its final validation accuracy.
• By epoch 10 (33.4% of training), models typically reach around 80% of their eventual
performance.
These observations highlight the efficiency of early training and provide strong motivation
for the use of early stopping mechanisms. More importantly, they motivated an investiga­
tion into whether models that perform poorly in the early epochs could be reliably identi­
fied and excluded from full training. This insight laid the foundation for our early­stopping
criteria, which aim to cut short the training of under­performing architectures—saving sig­
nificant computational resources without compromising the quality of the search.
To leverage this behavior in our NAS pipeline, we introduced a custom callback mecha­
nism that monitors validation accuracy at a strategic checkpoint. If the validation accuracy
fails to exceed a predefined threshold by a specific fraction of the training process, the
model is deemed unpromising and its training is cut early. Formally, let A(t) denote the
validation accuracy at epoch t, and let T be the total number of training epochs. We define
an early termination condition as:
A(t) < Amin
where
t = ⌊β⌋
Here, β ∈(0, T) represents the early evaluation point (as a fraction of total training), and
Amin is the minimum acceptable validation accuracy at that checkpoint.
Empirical analysis across different search runs and training budgets confirmed the effec­
tiveness of this rule in identifying weak models early. By eliminating such architectures
before completing the full training cycle, we were able to substantially reduce computa­
tional overhead while preserving the quality and reliability of model selection in the NAS
process.
48
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:56==
Notably, we observed that the optimal values for the evaluation point β and the minimum
acceptable accuracy Amin depend on the total training budget. That is, different training
durations (e.g., 30, 50, or 70 epochs) may require different early stopping thresholds
to maintain selection reliability. However, for any given training schedule, the chosen
parameters remained stable and reproducible across multiple independent NAS runs.
This consistency suggests that early stopping criteria can be effectively calibrated once
per training regime and then reused across searches, without the need for frequent re­
tuning.
Figure 7.5: Normalized validation accuracy curves for different TakuNet variants.
7.3.3
Learning Rate Scheduling
One of the most important factors influencing the training dynamics of deep neural net­
works is the learning rate. It controls the step size taken during gradient descent and
directly affects how quickly and effectively a model converges. A poorly chosen learn­
ing rate can lead to slow training, suboptimal convergence, or even complete instability.
Conversely, an appropriate learning rate schedule can significantly improve both training
speed and final performance.
In practice, even fixed learning rates—if well­tuned—can lead to strong results, especially
when training for a large number of epochs. However, static learning rates often fail to
adapt to the changing optimization landscape over time. Early in training, large updates
are generally beneficial for escaping sharp minima and accelerating exploration. Later,
smaller learning rates are preferable for fine­tuning and convergence.
To balance these needs, we adopted a dynamic learning rate strategy that combines a
linear warm­up phase with cosine annealing. The learning rate starts from a low initial
value and increases linearly over the first few epochs (warm­up), then gradually decays
following a cosine curve relative to the total number of training epochs.
This scheduling approach, inspired by the method introduced in [44], helps stabilize early
training and encourages smoother convergence. The cosine decay promotes better gen­
eralization by allowing the model to settle into flatter, wider optima that are less sensitive
to parameter noise.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
49
==PAGE:57==
The cosine function used ,inspired by [44] :
lr(t) = η0 · 1
2
(
1 + cos
( π(t −Twarmup)
Ttotal −Twarmup
))
,
(7.3)
where:
• η0 is the initial learning rate,
• Twarmup is the number of warmup epochs,
• Ttotal is the total number of training epochs,
• t is the current epoch number.
Cosine learning rate schedules have been widely adopted in modern image classification
models such as ResNet, DenseNet, and MobileNet, and are considered state­of­the­art
for datasets like CIFAR­10 and CIFAR­100 [45]. Studies show that cosine decay leads
to faster convergence and slightly improved final accuracy compared to traditional step­
based schedules.
As illustrated in Figure 7.6, for a random TakuNet model, increasing the number of train­
ing epochs does not significantly improve validation accuracy, due to the effects of the
learning rate scheduling strategy. This saturation behavior aligns with the expected be­
havior of cosine decay: once the learning rate approaches zero, further parameter up­
dates become minimal.
This observation prompted us to investigate whether this behavior is consistent across
all models or merely specific to this randomly selected one. Our goal was to determine
if early saturation is a general trend and, if so, to identify the optimal number of training
epochs that balances speed­up with minimal misranking error in the NAS pipeline.
Figure 7.6:
Normalized Validation accuracy(based on highest recorder accuracy) of
TakuNet trained for different number of epochs
50
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:58==
7.4
Post training Optimization
In this work, the trained neural networks are converted from Keras models to Tensor­
Flow Lite (TFLite) format using full integer quantization, enabling deployment on memory­
constrained embedded devices such as the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2. While
the original Keras models operate in 32­bit floating­point precision, the TFLite conversion
process maps both weights and activations to 8­bit integers. This reduction in numerical
precision can, in theory, lead to minor accuracy degradation.
Quantization may introduce rounding errors in arithmetic operations and discretization
effects during inference, especially near activation boundaries. Furthermore, optimized
TFLite kernels for layers such as depthwise convolutions or batch normalization may be­
have slightly differently from their float32 counterparts in Keras. These differences, though
usually subtle, can affect model outputs.
To mitigate such effects and preserve the model’s predictive performance, we follow the
post­training quantization procedure [28]. Specifically, we supply a representative dataset
during the quantization step. This dataset, drawn from the same distribution as the training
and validation data, is used to calibrate the dynamic range of the activations, ensuring that
the int8 quantized model accurately reflects the statistical properties of the original float32
model.
Using this method, we aimed to ensure that the accuracy of the quantized TFLite model
remains equivalent to that of its original float32 counterpart. As a result, we are able to
safely omit re­evaluating the model’s accuracy on the embedded device itself, thus sav­
ing time during deployment. Instead, we rely on the model’s validation accuracy prior
to quantization for performance comparisons, assuming that the post­quantization accu­
racy loss is negligible—as confirmed both by our empirical results and the recommended
quantization procedure.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
51
==PAGE:59==
8
Performance Analysis
In this part , we present the results of the optimization techniques introduced in Chapter
7 and describe the fitness function that was applied consistently across all experiments.
This fitness function serves as the primary evaluation metric, carefully balancing predictive
accuracy with hardware efficiency to ensure that the selected models are not only accurate
but also practical for deployment on resource­constrained devices.
As a baseline, we consider the unoptimized training setup involving 70 full epochs, which
serves as a reference point for all comparative analyses. The goal of the optimization
strategies is to reduce overall training time while preserving the fidelity of model ranking.
Particular emphasis is placed on minimizing the risk of misranking high­performing mod­
els, which could arise from premature termination or overly aggressive pruning. Preserv­
ing ranking consistency is essential to ensure that speed­up techniques do not undermine
the integrity of the NAS­driven model selection process.
The fitness function used in the Genetic Algorithm, to explore new model is defined as:
Fitness =













70 · Val.Accuracy + 20 ·
(
1 −
RAM
MaxRAM
)
+10 ·
(
1 −
Flash
MaxFlash
)
,
if RAM ≤MaxRAM ∧Flash ≤MaxFlash
−1000,
otherwise
(8.1)
This fitness function was designed to explicitly incorporate hardware constraints into the
optimization objective of the Genetic Algorithm (GA). By weighting both predictive accu­
racy and resource efficiency, the GA is guided to favor models that are not only accurate
but also suitable for deployment on memory­constrained devices.
To achieve this, RAM and Flash memory usage are normalized relative to their respective
maximum allowable values. The lower the memory consumption, the higher the contri­
bution to the overall fitness score. All three components—validation accuracy of the de­
ployable TFlite model, the normalized RAM usage, and the normalized Flash usage—are
scaled to lie within the range [0, 1], ensuring a balanced contribution to the final score.
The weights assigned to each term ensure that the fitness score lies within the range
[0, 100] under valid constraints. In cases where a model exceeds either the maximum RAM
or Flash memory budget, it is penalized with a fitness value of −1000. This severe penalty
ensures that resource­infeasible models are effectively eliminated from the population and
are not propagated to subsequent generations.
Notably, although the highest accuracy achieved during training (at 70 epochs) was ap­
proximately 60%, the fitness function allows models with lower accuracy to outperform
others if they demonstrate significantly lower memory usage. However, by assigning a
higher weight to the accuracy term in the fitness function, we ensure that performance
remains the primary objective. This is especially important considering that accuracy typ­
ically ranges up to 0.6, while the normalized RAM and Flash components can span from
0 to 0.85. Without the weighted terms, the smallest models would consistently dominate
52
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:60==
the selection process—regardless of their predictive performance. The chosen weight­
ing strategy ensures that the evolutionary search favors architectures that are not only
compact and efficient but also sufficiently accurate for deployment.
It’s important to note that microcontrollers are typically designed for specific tasks within
embedded systems, combining processing, memory, and input/output peripherals on a
single chip. This design makes them cost­effective and power­efficient for dedicated ap­
plications. In such scenarios, as long as the model fits within the available memory con­
straints of the microcontroller—such as the 256KB of SRAM on the Arduino Nano 33 BLE
Sense Rev2—the exact memory footprint becomes less critical, particularly with respect
to Flash memory, since it is not directly tied to energy consumption. However, RAM usage
remains a crucial factor. Even if a model technically fits within the device’s memory limits,
high RAM consumption during inference may still pose challenges, potentially rendering
certain models unsuitable for deployment under real­world constraints.
Therefore, the fitness function is weighted to prioritize the validation accuracy of the de­
ployed model, while also assigning greater importance to RAM usage in order to reduce
energy consumption. This design aligns with the practical constraints of deploying models
on resource­limited devices such as the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2 [46].
In this chapter, we present and analyze the results of the optimization strategies intro­
duced in Chapter 7. Several of these techniques are designed to reduce the training time
of the NAS algorithm without compromising the quality of model selection, while others
focus on optimizing the pre­ and post­training phases to further enhance overall efficiency.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed optimizations, we first conducted a baseline
run, which serves as the ground truth with 70­epoch training. This run explored a set of
model configurations without any optimizations applied. Based on these configurations,
we then re­trained the same models under a hypothetical scenario where the optimizations
had been used to guide the search process. This allowed us to simulate what the search
might have explored using our accelerated approach.
After re­training, we evaluated the impact of the optimizations in two ways: (1) by com­
paring the fitness­based rankings derived from the optimized run to those from the ground
truth run, quantifying the misranking rate and the severity of ranking errors ( mean square
error ); and (2) by measuring the total time that would have been saved had the optimiza­
tions been applied during the original search process.
A key metric considered throughout this analysis is the mean squared error (MSE). In
cases where an optimization misranks two models, we assess the severity of the mis­
ranking by comparing their fitness scores in the ground truth setting—defined by the full
70­epoch training. This provides a meaningful indication of the impact of prediction errors,
helping us quantify how much the optimization distorts the model selection process.
The MSE for misranked pairs is computed as follows:
MSE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(TrueFitnessi −TrueFitnessj)2
(8.2)
where N is the total number of misranking errors, and TrueFitnessi and TrueFitnessj are
the fitness scores of the misranked model pair (i, j) in the ground truth setup. A higher
MSE indicates more severe misrankings, reflecting greater deviation from the ideal model
selection.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
53
==PAGE:61==
The squaring operation in MSE inherently magnifies the impact of large differences in fit­
ness, which ensures that severe misrankings—those involving models with substantially
different real­world performance—are penalized more heavily than smaller, less conse­
quential mistakes.
Although the fitness function lies within the range [0, 100], it is important to consider the
absolute performance range of the evaluated models. To provide additional context, we
report the fitness scores of the best and worst models prior to normalization. This helps
quantify the practical implications of misrankings by illustrating how much real­world per­
formance (e.g., in terms of accuracy or hardware usage) separates the top­performing
models from the least efficient ones.
Model
Raw Fitness Score
Description
Best Model
59.5
High accuracy, low memory usage
Worst Model
45.8
Low accuracy, high memory
Table 8.1: Fitness scores of best and worst models
To better interpret the severity of MSE values, we also compute the root mean squared
error (RMSE) and express it relative to the raw fitness score range, i.e., maxFitness −
minFitness = 13.7. This ratio indicates how large the average prediction error is in relation
to the total performance spread among evaluated models:
Relative RMSE =
RMSE
59.5 −45.8 = RMSE
13.7
(8.3)
According to established guidelines in predictive modeling [47], a small relative RMSE
(e.g., under 10%) implies that, even when misrankings occur, the models involved are
very close in terms of real­world performance, suggesting minimal practical impact. Con­
versely, a large relative RMSE (e.g., above 30%) indicates that the ranking errors involve
models with substantially different fitness, potentially leading to significantly suboptimal
deployment decisions. This contextualization allows us to bridge the gap between statis­
tical misranking rates and their real­world consequences.
8.1
Memory­Aware­Filtering Experiment
To assess the effectiveness of the proposed Memory­Aware­Filtering optimization, a ded­
icated experiment was conducted in which the Memory­Aware­Filtering was deliberately
disabled. In this configuration, models exceeding the allowable RAM or flash memory
constraints were not filtered out prior to training. Instead, any model violating the hard­
ware limits was penalized post­training by assigning it a fixed fitness value of –1000. The
purpose of this experiment was to investigate whether the genetic algorithm (GA) could
inherently learn to avoid infeasible models, despite the lack of preemptive filtering.
Multiple 24­hour NAS runs were executed—each limited to a single run per day due to
DTU’s GPU resource policy—with models trained for up to 70 epochs. The initial pop­
ulation consisted of six randomly selected models. Because these were chosen with­
out memory constraints, most exceeded the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Rev2’s allow­
able limits. It became immediately apparent that higher model complexity significantly
increased training time per epoch. In many cases, models requiring more than 4 MB of
RAM and 200 MB of Flash resulted in epoch durations exceeding 900 seconds. Assuming
54
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:62==
that each epoch lasts approximately the same, this implies a total training time of:
900 × 70 = 63,000 seconds ≈17.5 hours
These findings demonstrate that even the initial population could not be fully trained within
the given time constraints, effectively stalling the entire GA process. As a result, the
genetic algorithm was never meaningfully activated, confirming the critical importance of
Memory­Aware­Filtering for enabling practical and efficient NAS on resource­constrained
embedded platform. An example of such an oversized model, including its memory usage
and training time, can be seen in Table 8.2.
Model
Train Acc
Test Acc
SWA Acc
TFLite Acc
Opt.
Precision
Recall
F1
RAM (KB)
Flash (KB)
TFLite (KB)
Fitness
Time (min)
Epochs
TakuNet_Init_2
0.9950
0.6717
0.6657
0
adamw
0.6654
0.6720
0.6760
4010.24
204151.26
0
­1000.00
1003.52
70
Table 8.2: Example of a model exceeding memory constraints, resulting in post­training
penalization.
Following earlier observations where the genetic algorithm (GA) was never meaningfully
activated due to excessive training times, we conducted a 10­hour NAS run with the num­
ber of training epochs reduced to 10. The goal was to increase throughput and evaluate
whether shorter training durations would enable the GA to operate effectively. However,
only a limited number of models were successfully trained during this run. The primary
bottleneck remained the same: oversized models with high RAM and Flash requirements
consumed a disproportionate amount of computational resources, stalling the search pro­
cess.
Despite these adjustments, the inefficiency introduced by allowing infeasible models to
enter the search space persisted. Large models often required significantly more time
per epoch compared to their resource­efficient counterparts (see Table 8.3), drastically
reducing the number of candidates that could be processed within the available time.
Furthermore, since the majority of these models exceeded deployment constraints and
were consequently assigned penalty scores (e.g., –1000) after training, the RankNet­
based predictor could not be trained effectively and rank the models accurately. As a
result, it failed to assist the guidance of the genetic algorithm (GA) toward selecting only
deployable models.
As illustrated in Figure 8.1, approximately 75% of the trained models were ultimately
deemed undeployable due to exceeding memory constraints. This underscores the signif­
icant inefficiencies that arise when Memory­Aware­Filtering is not employed. Not only is
considerable training time wasted on models that are later discarded, but the entire search
process is also hindered—resulting in longer training cycles and reduced effectiveness in
identifying promising candidates.
While, in theory, the genetic algorithm (GA) could be guided to favor only deployable
models, doing so would require an impractically large time budget. Moreover, without
early Memory­Aware­Filtering, the initial population includes a large proportion of invalid
models. As a result, RankNet struggles to learn meaningful rankings, reducing its abil­
ity to assist in the NAS speedup. These findings emphasize the critical importance of
incorporating Memory­Aware­Filtering into the search pipeline.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
55
==PAGE:63==
Model
Train Acc
Test Acc
SWA Acc
TFLite Acc
Opt.
Precision
Recall
F1
RAM (KB)
Flash (KB)
TFLite (KB)
Fitness
Time (min)
Epochs
TakuNet_Init_0
0.7922
0.5717
0.5727
0
adamw
0.5712
0.5717
0.5690
546.91
15020.00
0
­1000.00
14.48
10
TakuNet_Init_4
0.8505
0.6213
0.6241
0
sgd
0.6250
0.6200
0.6224
5120.00
225280.00
0
­1000.00
130.02
10
TakuNet_Mutant_13
0.4719
0.4396
0.4372
0.4367
adamw
0.4342
0.4396
0.4304
52.18
316.71
321.56
0.5130
4.92
10
Table 8.3: Summary of TakuNet model without Memory­Aware­Filtering and 10­epoch
training.
Figure 8.1: Overview of model training and deployability results.
8.2
RankNet Experiment
In this experiment, we analyzed the outcomes of a large­scale NAS run that lasted 10
hours. Given that the selection process is based on tournament comparisons, it is nearly
impossible to recreate the exact pairwise matchups observed during the original run. To
ensure transparency and reproducibility, we retained both the fitness scores and the pa­
rameter configurations of every model evaluated.
To evaluate the predictive performance of the RankNet model, we conducted 10,000 ran­
dom pairwise comparisons between different neural architectures, previously unseen
to the RankNet. Our model was trained based on and initial population of 10 models cre­
ating 45 pairs for training. In each comparison, the objective was to predict which of the
two models would achieve superior performance. Given the randomness inherent in such
pairings, a baseline model based on random guessing would be expected to achieve 50%
accuracy. Despite this, RankNet correctly identified the better­performing model in
∼83% of the comparisons, demonstrating strong predictive capability. Additionally, it
achieved a mean squared error (MSE) of 1.07 on the normalized fitness function, cor­
responding to a root mean squared error (RMSE) of 1.03. This translates to a relative
RMSE of 7.52%, indicating that even in cases where RankNet misranks two models, their
actual performance is typically very close—thus limiting the potential negative impact of
such errors (see Fig. 8.2).
56
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:64==
Figure 8.2: RankNet tournament evaluation results, across 10,000 model matchup.
These results highlight the strong predictive capability of the RankNet model. Achieving
an ∼83% accuracy in pairwise comparisons represents a substantial improvement over
the 50% accuracy expected from random guessing. In ranking tasks, such a margin
is considered highly significant, especially when coupled with a very low mean squared
error. Even relatively small improvements above chance can yield meaningful benefits in
optimization scenarios [48], making this level of performance particularly impaction.
Moreover, in our NAS algorithm, RankNet’s potential misjudgments are inherently miti­
gated. Specifically, we rely on RankNet’s predictions only when neither of the competing
models has been trained yet. This strategic usage ensures that the actual impact of any
prediction error is reduced, and the overall effectiveness of the NAS procedure remains
robust—even more so than what is reflected in this isolated evaluation.
While it is difficult to precisely quantify the overall speedup gained by integrating RankNet
into the NAS process, the fact that it performs better than random guessing is already
valuable. By more accurately identifying promising architectures early on, RankNet helps
to avoid the training of clearly suboptimal models. This selective approach evidently con­
tributes to reducing the total time and computational cost required by the NAS algorithm.
8.3
Early Stoppage Experiment
In this experiment, building on previous observations, we aimed to terminate the training
of certain models early when their final performance was likely to be suboptimal, thereby
reducing unnecessary computational cost. As previously discussed, the first few epochs
of training tend to be the most informative. If a model fails to reach a predefined validation
accuracy threshold by a given cutoff epoch, it is unlikely to outperform others later on. To
exploit this, we designed a threshold­based early stopping strategy: during training, if the
validation accuracy at a predefined cutoff epoch does not surpass a certain threshold, the
training is terminated. This approach simulates an informed pruning of under­performing
models.
To evaluate the effectiveness of this method, we performed a grid search over various
cutoff epochs and validation accuracy thresholds. For each configuration, we estimated
the fitness of every model at each termination point using Equation 8.1. This estimated
fitness captures how well a partially trained model is expected to perform, had it been
trained fully.
Similar to our earlier experiment (Section 8.2), we then conducted 10,000 random pair­
wise comparisons to assess how accurately they preserved the relative performance
rankings among models. Each configuration (i.e., combination of cutoff epoch and val­
idation accuracy threshold) was evaluated based on the misranking error—how often it
incorrectly ordered model pairs—and the total training time saved.
As shown in Table 8.4, the best configuration with an error rate below 19% achieved a
training time reduction of up to 19.48%. With a mean squared error (MSE) of 7.5, the
relative RMSE is approximately 20%. According to established guidelines [47], this value
falls between the thresholds for good and poor performance (10–30%), suggesting that
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
57
==PAGE:65==
the severity of misranking is non­negligible but not critical. Compared to RankNet, the
errors in this method appear to have greater impact, raising some concerns about its
reliability. Nonetheless, these results show that a well­calibrated threshold­based early
stopping strategy can significantly reduce training costs while maintaining a reasonably
accurate model selection process.
It is important to note that, during the grid search, we deliberately restricted the range
of both cutoff epochs and validation accuracy thresholds to cases where the model mis­
ranking did not exceed the 25% mark. This constraint was applied to minimize noise in
the comparisons, higher values tended to produce unstable and uninformative results in
the tournament­based evaluation. Furthermore, we observed that similar optimal ranges
for cutoff epochs and performance thresholds consistently emerged across multiple inde­
pendent training runs and NAS executions of varying durations. This recurring pattern not
only reinforces the robustness of our approach but also suggests that these values can
reliably produce a strong trade­off between speed and accuracy for the specific architec­
ture and dataset used. As such, they provide a practical and repeatable configuration for
accelerating NAS without compromising model selection quality.
Cutoff Epoch
Threshold
Error Rate (%)
MSE
Time Saved (min)
Time Saved (%)
10
0.33
18.99
7.5
108.35
19.48
11
0.33
14.71
7.65
105.51
15.28
...
...
...
...
...
...
Table 8.4: Top 2 early stopping configurations ranked by time saved.
8.4
Performance Stop Experiment
In this experiment, we conducted a full 10­hour training run without applying the perfor­
mance stop optimization described in Section 7.3.1.
Figure 8.3 illustrates the proportion of models that could have been early­stopped, along
with the corresponding percentage loss in validation accuracy. This loss is computed as
the relative difference between the validation accuracy at the cutoff point and the maxi­
mum validation accuracy achieved by each model during full training. By normalizing this
difference per model, we provide a consistent global benchmark for comparing the impact
of early stopping.
As depicted in Figure 8.3, approximately 10% of the models incurred less than a 5%
relative loss in validation accuracy compared to their fully trained counterparts. Further­
more, around 30% and 55% of the models exhibited less than 10% and 20% accuracy
loss, respectively. Remarkably, 90% of the models remained within a 30% margin of
their maximum validation accuracy, indicating that the majority of early­stopped models
retained competitive performance.
To rigorously assess the efficiency benefits of this method, we applied a performance­
based stopping strategy across all discovered models. Assuming uniform epoch duration
the un­optimized version required 556.10 minutes of training. When Performance opti­
mization was activated, a total of 214.57 minutes of training time was saved, reducing
the total compute time from 556.10 minutes to 341.53 minutes—a 38.59% reduction.
To assess the trade­off in decision quality, we conducted 10,000 random pairwise com­
parisons between model candidates using fitness evaluations computed at truncated
58
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:66==
training stages. As shown in Table 8.5, this resulted in a misranking error rate of 22.00%,
indicating that in most cases, stopping before full convergence preserved the correct rel­
ative ordering of models. Additionally, the mean squared error (MSE) was 4.36, corre­
sponding to a root mean squared error (RMSE) of 2.09, which is approximately 15.2%
of the total observed range in the fitness function. This suggests that even when rank­
ing discrepancies occur, their magnitude tends to be modest in practical terms. Overall,
these findings demonstrate that performance­based stopping can substantially reduce
computational cost while maintaining a high level of decision reliability.
Parameter
Value
No Change Patience
10
α (Window Size %)
0.30 (Epoch Diminishing Return: 21.0)
ϵ (Min Relative Improvement)
0.07
Error Rate
22.00%
RMSE
2.09
MSE
4.36
Original Training Time
556.10 minutes (≈9h 16m)
Training Time with Early Stopping
341.53 minutes (≈5h 41m)
Time Saved
214.57 minutes
Percentage Time Saved
38.59%
Table 8.5: Performance­based early stopping summary
Figure 8.3: Distribution of models based on projected validation accuracy loss.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
59
==PAGE:67==
8.5
Learning Rate Experiment
As previously discussed, cosine learning rate decay is theoretically expected to converge
faster than traditional schedules such as Step Decay, Constant Learning Rate, or Lin­
ear Decay [49] [50]. The motivation behind this experiment is to investigate whether we
can achieve reliable performance predictions with fewer than the 70 training epochs we
currently use as a baseline.
To test this hypothesis, we selected a set of models that were originally trained for 70
epochs. These models were then re­trained from scratch using the cosine decay schedule
but with reduced epoch budgets: specifically 10, 20, 30, and 50 epochs. For each of
these training durations, we performed 10,000 random pairwise comparisons to assess
whether limited trained models could still accurately reflect performance rankings.
Epochs
Prediction Mistake
Avg. Time Reduction
MSE
10
∼30%
∼85.24%
8.5
20
∼21%
∼62.12%
7.72
30
∼16%
∼55%
7.70
50
∼15%
∼32.69%
7.60
Table 8.6: Comparison of pairwise accuracy using different training durations with cosine
decay
As shown in Table 8.6, the mean squared error (MSE) remains relatively consistent across
all partial training durations, indicating that the average difference in true fitness scores
between misranked models does not vary significantly with training length. The corre­
sponding relative RMSE (rRMSE) ranges from 20% to 21%, which falls within the medium
to high range according to established guidelines [47]. This suggests that, while the rank­
ing errors are not extreme, they are substantial enough to affect model selection qual­
ity. Therefore, since MSE and rRMSE do not clearly favor a particular training duration,
greater emphasis should be placed on the remaining two metrics: Prediction Mistakes
and Average Time Reduction. Given that rRMSE reflects a non­negligible level of mis­
ranking severity, it becomes especially important to prioritize configurations with fewer
prediction mistakes—even if this comes at the expense of slightly higher training time—
as this more directly improves the reliability of the selected models.
The training for only 10 epochs achieves the greatest average time reduction—over
85%—but this comes with a high prediction mistake rate of approximately 30%. This
suggests that such a short training duration leads to significant underfitting, resulting in
unstable and unreliable performance rankings.
At the other extreme, training for 50 epochs yields the most accurate and stable predic­
tions, with only 15% mistakes, closely approaching the reliability of the full 70­epoch base­
line. However, the time savings at this level are considerably diminished—only around
32%—making it a less attractive option when computational efficiency is critical.
The intermediate settings of 20 and 30 epochs stand out as promising trade­offs. Training
for 20 epochs reduces time by more than 60%, while cutting prediction mistakes to 21%,
a notable improvement over the 10­epoch case. Meanwhile, 30 epochs further reduces
mistakes to 16%, while still preserving over 50% time savings. This suggests that models
trained for 30 epochs achieve nearly the same predictive quality as the 50­epoch variant,
but with better computational efficiency.
In summary, training for 20 or 30 epochs appears to offer the most effective balance
60
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:68==
between prediction reliability and efficiency.
These findings confirm that while cosine decay facilitates faster convergence compared
to traditional learning rate schedules, a minimum training threshold remains essential
for learning meaningful representations. Importantly, this also highlights the potential of
cosine­based scheduling to accelerate neural architecture search (NAS) workflows by
reducing evaluation costs without severely compromising the quality of performance
ranking.
8.6
Combined Optimization Experiment
Having individually evaluated the effectiveness of each proposed optimization technique,
we observed that each one contributed meaningful performance improvements. This nat­
urally led to the hypothesis that combining all strategies in a single Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) run could yield even better results. The goal of this experiment was to
investigate whether these optimizations would complement each other—potentially pro­
ducing a synergistic effect—or whether some techniques might interfere or become re­
dundant when applied together. In this section, we present the outcome of this combined
optimization effort and analyze how the interplay between techniques influenced the final
performance.
Below is a brief summary of each optimization technique included in the combined exper­
iment:
• Memory Estimation and Memory­Aware­Filtering: Accurately estimates each
model’s RAM and Flash memory consumption prior to training. Models exceeding
the microcontroller’s memory constraints are discarded, saving both training time
and ensuring deployability.
• RankNet Selection: Prioritizes promising models for training based on predicted
relative performance, effectively avoiding time spent on models unlikely to perform
well.
• Cosine Learning Rate Decay: Facilitates faster and smoother convergence by
gradually decreasing the learning rate, enabling models to reach informative perfor­
mance levels with fewer epochs.
• Performance­Based Stopping: Terminates training for models that show little or
no improvement over a specified number of epochs, preventing unnecessary com­
putation.
• Early Stopping: Halts training of under­performing models before the maximum
epoch limit is reached, further reducing computation time.
Among the applied strategies, the optimization techniques can be categorized into two
distinct groups based on when they operate during the NAS process: those applied before
training and those applied during training.
Pre­Training Optimizations act as a first line of defense, eliminating models that are
either infeasible or unlikely to perform well—before any training resources are consumed.
These include
• Memory­Aware­Filtering
• RankNet Selection
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
61
==PAGE:69==
Together, these pre­training techniques form an efficient external filtering mechanism
that enhances the scalability and resource efficiency of the NAS process without inter­
fering with the training procedure itself. Moreover, since Memory­Aware­Filtering and
RankNet Selection operate independently and address orthogonal concerns—hardware
feasibility and performance potential, respectively—they can be applied concurrently in
the pipeline to maximize early­stage pruning effectiveness.
In­Training Optimizations, on the other hand, directly influence how models are trained
and evaluated. These include:
• Cosine Learning Rate Decay
• Performance­Based Early Stopping
• Threshold­Based Early Stoppage
These strategies aim to accelerate convergence and reduce training time by dynamically
adjusting or halting the training process based on performance trends. However, because
they interact with the training dynamics, their combined effects must be carefully evaluated
to avoid redundancy or conflict.
To assess the impact of combining these in­training techniques, we performed exper­
iments starting from two different baseline training durations (20 and 30 epochs), and
progressively applied the following:
• Learning Rate Optimization (LR Opt.)
• Performance­Based Early Termination (Perf. Stop)
• Threshold­Based Early Stoppage (Early Stop)
This structure allowed us to isolate and analyze the contribution of each technique, both
individually and in combination, across varying training regimes.
Table 8.7 summarizes the error rates and the corresponding training speedup at each
stage for both baseline configurations.
Optimization Strategy
Error Rate (%)
MSE
Speedup (%)
Baseline epochs
Learning Rate Optimiza­
tion (LR Opt.)
21.00
7.72
62.12
20 epochs
+ Performance Stop
26.00
3.23
63.19
20 epochs
+ Early Stoppage (Max)
25.00
1.84
85.00
20 epochs
+ Early Stoppage (Safe)
22.00
2.14
63.64
20 epochs
Learning Rate Optimiza­
tion (LR Opt.)
16.00
7.70
55.00
30 epochs
+ Performance Stop
17.00
2.32
64.66
30 epochs
+ Early Stoppage
17.50
1.85
59.83
30 epochs
Table 8.7: Combined Optimization Effects at 20 and 30 Epoch Baselines
Performance Summary: 20­Epoch Baseline
We began with a baseline training duration of 20 epochs and progressively applied the
training­time optimizations in three stages:
• Learning Rate Optimization (LR Opt.): Achieved a substantial speedup of 62%
while maintaining a moderate error rate of 21%.
62
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:70==
• + Performance­Based Stopping (Perf. Stop): Adding this second optimization
slightly increased the error to 26%, but provided a minor gain in speedup, reaching
63.19%.
• + Threshold­Based Early Stoppage (Early Stop):
– Aggressive threshold: Error increased to 25%, but speedup improved signifi­
cantly to over 85%.
– Conservative threshold: Achieved a better balance with an error of 22% and a
speedup of 63.64%.
Performance Summary: 30­Epoch Baseline
We repeated the same optimization layering using a 30­epoch baseline:
• Learning Rate Optimization (LR Opt.): Delivered a strong speedup of 55% while
keeping the error low at 16%.
• + Performance­Based Stopping (Perf. Stop): Led to a small increase in error to
17%, with speedup improving to 64.66%.
• + Threshold­Based Early Stoppage (Early Stop): Resulted in a negligible change
in error (16.9%) and a modest speedup boost to 59.83%.
These results demonstrate that appending the stopping techniques to the learning rate op­
timization strategy leads to substantial reductions in both training time and mean squared
error (MSE), while preserving a tunable trade­off between speed and accuracy. Impor­
tantly, while the stopping strategies did not reduce the overall misranking error rate—and
in some cases slightly improved it—they significantly decreased the MSE. This suggests
that, although some ranking discrepancies remain, their practical impact is minimal, as
the magnitude of the errors is considerably reduced.
Key Findings
As the results indicate, adding either Performance­Based Stopping or Threshold­
Based Early Stoppage on top of Learning Rate Optimization consistently improves
training efficiency and drastically reduce the severity of misranking. However, it is also
evident that these two techniques cannot be applied simultaneously, as they both target
early termination but with different heuristics and decision criteria.
Interestingly, the most effective configurations differed depending on the baseline training
duration:
• For the 20­epoch setting, the combination of Learning Rate Optimization + Early
Stoppage delivered the best balance between accuracy and speedup.
• For the 30­epoch baseline, the combination of Learning Rate Optimization +
Performance­Based Stopping proved most effective.
Given that these two configurations emerged as the most promising in their respective
scenarios, we proceeded to conduct a targeted comparison experiment to determine
which approach offers better overall performance when evaluated under the same condi­
tions.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
63
==PAGE:71==
8.6.1
Final Comparison
Building on the previous experimental results, it remains unclear which combination of
optimization techniques delivers the best overall performance under a fixed time budget.
Of the two most promising strategies, one consistently achieves lower prediction error,
while the other offers a more substantial acceleration of the search process. This in­
herent trade­off between ranking accuracy and computational efficiency complicates the
selection of the most effective approach in practice.
To address this, we conduct a comparative evaluation aimed at answering two central
questions:
1. Which training configuration yields better model quality within a fixed computational
budget?
2. Can these speedup strategies—based on evaluating models using shortened train­
ing schedules—achieve significantly better results than a standard 70­epoch NAS
run with the pre­training optimizations?
To this end, we perform four independent NAS runs—two using 20 training epochs and
two using 30 epochs—each constrained to a wall­clock time of 12 hours. For a fair com­
parison, we also conduct two baseline NAS runs using the standard 70­epoch training
schedule with the Memory­Aware­Filtering enabled, likewise constrained to the same 12­
hour budget. This setup allows us to evaluate whether the proposed speedup configu­
rations offer meaningful gains in model quality and search efficiency. In addition, 2 runs
were conducted with only the pre­training optimizations for the same duration. These
comparisons help quantify the true impact of our optimization strategies.
For the 20­epoch setting, both runs apply early­stopping optimization, while the 30­epoch
experiments utilize performance­based stopping. In each case, we collect the resulting
Pareto fronts, representing the set of non­dominated solutions found during the search.
All experiments are conducted under identical conditions: using RankNet and memory­
estimation filtering and operating within the same hardware and time constraints. This
setup ensures a fair and balanced comparison between the short­horizon (20­epoch) and
long­horizon (30­epoch) strategies.
The Pareto­front models from each run consist of architectures that are non­dominated
across our key metrics— test accuracy, RAM usage (which correlates with inference time
and energy consumption), and flash memory footprint. In other words, no model on the
Pareto front is outperformed by another across all objectives in the same run. This defini­
tion aligns with the standard concept of Pareto­optimality in multi­objective optimization,
where a solution is Pareto­optimal if no objective can be improved without worsening at
least one other. [51]
As illustrated in Figure 8.4, the models produced using the 30­epoch training strategy tend
to dominate those from the 20­epoch run across most evaluated dimensions. In particu­
lar, the 30­epoch models generally achieve higher accuracy for a given RAM consumption
and offer better memory efficiency for a fixed level of predictive performance. While not
universally superior, the 30­epoch strategy demonstrates a consistent trend toward im­
proved accuracy–efficiency trade­offs when compared to the 20­epoch counterpart.
A noteworthy observation is that, regardless of training strategy, all Pareto­optimal models
converge around a narrow range of flash memory usage—between 300 and 306 KB.
This uniformity suggests that flash memory consumption does not play a major role in
differentiating the models in this context and therefore has minimal impact on the overall
64
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:72==
Pareto front structure.
However, while in general, the 30­epoch models appear to outperform those from the
20­epoch run, the observed differences are relatively modest. Given the inherent ran­
domness in deep learning training, such variations may fall within the bounds of statistical
or scientific uncertainty. As a result, although the longer training duration shows a trend
toward superior performance, the margin is not large enough to definitively exclude the
shorter run. This highlights the importance of evaluating optimization strategies not only
for few runs but for multiple runs and datasets.
Finally, the additional time allocated for the NAS to evaluate a greater number of candidate
models proves to be clearly beneficial. The models discovered through the optimizer­
based training runs (i.e., the 20­ and 30­epoch configurations) consistently outperform
those generated by the baseline runs. This performance gap is expected to widen further
in scenarios involving more complex search spaces or stricter time constraints, where
efficient model selection becomes even more critical. Overall, these findings underscore
the effectiveness of training­aware strategies in NAS, particularly when operating under
limited computational budgets.
Figure 8.4: Performance comparison of Pareto­optimal TinyML models found via 20­ and
30­epoch NAS runs, compared to non­optimized 70­epoch baselines.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
65
==PAGE:73==
8.7
Post­Training Quantization
To assess the impact of post­training quantization on model performance, we compared
the test accuracy of each float32 Keras model before and after conversion to the Ten­
sorFlow Lite (TFLite) format using full integer quantization. This quantization technique
reduces model size and inference latency by converting all weights and activations to 8­bit
integers. The conversion process requires a calibration step, during which a small rep­
resentative dataset is passed through the model to collect dynamic range statistics (i.e.,
the minimum and maximum values of activations and weights). These statistics are then
used to determine appropriate scaling factors for quantizing the model without significant
loss of accuracy. In our experiments, we used 100 samples from the training dataset as
the representative calibration set [28].
To ensure that the results were generalizable and not influenced by randomness, we con­
ducted the experiment on 100 different models. A subset of these models is presented in
Table 8.8. For each model, we computed the relative accuracy change using the following
formula:
Accuracy Loss (%) = Best Test Accuracy −TFLite Test Accuracy
Best Test Accuracy
× 100
Overall, the quantized models exhibited minimal degradation in accuracy. The average
accuracy loss across all 100 models was approximately 0.25%. In most cases, the differ­
ence was less than 1%, demonstrating that full integer quantization preserves predictive
performance well. Interestingly, in a few cases, the quantized TFLite models slightly out­
performed their original float32 counterparts. This is likely a result of inherent evaluation
variability—such as differences in random seeds, data shuffling, or measurement noise—
when quantifying validation accuracy.
These results support the conclusion that post­training quantization, when guided by a
representative dataset, provides a highly effective means of optimizing neural networks
for deployment on resource­constrained devices. Given the consistently low accuracy
loss, we can be confident that the quantized models retain the performance characteris­
tics of their original versions. Consequently, it is reasonable to omit separate accuracy
evaluations on the quantized models during deployment, thereby streamlining the work­
flow and reducing development time without compromising performance.
66
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:74==
Model
Best Train Acc.
Best Test Acc.
TFLite Test Acc.
TakuNet_Init_0
0.6310
0.4425
0.4493
TakuNet_Init_1
0.6030
0.4848
0.4839
TakuNet_Init_2
0.5275
0.4284
0.4250
TakuNet_Init_3
0.7327
0.5380
0.5341
TakuNet_Init_4
0.5700
0.4664
0.4619
TakuNet_Init_5
0.5395
0.4240
0.4159
TakuNet_Mutant_1
0.6448
0.4779
0.4763
TakuNet_Crossover_5
0.6142
0.4906
0.4843
TakuNet_Crossover_6
0.5953
0.4839
0.4747
TakuNet_Crossover_8
0.6396
0.4842
0.4810
TakuNet_Crossover_9
0.5923
0.4761
0.4773
TakuNet_Mutant_11
0.6019
0.4958
0.4914
TakuNet_Crossover_12
0.6375
0.4940
0.4936
TakuNet_Crossover_15
0.6287
0.4816
0.4817
TakuNet_Crossover_16
0.6336
0.4893
0.4887
TakuNet_Crossover_23
0.6058
0.4873
0.4808
TakuNet_Crossover_30
0.6223
0.4822
0.4847
TakuNet_Crossover_33
0.6178
0.4893
0.4893
TakuNet_Crossover_34
0.6062
0.4817
0.4740
TakuNet_Mutant_39
0.6156
0.4862
0.4858
TakuNet_Crossover_40
0.6194
0.4793
0.4841
TakuNet_Crossover_45
0.5988
0.4844
0.4801
TakuNet_Crossover_43
0.6276
0.4820
0.4772
TakuNet_Crossover_46
0.6211
0.4970
0.4923
TakuNet_Mutant_50
0.6008
0.4927
0.4881
TakuNet_Mutant_54
0.6325
0.5518
0.5523
TakuNet_Crossover_55
0.6448
0.5360
0.5335
TakuNet_Crossover_56
0.6419
0.4865
0.4854
TakuNet_Mutant_60
0.6086
0.4662
0.4741
TakuNet_Crossover_67
0.6535
0.4733
0.4773
TakuNet_Crossover_68
0.6068
0.4822
0.4866
TakuNet_Crossover_75
0.6055
0.4733
0.4729
Table 8.8: Comparison of float32 Keras and quantized TFLite test accuracies across mod­
els.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
67
==PAGE:75==
9
Conclusion
This thesis presented a comprehensive and optimized framework for accelerating Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) tailored for resource constrain platforms like the Arduino Nano
33 BLE Sense Rev2. The primary objective was to make the automated design of deep
learning models both feasible and efficient for real­world embedded AI applications.
This research aimed to enhance a Genetic Algorithm (GA)­based Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) framework through a comprehensive set of optimization strategies. A key
contribution was the development of a hardware­aware design methodology, which in­
corporated a fast and accurate memory estimation mechanism to efficiently eliminate ar­
chitectures that exceeded device constraints early in the search process. Furthermore,
the integration of RankNet, a pairwise surrogate model, enabled the prediction of relative
model performance without the need for full training, thereby guiding the search toward the
most promising regions of the architecture space. Collectively, these techniques served
as an effective filtering mechanism, allowing the system to discard unpromising candi­
dates early and avoid expending valuable computational resources on models unlikely to
yield competitive results.
Building upon this early­stage filtering, the framework further reduced training costs by
applying early stopping criteria to terminate training of architectures that failed to show
sufficient improvement during learning. In parallel, the adoption of cosine learning rate
scheduling—a state­of­the­art strategy known for its smooth convergence and improved
generalization—enhanced training stability and efficiency. Together, these methods min­
imized unnecessary computation and ensured that only the most promising, Pareto­
optimal architectures were fully trained, maximizing search efficiency without compro­
mising model quality.
To further tailor the NAS framework for deployment on embedded devices, an accurate
energy consumption estimation model was introduced, enabling the prediction of power
usage without requiring physical deployment. This allowed energy efficiency to be incor­
porated as a first­class objective during the search, alongside accuracy and memory. As a
result, the NAS algorithm was capable of identifying architectures that achieved balanced
trade­offs across all critical constraints, including performance, memory footprint, and en­
ergy consumption—ensuring practical deployability in real­world, resource­constrained
environments.
Collectively, these optimizations significantly reduced the total search time and compu­
tational cost, enabling the NAS algorithm to evaluate a substantially larger number of
candidate architectures within the same time frame. As a result, the system was able to
identify superior Pareto­optimal models, offering improved trade­offs between accuracy,
resource consumption, and inference efficiency.
To ensure that the selected architectures were not only accurate but also practically de­
ployable on resource­constrained embedded devices, a robust quantization and deploy­
ment pipeline was developed. By leveraging a carefully curated representative dataset,
the framework achieved state­of­the­art full integer quantization, drastically reducing
memory footprint and computational complexity while maintaining model accuracy. The
representative dataset enabled precise calibration of activation ranges during quantiza­
tion, ensuring that the deployed models performed comparably to their original floating­
point versions.
68
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:76==
As the foundation for the NAS process, TakuNet, a hand­crafted convolutional baseline
architecture, was adopted for its modularity and scalability. Although the original TakuNet
design was not developed within the scope of this work, it was fully restructured into a
parametric form, allowing its core components—including depth, width, kernel size, and
activation functions—to be optimized through the Genetic Algorithm.
Through this process—and with the integration of techniques such as Adaptive Dropout
and Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA)—this work extends TakuNet from a fixed, man­
ually crafted model into a flexible, hardware­aware architecture capable of adapting to
diverse datasets and meeting the constraints of embedded deployment scenarios.
In summary, this thesis demonstrated that by combining evolutionary search with predic­
tive modeling and embedded­awareness, NAS can be transformed into a practical tool for
TinyML. The framework balances model performance with resource constraints through
a set of general, reusable techniques. This work lays the groundwork for future research
in deploying NAS at the edge and serves as a reference for optimizing NAS in domains
where both computational and memory budgets are extremely limited.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
69
==PAGE:77==
10
Future Work
The acceleration strategies proposed in this thesis present opportunities for broader ap­
plication across neural architecture search (NAS) problems and embedded AI domains.
Several promising research directions can be identified to expand the impact and appli­
cability of the presented techniques.
10.1
Suggested improvements
10.1.1
Parallelization
The efficiency of the proposed NAS framework can be significantly enhanced through the
use of high­performance computing (HPC) resources. In this work, training of candidate
architectures were executed on an HPC system equipped with NVIDIA Tesla V100­SXM2­
32GB GPUs. Specifically, the environment was configured to utilize a dedicated GPU.
Although the algorithm was conducted sequentially on a single GPU, the framework nat­
urally lends itself to parallelization. In modern distributed computing environments—such
as multi­GPU servers or HPC clusters—a pool of GPUs can be used to train and test mul­
tiple candidate architectures concurrently. This parallel execution can drastically reduce
the wall­clock time per generation, enabling either the exploration of larger search spaces
or achieving faster convergence without compromising model performance.
Future work could integrate this parallelization strategy, distributing workloads across mul­
tiple GPUs or nodes to fully leverage the computational capabilities of HPC systems.
10.1.2
RankNet
In this work, RankNet was trained only once using the fully evaluated models from the ini­
tial population. This design choice allowed us to reduce training overhead and maintain a
stateless, single­run architecture. We observed that this one­time training step introduced
negligible latency—especially in scenarios where the overall search time exceeded sev­
eral hours (e.g., 5 hours or more).
However, the effectiveness of RankNet can vary depending on the complexity of the
search space. In simpler spaces, the initial population may provide sufficient diversity for
RankNet to make accurate relative performance predictions. In more complex or higher­
dimensional search spaces, additional training data might be necessary to capture the
nuanced relationships between architectures. In such cases, it may be beneficial to re­
tain evaluated models from later generations and periodically retrain RankNet to improve
its predictive accuracy over time.
An alternative strategy for scenarios involving multiple runs (e.g., hyperparameter tun­
ing, repeated architecture search on similar datasets, or production environments) is to
pretrain RankNet on a large, diverse set of architectures and performance results. The
pretrained RankNet model can then be stored and reused in future runs, either as­is or
with fine­tuning on a small subset of the current data. This can provide a warm­start for
ranking, saving time while retaining adaptability.
Ultimately, the optimal RankNet strategy depends on the application’s constraints:
• If runtime is critical and limited, a lightweight, one­time training approach is ideal.
• If memory and storage are available and the application requires multiple search
runs, pretraining and reusing a RankNet model may offer improved efficiency.
70
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:78==
It is difficult to define a one­size­fits­all policy for RankNet usage. Each application may
require a different strategy depending on its goals, compute budget, and architectural di­
versity. Nevertheless, the core idea of RankNet—as a predictive, pairwise model that
estimates relative architecture quality—remains highly versatile. Even with minimal over­
head, it can significantly accelerate neural architecture search by reducing the number of
poorly performing candidates that require full evaluation.
10.2
Generalization to Other Domains
Although this work has focused on image classification using the CIFAR­100 dataset, a
natural direction for future research is to extend the accelerated NAS framework to other
data modalities. Many embedded and real­world applications demand efficient models
for tasks such as audio classification (e.g., keyword spotting, environmental sound recog­
nition), time­series forecasting, and sensor­based anomaly detection.
Applying the proposed acceleration strategies—such as early stopping, surrogate model­
ing with RankNet, and one­time training—across these domains would provide valuable
insight into their generality and robustness. In particular, audio­based tasks, which of­
ten rely on spectrogram­based CNN architectures, offer a promising testbed due to their
structural similarity to image­based models. Validating the effectiveness of NAS accel­
eration techniques in these contexts would demonstrate their broader applicability and
relevance beyond image classification.
10.3
Application to Diverse Network Architectures
This work has focused solely on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which are widely
used in embedded vision applications.
However, modern lightweight AI models in­
creasingly incorporate alternative architectural elements, such as attention mechanisms,
transformer layers, and hybrid CNN­transformer designs. Future work could investigate
whether the proposed acceleration techniques—such as RankNet­based surrogate mod­
eling, early stopping, and one­time training—remain effective when applied to these more
advanced model families.
Transformer­based architectures (e.g., MobileViT [52], TinyViT [53]) and hybrid models of­
fer greater representational power and are gaining popularity in embedded systems due to
their improved ability to capture long­range dependencies. Similarly, graph­based mod­
els such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are used in domains like molecular analysis
and anomaly detection, and present unique structural challenges for NAS.
Successfully extending the NAS framework to support such architectures would require
carefully designed search spaces and possibly new embedding strategies for surrogate
learning. Nevertheless, if these adaptations are made, the acceleration techniques pro­
posed in this work have the potential to generalize across a wide range of network types—
broadening the scope and impact of efficient NAS in embedded AI.
10.4
Expansion of Search Space and Operators
An important direction for future work is to expand the search space to include a broader
range of architectural components that are commonly used in resource­constrained envi­
ronments. This may involve integrating additional layer types such as depthwise separa­
ble convolutions, squeeze­and­excitation blocks, inverted residuals, or lightweight atten­
tion mechanisms.
Extending the search space in this way would enable the discovery of more diverse and
potentially better­performing architectures tailored to specific deployment requirements.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
71
==PAGE:79==
A key challenge, however, is maintaining the efficiency of the NAS process despite this
increased complexity. Validating the sustained effectiveness of the proposed acceleration
techniques in the context of an expanded search space would underscore the framework’s
adaptability and robustness.
10.5
Evaluation in Unsupervised and Self­supervised
Settings
While this work has focused on supervised classification tasks—where models learn from
labeled data by mapping inputs to known outputs—an important direction for future re­
search is the extension of accelerated NAS methods to unsupervised and self­supervised
learning paradigms. In contrast to supervised learning, unsupervised methods operate
without labeled data, aiming instead to discover patterns, structures, or representations
inherent in the input data itself.
Architectures such as autoencoders, variational autoencoders, and contrastive learning
models (e.g., SimCLR, BYOL) are increasingly used in embedded scenarios for tasks like
anomaly detection, representation learning, and sensor data analysis.
Applying the proposed acceleration strategies—such as RankNet­based surrogate mod­
eling and early stopping—in these contexts would help evaluate their effectiveness in
optimizing encoder–decoder or contrastive architectures, where objective functions differ
significantly from classification loss.
Pursuing these directions would not only broaden the applicability of the techniques in­
troduced in this thesis but also strengthen their value across a wide range of learning
paradigms, model types, and hardware constraints. Such generalization would further
establish the proposed methods as a foundational component of efficient NAS for real­
world embedded AI applications.
72
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:80==
A
Appendix
The complete source code for the NAS (Neural Architecture Search) algorithm is available
in a private repository:
https://github.com/vasimosc2/ResourceEfficientNAS.git
Additionally, the source code for deploying a trained model to an Arduino device, along
with a few test cases, is available in the following private repository:
https://github.com/vasimosc2/ArduinoSketch.git
Access to both repositories is available upon request.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
73
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Andrew G Howard. “Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile
vision applications”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04861 (2017).
[2]
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. “Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional
neural networks”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2019,
pp. 6105–6114.
[3]
NN Alajlan and DM Ibrahim. TinyML: enabling of inference deep learning models on
ultra­low­power IoT edge devices for AI applications,” Micromachines, 13 (6): 851.
2022.
[4]
Shiqing Liu, Haoyu Zhang, and Yaochu Jin. “A survey on computationally efficient
neural architecture search”. In: Journal of Automation and Intelligence 1.1 (2022),
p. 100002.
[5]
Gilbert Tanner. Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense Overview. https://gilberttanner.com/
blog/arduino-nano-33-ble-sense-overview/. Accessed: 2025­05­18. 2020.
[6]
TechTarget Contributor. What is an embedded system? Accessed: 2025­05­18.
TechTarget. 2024. URL: https : / / www . techtarget . com / iotagenda / definition /
embedded-system.
[7]
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. “Neural architecture
search: A survey”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 20.55 (2019), pp. 1–
21.
[8]
Xin Qiu and Risto Miikkulainen. “Shortest edit path crossover: A theory­driven so­
lution to the permutation problem in evolutionary neural architecture search”. In:
International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2023, pp. 28422–28447.
[9]
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. “Darts: Differentiable architecture
search”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055 (2018).
[10]
Arber Zela, Jan Hendrik Siems, and Frank Hutter. “Understanding and Robustifying
Differentiable Architecture Search”. In: ICLR (2020).
[11]
Han Cai et al. “Once­for­all: Train one network and specialize it for efficient deploy­
ment”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09791 (2019).
[12]
Jiahui Yu et al. “Bignas: Scaling up neural architecture search with big single­stage
models”. In: Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow,
UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part VII 16. Springer. 2020, pp. 702–717.
[13]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning”. In: nature
521.7553 (2015), pp. 436–444.
[14]
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. “Representation learning: A
review and new perspectives”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and ma­
chine intelligence 35.8 (2013), pp. 1798–1828.
[15]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks”. In: Communications of the ACM 60.6
(2017), pp. 84–90.
[16]
Rikiya Yamashita et al. “Convolutional neural networks: an overview and application
in radiology”. In: Insights into imaging 9 (2018), pp. 611–629.
[17]
Danilo Pietro Pau, Prem Kumar Ambrose, and Fabrizio Maria Aymone. “A quanti­
tative review of automated neural search and on­device learning for tiny devices”.
In: Chips 2.2 (2023), pp. 130–141.
74
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
==PAGE:82==
[18]
Daniel Rossi, Guido Borghi, and Roberto Vezzani. “TakuNet: an Energy­Efficient
CNN for Real­Time Inference on Embedded UAV systems in Emergency Response
Scenarios”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05880 (2025).
[19]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very deep convolutional networks for
large­scale image recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014).
[20]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (2016), pp. 770–
778.
[21]
Forrest N Iandola et al. “SqueezeNet: AlexNet­level accuracy with 50x fewer pa­
rameters and< 0.5 MB model size”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360 (2016).
[22]
Mark Sandler et al. “MobileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2018, pp. 4510–4520.
[23]
Andrew Howard et al. “Searching for MobileNetV3”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 2019, pp. 1314–1324.
[24]
Xiangyu Zhang et al. “ShuffleNet: An extremely efficient convolutional neural net­
work for mobile devices”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vi­
sion and pattern recognition. 2018, pp. 6848–6856.
[25]
Christos Kyrkou and Theocharis Theocharides. “EmergencyNet: Efficient aerial im­
age classification for drone­based emergency monitoring using atrous convolutional
feature fusion”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations
and Remote Sensing 13 (2020), pp. 1687–1699.
[26]
Obed Mogaka et al. “TinyEmergencyNet: A hardware­friendly ultra­lightweight deep
learning model for aerial scene image classification”. In: Journal of Real­Time Image
Processing 21.51 (2024).
[27]
Nordic Semiconductor. Power Profiler Kit II. https://www.nordicsemi.com/Products/
Development-hardware/Power-Profiler-Kit-2. Accessed: 2025­06­03. 2023.
[28]
TensorFlow Team. Post­training quantization | TensorFlow Lite. https : / / www .
tensorflow.org/lite/performance/post_training_quantization. Accessed: 2025­06­
19. 2023.
[29]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep net­
work training by reducing internal covariate shift”. In: International conference on
machine learning. pmlr. 2015, pp. 448–456.
[30]
Tianyan Zhou, Yong Zhao, and Jian Wu. “Resnext and res2net structures for
speaker verification”. In: 2021 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop
(SLT). IEEE. 2021, pp. 301–307.
[31]
Joao Paulo Schwarz Schuler et al. “Grouped pointwise convolutions reduce param­
eters in convolutional neural networks”. In: Mendel. Vol. 28. 1. 2022, pp. 23–31.
[32]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[33]
Pavel Izmailov et al. “Averaging weights leads to wider optima and better general­
ization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05407 (2018).
[34]
TensorFlow. Optimizing TensorFlow Lite Runtime Memory. 2025. URL: https : / /
blog.tensorflow.org/2020/10/optimizing-tensorflow-lite-runtime.html#:~:text=the%
20model%20itself,large%20as%20the%20model%20itself.
[35]
Edgar Liberis and Nicholas D Lane. “Neural networks on microcontrollers: saving
memory at inference via operator reordering”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05110
(2019).
[36]
Danilo Pau et al. “Tiny machine learning zoo for long­term compensation of pressure
sensor drifts”. In: Electronics 12.23 (2023), p. 4819.
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
75
==PAGE:83==
[37]
Erez Manor and Shlomo Greenberg. “Custom hardware inference accelerator for
tensorflow lite for microcontrollers”. In: IEEE Access 10 (2022), pp. 73484–73493.
[38]
Swapnil Sayan Saha, Sandeep Singh Sandha, and Mani Srivastava. “Machine
Learning for Microcontroller­Class Hardware: A Review”. In: IEEE Sensors Jour­
nal 22.22 (2022), pp. 21362–21390. DOI: 10.1109/JSEN.2022.3210773.
[39]
Abid Hussain and Yousaf Shad Muhammad. “Trade­off between exploration and
exploitation with genetic algorithm using a novel selection operator”. In: Complex &
intelligent systems 6.1 (2020), pp. 1–14.
[40]
Vladimir Filipović. “Fine­grained tournament selection operator in genetic algo­
rithms”. In: Computing and Informatics 22.2 (2003), pp. 143–161.
[41]
Liang Fan and Handing Wang. “Surrogate­assisted evolutionary neural architecture
search with network embedding”. In: Complex & Intelligent Systems 9.3 (2023),
pp. 3313–3331.
[42]
Liam Li and Ameet Talwalkar. “Random search and reproducibility for neural archi­
tecture search”. In: Uncertainty in artificial intelligence. PMLR. 2020, pp. 367–377.
[43]
Alessandro Achille, Matteo Rovere, and Stefano Soatto. “Critical learning periods
in deep neural networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08856 (2017).
[44]
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. “Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm
restarts”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03983 (2016).
[45]
Aitor
Lewkowycz.
“How
to
decay
your
learning
rate”.
In:
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2103.12682 (2021).
[46]
Arduino. Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense – Cheat Sheet. Accessed: 2025­05­26. 2024.
URL: https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/nano-33-ble-sense/cheat-sheet/.
[47]
Daniel N Moriasi et al. “Model evaluation guidelines for systematic quantification
of accuracy in watershed simulations”. In: Transactions of the ASABE 50.3 (2007),
pp. 885–900. DOI: 10.13031/2013.23153.
[48]
Yoav Freund and Robert E Schapire. “Large margin classification using the percep­
tron algorithm”. In: Machine learning 37.3 (1999), pp. 277–296.
[49]
Zhiyuan Li and Sanjeev Arora. “An exponential learning rate schedule for deep
learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07454 (2019).
[50]
Chiheon Kim et al. “Automated learning rate scheduler for large­batch training”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05855 (2021).
[51]
Harold P. Benson. “Multi­objective Optimization: Pareto Optimal Solutions, Proper­
ties”. In: Encyclopedia of Optimization. Ed. by C. A. Floudas and P. M. Pardalos.
Springer Optimization and Its Applications. Boston, MA: Springer, 2008, pp. 2478–
2481. DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-74759-0_426.
[52]
Sachin Mehta and Mohammad Rastegari. “MobileViT: Light­weight, General­
purpose, and Mobile­friendly Vision Transformer”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2022, pp. 14124–14134.
[53]
Mingyuan Wu et al. “TinyViT: Fast Pretraining Distillation for Small Vision Trans­
formers”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10666 (2023).
76
Resource­Efficient Embedded Neural Networks
