==PAGE:1==
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed
Material in Biomass Combustion
An Experimental and Simulation-Based Investigation
Master Thesis
Sandra Ósk Alfreðsdóttir
DTU Biochemical and Chemical Engineering
Catalysis and High-temperature Engineering Centre
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
An Experimental and Simulation-Based Investigation
Master Thesis
June 27th, 2025
By
Sandra Ósk Alfreðsdóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Catalysis and High-temperature Engineering Centre, Brovej, Build-
ing 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Catalysis and High-Temperature
Engineering Center, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU), in collaboration with Ørsted, in partial fulfillment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Sandra Ósk Alfreðsdóttir - s233101
Signature
Date
ii
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Combustion of biomass in a bubbling fluidized bed (BFB) boiler is an established tech-
nology for electricity and heat generation. Interactions between alkali species and bed
material have been found to cause the formation of agglomerates, which can lead to de-
fluidization of the bed and a subsequent shutdown of operation. This thesis investigates
gaseous interactions between KCl and NaCl with bed material in a fixed-bed setting. The
simulation tools FactSage 8.3 and Chemkin were used to support and interpret the exper-
imental results. Additionally, simulations were used to explore the potential influence of
atmospheric conditions within a typical BFB boiler on the interactions between alkali salts
and the bed material.
An experimental setup was developed and evaluated through a series of preliminary tests.
Experiments were carried out at a temperature of 860 °C. Atmospheric conditions were
2.5 % or 5.0 % O2 in N2 on a dry basis, with a moisture content ranging from 3.04 % to
12.12 %. Formation of K-silicates and/or Na-silicates was observed in all experiments,
and layer formation around bed particles was successfully identified. Key experimental
findings included the following: interactions between KCl and silica bed material increased
with experimental duration; interactions between KCl and aged bed material decreased
with increasing bed age; and enhanced reactivity with bed material was observed when
a mixed solution of KCl/NaCl was used. Key findings from simulations indicated that
higher reactivity of KCl and NaCl is predicted under fluidized bed atmospheric conditions
compared to the experimental conditions described above. The findings of this thesis may
contribute to improved understanding and potential strategies for mitigating agglomeration
caused by interactions between alkali species and bed material.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
iii
==PAGE:6==
Symbols and Abbreviations
BFB - Bubbling Fluidized Bed
DI - Deionized water
EAC - Experimental atmospheric conditions
FAC - Fluidized bed atmospheric conditions
ICP-OES - Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission Spectroscopy
NDIR - Non-Dispersive Infrared Absorption
NLMP - Normal Liters Per Minute
ppm - parts per million
SEM/EDS - Scanning Electron Microscopy / Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
SLMP - Standard Liters Per Minute
UMG - Ultrasonic Mist Generator
XRF - X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy
g - gaseous phase
N - Normal (Normal liter)
λ - Excess air ratio
iv
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Sandra Ósk Alfreðsdóttir, MSc Biochemical and Chemical Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Hao Wu, Professor, Supervisor from DTU & Anne Juul Damø, Senior Researcher, Su-
pervisor from DTU
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisors at DTU for their continuous support and guid-
ance throughout every stage of this project. Your expertise, engagement, and insights
were truly invaluable.
Kristian Røhe Kongst Krum, Supervisor from Ørsted & Johan Peter Valentin Waden-
bäck, Supervisor from Ørsted
I’m also very grateful to my supervisors at Ørsted for their interest and involvement in
the project. Your support, especially in developing the experimental setup and providing
insight into the operation of Unit 6 at Asnæsværket, was greatly appreciated.
In addition, I would like to thank everyone at DTU’s Catalysis and High-Temperature En-
gineering Center who helped me out in various ways throughout this project.
And last but not least, thank you to my family and friends for all your support and for
reminding me that I was doing just fine. Laughing at stupid mistakes and listening to
occasional rant was highly appreciated!
Síðast en ekki síst vil ég þakka fjölskyldu og vinum fyrir allan þann stuðning í gegnum
verkefnið, og fyrir að minna mig á það að ég var bara í fínustu málum þótt mér fyndist það
ekki sjálfri. Þakka ykkur líka fyrir að hlusta á stöku væl hér og þar, kunni mikið að meta
það!
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Symbols and Abbreviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Agglomeration of bed materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Objectives, scope, and methodologies of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Bed agglomeration and defluidization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Interactions of ash and bed material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3
Modeling and simulation of ash-bed interactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.4
Technical basis of equilibrium calculations with FactSage 8.3
. . . . . . . . 25
2.5
Technical basis of employed analysis techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3
Experimental - Materials and Methods
33
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.3
Analysis methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.4
Methodology Development and Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4
Simulation of experiments
59
4.1
Simulated Atmospheric Conditions in a Bubbling Fluidized Bed Boiler
. . . 59
4.2
Thermodynamical equilibrium calculations with FactSage
. . . . . . . . . . 61
4.3
Chemical kinetic simulations with Chemkin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5
Results
65
5.1
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.2
Results of simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
6
Discussions
101
6.1
Discussion on experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
6.2
Discussion on results from simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
6.3
Summary of discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
7
Conclusions
109
Bibliography
111
A Supporting information - Results
115
A.1 Feeding rate of mist
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.2 Preliminary results from XRF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
A.3 SEM images of surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
A.4 Cross-section SEM/EDS with AQM tool analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
vii
==PAGE:10==
B Supporting information - Experimental
129
B.1 Figures of experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
B.2 Statistical calculations for XRF analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
B.3 Calculation of feeding rate and inlet concentration of KCl . . . . . . . . . . . 134
B.4 Development of KCl/HCl relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
B.5 Calibration of gas flow meters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
B.6 Overpressure and CO2 readings from selected experiments . . . . . . . . . 140
viii
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Biomass is a viable alternative to fossil fuels for the generation of electricity and heat
through combustion technologies. It can be effectively combusted in boilers such as flu-
idized bed systems due to their high fuel flexibility [1]. Bubbling fluidized bed (BFB) boilers,
for example, represent a widely applied technology for the thermochemical conversion of
biomass. This technology is commercially available and can be integrated into existing
infrastructure at both large and small scales. As noted, the primary products of biomass
combustion are heat and steam, which can be harnessed for electricity generation, mak-
ing it a promising approach for producing renewable energy [2, 3].
A representative example of this technology is Ørsted’s Asnæs Power Station Unit 6,
shown in Figure 1.1. The power station is located in Kalundborg, in western Zealand,
Denmark, and operates as a wood chip-fired bubbling fluidized bed boiler. It has been in
full operation since the 20th of November 2019, when the unit’s generator was connected
to the Zealand grid. The power station provides district heating to residential areas and
supplies process steam to nearby industries in Kalundborg. It has a capacity of 25 MW of
electrical power and 129 MWth of steam and district heating production [4].
Figure 1.1: Asnæs Power Station unit 6 [4].
Common fuels for biomass combustion include woody and herbaceous biomass. Woody
biomass includes materials such as wood chips and bark, while herbaceous biomass in-
cludes, for example, wheat straw [2]. Biomass is considered to be a CO2-neutral fuel since
the amount of the CO2 emitted is equal to the amount of CO2 which has been absorbed
by the biomass fuel. Fluidized bed technology can accommodate a wide range of fuels
which increases operational flexibility and, due to operational conditions, low emissions
of harmful pollutants, like NOx, are encountered [3]. However, agglomeration within the
fluidized bed remains a critical challenge in the operation of bubbling fluidized bed boilers,
as it can lead to defluidization and an unscheduled shutdown in operation.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Agglomeration of bed materials
Agglomeration occurs due to clustering of the bed material, which is commonly silica sand.
Agglomeration in fluidized bed combustion has largely been attributed to interactions be-
tween alkali compounds, primarily potassium and sodium species, and the bed material.
Both woody and herbaceous biomass contain potassium and sodium, though their con-
centrations tend to be higher in herbaceous biomass [2].
The mechanism behind bed agglomeration can generally be divided into melting-induced
agglomeration and coating-induced agglomeration. In the melting-induced mechanism,
molten ash forms liquid bridges between sand particles, adhering them together. In the
coating-induced mechanism, a coating layer is formed around silica bed particles due to
interactions with the biomass ash, causing them to stick together [5]. Both potassium and
sodium species are believed to react with silica to form silicates, specifically potassium
silicates and sodium silicates. The formed silicates can facilitate agglomeration through
surface coating of bed particles [1, 6]. While coating-induced agglomeration is considered
the dominant mechanism, melting-induced agglomeration is thought to contribute in high-
alkali biomass, such as herbaceous biomass [5].
Interactions between alkali compounds and bed material are primarily expected to occur
through gas-solid reactions. Thus, the release of potassium and sodium species from the
biomass is of interest. During combustion, potassium and sodium may be retained in the
biomass ash or released in the gaseous phase [7]. Potassium chloride is the most stable
gaseous species of potassium and tends to be devolatilized from the biomass, rather than
remain in the bed [8]. Release pathways of potassium are thought to be complex, and both
organically bound and inorganically bound potassium is released during combustion [9].
Different atmospheric conditions have further been found to affect interactions between
alkali compounds and bed material. The atmospheric conditions in a fluidized bed boiler
are typically reducing and thought to be complex; however, local oxidizing zones may exist.
Biomass often contains moisture which, upon heating, evaporates; steam conditions are
therefore also expected [1, 6, 7, 10].
Although the interactions between alkali compounds and bed material have been exten-
sively studied, many aspects remain unresolved. Potassium chloride has been shown to
react with silica to form potassium silicates under atmospheric conditions containing 25 %
H2O in N2 [10]. However, under slightly lower moisture conditions (20 % H2O in N2), no
such reactions were observed. Instead, KCl was reported to melt and cause agglomer-
ation by binding bed particles together [6]. The influence of KCl concentration, reaction
time, and the detailed reaction mechanisms has not been explored in detail. Moreover,
the potential interaction between KCl and NaCl in reactions with bed material has not been
thoroughly investigated.
1.2
Objectives, scope, and methodologies of the project
The overall objectives of this master thesis are stated as follows and discussed in more
detail below:
• Develop and evaluate experimental methods for conducting experiments.
• Investigate time-dependent interactions between KCl and silica bed material.
• Investigate interactions between KCl and aged bed material obtained from Asnæs
Power Station.
• Investigate interactions between KCl and NaCl with silica bed material.
2
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:13==
• Use simulation tools to support and interpret experimental findings, and explore the
influence of atmospheric conditions typical of BFB boilers on alkali–bed material
interactions.
The interactions between gaseous alkali species and bed material were investigated using
a fixed bed reactor setup. Alkali salts were introduced as aerosols into the reactor tube,
where they evaporated before reaching the heated bed. A flow sheet of the experimental
setup is shown in Figure 1.2. The setup was developed and evaluated to ensure reliable
and repeatable results.
Figure 1.2: Flow sheet of the experimental setup used to carry out experiments.
The setup was operated under controlled atmospheric conditions of 2.5 % or 5 % O2 in N2
on a dry basis, with a moisture content ranging from 3.04 % to 12.12 %, and at a bed tem-
perature of 860 °C. Interactions between KCl and silica bed material were studied over
durations of 1 h, 2 h, and 4 h to evaluate the time dependence of the reactions. Interac-
tions between gaseous KCl and aged bed material from Asnæs Power Station were also
investigated to assess the effect of bed age on reactivity. Three samples of differently
aged bed material were used to evaluate the extent of interaction as a function of bed
age. Additionally, interactions between silica sand and a mixed solution of KCl and NaCl
were explored to determine whether the presence of both salts influences reactivity, and
whether their individual interactions with the bed material differed.
The experimental findings were further supported and analyzed using two simulation tools.
Thermodynamic equilibrium calculations were performed with FactSage 8.3, including
both gaseous species and solid bed material. The kinetics of the gaseous components of
the system were investigated using Chemkin. Simulations served both to validate exper-
imental results and to extend the investigation to more complex atmospheric conditions
representative of full-scale bubbling fluidized bed boilers. These simulations provided
valuable insights for future work, as reproducing such conditions experimentally was not
feasible with the current experimental setup.
The extent of interactions between the salts and the bed material was assessed by mea-
suring the increase in potassium and sodium concentrations in the bed material before
and after the experiments. Surface and bulk compositions were characterized using estab-
lished analytical techniques, with a focus on elemental analysis. Due to time constraints,
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
3
==PAGE:14==
only limited surface imaging and cross-sectional evaluation were carried out to investigate
potential layer formation on the bed particles
1.3
Structure of thesis
The following chapters present the details of this work. A brief literature review in Chap-
ter 2 introduces the mechanisms of bed agglomeration and the interactions between
biomass ash and bed materials, with a particular focus on potassium and sodium salts.
The literature review also outlines relevant modeling approaches and simulation tools
used to investigate ash-bed material interactions. In addition, the theoretical foundations
of the analytical methods and simulation tools used in this study are outlined.
An experimental setup has been developed and evaluated to carry out the desired experi-
ments. The efforts to improve and verify this setup are described in Chapter 3. Limitations
of the setup are addressed, along with suggestions for future improvements. The simula-
tion work is outlined in Chapter 4, detailing both the thermodynamic and kinetic modeling
approaches.
Results are presented in Chapter 5 and are divided into two main sections, experimental
and simulation-based results. The experimental results focus on the characterization of
bed material samples, aiming to evaluate interactions between alkali species and the bed
material. The simulation results include thermodynamic equilibrium calculations using
FactSage 8.3, and chemical kinetic modeling using Chemkin. Results are then discussed
in detail in Chapter 6, and key conclusions are summarized in Chapter 7.
4
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
Biomass can be combusted in a Bubbling Fluidized Bed (BFB) Boiler for the production
of heat and electricity. With combustion, the chemical energy of biomass is converted
into heat. This heat is transferred via flue gas or used to generate steam, which is subse-
quently employed to produce electricity. BFB boilers are typically operated as a combined
heat and power production [11]. The main components of a BFB system include a fuel
supply system, air supply system, combustion furnace, ash and flue gas treatment units,
as well as a turbine and a generator. A BFB boiler system from Valmet is shown in Fig-
ure 2.1, where all major parts are visible [12].
Figure 2.1: Design of a BFB boiler system from Valmet. All major units are shown. [12].
The bed material, which commonly is silica sand, is located at the bottom of the com-
bustion chamber, and biomass fuel is fed from the top. The bed is fluidized using a flow
of primary fluidizing agent, giving it liquid-like properties with a clearly defined bed sur-
face [3]. Air is most commonly used as a fluidizing agent. Bubbling of the bed occurs at
a minimum bubbling velocity, which promotes fast vertical mixing, and to a lesser extent
horizontal mixing [13]. The bed material provides a stable environment for combustion, as
it maintains sufficient and even temperature distribution. Operating temperatures typically
range from 800 °C to 850 °C, with room for flexibility. Secondary air is often introduced
above the bed to ensure complete combustion [12].
The combustion of biomass is affected by its composition. The biomass fuel used for
combustion can range from agricultural waste to forest waste, in general any organic fuel,
excluding fossil fuels, can be considered biomass. Here, woody biomass like wood chips
and pellets, and herbaceous biomass like wheat straws, are of relevance [2]. The three
major elements which comprise biomass are carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, but elements
of interest and importance are alkali metals, earth alkaline metals, chlorine, sulfur, phos-
phorus, nitrogen, silicon and iron. Volatile inorganic components, such as alkali metals
and chlorides, can vaporize and react in the gas phase and contribute to ash formation,
whereas non-volatile elements, like calcium, magnesium, and silica, remain in the solid
phase where they can form bed ash or interact with the bed material [8]. Devolatiliza-
tion of biomass is relatively fast due to incompact structure, high concentration of oxygen
and hydrogen, and low ash content. Devolatilization products typically include CO, CO2,
and H2O, as well as volatile inorganic compounds such as alkali salts [14]. Herbaceous
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
5
==PAGE:16==
biomass is generally rich in alkali metals, while woody biomass shows lower concentra-
tions [2].
One of the most critical challenges in biomass combustion within a BFB boiler is the forma-
tion of agglomerates, which can lead to bed defluidization and ultimately cause unplanned
shutdowns. Agglomeration occurs due to interactions between devolatilized ash and the
bed material, resulting in the formation of solid clusters that disrupt fluidization [2]. The
mechanisms behind agglomeration have been extensively studied and will be discussed
here, along with the key affecting parameters that influence the process. Interactions be-
tween ash and bed material will be further discussed in more detail, particularly the roles
of potassium and sodium salts. Effort has been put in modeling and simulation of ash-bed
material interactions, which will be discussed here. A brief technical background of the
thermodynamic equilibrium calculation software FactSage 8.3 is given, as the software
will be used for simulation of experimental results and to explore effects of the complex
gas atmospheric conditions typical of BFB boilers. Additionally, a technical background
of the analytical techniques used to characterize experimental samples will be provided.
These techniques include X-ray fluorescence (XRF), scanning electron microscopy with
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDS), and inductively coupled plasma opti-
cal emission (ICP-OES).
2.1
Bed agglomeration and defluidization
Alkali species are considered responsible for agglomeration and the subsequent deflu-
idization of the bed. Agglomeration can be described as clustering of bed material parti-
cles, due to adhesion or reaction with alkali compounds, with possible diffusion of calcium
or magnesium into these compounds. The formation of agglomerates leads to a broader
particle size distribution, which can lead to bed segregation and reduce the overall mix-
ing efficiency. Both those factors will lead to temperature becoming unevenly distributed
[15]. Agglomeration mechanisms can be broadly categorized into coating-induced and
melting-induced processes, both of which will be discussed here. Additionally, various
operational parameters influence the tendency towards agglomeration, and their roles
and significance will also be discussed.
2.1.1
Mechanisms of agglomeration
Two main agglomeration mechanism can be defined for the process of biomass com-
bustion, coating-induced agglomeration or melting-induced agglomeration. The coating
induced mechanism is generally considered dominant, but in the case of herbaceous
biomass, melting induced agglomeration can make significant contributions [5].
Melting-induced agglomeration can be described as the formation of liquid phase bridges
between bed material particles which adheres the particles together. Only a small part of
the molten bed material agglomerates and the melted ash needs to be sufficiently sticky
so that the particles adhere together. This mechanism occurs fast, but is not speculated
to be of big importance [5, 8]. However, herbaceous biomass often contains high concen-
trations of alkali metals, which can melt at the operating temperatures of a fluidized bed
reactor. Therefore, melting-induced agglomeration could be of some importance in the
combustion of herbaceous biomass [5]. Melting behavior of ash formed from the combus-
tion of biomass has been found to depend on the concentration of potassium and calcium.
When the ternary system K2O-SiO2-CaO is looked at, high concentration of potassium
and low concentration of calcium results in the formation of significant amount of melts,
at temperatures below 900 °C. In contrast, when calcium concentrations are high and
potassium concentrations are low, no significant formation of melts is observed until at
temperatures well exceeding 900 °C [16].
6
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:17==
Coating-induced mechanism describes the formation of a coating layer around silica bed
particles, formed in a reaction with alkali species. The coated silica particles can ad-
here together, and subsequently initiate agglomeration. The coating-induced mechanism
forms around more bed material, affecting greater part of the bed compared to the melting-
induced mechanism, but it occurs slower. Nevertheless, coating-induced mechanism is
speculated to be the dominant mechanism behind bed agglomeration [5, 8]. Typically,
one to three concentric layers are formed around a bed particle. The combined thickness
of the layers has been reported to be between 10 µm to 75 µm, often depending on the
time duration of experiments. Agglomeration is speculated to occur due to the inner most
coating layer, since the binding element in agglomeration has a similar composition to this
layer [5]. The formation of the inner layer has been found to grow towards the center of the
particle, by an attack or reaction with the silicon found in the bed particle. Unreacted parts
of the bed particles then get exposed and available for further reactions [5, 17]. While cal-
cium silicates are typically the dominant species in the inner layer, alkali silicates may
also form, particularly within cracks where other ash-forming elements cannot penetrate
[17]. Typical composition of the coating layers will be discussed in further details later on.
In Figure 2.2 are melting-induced and coating-induced mechanisms illustrated [5].
Figure 2.2: Coating-induced and melting-induced mechanisms [5].
The coating-induced mechanism has been speculated to be able to occur by three distinct
sub-processes, although their relative significance is not well agreed upon [5]. The first
sub-process involves the attachment of an ash particle on a bed particle via van der Waals
forces. The attached ash-particle is usually smaller than 10 µm in diameter. The second
sub-process involves the condensation of a volatilized ash specie onto the surface of a
silica particle, which requires a temperature gradient to be possible to occur. The third
sub-process involves the interaction of partially molten ash particles with silica particles.
These partially molten ash particles adhere to silica surfaces and can cause two silica
particles to stick together. It must be noted that a liquid bridge does not form between
the two adhered silica particles, such that this mechanism is distinct from melting-induced
agglomeration [5].
The extent of which the second mechanism occurs has been debated upon. The inner
coating layer which is formed suggest a selective condensation of volatilized ash particles,
but the driving force of condensation should not be present in a fluidized bed reactor. The
conditions in a fluidized bed should be near isothermal, and thus the temperature differ-
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
7
==PAGE:18==
ence to drive condensation or evaporation is not present, so that this mechanism should
have negligible effects of agglomeration in the bed [5]. However, Öehman et al. reported
that condensation of gaseous alkali species contribute to formation of agglomerates, due
to local temperature gradients which could drive the condensation [16]. The third mecha-
nism described can also be applied to burning of char particles which is thought to be of
a big importance when it comes to formation of agglomerates. The surface temperature
of a char particle can be higher than the melting point of an ash particle, which will facil-
itate the melting of it. The molten ash compound can detach from the char particle and
collide and stick to a bed particle. A bed particle could also collide with a char particle that
contains a molten ash particle, which would stick to the bed particle [5, 8].
Öehman et al. proposed a three step mechanism behind the formation of a coating layer
around a bed particle. The first step is when an ash particle sticks to a bed particle.
This step can occur through different ways as has been described, it can attach to the
bed particle, gaseous alkali species can condensate on the surface of the bed particle, or
gaseous alkali species react with the silica particle. The next step defined is the formation
of a coating layer by the continued deposition of ash particles on the surface of a bed
particle. During this step the inner silica melt layer is formed. The last step is the melting
of this inner silica layer which is responsible for the agglomeration process, as has been
discussed [16].
2.1.2
Composition and structure of coating layers
Formed coating layers around a bed particle have been found to mainly consist of silicon,
calcium and potassium, with minor amounts of other elements. One to three layers have
been reported to form around the quartz particles, with a total thickness of few microm-
eters up to 50 µm-75 µm. The inner layers have been found to be quite homogeneous,
consisting of silicates, potassium and calcium melts, while the composition of the outer
layer is more heterogeneous and resembles the composition of the biomass ash. Addi-
tionally, the outer layer has been found to be more granular and often porous [5, 16, 17,
18, 19].
Brus et al. [17] performed controlled agglomeration experiments in a 5 kW BFB boiler,
using five representative Nordic biomass types, including bark, straw, and olive residue.
The quartz bed was maintained at 800 °C in each experiment, and lasted 40 h for bark and
olive residue, but an unscheduled defluidization occurred in the experiment with straw as
fuel, and a total experimental time was not noted. Following complete combustion, the
bed was heated at a rate of 3 °C min−1 until agglomeration was observed, or a maximum of
1040 °C was reached. However, agglomeration temperatures for fuels were not reported.
All fuels, except straw, formed distinct particle coatings, consisting of an inner and outer
layer as identified by SEM/EDS. An example of the coating formed during bark combustion
is shown in Figure 2.3.
8
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Inner and outer coating layers around a silica bed particle, when bark was
used as fuel and the experiment lasted for 40 h [17].
For olive residue the main constituents of the inner layer were silicon and potassium, with
minor amounts of calcium and magnesium. For bark, the inner layer mainly consisted
of silicon, potassium and calcium. The composition of the outer layer for both fuels was
more complex and representative of the fuel ash. Over 90 % of the melt around the sil-
ica particles was found to consist of different phases within the K2O-CaO-SiO2 ternary
system. No coatings were observed on bed particles following straw combustion. How-
ever, “necks” composed almost entirely of K-silicates were detected. Agglomeration was
attributed to the direct adhesion of molten ash or fuel particles coated with sticky ash. In
the case of olive residue, inward growth of the coating layer could be accurately detected,
as shown in Figure 2.4. Although bark layers were thinner and an accurate determination
could not be obtained, similar behavior was strongly indicated.
Figure 2.4: Unreacted bed particle is shown on the left, and a bed particle after 40 h
experiment is shown on the right. Olive residue was used as fuel, and it was successfully
shown that the coating layer grows inwards [17].
It was concluded that K-silicates can form via potassium diffusion into cracks inaccessible
to larger ash compounds. At high temperatures, these K-silicates partially melt, allowing
for higher diffusion rates of potassium and therefore accelerating silicate formation. It was
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
9
==PAGE:20==
further concluded that calcium silicates are the most stable species, but in the absence
of calcium, potassium silicates are the most stable, and become the preferred product.
Nuutinen et al. [18] observed the formation of one to three distinct layers around a quartz
bed particle, which differed in chemical composition. The bed particle were from a labo-
ratory BFB where wood residue and bark fuel were used as fuel. Time duration of exper-
iments and bed temperature were not reported. The innermost coating layer, which was
dense and approximately 5 µm-20 µm thick, contained about 18 wt.% - 27 wt.% potassium,
60 wt.% silicon, and 10 wt.% calcium, along with other minor elements such as mag-
nesium, iron, and sodium. The composition of the inner most coating layer was found
to resemble the adhesive layer in agglomerates. It was concluded that coating layers
which contained the alkali metals potassium and sodium, could therefore be adhesive
and cause agglomeration. Calcium was found to be the major component of the interme-
diate coating layer, constituting 66 wt.% - 71 wt.%. Silicon concentration was 23 wt.% -
27 wt.%, and potassium concentration only around 2 wt.%, while magnesium concentra-
tion increased to around 4 wt.%. This was the thickest layer of 5 µm-50 µm, but porous.
The outermost layer was the thinnest, or around 1 µm-5 µm, but relatively dense. Silicon
comprised around 35 wt.%, calcium around 10 wt.%, potassium around 3 wt.%, and mag-
nesium around 14 wt.% - 37 wt.%, but its composition was found to vary considerably
around the same bed particle.
Öehman et al. [16] found that the formed coating layers around bed particles are generally
homogeneous, but their composition depends on the composition of the fuel. The formed
coating layers were found to be 10 µm-50 µm thick in total, and silicon was the dominating
element. When wood, bark, wood reside, or wheat straw was used as fuel, it was found
that over 90 wt.% of the coating composition was the ternary system K2O-CaO-SiO2. The
outermost coating layer can be heterogeneous mixture of different particles, but tends
towards homogenization with time.
Grimm et al. [19] reported that combustion of fuels comprising of logging residues, bark
and wheat straws, resulted in homogeneous inner coating layer, and more granular struc-
tured outer coating layer forming around the bed particles. The experiments were con-
ducted in a laboratory scale reactor and lasted 8 h. In Figure 2.5 typical results of cross-
sectional image showing the formed coating layers around silica particles when logging
residue, bark, and wheat straw were used as fuel, are presented.
(a) Logging residue used as
fuel.
(b) Bark used as fuel.
(c) Wheat straw used as fuel.
Figure 2.5: Formed coating layers around silica bed particles during combustion of differ-
ent biomasses [19].
10
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:21==
For woody biomass investigated, the inner coating layer was dominated by Si, K and Ca,
where the composition was around 70 wt.%, 16 wt.%, and 10 wt.%, respectively. The outer
layer also mostly consisted of the same elements, in addition to magnesium. Silicon was
measured around 60 wt.% - 65 wt.%, calcium around 18 wt.%, potassium around 10 wt.%,
and magnesium around 4 wt.%. For wheat straw, the outer coating layer was dominated
by silicon and potassium, but the concentration was found to be 70 wt.% and 25 wt.%,
respectively. Concentration of magnesium and calcium were both measured around 2
wt.%. The composition of the inner layer was not reported, though an inner layer was
observed to form [19].
There is general agreement on the formation of layered coatings around bed particles.
Studies have reported the formation of 1 to 3 distinct layers, though the formation of lay-
ers has been found to be dependent on the time duration of experiments [20]. Among the
studies reviewed here, only one conducted at the laboratory scale, specified the experi-
mental duration, noting that a coating layer formed over an eight hour experimental time
in a fluidized bed setting. Generally, it has been found that the inner coating layers are
dominated by Si, K and Ca, and tend toward homogeneity. The composition of the outer
layer varies between experiments, but it can contain considerable amounts of silicon and
calcium, and other elements representative to the biomass-ash composition. The outer
layers have been found to be more heterogeneous, compared to the inner layers.
2.1.3
Bed material at industrial scale operation
During full scale operation, bed material is continuously exchanged at a defined rate,
allowing individual particles to remain in the boiler for several weeks. The rate of exchange
of bed material can be based on the bed’s total weight or the plant’s power output, for
example [20, 21]. It is therefore of interest to investigate how extended operation period
affects bed material.
Brus et al. [17] performed an experiment in a 30 MW BFB boiler, using woody fuel blend
composed of 10 wt.% bark, 30 wt.% logging debris, and 40 wt.% wood chips. The bed
temperature was maintained between 800 °C - 880 °C. The experiment lasted 35 days,
but cross-sectional images of silica bed particles after 0, 7, 21, and 33 days are shown
in Figure 2.6. These images clearly illustrate the progressive growth of the coating layers
over time. The major constituents of the layer were found to be potassium calcium silicates
[17].
Figure 2.6: Coating layer formation around a silica bed particle after 0, 7, 21, and 33 days
of operation of a 30 MW BFB Boiler, using woody biomass [17].
He et al. [20] carried out a similar experiment to the work of Brus et al. [17], with a more
detailed analysis of the composition of the formed coating layers. The experiment was
conducted in a 30 MW BFB boiler using the same woody fuel blend. The bed material was
>80% quartz, with an average particle diameter of approximately 700 µm. The experiment
ran for 23 days, and bed material samples were collected after 1, 3, 5, 13, and 23 days
from complete bed change at startup. All collected samples showed the formation of at
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
11
==PAGE:22==
least one coating layer around the bed particles. The formed layers were analyzed by
cross-sectional imaging with SEM/EDS. Because the bed was continuously exchanged
throughout the experiment, only the largest collected particles were selected for analysis,
to better represent the age of the bed material. Distinct inner and outer layers were visible
in the cross-sections, as illustrated in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Identification of formed inner and outer layer around a bed particle [20].
EDS analysis of the coating layers was performed using spot analysis, with measurement
points selected at the center of each visually identified layer. For each particle, two to
three EDS spot analyses were conducted, evenly distributed around the bed particle. In
the sample taken after 1 day of operation, only one coating layer was observed, but in all
other samples an inner layer and an outer coating layer were identified. The thickness
of these layers were found to increase with longer operational time. The inner layers
were found to consist mainly of calcium, silicon, at an O- and C-free basis, and were
more homogeneous compared to the outer layer. Measured concentration of potassium
was always well below 5 mole %. The calcium concentration was found to increase with
increasing operation time, and the K/Ca molar ratio within the inner layer was also moni-
tored. After 1 day, this ratio was slightly higher than 0.05, but it declined to approximately
0.03 by day 5, and remained relatively constant for the remainder of the study. Higher
K/Ca ratio observed at the beginning of the experiment suggest that the layer formation is
initiated by the formation of K-silicate melts. These melts result from reactions between
silica bed particles and gaseous or condensed alkali species. The layer which was formed
was sticky and trapped ash particles, including CaO and MgO. The trapped ash particles
can then dissolve into the melt and react with it, decreasing the K/Ca ratio. When Ca/Si
molar ratio is investigated, it reaches a relatively high level over time. A calcium-silicate
rich layer is formed around the bed particles, protecting them from further reactions with
12
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:23==
potassium and thereby reducing the rate of the inner layer formation. The outer coating
layer was found to be more representative of the overall ash composition, as well as being
more heterogeneous and particle rich. Unlike the inner layer, the composition of the outer
layer did not change significantly with extended operation time [20].
Based on results from the experiment, the layer formation process was split up into three
stages. The first stage is the layer formation by reactions between potassium and bed
particles, resulting in a formation of a molten phase. This results in a high K/Ca ratio. Only
one layer is formed and this phase was observed to last only for the first day. During the
second stage, the outer layer is formed and the K/Ca ratio of the inner layer decreases.
This was observed for samples taken after the first day and up until the 13th day, and this
stage thus said to last between day 1 and 13 of operation. The rate of layer formation
decreased with time during the second stage. In the last stage, which lasted until the end
of the experiment, the K/Ca ratio remained fairly constant, and high Ca/Si concentration
was observed in the inner layer. Growth rate of the layers decreased with time, but the
total layer thickness of the samples taken after 1, 3, 5, 13, and 23 days were 2 µm, 11 µm,
13 µm, 29 µm, and 35 µm, respectively. In Figure 2.8 is the development of the inner and
outer layer thickness, as well as the combined thickness shown [20].
Figure 2.8: Growth of inner and outer layer over the duration of the experiment [20].
For the purpose of this review, the measured molar percentages of key elements from both
the inner and outer layers were extracted and are presented below. The composition of
the inner layer is summarized in Table 2.1, while Table 2.2 summarizes the composition
of the outer layer. To facilitate comparison with other studies discussed here, the molar
percentages were also converted to weight percentages.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
13
==PAGE:24==
Table 2.1: Mole percentages and weight percentages of potassium, silicon, and calcium
in the inner layer around a bed particle, at different bed age.
Bed age [days]
Element
Basis
1
3
5
13
23
K
[mole %]
1.4
0.7
0.7
0.5
0.6
[wt.%]
1.84
0.94
0.97
0.67
0.80
Si
[mole %]
57.0
42.3
39.5
40.0
42.6
[wt.%]
47.23
33.93
31.89
33.09
35.18
Ca
[mole %]
25.0
41.1
44.9
50.5
50.9
[wt.%]
45.34
59.26
63.91
66.54
65.22
Mg
[mole %]
4.0
4.7
4.4
1.6
0.9
[wt.%]
5.60
5.87
5.23
1.70
0.99
Table 2.2: Mole percentages and weight percentages of potassium, silicon, and calcium
in the outer layer around a bed particle, at different bed age.
Bed age [days]
Element
Basis
3
5
13
23
K
[mole %]
1.2
1.1
0.9
1.1
[wt.%]
1.75
1.63
1.30
1.63
Si
[mole %]
33.3
31.2
24.2
30.0
[wt.%]
34.84
32.31
25.49
31.21
Ca
[mole %]
36.5
36.7
42.3
40.2
[wt.%]
54.57
55.37
63.23
59.76
Mg
[mole %]
9.8
11.4
12.5
10.5
[wt.%]
8.88
10.68
10.00
7.39
The concentration of potassium in the inner layer decreases over time, while it remains
relatively stable in the outer layer. Calcium concentration increases in both layers, though
the increase is more pronounced in the inner layer. Concentration of silicon decreases in
the inner layer, but remains fairly consistent in the outer layer, except at a bed age of 13
days, where a deviation is observed. Magnesium concentration decreases in the inner
layer over time, whereas it remains relatively constant in the outer layer. In Figure 2.9 can
the development of the layer formation be seen [20].
14
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.9: Development of layer formation. The samples are from the following times:
(a) 1 day, (b) 3 days, (c) 5 days, (d) 13 days, and (e) 23 days [20].
Gatternig et al. [5] determined agglomeration temperature of used bed material from
commercial-scale fluidized bed reactors, and analyzed their chemical composition both
before and after agglomeration temperature experiments. Among the used bed materi-
als which were studied, was one sample from a 43 MW BFB boiler, which had used wood
chips as fuel. This bed material was tested in a laboratory-scale reactor. The bed material
primarily consisted of SiO2, where some calcium may have been added during operation,
but a specified amount was not noted. Details such as the age of the bed material and
specific operational parameters of the BFB boiler were also not documented. In the ex-
periments the bed material was initially heated to 550 °C, and then the temperature was
increased at a rate of 5 °C min−1 until agglomeration was detected via pressure variance
analysis. For the material originating from wood chip combustion, the agglomeration tem-
perature was determined to be at 808 °C.
The formed coating layer prior to agglomeration testing are illustrated in Figure 2.10, and
the measured concentrations of SiO2, CaO, MgO, and K2O within each layer are summa-
rized in Table 2.3.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.10: Coating layer formed around a bed particle from a 43 MW BFB reactor using
wood chips as fuel [5].
Considerable concentration of K2O is found in the inner and intermediate layer, but its
concentration decreases in the outer layer. Concentration of CaO notably decreases out-
wards, and in contrast, concentration of SiO2 increases inwards toward the center of the
particle.
Table 2.3: Measured concentration of SiO2, CaO, MgO, and K2O, in inner, intermediate
and outer layer of a bed particle from a 43 MW BFB boiler.
Point / Coating layer
SiO2 [wt.%]
CaO [wt.%]
MgO [wt.%]
K2O [wt.%]
1 / Inner
70.83
9.35
1.21
18.61
2 / Intermediate
56.17
30.75
0.41
12.68
3 / Outer
27.03
72.39
0.34
0.23
Following the determination of agglomeration temperatures, the bed material particles and
resulting agglomerates were re-analyzed. It was found that the binding material within the
agglomerates closely resembled the composition of the inner coating layers observed in
the original bed samples (see Table 2.3). This material had penetrated through the outer
layer, forming liquid bridges that fused bed particles together. Figure 2.11 shows the con-
necting layer and particle surface, along with EDS analyses at two specific points. The
analyzed particle had been part of an agglomerate, where the adjoining particle was re-
moved before analysis. Notably, the connecting layer appears to have a smoother texture.
16
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.11: Connecting layer and surface of an agglomerated particle, where the adjoin-
ing particle was removed prior to analysis. EDS spectral analysis of the two analyzed
points is shown as well [5].
Overall, the outer coating layer was found to reflect the composition of the biomass ash,
with the exception of potassium and silicon. These two elements, along with calcium,
were significantly enriched in the inner layers.
Gatternig et al. [5] provided an explanation for the absence of potassium and silicon in the
outer coating layer and their enrichment in the inner layer. Initially, ash particles adhere
to the surface of bed particles either as solids, or partially molten often in combination
with a char particle. The attached ash particle then reacts with the bed particle, driven by
an increase in entropy. Silica has a highly ordered crystal structure, with silicon atoms ar-
ranged in a tetrahedral lattice. Elements such as calcium and aluminum tend to substitute
silicon atoms within this structure, while potassium and sodium would occupy interstitial
sites. By occupying interstitial spaces, stress is imposed on the Si-O-Si bonds, and the
thermal energy for bond breaking is reduced, thus lowering the melting point of the mate-
rial. The continuous attack on the silica lattice results in the inner coating layer growing
inwards toward the center of the particle. Over time, sufficient silica melt is generated,
allowing a continuous outer layer to form. This layer facilitates the adhesion of additional
ash particles, promoting outward growth as well.
The studies by He et al. and Gatternig et al. show notable discrepancies in the reported
potassium concentrations within the inner coating layer. He et al. measured approxi-
mately 0.80 wt.% potassium after 23 days of bed operation, while Gatternig et al. reported
significantly higher concentrations, ranging from 18.61 wt.% - 12.68 wt.% in the inner and
intermediate layers. Additionally, He et al. observed a higher calcium concentration and
a lower silicate content in the inner layer compared to Gatternig et al. Several factors may
explain these differences. First, variations in the potassium and calcium content of the
biomass fuel likely play a significant role, as these elements have been shown to strongly
influence melt formation [16]. As previously discussed, coating layer development is time-
dependent. Since Gatternig et al. did not report the age of the bed material, no direct
comparison can be made in that regard. Nevertheless, all studies consistently observed
the formation of K-silicates, Ca-silicates, or mixed K–Ca-silicates in the coating layers.
2.1.4
Affecting parameters on agglomeration
Many parameters affect tendency toward agglomeration. Gatternig et al. [5] summarised
possible influential parameters in a literature review, and defined them based on how
changing their value affected tendency toward agglomeration. In Table 2.4 are the inves-
tigated parameters and their effects summarized.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
17
==PAGE:28==
Table 2.4: Affecting parameters on tendency toward agglomeration [5].
Parameter
Effect
Temperature
Increasing temperature increases the tendency toward ag-
glomeration.
Fluidizing velocity
Increasing fluidizing velocity decrease tendency toward ag-
glomeration.
Particle size
Increasing particle size increases tendency toward agglom-
eration.
Excess air ratio
Increasing excess air ratio decreases tendency toward ag-
glomeration.
Bed height
Decreasing bed height decreases tendency toward agglom-
eration.
Ash accumulation
Decreasing ash accumulation decreases tendency toward
agglomeration.
Heating rate
No significant effect.
Addition of sodium
Increases tendency toward agglomeration.
Addition
of
calcium/-
magnesium/aluminum
Decreases tendency toward agglomeration.
The most influential operational parameter was found to be temperature, since it relates
to the melting of ash compounds. Increasing the temperature will generally increase ten-
dency toward agglomeration, due to the temperature rising above the ash forming com-
pounds melting points. Fluidizing velocity was also reported to have significant influence
on agglomeration. The fluidizing agent is responsible for mixing and thus balancing tem-
perature distribution in the bed, and also facilitates drag force on particles which sepa-
rates them. Higher fluidizing velocity can better facilitate the factors described, and thus
increasing the fluidizing velocity will decrease tendency toward agglomeration. Larger
particle size was also found to increase agglomeration, due to their higher inertia which
would lead to worse fluidization. Ideally, particle size distribution should be narrow or
Gauss-distributed to ensure sufficient fludization. Increasing excess air ratio was found
to decrease tendency toward agglomeration, while decreasing bed height and ash accu-
mulation in bed decrease agglomeration tendency. Heating rate was not found to have
significant difference when it came to agglomeration tendency. Addition of additives fur-
ther affects tendency toward agglomeration. While the addition of sodium increases the
tendency toward agglomeration, the addition of calcium, magnesium, and aluminum has
the opposite effect, reducing the tendency. This difference is attributed to the way these
additives interact with silica, sodium forms compounds with silica that have a lower melt-
ing temperature, promoting agglomeration, whereas calcium, magnesium, and aluminum
form compounds with higher melting temperatures, which help reducing it [5].
Composition of the biomass and concentration of individual elements will also affect ten-
dency toward agglomeration. The presence of calcium and phosphorus will decrease
tendency toward agglomeration, but they can also react with each other so that this de-
crease can be diminished [8]. The presence of calcium can decrease agglomeration by
few different pathways. Firstly, it can simply provide diluting effect without any reactions,
or it can react with silica and form Ca-silicates, competing with the formation of K-silicates.
Additionally silica could prefer reacting with calcium over potassium, supported by the in-
creased release of potassium when concentration of calcium in biomass increases. Cal-
cium can further diffuse into formed K-silicates, and with that raise the melting point of the
18
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:29==
compound and lowering the tendency toward agglomeration [8]. Phosphorus can further
react with potassium and form phosphates, thus decreasing formation of K-silicates. It has
been reported that the addition of phosphoric acid to biomass consisting of wheat straws,
reduces the potassium found in the fine ash and K-Ca-phosphates are formed [8]. How-
ever, calcium and phosphate will also react with each other, resulting in Ca-phosphates
which are more stable than K-phosphates and K-silicates. The formation of K-silicates is
therefore increased, since less calcium is available to form Ca-silicates, and less calcium
will diffuse into formed K-silicates which will then melt at lower temperatures [20].
2.2
Interactions of ash and bed material
During combustion of biomass, ash and vaporized inorganic species can react with the
bed material to form various compounds. The atmospheric conditions in the furnace can
greatly affect what reactions can and will occur. Although the complex atmosphere of a
fluidized bed reactor is not fully understood, it is generally regarded as having an overall
reducing environment, due to high concentration of H2 and CO [22]. However, local oxi-
dizing zones may also exist, since air is commonly used as a fluidizing agent. Additionally,
biomass generally contains moisture which will contribute to the presence of H2O(g) found
in the furnace. Partial oxidation of volatiles further adds to the content of water vapor
found [8]. As a result, the atmospheric conditions considered in this review are air (oxidiz-
ing), hydrogen (reducing), and steam. A summary of the experimental conditions from the
studies discussed is presented in Table 2.5. All studies were conducted in a laboratory
scale fluidized bed reactor [6, 1, 10].
Table 2.5: Summary of atmospheric conditions, temperature and alkali species of experi-
ments covering ash-bed material interactions.
Reference
Atmosphere
Temperature
Alkali species
[6]
Air / 20 % Steam in N2
750 °C - 900 °C
Pure potassium salts with quartz sand
[10]
Air / H2 / 25 % H2O in N2
550°C - 1020°C
Pure potassium salts and KOH with quartz sand
[1]
Air / 20 % Steam
750°C - 900°C
Pure sodium salts with quartz sand
2.2.1
Interactions of potassium salts with bed material
The three common model potassium salts that have been used to study ash-bed inter-
actions in biomass combustion are potassium chloride, potassium sulfate and potassium
carbonate, and their interactions with the bed material will be discussed here. First, the
pathways by which potassium is released from biomass will be briefly outlined.
Release pathways of potassium from biomass can be complex and are not easily mea-
sured. In Figure 2.12 is a summary of proposed release mechanisms of potassium during
combustion of biomass presented [8, 9, 23]. Organically bound potassium is typically re-
leased at lower temperatures than the evaporation temperatures of the potassium salts.
Upon decomposition of the organic structure, potassium may be released in the form of
atomic K, or it may persist bound to char or a carboxylate ion, R COOK. This bound
potassium can later transition into atomic K, which serves as a reactive intermediate and
may convert into either KCl or KOH. The predominant forms in this case are thought to be
KCl and KOH. However, both atomic K and KOH are though likely only to exist as interme-
diates before reacting further. These species may also interact with the bed material and
are therefore included in the subsequent analysis [23]. Release mechanism of potassium
is further discussed in a previous literature review [24].
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.12: Proposed release pathways of potassium during combustion of biomass.
Built on work from Liu et al. [23], He et al. [8], and Johansen et al. [9]
Sevonius et al. [6] conducted a study on the interaction between quartz sand and the pure
potassium salts KCl, K2CO3 and K2SO4, over the temperature range of 750 °C-900 °C.
The atmospheric conditions of investigation were dry air and with a moisture content of
20 % (steam conditions). The quartz sand bed was heated up to a desired temperature,
after which a given amount of solid salt was added at 10-minute intervals until either de-
fluidization occurred or no changes were observed, at which point the experiment was
concluded. The study showed that potassium chloride did not react with the bed material
under air or steam conditions, rather it acted as a glue to adhere sand particles together.
Defluidization was not detected at a temperature of 750 °C, but it was observed at tem-
peratures of 800 °C and 850 °C. The melting point of KCl is 770 °C, which further sup-
ported that the formation of agglomerates was due to KCl melting and sticking the bed
particles together. It was observed that more KCl was needed at higher temperatures
to cause defluidization, which was speculated to be due to the fact that KCl evaporated
faster with increasing temperatures. Defluidization of the bed occurred at testing temper-
atures between 750 °C-900 °C under steam conditions, where the amount of salt required
for defluidization decreased with increasing temperature. The bed material was analysed
and no formation of K-silicates was observed, and no reaction layer was found, rather
had KCl melted and glued the be particles together. This was observed at testing tem-
peratures of 800 °C, 850 °C and 900 °C. At a temperature of 750 °C, separate particles of
KCl were observed, but they were rounded and thought to have been stuck to the quartz
particles which caused defluidization. It was further speculated that steam hindered the
evaporation of KCl which was detected to remain in the bed throughout the experiment
[6].
Ma et al. [10], reported similar results in the case of potassium salts under air and hydro-
20
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:31==
gen conditions (5 % H2 in N2). They tested the same potassium salts as are discussed
above, as well as KOH in few cases. The bed material and potassium salts were thor-
oughly mixed and tested in a laboratory-scale fluidized bed reactor. The bed was heated
to 550 °C at a rate of 20 °C min−1, after which the heating rate was reduced to 3 °C min−1
until defluidization occurred or the maximum temperature of 1020 °C was reached, at
which point the experiment was terminated. No reactions with bed material was detected
in the case of KCl, so that defluidization that might occur is due to the melting of KCl,
which caused bed particles to glue together. In addition, defluidization was detected to
occur at temperatures close to the melting point of KCl, which further supports this claim.
However, under steam conditions, the formation of K-silicates, reported in the form of
K2O·SiO2, was detected on the surface of bed particles by EDS analysis. The formation
of K-silicates was detected to start at temperatures of 700 °C [10].
The mechanism of defluidization under steam conditions has been reported to differ com-
pared to dry conditions by several studies, summarized by an extensive literature review
by He et al. [8]. One possible explanation is the reaction between KCl and steam to
form KOH, which can more readily react with the bed material to form K-silicates. It was
reported by Ma et al., who additionally investigated the effects of KOH on defluidization,
that defluidization was detected at temperatures of 250 °C under hydrogen and steam con-
ditions. The melting point of KOH is 360 °C, which suggest the formation of compounds
with lower melting point [10]. It is proposed that a liquid phase forms as KOH becomes
molten, thereby increasing the likelihood of defluidization. However, it was not reported
whether the formation of potassium silicates was confirmed by EDS analysis, as was done
for other salts in the study [10].
Potassium sulfate has not been reported to interact with silica sand under dry air or steam
conditions, when the pure salt is investigated. Additionally, the compound has a high melt-
ing point, or 1069 °C, so it also does not melt and adhere sand particles together at typical
operational temperatures of a fluidized bed reactor [6, 10]. However, defluidization occurs
at a temperature of 850 °C under hydrogen conditions which are reducing [8]. Defluidiza-
tion occurs at a lower temperature than the melting point of the compound so reactions
to form K-silicates is suggested to occur according to the following reaction [10].
K2SO4(s) + nSiO2(s) + 4H2(g) →K2O · nSiO2(l) + H2S(g) + 3H2O
(2.1)
where n = 2,4. Potassium sulfate was not detected in the bed under hydrogen conditions
suggesting it had reacted into other compounds. Thermodynamical calculations that were
conducted by the group with FactSage further supported these results [10].
Sevonius et al. [6] reported potassium carbonate to cause defluidization at all experi-
mental temperatures between 750 °C-900 °C, under both air and steam conditions. The
amount of the pure salt needed to cause defluidization decreased with increasing temper-
ature. The amount of salt needed to cause defluidization was similar at both conditions,
except at 750 °C, when less salt was needed under steam conditions. At both condi-
tions and all temperatures, K2CO3 was reported to react with the bed material to form
K-silicates [6]. Ma et al. [10] also observed reaction between K2CO3 and bed material to
form K-silicates. The reaction was independent of reaction atmosphere and occurred at
all experimental temperatures. It was observed that a longer reaction time was needed at
lower temperatures. However, this study came to the conclusion that tendency towards
agglomeration was more under steam and hydrogen conditions compared to air condi-
tions. Melting temperature of K2CO3 was reported to be at 901 °C, since defluidization
occurred at temperatures below the melting point of the compound, a reaction with the
bed material is suggested. Agglomeration at air conditions was speculated to be mainly
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
21
==PAGE:32==
due to reactions with bed material to from K-silicates which have low melting temperature.
The higher agglomeration tendency under steam and hydrogen conditions was speculated
to be due to formation of KOH, which can cause defluidization at lower temperatures like
has been discussed. He et al.[8] reported that a mixture of K2CO3 and silica will melt
at temperature of 863 °C, and release carbon dioxide at temperatures of 850 °C-1150 °C
indicating decomposition of potassium carbonate to oxides to react with silica. There-
fore, biomass rich in potassium carbonate would increase the formation of K-silicates in
the bed, and therefore increase the tendency towards agglomeration. Ancinic et al. [7]
studied interactions between K2CO3 and silica sand by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA).
Although the atmospheric conditions were pure N2, pure CO2 and a mixture of the two,
do results provide insight into the interactions. In their experiments, pure K2CO3 and sil-
ica sand were heated to temperatures between 750 °C and 800 °C, and mass loss was
attributed to CO2 release, from which conversion of K2CO3 could be calculated. It was
found that solid–solid interactions between K2CO3 and bed material occurred as early as
at 700 °C. The extent of conversion was influenced by the degree of mixing, where well
mixed samples showed much higher conversion compared to samples with localized lay-
ers of K2CO3. From SEM/EDS analysis, it was proposed that the reaction initiates at the
interface between K2CO3 and silica, forming a homogeneous product layer [7].
In summary, potassium chloride is expected to melt and adhere the sand particles to-
gether, with little to no reactions with the bed material under air and hydrogen conditions,
but possibly react with the bed material under steam conditions. Potassium sulfate is not
suspected to contribute to defluidization due to high thermal stability and melting point
under air and steam conditions, but defluidization was detected at lower temperatures
than the melting point of the compound under hydrogen conditions. Potassium carbonate
is expected to react with silica sand and form K-silicates, under all discussed conditions,
as well as the atmospheric conditions investigated by Ancinic et al. [7]. It was further
suggested that defluidization was generally observed at lower temperatures in reducing
conditions, compared to oxidizing conditions [10]. Potassium chloride has only been re-
ported to react with silica sand under steam conditions. This may be attributed to the
reaction of KCl with steam to form KOH, which may more readily react with silica sand
to form K-silicates. The extent of contributions from KOH is though yet to be concluded.
Additionally, KCl is the most stable alkali species in the gas phase, compared to other
potassium salts, and tends to be volatilized from biomass rather than remain in the bed
and react with silica sand [8].
Ma et al. investigated the melting curves of the pure alkali salts under air conditions, in
presence of silica sand. The melting curves for KCl and K2SO4 were identical for the pure
salts and in the presence of the sand, further suggesting that no reaction occurs between
the salts and the silica sand, and possible defluidization occurs due to the melted com-
pounds to adhere sand particles together. However, in the case of potassium carbonate,
the two melting curves were not the same. In the presence of silica sand was the melting
point lower further suggesting that a lower melting compound was formed in a reaction
with silica sand [10]. Reactions with silica sand occur at lower temperatures than the melt-
ing point of the compound, as is further supported by Ancinic et al. [7]. In Figure 2.13 is
a summary of the proposed interactions of the pure potassium salts shown under differ-
ent atmospheric conditions. The possible melting of salts is not included. The proposed
product under all conditions were K-silicates, where KOH was a possible intermediate.
22
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.13: Interactions of potassium salts with bed material under different atmospheric
conditions. Built on work from Ma et al. [10] and Sevonius et al. [6].
2.2.2
Interactions of sodium salts with bed material
The same three sodium salts will be discussed here, sodium chloride, sodium sulfate and
sodium carbonate. Their interaction with bed material under air and steam, conditions will
be considered.
Sevonius et al.
[1] conducted a study on the pure sodium salts NaCl, Na2SO4, and
Na2CO3. Same experimental procedure was used as in their previous study of potas-
sium salts [6]. For sodium chloride, defluidization was detected at all tested temperatures
between 750 °C-900 °C under steam conditions. Under air conditions did defluidization
occur at all temperatures, except for at 750 °C. No reaction between sodium chloride and
the bed material was detected under neither conditions at temperatures of 750 °C and
800 °C. An explanation for why defluidization occurred under steam conditions at 750 °C,
but not under air conditions could not be provided. The melting point of sodium chloride
was reported to be 801 °C. Defluidization occurred at 800 °C under both conditions be-
cause the temperature occasionally exceeded 801 °C, causing the sodium chloride to melt
and bind the sand particles together. At temperatures of 850 °C and 900 °C under air con-
ditions, was sodium chloride reported to have melted and glued sand particles together,
with no signs of any reaction with the bed material, and caused defluidization. This was
visible on a cross-section SEM/EDS. However, under steam conditions at temperatures
of 850 °C and 900 °C, reactions between sodium chloride and silica to form Na-silicates
were detected. This suggest a liquid-solid phase reaction between the molten sodium
chloride and bed material. Defluidization was speculated to be due to a combination of
formation of Na-silicates and the melted salt gluing bed particles together [1].
For sodium carbonate, defluidization was detected at all tested temperatures between
750 °C-900 °C, under both air and steam conditions. A reaction between the sodium car-
bonate and bed material was also detected in all cases to some extent. The reaction under
both conditions seemed to follow the trend of occurring faster with increasing temperature,
but the same amount of salt caused defluidization at tested temperatures [1].
Sodium sulfate was only tested at a temperature of 900 °C, and caused defluidization
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
23
==PAGE:34==
under both air and steam conditions. No reaction was detected with the bed material was
detected under neither conditions. The melting point of sodium sulfate was reported to
be at 884 °C, and it was observed that the salt had melted and glued the bed particles
together [1].
2.3
Modeling and simulation of ash-bed interactions
It is of interest to use modeling and simulation techniques to describe the complex condi-
tions present in a fluidized bed reactor, to further enhance understanding of its operation.
Simulation and modeling have been widely employed to predict and describe agglomera-
tion phenomena [25, 26], and to evaluate the agglomeration tendency associated with dif-
ferent biomass fuels [27]. Thermodynamical equilibrium calculations and kinetic modeling
has been widely used, where fate of different species and possible reaction mechanisms,
under different operating conditions are investigated [10, 28, 29].
Zhou et al. [26] developed a mathematical model based on force balance with the aim
of predicting the size of formed agglomerates in a fluidized bed. The forces that act on
an agglomerate were determined to be drag force Fy, collision force FC, the difference
between gravity and buoyant force Fg, and cohesive force between two agglomerates Fva,
resulting in the balance:
Fy + FC = Fg + Fva
(2.2)
Drag force was found to be negligible compared to the collision force and was therefore
omitted. The predicted average sizes of agglomerates that were calculated to be formed
were in agreement with experimental data [26]. Li et al. [25] similarly developed a mathe-
matical model to describe the agglomeration process. The model built on a force balance
between force caused by liquid bridges, and a breaking force induced by bubbles, and
evolvement of agglomerates was predicted. Few important assumptions are made by the
model, including that no heat transfer is considered, ash content in bed increases linearly
over time, and that sand particles are spheres with uniform size. After two agglomerates
collide, they can separate, agglomerate or disintegrate. For estimations of liquid and solid
phase of the biomass ash and bed material at a specific temperature, FactSage-Equilib
was used. The time of defluidization calculated was in good agreement with experimental
results.
Nik Norizan et al. [27] developed a semi-empirical index, Ia, which predicts tendency to-
ward agglomeration for fluidized bed boilers. The motivation behind the agglomeration
index is to aid operators to anticipate agglomeration tendency when different biomasses
are utilized as fuels. The index was formulated by partial least square regression (PLSR)
coupled with cross-validation technique, and was used for analysis of training datasets
by taking into account their chemical ash composition and their predicted melting fraction
by thermodynamical calculations. Datasets were found in literature, where nine major
ash forming elements were considered; Na2O, MgO, Al2O3, SiO2, P2O5, K2O, CaO, SO3,
Fe2O3 and quartz (SiO2). Estimates of melting fractions were found by FactSage 8.1,
where the solid-liquid phase at equilibrium was taken as the melting fraction. The estima-
tions were based on the chemical ash composition of the various fuels, in the presence
of quartz bed material, under oxidizing conditions where oxygen was in 10% excess, and
valid for the temperature range of 700 °C-900 °C. The index Ia, is given by Equation (2.3),
where the individual compounds should be in mass-fractions.
Ia = 0.34 −1.2055(MgO + CaO) + 1.6228(K2O + Na2O)
+7.113 · 10−1SiO2 + 1.627 · 10−1(SO3 + P2O5)
(2.3)
24
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:35==
A positive coefficient indicates that the following compound increases the tendency to-
ward agglomeration, and inversely, a negative coefficient indicates decrease in tendency
toward agglomeration. Furthermore, K2O was found to increase tendency toward agglom-
eration the most, but CaO was found to decrease the tendency toward agglomeration the
most. It was found that the index was able to predict tendency of agglomeration for a
fluidized bed boiler, based on the chemical ash composition of a given fuel. An index of
Ia ≤0.5 results in a low agglomeration tendency, and an index of Ia > 0.5 results in a high
agglomeration tendency.
Investigation of the thermodynamics and kinetics of the combustion of biomass is of in-
terest, as that will provide insight in composition and conditions in the boiler. Chanpirak
et al. [28] improved a chemical kinetic model for the gaseous reactions of potassium
salts, incorporating reaction mechanisms and thermodynamic data. The model builds on
an earlier version developed by Glarborg and Marshall [29]. The work of Chanpirak et
al. focused on improving the sulfation of KCl, and validating the model with experimental
results. The model includes major reaction pathways of potassium, as well as subsets
for chlorine and sulfur, and has been validated under oxidizing conditions. The improved
model was found to be in an agreement to experimental results [28]. Thermodynamical
equilibrium calculation have been used as input and source of estimation for further mod-
eling and simulation. However, it has also been proven to be useful to further analyze,
verify, and enhance understanding of experimental results. Ma et al. [10] used FactSage
7.0 to analyze and verify experimental results, when different potassium salts were added
to a pilot scale fluidized bed reactor with quartz bed material, under different atmospheric
conditions. The experimental setup was simulated under same conditions, and the results
of the thermodynamic equilibrium calculations, were found to be in an agreement with ex-
perimental results, and could be used to for further analysis. However, few discrepancies
were noted, and attributed to the fact that equilibrium is not reached in a fluidized bed
reactor, due to the heterogeneity of the system [10].
Modeling and simulation can be used in very different applications to understand and op-
timize the operation of a fluidized bed. However, due to complex operational conditions,
some assumptions often have to be made in order to obtain the desired goal. A model
made with careful and well formulated assumptions can however provide insight, and can
be validated by experimental results [26, 25]. The tradeoff to a simplified approach by
making assumptions, can be a computationally expensive simulation. It must be noted
that more complex simulations still have to be considered carefully and have to be vali-
dated. However, valuable insights can be obtained that might be difficult or impractical
to achieve through experiments alone [30]. The use of thermodynamic equilibrium and
kinetic models are useful to further analyze and understand results, as well as to make
estimations for further modeling. One must however be careful whether the used model
is applicable for the intended modeling conditions. Validation of databases and modeling
softwares that build on them, is of great importance, as limitations and weaknesses to a
given model have to be considered before a model is used. Nevertheless, modeling is a
useful tool for analysis, optimization, verification and better understanding.
2.4
Technical basis of equilibrium calculations with FactSage
8.3
The thermodynamic simulation tool FactSage 8.3 will be employed to simulate the exper-
imental system. In FactSage 8.3, equilibrium calculations are performed by minimizing
the total Gibbs free energy of the system. For a pure substance, the Gibbs free energy is
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
25
==PAGE:36==
calculated from enthalpy and entropy, according to Gibbs-Helmholtz relation:
G = H −T · S
(2.4)
Where the system is temperature dependent, and enthalpy and entropy are variables of
the system. Enthalpy is further found from the free energy and the internal energy where
entropy is an input. A schematic overview of the relationships between thermodynamic
variables used in the Gibbs free energy minimization process is shown in Figure 2.14.
Figure 2.14: Simplified schematic of relationships between different variables for mini-
mization of Gibbs free energy in FactSage.
For a solution of components the chemical potential can be obtained from the Gibbs en-
ergy through Legendre transformation. The chemical potential is defined through Maxwell’s
relations as is shown in Equation (2.5).
26
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:37==
µi =
(∂G
∂ni
)
T,p
=
(∂H
∂ni
)
S,p
=
(∂U
∂ni
)
S,V
=
( ∂A
∂ni
)
T,V
(2.5)
These relationships allow for deeper insights into the systems behavior, as equilibrium
composition and phase stability can be derived from the chemical potentials and mini-
mized Gibbs energy [31].
2.5
Technical basis of employed analysis techniques
A brief technical backrgound of the analysis techniques X-ray Fluoresence (XRF), Scan-
ning Electron Microscopy (SEM), and Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission
Spectroscopy / Mass spectroscopy (OES/MS) will be covered in the next sections. All
techniques will be used for analysis of generated samples from experiments.
2.5.1
X-ray Fluoresence
X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy is a widely applied method for chemical analysis. A
typical XRF instrument contains an excitation source, sample presentation device, X-ray
spectrometer, processing device, and controls, as is shown in Figure 2.15 [32].
Figure 2.15: Major parts of an XRF [32].
X-ray fluorescence instrumentation can be categorized as either wavelength-dispersive
(WDXRF) or energy-dispersive (EDXRF). While both techniques are based on the same
fundamental principles, they differ in the method used to process the detected X-rays [32].
In this work, an energy-dispersive XRF (EDXRF) system is employed and will therefore
be described in more detail below.
X-ray photons are emitted from the excitation source, and excite and ionize inner shell
electrons in an atom found in the sample. By ionization of an inner shell electron, the atom
becomes unstable and seeks out a stable electron configuration by filling the vacancy with
an outer shell electron. The electron goes through an energy change, and emits an X-ray
corresponding to the energy difference between the two orbitals it is transferring between.
The emitted energy is characteristic to that atom [32]. A schematic figure of an atom with
three electron shells is shown in Figure 2.16.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 2.16: An atom containing three contributing shells and their energy levels. Emitted
X-rays due to electron transfers are shown [32, 33].
The energy levels in K-shell are all degenerate as they would correspond to s-orbitals. L-
shell has three energy levels, corresponding to s-orbital and two energy levels of p-orbitals
which differ in spin orbit interaction [33], and M-shell has five energy levels corresponding
to s-orbital, two levels of p-orbitals, and two levels of d-orbitals [33]. When an electron from
K-shell is ionized in the atom shown in Figure 2.16, there are three possible mechanisms
that can occur. Firstly, an electron from L-shell can move to K-shell emitting fluorescent
X-ray corresponding to that energy change, and the spectral line is denoted as Kα. The
emitted spectral line is further differentiated based on whether an electron from s-orbital
or p1/2-orbital or p3/2-orbital fills the vacancy, denoted as Kα3, Kα2, and Kα1, respectively.
The emitted spectral lines from the two p-orbitals are much more intense, compared to
the s-orbital, which is often not resolved in an XRF instrumentation. The second possible
mechanism is when an electron from M-shell can move to K-shell emitting an fluorescence
X-ray corresponding to the energy change. The emitted spectral line is denoted as Kβ,
and is further subdivided based on from which orbital an electron fills the vacancy, as has
been discussed. Thirdly, an internal capture of the fluorescent X-ray occurs which leads
to an emission of an Auger electron [32].
For analysis, one line is chosen for determination of an element. The most intense fluo-
rescent line is usually Kα (Kα2 and Kα3), and is the preferred choice for elements ranging
from sodium to molybdenum. Now, intensity of fluorescent lines can be reduced or ampli-
fied due to several reasons. The X-ray from excitation source is reduced as it penetrates
a sample, and there exist a critical depth where sample can be analyzed. Fluorescent
X-ray can escape through a sample without being detected. An emitted fluorescent X-ray
can also be absorbed by a second element, if the energy of it lies immediately above the
absorption line of that element [32].
For each sample analysis, three different tube potentials are used. Firstly, 50 kV poten-
tial combined with 250 µm copper filter is used, then a 40 kV potential combined with
500 µm aluminum filter, and lastly 20 kV potential with no filter. Higher potential will ex-
28
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:39==
cite electrons from elements with higher atomic number [34]. Obtained spectra from an
XRF analysis must be considered carefully, as factors like spectral overlap, Rayleigh and
Compton scattering, enhanced background, escape peaks, and sum peaks might affect
the results. Spectral overlap in EDXRF is common, and thus must be considered care-
fully if sample contains elements with spectral lines that lie close together [32]. Rayleigh
and Compton scattering effects from silver can be expected in 30-50 kV range, since sil-
ver tube anode is used. In Figure 2.17, theoretical Rayleigh and Compton scattering are
shown when 20 kV potential has been used. An enhanced background can result from
incomplete charge collection in the X-ray detector, resulting in a random contribution to
the background at a lower energy than the original fluorescent X-ray.
Figure 2.17: Theoretical Rayleigh and Compton scattering from Silver, when 20 kV po-
tential has been used.
Escape peaks can occur when an incoming X-ray photon excites a silicon atom within
the detector itself, causing the detector to emit a secondary X-ray that escapes without
being absorbed, thereby reducing the detected energy. This can cause a peak to appear
at an energy of 1.78 keV, which is the K-line for Si atom. Sum peaks can be detected
when near-coincident X-rays cannot be resolved, and correspond to a pulse pile-up [32].
In Figure 2.18 are suggested sum peaks of Si Kα1 + Si Kα1 shown, which appears as a
suggested line in the analysis software.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 2.18: Suggested sum peaks of Si Kα + Si Kα represented by the two yellow lines.
Sample preparation is additionally a factor of consideration before analysis is conducted.
Generally granules and powdered material are ready for analysis directly after they have
been placed in a suitable sample cup. There exists a critical penetration depth, such
that sample thickness has to be considered, to ensure that a representative results are
obtained, but not only the surface concentration if that is not desired [32].
2.5.2
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is a widely used technique for surface analysis,
often combined with Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) for chemical charac-
terization. The major parts of an SEM instrument are shown in Figure 2.19.
30
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:41==
Figure 2.19: Major parts of a SEM device, as explained by Inkson [35].
The electron source is positioned above the sample in a vacuum chamber, typically main-
tained at pressures between 10−4-0.1 Pa to minimize interactions with air molecules.
Beam of electrons from the electron source is focused on the sample, causing a range of
interactions with the sample which emit both electrons and X-rays. The emitted electrons
can be in the form of primary electrons or secondary electrons (SE). Primary electrons are
electrons originating from the electron source and are elastically scattered back from the
sample. Secondary electrons originate from interactions between primary electrons and
the sample, and an electron with the kinetic energy produced by the interaction is emitted.
Surface topography is captured by the emission of SEs. Primary electrons can also re-
place an electron in an atom present in the sample, resulting in energy being released in
the form of an X-ray, which is characteristic for that atom and thus allowing for chemical
analysis of the sample [35].
SE detectors are typically positioned on one side of the vacuum chamber. Because detec-
tor placement can cause shadowing, tilting the sample toward the detector enhances SE
collection from surface features. Imaging at multiple tilts is therefore useful for topograph-
ical analysis. Bright regions in SEM images often correspond to slopes, ridges, edges,
and points due to increased SE emission, while rougher areas may show contrasting light
and dark zones. As a result, SEM is well-suited for surface characterization of samples.
Emitted characteristic X-rays are detected and analyzed, resulting in an EDS spot spec-
trum. However, quantitative EDS analysis is complex and depends on factors such as
elemental bonding, sample thickness, absorption effects, and detector efficiency [35].
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
31
==PAGE:42==
Proper sample preparation is essential to obtain accurate surface topography. Surfaces
must be clean, and non-conductive materials must be covered with a thin conductive
layer to prevent build up of charge, ensuring effective surface topographical analysis. To
best preserve a samples, they should be stored in vacuum-sealed containers to avoid
contamination and moisture exposure. SEM is generally regarded as a non-destructive
analytical technique [35].
2.5.3
Inductively Coupled Plasma - OES/MS
Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) is a technique used for both qualitative and quantita-
tive analysis of samples [36]. Sample detection can be performed using either Optical
Emission Spectroscopy (OES) or Mass Spectrometry (MS). Both techniques are capable
of detecting a wide range of elements with high accuracy and low detection limits [36, 37].
An ICP instrumentation typically consists of a torch, generator, a sample introduction tech-
nique, and a detection technique. The plasma, which usually is composed of argon gas,
is generated in the torch. The torch insulates the plasma, stabilizes it, as well as it enables
sample injection. The generator supplies the energy that is coupled through a magnetic
field to the argon gas, causing it to break down into atoms, electrons, and ions, thus form-
ing the plasma. The sample is commonly introduced into the plasma as very fine liquid
particles, typically using a nebulization system. This ensures complete volatilization and
atomization of the sample, but the residence time in the plasma is only a few milliseconds
[36]. Often, the sample must be dissolved prior to analysis, which can introduce trace
contamination and is a potential source of interferences in analysis, for both ICP-OES
and ICP-MS [36, 37].
In ICP-OES, a spectrochemical source is used to excite the fully atomized atoms, con-
tained in the plasma. When an atom subsequently de-excites, it emits a characteristic
spectral line, which is detected by the dispersive system. The emission of spectral lines
allows for the determination of a sample’s elemental composition, as well as quantitative
measurements based on the intensity of the detected lines. One of the challenges with
ICP-OES is spectral interference. Such interference can result from the presence of other
elements in the sample, components of the solvent, or background emission from argon
gas [36].
In ICP-MS, a mass spectrometer is used to detect elements based on their mass-to-
charge ratio (m/z). After the sample is atomized in the plasma, it is extracted into a mass
spectrometer and analyzed. Just like in ICP-OES, interferences can pose challenges in
ICP-MS, and include both spectroscopic and non-spectroscopic interferences. Spectro-
scopic interference occurs when another species shares the same nominal m/z value as
the target analyte. The interfering specie can be an isotope of another element, or a molec-
ular ion, like N +
2 , which may be formed in the plasma. Nonspectroscopic interferences can
arise from any component of the ICP-MS instrument, and affecting the detection quality
of the sample [37].
32
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:43==
3
Experimental - Materials and Methods
This chapter provides a description of the materials and the experimental setup used for
experiments. Methods used for characterization of samples obtained from experiments
are briefly described, as is emphasis of each analytical method noted. The development
and evaluation of the experimental setup is detailed, and the preliminary tests conducted
in that purpose are described.
3.1
Materials
The bed material used for experiments was silica sand and aged bed material from Asnæs
Power Station. The silica sand was from Dansand A/S and noted particle size distribu-
tion was 0.09 mm-0.25 mm. Five samples of silica sand, weighing 0.50 g - 0.56 g, were
measured with XRF, and average composition of the five major components, as well as
chlorine and sodium oxide are stated in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Composition of silica sand used for experiments, measured by XRF.
Compound
Concentrateion [wt.%]
SiO2
89.92
Al2O3
3.65
TiO2
2.76
K2O
2.02
Fe2O3
0.82
Cl
1.75·10−4
Na2O
0.10
Three samples of aged bed material from Asnæs Power Station were used, correspond-
ing to 5, 81, and 161 days of operation after a complete bed change at startup. Each
sample was sieved to obtain particle size distribution of <0.355 mm. It was assumed that
the samples were homogeneous and that the sieved portions were representative of the
overall bed material. However, no additional steps were taken to verify that the sieved ma-
terial accurately reflected the full sample, nor that the sand samples used in experiments
were representative of the sieved portions. One sample from each bed age was prepared
for analysis, and their compositions were determined using XRF. The concentrations of
the seven major components, along with chlorine, are presented in Table 3.2.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
33
==PAGE:44==
Table 3.2: Measured composition of silica sand with XRF from Dansand A/S.
Age of bed material
5 day old
81 day old
161 day old
Weight [g]
0.48
0.50
0.53
SiO2 [wt.%]
45.38
42.77
33.46
Al2O3 [wt.%]
2.31
2.97
2.12
TiO2 [wt.%]
2.58·10−2
1.15
0.00
K2O [wt.%]
2.61
7.99
7.95
Fe2O3 [wt.%]
1.85
2.71
1.39
Cl [wt.%]
8.21 ·10−3
1.88·10−3
0.00
CaO [wt.%]
39.23
32.96
47.31
MgO [wt.%]
3.40
4.42
3.70
The salts used for experiments were KCl and NaCl, both with a minimum purity of ≥99.0 %.
A solution of 1 wt.% salt in DI water was prepared for all experiments. In cases where
both KCl and NaCl were used, the solution was formulated with a 50/50 molar ratio of the
two salts, while still totaling to a 1 wt.% solution. Urea was added to the solution to enable
continuous monitoring of the mist feeding rate, as described in Section 3.4.4 [38]. The
urea, with a minimum purity of ≥99.5 %, was also added at a concentration of 1 wt.% for
all experiments
Pure N2 and O2 of minimum 99.999 % purity were used to carry mist into the reactor [39].
The two gases were stored in individual cylinders.
3.2
Experimental setup
An experimental setup was developed to investigate the interactions of gaseous alkali
salts with silica sand. A flowsheet of the experimental setup is shown in Figure 3.1. Fig-
ures of the experimental setup and individual parts are shown in Appendix B.1.
Figure 3.1: Flow sheet of the experimental setup used to carry out experiments.
The flow of N2 and O2 was controlled using El-Flow Select mass flow controllers from
Bronkhorst. The total gas flow rate was 800 mLN/min, of 2.5 % or 5 % O2 in N2. Both flow
34
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:45==
meters were calibrated, and it was verified that their setpoints could be taken as accurate
representations of the actual output, as detailed in Appendix B.5. The two gas streams
were premixed before entering the container holding the salt solution. The solution used
in experiments was stored in a 1.5 L cylindrical tank equipped with a cooling jacket, so
that the temperature of the solution could be maintained at 15 °C with circulating water. A
24 V Ultrasonic Mist Generator (UMG) from Reptile Planet was used to generate aerosols,
which were approximately 1 µm in diameter [38]. The aerosols were transported into the
top part of the reactor via the gas flow.
To minimize condensation in the top part and along the inner walls of the reactor tube,
heat tracing at 50 °C was applied and insulated with aluminum foil. Upon entering the
high-temperature zone of the reactor, the aerosol droplets were expected to evaporate
rapidly, releasing salt, urea, and water in the gaseous phase [39].
The experiments were conducted in a quartz tube reactor that was 900 mm long and 6 mm
in inner diameter. The reactor was heated using an electrical oven equipped with three
heating elements, which maintained a uniform temperature of 860 °C over approximately
400 mm zone, as is further shown in Section 3.4.6. A fixed bed of silica sand was sup-
ported on quartz wool positioned on a rim located 400 mm downstream from the reactor
inlet. At the reactor outlet, a water basin containing 150 g of DI water was placed to collect
condensed solution. The increase in the basin’s weight was used to estimate the average
mist feeding rate.
The water basin was connected to a Fisher-Rosemount NGA 200 Analytical MLT4 gas an-
alyzer, which continuously measured the outlet concentrations of CO2, CO, and O2. These
measurements enabled real-time monitoring of the mist feeding rate [38], as further dis-
cussed in Section 3.4.4. Prior to entering the gas analyzer, the gas stream passed through
a conditioning system consisting of a cooler and a filter to ensure that only gaseous prod-
ucts reached the gas analyzer. The gaseous species exiting the gas analyzer were dis-
charged to a collective vent.
3.3
Analysis methods
After each experiment, two physical samples were collected; a solid sand sample and the
collected solution in the water basin. During the experiments, the quartz wool supporting
the sand bed often became brittle and could mix with the sand sample during sample
collection, leading to a potential contamination of the solid samples.
Chemical characterization of sand samples was carried out using X-ray fluorescence
spectroscopy (XRF), Scanning Electron Microscopy combined with Energy Dispersive
X-ray Spectroscopy (SEM/EDS), and Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spec-
troscopy (ICP-OES). Both XRF and SEM/EDS analyze the chemical composition of the
surface of the analyzed sample. The sand samples were further analyzed using ICP-OES,
where samples are dissolved prior to analysis, such that the total chemical composition
of the sample is obtained. A few selected samples also underwent cross-sectional imag-
ing by SEM/EDS using an AQM tool to further investigate formation of potential coating
layers, and their composition [40].
For XRF analysis, a Bruker S2 Puma Series II EDXRF analyzer was be employed. This
instrument is capable of detecting elements from sodium to americium, with detection
limits in the parts-per-million (ppm) range [34]. XRF primarily served as a tool for prelimi-
nary chemical characterization of the sand samples, and was extensively used during the
methodology development phase to analyze non-experimental samples. This was due to
convenience and availability of the instrument, and relatively quick analysis time.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
35
==PAGE:46==
SEM/EDS analysis was carried out using a Prisma E scanning electron microscope from
ThermoFisher Scientific. This system offers imaging resolutions of 3.0 nm at 30 kV in both
high and low vacuum, and 7.0 nm at 3 kV [41]. Sand samples were washed with DI wa-
ter prior to SEM/EDS analysis, to remove most of the possible condensed alkali species
from particle surfaces. Although the sand is expected to accumulate surface charge dur-
ing imaging, no conductive coating was applied, as the primary goal was chemical com-
position analysis rather than topographic characterization. In all cases were analyses
conducted on an C-free basis.
All collected sand samples were additionally analyzed using ICP-OES, where samples
were also rinsed before analysis to remove possible condensed alkali species. For this
method, samples were dissolved in a 65 % nitric acid, 30 % hydrochloric acid, and 40 %
hydrofluoric acid, which was diluted down to a final concentration of 2 % nitric acid [42].
Thus, allowing for determination of the bulk composition. As potassium and sodium can
be expected to penetrate into a silica sand particle, ICP-OES/MS is essential for obtaining
a complete chemical profile [17]. Elements analyzed by ICP-OES were Mg, K, Ca, Fe,
Al, P, Si and Na, and therefore is composition reported relative to these elements. Where
results from ICP-OES and SEM/EDS analysis were compared directly to each other, were
results of SEM/EDS analysis calculated relative to these elements.
Selected samples were further analyzed using Automated Quantitative Mineralogy (AQM),
carried out by the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland (GEUS). Cross-sectional
imaging was performed with a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) equipped with the
ZEISS Mineralogic software platform, serving as the AQM tool [40]. Prior to analysis, sam-
ples were mounted in epoxy resin, polished, and coated with a 10 nm thick carbon layer
to prevent charging during imaging [43]. Imaging was conducted using Backscattered
Electron (BSE) detectors, while compositional analysis was performed via Energy Disper-
sive Spectrometry (EDS) [40]. Composition analysis of the bulk sample was conducted
in 5 µm steps, and more detailed analysis was carried out in 1 µm steps to examine the
layer structure and composition at the borders of bed particles. This is further explained
and shown in Appendix A.4. The EDS analysis is interpreted as distinct phases based on
a user-defined mineral list. Since the densities of the individual mineral phases are not
specifically defined, there is some uncertainty associated with the calculated weight per-
cent composition of the sample. Nevertheless, weight percent values were used here for
comparison with other results, while area percentages are presented alongside to provide
context and highlight potential uncertainties [43].
Finally, conductivity measurements of the collected solutions were carried out as needed
using a WTW Cond 7110 conductivity meter. When pH measurements were required,
they were performed using the pHenomenal pH meter from VWR.
3.4
Methodology Development and Evaluation
The following sections present the development and evaluation of the experimental setup
and procedures. This process involved a series of preliminary tests aimed at verifying
and optimizing the system to ensure repeatability and reliability of results. A summary of
the final methodology is provided, followed by an evaluation of the system’s performance
and a discussion of potential improvements for future work.
3.4.1
Required mass of sand sample for XRF analysis
To evaluate whether sufficient sample mass of bed material could be collected after an
experiment to yield reliable XRF results, five samples of raw bed material with varying
weights were analyzed, noted as samples S1-S5. Samples were analyzed and composi-
36
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:47==
tion in weight percentage was obtained. The five major compounds in each sample were
SiO2, Al2O3, K2O, TiO2 and Fe2O3, and they were used to determine whether the lowest
sample mass (sample S3) differed from the other four tested samples. The measured
concentration of each sample is presented in Table 3.3. The expected absolute standard
deviation of measured compounds is between 0.001 wt.% and 0.039 wt.% [34].
Table 3.3: Composition and weight of analyzed sand samples with XRF.
Sample no.
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Weight [g]
4.96
1.07
0.40
1.03
2.02
SiO2 [wt.%]
91.20
92.35
91.35
91.64
90.92
Al2O3 [wt.%]
3.90
3.40
3.60
3.80
4.10
K2O [wt.%]
3.30
2.30
2.20
3.20
3.30
TiO2 [wt.%]
0.58
0.90
1.70
0.46
0.71
Fe2O3 [wt.%]
0.41
0.37
0.54
0.32
0.37
Two general trends are observed, measured K2O increases with increasing sample weight,
and measured TiO2 decreases with decreasing sample weight. This can more clearly be
seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Weight percentages of selected compounds from XRF analysis of sand sam-
ples of different weights.
To further investigate whether sample weight influences the measured composition, two
sets of five samples were compared. One set consisted of samples weighing approxi-
mately 0.5 g, and the other sample set consisted of samples weighing around 2.0 g. A two-
tailed T-test was conducted for all five major detected compounds to determine whether
the average values of the two groups were statistically the same. All calculations are pro-
vided in Appendix B.2. The results for each compound are illustrated in Figure 3.3, where
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
37
==PAGE:48==
the samples are arranged in order of increasing weight within its set. It is observed that
measured weight percentages between the 0.5 g sample set and 2.0 g sample set, vary
more for K2O, TiO2, and Fe2O3, compared to SiO2 and Al2O3.
38
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.3: Comparison of measured concentration of each compound from the two sam-
ple sets. Samples within a set are arranged according to increasing weight.
In Table 3.4 are the calculated averages of both sample sets are summarized, as well as
the results of the T-test.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
39
==PAGE:50==
Table 3.4: Results of T-test for each compounds tested. The test revealed whether aver-
ages between the two samples groups were statistically the same.
Compound
SiO2
Al2O3
K2O
TiO2
Fe2O3
Average of 0.5 g samples
89.92
3.65
2.02
2.76
0.82
Average of 2.0 g samples
91.30
3.54
2.32
1.51
0.55
Are averages statistically the same?
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
For SiO2 and Al2O3, the results of the T-test show that the two sample weights yield sta-
tistically same results. However, this is not the case for the other three compounds. It is
therefore concluded that XRF analysis is sensitive to sample weight and is not suitable
for accurately quantifying the concentration of minor compounds in samples which were
obtained from experiments. However, XRF was used as a method for preliminary anal-
ysis. The average results from the analysis of the 0.5 g samples served as a baseline
for the composition of the raw bed material, against which changes in composition were
evaluated.
3.4.2
Generation and feeding of aerosols to reactor
Two options were considered to obtain both sufficient and constant generation and feeding
of aerosols into the tube reactor; a 24 V ultrasonic mist generator (UMG), and Model 3076
Constant Output Atomizer [44]. A 24 V UMG has previously been used successfully in
similar experimental setups [38, 39]. The average droplet size of aerosols produced was
measured to be 1 µm, and remains unaffected by the concentration of an additive [38].
The stability of aerosol feeding from the UMG can be monitored via the measured over-
pressure in the system. A representative overpressure profile is shown in Figure 3.4,
recorded during operation with a total gas flow rate of 800 mLN/min and 0.5 g of bed mate-
rial placed on quartz wool inside the reactor. Fluctuations in the overpressure signal were
attributed to condensation of the solution on the inner walls of the inlet tubing, which is
consistent with previous observations [38, 39]. The two dashed lines in Figure 3.4 indicate
the time when the mist generator was turned on and off. Gas flow was simultaneously
stopped when the mist generator was turned off.
40
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.4: Overpressure readings which correspond to feeding of mist into the reactor
tube. Peaks are attributed to condensed larger droplets being fed into the reactor [38, 39].
However, achieving an airtight system had posed some problems, largely due to the con-
tainer required for housing the UMG. Thus, the Atomizer was considered as an alternative
way to generate aerosols. The Atomizer is shown in Figure B.1 in Appendix B.1. The per-
formance of the Atomizer was evaluated by using only DI water, and monitoring the over-
pressure in order to asses whether a stable aerosol production could be achieved. Gen-
eration of aerosols did not proof to be successful at gas flow rates between 500 mLN/min
and 1500 mLN/min. This outcome was attributed to the Atomizer’s design specifications,
which require a minimum airflow of 3.0–3.5 SLPM. Since the gas flow to the system could
not be increased, no further efforts were made to adapt the use of Atomizer for generation
of aerosols.
Later on in the developmental phase, it was discovered that the airtightness of the ex-
perimental system could be effectively monitored by tracking O2 readings from the Rose-
mount NGA 2000 MLT4 Analyzer. As has been noted, was the oxygen setpoint in experi-
ments maintained at either 2.5 % or 5 %, and its measured concentration remained stable
throughout successful runs. However, if there was a leak in the system, the oxygen con-
centration gradually increased, approaching ambient atmospheric levels. An example of
this behavior is illustrated in Figure 3.5, where the leak in the experimental system was
traced back to the container housing the UMG. Shortly after the experiment began, fluctu-
ations in the oxygen concentration were observed, indicating potential leaks. After 09:43,
the oxygen level began to rise steadily, reaching approximately 21 %. This monitoring
capability provided a valuable means to detect leaks, which was considered a limitation
of using the UMG.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.5: Oxygen readings from an experiment where leak was detected in the system.
3.4.3
Design of tube reactor
Two different designs of reactor tubes were tested and evaluated based on ease of oper-
ation, and the ability to maintain sufficient airflow without causing an excessive pressure
drop across the system. Both reactor tubes were cylindrical quartz tubes, each 900 mm
long, with an outer diameter of 9 mm and an inner diameter of 6 mm. Their design dif-
fered in how the fixed bed was supported, the first design included a porous quartz plate
on which the bed material could rest directly on. The second design featured a rim that
could support a layer of quartz wool, and the bed material could be placed on top of the
wool. Both the porous quartz plate and the rim were located at 400 mm below the inlet of
the reactor tube. The two designs are presented in Figure 3.6, where the porous quartz
plate is on the left, and the design with the rim is on the right. Previously only quartz wool
had been used to support the fixed bed, but it had posed some problems with the bed
moving due to gas flow passed through the reactor.
42
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.6: Two reactor designs; with quartz plate on the left and with rim on the right.
For testing of the two designs, the temperature was set to 860 °C, 0.2 wt.% KCl solution
was used, carried by by a pure N2 gas flow, and 0.5 g of bed material was added. Addi-
tionally, the quartz wool supported on the rim in the second design weighed 0.060 31 g.
To asses wether the two designs could sustain sufficient gas flow, the flow rate was grad-
ually increased to evaluate the pressure drop across the system. Stable overpressure
readings with minimal peaks were desired. The gas flow was set to 500 mLN/min, and
then increased in 250 mLN/min steps up to 1250 mLN/min. Each step was held for 30
minutes or until a stable trend in the overpressure readings was observed.
During testing of the reactor tube with porous plate, gaps between the reactor wall and
the porous plate were noticed, which allowed the bed material to escape. The reactor
design was able to sustain the tested gas flow rates but the majority of the bed material
had washed away at the end of the experiment. Thus, a porous quartz plate was deemed
unfit, since it could not support the bed material sufficiently.
The reactor tube with the rim was then tested under same conditions. Overpressure read-
ings at different gas flow rates are shown in Figure 3.7, with the times at which the flow
rate was increased indicated by dashed gray lines.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.7: Overpressure at gas flow rates between 500 mLN/min - 1250 mLN/min.
At a flow rate of 500 mLN/min, the overpressure was observed to gradually decrease,
so the system was allowed to stabilize before increasing the flow rate. A general trend
of higher peaks in overpressure with increasing gas flow rate was noted. More stable
overpressure readings were observed at 500 mLN/min and 750 mLN/min, compared to
the two higher tested flow rates of 1000 mLN/min and 1250 mLN/min. Both lower peaks
and lower baseline overpressure were observed. Therefore was the preferred operating
range of gas flow rate determined to be lower than 1000 mLN/min. The rim was additionally
able to support the quartz wool and the bed material, and the sample could be collected
at the end of the experiment.
3.4.4
Estimation of feeding rate of mist
To estimate the feeding rate of mist into the tube reactor, two approaches were used.
Firstly, the weight increase of the basin at the outlet of the reactor could be used to es-
timate the average feeding rate during an experiment. Secondly, a carbon tracer was
added to the salt solution, which was then combusted in the reactor, and outlet concentra-
tion of CO2 and CO was measured with a gas analyzer providing a continuous monitoring
of the feed. This approach has been used in similar work and proven successful [38].
Efforts of selecting a carbon tracer, and verification of its ability to estimate feeding rate
are further discussed in next sections.
However, some complications regarding readings from the gas analyzer were encoun-
tered after two experiments had been conducted. Efforts of identifying the problem and
counteractive steps are discussed in later in this Section. As a result, feeding rate es-
timations for data processing were based on the increase in the water basin’s weight.
Nevertheless, both estimation methods were applied in all experiments, and the results
are summarized and discussed in more detail in Appendix A.1.
Carbon tracer for feeding rate estimations
Two possible carbon tracers were considered for continuous monitoring of the feeding
rate, or ethanol and urea. Both carbon tracers were tested to determine their ability to
accurately estimate the feeding rate of mist. For both preliminary test, was the tempera-
ture set to 860 °C, a total gas flow of 800 mLN/min was used, and the solution was kept
at 15 °C with circulating cooling water. The gas flow was premixed of O2 and N2, where
the oxygen concentration was gradually increased to ensure that full combustion could
be assumed at a given concentration.
Ethanol combusts according to the following global reaction:
C2H5OH(g) + 3O2(g) →2CO2(g) + 3H2O(g)
(3.1)
44
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:55==
Thus, a 1:2 carbon ratio between measured CO2, and ethanol fed into the reactor is ex-
pected. For testing of ethanol, a 5 wt.% solution was prepared in DI water. Before mist
generator had been turned on and oxygen flow had been added, CO2 and CO were mea-
sured by the gas analyzer. Vapor phase above a 4.77 wt.% aqueous ethanol solution at
25 °C is measured to consist of 37.48 % v/v % of ethanol [45], such that a vapor phase
above 5 wt.% solution kept at 15 °C can be expected to contain significant amount of
ethanol. Additionally, autoignition temperature of ethanol has been measured to be at
368.8 °C [46]. Thus it was concluded that significant amount of ethanol will evaporate
and be carried into the tube reactor, combust, and contribute to measured CO2 and CO.
This was further verified by thermodynamical equilibrium calculations with FactSage 8.3.
A system at 15 °C consisting of 5 wt.% of ethanol in water, under N2 conditions, was sim-
ulated to contain a considerable amount of CO, CO2, and CH4. Since ethanol can not be
assumed to be contained in the solution, it cannot be used to monitor the mist feeding
rate, and was therefor deemed unsuitable as a carbon tracer.
Next, urea was tested as a carbon tracer which has previously been used in similar work
[38]. Decomposition of urea is complex, and is expected to fully decompose at high tem-
peratures [47, 48]. An aqueous solution of urea evaporates at elevated temperatures,
described by Equation (3.2) [47].
N2H4CO(aq) →N2H4CO(g) + xH2O(g)
(3.2)
Once in the gas phase, urea decomposes to ammonia and isocyanic acid. Full decompo-
sition is expected at high temperatures according to Equation (3.3) [47]:
N2H4CO(g) →NH3(g) + HNCO(g)
(3.3)
In the presence of oxygen, isocyanic acid will further oxidize to CO2 and CO [38]. Assum-
ing a complete combustion, where no CO is formed, the reaction would be described by
Equation (3.4).
HNCO + O2 →CO2 + NO + H2O
(3.4)
Such that the carbon ratio of added urea, and measured CO2 (and possible CO) is 1:1.
For testing of urea, a 1 wt. % solution was prepared. Evaporation of urea in a water
solution has been found to be negligible [38]. The oxygen concentration was varied as
listed; 2.5 %, 6.25 %, 10 %, 1.25 %. Measured CO2 and O2 concentration are shown in
Figure 3.8.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.8: Testing of urea as a carbon tracer at varied oxygen concentrations.
Oxygen concentration was observed to reach stable concentration close to its inlet concen-
tration. The concentration of CO2 showed significant fluctuations, but appears indepen-
dent of oxygen concentration. It was therefore concluded that 1.25 % O2 concentrations
and higher, would be sufficient for full combustion of urea, and the noted absence of CO
further supported that. Fluctuations in measured CO2 can be traced to uneven feeding
of the mist into the reactor, due to condensation of droplet on the inner wall of the tube
leading to the inlet. Oxygen concentration of 2 % had previously been used for combus-
tion of 5 wt.% solution of urea [38], and it was therefore decided to use 2.5 % of oxygen
to ensure sufficient oxygen concentration as fluctuations in feeding could be expected.
Effects of addition on Urea on reaction equilibrium
To assess potential effects of adding urea to the salt solution, thermodynamic equilibrium
calculations were conducted with FactSage 8.3. Two simulations were run, first without
urea and then with urea, and the results of the two runs were compared. For simulations,
feeding rate of mist was assumed to be 1 mg s−1, temperature set to 860 °C, bed material
was assumed to be pure silicate, and a total gas flow rate of 500 mL min−1 was simulated,
consisting of 6 % O2 in N2. First simulation modeled the case when 1 wt.% aqueous
solution of KCl was used, and the second case included a solution consisting of 1 wt.%
KCl and 1 wt.% urea. All specifications of the software setting were according to future
discussions in Section 4.2. In both cases, was the formation of a molten K2O and SiO2
predicted. The formation of K2O without urea was predicted to be 51.8 % of the molar input
of KCl, while in the presence of urea, it was predicted to be 52.1 %. This indicates a slightly
higher formation of K2O in the presence of urea. Since the effect of urea addition was
predicted to be minimal, it was considered negligible and excluded from further analysis.
Complications Regarding Gas Analyzer
After the first three planned experiments had been performed, the filter in the gas con-
ditioning system leading to the gas analyzer had to be replaced. A pressure drop was
observed during the third experiment leading it to being terminated early, and the issue
was attributed to the filter. Following the filter replacement, some complications regard-
ing output readings from the gas analyzer were experienced. The expected average
concentration of CO2 was between 300-400 ppm, and expected average of overpressure
ranged between 50-80 mbar. These expectations were based on preliminary tests and
the method development phase, and were observed in the first two experiments. How-
46
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:57==
ever, in few later experiments, the average CO2 readings rose to around 2500 ppm, in
combination with reduced average overpressure of around 10-12 mbar.
A summary of all conducted experiments, along with their respective dates, is provided
in Table 3.5. The table also indicates which experiments showed elevated CO2 readings.
Experiments 3.2 and 3.3 were repetitions of experiment 3, and experiment 4.2 was a
repeat of experiment 4. These were performed as a precaution, and only one from each
set was included in the final data analysis. However, for the sake of completeness in this
discussion, all are shown. Additionally, experiments 1.r, 3.r, 4.r, and 8.r are repeats of
experiments 1 and 2, 3–3.3, 4–4.2, and 8, respectively, and were conducted after the lid
of the water basin was changed, which is further detailed in Appendix B.1.
Table 3.5: Summary of when each experiment was conducted and which experiments
showed elevated CO2 readings.
Experiment no.
Date performed
Elevated CO2
1.
9.May
2.
12.May
3.
13.May
3.2
14.May
x
3.3
15.May
x
4.
20.May
4.2
20.May
5.
20.May
6.
22.May
x
7.
26.May
8.
26.May
1.r
27.May
3.r
28.May
4.r
27.May
8.r
27.May
Representative CO2 and overpressure readings are shown in Figure 3.9, of values that
were expected and do not show elevated CO2 readings. These results are from experi-
ment 3.r which lasted 4 h.
(a) CO2 readings.
(b) Overpressure readings.
Figure 3.9: Readings of CO2 and overpressure in experiment 3.r which lasted 4 h.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.10 presents the CO2 concentration and overpressure readings from experiment
3.3, where elevated CO2 levels and a reduction in overpressure were observed. It is
important to note that the trends observed in the two CO2 graphs, Figure 3.9a and Fig-
ure 3.10a, differ notably. While Figure 3.9a shows narrow peaks and a relatively steady
baseline overpressure, Figure 3.10a exhibits broader peaks and a more fluctuating base-
line overpressure. A detailed discussion of observed changes in CO2 and overpressure
readings throughout the experiments is provided in Appendix B.6. Additionally, it should
be noted that the gas analyzer channel measuring CO2 concentration in ppm operates
within a range of 0–3000 ppm. As a result, any values exceeding a hard limit of 4250 ppm
are not recorded, which explains the visible gaps in the data.
(a) CO2 concentration readings.
(b) Overpressure readings.
Figure 3.10: Readings of CO2 concentration and overpressure from experiment 3.3 (4 h
duration).
The CO2 readings from gas analyzer appear inversely related to the overpressure in the
system; higher overpressure results in lower CO2 readings. This is clearly observed in
Figure 3.11, where the average overpressure and average CO2 concentration from all
experiments listed in Table 3.5 are plotted against each other. The number of each ex-
periment has been added as a data label for clarity.
48
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.11: Average overpressure and the corresponding average measured concentra-
tion of CO2 from the gas analyzer, from all experiments listed in Table 3.5.
To verify that these elevated CO2 readings were possible, a test was conducted under
normal operating conditions using calibration gas, generation of mist was omitted. The
calibration gas has a composition of 3800 ppm of CO2 and CO, and O2 concentration of
4.5 %. A flow of 800 mLN/min of calibration gas was used. In Figure 3.12 are the resulting
CO2,CO, and O2 readings shown, note that all concentrations are shown in volume per-
centages. The two dashed lines indicate when calibration gas was turned on and off. The
concentration of oxygen reaches an expected value close to its setpoint of 4.5 %. The
concentration of CO rises up close to its setpoint of 0.38 %, but then falls off again as it
undergoes complete combustion to CO2. This is due to the presence of excess oxygen
and high temperatures, which promote the fast oxidation of CO to CO2[49]. The concen-
tration of CO2 rises steadily to its setpoint of around 0.38 %, and as CO concentration
falls, CO2 takes a step up close to the combined setpoints of CO2 and CO, as expected.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 3.12: Testing with calibration gas to verify that elevated readings from gas analyzer
are possible. The two dashed lines indicate the time when calibration gas was turned on
and off.
In conclusion, the gas analyzer readings aligned with expectations, such that the elevated
CO2 levels observed in experiments cannot be dismissed. Now, with higher possible CO2
readings than were previously expected, it was necessary to adjust the oxygen concen-
tration used in experiments, in order to ensure full combustion of urea. Therefore were
testing of urea under varied oxygen concentration repeated, similar to what was shown
in Figure 3.8. In this test was the oxygen concentration varied between 2.5 %-10 %, in
increments of 2.5 %. The resulting CO2 and O2 readings are shown in Figure 3.13a, and
CO and O2 readings are shown in Figure 3.13b. The dashed lines in both graphs indicate
the time when oxygen concentration was increased in the aforementioned increments.
(a) CO2 readings with increasing oxygen.
(b) CO readings with increasing oxygen.
Figure 3.13: Repeated test to adjust oxygen concentration required for complete combus-
tion of urea. Dashed lines indicate the time when oxygen concentration was increased in
2.5 % steps.
The CO2 concentration is observed to take a jump when oxygen concentration is increased
from 2.5 % to 5 %, as well as the concentration of CO. Both readings seem to stabilize
after this jump and do not change with increasing oxygen. The concentration of CO was
50
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:61==
observed to fall back to the baseline of what it had been at an oxygen concentration of
2.5 %, while the concentration of CO2 remained at an elevated baseline. Therefore it
was concluded that increasing the oxygen concentration to 5 % was necessary to ensure
complete combustion of urea.
Discussion on estimations of feeding rate of mist
The mist feeding rate, estimated from the weight increase in the water basin, is likely un-
derestimated. This is primarily due to aerosol condensation at the reactor outlet, which
prevents the entire solution exiting the tube reactor from being collected in the basin. Ef-
forts of minimizing condensed solution at the outlet of the reactor and in the lid of the
water basin are further discussed in Appendix B.1. A slight dependence on the amount of
collected solution was observed between lids, but this was considered minimal, and the
weight increase was assumed sufficient to estimate the mist feeding rate of mist.
Additionally, feeding rate estimations based on the weight increase in the water basin
were found to depend on time duration of experiments. In contrast, estimations from
CO2 readings from gas analyzer showed more consistent results for all time durations
of experiments. Therefore was potential underestimation of the feeding rate based on
weight increase in the water basin assessed, by comparing it to the estimations obtained
by CO2 readings. Average feeding rate of mist calculated by both methods across all
valid experiments were used, excluding those that showed elevated CO2 readings. The
processing of feeding rate data is presented in more detail in Appendix A.1. The calculated
underestimation, based on experiment duration, along with the average feeding rates from
both methods of feeding rate estimations, is provided in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Underestimation of feeding rate of mist based on weight increase of water
basin, compared to CO2 readings from gas analyzer.
Time duration h
Average mist feeding rate [mg s−1]
Underestimation of feed
From weight increase
From gas analyzer
1
0.67
1.49
55.21 %
2
0.95
1.52
37.70 %
4
1.07
1.53
29.84 %
The underestimation of feeding rate of mist is greater for shorter time duration. This can
be expected due to time delay of possible condensed solution at the outlet of the reactor
reaching the water basin. Nevertheless, feeding estimations based on weight increase in
water basin were used for processing of results.
3.4.5
Minimum required flow to gas analyzer
It was of interest to determine the required gas flow rate to the gas analyzer that would
ensure reliable readings of CO2, CO, and O2. The Rosemount NGA 2000 MLT4 Analyzer
measures O2 using a paramagnetic detector (PO2), while CO2 and CO are measured
using non-dispersive infrared absorption (NDIR). For both measurement techniques, the
detection limit is ≤1% of full scale capacity, provided that pressure and temperature re-
main constant. The recommended gas flow rate to the gas analyzer for accurate operation
ranges from 0.2 L min−1 to 1.5 L min−1 [50].
To determine the minimum flow rate through the experimental system that would still pro-
duce reliable gas analyzer readings, a series of tests were conducted using calibration
gas at varying flow rates. The system was set up as under normal operating conditions,
but without mist generation or bed material present. The calibration gas contained 3800
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
51
==PAGE:62==
ppm of CO2 and CO, and 4.5 % O2, balanced in N2. Between each test at different flow
rates, was the calibration gas shut off and replaced with pure N2, to allow the measured
concentrations of CO2, CO, and O2 to fall back to zero. This allowed for estimation of ex-
pected delay in detection of measured gases, from the time of when calibration gas was
turned on. Each tested flow rate was let run for 10 minutes. After the experiments, the
proportion of data points falling within 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % of the setpoint values for CO2
and CO over the whole period of 10 minutes, was calculated. The results are summarized
in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Measured data points within 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % of the setpoint of CO2 and CO
at different flow rates of calibration gas.
Flow rate
% within 1 %
% within 5 %
% within 10 %
1500 mLN/min
CO2
65.88
76.25
77.08
CO
71.20
76.51
76.91
1200 mLN/min
CO2
57.21
75.94
78.36
CO
74.42
78.00
78.67
1000 mLN/min
CO2
26.21
71.85
75.42
CO
71.24
75.33
76.33
800 mLN/min
CO2
0
68.44
75.47
CO
70.47
76.08
77.38
650 mLN/min
CO2
0
60.70
70.48
CO
63.79
72.30
73.97
500 mLN/min
CO2
0
42.60
59.82
CO
49.06
62.70
64.83
350 mLN/min
CO2
0
0
23.73
CO
0
37.61
40.22
200 mLN/min
CO2
0
0
0
CO
0
15.88
20.95
It was observed that higher gas flow rates resulted in shorter delays between the intro-
duction of the calibration gas and the detection of CO2 and CO. For all tested flow rates
except 200 mLN/min, CO measurements stabilized near the setpoint within the 10-minute
test period. In contrast, CO2 readings generally took longer to stabilize and did not reach
a steady value within 10 minutes at flow rates of 350 mLN/min and 200 mLN/min. At a flow
rate of 800 mLN/min, both CO2 and CO measurements stabilized at levels comparable to
those observed at higher flow rates. In general, lower flow rates resulted in stable read-
ings at gradually lower concentrations or failed to reach stability within the test duration.
It is noted that lower stable concentrations readings could be due to insufficient gas flow,
and/or due to insufficient testing time to reach readings of the setpoint of the calibration
gas.
However, a flow rate of 800 mLN/min was deemed the most suitable for the system, as
acceptable accuracy in measurements of CO2 and CO is obtained, without increasing
pressure drop across the system to much, as discussed in Section 3.4.3. At this flow
rate, of approximately 8 minutes is expected before stable readings are obtained. When
bed material is included, the time to reach stable readings is expected to slightly increase.
52
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:63==
The measured concentrations of CO2 and CO at a gas flow rate of 800 mLN/min over a
10-minute period are shown in Figure 3.14, including shaded areas representing 1 %, 5 %,
and 10 % range from the setpoint values of CO2 and CO in the calibration gas.
Figure 3.14: Readings of CO2 and CO at a flow rate of 800 mLN/min. The setpoint of the
calibration gas is shown, as well as 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % range within this setpoint.
3.4.6
Temperature profile in reactor
A type K thermocouple was used to measure the temperature profile within the quartz
reactor tube, which is heated using a vertical oven. The oven is 60 cm long, and the
reactor tube is placed such that 20 cm extended above and 10 cm extended below the
oven. The fixed bed for experiments will be positioned between the top and center heating
elements, at approximately 20 cm-22 cm downstream from the inlet of the oven. The oven
is equipped with three heating elements, with the central element acting as the master
controller. A schematic of the oven is shown in Figure 3.15.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 3.15: Oven used to heat up quartz reactor tubes. Three heat elements control the
temperature, with the center one being the master controller.
All three heating elements of the oven were set to 860 °C, and the system was allowed to
reach the set temperature. The temperature profile inside the reactor tube was measured
in approximately 1.5 cm increments. Figure 3.16 shows the resulting temperature profile,
with the positions of the three heating elements indicated by dashed lines.
Figure 3.16: Temperature profile in reactor tube. Position of the three heat elements are
shown with dashed lines.
At heights between 12 cm and 48 cm, the measured temperatures exceeded the setpoint
of 860 °C, ranging from 860.4 °C to 869.2 °C. The highest temperatures were measured
between the center and bottom heat elements. The temperature around the bed was
measured to be around 863.7 °C and 865.7 °C.
54
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:65==
As an attempt to obtain a more uniform temperature zone of around 860 °C, the set point
of all three elements was now reduced to 855 °C. The temperature profile was measured
again at this lower set point temperature and in approximately 5 cm increments. Now
the measured temperature in the bottom half was measured in the range of 859.2 °C to
865.0 °C, but around the position of the bed was the temperature measured to be around
855.1 °C. Thus, as a final improvement of obtaining a uniform temperature zone, was the
set point of the top heating element set back to 860 °C, while the other two were kept
at 855 °C. The temperature profile in the top half of the reactor was measured for the
last time, in 2 cm increments. The resulting temperature profile of the oven, when the
top heating element is set to 860 °C, and the other two are set to 855 °C, is shown in
Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17: Temperature profile in reactor tube when set point of the top heat element is
set to 860 °C, and the set point of the center and bottom heat elements are set to 855 °C.
Position of the three heat elements are shown with dashed lines.
Now the temperature around the position of the bed was measured to be around 860.2 °C
to 861.3 °C. A zone of approximately 40 cm, from position 14 cm to 54 cm, is measured
to be in the range of 859.2 °C to 865.0 °C, such that an uniform temperature zone could
be assumed.
To estimate the temperature overshoot of the three heat elements, the thermocouple was
placed at the location of each element, and the oven allowed to heat up. In all cases, the
set point of all three heat elements was set to 860 °C. The temperature at each location
exceeded the setpoint and remained above it 50 minutes after heating began. Table 3.8
summarizes the maximum temperature reached, the temperature after 50 minutes, and
the heating rate up to 860 °C for each of the three positions.
Table 3.8: Maximum temperature of the three heating elements when set point was set to
860 °C, as well as temperature after 50 minutes and the heating rate up to 860 °C.
Heat element position
Top
Center
Bottom
Max. temperature [°C]
874.1
882.6
874.8
Temperature after 50 min.[°C]
865.3
870.4
868.5
Heating rate (to 860 °C) [°C s−1]
0.59
0.64
0.51
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
55
==PAGE:66==
To reduce temperature overshoot, and by that shortening the time required for thermal sta-
bilization, all heating elements were initially set to 845 °C, and the set point then increased
to the desired temperature. The thermocouple was placed at the center heating element,
and the oven was allowed to heat up. Under these conditions, the temperature peaked
at 875.0 °C, but stabilized at 863.8 °C within 3 minutes. Since the highest heating rate
and peak temperature were recorded for the center heating element, it was assumed that
the two other elements reached lower peak temperatures and required shorter balancing
times. No further testing was conducted to verify this assumption.
Based on these preliminary tests to ensure a uniform temperature zone of approximately
860 °C around the bed, all three heating elements will initially be set to 845 °C. Subse-
quently, the setpoint for the top heating element will be increased to 860 °C, while the
center and bottom elements will be adjusted to 855 °C
3.4.7
Relationship between KCl and HCl for conductivity and pH
It was of interest to develop a relationship between measured conductivity and pH, to the
concentration of KCl and HCl. The motivation was to use this relationship to estimate the
conversion of KCl, based on measured conductivity and pH of the collected solution in
the water basin at the outlet of the reactor tube.
When KCl reacts with silica, HCl is expected to form. Therefore, the pH and conduc-
tivity of solutions with known concentrations of KCl and HCl were measured. Theoreti-
cal limits were defined by assuming 0% and 100% conversion of KCl at a mist feeding
rate of 1 mg s−1 over two hours, corresponding to a maximum possible concentration of
0.0064 mol L−1 for both KCl and HCl. Solutions ranging from 0 mol L−1 to 0.0064 mol L−1
in increments of 0.0012 mol L−1 of KCl were prepared, and HCl added in steps to cap-
ture possible combinations. Full details of the development of this relationship, as well as
results, are provided in Appendix B.4.
However, the use of urea will further affect the measured pH due to the formation of NH3
(see Equation (3.3)). Introducing a third component in the relationship was considered
beyond the scope of this work, so the development of a more comprehensive model was
not pursued. Additionally, accurately predicting concentrations of KCl and HCl from con-
ductivity and pH, would require the development of a mathematical model, similar to the
work of Usobiaga et al. [51].
During the development of the conductivity–pH relationship, it became evident that in an
aqueous solutions containing only KCl and HCl, the decrease in pH relative to pure DI
water could be attributed entirely to the presence of HCl. From the collected solution in
the water basin at the outlet of the reactor, can the concentration of KCl and HCl therefore
be calculated, as the feeding rate of the solution is known from the increase of the basin’s
weight. Therefore conversion of KCl can be estimated based on measured pH, when
urea has not been used. Results supporting this assumption, as well as description of
calculations can be found in Appendix B.4.
3.4.8
Estimation of interactions with reactor wall
Potassium chloride is expected to react with the quartz wall of the tube reactor. Therefore,
it is important to estimate the extent of this reaction and assess whether such interactions
can be minimized. One consideration was whether a new reactor tube or one previously
exposed to KCl solution would result in reduced interaction with the reactor wall. The
extent of interaction was assessed by estimating the conversion of KCl, following the
methodology described in Section 3.4.7. For all tests investigating wall interactions, the
reactor temperature was set to 860 °C, with a gas flow of 500 mLN/min of pure N2, and
56
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:67==
a 0.2 wt.% KCl solution in DI water. No bed material was included. To prepare a used
reactor tube for comparison, the system was operated under these same conditions for 8
hours prior to testing. Two experiments were then conducted with a new tube and two with
the used tube. The conductivity and pH of the solution collected from each experiment
are summarized in Table 3.9.
Table 3.9: Measured conductivity, temperature, and pH of the outlet solution collected
after experiments with a new and a used quartz reactor tube.
Experiment
Conductivity [µS/cm]
Temperature [°C]
pH
Conversion of KCl [%]
New tube 1
2310
24.3
4.354
5.987
New tube 2
2040
24.1
4.381
5.607
Used tube 1
282
24.4
3.675
11.593
Used tube 2
350
24.3
3.421
17.232
Based on the results presented in Table 3.9, the use of new tube reactors results in less
wall interactions compared to used reactors, as indicated by the lower calculated conver-
sion of KCl. This is further supported by the higher measured pH values in experiments
with new tubes, suggesting reduced HCl formation and, consequently, lower KCl conver-
sion. Additionally, the higher conductivity measurements suggest a greater amount of
unreacted KCl was collected in the water basin when new tubes were used. It is there-
fore speculated that potassium-silicates formed on the reactor wall could promote further
reactions.
However, it is important to note that the used reactor tubes were not rinsed prior to exper-
iments. Residual water-soluble KCl or other K- or Cl-containing species might have been
present on the inner walls of the tube reactor. This was confirmed after the experiment
labeled Used tube 2. The tube reactor was rinsed with DI water, and the rinse solution
showed elevated conductivity, indicating the presence of residual water soluble species.
A second rinse brought the conductivity close to that of pure DI water (measured conduc-
tivity of DI water is 0 µS/cm), confirming successful removal of remaining species. The
results from the two used tubed experiments further indicate that some stable level of in-
teraction in the tube reactor is reached. Therefore, it was decided to use a used reactor
tube throughout the experiments, replacing it only if it broke. This approach additionally re-
duced equipment usage and prolonged the lifespan of reactor tubes. Additionally, rinsing
reactor tubes between experiments with DI is necessary, and it will remove the majority of
water-soluble KCl and other condensed species from the inner walls of the reactor. It was
further observed, that a quartz tube reactors do not become chemically saturated, rather
a reaction with KCl will form a layer of deposits on the inner walls, leading to formation
of cracks and the reactor will eventually break. Consequently, saturating the reactor to
eliminate further interaction was not a viable solution.
To establish a baseline for wall interactions, a procedure was implemented where a new
reactor tube was exposed to a 1 wt.% KCl solution for 4 h, and is then considered to
be a starting point of a used reactor tube. Subsequently, an experiment was conducted
under typical conditions, 2 h duration, 860 °C reactor temperature, 1 wt.% KCl solution,
and a 800 mLN/min N2 gas flow, to estimate the extent of interaction between KCl and the
reactor walls in the used tube. The conversion of KCl was calculated to be 8.00 %. In
similar work, a KCl conversion of approximately 30 % was observed at 860 °C, using a 5
wt.% KCl solution fed at 0.25 mg s−1, with a gas flow of 1 LN/min consisting of 2 % O2 in
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
57
==PAGE:68==
N2, which is higher than has been estimated here [38].
Considering that the fixed bed is located 20 cm below the oven inlet and the heated zone is
60 cm long, approximately 1/3 of the reactor wall in the heated zone is exposed to the KCl
solution before it reached the bed. That corresponds to 2.66 % of inlet KCl to be expected
to react with the reactor walls, before reaching the bed. Therefore are interactions with
the reactor wall assumed to remain within a range of 2.66 %-5.687 %, where results of
Used tube 2 have been taken as the upper limit of interactions.
3.4.9
Summary of preliminary tests
An experimental system has been developed and improved through a series of preliminary
tests. The temperature profile within the reactor has been improved such that an uniform
temperature zone of around 400 mm can be assumed. The use of urea as a tracer to
estimate the feeding rate of mist has proven effective, and the system is capable of main-
taining a sufficient and stable gas flow to allow for reliable gas analyzer measurements.
However, several areas for further improvement have been identified. The most critical
factor of future work would be to identify the issue causing elevated readings of CO2 from
the gas analyzer, as continuous monitoring of feeding of mist is desired. It has been
shown that these elevated readings are possible but the cause is still unknown. Further
investigations into the system operating around the gas anlyzer, such as its measuring
range and operation of gas conditioning system, is recommended. Maintaining the sys-
tem as airtight as possible is desired, and the current generation and feeding system of
aerosols in the reactor makes that challenging, even though leaks can be monitored via
O2 readings. Since the system operates at a slight overpressure relative to ambient con-
ditions, leaks into the system are not expected to be considerable, and were not observed
to be. However, a more robust method of generation and feeding of aerosols in the reac-
tor would be beneficial. One possible solution involves reducing condensation of aerosol
droplets during transport to the reactor tube. This could potentially be achieved through
the use of heat tracing at temperatures which would minimize condensation of aerosols
into droplets.
Interactions between reactor wall and the salt solution also pose challenges. As some
of the inlet KCl is expected to react with the quartz reactor wall, it imposes uncertainty
regarding the actual amount that reaches the bed. Additionally, prolonged exposure to
KCl causes the reactor walls to become brittle and eventually break. This makes the
system less robust, as it can not sustain the experimental conditions and reduces the
lifespan of equipment. It was observed that sand particles can be glued or reacted stuck
to the wall, making the collection of sand sample challenging and hinders the collection
of the complete sample. Given these considerations, evaluation of both the material and
design of the reactor tube are recommended.
Additionally, possible future work would be to investigate the ternary system KCl-HCl-
NH3 in aqueous solution, and evaluate the possibility of developing a model which could
predict the concentration of the three compounds, using easily accessible measurement
methods.
In conclusion, the experimental setup developed for this study meets its intended objec-
tives and is capable of generating reliable results. Nevertheless, targeted improvements
have been proposed to enhance its robustness, consistency, and long-term performance.
58
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:69==
4
Simulation of experiments
Two simulation tools were employed to support and further analyze the experimental re-
sults. First, FactSage 8.3 was used to model the thermodynamic equilibrium of the system.
Second, Chemkin Ansys 2025 R1, a chemical kinetics software, was used to investigate
the gaseous chemical kinetics. Together, they were used to interpret the experimental
findings and to explore the influence of atmospheric conditions in the bed of a typical full-
scale fluidized bed boiler. The atmospheric conditions in the bed of a fluidized bed reactor
can be complex and hard to measure [8]. To obtain an estimation of the atmospheric con-
ditions, a combustion of biomass was simulated with FactSage 8.3, as is described in
more detail in the following subsection.
4.1
Simulated Atmospheric Conditions in a Bubbling
Fluidized Bed Boiler
Representative atmospheric conditions expected during fluidized bed combustion were
estimated by simulating combustion of biomass using FactSage 8.3. The fuel composition
used in the simulation is summarized in Table 4.1, which reflects the composition of wood
chips utilized at Asnæs Power Station Unit 6 [21]. All concentrations are noted at a dry
basis, but moisture content in the fuel can vary between 35 %-55 % [21]. The combustion
was simulated across a temperature range of 600 °C - 1200 °C, in 50 °C increments, in
previous work [24]. An excess air ratio of λ = 0.5 was assumed [21], and its composition
was assumed to be 79 % N2 and 21 % O2. All species were initially assumed to be in the
gas phase, and no bed material was included in the simulation.
Table 4.1: Composition of a wood chip biomass fuel utilized at Asnæs Power Station Unit
6. All concentrations are on a dry basis but moisture content in the fuel can vary between
35 %-55 % [21].
Element
Unit
Concentration
Carbon
[%]
50.0
Hydrogen
[%]
5.9
Nitrogen
[%]
0.22
Sulphur
mg kg−1
170
Chlorine
mg kg−1
80
Potassium
mg kg−1
1200
Sodium
mg kg−1
90
Calcium
mg kg−1
5000
Magnesium
mg kg−1
400
Silicon
mg kg−1
1500
Phosphorous
mg kg−1
200
The simulated atmospheric compositions across the temperature range of 600 °C - 1200 °C
are presented in Figure 4.1. From these results, the gas composition at 850 °C was se-
lected as the representative for fluidized bed combustion conditions and was used in
subsequent simulations. The corresponding gas-phase composition is summarized in
Table 4.2, which includes all species with a molar fraction ≥0.01.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.1: Simulated atmospheric conditions in a fluidized bed reactor during combustion
of biomass, simulated over the temperature range of 600 °C - 1200 °C.
Table 4.2: Simulated atmospheric conditions in a fluidized bed boiler during combustion
of biomass at a temperature of 850 °C and an excess air ratio of 0.5.
Element
Composition [mol frac.]
H2
0.153
N2
0.528
H2O
0.107
CO
0.128
CO2
0.083
Although N2 constitutes the majority of the gaseous molar phase, the atmosphere above
the bed is expected to be reducing due to the elevated concentrations of H2 and CO [22].
An estimate of the KCl concentration was made based on the biomass fuel composition
listed in Table 4.1, to verify that the concentrations used in the simulations were within a
reasonable range. The concentration of KCl was calculated under the assumption that all
chlorine and potassium in the fuel are released into the gas phase. Most of the chlorine
is expected to form KCl, while excess potassium is hypothesized to form KOH or other
reactive intermediates. Therefore, the chlorine content in the wood chip fuel serves as a
lower bound for the estimated KCl concentration, and the potassium content serves as an
upper bound. The calculated lower and upper bounds are presented in Table 4.3, based
on an excess air ratio of λ = 0.5.
60
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:71==
Table 4.3: Lower and upper bounds of the estimated KCl concentration based on the fuel
composition in Table 4.1 and an excess air ratio of λ = 0.5.
KCl concentration [ppm]
Lower bound
17
Upper bound
233
4.2
Thermodynamical equilibrium calculations with FactSage
Thermodynamic calculations were conducted to support the evaluation and interpretation
of the experimental results. These calculations were performed using FactSage 8.3, em-
ploying the Equilib calculation module. In addition, interactions between KCl and the bed
material were simulated under fluidized bed atmospheric conditions to gain insight into
possible effects of those reducing conditions.
Databases for calculations in FactSage are selected based on the compounds present
in the system and their expected behavior. A pure substance database is required, and
a compound databases can be selected with it. Additionally, solution databases within
the compound databases can be selected based on the anticipated behavior of the sys-
tem. The software can access all selected databases during simulation, thus ensuring
consistency among them is critical.
It is further advised to select species from com-
pound databases to ensure thermodynamic consistency. For this work, the pure sub-
stance database FactPS was chosen, along with the compound databases FTOxide and
FTSalt[52], but they have been optimized to be thermodynamically consistent with each
other. The databases FTSalt and FTOxide have been chosen for similar simulations in
work from Ma et al. [10, 53]. Within FTOxide, the solution database SLAGA was selected,
as it models the behavior of complex oxide slag systems, including the multicomponent
system Na2O-K2O-CaO-MgO-Al2O3-SiO2. Within FTSalt, the SALTA solution database
was selected, as it includes relevant salts of alkali metals of investigation [52].
Three simulations replicating the experimental conditions were conducted, noted as F1,
F2 and F3, with the molar inputs summarized in Table 4.4. The simulations aim to predict
thermodynamic equilibrium conditions for three cases: when a solution of KCl is present,
when a solution of NaCl is used, and when a mixed solution of both is used. The calculated
input values represent the average total moles of additives introduced into the reactor tube
over the course of a 2-hour experiment, along with a total bed material mass of 0.5 g. The
details of these average value calculations are provided in Appendix A.1. The average
KCl concentration was 201 ppm, which was also used as input for simulation F2, where
only NaCl is included. In simulation F3, where both salts are present, the concentration
of each was set to 100.5 ppm. The same alkali to silica ratio maintained in all simulations,
or equal to 0.112. Additionally, the average CO2 concentration was 241 ppm, and the
average moisture content was 7.89%. All simulations were carried out at a temperature
of 860 °C and a pressure of 1 atm.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
61
==PAGE:72==
Table 4.4: Summary of input parameters in FactSage simulations, modeling the experi-
mental conditions. The total amount of gas were 4.648 moles.
Compound
Unit
Simulation no.
F1
F2
F3
N2
[vol. % (dry gas)]
95
95
95
O2
[vol. % (dry gas)]
5
5
5
KCl
[ppm]
201
100.5
NaCl
[ppm]
201
100.5
H2O
[mole %]
7.89
7.89
7.89
Urea
[ppm]
241
241
241
SiO2
[g]
0.5 g
0.5 g
0.5 g
To investigate the effects of atmospheric conditions typical of a fluidized bed boiler, the
same experiments outlined in Table 4.4 were repeated, but with gas compositions rep-
resentative of a fluidized bed environment. In simulations F1–F3, the total gas phase
(4.648 moles) originally consisted of N2 and O2. For the fluidized bed simulations, this
same total was redistributed according to the mole fractions in Table 4.2, with an added
SO2 concentration of 100 ppm. Salt concentrations and bed material amounts were also
kept constant, maintaining the same alkali to silica molar ratio of 0.112 as in experiments
F1–F3. A summary of the molar inputs for each experiment is provided in Table 4.5. All
simulations were conducted at 860 °C and a pressure of 1 atm.
Table 4.5: Summary of input parameters used in FactSage simulations to investigate the
effects of atmospheric conditions representative of a fluidized bed boiler. Total amount of
gas were 4.648 moles.
Compound
Unit
Simulation no.
F4
F5
F6
H2
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.153
0.153
0.153
N2
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.528
0.528
0.528
H2O
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.107
0.107
0.107
CO
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.128
0.128
0.128
CO2
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.083
0.083
0.083
KCl
[ppm]
201
100.5
NaCl
[ppm]
201
100.5
SO2
[ppm]
100
100
100
SiO2
[g]
0.5
0.5
0.5
4.3
Chemical kinetic simulations with Chemkin
Chemkin is a simulation tool designed to model the chemical kinetics of a given system
[54]. In this work, Chemkin was employed to simulate the gaseous reactions of potassium
and sodium under the experimental conditions. Additionally, it was used to investigate
how atmospheric conditions typical of a fluidized bed boiler influence possible gaseous
interactions of KCl and NaCl with other components. The experimental system was sim-
ulated using a closed homogeneous reactor model, which represents a transient, homo-
geneous batch environment [54]. While Chemkin includes some built-in chemical data, it
often requires users to supply custom databases. Each species in the chemical system
62
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:73==
requires thermodynamic data and reaction mechanisms. Thermodynamic data determine
species properties and reaction equilibria, while reaction mechanisms define gas-phase
interactions. Linking species to thermodynamic data is essential, as equilibrium constants
and reverse reaction rates depend on it [55]. The chemistry set for gaseous reactions of
potassium which will be used for this work, was initially developed by Glarborg et al. [29],
and has been improved and modified in various subsequent works. The set used here is
the most recently improved by Chanpirak et al., where sulfation of KCl was studied and the
chemical kinetic model modified. The model additionally includes subsets for chlorine and
and sulfur [28]. While it has been validated under oxidizing conditions, its performance
under reducing conditions remains unverified. Therefore any results obtained from sim-
ulations under reducing conditions (simulations F4, F5 and F6 [56]), must be interpreted
critically [57].
Similarly, the chemistry set for sodium gas-phase reactions was also initially established
by Glarborg et al. [29] and later adapted for specific reaction mechanisms [28]. However,
the chemistry set for sodium is considered less reliable compared to the chemistry set
for potassium. For the purpose of this work, the two chemistry sets have been combined
to study gaseous reactions of potassium and sodium at the same time. However, no
possible interactions of potassium and sodium are included in the merged set, and it has
not formally been validated. Therefore should the obtained results be considered carefully
and critically [57].
Three simulations replicating experimental conditions were run with Chemkin, denoted
as C1, C2 and C3, similar to what was done with FactSage 8.3. Urea and bed material
were not a possible input as the databases used do not include necessary data for those
compounds. Full combustion of urea was assumed, and CO2 was entered as input instead
of urea, but NH3 is disregarded as that also is not included in the databases. Summary
of inputs for simulations are summarized in Table 4.6. All simulations were run at 860 °C
and at a pressure of 1 atm.
Table 4.6: Summary of input in Chemkin simulations replicating experimental results.
Compound
Unit
Simulation no.
C1
C2
C3
N2
[vol. % (dry gas)]
95
95
95
O2
[vol. % (dry gas)]
5
5
5
KCl
[ppm]
201
100.5
NaCl
[ppm]
201
100.5
H2O
[mole %]
7.89
7.89
7.89
CO2
[ppm]
241
241
241
Investigations into the effects of atmospheric conditions representative for a fluidized bed
were also run, similar to those of FactSage. The atmospheric conditions were formulated
in the same way as for the FactSage simulations summarized in Table 4.5. The input to
the simulations are summarized in Table 4.7. Table 4.5.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
63
==PAGE:74==
Table 4.7: Summary of input parameters used in Chemkin simulations to investigate the
effects of atmospheric conditions representative of a fluidized bed boiler.
Compound
Unit
Simulation no.
C4
C5
C6
H2
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.153
0.153
0.153
N2
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.528
0.528
0.528
H2O
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.107
0.107
0.107
CO
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.128
0.128
0.128
CO2
[mole frac. of gaseous phase]
0.083
0.083
0.083
KCl
[ppm]
201
100.5
NaCl
[ppm]
201
100.5
SO2
[ppm]
100
100
100
64
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:75==
5
Results
This chapter presents the results, which are divided into two main parts. First, the experi-
mental findings are discussed, followed by the results from the simulation work.
5.1
Experimental results
The experimental results are presented according to the following key areas of investiga-
tion:
• A: Time-dependent interactions between KCl and silica bed material.
• B: Interactions of KCl and aged bed material.
• C:Interactions of mixed KCl and NaCl with silica bed material
Table 5.1 provides an overview of all conducted experiments, including important exper-
imental parameters. The experiments are grouped according to their respective investi-
gation points. Experiments 1 and 2 appear twice, as their results serve dual purposes;
investigating the time dependence of interactions with bed material (A), and comparing in-
teractions between a pure KCl solution and a mixed KCl/NaCl solution (C). All experiments
were performed at a constant reactor bed temperature of 860 °C with a total gas flow rate
of 800 mLN/min. Experiments 1, 2, and 3.3 were carried out using a gas composition of
2.5 % O2 in N2, while all others were carried out using 5 % O2 in N2. In future processing,
experiments labeled with ’.r’ were assigned to a lower range of inlet KCl concentrations.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
65
==PAGE:76==
Table 5.1: Summary of experiments conducted categorized based on their corresponding
area of investigation. In future processing, experiments labeled with ’.r’ were assigned to
a lower range of inlet KCl concentrations.
Experiment
Salt
Time
Particle size
Bed material
KCl / NaCl
Atmospheric
no.
[h]
[mm]
[ppm]
conditions
A: Time-dependent interactions between KCl and silica bed material.
1
KCl
2
0.09-0.25
Raw
260
2.5 % O2 in N2
1.r
KCl
2
0.09-0.25
Raw
91
5 % O2 in N2
2
KCl
2
0.09-0.25
Raw
208
2.5 % O2 in N2
3.3
KCl
4
0.09-0.25
Raw
233
2.5 % O2 in N2
3.r
KCl
4
0.09-0.25
Raw
205
5 % O2 in N2
4.2
KCl
1
0.09-0.25
Raw
103
5 % O2 in N2
4.r
KCl
1
0.09-0.25
Raw
136
5 % O2 in N2
B: Interactions of KCl and aged bed material
5
KCl
2
>0.355
5 day old
75
5 % O2 in N2
6
KCl
2
>0.355
81 day old
299
5 % O2 in N2
7
KCl
2
>0.355
161 day old
237
5 % O2 in N2
C: Interactions of KCl and NaCl with silica bed material
8
KCl+NaCl
2
0.09-0.25
Raw
103/103
5 % O2 in N2
8.r
KCl+NaCl
2
0.09-0.25
Raw
114/114
5 % O2 in N2
1
KCl
2
0.09-0.25
Raw
260
2.5 % O2 in N2
2
KCl
2
0.09-0.25
Raw
208
2.5 % O2 in N2
To evaluate reaction degree between alkali species and bed material, were measured
alkali-to-silicon ratios in bed sample compared. Chlorine concentrations were also ex-
amined, as high levels of chlorine and alkali metals typically indicate the presence of con-
densed alkali species, whereas low chlorine concentrations combined with high potassium
and sodium levels suggest the formation of potassium and sodium silicates. In addition,
samples from experiments 1.r, 3.r, 4.r, and 8.r underwent SEM/EDS spot analysis, which
are discussed following their characterization. For all spot analyses, the concentrations of
K, Na, Cl, Si, and Fe were measured and reported. Cluster formation was observed in all
samples with SEM, but typical cluster formation in samples from experiments which lasted
1 h, 2 h and 4 h are shown in Appendix A.3. Furthermore, samples from experiments 1.r,
3.r, and 8.r were subjected to AQM analysis through cross-sectional SEM/EDS imaging.
These results provide insight into potential layer formation and the composition of the
mineral phases identified. In all cases where ICP-OES and SEM/EDS analyses are com-
pared to each other, are both results reported relative to measured composition of Mg, K,
Ca, Fe, Al, P, Si and Na.
5.1.1
Time dependence of interactions between KCl and silica bed
material
Time dependence of interactions between KCl and bed material were investigated by com-
paring K/Si ratios of samples from experiments which lasted 1 h, 2 h, and 4 h. In Figure 5.1
are K/Si ratio plotted versus experimental time, for experiments 1, 2, 3.3 and 4.2, which
had an inlet concentration of 103-260 ppm KCl. In Figure 5.2 is the K/Si ratio plotted ver-
sus experimental time for experiments 1.r, 3.r, and 4.r, which had an inlet concentration
of KCl in the range of 91-205 ppm. Both Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2 include results from
66
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:77==
ICP-OES and SEM/EDS.
Figure 5.1: Time dependence of K/Si ratio based on ICP-OES and SEM/EDS analysis.
Range of KCl inlet concentration was 103-260 ppm.
Figure 5.2: Time dependence of K/Si ratio based on ICP-OES and SEM/EDS analysis.
Range of KCl inlet concentration was 91-205 ppm.
A general increase in K/Si ratio is observed with longer experimental durations, both based
on results from ICP-OES and SEM/EDS analyses. The trajectory of increase for the lower
inlet concentration of KCl shows lower K/Si ratio, as can be expected based on less inlet
concentration. ICP-OES results show a near-linear increase in K/Si ratio over time, while
SEM/EDS suggests a slower rise between experimental times of 2 h and 4 h. This differ-
ence is attributed to ICP-OES measuring the bulk composition of the bed particles, while
SEM/EDS captures the surface concentration. Therefore is it suggested that potassium
penetrates inwards with increasing experimental time. The most pronounced difference
between K/Si ratio measured by the two analysis methods is observed at experimental
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
67
==PAGE:78==
duration of 4 h. Such that with increasing experimental time is the inwards progression of
potassium expected to increase.
Surface concentration is measured by SEM/EDS, where the rate of change in K/Si ra-
tio may slow as the surface of the particle becomes more reacted over time. As will be
discussed in Section 5.1.4, is the formation of silicates observed to penetrate toward the
center of bed particles, and possible outer edge of SiO2 can form. Thus, could the de-
creased K/Si concentration on the surface of the particle additionally be due to this SiO2
outer edge.
Now, to estimate the level of potential condensed KCl on the surface of the particles,
are the concentrations of Cl and K investigated. Potassium and chloride were in a 1:1
molar ratio of each other, such that their concentration in moles per gram of sample is
compared. Their concentration with increasing experimental time is shown in Figure 5.3.
The concentration of Cl appears to decrease over time, while the concentration of K is
observed to increase, such that more condensed alkali species might be expected on the
surface of the particles after shorter experimental time. However, the concentration of Cl
is in all cases less than the measured concentration of K, suggesting that potassium is
present at the surface of the particle as a K-silicate from a reaction with the bed material.
Figure 5.3: Measured concentrations of K and Cl by SEM/EDS, based on time duration
of experiments.
Increasing K/Si ratio is expected with increasing experimental time due to interactions be-
tween KCl and bed material to form K-silicates. The formation of K-silicates is observed
to grow inwards, captured by increasing potassium concentration from ICP-OES analysis.
Slower increase of K/Si ratio is observed on the surface of the particle over the experimen-
tal time, and explained by decreasing surface interactions, and/or formation of an outer
edge of SiO2.
SEM analysis of surfaces
This chapter discusses the spot analyses of samples from experiments 4.r, 1.r, and 3.r,
which correspond to experimental durations of 1 h, 2 h, and 4 h, respectively. In all sam-
ples, sodium contamination was detected. This contamination is attributed to residual
68
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:79==
NaCl on the inner walls of the tube leading from the mist generator to the reactor. This
tube was not rinsed between experiments, such that NaCl from previous runs could have
migrated to the reactor bed and contaminated the sample. As a result, is the measured
sodium concentration reported in all cases.
Figure 5.4 presents the SEM/EDS spot analysis of a sample from experiment 4.r. Six
points were analyzed, and the corresponding elemental concentrations are summarized
in Table 5.2. SEM imaging revealed a textured surface with alternating regions which
appeared as brighter and darker. The spot analysis suggests that the brighter regions
correspond to unreacted bed material, as exemplified by Point 2, where silicon and iron
are the dominant elements. In contrast, the darker regions exhibit higher concentrations
of potassium and sodium, such as at Point 1. These darker areas also show low chlorine
concentrations, which indicates that potassium likely reacted with the silica to form potas-
sium silicates. The darker regions corresponding to reacted surfaces appear to have a
smoother texture, compared to the brighter regions.
Figure 5.4: Spot analysis of a particle from experiment 4.r. Image has been magnified
2000x.
Table 5.2: Measured concentration of points in spot analysis of a particle from experiment
4.r.
Element
Pt. 1
Pt. 2
Pt. 3
Pt. 4
Pt. 5
Pt. 6
K [wt. %]
5.3
1.3
0.5
2.5
2.8
Na [wt. %]
5.9
1.7
0.7
3.9
3.3
Cl [wt. %]
0.1
Si [wt. %]
29.3
35.5
28.5
30.8
25.7
26.6
Fe [wt. %]
1.1
0.3
1.4
0.8
0.7
5.8
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
69
==PAGE:80==
An EDS map of potassium and silicon for the same surface is presented in Figure 5.5
and Figure 5.6, respectively. Overlap of concentrated areas of potassium and the darker
regions seen in Figure 5.4 is observed. Overlap of concentrated potassium regions in
Figure 5.5, and less dense concentrated silicon regions in Figure 5.6 is also observed.
Figure 5.5: EDS map of potassium from spot analysis of a sample from experiment 4.r.
Image has been magnified 2000x.
70
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:81==
Figure 5.6: EDS map of silicon from spot analysis of a sample from experiment 4.r. Image
has been magnified 2000x.
Figure 5.7 shows the spot analysis of a sample from experiment 1.r. A total of five points
were analyzed, with their elemental concentrations summarized in Table 5.3. Compared
to the surface in Figure 5.4, the brighter regions occupy a smaller area, and the smoother
darker regions are more visible, indicating a higher degree of surface reactions. As in
the previous sample, these brighter regions are associated with unreacted bed material,
evident at Point 3, which shows minimal to no detectable alkali or chlorine. Conversely,
the darker regions, such as Point 2, exhibit elevated concentrations of potassium and
sodium.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
71
==PAGE:82==
Figure 5.7: Spot analysis of a particle from experiment 1.r. Image has been magnified
2000x.
Table 5.3: Measured concentration of points in spot analysis from experiment 1.r.
Element
Pt. 1
Pt. 2
Pt. 3
Pt. 4
Pt. 5
K [wt. %]
3.8
0.1
Na [wt. %]
3.3
3.2
Cl [wt. %]
0.2
0.2
Si [wt. %]
32.0
21.3
33.3
33.9
21.5
Fe [wt. %]
0.4
4.4
0.2
0.3
3.1
Figure 5.8 and Figure 5.9 show EDS maps of potassium and silicon for the same sur-
face as shown in Figure 5.7. Same observations are made as from experiment 4.r, but
more pronounced overlap between concentrated areas of potassium with darker regions
is observed. It was also observed that concentrated areas of potassium overlap with less
dense silicon regions more pronouncedly than before.
72
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:83==
Figure 5.8: EDS map of potassium from experiment 1.r. Image has been magnified 2000x.
Figure 5.9: EDS map of silicon from experiment 1.r. Image has been magnified 2000x.
Figure 5.10 shows the spot analysis of a sample from experiment 3.r. In total were 9
points measured and their concentration is summarized in Table 5.4. Points 1 through
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
73
==PAGE:84==
7 are located along the interface of what was speculated to be two fused sand particles.
The potassium concentration at these points varies significantly, as is observed between
Points 6 and 7 for example. Points 8 and 9, positioned near Point 1, also show high potas-
sium levels and lower chlorine concentrations, suggesting formation of silicates. Here are
smoother darker surfaces dominant.
Figure 5.10: Spot analysis of a particle from experiment 3.r. Image has been magnified
1000x.
Table 5.4: Measured concentration of points in spot analysis from experiment 3.r.
Element
Pt. 1
Pt. 2
Pt. 3
Pt. 4
Pt. 5
Pt. 6
Pt. 7
Pt. 8
Pt. 9
K [wt. %]
15.03
0.62
0.99
1.01
4.36
13.29
0.09
15.10
12.81
Na [wt. %]
1.0
0.4
0.3
1.2
1.6
1.6
1.2
Cl [wt. %]
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Si [wt. %]
36.4
44.5
50.1
42.4
38.0
31.2
36.1
33.6
34.7
Fe [wt. %]
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.7
0.6
0.2
0.3
0.3
Compared to spot analyses of samples from experiments 4.r and 1.r, potassium concen-
tration appears more evenly distributed on the bed particle, while also showing elevated
values in localized areas. Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12 show EDS maps of potassium and
silicon of the same surface as in Figure 5.10. Clear regions where potassium appears to
react on the surface are visible. In particular, the potassium map in Figure 5.11 displays a
distinct potassium-rich strip near Point 6, which is thought to mark the boundary between
the two fused bed particles. The absence of chlorine in this region suggests the formation
of K-silicates.
74
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5.11: EDS map of potassium from experiment 3.r. Image has been magnified
1000x.
Figure 5.12: EDS map of silicon from experiment 3.r. Image has been magnified 1000x.
From the three spot analysis images, Figure 5.4, Figure 5.7, and Figure 5.10, both re-
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
75
==PAGE:86==
acted and unreacted surface regions could be identified. In the SEM images, unreacted
areas appeared brighter, while reacted areas appeared darker. The darker regions ap-
peared smoother in texture compared to the brighter unreacted regions. In all cases were
the brighter regions found to have a composition consistent with the original bed mate-
rial, whereas darker regions exhibited elevated concentration of potassium and sodium.
These observations, combined with low chlorine measured, indicate that potassium re-
acted with silicon in the bed material to form K-silicates. The highest concentrations of
potassium was measured in the sample from experiment 3.r (4 h experimental time), which
also showed the most pronounced darker surfaces. In contrast, the lowest potassium
concentrations were observed in the sample from experiment 4.r (1 h experimental time),
where the bright, unreacted areas were most pronounced. Chlorine levels remained rela-
tively consistent across all samples.
Surface interactions appear to increase and cover a larger portion of the particle surface
with increasing experimental time. The reaction is observed to initiate as localized patches
on the particle, which gradually spread and become more uniform. However, it must be
noted that only one region of each sample was investigated, such that results presented
here are only regarded as indicators to what trends might be expected.
5.1.2
Interactions of KCl and aged bed material
The next area of investigation focuses on the interactions between KCl and aged bed
material obtained from Asnæs Power Station. Three different bed ages were tested; 5
day old, 81 day old, and 161 day old materials, based on their duration of operational
use since the last complete bed change. Figure 5.13 presents the K/Si ratios of the bed
material before and after the experiments, based on ICP-OES analysis. The increase
in K/Si ratio after the experiment, relative to the unused aged bed material, provides an
indication of the material’s reactivity with KCl as a function of age. An increasing K/Si
ratio is observed from the 5 day old to the 81 day old bed material, but a decrease is
seen between the 81 day and 161 day old samples. It is important to note that the inlet
concentration of KCl in experiment 5 was 75 ppm, compared to 299 ppm in experiment
6. This leads to the conclusion that the reactivity of the 5 day old bed material was more
compared to the 81 day old bed material, since lower feeding rate resulted in similar
increase of the K/Si ratio. Thus is it observed that reactivity of the bed material decreases
with increasing bed age.
Additionally is the K/Si ratio from unused bed material observed to increase near-linearly
with increasing bed age, suggesting that while in operation increasing portion of the bed
particle had reacted with potassium. Since the 161-day-old bed material showed the
least reactivity with KCl, it is concluded that the bed material tends towards saturation
with potassium over time during operation.
76
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:87==
Figure 5.13: Measured K/Si ratio of aged bed material, both unused and after an experi-
ment. Results are obtained from ICP-OES analysis.
Figure 5.14 shows the K/Si ratios obtained from SEM/EDS analysis. The increase in the
K/Si ratio after the experiment, relative to the unused bed material, was observed to de-
crease with increasing bed age. For the 161 day old bed material, the change in K/Si ratio
was negligible, with values before and after the experiment overlapping. These results
suggest that the bed material becomes increasingly saturated with potassium over its op-
erational life, and the surface is less available for interactions with KCl. It is suggested
that the 161 day old bed material had reached surface potassium saturation. Addition-
ally, lower K/Si ratios measured by SEM/EDS compared to ICP-OES further suggest an
inward progression of potassium into the particle structure.
Figure 5.14: Measured K/Si ratio of aged bed material, both unused and after an exper-
iment. For the 161-day-old sample, the measured K/Si ratios of the unused and post-
experiment bed materials overlap. Results are obtained from SEM/EDS analysis.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
77
==PAGE:88==
The concentration of possible condensed KCl species is evaluated by comparing the con-
centration of K and Cl on the basis of mole per gram of sample. Figure 5.15 shows the
concentration of K and Cl in samples of aged bed material after experiments. In all cases
is the concentration of potassium observed higher than the concentration of chlorine, sug-
gesting that potassium is present in the form of potassium silicate.
Figure 5.15: Concentration of K and Cl in samples of aged bed material after experiments.
Results are obtained by SEM/EDS anlaysis.
Lower K/Si ratios are observed from SEM/EDS analysis compared to ICP-OES, consis-
tent with the findings from the time-dependent interaction study discussed in Section 5.1.1.
While the K/Si ratio of unused aged bed material shows a linear increase in the ICP-OES
results, this trend flattens in the SEM/EDS data. These different trends are again at-
tributed to potassium penetrating towards the center of the bed particle, and the increase
in concentration is captures by ICP-OES when the bulk composition of the entire parti-
cle is analyzed. The declining trend in SEM/EDS suggests that the surface becomes
increasingly saturated with potassium as operational age increases, leading to a smaller
observed change in surface K/Si ratio between bed material after experiments and unused
aged bed material.
However, both analyses suggest that reactivity of bed material with KCl decreases with
increasing operational age. As the bed material becomes progressively saturated with
potassium during use, less unreacted surface or internal structure remains available for
further interaction with KCl.
5.1.3
Interactions of KCl and NaCl with silica bed material
The final investigation point concerns the interactions between a solution of KCl and NaCl
with the bed material, compared to interactions when only a KCl solution is used.
Table 5.5 presents the measured K/Si and Na/Si ratios, along with the combined (K+Na)/Si
ratio, for samples from experiments 8 and 8.r, which used a mixture of KCl and NaCl, and
experiments 1 and 2, which only used KCl. Both weight percent and mole percent ratios
are reported, based on ICP-OES analysis. For experiments 1 and 2, Na/Si values are
78
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:89==
included despite the absence of sodium addition, as a small amount of sodium is present
in the raw bed material, as previously detailed in Table 3.1.
Lower K/Si ratios are observed in samples from experiments 8 and 8.r compared to in
experiments 1 and 2. However, this is expected, as the solution used in experiments 1
and 2 contained 1 wt.% KCl, while the solution in experiments 8 and 8.r had a 50/50 molar
mixture of KCl and NaCl, totaling 1 wt.%. Higher Na/Si ratios are seen in experiments 8
and 8.r, compared to samples from experiments 1 and 2, such that reaction between
NaCl and the bed material occurs. A higher reactivity of KCl with the bed material is
suggested when it is part of a mixed solution. This is observed by comparing molar K/Si
ratios from experiments 8 and 8.r, with ratios from experiments 1 and 2, where the inlet
concentration of KCl was roughly twice that used in experiments 8 and 8.r. The highest
reactivity is observed in experiment 8, as indicated by the highest combined (K+Na)/Si
molar ratio. Additionally, the K/Si and Na/Si ratios are nearly identical, suggesting that
KCl and NaCl exhibit similar reactivity with the bed material. However, the (K+Na)/Si ratio
measured in experiment 8.r was the lowest among all experiments. Both K/Si and Na/Si
ratios are lower compared to experiment 8, with the Na/Si molar ratio decreasing by half.
Thus, no clear trend is observed in the reactivity of the bed material when comparing the
use of a mixed KCl/NaCl solution to a solution containing only KCl.
Table 5.5: Measured K/Si, Na/Si and (K+Na)/Si ratios of samples from experiemnts 1, 2,
8, and 8.r. Results are obtained from ICP-OES analysis.
Experiment no.
1
2
8
8.r
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
mole %
K/Si
0.257
0.185
0.251
0.181
0.170
0.122
0.135
0.097
Na/Si
0.006
0.007
0.005
0.006
0.101
0.123
0.053
0.065
(K+Na)/Si
0.263
0.192
0.256
0.187
0.271
0.245
0.188
0.162
Table 5.6 presents the K/Si and Na/Si ratios, along with the combined (K+Na)/Si ratio, for
the same set of experiments discussed above, based on SEM/EDS analysis. Again are
both weight percent and molar percent ratios presented. As with the ICP-OES results,
lower K/Si ratios are observed in samples from experiments 8 and 8.r compared to those
from experiments 1 and 2. This is consistent with the lower amount of KCl added in exper-
iments 8 and 8.r. The Na/Si ratios of experiments 8 and 8.r are higher than measured in
experiments 1 and 2, again suggesting interactions between sodium and the bed material.
Interestingly, are the molar ratios of Na/Si in experiments 8 and 8.r, higher than the K/Si
ratio, suggesting a higher reactivity of sodium than potassium. The highest (K+Na)/Si mo-
lar ratio is again observed in experiment 8, and thereafter in experiment 1. Experiments 2
and 8.r show similar (K+Na)/Si molar ratios. Again is no concrete trend observed regard-
ing increased reactivity with the bed material when a mixed solution of KCl and NaCl has
been used, versus when only a solution of KCl has been used.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
79
==PAGE:90==
Table 5.6: Measured K/Si, Na/Si and (K+Na)/Si ratios of samples from experiemnts 1, 2,
8, and 8.r. Results are obtained from SEM/EDS analysis.
Experiment no.
1
2
8
8.r
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
mole %
K/Si
0.234
0.168
0.196
0.141
0.076
0.054
0.095
0.068
Na/Si
0.014
0.017
0.026
0.032
0.142
0.174
0.084
0.103
(K+Na)/Si
0.248
0.185
0.223
0.173
0.218
0.228
0.179
0.171
To better assess the extent of interactions between KCl and NaCl with the bed material,
the full concentrations of the measured samples are presented in Table 5.7, alongside the
composition of the raw bed material. Concentration is given relative to the elements which
are listed. The reactivity with the bed material can be estimated by the decrease in silicon
concentration in the samples compared to the raw bed material. The greatest decrease
in silicon concentration is observed in experiment 8, while the smallest decrease is seen
in experiment 8.r. Again is no concrete indication of the effect on reactivity when a mixed
solution of KCl and NaCl is used.
Table 5.7: Total composition of samples from experiments 1, 2, 8, and 8.r, as well as raw
bed material analyzed by ICP-OES.
Experiment no.
1.
2.
8.
8.r
Raw bed material
Mg [wt. %]
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
K [wt. %]
18.8
18.6
12.1
10.5
7.8
Ca [wt. %]
0.2
0.2
0.5
0.3
0.3
Fe [wt. %]
0.9
1.0
1.6
1.3
1.3
Al [wt. %]
6.2
5.5
7.4
5.4
8.1
P [wt. %]
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Si [wt. %]
73.2
74.1
71.0
78.2
81.3
Na [wt. %]
0.4
0.4
7.1
4.2
1.0
In summary, the sample from experiment 8.r shows increased reactivity with the bed ma-
terial compared to those from experiments 1 and 2, based on ICP-OES analysis, while ex-
periment 8 shows decreased reactivity. SEM/EDS analysis predicts the highest reactivity
in experiment 8, with comparable levels observed in experiments 1, 2, and 8.r. Therefore,
an increasing trend in reactivity with the bed material is suggested when using a mixed
solution of KCl and NaCl, compared to using KCl alone.
The concentration of possible condensed alkali species was evaluated by comparing con-
centration of K, Na and Cl on the basis of moles per gram of sample. Results are pre-
sented in Figure 5.16. In all cases is the concentration of chlorine less than the concen-
tration of potassium and sodium, suggesting that the two are present as silicates.
80
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:91==
Figure 5.16: Concentration of potassium, sodium and chlorine in samples from experi-
ments 1, 2, 8, and 8.r. Results are obtained from SEM/EDS analysis.
All analyses indicated the formation of both potassium and sodium silicates when a mixed
solution of KCl and NaCl was used. ICP-OES results showed varying reactivity with the
bed material, both higher and lower, when the combined salt solution was used, compared
to using KCl alone. SEM/EDS analysis revealed higher or comparable reactivity with the
mixed solution. Taken together, these findings suggest an overall increasing trend in
reactivity when a mixed solution is used. Additionally, KCl appeared more capable of
penetrating the bed sample. In contrast, NaCl was observed to be more reactive at the
surface of the bed particles compared to KCl.
SEM analysis of surfaces
In Figure 5.17 is the spot analysis of a sample from experiment 8.r presented. In exper-
iment 8.r, a mixed solution of KCl and NaCl was used over a 2 h experimental duration.
In total were 9 points analyzed and their concentration is presented in Table 5.8. Points
1-3 are located on the interface of what was speculated to be two particles fused together.
Points exhibiting higher potassium relative to sodium (for example Point 7), lower potas-
sium relative to sodium (for example Point 6), as well as more balanced concentration (for
example Point 2), are all observed. Point 9 reveals a relatively high chlorine concentra-
tion, suggesting the presence of condensed alkali species. At other points, chlorine levels
are lower, while potassium and sodium concentrations are higher, indicating a reaction
with silicon to form silicates. Brighter surface areas are again measured to correspond to
unreacted bed material, whereas darker regions contain elevated potassium and sodium
concentrations.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
81
==PAGE:92==
Figure 5.17: Spot analysis from 8.r. Image has been magnified 1000x.
Table 5.8: Measured concentration of points in spot analysis from experiment 8.r.
Element
Pt. 1
Pt. 2
Pt. 3
Pt. 4
Pt. 5
Pt. 6
Pt. 7
Pt. 8
Pt. 9
K [wt. %]
4.6
1.2
1.3
1.4
2.7
9.0
0.6
Na [wt. %]
4.0
1.2
1.8
3.2
5.3
3.6
3.0
Cl [wt. %]
0.5
0.3
2.1
Si [wt. %]
26.9
50.3
42.2
36.7
36.7
34.4
30.9
35.3
53.4
Fe [wt. %]
7.2
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.4
1.3
0.4
0.3
Figure 5.18, Figure 5.19, and Figure 5.20 present EDS maps showing the distribution
of potassium, sodium, and silicon, respectively. There is notable overlap between the
potassium and sodium concentrations, which coincide with regions where silicon concen-
tration is measured less dense. This suggests that potassium and sodium react in the
same areas. A strip of high potassium and sodium concentration is visible in Figure 5.18
and Figure 5.19, which was speculated to represent the interface between two fused bed
particles.
82
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:93==
Figure 5.18: EDS map of potassium from experiment 8.r. Image has been magnified
1000x.
Figure 5.19: EDS map of sodium from experiment 8.r. Image has been magnified 1000x.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
83
==PAGE:94==
Figure 5.20: EDS map of silicon from experiment 8.r. Image has been magnified 1000x.
The distributions of sodium and potassium are observed to overlap, with no clear regions
of distinctly higher concentration for either alkali metal, despite individual point analyses
showing varying potassium and sodium concentrations. Therefore is it suggested that
potassium and sodium may react in the same regions, with higher localized concentra-
tions of each specie. The low or negligible chlorine concentrations further supports the
formation of potassium and sodium silicates. It is important to note that only one region of
the sample was analyzed, so these findings primarily indicate potential trends rather than
definitive conclusions.
5.1.4
Characterization of layer formation around bed particles
Samples from experiments 1.r, 3.r, and 8.r were analyzed using cross-sectional SEM
with an AQM tool to investigate potential layer formation around the bed particles and
determine their composition. In experiments 1.r and 3.r was a solution of KCl used for
experimental durations of 2 h and 4 h, respectively. In experiment 8.r was a mixed solution
of KCl and NaCl used for 2 h. First, the composition of the formed layers are discussed,
followed by a description of the trends in layer formation observed in the cross-sectional
images of the particles.
Composition of identified mineral phases
The identified mineral phases with an area greater than 1% of the analyzed surface are
presented in Table 5.9, which includes both the weight percentage and area percentage
of each phase. The average composition of each element in the identified mineral phases
are summarized in Appendix A.4. In Figure 5.21 is the composition of the identified mineral
phases showed schematically, based on the weight percentages.
84
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:95==
Table 5.9: Composition (wt.% and area %) of identified mineral phases in bed samples.
Phases of greater than 1% area are included.
Experiment no.
1.r
3.r
8.r
Unit
[Wt.%]
[Area%]
[Wt.%]
[Area%]
[Wt.%]
[Area%]
SiO2
78.9
77.2
76.2
74.7
78.4
77.7
KSiAlOx
8.5
8.3
9.5
9.4
9.7
9.7
KSiOx
2.9
2.8
6.7
6.6
NaAlSiOx
1.8
1.7
Six
1.5
1.5
1.2
1.2
1.4
1.4
(KNa)SiOx
6.3
6.2
Total K- and Na-silicates
13.1
12.8
16.3
15.9
16.0
15.9
Figure 5.21: Composition of measured mineral phases around a bed particle from exper-
iments 1.r, 3.r, and 8.r.
Unreacted SiO2 remains the dominant mineral phase in all samples, followed by KSiAlOx.
However, feldspar particles are identified in the bulk composition, as is further shown in
Appendix A.4, which will contribute to the overall measured composition. Composition
of feldspar can be described as KSiAlOx-NaSiAlOx-CaSiAlOx, such that the NaAlSiOx
measured in sample 1.r can also be attributed to a feldspar particle. Nevertheless, as
is seen in Figure 5.22, is formation of KSiAlOx observed in the silicate layer, such that
the formation of possible K-Al-silicate and Na-Al-silicate cannot be disregarded. It is also
important to note that feldspar particles, and other non-silica particles, were observed to
have layer formation around them, mostly identified as KSiOx, which will further contribute
to the overall results.
The third most abundant phase in samples 1.r and 3.r is KSiOx, which is considered to
represents the main K-silicate formed, based on both weight and area percentages. In
samples 8.r, where a mixed solution of KCl and NaCl has been used, is the third most
abundant mineral phase (KNa)SiOx. As previously discussed, samples 1.r and 3.r were
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
85
==PAGE:96==
contaminated with NaCl, such that sodium contamination can be expected in those sam-
ples.
Alkali-to-silicon ratios for each sample were calculated based on the average composi-
tion of the identified phases, as summarized in Appendix A.4. The compositions were
determined relative to the concentrations of Si, K, Al, Na, Ca, Fe, P, and Mg, or the same
elements as were considered in previous ICP-OES and SEM/EDS analyses. The result-
ing alkali-to-silicon ratios, expressed both by mole percentage and weight percentage,
are presented in Table 5.10.
Table 5.10: Alkali to silicon ratio in samples given both by molar percentages and weight
percentages.
Experiment no.
1.r
3.r
8.r
mole %
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
K/Si
0.030
0.042
0.043
0.060
0.034
0.048
Na/Si
0.005
0.004
0.002
0.002
0.012
0.010
(K+Na)/Si
0.035
0.046
0.045
0.062
0.046
0.057
The time dependence of silicate layer formation can be evaluated by comparing samples
from experiments 1.r and 3.r, which ran for 2 h and 4 h, respectively. Sample 3.r shows
greater silicate formation, as indicated by higher area and weight percentages in Table 5.9,
as well as elevated K/Si ratio in Table 5.10. Based on molar ratios K/Si and Na/Si in
experiment 8.r, is higher reactivity of KCl suggested, compared to NaCl.
To assess the effect of using a mixed salt solution, results from experiments 1.r and 8.r
are compared. As shown in Table 5.9, sample 8.r exhibits a greater extent of silicate
formation. This is further supported by the higher molar (K+Na)/Si ratios in Table 5.10,
indicating increased reactivity when both salts are present. It’s worth noting that the inlet
KCl concentration in experiment 1.r was 91 ppm, whereas experiment 8.r had 114 ppm
of both KCl and NaCl. However, experiment 8.r shows similar (K+Na)/Si molar ratio com-
pared to experiment 3.r, despite having half the experimental duration. This further sup-
ports increased reactivity of a mixed solution, compared to only a solution of KCl. When
comparing the K/Si and Na/Si molar ratios in sample 8.r, potassium appears to be more
reactive than sodium. Overall, the results indicate increased reactivity with the bed ma-
terial when a mixed solution of KCl and NaCl is used, compared to a solution containing
only KCl. Additionally, KCl appears to be more reactive with the bed material than NaCl.
To estimate the effects of feldspar and other identified non-silica particles, the alkali-to-
silicon ratios were calculated again, but only including the mineral phase SiO2, KSiOx, Six,
and (KNa)SiOx. The ratios are presented in Table 5.11.
Table 5.11: Alkali to silicon ratios of samples given both by molar percentages and weight
percentages, based on the phases SiO2, KSiOx, Six, and (KNa)SiOx.
Experiment no.
1.r
3.r
8.r
mole %
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
mole %
wt. %
K/Si
0.011
0.015
0.022
0.031
0.013
0.018
Na/Si
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.012
0.010
(K+Na)/Si
0.012
0.016
0.025
0.033
0.025
0.028
86
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:97==
In general, lower K/Si and consequently lower (K+Na)/Si ratios are observed in Table 5.11
compared to those in Table 5.10, where all mineral phases were included. It is evident
that the values presented in Table 5.10 overestimate the K/Si ratio. By comparing the K/Si
ratios, the overestimation is expected to range from 48.2 % to 63.4 %. Only in sample 1.r
is a lower Na/Si ratio calculated, as NaSiAlOx was detected exclusively in that sample.
Despite this, the same trends are observed in Table 5.11 as in Table 5.10. The K/Si molar
ratio in sample 3.r is found to be twice that of sample 1.r, indicating increased reactivity
with increasing experimental duration. Similarly, the (K+Na)/Si ratio in experiment 8.r is
more than double that of experiment 1.r and is predicted to be the same as in experi-
ment 3.r, suggesting a higher reactivity of the mixed KCl and NaCl solution. Therefore
an overestimation of K/Si and Na/Si can be expected due to feldspar and other non-silica
particles, but observed trends remain unaffected.
In summary, the most abundant silicate in samples 1.r and 3.r was KSiOx, and the main
silicate in experiment 8.r was (KNa)SiOx. The extent of silicate formation was observed to
increase with increasing experimental time, as was evident by comparing samples from
experiments 1.r and 3.r. Greater silicate formation was also observed when a solution of
both KCl and NaCl was used, compared to when only KCl was present, this was apparent
when comparing sample 8.r with samples 1.r and 3.r.
Layer formation around bed particles
The following section discusses observations from cross-sectional images of layer forma-
tion around the bed particles. The formed layers were found to follow the same trends
across all analyzed samples. Layer formation was generally seen to initiate in patches on
the particle surface, which then potentially grew or merged together to cover a larger sur-
face area of the particle. The growth of the silicate layers progressed inwards toward the
core of the particle. Potassium and sodium were found to have penetrated surface cracks
and formed silicates within them. Additionally, edges of SiO2 were observed around sili-
cate phases in all samples.
In Figure 5.22 is an example of layer formation initiating in patches shown on a bed particle
from experiment 1.r. The left image is a BSE (Backscattered Electron) image, highlighting
compositional contrast, and the right image is the corresponding EDS map, where differ-
ent colors represent distinct mineral phases. In the BSE image, the formation of localized
patches is clearly visible, and are identified mainly as KSiOx and KSiAlOx on the EDS
map.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
87
==PAGE:98==
Figure 5.22: Cross-sectional image of sand particle from experiment 1.r. Formed silicate
phases are observed to form in patches around the sand particle.
Figure 5.23 and Figure 5.24 also show bed particles from experiment 1.r. In Figure 5.23
is penetration of potassium into a crack observed, where KSiOx has been formed.
Figure 5.23: Cross-sectional image of sand particle from experiment 1.r. Formation of
silicate in a crack in the particle is observed.
In Figure 5.24 can a silicate phase consisting primarily of KSiOx and (KNa)SiOx be seen,
which appears to have grown toward the center of the particle. A thin outer edge of SiO2
is also seen around silicate phases in the particle.
88
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:99==
Figure 5.24: Cross-sectional image of sand particle from experiment 1.r. The silicate
phase is observed to grow inwards and a SiO2 edge around silicate phases is observed.
Figure 5.25, Figure 5.26, and Figure 5.27 show bed particles from experiment 3.r. Sili-
cates which are speculated to have penetrated towards the center of the bed particle are
observed in Figure 5.25. It is noted the the border around the bed particle is identified to
consist of SiO2, while the different silicate phases have migrated towards the center.
Figure 5.25: Cross-sectional image of sand particle from experiment 3.r. Silicate phases
are observed to grow inward, with a SiO2 edge surrounding all formed layers.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
89
==PAGE:100==
In Figure 5.26 is significant silicate phase observed in the upper particle, consisting of
KSiOx, KSiAlOx and KSiAlFeOx. Here are the outer edges of the particle mainly the iden-
tified silicate phases. On the lower particle in the Figure can a possible penetration of
potassium into cracks to form silicates be seen.
Figure 5.26: Cross-sectional image of sand particles from experiment 3.r. Significant layer
formation is seen, and penetration of potassium into cracks.
Figure 5.27 shows a patchy formation of silicate phases, where SiO2 outer edge has been
identified around most of the formed layers.
Figure 5.27: Cross-sectional image of sand particle from experiment 3.r. Formed layers
are observed to form in patches around the sand particle with an outer edge of SiO2.
90
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:101==
Figure 5.28, Figure 5.29, and Figure 5.30 show bed particles from experiment 8.r. An ex-
ample of penetration of sodium and potassium into a crack of the bed particle is observed
in Figure 5.28. A distinct line lies through the particle, interpreted as a crack into which
KCl and NaCl have penetrated, leading to the formation of silicates primarily identified as
(KNa)SiOx.
Figure 5.28: Cross-sectional image of sand particle from experiment 8.r. Formed layers
are observed to form in patches around the sand particle, and possibly penetrate into
cracks in the sand particle.
In Figure 5.29 is significant silicate formation seen, primarily consisting of (KNa)SiOx, but
KSiOx, KSiAlOx, KSiAlFeOx, and NaSiOx are also observed. A thin outer edge of SiO2 is
seen to form around the silicate phases.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
91
==PAGE:102==
Figure 5.29: Cross-sectional image of sand particle from experiment 8.r. Formed silicates
have penetrated towards the center of the particle, while the outer boarder are identified
as SiO2.
Figure 5.30 shows the formation of silicates which have grown inwards toward the core of
the bed particle. The edge of the upper patch is the silicate layer itself, but on the lower
patch are both the silicate phase and SiO2 identified.
Figure 5.30: Cross-sectional image of sand particle from experiment 8.r. Formed layers
are observed to form in patches around the sand particle and grow inwards.
The composition of the (KNa)SiOx phase was further examined by calculating the mo-
92
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:103==
lar Na/K ratio based on the average composition of the layer reported for each sample.
These ratios are presented in Table 5.12 for all samples. Only minor amounts (≤1 %
area) of this K-Na-silicate phase were identified in samples 1.r and 3.r, they are included
for comparison with sample 8.r.
Table 5.12: Na/K molar ratio in (KNa)SiOx phase in samples from experiments 1.r, 3.r,
and 8.r.
Experiment no.
Na/K molar ratio
1.r
0.543
3.r
0.456
8.r
1.278
A higher sodium content than potassium was observed in the (KNa)SiOx phase in ex-
periment 8.r. In this sample, the dominant Na-silicate identified was NaSiOx, with a con-
centration of 0.06 wt.%, while KSiOx was present at a higher concentration of 0.43 wt.%.
This suggests that sodium may have a greater preference to react alongside potassium,
rather than the other way around, which could explain the higher sodium content in the
K-Na-silicate phase.
As has been shown were same trends in layer formation observed across all the samples.
Silicate phases were observed to form in patches and then cover a greater surface area,
as was evident from comparing samples 1.r and 3.r. Whether this progression occurs
through continuous surface reactions in localized patches which then merge, or a lateral
growth of the initial patch has not been determined. The formed silicate layers appeared
to progress inwards, and potassium and sodium were observed to have form silicates in
cracks, such that possible penetration is speculated. A a thin outer edge of SiO2 around
silicate phases was observed in all samples, but few different reasons for this observation
are hypothesized. Firstly, it is considered that the formed silicates may have penetrated
the surface and extended beneath it. Potassium and sodium could have entered through
cracks or pores in the bed particle surface that were not captured in the 2D cross-sectional
images. Secondly, sample preparation is considered a possible reason, but as this is
observed consistently in all samples this is not though to be likely. Lastly, this thin outer
edge of SiO2 might have formed as an outer coating layer.
5.2
Results of simulations
Results of thermodynamic equilibrium calculations with FactSage 8.3 are presented in
Section 5.2.1, and results from chemical kinetic simulations with Chemkin are presented
in Section 5.2.2.
5.2.1
Results of thermodynamical equilibrium calculations with FactSage
Results from simulations conducted using FactSage 8.3 are presented in this section.
A brief overview of the main simulation parameters is provided in Table 5.13, while a
detailed description of the simulations can be found in Section 4.2. Simulations F1–F3
were performed under atmospheric conditions designed to replicate experimental condi-
tions (EAC), whereas simulations F4–F6 were performed using atmospheric conditions
expected in a fluidized bed reactor (FAC).
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
93
==PAGE:104==
Table 5.13: Brief summary of simulations using FactSage 8.3, detailed description is given
in Section 4.2.
Simulation no.
Salt
Atmopsheric conditions
F1
201 ppm of KCl
5 % O2 in N2
F2
201 ppm of NaCl
5 % O2 in N2
F3
100.5 ppm KCl + 100.5 ppm NaCl
5 % O2 in N2
F4
201 ppm of KCl
Fluidized bed conditions (Table 4.2)
F5
201 ppm of NaCl
Fluidized bed conditions (Table 4.2)
F6
100.5 ppm of KCl + 100.5 ppm of NaCl
Fluidized bed conditions (Table 4.2)
For all simulations, are the molar percentages of K2O, Na2O, and slag-SiO2 presented
relative to the total solid phase, which also includes unreacted SiO2. Additionally, the
composition of the slag phase is reported in terms of the weight percentages of potassium,
sodium, and silicon, along with the corresponding alkali-to-silicon ratios. Finally, the molar
percentages of the major gaseous potassium and sodium species are also summarized.
Table 5.14 summarizes the molar percentage of K2O, Na2O, and slag-SiO2 of the solid
phase, for all simulations.
Table 5.14: Molar percentages of K2O, Na2O, and slag-SiO2 in the solid phase. Input
alkali to silica ratio in all experiments was 0.112.
Simulation
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
K2O [mole % of solid phase]
2.3
1.5
2.6
1.6
Na2O [mole % of solid phase]
3.6
2.0
3.8
2.0
Slag-SiO2 [mole % of solid phase]
10.8
11.0
14.3
11.7
11.6
15.0
Higher reactivity of NaCl with bed material compared to KCl is suggested, based on higher
molar percentage of Na2O formed in simulations F2 and F5, compared with simulations
F1 and F4. The presence of both KCl and NaCl enhances the reactivity of each, as
seen when comparing the molar percentages of formed slag-SiO2. Greater formation of
slag-SiO2 is seen in simulations F3 and F6, compared to in simulations F1 and F2, and F4
and F5, respectively. Additionally, simulations performed under fluidized bed atmospheric
conditions (FAC) predict slightly higher mole percentages of K2O, Na2O, and slag-SiO2
than those conducted under experimental atmospheric conditions (EAC). Under FAC, a
small portion of the added SO2 is also predicted to react with KCl, NaCl, and SiO2 to form
slag compounds, although these contributions are negligible.
Table 5.15 summarizes the slag phase composition in weight percentages for each sim-
ulation, calculated relative to the total solid phase which includes unreacted SiO2(s). In
addition, the alkali-to-silicon ratios are also reported.
94
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:105==
Table 5.15: Composition of the formed slag phase in weight percentages and alkali-to-
silicon ratios.
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
K [wt.%]
6.3
3.9
6.8
4.2
Na [wt.%]
5.7
3.1
6.0
3.2
Si [wt.%]
10.3
10.8
13.7
11.2
11.3
14.4
K/Si
0.6
0.3
0.6
0.3
Na/Si
0.5
0.2
0.5
0.2
(K+Na)/Si
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.5
0.5
The K/Si ratio is predicted to remain consistent between EAC and FAC, when comparing
simulations F1 and F4. A similar trend is observed for sodium, with the Na/Si ratio re-
maining unchanged between simulations F2 and F5. Higher reactivity of potassium and
sodium in the presence of each other are noted based on increased weight percentages,
but do not result in higher alkali-to-silicon ratio.
Table 5.16 presents the major gaseous potassium species, expressed as molar percent-
ages relative to the total input of KCl. Species with higher molar percentage than 1.0·10−3
of the total molar input of KCl are noted.
Table 5.16: Major gaseous potassium species in simulations F1, F3, F4 and F6, ex-
pressed in terms of molar percentage of the total input of KCl.
F1
F3
F4
F6
KCl(g)
[%]
54.3
45.0
50.8
41.5
(KCl)2(g)
[%]
2.8
1.0
2.5
0.8
KOH(g)
[%]
4.5·10−2
2.5·10−2
5.2·10−2
3.0·10−2
In all simulations was the dominant gaseous potassium species unreacted KCl(g), followed
by (KCl)2(g). Under FAC, do the molar percentages of both KCl(g) and (KCl)2(g) decrease
compared to EAC, which aligns with the higher formation of K2O-slag predicted under
FAC. A similar trend is observed when comparing simulations with only KCl to those also
containing NaCl, a lower molar percentages of gaseous KCl are predicted in F1 and F4
than in F3 and F6, indicating enhanced reactivity of KCl in the presence of NaCl. Potas-
sium hydroxide (KOH) is predicted to be the third most abundant gaseous species, with
a slight increase in concentration under FAC compared to EAC, but lower concentrations
when sodium is also present. In FAC simulations where SO2 was included, a minor con-
version of KCl(g) to K2SO4(g) was predicted. This was the only sulfur-containing potassium
species observed in the gas phase, but was only present in negligible concentrations.
Table 5.17 presents the major gaseous sodium species, expressed as molar percentages
relative to the total input of NaCl. Species with higher molar percentage than 1.0·10−3 of
the total molar input of NaCl are noted.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
95
==PAGE:106==
Table 5.17: Major gaseous sodium species in simulations F2, F3, F5 and F6, expressed
in terms of molar percentage of the total input of NaCl.
F2
F3
F5
F6
NaCl(g)
[%]
32.2
26.8
29.0
23.8
(NaCl)2(g)
[%]
1.6
0.6
1.3
0.4
NaOH(g)
[%]
1.7·10−2
1.5·10−2
2.0·10−2
1.7·10−2
Similar to the potassium-containing species, NaCl(g) and (NaCl)2(g) are predicted to be
the two dominant sodium-containing gaseous species. Under FAC conditions, both molar
percentages are predicted to be lower compared to EAC, suggesting increased reactivity
under FAC conditions. Lower molar percentages of NaCl(g) and
5.2.2
Results of chemical kinetic simulations with Chemkin
Results from simulations conducted using Chemkin are presented in this section. Overview
of the main simulation parameters is shown in Table 5.18, while a detailed description is
provided in Section 4.3. Simulations C1-C3 were performed under experimental atmo-
spheric conditions (EAC), whereas simulations C4–C6 were performed under fluidized
bed atmospheric conditions (FAC).
Table 5.18: Brief summary of simulations using Chemkin, detailed description is given in
Section 4.3.
Simulation
Salt
Atmospheric conditions
C1
201 ppm of KCl
5 % O2 in N2
C2
201 ppm of NaCl
5 % O2 in N2
C3
100.5 ppm of KCl + 100.5 ppm of NaCl
5 % O2 in N2
C4
201 ppm of KCl
Fluidized bed conditions (Table 4.2)
C5
201 ppm of NaCl
Fluidized bed conditions (Table 4.2)
C6
100.5 ppm of KCl + 100.5 ppm of NaCl
Fluidized bed conditions (Table 4.2)
For all simulation is the molar conversion of KCl and NaCl first presented. This is followed
by an examination and comparison of the major gaseous products formed across simula-
tions. Finally, the dominant predicted reaction pathways are identified and summarized.
Figure 5.31 shows the conversion of KCl and NaCl over one second in simulations C1, C2,
and C3. A higher conversion is predicted for NaCl compared to KCl, both when comparing
simulation C1 to C2, and in simulation C3 where both alkali chlorides are present. The
presence of both salts appears to inhibit each other’s conversion, such that the conversion
of KCl is lower in simulation C3 compared to C1, and conversion of NaCl is lower in
simulation C3 compared to C2. In all simulations do the conversions of both KCl and NaCl
reach a constant value nearly instantaneously. The major predicted gaseous products of
potassium and sodium were KOH, (KCl)2, NaOH, and (NaCl)2.
96
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:107==
Figure 5.31: Conversion of KCl and NaCl in simulations C1, C2 and C3. Major formed
species were KOH, (KCl)2, NaOH, and (NaCl)2 in all simulations.
In Figure 5.32 is the conversion of KCl and NaCl in simulations C4, C5 and C6 shown over
the simulation time of one second. The major predicted gaseous products of potassium
and sodium were KOH, (KCl)2, NaOH, and (NaCl)2. NaCl shows a higher conversion than
KCl, both when simulations C4 and C5 are compared, as well as in simulation C6. Lower
conversion of KCl and NaCl is observed in the presence of each other, as is evident when
comparing simulation C6 to C4 and C5.
Figure 5.32: Conversion of KCl and NaCl in simulations C4, C5 and C6.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
97
==PAGE:108==
The effects of atmospheric conditions appear to be minor, when Figure 5.31 and Fig-
ure 5.32 are compared with each other, but slightly higher conversions are observed un-
der FAC compared to EAC. For instance, the conversion of KCl rises from approximately
9.5 % in C1 to around 9.8 % in C4. Similarly, NaCl conversion increases from about 14.9 %
in C2 to 15.1 % in C5. Under FAC, were the major alkali–sulfur gaseous compounds pre-
dicted to form KSO2 and NaSO2, with estimated concentrations of 0.002 % and 0.01 %,
respectively, relative to the total alkali molar input. The formation of K2SO4 and Na2SO4
was predicted to be negligible.
Table 5.19 compares the formation of (KCl)2(g) and KOH(g) in simulations C1, C3, C4
and C6. Formation is expressed as a molar percentage relative to the total input of KCl.
The formation of (KCl)2(g) is predicted to be similar under both EAC and FAC conditions,
indicating minimal influence from atmospheric conditions. However lower formation is
observed for (KCl)2(g) in simulations C3 and C6 when NaCl was also an input, compared
to C1 and C4. A slightly higher formation of KOH is observed under FAC than EAC, again
suggesting limited atmospheric influence. Notably, simulations C3 and C6 show slightly
increased KOH formation, indicating that the presence of NaCl may increase the formation
of KOH.
Table 5.19: Formation of (KCl)2(g) and KOH(g) formed, expressed as molar percentages
of input KCl.
Compound
C1
C3
C4
C6
(KCl)2(g) [mole % of total input]
3.8
2.0
3.8
2.0
KOH(g) [mole % of total input]
1.9
2.43
2.2
2.8
Table 5.20 compares the formation of (NaCl)2(g) and NaOH(g) in simulations C2, C3,
C5 and C6. Formation is reported as a molar percentage of the total NaCl input. Simi-
lar amounts of (NaCl)2(g) are predicted under both EAC and FAC conditions, indicating
that atmospheric conditions only have a minor effects on its formation. The formation
of (NaCl)2(g) decreases in simulations C3 and C6, compared to C2 and C5, but same
trend was observed for the formation of (KCl)2(g). A slightly higher formation of NaOH is
observed under FAC than EAC, while its formation decreases slightly when KCl is also
present, which is opposite to the trend seen for KOH. These results suggest minor effects
of both atmospheric conditions and the presence of KCl on NaOH formation.
Table 5.20: Formation of (NaCl)2(g) and NaOH(g) formed, expressed as molar percentages
of input NaCl.
Compound
C2
C3
C5
C6
(NaCl)2(g) [mole % of total input]
6.9
4.0
6.9
3.9
NaOH(g) [mole % of total input]
1.0
0.8
1.2
0.9
In summary, are atmospheric conditions predicted to have minor effects on the conversion
of KCl and NaCl, and therefore on the formation of KOH, (KCl)2, NaOH, and (NaCl)2. In
simulations C3 and C6, when both alkali salts are present, is the conversion of KCl and
NaCl predicted to be slightly lower, compared to when only KCl or NaCl are simulated.
Table 5.21 summarizes the major reaction pathways of the potassium- and sodium- con-
taining compounds. These pathways are common across all simulations, however, the
98
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:109==
net formation or consumption of specific reactants and products varies between cases,
as reflected in the simulation results discussed above.
Table 5.21: Major reaction pathways for potassium and sodium both under experimental
atmospheric conditions and fluidized bed atmospheric conditions.
Reaction pathways
2KCL −−⇀
↽−−(KCl)2
KOH + HCl −−⇀
↽−−KCl + H2O
2NaCl −−⇀
↽−−(NaCl)2
NaOH + HCl −−⇀
↽−−NaCl + H2O
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
99
==PAGE:110==
100
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:111==
6
Discussions
In this section will results from experiments and simulations be discussed, and summa-
rized with regards to common findings and discrepancies. But first will the performance
of the experimental setup be briefly addressed. The experimental setup was able to pro-
duce consistent and reliable results, but the major draw back was the mist feeding and
monitoring. In Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2 are feeding rate of mist versus measured alkali to
silicon ratios plotted for each experiment, based on results from ICP-OES and SEM/EDS,
respectively. For experiments 8 and 8.r is (K+Na)/Si ratio plotted, and for all other exper-
iments is K/Si ratio plotted. Experiments with same time duration and salt solution were
plotted as the same data series. For experiments with 3 data points, a trendline has been
added and its R2 value is displayed, to indicate the correlation between feeding rate of
mist and the measured alkali to silicon ratio. Additionally have experiment numbers been
added as a data labels for clarity.
Figure 6.1: Feeding rate of experiments versus the measured alkali to silicon ratio based
on ICP-OES results. Experiments with same time duration and salt solution are plotted
as same data series, but experiment number has been added as data label.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
101
==PAGE:112==
Figure 6.2: Feeding rate of experiments versus the measured alkali to silicon ratio based
on SEM/EDS results. Experiments with same time duration and salt solution are plotted
as same data series, but experiment number has been added as data label.
As evident from the Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2, the feeding rate varied significantly between
experiments. Despite this variation, a consistent correlation was observed, with higher
feeding rates generally resulting in higher measured K/Si ratios. This is particularly evident
from R2 values of trendlines, as high correlation is observed in every case. However,
an exception was noted in experiments 8 and 8.r, although experiment 8.r had a higher
feeding rate, it exhibited a lower measured (K+Na)/Si ratio. Inconsistent feeding rate
introduced uncertainties that affected the reliability and clarity of data interpretation.
6.1
Discussion on experimental results
Formation of K-silicates and Na-silicates were observed at bed temperature of 860 °C,
atmospheric conditions of either 2.5 % or 5 % in N2 on a dry basis with a moisture content
ranging between 3.04 %-12.12 %.
The observed formation of K-silicates under these conditions aligns with the findings of
Ma et al. [10], who reported K-silicate formation from the interaction of pure KCl with bed
material, beginning at 700 °C and under a moisture level of 25 %. However, formation
of K-silicates is in contrasts with the findings of Sevonius et al. [6], who observed no
K-silicate formation under similar conditions (750 °C, 800 °C, 850 °C, and 900 °C) and at
a moisture level of 20 %. Instead, KCl was found to melt and cause agglomeration by
gluing bed particles together [6]. From spot analysis of bed material from experiment 3.r
shown in Figure 5.10, were two particles speculated to be fused together, and a strip of
high potassium content was found to lie on their interface. Chlorine was measured in a
concentration of 0.1 wt%, while potassium was measured at a concentration of 13.3 wt%,
and silicon of 31.2 wt.%, suggesting the formation of K-silicate rather than melting of KCl
and gluing the particles together.
The formation of Na-silicates observed in the current work is consistent with the findings
of Sevonius et al. [1], who reported Na-silicate formation from the interaction of pure
NaCl with silica sand under 20 % steam. In their study, silicate formation was detected at
102
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:113==
temperatures of 850 °C and 900 °C.
To interpret the time-dependence of interactions, were conducted experiments grouped
in two inlet concentration ranges of KCl. Both ranges showed an increasing trend of K/Si
ratio over time. However, experiments 4.r, 1.r, and 3.r consistently showed lower K/Si
ratios than their respective counterparts (4.2, 1 and 2, and 3.3). Lower mist feeding rates
in 1.r and 3.r likely explain this difference, but 4.r had a higher feeding rate than 4.2,
indicating feeding rate alone does not fully explain the observed differences. Mist feeding
rates and measured alkali to silicon ratios can be seen in Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2. A
contributing factor may be a slight increase in system overpressure, or around 10 mbar,
in experiments 1.r, 3.r, 4.r, and 8.r, caused by a new lid on the water basin, as detailed
in Appendix B.6. As previously outlined, an increase in overpressure can be expected to
reduce feeding rate of mist.
Increased formation of K-silicates with increasing time was measured by ICP-OES, SEM/EDS,
and by analysis with the AQM tool. These results were as expected. ICP-OES results
showed a near-linear increase in the K/Si ratio over time, while SEM/EDS indicated a
slower increase between 2 h and 4 h compared to the initial period. Lower K/Si ratios
were also measured by SEM/EDS, compared to ICP-OES. This difference was attributed
to inward-growing K-silicates, captured by ICP-OES, while surface reactions appeared
to slow over time. A few reasons behind the different trends in measured K/Si ratios
at the surface of the bed particle, versus its bulk composition will now be discussed. It
was speculated that surface reactions slow down as the surface becomes increasingly
reacted, as suggested by SEM surface images and edge features in cross-sectional anal-
ysis. SEM surface images showed more pronounced unreacted surfaces in a sample
from a 1 h experiment, and increasingly widespread reacted regions in samples from 2 h
and 4 h experiments. Another contributing factor could be particle porosity. Potassium
and sodium were observed to penetrate cracks, suggesting that a weaker structure could
facilitate an easier access to the bed particle. It is also suggested that potassium and
sodium may diffuse into already formed silicate layers, with diffusion through these layers
potentially being favored over direct surface reactions with the bed material. As a result,
surface interactions would decrease over time, while the internal concentration of potas-
sium would continue to rise. Lastly, impurities within the bed particles might also influence
this trend. Elements such as aluminum and iron were detected, and it is possible that they
initially react more readily with KCl and NaCl. As those impurities become consumed, the
surface reactivity decreases. However, in Table 5.10 and Table 5.11 were K/Si ratios
compared, where all identified mineral phases by AQM analysis were included, and then
when only selected phases were considered. This was done to consider the effects of
feldspar and other non-silica particles on the measured K/Si ratios. The calculated K/Si
ratios from these tables are noted in Table 6.1, for experiments 1.r (2 h) and 3.r (4 h). A
more pronounced increase in the K/Si ratio is observed between experiments when only
the phases SiO2, KSiOx, Six, and (KNa)SiOx have been considered, compared to when
all phases (like KSiAlOx) are included. Therefore is it considered unlikely that possible
impurities are more reactive compared to silica.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
103
==PAGE:114==
Table 6.1: K/Si ratio when all mineral phases are considered, verus when only SiO2, KSiOx,
Six, and (KNa)SiOx have been considered.
Phases
All phases
Only SiO2, KSiOx,
Six, and (KNa)SiOx
Experiment no.
K/Si ratio
K/Si ratio
1.r
0.030
0.011
3.r
0.043
0.022
In summary, several possible reasons have been proposed to explain the lower measured
K/Si ratios, and their slower increase, on the surface of bed particles compared to the bulk
K/Si ratio. These factors may also act together to produce the observed trends.
The reactivity of aged bed material with KCl was found to decrease with increasing op-
erational age of the bed material, as shown by both ICP-OES and SEM/EDS analyses.
Additionally, was the aged bed material observed to have accumulated potassium over
its operational age. In particular, the 161-day-old sample was suggested to have reached
saturation at its surface, as no significant increase in the surface K/Si ratio was observed.
As well was only a slight increase in the bulk K/Si ratio measured, indicating that the
internal structure was also nearing saturation. Overall, these findings suggest that the
reactivity of the bed material with KCl decreases with age, while potassium continues to
accumulate until saturation is reached, first at the surface, and eventually within the bulk
composition.
Based on results from ICP-OES and SEM/EDS, increased reactivity with the bed material
was indicated when a mixed solution of KCl and NaCl was used, compared to when only
a KCl solution was used. SEM/EDS indicated similar or higher surface reactions when a
mixed KCl and NaCl solution was used, compared to pure KCl. Notably, higher Na/Si ra-
tios than K/Si were measured, suggesting that NaCl may be more reactive at the surface
than KCl. ICP-OES results were more variable, showing both higher and lower reactivity
in mixed solution experiments. However, when bulk composition was considered, slightly
greater reactivity of KCl than NaCl was observed, and KCl also appeared more reactive
in the mixed solution than when used alone. However, AQM analysis clearly indicated
increased reactivity with bed material when the mixed KCl/NaCl solution was used. The
extent of interactions of a mixed solution were measured to lead to similar formation of
silicates as in a 4 h experiment when only KCl had been used. Additionally, slightly lower
feeding rates were recorded in experiments 8 and 8.r (6.34 mg s−1 and 7.05 mg s−1) com-
pared to experiments 1 and 2 (9.25 mg s−1 and 7.25 mg s−1), which could affect the results
as previously discussed. This further supports increased reactivity of the mixed solution
with the bed material. It is therefore concluded that reactivity is enhanced when using a
KCl/NaCl mixture rather than KCl alone. Moreover, the presence of NaCl may increase
KCl penetration into the particle interior, while NaCl appears more reactive at the surface
compared to KCl.
Layer formation in the analyzed samples followed consistent trends. Silicate layers were
observed to initiate in localized patches, which then grew laterally or merged together,
gradually covering larger surface areas. This trend was evident in both SEM surface
images and cross-sectional SEM/EDS analyses using the AQM tool. Previous studies
have reported the formation of continuous coating layers that cover the entire bed particle
[16, 17]. However, these studies were conducted over longer durations in a fluidized
104
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:115==
bed setting, whereas the experiments conducted here had shorter time durations under a
fixed bed setting. The patchy layer formation observed here may therefore be attributed
to limited reaction time and the reduced surface exposure expected in fixed bed settings.
The formed silicate phases were also observed to progress inwards toward the core of
the bed particles. This trend became evident when comparing samples 1.r (2 h duration)
and 3.r (4 h duration) using the AQM tool, where deeper silicate penetration was noted
in experiment 3.r. Similar trends were supported by ICP-OES and SEM/EDS analyses,
as ICP-OES showed a near-linear increase in potassium concentration over time, while
SEM/EDS indicated a slower rate of surface accumulation. Together, these findings sug-
gest inward growth of the silicate layer, which has also been reported in literature [17].
However, how this inwards progression of the silicate layer occurs is undetermined. One
possibility is that potassium and sodium diffuse through the existing silicate layer, reach-
ing unreacted bed material and forming new silicates. Another possibility considered, is
that potassium and sodium might react with the silicate layer as they diffuse, and unre-
acted silica gradually is reacted into the silicate phase. Since only average compositions
of mineral phases were measured, any gradients in potassium and sodium concentration
within the silicate layer remain unknown. Spot analyses or gradient mapping could give
an indication to which mechanism this inwards progression might occur. If dissolution of
the bed particle in the silicate phase is the dominating mechanism, a higher silica concen-
tration in the silicate phase near the core of the particle would be expected. If diffusion
of potassium and sodium through the silicate layer to react with the bed particle would be
dominating, a more uniform composition of the silicate phase would be expected.
A thin outer edge of SiO2 surrounding the formed silicate phases was consistently ob-
served across all analyzed samples. One possible explanation is the extension of formed
silicates underneath the surface of the bed particle. Potassium and sodium have been
observed to penetrate cracks, and as a 2-D view is analyzed by cross-section, the pres-
ence of possible cracks is not always captured. Further could the silica bed particle be
porous and contain weaker structures, allowing for an easy access underneath the bed
particle surface. The second explanation provided are possible effects of samples prepa-
ration, but as this is observed across all samples it is not though likely. A third explanation
provided is the formation of an outer SiO2 coating layer. Several studies have reported
the formation of 1–3 distinct coating layers around bed particles, often comprising molten
phases within the ternary K2O-SiO2-CaO system. Typically, the innermost layer is rich
in potassium and silicon, when present a middle layer contains elevated silicon, calcium,
and sometimes magnesium, and the outermost layer is dominated by silicon and calcium
along with minor elements representative of the biomass ash composition [5, 16, 17, 18,
19]. Thus, the presence of an outer SiO2 layer is considered a viable explanation. How-
ever, whether the experimental duration in this study was sufficient for such layered struc-
tures to fully develop remains uncertain. Notably, the referenced studies were based on
longer experimental times or samples from full-scale fluidized bed boilers [5, 16, 17, 18,
19].
As a summary, alkali-to-silicon ratios measured by ICP-OES, SEM/EDS, and cross-sectional
SEM/EDS using the AQM analysis tool are compared. Results from samples 1.r, 3.r, and
8.r are presented in Table 6.2, showing weight-based ratios, while the corresponding mo-
lar ratios are provided in Table 6.3. In all cases, concentrations are reported relative to
the measured amounts of Si, K, Al, Na, Mg, P, Ca, and Fe.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
105
==PAGE:116==
Table 6.2: Measured alkali to silicon ratios by weight composition for samples 1.r, 3.r, and
8.r, from ICP-OES, SEM/EDS and cross-section SEM/EDS with AQM tool.
Experiment no.
1.r
3.r
8.r
Analysis method
ICP
SEM
AQM
ICP
SEM
AQM
ICP
SEM
AQM
-OES
/EDS
-OES
/EDS
-OES
/EDS
K/Si
0.119
0.117
0.042
0.233
0.151
0.060
0.135
0.095
0.048
Na/Si
0.011
0.028
0.004
0.019
0.026
0.002
0.053
0.084
0.010
(K+Na)/Si
0.130
0.146
0.046
0.252
0.177
0.062
0.188
0.179
0.057
Table 6.3: Measured molar alkali to silicon ratios for samples 1.r, 3.r, and 8.r, from ICP-
OES, SEM/EDS and cross-section SEM/EDS with AQM tool.
Experiment no.
1.r
3.r
8.r
Analysis method
ICP
SEM
AQM
ICP
SEM
AQM
ICP
SEM
AQM
-OES
/EDS
-OES
/EDS
-OES
/EDS
K/Si
0.085
0.084
0.030
0.167
0.109
0.043
0.097
0.068
0.034
Na/Si
0.013
0.034
0.005
0.023
0.031
0.002
0.065
0.103
0.012
(K+Na)/Si
0.098
0.119
0.035
0.190
0.140
0.045
0.162
0.171
0.046
Generally, lower alkali-to-silicon ratios were obtained using AQM tool compared to ICP-
OES and SEM/EDS. While both ICP-OES and AQM reflect the bulk composition, SEM/EDS
primarily captures surface characteristics. The discrepancy suggests that ICP-OES may
have underestimated the silicon content. Additionally, the presence of feldspar and non-
silica particles, were estimated to increase calculated K/Si ratios by 48.2 % to 63.4 %
based on results obtained from AQM analysis. This overestimation of K/Si ratios is also
expected in results from ICP-OES and SEM/EDS. Nevertheless, the ratios from all meth-
ods follow the same overall trends, supporting the consistency of the results. It is therefore
concluded that the experimental measurements were reliable.
6.2
Discussion on results from simulations
Simulation tools were employed both to interpret experimental findings and to investigate
the effects of fluidized bed boiler atmospheric conditions.
In all FactSage simulations, was a slag phase of K2O, Na2O and slag-SiO2 predicted. A
higher extent of KCl, NaCl, and SiO2 was predicted to be in slag phase under fluidized
bed atmospheric conditions (FAC) compared to the experimental atmospheric conditions
(EAC). However, thermodynamic calculations do not specify the exact reaction pathways
with the bed material. The dominant gas-phase alkali species were unreacted KCl and
NaCl, suggesting a tendency for these salts to remain in the gas phase or to react with
the silica bed material. This aligns with findings by He et al. [8], who reported KCl as
the most stable alkali specie. Minor gaseous species predicted by FactSage included
(KCl)2 and (NaCl)2 (1–2% of KCl and NaCl molar input), along with trace amounts of KOH,
NaOH, and atomic K and Na (<0.1 % of KCl and NaCl molar input). Notably, formation
of KOH and NaOH was higher under FAC than EAC. Chemkin simulations also predicted
slightly higher conversion of KCl and NaCl under FAC, along with increased formation
of KOH, NaOH. KOH is considered a reactive intermediate in biomass combustion and
may contribute to silicate formation [23]. Ma et al. [10] further proposed that KCl reacts
106
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:117==
with H2O to form KOH, which more readily interacts with silica to form potassium silicates.
Therefore could increased reactivity with bed material predicted by FactSage 8.3 under
FAC compared to EAC, be attributed to increased formation of KOH and NaOH, which
may be more reactive toward silica than KCl and NaCl.
However, it is important to note that the Chemkin databases used have not been validated
for the reducing conditions typical of fluidized beds. While both FactSage and Chemkin
predict greater alkali conversion under FAC, the effects were more pronounced in the
FactSage results.
Thermodynamic equilibrium calculations with FactSage indicated that NaCl converts to
the slag phase more readily than KCl under both EAC and FAC conditions. Additionally,
the presence of both alkali species was predicted to enhance the formation of K2O and
Na2O, as well was the formation of slag-SiO2 increased. Higher conversion of NaCl com-
pared to KCl in the gas phase was also predicted under both atmospheric conditions by
simulations with Chemkin. In contrast to FactSage, does Chemkin predict lower conver-
sions for both KCl and NaCl in the presence of each other. This discrepancy is most likely
due to the database used for Chemkin simulations, but the merged mechanism database
for potassium and sodium gaseous interactions has not been validated, nor does it include
any possible interactions between then two alkali species.
6.3
Summary of discussions
As demonstrated, uncertainties in the mist feeding rate complicate interpretation of the
experimental results. However, silicate formation was consistently observed across all
experiments and is further supported by FactSage under the experimental conditions.
Both FactSage 8.3 and Chemkin simulations predicted the presence of gaseous KOH
and NaOH. Additionally, KCl has been reported to react with water vapor to form KOH,
which more readily interacts with silica to form K-silicates [10]. These findings align with
the experimental observations of K-silicate formation, especially considering that the ex-
periments were conducted under moisture contents ranging from 3.04 % to 12.12 %. It
is therefore likely that gaseous KCl and NaCl reacted with water vapor to form KOH and
NaOH, which subsequently reacted with the silica bed material. No interactions between
bed material and KCl and NaCl have been reported under dry atmospheric conditions [6,
10]. However, though direct reactions between KCl/NaCl and silica are not commonly
reported, they cannot be entirely ruled out here.
Increased reactivity of both KCl and NaCl was observed experimentally and is further
supported by FactSage simulations. However, the relative reactivity of the two salts varied
depending on the analytical method. SEM/EDS suggested higher reactivity for NaCl, ICP-
OES indicated similar reactivity between the two, while cross-sectional analysis using the
AQM tool suggested KCl to be more reactive. Simulations by FactSage further suggested
NaCl to be more reactive compared to KCl. One possible explanation is that potassium
may penetrate deeper into the bed particle, whereas sodium remains closer to the surface.
Finally, the alkali-to-silicon ratios predicted for the slag phase by FactSage were compared
to the experimentally measured compositions of formed silicates, as identified using the
AQM tool. Simulation F1 modeled the interaction of 201 ppm KCl with 0.5 g of SiO2 sand
under experimental atmospheric conditions. These results were compared with data from
experiments 1.r and 3.r, where KCl solution was used over durations of 2 h and 4 h, respec-
tively. Only the silicate phases KSiOx and (KNa)SiOx were considered in the calculation
of K/Si ratios from the experiments. The results are presented in Table 6.4. FactSage pre-
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
107
==PAGE:118==
dicts slightly higher K/Si ratios than those observed experimentally, although the values
are of comparable magnitude.
Table 6.4: Predicted K/Si ratio in slag phase by FactSage in simulation F1 compared with
K/Si ratio of silicate phases identified by the AQM tool, in experiments 1.r and 3.r.
Experiment no./Simulation
K/Si ratio
1.r
0.250
3.r
0.276
F1
0.436
Similarly, simulation F3 considered a mixture of 100.5 ppm each of KCl and NaCl with
0.5 g SiO2 sand under experimental atmospheric conditions. This was compared to ex-
periment 8.r, where a mixed KCl/NaCl solution was used for 2 h. Again, only KSiOx and
(KNa)SiOx phases were included in the calculation of alkali/Si ratios of experiments. Re-
sults are shown in Table 6.5. The predicted alkali/Si ratios from FactSage were higher
than experimental values but remained within the same order of magnitude. Additionally,
both predicted and measured values showed lower K/Si ratios compared to Na/Si ratios.
Table 6.5: Predicted Alkali/Si ratio in slag phase by FactSage in simulation F3 compared
with Alkali/Si ratio of silicate phases identified by the AQM tool, in experiment 8.r.
Experiment no./Simulation
K/Si ratio
Na/Si
(K+Na)/Si
8.r
0.168
0.215
0.383
F3
0.205
0.276
0.481
Overall, the comparison indicates reasonable agreement between the predicted and mea-
sured alkali to silicon ratios in silicate phases.
108
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:119==
7
Conclusions
Formation of K-silicates and Na-silicates was consistently observed in all experiments
conducted at a bed temperature of 860 °C, under a dry atmospheric composition of 2.5 %
or 5 % O2 in N2, with a moisture content ranging from 3.04 % to 12.12 %. This was fur-
ther supported by thermodynamic equilibrium calculations using FactSage. It is therefore
concluded that gaseous KCl and NaCl interactions with the silica bed material lead to the
formation of silicates under the aforementioned conditions.
The extent of interaction between KCl and silica sand was found to increase over time.
When considering the total chemical composition of the bed particles, the K/Si ratio exhib-
ited a near-linear increase across the tested durations of 1 h, 2 h, and 4 h. However, the
increase in the K/Si ratio measured on the particle surface appeared to slow over time.
This suggested inwards attack of the formed K-silicate layer.
Decreasing interaction between KCl and aged bed material from Asnæs Power Station
was observed with increasing operational age of the bed material. Three different bed
material samples at different bed ages were tested, or 5 day old, 81 day old and 161 day
old. Results further indicated progressive potassium saturation in the aged bed material
with increasing bed age. Thus it was concluded that reactivity with KCl decreases with
operation, and the bed material tends towards saturation of potassium during operation.
Increased reactivity with the bed material was observed when a mixed solution of KCl
and NaCl was used, compared to using only KCl. These findings were further supported
by thermodynamic simulations performed with FactSage 8.3. Conflicting results were ob-
tained regarding whether KCl or NaCl exhibited greater reactivity toward the bed material.
However, the data suggest that potassium may penetrate more readily into the bed par-
ticles, while sodium tends to remain near the surface. It should also be noted that the
overall extent of interaction between both salts and the bed material were comparable.
Layer formation followed a consistent trend across all analyzed samples.
The major
K-silicate phase formed was observed to be KSiOx, and when NaCl was also included
was the major silicate (KNa)SiAlOx. Silicate formation was observed to initiate in surface
patches, which then covered a greater surface area with time. Inward growth of the sili-
cate layer was also observed, and potassium and sodium were further observed to diffuse
into surface cracks and form silicates internally. A thin outer edge of SiO2 was observed
in all samples, surrounding the formed silicates.
FactSage 8.3 and Chemkin were further used to investigate the impact of fluidized bed
reactor atmospheric conditions on the interactions of KCl and NaCl with bed material.
Simulations with FactSage predicted increased formation of the slag phase K2O, Na2O
and SiO2 under fluidized bed atmospheric conditions. Similar trends were observed in
Chemkin simulations, although the extent of conversion was lower than that predicted
by FactSage. Formation of gaseous KOH and NaOH was predicted by both simulation
tools, with increasing amounts under fluidized bed atmospheric conditions compared to
experimental atmospheric conditions. Notably, KOH has been suggested as a reactive
intermediate formed during biomass combustion. Neither FactSage or Chemkin predicted
any major sulfur-containing species to form, but SO2 was an input under fluidized bed
atmospheric conditions. It was therefore concluded that the presence of SO2 will have
negligible effects on the gaseous alkali chemistry under reducing conditions.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
109
==PAGE:120==
For future work, it is recommended to further investigate the effects of a mixed NaCl and
KCl solution on interactions with the bed material, to confirm or reject the findings of this
thesis. Additionally, studying the interactions of NaCl alone with the bed material and
comparing them to those of KCl would provide valuable insights. Thermodynamic simu-
lations suggest that fluidized bed atmospheric conditions enhance the reactivity of both
salts with the bed material. Therefore, replicating these atmospheric conditions in an ex-
perimental setting would be a valuable continuation of this work. It would also be valuable
to investigate the interactions of KOH with the bed material under the same experimen-
tal conditions. This would provide insight into the differences in reactivity between KCl
and KOH with the bed material. In addition, it would be interesting to explore whether
formed K-silicates can catalyze further silicate formation. Preliminary observations from
quartz-wall interactions indicated higher conversion when a used quartz reactor tube with
existing silicate deposits was employed, compared to a new quartz tube. Investigating
whether a similar catalytic effect occurs on the surface of bed particles could offer deeper
insight into silicate layer formation and development.
110
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[1]
Christoffer Sevonius et al. “Impact of sodium salts on agglomeration in a laboratory
fluidized bed”. eng. In: Fuel 245 (2019), pp. 305–315. ISSN: 00162361, 18737153.
DOI: 10.1016/j.fuel.2019.02.034.
[2]
Zhongyang Luo and Jinsong Zhou. “Thermal Conversion of Biomass”. eng. In: Hand-
book of Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation (2021), pp. 1–57. DOI: 10.1007/
978-1-4614-6431-0_27-3.
[3]
Joris Koornneef, Martin Junginger, and André Faaij. “Development of fluidized bed
combustion-An overview of trends, performance and cost”. eng. In: Progress in En-
ergy and Combustion Science 33.1 (2007), pp. 19–55. ISSN: 1873216x, 03601285.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pecs.2006.07.001.
[4]
Ørsted A/S. Asnæs Power Station generates green power. Online news article. First
green power generated by the turbine at the new wood chip-fired unit 6. Nov. 2019.
URL: https://orsted.com/en/media/news/2019/11/asnaes-power-station-generates-
green-power (visited on 06/07/2025).
[5]
Bernhard Gatternig and Jürgen Karl. “Investigations on the mechanisms of ash-
induced agglomeration in fluidized-bed combustion of biomass”. eng. In: Energy
and Fuels 29.2 (2015), pp. 931–941. ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI: 10.1021/
ef502658b.
[6]
Christoffer Sevonius, Patrik Yrjas, and Mikko Hupa. “Defluidization of a quartz bed
- Laboratory experiments with potassium salts”. eng. In: Fuel 127 (2014), pp. 161–
168. ISSN: 18737153, 00162361. DOI: 10.1016/j.fuel.2013.10.047.
[7]
Bozidar Anicic et al. “Agglomeration mechanism in biomass fluidized bed combus-
tion – Reaction between potassium carbonate and silica sand”. eng. In: Fuel Pro-
cessing Technology 173 (2018), pp. 182–190. ISSN: 18737188, 03783820. DOI:
10.1016/j.fuproc.2017.10.005.
[8]
Zi-Meng He, Jing-Pei Cao, and Xiao-Yan Zhao. “Review of Biomass Agglomeration
for Fluidized-Bed Gasification or Combustion Processes with a Focus on the Effect
of Alkali Salts”. eng. In: Energy and Fuels (2022). ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI:
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.2c01183.
[9]
Joakim M. Johansen et al. “Release of K, Cl, and S during Pyrolysis and Combus-
tionof High-Chlorine Biomass”. In: Energy Fuels 25 (2011), pp. 4961–4971. ISSN:
0887-0624.
[10]
Teng Ma et al. “Biomass ash induced agglomeration in fluidized bed. Part 2: Effect of
potassium salts in different gas composition”. eng. In: Fuel Processing Technology
180 (2018), pp. 130–139. ISSN: 18737188, 03783820. DOI: 10.1016/j.fuproc.2018.
08.004.
[11]
Hartmut Spliethoff. Power generation from solid fuels. eng. Springer, 2010, XXXVII,
672 S. (unknown). ISBN: 1282837745, 3642028551, 364202856x, 3642028578,
9781282837744, 9783642028557, 9783642028564, 9783642028571, 6612837748,
9786612837746.
[12]
Valmet BFB Boiler - Bubbling Fluidized Bed technology. Date accessed: 27/01/2025.
Valmet. 2024.
[13]
J. G. Yates. “Effects of temperature and pressure on gas-solid fluidization”. eng. In:
Chemical Engineering Science 51.2 (1996), pp. 167–205. ISSN: 00092509, 18734405.
DOI: 10.1016/0009-2509(95)00212-X.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
111
==PAGE:122==
[14]
Anker Degn Jensen and Peter Glarborg. Combustion and High Temperature Pro-
cesses Notes for Course 28244. 2016.
[15]
Malte Bartels et al. “Agglomeration in fluidized beds at high temperatures: Mech-
anisms, detection and prevention”. eng. In: Progress in Energy and Combustion
Science 34.5 (2008), pp. 633–666. ISSN: 1873216x, 03601285. DOI: 10.1016/j.
pecs.2008.04.002.
[16]
Marcus Öhman et al. “Bed agglomeration characteristics during fluidized bed com-
bustion of biomass fuels”. eng. In: Energy and Fuels 14.1 (2000), pp. 169–178.
ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI: 10.1021/ef990107b.
[17]
Elisabet Brus, Marcus Öhman, and Anders Nordin. “Mechanisms of bed agglomer-
ation during fluidized-bed combustion of biomass fuels”. eng. In: Energy and Fuels
19.3 (2005), pp. 825–832. ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI: 10.1021/ef0400868.
[18]
Laura H. Nuutinen et al. “Coating layers on bed particles during biomass fuel com-
bustion in fluidized-bed boilers”. eng. In: Energy and Fuels 18.1 (2004), pp. 127–
139. ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI: 10.1021/ef0300850.
[19]
Alejandro Grimm et al. “Bed Agglomeration Characteristics in Fluidized Quartz Bed
Combustion of Phosphorus-Rich Biomass Fuels”. eng. In: Energy and Fuels 25.3
(2011), pp. 937–947. ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI: 10.1021/ef101451e.
[20]
Hanbing He, Dan Boström, and Marcus Öhman. “Time dependence of bed particle
layer formation in fluidized quartz bed combustion of wood-derived fuels”. eng. In:
Energy and Fuels 28.6 (2014), pp. 3841–3848. ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI:
10.1021/ef500386k.
[21]
Ørsted. Personal communication. Sept. 2024.
[22]
Liyan Zhao. “Agglomeration during Fluidized Bed Combustion and Gasification of
Biomass”. eng. 2021.
[23]
Siyu Liu et al. “Experimental exploration of potassium compounds in the vicinity
of a burning biomass pellet: From near-surface to downstream”. In: Proceedings
of the Combustion Institute 40.1 (2024), p. 105583. ISSN: 1540-7489. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2024.105583. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1540748924003912.
[24]
Sandra Ósk Alfreðsdóttir. “Agglomeration During Combustion of Biomass in a Flu-
idized Bed Reactor”. Dec. 2024.
[25]
Shiyuan Li et al. “A model for agglomeration in bio-fuel fired fluidized bed”. eng. In:
Journal of Thermal Science 19.5 (2010), pp. 451–458. ISSN: 1993033x, 10032169.
DOI: 10.1007/s11630-010-0408-7.
[26]
Tao Zhou and Hongzhong Li. “Force balance modelling for agglomerating fluidiza-
tion of cohesive particles”. eng. In: Powder Technology 111.1-2 (2000), pp. 60–65.
ISSN: 1873328x, 00325910. DOI: 10.1016/S0032-5910(00)00241-2.
[27]
Nik Nor Aznizam Nik Norizam et al. “An improved numerical model for early de-
tection of bed agglomeration in fluidized bed combustion”. eng. In: Journal of the
Energy Institute 119 (2025), p. 101987. ISSN: 17460220, 17439671. DOI: 10.1016/
j.joei.2025.101987.
[28]
Arphaphon Chanpirak et al. “An experimental, theoretical, and kinetic modeling
study of gas-phase sulfation of KCl”. eng. In: Fuel 363 (2024), p. 130974. ISSN:
18737153, 00162361. DOI: 10.1016/j.fuel.2024.130974.
[29]
Peter Glarborg and Paul Marshall. “Mechanism and modeling of the formation of
gaseous alkali sulfates”. eng. In: Combustion and Flame 141.1-2 (2005), pp. 22–
39. ISSN: 15562921, 00102180. DOI: 10.1016/j.combustflame.2004.08.014.
[30]
Stephan Kraft et al. “Optimization of a 50 MW bubbling fluidized bed biomass com-
bustion chamber by means of computational particle fluid dynamics”. eng. In: Biomass
112
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:123==
and Bioenergy 89.Sp. Iss. SI (2016), pp. 31–39. ISSN: 18732909, 09619534. DOI:
10.1016/j.biombioe.2016.02.020.
[31]
FACTSAGETeam. Introduction to thermodynamic models and algorithms of Fact-
Sage. [Online]. Available: https://www.crct.polymtl.ca/fact/factsage/Intrsage.pdf.
Accessed: February 12, 2025. 2020.
[32]
Kouichi tsuji. “X-Ray Fluorescence and Emission | X-Ray Fluorescence Theory”.
eng. In: Encyclopedia of Analytical Science (2019), pp. 471–481. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-12-409547-2.14474-9.
[33]
R. Jenkins et al. “Nomenclature, Symbols, Units and Their Usage in Spectrochem-
ical Analysis VIII Nomenclature System for X-Ray Spectroscopy”. eng. In: Powder
Diffraction 6.02 (1991), pp. 95–101. ISSN: 19457413, 08857156. DOI: 10.1017/
S0885715600017085.
[34]
X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) S2 PUMA Series 2. https://www.bruker.com/en/products-
and-solutions/elemental-analyzers/xrf-spectrometers/s2-puma-series2.html. Accessed:
March 13th 2025.
[35]
B. J. Inkson. “Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Mi-
croscopy (TEM) for Materials Characterization”. eng. In: Materials Characterization
Using Nondestructive Evaluation (nde) Methods (2016), pp. 17–43. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-08-100040-3.00002-X.
[36]
Maria L. Fernández-Sánchez. “Atomic Emission Spectrometry | Inductively Coupled
Plasma”. eng. In: Encyclopedia of Analytical Science (2019), pp. 169–176.
[37]
José Luis Todolí. “Atomic mass spectrometry | inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry”. eng. In: Encyclopedia of Analytical Science (2019), pp. 209–217.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-409547-2.14473-7.
[38]
Kristian R.K. Krum et al. “Selective Noncatalytic Reduction of NO<sub>x</sub> Us-
ing Ammonium Sulfate”. eng. In: Energy and Fuels 35.15 (2021), pp. 12392–12402.
ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI: 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.1c01451.
[39]
Arphaphon Chanpirak et al. “An Experimental and Chemical Kinetic Modeling Study
of the Role of Potassium in the Moist Oxidation of CO”. eng. In: Fuel 335 (2023),
p. 127075. ISSN: 18737153, 00162361. DOI: 10.1016/j.fuel.2022.127075.
[40]
Nynke Keulen, Sebastian Næsby Malkki, and Shaun Graham. “Automated quantita-
tive mineralogy applied to metamorphic rocks”. eng. In: Minerals 10.1 (2020), p. 47.
ISSN: 2075163x. DOI: 10.3390/min10010047.
[41]
Thermo Fisher Scientific. Prisma E Scanning Electron Microscope. https://www.
thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/electron- microscopy/products/scanning- electron-
microscopes/prisma-esem.html. Accessed: May 11, 2025. 2025.
[42]
DTU Sustain. ICP-OES analysis specifics. Personal communication. 2025.
[43]
GEUS. Automated Quantitative Mineralogy Method. Personal communication. 2025.
[44]
TSI Incorporated. Model 3076 Constant Output Atomizer Instruction Manual. 2005.
URL: http://www.lisa.u- pec.fr/~formenti/Tools/Manuals/Atomizer- TSI- 3076-
manual.pdf.
[45]
Roberts Waller and Tom Strang. “Physical Chemical Properties of Preservative So-
lutions - I. Ethanol - Water solutions”. In: Collection Forum 12 (1996), pp. 70–85.
DOI: 10.1016/j.fuel.2022.127075.
[46]
Chan Cheng Chen et al. “Autoignition temperature data for methanol, ethanol, propanol,
2-butanol, 1-butanol, and 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol”. eng. In: Journal of Chemical
and Engineering Data 55.11 (2010), pp. 5059–5064. ISSN: 15205134, 00219568.
DOI: 10.1021/je100619p.
[47]
Kristian Røhe Kongsted Krum. “Decomposition of urea, Dekomponering af urea”.
und. 2017.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
113
==PAGE:124==
[48]
Kristian Krum et al. “Kinetic modeling of urea decomposition and byproduct forma-
tion”. eng. In: Chemical Engineering Science 230 (2020), p. 116138. ISSN: 18734405,
00092509. DOI: 10.1016/j.ces.2020.116138.
[49]
A. G. Gaydon and H. G. Wolfhard. Flame Structure and Flame Reaction. Tech. rep.
NASA-TT-F-1231. Originally published by Chapman and Hall Ltd., London. NASA
Technical Translation, 1966. URL: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/19660030051/
downloads/19660030051.pdf.
[50]
Emerson Process Management. Rosemount NGA 2000 MLT Analyzer Module In-
struction Manual. Rosemount Analytical Inc. Apr. 2008. URL: https://www.analyzedetectnetwork.
com/manuals/zgpiAG9oyL.pdf.
[51]
Aresatz Usobiaga, Alberto De Diego, and Juan Manuel Madariaga. “Electrical con-
ductivity of concentrated aqueous mixtures of HCl and KCl in a wide range of com-
positions and temperatures”. eng. In: Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data
45.1 (2000), pp. 23–28. ISSN: 15205134, 00219568. DOI: 10.1021/je990160u.
[52]
FACTSAGETeam. Database Documentation. [Online]. Available: https://factsage.
com/database-documentation/. Accessed: February 12, 2025. Sept. 2023.
[53]
Charlie Ma, Rainer Backman, and Marcus Öhman. “Thermochemical Equilibrium
Study of Slag Formation during Pressurized Entrained-Flow Gasification of Woody
Biomass”. eng. In: Energy and Fuels 29.7 (2015), pp. 4399–4406. ISSN: 15205029,
08870624. DOI: 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b00889.
[54]
Ansys. Ansys Chemkin Getting Started Guide. Accessed: May 7, 2025. Jan. 2025.
[55]
Ansys. Ansys Chemkin Theory Manual. Accessed: May 7, 2025. Jan. 2025.
[56]
Hai Bo Zhao et al. “Effect of Steam and SiO2 on the Release and Transformation
of K2CO3 and KCl during Biomass Thermal Conversion”. eng. In: Energy and Fu-
els 32.9 (2018), pp. 9633–9639. ISSN: 15205029, 08870624. DOI: 10.1021/acs.
energyfuels.8b02269.
[57]
Peter Glarborg. Personal communication. March 17, 2025. 2025.
114
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:125==
A
Supporting information - Results
A.1
Feeding rate of mist
Measured feeding rate of all experiments is presented in the following subsection, first
based on weight increase of water basin, then based on CO2 measurements from gas
analyzer. Average mist feeding rate based on time duration of experiment has been cal-
culated, and average inlet concentration of salts and water were subsequently calculated.
All calculations of mist feeding rate and inlet concentration of KCl and NaCl are explained
in Appendix B.3.
A.1.1
Feeding rate based on weight increase in water basin
In Table A.1 is measured water increase in all experiments noted, as well as calculated
mist feeding rate, inlet concentration of salts, and inlet concentration of H2O.
Table A.1: Feeding rate of mist and inlet concentration of KCl and NaCl based on weight
increase of collected solution in water basin.
Experiment no.
Weight increase
Mist feeding
KCl inlet conc.
NaCl inlet conc.
H2O inlet conc.
[g]
[mg s−1]
[ppm]
[ppm]
[%]
1
9.25
1.29
259.85
10.52
2
7.25
1.01
208.22
8.43
3.3
16.39
1.14
232.94
9.43
4.2
1.70
0.47
102.51
4.15
5
2.47
0.34
75.21
3.05
6
10.85
1.51
299.21
12.12
7
8.35
1.16
237.00
9.60
8
6.34
0.88
102.88
103.38
7.45
1.r
3.01
0.42
90.95
3.68
3.r
14.22
0.99
204.65
8.29
4.r
2.30
0.64
136.16
5.51
8.r
7.05
0.98
113.56
114.12
8.23
Time dependence on estimations of feeding rate was noted, and therefore was average
feeding rate calculated as time dependent. Feeding rate in the two longer time durations,
2 h and 4 h, are comparable to each other, but a time duration of 1 h shows lower values.
This is attributed to condensation of droplet at the reactor outlet, such that a delay of
solution transferring to the water basin is expected, and with longer experimental time
duration, this delay becomes negligible. In Table A.2 is the average feeding rate of mist
and standard deviation noted, based on time duration of experiments.
Table A.2: Average feeding rate of mist based on time duration of experiments.
Time duration [h]
Average mist feeding [mg s−1]
St.dev of mist feeding rate [mg s−1]
1
0.56
0.08
2
0.95
0.38
4
1.06
0.08
Based on the average mist feeding rate, were average salt and water inlet concentration
calculated based on time duration of experiments, and are presented in Table A.3.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
115
==PAGE:126==
Table A.3: Average inlet concentration of salts and H2O based on average mist feeding
rate.
Time duration
KCl inlet conc.
KCl & NaCl inlet conc.
H2O inlet conc. h>h
[ppm]
[ppm]
[%]
1
119
-
4.83
2
201
100.5 & 100.5
7.89
4
205
-
8.29
A.1.2
Feeding rate based on CO2 readings from gas analyzer
In Table A.4 is the average mist feeding rate based on CO2 readings from gas analyzer,
from all experiments presented. Calculated salt and water inlet concentrations are pre-
sented as well.
Table A.4: Feeding rate of mist and inlet concentration of KCl and NaCl based on mea-
surements of CO2 from gas analyzer.
Experiment no.
Average CO2
Mist feeding
KCl inlet conc.
NaCl inlet conc.
H2O inlet conc.
[ppm]
[mg s−1]
[ppm]
[ppm]
[%]
1
411.50
1.47
292.67
11.85
2
404.90
1.45
288.52
11.68
3.3
2613.02
9.33
1137.30
46.06
4.2
459.43
1.64
322.31
13.05
5
547.07
1.95
374.47
15.16
6
2458.90
8.78
1100.11
44.55
7
432.83
1.55
305.96
12.39
8
354.73
1.27
143.38
144.07
10.39
1.r
402.97
1.44
287.31
11.63
3.r
373.11
1.33
268.33
10.87
4.r
386.13
1.38
276.64
11.20
8.r
427.50
1.53
169.18
170.01
12.26
In Table A.5 are the average feeding rate based on time duration of experiments, and
standard deviation is presented. Two experiments showed elevated readings of CO2,
compared to other experiments, or experiments 3.3 and 6. Thus is the average feeding
rate and standard deviation also presented when these experiments have been excluded.
In the case of time duration of 2 h, experiment number 6 has been excluded, and in
the case of time duration of 4 h, experiment 3.3 has been excluded, leaving only one
experiment left for estimation of feeding rate for the 4 h time duration.
116
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:127==
Table A.5: Average feeding rate of mist based on CO2 measurements from gas analyzer.
For time duration of 2 h and 4 h both average of all experiments and excluding experiments
with unusually high readings are noted.
Time duration [hrs.]
Average mist feeding [mg s−1]
St.dev of mist feeding rate [mg s−1]
1
1.51
0.13
2
2.43
2.41
2 (excluding exp. 6)
1.52
0.2
4
5.33
4.00
4 (excluding exp. 3.3)
1.33
0
The average inlet concentration of salts and H2O were calculated based on time duration
of experiments and are presented in Table A.6.
Table A.6: Average inlet concentration of salts and H2O based on average mist feeding
rate based on CO2 measurements from gas analyzer. For time duration of 2 h and 4 h
both average of all experiments and excluding experiments with unusually high readings
are noted.
Time duration
KCl inlet conc.
KCl & NaCl inlet conc.
H2O inlet conc.
[h]
[ppm]
[ppm]
[%]
1
299
12.13
2
409
204.5 & 204.5
16.24
2 (excluding exp. 6.)
311
155.5 & 155.5
12.20
4
703
28.46
4 (excluding exp. 3.3)
268
10.87
A.2
Preliminary results from XRF
Preliminary results of experimental samples obtained with XRF analysis will be presented
here. Preliminary results by XRF analysis will be presented here. Increasing experimen-
tal time, effects of aged bed material, and the effects of using a solution of KCl and NaCl,
will all be investigated. In all cases will the alkali-silica ratio be compared, as well a con-
centration of Cl.
In Figure A.1 and Figure A.2 is time dependence of the ratio K2O/SiO2 and concentration
of Cl investigated, respectively. Measured K2O/SiO2 is seen increase steadily with in-
creasing time. Two trajectories are seen, the lower one corresponding to experiments 1.r,
3.r, and 4.r, and the upper one corresponding to experiments 1., 2., 3.3, and 4.2. Both tra-
jectories show increasing ratio with time, though it is more pronounced in the upper one.
Data labels have been added for clarity. A difference is noted between the two experi-
mental series. Vague decrease in Cl concentration with time is noted. However, samples
were not washed before analysis, such that condensed KCl or other Cl-containing species
might be present.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
117
==PAGE:128==
Figure A.1: Ratio of K2O/SiO2 over time.
Figure A.2: Concentration of Cl over time.
In Figure A.3 and Figure A.4 is the ratio K2O/SiO2 and concentration of Cl shown with
increasing age of bed material. Bed material was obtained from Asnæs Power Station,
and results of that unused bed material is shown as well for comparison. The increase in
K2O/SiO2 ratio between aged bed material used for experiments, and unused bed mate-
rial, is observed to decrease with increasing bed age. This indicates that with increasing
bed age will the bed material become saturated by K2O, or available SiO2 to react with
potassium becomes to little. Thus will the bed material no longer be able to react further
with potassium, and less increase of the K2O/SiO2 ratio is observed. No obvious trend
is observed for the concentration of Cl with increasing bed age, but as stated above was
the sample not washed before such that condensed KCl might be present.
118
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:129==
Figure A.3: Ratio of K2O/SiO2 in differently aged bed material from Asnæs power station.
Unused bed material with same bed age is also shown.
Figure A.4: Concentration of Cl in differently aged bed material from Asnæs power station.
Unused bed material with same bed age is also shown.
In Table A.7 are the K2O/SiO2 ratio, Na2O/SiO2 ratio, and Cl concentration shown. More
K2O is present in the raw bed material compared to Na2O, but for both experiments 8. and
8.r is the ratio of Na2O/SiO2 higher than for K2O/SiO2. This indicates that the preferred
reactant with silica is sodium, when both sodium and potassium are available in the same
concentration.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
119
==PAGE:130==
Table A.7: Ratio of K2O/SiO2 and Na2O/SiO2, concentration of Cl, from experiments 8.
and 8.r.
Experiment
8.
8.r
Raw sand
K2O/SiO2
6.176·10−2
8.738·10−2
2.251·10−2
Na2O/SiO2
3.812·10−2
2.786·10−2
1.095·10−3
Cl
1.893·10−2
0.500
1.752·10−2
A.3
SEM images of surfaces
In this section are typical cluster formations observed in experiments shown. Clusters
from experiments 4.2, 1, and 3.3 are shown, representing typical cluster formation over
experimental durations of 1 h, 2 h, and 4 h. In Figure A.5 is cluster from experiment 4.2
shown.
Figure A.5: Cluster formation observed in a sample in experiment 4.2.
In Figure A.6 is a cluster from experiment 1 shown. It is noted that the bed particles appear
more fused together, compared to what was seen in Figure A.5.
120
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:131==
Figure A.6: Cluster formation observed in a sample in experiment 1.
Figure A.7 shows a cluster formation from experiment 3.3. Here do the bed particle appear
even more fused together, compared to what was observed from experiment 1.
Figure A.7: Cluster formation observed in a sample in experiment 3.3.
Cracks were observed in the sample from experiment 3.3, as shown in Figure A.8. It was
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
121
==PAGE:132==
not determined whether these cracks formed during the experiment. If they did, possible
causes include thermal cracking or interactions with alkali species.
Figure A.8: Crack observed on a particle from experiment 3.3.
A.4
Cross-section SEM/EDS with AQM tool analysis
Supporting information of cross-section analysis with SEM/EDS with the AQM tool is pro-
vided here. In Table A.8 is the average elemental composition of identified mineral phases
in the sample from experiment 1.r summarized. Mineral phases with higher than 1 % area
of analyzed surfaces are included, and values are given in weight percentages.
Table A.8: Average composition of identified mineral phases in sample 1.r. Values are
given in weight percentages.
Element
SiO2
KSiAlOx
KSiOx
NaAlSiOx
Six
(KNa)SiOx
Si [wt.%]
54.07
35.07
43.49
36.46
78.34
41.3
O [wt.%]
45.66
37.34
39.01
41.05
18.79
37.35
K [wt.%]
0.27
15.82
15.16
0.45
2.87
15.45
Al [wt.%]
11.6
1.00
12.61
0.8
Na [wt.%]
0.12
0.89
8.77
4.93
Ca [wt.%]
0.00
0.01
0.59
Cl [wt.%]
0.02
0.04
0.01
0.03
Fe [wt.%]
0.03
0.35
0.05
0.1
S [wt.%]
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.02
P [wt.%]
0.00
Mg [wt.%]
0.02
In Figure A.9 is the image used for bulk analysis of mineral phases in sample from exper-
122
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:133==
iment 1.r provided. The identified mineral phases are show as distinct colors and at the
bottom of the figure are labels provided. As can be seen are majority of particles identified
to contain silicate formation. As well are ilmenite (FeTiOx), feldspar (KSiAlOx), and other
particles identified. It is noted that some of those particles as well have silicate formation
around them.
Figure A.9 shows the image used for analysis of mineral phases in the sample from ex-
periment 1.r. The identified mineral phases are represented in distinct colors, with cor-
responding labels provided at the bottom of the figure. Analysis was done in 1 µm steps
[43]. The majority of the particle are observed to contain some silicate phases. Addition-
ally, ilmenite (FeTiOx), feldspar (KAlSiOx-NaAlSiOx-CaAlSiOx), and other mineral phases
have been identified, and will therefore contribute to the bulk composition. It is also noted
that some of these non-silica particles are surrounded by silicate formations.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
123
==PAGE:134==
Figure A.9: Image used for analysis of bulk composition of the sample from experiment
1.r
124
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:135==
In Table A.8 is the average elemental composition of identified mineral phases in the
sample from experiment 3.r summarized. Mineral phases with higher than 1 % area of
analyzed surfaces are included, and values are given in weight percentages.
Table A.9: Average composition of identified mineral phases in sample 3.r. Values are
given in weight percentages.
Element
SiO2
KSiAlOx
KSiOx
NaAlSiOx
Six
(KNa)SiOx
Si [wt.%]
54.41
35.54
42.61
35.10
77.45
41.59
O [wt.%]
45.22
37.07
38.99
40.92
20.21
36.19
K [wt.%]
0.37
15.88
16.36
0.27
2.34
17.25
Al [wt.%]
11.35
0.53
13.60
0.22
Na [wt.%]
0.09
1.23
8.01
4.63
Ca [wt.%]
0.01
0.00
2.03
Cl [wt.%]
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.02
Fe [wt.%]
0.03
0.21
0.04
0.05
S [wt.%]
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.03
P [wt.%]
0.00
Mg [wt.%]
0.02
0.01
Figure A.10 shows the image used for analysis of mineral phases in the sample from
experiment 3.r. Again is silicate formation observed around majority of particles, and
more mature layers are noted compared to the sample from experiment 1.r. As well are
ilmenite (FeTiOx), feldspar (KSiAlOx), and other particles identified, similar to before.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
125
==PAGE:136==
Figure A.10: Image used for analysis of bulk composition of the sample from experiment
3.r
126
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:137==
In Table A.10 is the average elemental composition of identified mineral phases in the
sample from experiment 8.r summarized. Mineral phases with higher than 1 % area of
analyzed surfaces are included, and values are given in weight percentages.
Table A.10: Average composition of identified mineral phases in sample 8.r. Values are
given in weight percentages.
Element
SiO2
KSiAlOx
KSiOx
NaAlSiOx
Six
(KNa)SiOx
Si [wt.%]
54.93
35.90
40.80
37.18
77.69
43.42
O [wt.%]
44.84
36.17
39.32
40.18
20.31
37.99
K [wt.%]
0.22
16.00
14.27
0.32
2.00
10.15
Al [wt.%]
11.68
3.29
12.68
0.55
Na [wt.%]
0.19
1.34
9.04
7.63
Ca [wt.%]
0.00
0.11
0.53
Cl [wt.%]
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.04
Fe [wt.%]
0.03
0.76
0.04
0.18
S [wt.%]
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.01
P [wt.%]
0.00
Mg [wt.%]
0.05
0.02
Figure A.10 shows the image used for analysis of mineral phases in the sample from
experiment 3.r. Again is silicate formation observed around majority of particles, and
more mature layers are noted compared to the sample from experiment 1.r. As well are
ilmenite (FeTiOx), feldspar (KSiAlOx), and other particles identified, similar to before.
Figure A.11 shows the image used for analysis of mineral phases in the sample from
experiment 8.r. Again is silicate formation observed around majority of particles, and now
are K-Na-silicates observed. As well are ilmenite (FeTiOx), feldspar (KSiAlOx), and other
particles identified, similar to before.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
127
==PAGE:138==
Figure A.11: Image used for analysis of bulk composition of the sample from experiment
3.r
128
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:139==
B
Supporting information - Experimental
B.1
Figures of experimental setup
A Model 3076 Constant Output Atomizer is shown in Figure B.1. The Atomizer was tested
as a way for generation of aerosols, but proved unsuccessful likely due to lower gas flow
to it than it’s specifications recommend [44].
Figure B.1: Model 3076 Constant Output Atomizer [44]
An overview of the experimental system is shown in Figure B.2. The gas control panel,
mist generator, oven, all parts of the reactor, and the gas conditioning system are shown.
Note that the water basin is directly connected to a vent located above the system, but
not to the gas conditioning system like during experiments.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
129
==PAGE:140==
Figure B.2: Overview of experimental setup.
In Figure B.3 is the mist generator shown as well as the container housing it. Cooling
water was connected to the joint on the container’s side during experiments.
Figure B.3: Mist generator and teh container housing it.
In Figure B.4 is the top part of the reactor shown. Generated aerosols were fed to one of
the side inlets, and the other one kept closed. The bottom outlet of the top part connected
to the quartz tube reactor.
130
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:141==
Figure B.4: Top part connecting to the reactor tube.
Three different lids on the water basin were used throughout developmental phase and
experiments. In Figure B.5a is the original design of the lid shown, noted as Lid 1. The
reactor tube was connected to the top inlet, such that the collected solution had a vertical
path to the water basin, therefore minimizing condensed solution not reaching the water
basin. The inlet of the water basin reached below the surface of the DI water, such that gas
flow through the reactor could be monitored via formation of gas bubbles. Unfortunately,
Lid 1 broke, as well as the spare part before experiments begun, and repairs of those
parts were delayed. Thus was the lid shown in Figure B.5b used for experiments number
1 - 8, and connected to the reactor via the same tubes as the lid shown in Figure B.5c
contains. Now could the condensed solution more easily be trapped in the lid on its way
from the reactor tube to the water basin. Therefore was less weight increase expected
in the water basin expected when Lid 2 was used, compared to Lid 1. Since Lid 1 was
never used for experiments, no concrete comparison was possible. However, based on
preliminary tests, less weight increase with Lid 2 is strongly indicated. The inlet to Lid 2
did not reach below the DI water surface. To ensure that this lid had been effective in
water collection, Lid 3 shown in Figure B.5c was used for experiments 1.r, 3.r, 4.r, and 8.r,
which were all repeats of already conducted experiments. Lid 3 had the same drawback
of Lid 2 of not having a vertical inlet to the water basin, allowing for condensation on the
inlet tube. However it has an inlet reaching below the water surface in the water basin
with a porous plate at the bottom. Minimal difference in water collection between Lid 2
and Lid 3 was observed, so water collection with both lids was concluded sufficient.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
131
==PAGE:142==
(a) Lid 1: Original lid de-
sign.
(b) Lid 2: Short lid.
(c) Lid 3: Lid with porous
plate.
Figure B.5: Different lid designs used in experiments.
In Figure B.6 is the gas conditioning system leading to the gas analyzer shown. The
system consists of a cooler and a filter, which ensures that no condensable species reach
the gas analyzer.
Figure B.6: Gas conditioning system leading to gas analyzer.
B.2
Statistical calculations for XRF analysis
Two groups of sand samples were analyzed, and the average concentrations of the five
major compounds were compared in order to determine whether statistically same results
were obtained between the two sample groups. The first group consisted of five sand
samples, each weighed approximately 0.5 g (Table B.1), and the second group contained
five samples of approximately 2.0 g each (Table B.2).
132
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:143==
Table B.1: Results of analysis of samples weighing approximately 0.5 g. Five major com-
pounds are compared.
Sample
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Weight [g]
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.53
0.56
SiO2 [wt.%]
87.50
91.11
89.33
91.00
90.65
Al2O3 [wt.%]
4.08
3.45
3.66
3.33
3.74
TiO2 [wt.%]
4.26
2.09
3.28
2.14
2.01
K2O [wt.%]
2.06
1.99
1.92
2.01
2.14
Fe2O3 [wt.%]
1.18
0.68
0.89
0.71
0.66
Table B.2: Results of analysis of samples weighing approximately 2.0 g. Five major com-
pounds are compared.
Sample
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Weight [g]
2.01
2.02
2.06
2.12
2.12
SiO2 [wt.%]
91.28
90.94
91.70
92.02
90.55
Al2O3 [wt.%]
3.51
3.66
3.41
3.43
3.67
TiO2 [wt.%]
1.47
1.61
1.42
1.08
1.99
K2O [wt.%]
2.41
2.42
2.21
2.23
2.35
Fe2O3 [wt.%]
0.56
0.62
0.49
0.50
0.58
The aim was to determine whether the two groups yielded statistically similar results. A
two-tailed t-test allowing for unequal variances was used to compare the concentration of
each compound between the two groups. Before applying the test, normality of the data
was verified using the Shapiro–Wilk test, which confirmed that all sample distributions
could be assumed normal.
The null hypothesis for the t-test was according to Equation (B.1).
H0 : µ1 −µ2 = 0
(B.1)
where µ is the average of the respective compound from each sample group. The alter-
native hypothesis was according to Equation (B.2).
H1 : µ1 −µ2 ̸= 0
(B.2)
The null hypothesis is refused and the alternative hypothesis is accepted by the con-
straints given in Equation (B.3), with a 95 % confidence level.
µ1 −µ2 ̸= 0 if
{
T > t0.025,ν
T < −t0.025,ν
(B.3)
Where the degree of freedoms, ν, is found from the standard deviation, s, and the popu-
lation size, n, according to Equation (B.4)
ν =
( s2
1
n1 + s2
2
n2
)2
(s2
1/n1)2
n1−1
+ (s2
2/n2)2
n2−1
(B.4)
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
133
==PAGE:144==
and test statistic, T, is found with Equation (B.5).
T =
¯µ1 −¯µ2
√
s2
1
n1 + s2
2
n2
(B.5)
The results of the t-test are summarized in Table B.3.
Table B.3: Results of two-tailed t-test where unequal variance is allowed.
Tested compound
ν
t0.025,ν
T
H0 accepted
SiO2
5
2.57
-2.11
Yes
Al2O3
5
2.57
0.92
Yes
TiO2
5
2.57
2.98
No
K2O
8
2.31
5.84
No
Fe2O3
4
2.78
3.04
No
Thus, the measured averages of SiO2 and Al2O3 are statistically the same for the two
sample populations, but for TiO2, K2O and Fe2O3 they are not.
B.3
Calculation of feeding rate and inlet concentration of KCl
From the gas analyzer, the measured concentration of CO2 in part-per-million by volume,
is obtained. The average concentration is found, and used to estimate the average feed-
ing rate of the mist. Firstly, the volume flow rate of CO2 is found:
˙VCO2[L/s] = AverageCO2[ppm]
106
· ˙Vgas[L/s]
(B.6)
Secondly, the molar flow rate is found, assuming standard conditions as the mass flow me-
ters used assume standard conditions. Volume of gas at standard conditions (T=273,15
K, P = 1 atm) is found by the ideal gas law:
˙nCO2[mol/s] =
˙VCO2[L/s]
Vgas[L/mol]
(B.7)
Full combustion of urea is assumed, and ratio between CO2 and urea is 1:1, such that
˙nCO2 = ˙nurea. Next, the mass flow rate of urea is found:
˙murea[mg/s] = ˙nurea[mol/s] · MWurea[g/mol] · 1000[mg/g]
(B.8)
Lastly, the flow rate of the mist is found with the weight percent of urea in the original
solution:
˙mmist[mg/s] = ˙murea[mg/s]
wt.%urea
(B.9)
Now the average inlet concentration of KCl can be found. The mass flow rate of KCl is
found with the weight percentage of the solution:
˙mKCl[mg/s] = wt.%KCl · ˙mmist[mg/s]
(B.10)
Next, the molar flow rate is found:
˙nKCl[mol/s] =
˙mKCl[mg/s]
1000[ mg/g] ·
1
MWKCl[g/mol]
(B.11)
134
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:145==
The total gas flow rate at standard conditions is found:
˙ngas[mol/s] =
˙Vgas[L/s]
Vgas[L/mol]
(B.12)
Finally, the average inlet concentration of KCl in ppm is found:
KClppm = ˙nKCl[mol/s]
˙ngas[mol/s] · 106
(B.13)
B.4
Development of KCl/HCl relationship
Combinations of KCl and HCl concentration were measured over the range of 0.0 mol L−1-
0.0064 mol L−1, in steps of 0.0012 mol L−1 for each compound. Based on a feed rate of
1 mg s−1 of a 1 wt.% KCl solution, mole balance calculations give a theoretical maximum
combined concentration of KCl and HCl of 0.0064 mol L−1. However, for the purposes
of establishing the conductivity–pH relationship, this range was extended by one to two
additional increments of 0.0012 mol L−1.
To prepare the solutions, 100 g of deionized water was added to each of five containers.
A specified amount of KCl was introduced into each container, followed by incremental
additions of HCl in steps of 0.0012 mol L−1. This resulted in five data series, denoted as L1,
L2, L3, L4, and L5. The initial properties of the DI water are summarized in Table B.4. The
measurement results for each data series are presented in Table B.5 through Table B.9.
Table B.4: Weight, conductivity, temperature, and pH of the five samples of DI water used
for the five data series L1-L5
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
Water (g)
100.28
100.38
100.62
100.16
100.37
Conductivity (µS/cm)
3.00
2.10
3.10
3.00
4.00
Temperature (°C)
23.8
23.8
23.8
23.5
24.0
pH
5.516
5.968
5.654
5.645
5.569
Table B.5: Data line L1: Conductivity and pH measurements for varying HCl concentra-
tions with KCl at 0.0012 mol L−1
Point
KCl (mol L−1)
HCl (mol L−1)
Conductivity (µS/cm)
Temperature (°C)
pH
P1
0.0012
0.0000
143.8
23.9
5.212
P2
0.0012
0.0012
619.0
23.6
2.961
P3
0.0012
0.0025
1117.0
23.9
2.641
P4
0.0012
0.0038
1601.0
23.8
2.465
P5
0.0012
0.0051
2080.0
23.8
2.345
P6
0.0012
0.0064
2580.0
24.0
2.245
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
135
==PAGE:146==
Table B.6: Data line L2: Conductivity and pH measurements for varying HCl concentra-
tions with KCl at 0.0025 mol L−1
Point
KCl (mol L−1)
HCl (mol L−1)
Conductivity (µS/cm)
Temperature (°C)
pH
P1
0.0025
0.0000
304
23.8
5.498
P2
0.0025
0.0012
802
24.0
2.927
P3
0.0025
0.0025
1304
24.0
2.624
P4
0.0025
0.0038
1776
24.1
2.456
P5
0.0025
0.0051
2270
23.9
2.333
P6
0.0025
0.0064
2740
23.9
2.260
Table B.7: Conductivity and pH measurements for varying HCl concentrations with KCl at
0.0038 mol L−1
Point
KCl (mol L−1)
HCl (mol L−1)
Conductivity (µS/cm)
Temperature (°C)
pH
P1
0.0038
0.0000
461
24.0
5.547
P2
0.0038
0.0012
829
23.9
2.986
P3
0.0038
0.0025
1351
24.0
2.669
P4
0.0038
0.0038
1834
24.0
2.484
P5
0.0038
0.0051
2330
24.0
2.353
Table B.8: Conductivity and pH measurements for varying HCl concentrations with KCl at
0.0051 mol L−1.
Point
KCl (mol L−1)
HCl (mol L−1)
Conductivity (µS/cm)
Temperature (°C)
pH
P1
0.0051
0.0000
604
23.8
5.542
P2
0.0051
0.0012
1058
24.0
2.959
P3
0.0051
0.0025
1540
24.0
2.711
P4
0.0051
0.0038
1892
24.0
2.509
Table B.9: Conductivity and pH measurements for varying HCl concentrations with KCl at
0.0064 mol L−1.
Point
KCl (mol L−1)
HCl (mol L−1)
Conductivity (µS/cm)
Temperature (°C)
pH
P1
0.0064
0.0000
758
23.6
5.550
P2
0.0064
0.0012
1172
23.8
2.998
P3
0.0064
0.0025
1666
23.9
2.661
The relationship between the decrease in measured pH from that of pure deionized (DI)
water and from the solutions was first investigated. Results showed that the measured pH
depends almost entirely on the concentration of HCl. However, at the lowest measured
concentrations of HCl (0.0012 mol L−1), a slight influence from KCl was observed, where
the higher the concentration of KCl was, the higher the pH. This effect diminishes as
the HCl concentration increases, as illustrated in Figure B.7. Based on these findings, it
was assumed that the decrease in pH relative to pure DI water could be attributed solely
136
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:147==
to changes in HCl concentration. To quantify this relationship, the average of logarithmic
trendlines fitted to the five data sets was taken. Two additional data points, corresponding
to HCl concentrations of 0.000 56 mol L−1 and 0.000 93 mol L−1, were also included in the
final curve, shown in ??. This resulted in the relationship shown in Equation (B.14), from
which the concentration of HCl can be calculated from the measured decrease in pH.
[HCl] = −0.4416 · ln (pHdecrease) −0.00106
(B.14)
Figure B.7: Measured pH decrease of data lines L1–L5, and their trendlines, versus con-
centration of HCl.
Figure B.8: Average trendline of pH decrease versus concentration of HCl.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
137
==PAGE:148==
Next, the measured conductivity for each data line was plotted, as shown in Figure B.9.
Conductivity was found to correlate with the combined molarity of KCl and HCl.
Figure B.9: Conductivity of a solution based on the total concentration of KCl and HCl.
However, to enable prediction of KCl concentration from measured conductivity and pH,
the development of a mathematical model is required, similar to the approach presented
by Usobiaga et al. [51], who proposed a model to estimate HCl and KCl concentrations
in aqueous solutions based on conductivity measurements. Additionally, the use of urea
in experiments further adds to the complexity of the pH-conductivity relationship, due to
the formation of NH3 (see Equation (3.3)). Due to this, further development of this model
was not pursued.
Nevertheless, since the decrease in pH can be attributed solely to the presence of HCl,
it allowed for the calculation of KCl and HCl concentrations. The total mass of liquid
collected in the water basin at the outlet of the reactor is used to estimate the total amount
of solution fed into the system. From this, the total number of moles of chloride ions (Cl–)
can be calculated. The portion of Cl– associated with HCl is subtracted based on the
estimated HCl concentration from pH data, and the remainder is attributed to KCl.
B.5
Calibration of gas flow meters
To verify that the two flow meters controlling the flows of N2 and O2 were operating
as expected, they were calibrated. The flow meter for O2 has a maximum setting of
100 mLN/min, and was calibrated using a Gilian Gilibrator 2, which measures within a
range of 1–250 mLN/min. The oxygen flow was initially set to 100 mLN/min, and then de-
creased in 10 mLN/min increments down to 10 mLN/min. This procedure was performed
twice, using two different calibrators of the same type and range. The Gilibrator provides
measurements in SLPM (Standard Liters per Minute), while the flow meter is set in NLPM
(Normal Liters per Minute). Therefore, the recorded flow values were converted to NLPM
using Equation (B.15).
NLPM = SLPM · TSTP
T
·
P
PSTP
(B.15)
The average of the two calibration runs was used, and the resulting correlation between
setpoint and actual output is shown in Figure B.10.
138
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:149==
Figure B.10: Obtained relationship between set point and actual output from calibration
of flow meter controlling the O2 gas flow.
As is clear, the setpoint corresponds closely with the actual output, and it is therefore
assumed that the setpoint can reliably represent the true flow.
The same procedure was carried out for the flow meter controlling the flow of N2. In
this case, two Gilian Gilibrator 2 units with a measurement range of 20–6000 mLN/min
were used. The gas flow of N2 was initially set to 1200 mLN/min, and then decreased
in 100 mLN/min increments down to 200 mLN/min. The flow rate of N2 used for experi-
ments was 760 mLN/min or 780 mLN/min, which lies well within the calibration range. The
resulting calibration relationship is shown in Figure B.11, again demonstrating a strong
correlation between the flow meter setpoint and actual flow. Consequently, the setpoint
is also assumed to reflect the true flow for N2.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
139
==PAGE:150==
Figure B.11: Obtained relationship between set point and actual output from calibration
of flow meter controlling the N2 gas flow.
B.6
Overpressure and CO2 readings from selected
experiments
Changes in CO2 and overpressure readings were encountered and the changes will be
summarized here. In Figure B.12 and Figure B.13 are CO2 and overpressure readings
from experiment 1 are shown. These results were representative for what had been en-
countered in the development phase of the experimental setup. Experiment number 2.
additionally showed similar trends.
Figure B.12: Readings of CO2 in experiment 1.
140
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:151==
Figure B.13: Readings of overpressure in experiment 1.
In Figure B.14 and Figure B.15 are CO2 and overpressure readings from experiment 3.
shown. This experiment was terminated after approximately 3.5 h, as a sudden drop in
overpressure was observed. The filter in the gas conditioning system leading to the gas
analyzer was changed after this experiment.
Figure B.14: Readings of CO2 in experiment 3 which was terminated after approximately
3.5 h.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
141
==PAGE:152==
Figure B.15: Readings of overpressure in experiment 3 which was terminated after ap-
proximately 3.5 h. A sudden drop in overpressure was noted.
Elevated readings of CO2 were observed in experiments 3.2 and 3.3, which were con-
ducted after experiment 3, as is discussed and shown in Section 3.4.4. In the next ex-
periments, did readings of CO2 and overpressure returned back to similar values as for
experiment 1 and 2. As an example are results from experiment number 5 shown in
Figure B.16 and Figure B.17.
Figure B.16: Readings of CO2 in experiment 5.
142
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:153==
Figure B.17: Readings of overpressure in experiment 5.
However, in the next experiment conducted elevated CO2 were observed again. Readings
of CO2 and overpressure from experiment 6. are shown in Figure B.18 and Figure B.19.
Figure B.18: Readings of CO2 in experiment 6.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
143
==PAGE:154==
Figure B.19: Readings of overpressure in experiment 6.
In the next two experiments performed (number 7 and 8), were readings of CO2 and over-
pressure similar to results from the experiment number 5. To ensure that water collection
was sufficient in the water basin, was a new lid with porous plate used, and 4 experiments
were repeated. Experiments 1., 3., 4., and 8., were repeated and noted as 1.r, 3.r, 4.r,
and 8.r. In all cases were slightly lower peaks in CO2 readings observed, around 1000
ppm - 1500 ppm in height, as well as the baseline overpressure had slightly increased.
Overpressure ranged between 50 mbar - 90 mbar. In Figure B.20 and Figure B.21 are
CO2 and overpressure readings from experiment 8.r are shown. Slightly lower peaks in
CO2 concentration, and slightly higher observed baseline overpressure, was attributed to
the new lid used in these experiment, which contained a porous plate at its outlet which
the gaseous species and condensed solution passed through.
Figure B.20: Readings of CO2 in experiment 8.r.
144
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
==PAGE:155==
Figure B.21: Readings of overpressure in experiment 8.r.
Interactions of Gaseous Alkali Salts and Bed Material in Biomass Combustion
145
==PAGE:156==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
