==PAGE:1==
Design and implementation
of hardware accelerators
for embedded AI
Alessandro Mitola
Kongens Lyngby 2025
IMM-M.Sc.-2025
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk IMM-M.Sc.-2025
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The primary objective of this thesis work is to create and develop an automated
hardware generation technique capable of producing multiple and distinct im-
plementations of a given modified version of a binarized neural network (BNN),
all tailored for FPGA deployment.
The fundamental architecture of the generator is discussed, followed by a pre-
sentation of the characteristics of each inferred network, ranging from fully par-
allel solutions that trade hardware utilization for lower execution times to more
resource-efficient implementations that conserve hardware space at the expense
of slower performance. Samples from the MNIST dataset are used to validate
the aforementioned characteristics.
This approach to hardware generation aims at creating efficient hardware so-
lutions that are both versatile, to better suit specific user requirements, and
extendable to support new design ideas.
Overall, the results shown here provide a solid foundation for further research
and optimization in the field of automated FPGA development for AI-based
applications.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter science of the Technical University of Denmark during my international
internship, supported by the study abroad thesis funding provided by Politecnico
di Bari, in fulfillment for the requirements of a MSC in Automation Engineer-
ing with a specialization in Robotics at Politecnco di Bari in Bari, Italy. The
thesis was carried out from 10/02/2025 to 10/07/2025 under the supervision
of Associate Professor Luca Pezzarossa, Riccardo Miccini and co-supervision of
Assistant Professor Martino De Carlo (Politecnico di Bari).
Kongens Lyngby, 11-April-2025
Alessandro Mitola
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my super-
visors. To Martino De Carlo, who made it possible for me to embark on this
journey, I owe special thanks. I am equally grateful to Luca Pezzarossa and
Riccardo Miccinni for welcoming me to this foreign land and for their invalu-
able support throughout this experience. Their advice, guidance, and consistent
presence have been instrumental in shaping and completing this thesis. I am
truly thankful to all three for their unwavering dedication and mentorship.
I also owe a lot (mostly in money) to all the new friends I’ve made here. You
have made time pass like a breeze, and I sincerely hope to meet you again in
the near future.
Lastly, a sincere thank you to my family for their steady presence and support,
even from afar. Their constant encouragement has been invaluable throughout
this journey.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Hardware Acceleration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
FPGA Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Perceptrons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Binary Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Related Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.1
The DeepBurning Generator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.2
The VANNGen Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.3
The Hls4ml Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Design
23
3.1
Generator Design Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Hardware Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Parallel Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Serial Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Overall Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Implementation
37
4.1
Python Generator Core
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
ModelParser Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
Manager Class
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.2.1
The create layers dict Method . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.2.2
The create neurons dict Method . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.2.3
The create pkg dict Method
. . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.2.4
Additional Dictionary Creator Methods . . . . .
51
4.1.3
Templates and NeuronModel Class . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
VHDL Hardware Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.1
Neuron Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.2
Layer Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.2.3
Neural Network Entity Implementation
. . . . . . . . . .
69
4.2.4
ROM Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.2.5
Input Loader Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5
Evaluation
75
5.1
Network Components Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.1.1
Neuron Behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.1.2
Layer Behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.1.3
ROM Controller Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5.2
MNIST Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.2.1
MNIST 8×8 Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.2.2
MNIST 14×14 Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.2.3
MNIST 28×28 images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
5.3
Deep Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
5.4
Final Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6
Conclusion
103
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Bibliography
107
A Generator Templates
111
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter introduces the main concepts explored throughout this thesis, pro-
viding a contextual overview of the relevant research domains that underpin the
work.
At its core, the thesis presents a comprehensive study on the implementation of
neural networks on Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), with a partic-
ular emphasis on developing a flexible, automated hardware generation frame-
work. The primary contribution is the design and implementation of a Python-
based generator capable of producing dedicated VHDL accelerators for neural
network inference. The generator is openly available and can be accessed at:
https://github.com/alsssss/NNGenerator/tree/main.
The neural network classes targeted by the proposed generator are referred to as
Binarized Neural Networks (BNN). Contrary to the prevailing approaches
and definitions found in most of the existing literature [1, 2, 3], this work adopts
a different version of BNNs, thus contributing to a relatively underexplored
aspect within the previously outlined scope of research.
To support this exploration, the hardware generator employs a Jinja2-powered
templating system that allows users to choose among different implementations
of neurons and layers, tailoring the hardware to meet specific design goals such
as area efficiency, power consumption, and execution time. Configurations are
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
selected through direct user commands, enabling the rapid generation of cor-
responding VHDL code. Two primary architectural paradigms are supported:
serial designs, which prioritize resource sharing and compactness, and parallel
designs, which favor speed and throughput.
This introduction continues by giving an overview of the motivations behind
the selection of this particular research focus, followed by a review of the state-
of-the-art neural network generator frameworks, which served as a basis for the
design choices and ideas presented here.
An exhaustive introduction to the
fundamental concepts that are key to understanding the context of this thesis
is then provided.
The findings presented throughout the course of this thesis highlight the validity
of both the design and implementation of the proposed approaches, while also
highlighting the potential of this work to be used as a foundation for future
improvements to support ongoing advancements in this field of research.
1.1
Motivation
Since its conception in the 1950s, the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has
experienced unprecedented growth, achieving remarkable results in areas such
as image, text, and speech recognition, as well as audio denoising and hundreds
of other fields. It has also become one of the most prominent research topics in
today’s scientific community, with new articles published almost daily.
As a fundamental component of many AI-based applications, neural networks
(NNs) have also experienced rapid advances, driven by the availability of large-
scale datasets and the exponential growth in computational power. By emulat-
ing the parallel structure of the human brain, neural networks excel in pattern
recognition, decision making, and other machine learning tasks. However, their
inherent parallelism, which enables high throughput and fast execution, becomes
a challenge when hardware inference is performed on general-purpose devices
such as CPUs [4]. The sequential nature of these processors often leads to sig-
nificant performance limitations and computational bottlenecks, as extensively
shown in [5].
The rise of FPGA technology as a hardware accelerator for neural network de-
ployment can be attributed to its intermediate position among the computing
platforms commonly used for hardware inference.
Application Specific Inte-
grated Circuits (ASICs) typically offer superior performance and energy effi-
ciency, while FPGAs provide a key advantage in terms of reconfigurability, al-
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Motivation
3
lowing them to be reprogrammed to support a broader range of applications.
On the other end of the spectrum, general-purpose CPUs are highly flexible but
suffer from limited parallelism, and GPUs offer high parallel throughput at the
cost of being less power efficient and providing limited hardware-level customiza-
tion. Figure 1.1, from the work of Nechi et al. [5], highlights the differences in
latency and energy efficiency among the architectures just described.
Figure 1.1: CPU, GPU, FPGA latency and energy differences [5].
Despite their advantages, FPGAs are not without limitations. One of the pri-
mary challenges they pose is related to the skills needed to use them effectively.
Unlike CPUs and GPUs, which can be programmed using high-level languages
(e.g., Python, C, Java) within well-established IDEs, FPGAs typically require
expertise in hardware description languages (HDLs) such as VHDL or Verilog.
Although these enable concurrent execution and support modular design, they
lack high-level abstraction constructs and the expressive power of more common
software languages. This also limits their ability to describe reusable hardware
components, making them unfit to be used for flexible hardware generation tasks
[6]. This is precisely the main problem that this work sets out to address.
In response to these challenges, recent years have seen significant efforts to em-
bed low-level hardware control features of HDLs into languages that support
higher levels of abstraction and more convenient data manipulation techniques.
This has led to the creation of the Chisel hardware construction language and
the MyHDL Python package, just to name a few [5]. Chisel is built on Scala,
an object-oriented programming language, to introduce higher abstraction into
hardware design, while MyHDL uses Python, one of the most widely employed
programming languages, to make hardware development easier and more acces-
sible. Both of these languages are eligible for generating customizable hardware
components and have been used in a large number of papers.
For example,
in [6], a configurable IP generator based on MyHDL is proposed, while in [7],
different hardware modules based on Chisel are presented.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
However, given the time constraints of this work, it was necessary to pursue a
different approach to hardware generation, one that could avoid the time over-
head that would be introduced by learning Chisel and Scala. MyHDL was also
discarded because of its uncontrollable conversion process from Python to VHDL
or Verilog. As a result, a purely Python-based generator was designed, devel-
oped, and utilized to produce VHDL files directly, guaranteeing full control over
the structure and content of the generated hardware descriptions. Although this
solution also uses a high-level language as an interface, it differs greatly from the
previously discussed alternatives, as unlike those languages, it does not attempt
to replace traditional HDLs, but instead focuses on automating the generation
of VHDL files through well-known Python constructs, thus combining the best
of both worlds. The generator and its structure, as well as similar architectures
found in the literature, will be discussed in the following chapters.
1.2
Outline
This text will be organized into six chapters, the first of which is the introductory
one, the same one that includes this section. Their names, accompanied by a
brief description of what they deal with, are summarized in the following list.
• Introduction: The first chapter of this thesis. Its main focus is to present
the ideas behind hardware generation and lay the foundation for what is
to come.
• Background: A deep dive into FPGA, hardware accelerators, and neural
network fundamentals with a focus on BNNs.
It also summarizes the
contents of closely related research papers.
• Design: Presents the overall structure and architecture of the Python
hardware generation application, as well as the design of each individual
VHDL entity from a high-level perspective.
• Implementation: This section aims to answer how the previously intro-
duced designs were realized by providing concrete examples and detailed
explanations of the development process.
• Evaluation: This chapter analyzes the components generated by the sys-
tem and offers an in-depth evaluation of the various network configurations
that can be produced.
• Conclusion: The final chapter of this thesis summarizes the work car-
ried out and discusses potential directions for future developments and
expansions.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter aims to deepen the reader’s understanding of the topics briefly
touched upon in Chapter 1. The fundamentals of FPGAs, hardware accelera-
tors, and neural networks, as well as the most relevant prior works closely related
to this study, will be discussed here. A section dedicated to binary neural net-
works (BNNs) will also be added to highlight the difference between them and
the models used in this work during evaluation.
2.1
Hardware Acceleration
With hardware acceleration, we refer to the process of offloading specific tasks
within a system to specialized hardware components, specifically designed to
carry out resource-intensive operations in an efficient and optimized way. A
very common example of this mechanism is represented by the CPU-GPU inter-
action in computer systems. A very high-level representation of this interaction
is schematized and shown by image 2.1. The CPU queues frame data to be
rendered and sends it to the GPU, which due to its high parallel structure can
efficiently process it in a relatively short time, allowing the CPU to switch and
focus on other tasks. At the end of its calculations, the GPU sends the results
back to the requesting element, acting as a black-box from the perspective of
the main processing unit.
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
Figure 2.1: CPU-GPU interaction example.
In the context of AI-based applications, hardware acceleration is typically em-
ployed to treat neural network models. As was briefly pointed out in chapter 1,
these models’ structures are inherently parallel and greatly benefit from being
executed in highly concurrent hardware architectures, such as the one possessed
by FPGAs. Therefore, this discussion will now shift to explaining the essentials
of the FPGAs design and architectural principles.
2.1.1
FPGA Technology
A complete and concise definition for what a Field Programmable Gate Array
can be found in the book The Design Warrior’s Guide to FPGAs, where the
following is stated:
“Field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are digital integrated cir-
cuits (ICs) that contain configurable (programmable) blocks of logic
along with configurable interconnects between these blocks. Design
engineers can configure (program) such devices to perform a tremen-
dous variety of tasks.[8]”
The introduction of such devices in the scientific community was prompted by
the need to reduce development time and allow the deployment of functional
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Hardware Acceleration
7
integrated circuits minutes after the end of their design phase [9]. To better con-
textualize the reason behind this need, it is important to examine the state of IC
development prior to the introduction of FPGAs, which occurred approximately
40 years ago, and how it has evolved since then.
In the 1960s, digital circuit where primarily made using logic families such as
Diode-Transistor Logic (DTL) and Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL). As their
names hint at, DTL is used to manufacture digital circuits that use diodes in
input stages and BJTs in output stages, while in TTL only BJTs are used to
store logical states and switch between them [10]. These technologies require
manual wiring or custom chips, which can result in long development cycles.
These images provide a visual example of what has just been explained.
Figure 2.2: TTL logic family example.
The first step towards reconfigurable and reusable circuits comes in the form of
Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs). In this technology, logic functions (OR,
AND, etc.) are fixed, while the way they are interconnected together can be
altered to produce different results. The act of choosing which connection to
create is often referred to as ”programming” the device. PLDs can be classified
according to which parts of their internal structure remain fixed and which are
programmable. For example, Programmable ROMs or PROMs are defined by
having a predefined AND array and a programmable or array structure, whereas
Programmable Logic Arrays (PLAs) allow both the AND and OR arrays to be
programmed.
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
Figure 2.3: PROM and PAL schemes.
As technology progressed, circuit architectures such as the one shown in figure
2.3 became known as Simple Programmable Logic Devices (SPLDs), to better
distinguish them from the emerging family of more advanced reprogrammable
devices known as Complex Programmable Logic Devices (CPLDs). It is within
this category that the FPGAs came to be classified.
In opposition to SPLDs, FPGAs allow greater flexibility, not only by employing a
complex programmable interconnect matrix that links I/O ports to logic blocks,
but also by making the logic blocks configurable. As [9] puts it best, an FPGA
to be properly recognized as such must be composed of three different parts:
• Programmable logic blocks capable of implementing different logic func-
tions (Configurable Logic Blocks or CLBs).
• Programmable routing that connects these logic blocks (Switch Boxes and
Connection Boxes).
• I/O blocks connected through the routing interconnect matrix to the logic
blocks.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Hardware Acceleration
9
Figure 2.4: General scheme of a Field Programmable Gate Array.
As shown in Figure 2.4, switch boxes are responsible for connecting horizontal
and vertical routing tracks, while connection boxes act as an interface between
the interconnect matrix and logic blocks. The implementation details of these
elements vary from vendor to vendor, but they consistently adhere to the infras-
tructure shown above, which is called island-style routing architecture. Usually,
this type of connection structure can occupy up to 90% of the total circuit area
of an FPGA, leaving only 10 to 20% for the actual logic blocks [9]. This trade-off
between logic and interconnection resources helps explain the superior perfor-
mance of ASICs compared to FPGAs, as discussed in Chapter 1. Regarding
the way through which FPGA programming is performed, most vendors employ
one of the following three technologies:
• SRAM-based programming technology: Static memory cells spread
across all the device control its configuration based on their bit content.
Due to SRAM cells requiring up to 6 transistors (6-T cells), this is classified
as a volatile and area-costly approach to reconfiguration. Nevertheless, it
is one of the most popular and widely used.
• Flash programming technology: EPROM transistors are used as one-
time or limited-time programmable switches to control the configuration
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
of the device. This is a non-volatile approach to configuration that has
the great advantage of using only one transistor. The main drawback is
the limited number of programming cycles that the device can endure.
• Anti-fuse programming technology: In opposition to fuses, an anti-
fuse is comparable to an open switch in its rest state. By applying the
necessary voltage, it ”breaks” and creates the desired connection. This
is a non-volatile, non-transistor based technology that has the big disad-
vantage of being one-time programmable (OTP). It was one of the main
programming technologies used for SPLDs.
Logic blocks, on the other hand, can vary greatly from vendor to vendor in
both their structure and their capability. In principle, all logic blocks always
need to contain basic logic and storage functionalities, no matter how they are
implemented. Xilinx and Altera use LUT-based CLBs as they provide a good
trade-off between too fine-grained structures, where a logic block can perform
a very limited amount of logic tasks (the extreme would be a single transistor
used as a logic block) and too course-grained structures, where a logic block
can perform a lot of operations if rightly configured (in this case the extreme
example would be a whole processor used as a logic block).
LUT-based CLBs can be made of one or more Basic Logic Elements (BLEs).
Each BLE generally contains an LUT table, a Flip-Flop, and a multiplexer that
chooses between the output of one or the other, as shown in the following image.
Figure 2.5: Schematic view of a BLE.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Neural Networks
11
Modern FPGAs can contain up to 10 of these BLEs in a single cluster and can
include a number of different hardware blocks designed for resource-intensive
tasks. As an example, BRAM slices provide hardwired memory blocks inside of
the FPGA fabric.
In the Xilinx environment, which is used in this work, CLBs are referred to
as Logic Cells (LCs), and their diagram can be summarized by the following
picture:
Figure 2.6: Schematic view of a Xilinx LC.
The use of LUT-based CLBs implies that any design implemented on an FPGA
will eventually be synthesized into configurations of lookup tables and flip-flops.
Consequently, these two metrics serve as primary indicators during the evalua-
tion of a given design.
2.2
Neural Networks
As their name suggests, neural networks are a class of computational models
or, more broadly, of machine learning algorithms inspired by the structure of
biological neural systems and capable of performing decision-making tasks [11].
Therefore, to introduce them, it is helpful to briefly examine how a biological
neuron is structured.
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
Figure 2.7: Scheme of a human neuron [12].
Starting from the left of picture 2.7, the dendrites are small branches that
gather electrical signals coming from the neuron’s surroundings, typically the
result of other neurons’ activity. They act as input channels for the cell. These
signals are then collected and processed within the cell body of the neuron to
produce a single output value in the form of an electrical impulse. The axon
carries this value to the neuron’s terminals, where it is distributed to adjacent
cells. The existing connection between two neurons is called a synapse, and
its strength, controlled by electrochemical processes, determines how effectively
signals are transmitted from one neuron to another, or, in other words, how
strongly the output of one neuron is perceived by the dendrites of the other
neuron.
With just this information at hand, we can already start building a simple math-
ematical equivalent for the human neuron. The dendrites can be modeled as
an input array I = [i1, i2, . . . , in], where each element corresponds to a signal
received from another neuron. Each of these inputs is ”weighted” by a corre-
sponding synaptic value, which can also be considered as stored in a scalar array
W = [w1, w2, . . . , wn]. The cell body then processes the weighted inputs using
a generic scalar function ϕ(I ◦W) (where ◦denotes the element-wise product)
and finally produces some value y which is carried by the axon.
y = ϕ(I ◦W)
(2.1)
Equation 2.1 provides a mathematical abstraction of a biological neuron’s be-
haviour and forms the basis for the definition of the artificial neuron, commonly
referred to as a perceptron.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Neural Networks
13
2.2.1
Perceptrons
A perceptron is the simplest neural network architecture, introduced by Frank
Rosenblatt in 1957 [13]. To properly define it, we need to specify the actual
form of the function ϕ that appears in the previously shown equation (2.1).
This function is typically composed of two stages: first, the summation of the
weighted inputs; second, the application of a nonlinear transformation known as
the activation function and denoted by the letter σ. A third stage can also be
included in the form of a constant offset added to the weighted sum of inputs.
This offset is commonly termed as bias of the perceptron and is commonly
indicated with the letter b. Therefore, equation 2.1 takes the following form.
y = σ
 
b +
n
X
i=1
xiwi
!
(2.2)
This is the fundamental equation of the perceptron model, which can be visu-
alized in the image below.
Figure 2.8: Model of a perceptron.
The activation function σ, as mentioned above, can be any nonlinear transfor-
mation, both discrete and continuous. The very first model of the perceptron
employed a discrete function known as Heaviside step function, the mathemat-
ical form of which is shown below:
H(x) =
(
0
if x ≤0
1
if x > 0
(2.3)
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
This is also the operation that all networks created by the generator presented
in this work will use as their activation functions. Discrete transformations,
such as this, are used for classification and pattern recognition tasks, while
continuous functions, such as the sigmoid or linear functions, are better suited
for networks used as approximators.
The human brain owes its complexity to the thousands of neurons and intercon-
nections; similarly, the perceptron must be organized into structured architec-
tures in order to perform highly complex tasks. An entity formed by multiple
interconnecting perceptron is known as Artificial Neural Network (ANN).
The topology of an ANN can drastically change its capabilities and functions.
Many such networks have been studied and developed in the literature; however,
one of the most widely used and well-established architectures is the Multilayer
Perceptron (MLP) [14].
Figure 2.9: Scheme of an MLP [15].
Here, neurons are arranged in layers. They are classified on the basis of their
position in the network.
• Input layers are the very first layers of a net. They receive the input
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Neural Networks
15
array.
• Hidden layers are any layers that stand between the input and output
layers. There can be either zero hidden layers or an indefinite amount of
them. If more than one is present, the entire network is classified as a
Deep Neural Network [11].
• Output layers are the final layers of a net. They produce the outputs of
the network.
In an MLP, fully connected or dense layers are used, which means that each
neuron is connected to every neuron in the preceding layer but not to others
within the same layer. The equation describing a layer has the same form as
equation 2.2 but is now expressed in matrix form.
y = σ (b + xW)
(2.4)
W is the weight matrix and its generic element wij represents the weight that
connects the ith input to the jth neuron. Since each layer has its own weight ma-
trix, the weights of the whole network can be represented as a three-dimensional
tensor.
MLPs are also feedforward networks, as information only flows strictly from the
inputs to the outputs of the network (left to right in figure 2.9). The only time
this flow is reversed is during the training process. Training for an MLP, or, for
any other ANN, means calculating the optimal values of the network’s weights.
This is usually done using algorithms like backpropagation, which adjust the
weights iteratively, starting from the output layer and working backward to
minimize the difference between predicted and expected outputs. While this
thesis does not explore training in detail, since all models are pre-trained before
hardware inference, this brief overview provides essential context.
2.2.2
Binary Neural Networks
In the literature, Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) are frequently encountered
in the context of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [16].
CNNs are a
class of neural networks in which layers perform convolution operations by slid-
ing learned filters (weight tensors) over the input tensor. This architecture is
particularly effective for image and object recognition tasks.
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
Figure 2.10: Scheme of a CNN.
These networks are often divided into two segments: a convolutional feature
extractor, where convolution operations are applied, and a classification part,
typically placed at the end of the network topology and made of one or more
fully connected MLP layers, as shown in Figure 2.10. Such architectures can
become very expensive in terms of hardware resources due to the large amount
of floating point operations that need to be carried out (there can be millions of
such operations as shown in [17]). Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) address this
issue by binarizing weights, biases, and activations. BNNs constrain weights and
activations to the values −1 and 1, thus replacing expensive multiply-accumulate
operations with efficient XNOR and bitcount operations [16]. In mathematical
terms, for a single neuron, if we just consider the arguments of the activation
function shown in equation 2.2, we can now write that:
ysum = b +
n
X
i=1
xiwi
with b, xi, wi ∈{−1, 1}
(2.5)
This formulation highlights how multiplication can be completely avoided and
replaced by the XNOR operation, since it produces the same result for each
term of the sum (−1 in this case is the low state for the logic operation).
xi
wi
xi XNOR wi
xiwi
-1
-1
1
1
-1
1
-1
-1
1
-1
-1
-1
1
1
1
1
However, in equation 2.5, ysum is still an integer value. To ensure binary ac-
tivations, a slightly altered version of the step function defined in equation 2.3
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Neural Networks
17
(which will be denoted as Hb) must be applied, leading to:
Hb(x) =
(
−1
if x ≤0
1
if x > 0
(2.6)
y = Hb
 
b +
n
X
i=1
xiwi
!
with b, xi, wi ∈{−1, 1}
(2.7)
Equation 2.7 forms the core of Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs).
Yet, the BNNs that will be widely used in this work differ from the common
rule in four key aspects:
• Only the inputs and activations of the neural network are binarized, while
the weights and biases are retained as 8-bit integers. Although outside the
scope of this work, this design choice is based on the accuracy limitations
of BNNs [16]. In this context, accuracy refers to the network’s ability to
correctly predict or classify inputs. In conventional BNNs weights can only
take on two discrete values, thus significantly complicating the training
process, making it harder for the network to converge to optimal solutions.
By maintaining higher-precision weights and biases, it becomes possible
to partially mitigate these issues.
• Inputs and activations are constrained to the values of 0 and 1. This allows
us to rewrite equations 2.6 and 2.7 in the following way:
Hwi(x) =
(
0
if x ≤0
wi
if x > 0
(2.8)
y = H
 
b +
n
X
i=1
Hwi(xi)
!
(2.9)
• This time multiplication is replaced by a conditional masking operation.
Specifically, each input xi acts as an enable signal that either passes the
corresponding weight wi or suppresses it to zero. In this way, hardware
efficiency is still preserved while retaining the integer representation of the
weights.
• Not all activations of the neural network are binarized. In fact, the outputs
of the last layer, or in other words, the results of the whole neural network,
are kept at a bitwidth of 32 bits. The reason for this lies in the fact that
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
all trained nets that will be generated and evaluated in this work produce
logits as outputs. It can also be said that the last layer is a logit layer.
In machine learning, logits are often intended to be the raw results of the
net, typically spanning the range {−∞, ∞}, they represent how strongly
the model associates the input with each output class ( e.g., in MNIST,
each of the ten input digits has ten corresponding logits in the last layer
of the network). To constrain these values back to the range {0, 1}, a
softmax or sigmoid function is needed.
However, the implementation
details of these functions are not the focus of the generator developed in
this work. Instead, only the final raw data will be considered.
The scheme of a BNN neuron can be illustrated as follows.
Figure 2.11: Scheme of a BNN neuron.
2.3
Related Works
This section is dedicated to describing the primary hardware generators that
serve as a foundation for the one developed in this thesis, as well as hardware
architecture optimization principles. For each of them, a brief summary is pro-
vided along with the corresponding reference paper.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Related Works
19
2.3.1
The DeepBurning Generator
DeepBurning is a Python and C++ based framework for generating efficient
FPGA hardware designs of various types of neural networks. Its architecture is
summarized in the schematic presented in [18], and is organized into two main
layers, as illustrated in Figure 2.12. These layers are:
• Input layer : It takes as input a model description script that outlines
the network topology and layer definitions at a high level, and user-defined
hardware constraints, such as area and power limitations. This data is
parsed and then transformed into a structured format that serves as the
foundation for the layer.
• Hardware Generator and Compiler layer : Using data from the pre-
vious layer, it maps the neural network’s components into hardware by
using templates of configurable, low-level RTL blocks from a highly gran-
ular component library. It also generates the on-chip Address Generation
Units (AGUs), which serve as the core control units of the data-driven
architecture. They fetch, store and forward input features, weight val-
ues, and intermediate results. At the same time, the compiler enforces
the user’s area, power, and timing constraints to dynamically regulate the
amount of data sent to the accelerator (Runtime control). In accordance
with the data-driven architecture, the arrival of data triggers the execution
of the NN’s components in the accelerator.
Figure 2.12: DeepBurning architecture [18].
The paper describing this generator [18] also introduces two key techniques
for optimizing hardware resource reuse in neural network accelerators: spa-
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
tial folding and temporal folding. Spatial folding involves reusing the same
hardware components for different parts of the neural network. For example, a
network with four layers that is fully spatially folded would be implemented as
a single physical layer reused four times. Temporal folding, on the other hand,
refers to breaking operations into smaller sections that share the same hardware
over multiple clock cycles. For example, a network with four layers, as before,
could be spatially folded into two physical layers, and each of them could be
temporally folded twice.
2.3.2
The VANNGen Generator
VANNGen is a Java-written hardware generator that builds VHDL code from
text-based VHDL templates [4]. Unlike DeepBurning, which generates neural
networks by instantiating and connecting predefined RTL IP cores, this ap-
proach produces a complete VHDL design that can describe a particular com-
ponent with a higher level of abstraction (behavioural style of programming).
The following scheme better describes the VANNGen architecture:
Figure 2.13: VANNGen architecture [4].
The overall structure of VANNGen is organized into classes, as Java is used as
the main programming language. Each class corresponds to a specific neural
network component and manages all associated data and functionality.
The
keeper module in Figure 2.13 holds relevant data for the generator core class
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Related Works
21
system. This is one of the most common generator designs found in the liter-
ature. In fact, the next generator discussed in this section differs only in its
implementation, not in its underlying concept.
2.3.3
The Hls4ml Generator
This generator is built as a Python package to convert neural network models
into FPGA firmware [19]. Its main difference with respect to the VANNGen
generator is that the output it produces is HLS code. The scheme provided by
[19] is the following:
Figure 2.14: Hls4ml architecture [19].
An important design feature of this generator is the reuse factor, a parameter
that controls the spatial and temporal folding of the inferred network [1]. This
design choice was one of the key inspirations for the development of the generator
presented in this work.
==PAGE:32==
22
Background
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Design
This chapter provides a detailed description of the design and architecture of
both the Python hardware generation framework and the possible hardware
designs that it is capable of producing.
However, it is important to note that at the heart of this entire work lies a set
of core design principles, shared across all stages of development, which support
the primary goal of enabling efficient neural network inference on FPGAs. These
principles are the following.
• Flexibility: The system must allow users to configure a wide range of
network configurations to better fit their needs.
• Modularity: Both generator and hardware designs must be structured
to make them extendable or replaceable.
• Correctness: All possible hardware configurations must always produce
correct results.
• Accessibility: Users should be able to use the system with little setup.
==PAGE:34==
24
Design
3.1
Generator Design Overview
As was already stated in the introductory chapters, the hardware generator
developed for this work is Python-based and produces the VHDL files of the
desired neural network, thus aligning itself with the ideas and standard pro-
cedures of generator building briefly touched upon in section 2.3.
Although
built on those same concepts, a key design aspect that sets this generator apart
is its approach to data handling. Important data about the network are, in
fact, designed to be stored, accessed, and managed through dictionary-based
data structures. Inputs of the generator are first parsed to produce a structured
JSON file, which serves as a “twin” to the original ONNX model of the network.
A schematic overview of the generator’s primary operations is shown below.
Figure 3.1: Python-based generator.
Overall, four main sections of this framework can be identified:
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Generator Design Overview
25
• Input Section: This is the part of the system that grants access to
the underlying functionalities of the generator, acting as an interface for
the users. By changing the ONNX model file, the overall neural network
model can be modified, while acting on the YAML file, and the parameters
within, makes it possible to control the mode in which the network can
be inferred.
These two files are parsed and manipulated by the Input
Manager, one of the components of the main Python back-end, to produce
a JSON file.
• Intermediate Section: Most of the computational activity occurs at
this stage. The generator core can read and manipulate the data stored
in the JSON file to produce new dictionaries for each component of the
network, containing the essential data needed to fill the VHDL templates.
The templates to populate are also chosen in this section. The final result
is the VHDL code needed to deploy a neural network on an FPGA.
• Template Storage: The file storage of all the implemented templates.
Templates can be viewed as blueprints for the final VHDL files. They
change in accordance with the selected parameters of the YAML file. The
Python core automatically handles their selection and population with the
appropriate values.
• Output Section: These are the final products of the generation process.
They are all stored in the same directory, and the user can specify whether
to output all files needed for FPGA inference or only those strictly required
for simulation. To run them, a simulator and a synthesizer program are
required.
To accommodate the dictionary-centric approach of this generator, the frame-
work itself is built using the object-oriented features offered by Python. Object-
oriented programming (OOP), in this case, offers a clean way to logically distin-
guish and organize the information passed to each of the to-be-filled templates
or more broadly to each of the entities that will compose the final design. This
concept is referred to as encapsulation and together with classes and objects,
it forms the primary tool used for this generator. Contrary to most typical uses
of OOP, this framework will not use any form of inheritance, as neural net-
work components need different and specific data to structure their templates.
In contrast, the composition principle will be used. It dictates that the re-
lation between objects should be based on ownership. It is, in fact, natural
and theoretically accurate to consider neuron objects as being ”owned” by layer
objects and layers as components owned by the overall neural network object.
Following this logic, the design deliberately includes a dedicated class responsible
for generating dictionaries for all the major components of the entire network.
This centralized class acts as the main data abstraction layer that handles the
==PAGE:36==
26
Design
JSON structure internally and exposes a simplified dictionary-based interface
to the rest of the classes.
3.2
Hardware Design
The effectiveness of a hardware generator fundamentally depends on the variety
of configurations it can produce. It follows naturally then that the design phi-
losophy guiding hardware creation is centered around flexibility. In this context,
the adaptability or flexibility of an ANN hardware implementation reflects its
capacity to balance the trade-off between chip area usage and execution time.
These two metrics are directly influenced by the granularity through which the
network components are mapped onto the hardware. The smaller the execution
unit, the lower the minimum resource footprint required to implement a mini-
mal neural network, but at the cost of increased execution time. Consequently,
the critical design choice lies in defining the unit of execution of the system. In
this work, the following statement holds across all network configurations that
can be generated:
The neuron is the atomic, smallest possible unit of execution.
This principle has wide-ranging implications, affecting everything from state
machine design to memory usage. Moreover, every hardware configuration pro-
duced by the generator can be categorized into two principal architectural fam-
ilies, which will henceforth be referred to as the Parallel and Serial imple-
mentations. In the parallel configuration, each neuron and layer defined in the
ONNX model is physically instantiated in hardware, that is, dedicated physical
blocks are allocated for every computational unit in the network. In contrast,
the serial configuration implements only a subset of the neurons and layers spec-
ified in the input model. The same hardware blocks are reused across multiple
layers and neurons through spatial and temporal folding techniques.
3.2.1
Parallel Design
This section provides high-level descriptions of the parallel architectures that the
generator is capable of producing. Neuron diagrams are presented alongside the
corresponding layer designs to highlight their structural relationships. Within
this mode, the generator supports the creation of three distinct neuron layouts.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Hardware Design
27
Figure 3.2: Neuron with binary output.
The first design, shown in Figure 3.2, is instantiated by every input and hidden
parallel layer that operates without an explicit timing control. This means that
both the neuron and its corresponding layer run continuously throughout the
entire network operation. Starting from the left, input registers, represented as
white boxes for simplicity, drive a set of multiplexers that select between zero
and an actual weight value for accumulation. A comparator then implements
the Heaviside step function. These operations are always repeated at each clock
cycle.
In this parallel configuration, weights and biases are always provided
as constant values.
This approach enables synthesis tools to optimize them
efficiently, minimizing the usage of LUTs or flip-flops. The second neuron design
closely resembles the first, with the key difference being the absence of the
activation function. As a result, it outputs the raw accumulated value directly.
Figure 3.3: Neuron with full output.
==PAGE:38==
28
Design
The neurons described above are integrated into a parallel and always active
layer (Figure 3.4), as already mentioned. This design instantiates one physical
neuron for every neuron defined in the corresponding layer of the input model.
As a result, all computations for one layer are executed simultaneously. Only
the very first layer of the network checks the binary input values before stor-
ing them in registers. This check is implemented using the same structure as
that used for neurons; however, in this case, the multiplexer selects between the
values provided in input and those already stored in the layer registers. This
mechanism helps coordinate the arrival of new data from an input loader en-
tity, which asserts the start signal once it completes the input binarization. This
binarization step is necessary because the final system is designed to receive 8-
bit integer values by default (configurable up to 32 bits). After the input is
loaded and latched, all subsequent layers operate in a pipelined manner: each
layer processes its inputs and produces outputs at every clock cycle, regardless
of the state of other layers. This means that neuron logic is continuously active
throughout the process, maximizing throughput at the cost of increased hard-
ware resource usage. This approach should also result in an increase in dynamic
power consumption as neurons are never selectively activated.
Figure 3.4: Layer configuration without timing control.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Hardware Design
29
The last type of neuron that can be found in a parallel layer exemplifies the
temporal folding technique.
Rather than having all neuron functions active
simultaneously at every clock cycle, the operations are divided into multiple
stages controlled by a finite-state machine. In this case, the neuron can remain
idle when it is not needed and only be active during each of its stages, a con-
ceptual diagram of which can be seen in Figure 3.5. During the load stage, the
weight values are prepared for the accumulation operation, while the sum and
the output stages are responsible for computing the final value. Additionally,
once the final state is reached, each neuron signals the layer about the end of
its activity, prompting it to make the following layer to start its operation.
Figure 3.5: Neuron with states.
To support this behaviour, the layer structure, shown in Figure 3.6, now includes
a different check at the beginning of its operation: the input registers accept
new data only when the layer has been activated (start = ’1’) and the neurons
are currently idle (start n = ’0’). This effectively creates a locking mechanism.
The start n signal is toggled to a high state when the layer registers first store
the input value (the start signal goes high), and is reset to a low state when
all neurons of the current layer reach their final stage (all done signals are set
to high). Moreover, the start signal of the first layer is set by the input loader
entity as before, while the start signals of the other layers are also set by the
neurons of the previous layer finishing their operations. With this new timing
discipline in place to this strict timing discipline, the system can support loading
weights from external memory instead of relying solely on constants, although
==PAGE:40==
30
Design
the option still exists.
Both the weight loader and input loader entities
discussed in this section will be explained in Section 3.3 and Chapter 4.
Figure 3.6: Synchronized parallel layers.
3.2.2
Serial Design
In the serialization process of the inferred neural network structure, reuse is the
defining principle. Starting from the neuron level, it has already been explained
that the models used by this generator produce non-binary outputs, resulting
in changes in the way the output of a neuron is calculated. Unlike before, seri-
alization requires a single neuron instance, being the atomic unit of execution,
to be reused throughout the entire network. To support this, a MIMO (Multi-
ple Input, Multiple Output) neuron architecture is adopted, in contrast to the
theoretical MISO (Multiple Input, Single Output) configuration. Each inferred
neuron still receives all the inputs as in the previously shown models, but now
produces two outputs: one in binary form and the other as an integer.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Hardware Design
31
Figure 3.7: MIMO and MISO neuron comparison.
For serialized designs, timing control is crucial; therefore, neurons integrated
with a finite state machine (FSM) are the ones always used. These FSM-based
neurons always compute both output types in parallel, as shown in Figure 3.5.
The layer logic then has to distinguish which output to use.
Figure 3.8: Neuron for the serialized design.
The layer architecture in this case required a substantial redesign compared to its
parallel counterpart. To enable greater configurability, the user can define how
many physical neurons are instantiated in each layer. This directly introduces
spatial folding: fewer physical neurons are reused to emulate a larger logical
layer. At the same time, temporal folding comes into play as these neurons
are activated in multiple sequential steps to process all required computations.
This architectural shift not only changes how neurons are instantiated, but also
impacts the overall data flow and timing of the network. Each inferred layer
==PAGE:42==
32
Design
must now assume a more active role in coordinating neuron usage, managing
its input routing, and storing its temporary results to reuse in successive cycles.
A reduction in hardware usage is expected at the cost of a more sophisticated
control system. Timing logic becomes more critical, and careful synchronization
is needed to ensure the correct propagation of data across layers. To address
this, a dedicated finite state machine is introduced at the layer level to govern
timing and synchronization. One can think of the entire system as a hierar-
chical control structure, where the main FSM at the layer level orchestrates
the operation of multiple neuron-level FSMs. It regulates when neurons begin
processing, monitors their progress, and determines when each layer’s execution
cycle is complete. The following figure provides an abstract representation of
this structure.
Figure 3.9: Serialized layer structure.
Now, the first multiplexer, driven by the FSM, must select between input values
coming from the input loader, output values produced by a previous serialized
layer, or simply zeros for reset conditions. The first batch of registers is then
tasked with storing the selected values and providing them to all instantiated
neurons. In the general case, neurons produce two outputs: an integer output
(green arrow) and a binary one (blue arrow), both of which are stored separately
in a second batch of registers. A demultiplexer follows the binary output regis-
ters and reroutes their contents either back to the beginning of the layer or to the
final output multiplexer. This last multiplexer controls the actual output of the
layer. The possibility of choosing a binary value as the final output stems from
an additional configuration option: the user can configure how many logical lay-
ers each physical layer serializes, a concept similar to the reuse factor presented
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Hardware Design
33
in Section 2.3.3. For instance, a network with four layers can be implemented
using just two instantiated layers: one handling the first three in sequence, and
the other dedicated solely to the final layer. It is important to note that in this
design, from the layer’s perspective, the physically instantiated neurons form
an indivisible unit and must always be executed simultaneously. Whenever the
number of physical neurons exceeds the number of remaining logical neurons
to process, the excess neurons must still be activated. To ensure correct be-
haviour, the weight-loading mechanism must be designed to accommodate this
constraint. This work addresses it by applying zero padding to unused neuron
slots. By exploiting this flexibility, the number of inferred neurons can be set to
any integer value between one and the size of the largest layer in the network, or
of the chosen group of layers to be serialized together. This is better exemplified
in the following image.
Figure 3.10: Layer inference with zero padding example.
==PAGE:44==
34
Design
The first configuration of the network deploys a single layer of three neurons
on the FPGA. During the first cycle, all three neurons are required to match
the size of the network’s input layer, so there is no padding.
In the second
cycle, only two neurons must be executed; therefore, one of the inferred neurons
receives zeroed weights to effectively disable it (red neuron in Figure 3.10). The
same logic applies to the final layer.
In the second implementation, two layers are instantiated: one with two neurons
and another with a single neuron. This configuration requires the first logical
layer to execute in two sequential cycles. The first cycle computes the outputs
of the first two neurons, while the second cycle processes the third neuron and
disables the unused one through zero padding. The second logical layer directly
maps to its physical counterpart, and the final layer uses the second instantiated
layer, activating only one neuron during execution.
3.3
Overall Structure
Beyond the design of neurons and layers, the hardware generator is also designed
to construct the top-level architecture required to integrate these components
and enable simulation and synthesis on the FPGA.
Figure 3.11: Generated architecture.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Overall Structure
35
Outside of the neural network entity, all the additional components required for
synthesis are shown. These entities will not be discussed in detail, as they are
either directly provided by Professor Luca Pezzarossa or are modified versions
of his original implementations. Their functions in this work are briefly outlined
below.
• UART: Enables input data transfer from the PC to the FPGA’s memory
component (Memory3) using the USART communication protocol.
• Top: The top-level entity of the entire project. It coordinates communi-
cation between the neural network and the other components required for
synthesis.
• Memory3: A dual-port block RAM with a word size of 32 bits and 211
addressable memory locations, where 11 is the address width.
• Controller: Writes data received from the UART to port B of the Mem-
ory3 component.
• Clock divider: Divides the 100 MHz board clock by a specified param-
eter. In this work, it is configured to always halve the input clock.
• Debounce: Implements debouncing logic for the board’s push buttons.
• Process Controller: Reads data from Memory3 and sends them to the
input loader. It also collects the neural network’s output and writes it
back into the same memory block. Both reading and writing operations
are performed through port A.
• Types: Contains shared-type definitions and constants used across the
listed components.
Inside the neural network entity, the dotted boxes represent components that
may or may not be present depending on the user’s configuration. The input
loader, the type package, and at least one layer and one neuron are always
generated. In addition to layers and neurons, the neural network entity also
contains the following components.
• Input loader: Takes the values read by the Process controller, binarizes
them, and stores them in a register to be accessed by the layer entities.
Both the bus throughput of the received data and the bitwidth of the
individual values can be modified by the user, although both must be
constrained to powers of 2.
==PAGE:46==
36
Design
• Types package: Package for weight and bias constants of the net when
the ROM is deliberately not used, as well as type definitions for some
signals of the network architecture.
• Storage Unit: Composed of a ROM memory block and a controller, it
is instantiated only when the user requests data to be loaded from ROM.
Each layer initiates the reading process via a control signal when it is
their turn to activate a neuron. Using ROM can make execution times
slower due to the additional memory access overhead. The memory block
features a variable address width that adjusts depending on its total size,
while its word size is always fixed at 32 bits. This choice was made to
reduce the number of memory accesses needed to read the entire memory
contents.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Implementation
This chapter provides an overview of the Python-based generator, starting from
its class structure and progressing through the main methods responsible for
its operation. A major focus is given to the VHDL components produced by
the generator, detailing how elements of the designs presented in the previ-
ous chapter were realized. This includes presenting the finite-state machines
employed throughout the design, describing the transformation process from
reusable structural templates to synthesizable VHDL, and providing represen-
tative examples of the resulting implementations. To improve readability, only
the portions of the code relevant to the discussion are shown. The templates
used for VHDL generation are provided in the appendix as a reference.
4.1
Python Generator Core
The source code of the hardware generator is composed of ten classes and
one standalone Python module named helper, which includes utility functions
to handle lists, arrays, and perform simple mathematical computations used
throughout the codebase. Their files reside in the main source folder, alongside
the YAML user configuration file and the JSON file that describes the core data
extracted from the ONNX model. The following PlantUML scheme, in which
==PAGE:48==
38
Implementation
methods and attributes are purposefully omitted for the sake of clarity, offers a
schematic overview of their layout.
Figure 4.1: Class system of the generator.
A total of three composition relationships exist between five of the classes shown.
The first exists between the ModelParser and Manager classes, where the lat-
ter owns an instance of the first and controls its execution. Specifically, the
Manager class initiates the input parsing process of the generator outlined in
Chapter 3 through the methods provided by ModelParser, storing the resulting
data structure as one of its attributes. The remaining two composition relations
define the fundamental structure of the neural network: each NeuronModel in-
stance is associated with a given LayerModel class, and each LayerModel is, in
turn, a component of the overall TopModel class, which can be considered as
the neural network itself. The Manager class also plays another key role in
the framework, serving as the dictionary builder for all the other components.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Python Generator Core
39
It acts as the core of the entire system, with most of its methods dedicated
to the generation of the data structures required by the rest of the generator.
Although the remaining classes are kept separate to logically distinguish the
different VHDL files they produce, their internal logic and structure remain
largely similar, something that will be further clarified in the following sections.
The discussion now shifts to explaining the three major classes of this generator:
ModelParser, Manager, NeuronModel. The NeuronModel class, in particular, is
introduced in conjunction with the VHDL templates due to their direct rela-
tionship. Classes not included in the list are not covered, as their primary role
is to trigger their respective generate vhdl method, which initializes the Jinja2
templating engine and produces the final VHDL results.
4.1.1
ModelParser Class
Figure 4.2: ModelParser Class.
This class has only two attributes. The dir attribute is given as input through
its one and only construction parameter, and it is the path of the folder where
the ONNX model files are stored. The model attribute is its internal dictio-
nary, used to store the results of the parsing process, carried out by the parser()
method. It also serves as the source dictionary out of which the JSON file of
the network is constructed. Although not strictly needed for the execution of
the code itself, it provides a clear depiction of both the ONNX model and the
corresponding neural network. It proves useful during debugging too, as it al-
lows us to verify whether the parsing process has been performed correctly. The
parser method serves the purpose of analyzing the ONNX file read from the
model dir directory, extracting all its contents and storing them in the model
attribute and the JSON file. A neural network in ONNX format is composed
of a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where each node represents a computational
operation (such as matrix multiplication, activation functions, or convolutions),
and the edges denote the data flow between them, or in other words, the input
tensors and the output tensors used by the nodes. It also stores the constant
==PAGE:50==
40
Implementation
parameters learned during training, namely the weights and biases of the net-
work. These are called initializers of the model. In the parser method these
data are extracted through the onnx Python package as shown below:
1
nodes = model.graph.node
2
initializers = {init.name: onnx.numpy_helper.to_array(init) for init in
model.graph.initializer}
,→
The layer nodes are then identified. Since the primary focus of this work is
on MLP architectures, these nodes are typically named MatMul (Matrix Mul-
tiplication) or Gemm (Generalized Matrix Multiplication). For each of them,
the corresponding weights and biases that define the layer are extracted. An
initial dictionary (network details) is built containing the following entries for
each layer: its index, name, bidimensional weight matrix, biases, dimensions of
its input and output arrays. Of course, a for loop is used, and inside it the
activation function method is also called.
This was implemented to prepare
the generator for future expansions, enabling it to recognize different types of
activation functions. However, currently it only returns the Sigmoid name, as
the only function supported at this stage is the threshold one. In addition, the
input and output dimensions and types are taken into account. Since both are
treated as tensors, their overall shape is considered.
1
layers = [node for node in nodes if node.op_type == 'Gemm' or
node.op_type == 'MatMul']
,→
2
for i, layer in enumerate(layers):
3
layer_info["layer_idx"] = i
4
layer_info["weights_matrix"] = weights.tolist()
5
...
6
layer_details.append(layer_info)
7
network_details["layers"] = layer_details
8
...
9
network_details["inputs_outputs"] = input_output_info
Lastly, the complete dictionary is constructed, assigned to the model attribute,
and saved as the network details JSON file in the json files folder of the generator
project.
1
counter=1
2
for layer in network_details["layers"]:
3
layer_key = "layer_" + str(counter)
4
weight_key = "w_matrix_" + str(counter)
5
...
6
NN_model[layer_key] = {"layer_idx": counter,
"layer_name":layer['layer_name']}
,→
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Python Generator Core
41
7
NN_model[layer_key][weight_key] = {'Values' :np.matrix(...),
'type': ...}
,→
8
NN_model[layer_key][bias_key] = ...
9
NN_model[layer_key][activation_key] = ...
10
counter += 1
11
self.model=network_details
12
with open('json_files/network_details.json', 'w') as json_file:
13
json.dump(self.model, json_file, indent=4)
The HyperM function is used to integrate the final JSON file with user-provided
information.
Two different methods were implemented: one that guides the
user through a simple run-time input system, and another that directly loads
a YAML file precompiled before execution (with only one method active; the
other is simply commented out). In both cases, the additional information is
incorporated into the JSON file. When using the YAML file option, the user is
required to fill out the following fields.
• folder name: This is the name of the folder where the final VHDL results
will be stored. It is always located inside the ”Results” directory of the
project.
• onnx file name: This is the name of the .ONNX model that the generator
needs to analyze to output its hardware implementation.
• with uart: This Boolean argument determines whether the files saved in
the final directory include only the neural network model (false) or the
entire system with the UART communication protocol (true).
• file bitwidth: Specifies the bitwidth of the constants stored in the VHDL
package. It was kept at eight for the evaluation phase of this work.
• counter max: It is an integer that represents the number of clock cycles
the Process controller has to wait before writing the output section of the
Memory3 entity. It is only relevant when the handshake argument is set
to false.
• start input: The starting memory address in Memory3 where input values
are stored by the UART protocol.
• start output: The starting memory address in Memory3 where the Pro-
cess controller will store the output values of the neural network.
• THRESHOLD: The integer threshold value used by the input loader to
binarize the 8 bit input values. Its value depends on how the input values
are generated and can usually be 0 or 127.
==PAGE:52==
42
Implementation
• is serialized: This Boolean argument selects a serial design for the neural
network when true, or one of the two parallel designs when false; the choice
between the parallel options is determined by the handshake argument.
• serial layers: Specifies the number of layers to be inferred in hardware
when a serial design is used. It must be null when the parallel solutions
are chosen.
• layer reuses: It is a list where each entry indicates how many times a
specific inferred layer will be used. The number of entries must match the
value specified in serial layers. If there is only one inferred layer for the
entire network (i.e., serial layers equals 1), this argument should be set to
the string “max” instead of a list.
• serialized neurons: A list where each entry specifies how many neurons
should be physically instantiated for each inferred layer. As in the previous
case, the number of entries must match the value specified in serial layers.
The list format must be maintained even when only one layer is present.
Each entry can be set to “max” to deploy all neurons of a given layer.
It must be declared as ”null” when is serialized is false. The same rule
applies to the two previous arguments.
• different files: A Boolean argument valid only for parallel architectures.
It determines whether each neuron should have its own VHDL file (true)
or whether one file should be generated per layer (false). This is only a
stylistic or organizational preference.
• weight file: A Boolean argument that determines whether the weights and
biases of the network are stored as arrays of constants (true) or loaded
dynamically from a BRAM entity (false). This must always be true when
handshake is false.
• handshake: A Boolean argument that selects between a timing-controlled
architecture (true) or a continuously active one (false).
For serialized
architectures, this must always be true.
The resulting JSON file structure is as follows:
1
"num_layers": 2,
2
"layers": [ layer_idx": 0,
3
"layer_name": "/fc1/MatMul",
4
"layer_inputs": 196,
5
"layer_outputs": 24,
6
"weights_matrix": [ ... ],
7
"weights_dtype": "float32",
8
"biases": [ ... ],
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Python Generator Core
43
9
"biases_dtype": "float32",
10
"activation_function": "None"]
11
"inputs_outputs" : ...
12
... YAML file parameters ...
4.1.2
Manager Class
The Manager class is the largest in terms of attributes and methods, as can be
ssen in Figure 4.3. Consequently, only the essential methods used to construct
the dictionaries are discussed. This class is instantiated without any constructor
arguments, at the very beginning of the main function, making it the first class
to be called and the first line of code to be executed.
Figure 4.3: Manager Class.
==PAGE:54==
44
Implementation
Starting with its attributes, the first one shown in Figure 4.3 holds the same
dictionary as the model attribute created in ModelParser, as this class is in-
stantiated and used by Manager in its
init
method. Here, the remaining
attributes are computed using the os Python package, as they are the paths to
the various directories that make up the entire project.
• templates dir: The path of the folder that contains the VHDL templates.
• json dir: The path of the folder that contains the JSON and YAML files.
• ONNX dir: The path of the folder that contains the .ONNX files of the
neural network models trained in Pytorch.
• synth dir: The path of the folder that contains the VHDL files needed to
functionally deploy the neural network on an FPGA.
• final dir: The path of the folder that contains all the output VHDL files
of the network. These represent the results of the generation process. Its
name is specified by the user inside the user configuration file and it will
always be placed inside the Results folder of the project
• unused dir: This folder contains the VHDL code for the testbenches, which
are used exclusively for evaluating the neural network component during
simulation.
It also performs two additional tasks: it calls the prepare folder method, which
creates the final dir folder, and it checks the user defined handshake key in the
onnx dict to set the neuron design to either the version without timing control
(no loop) or the one that uses an FSM to govern its operations (state mode).
This is required because they use two distinct templates for generation.
4.1.2.1
The create layers dict Method
Following the initialization of its attributes, the Manager class begins to build
the internal representation of the network using structured dictionaries. It starts
by calling the create layers dict method, which constructs a dictionary where
each entry corresponds to an individual layer or layer group, which is in itself a
dictionary. To determine which data to generate for the template, it relies on the
is serialized flag. When true, the method configures the layers to be executed in
a time-multiplexed manner and proceeds to initialize the layer dictionary with
as many entries as the user-provided layer reuses list.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Python Generator Core
45
1
layer_reuses = self.onnx_dict.get("layer_reuses", [])
2
if layer_reuses == "max":
3
layer_reuses = [self.onnx_dict["num_layers"]]
4
layers_dict = [{} for _ in range(len(layer_reuses))]
5
for i in range(len(layer_reuses)):
6
...
The individual values stored in layer reuses serve as counters that determine how
many consecutive layers from the ONNX model are to be grouped and reused
using a single physical hardware layer. For each group, the function traverses
the relevant portion of the JSON dictionary to extract data for the templates,
including the following:
• max data width: The maximum number of input features across the group,
which determines the width of the input bus and the size of shared input
registers, visible in Figure 3.9. The get layer input widths() method re-
turns a list representing the number of inputs for each layer in the model
(e.g. [128, 64, 32, 10])
1
input_widths = self.get_layer_input_widths()
2
...
3
layers_dict[i]["max_data_width"] = max(input_widths[count : count
+ layers_to_check])
,→
• max neuron number: The largest neuron count among the layers in the
current layer group.
If the user chooses ”max” as the only entry in
layer reuses, it is also the number of neurons physically deployed on the
FPGA. The get neuron per layer() method returns a list representing the
neuron count for each layer in the model (e.g. [64, 32, 10])
1
neurons = self.get_neuron_per_layer()
2
...
3
layers_dict[i]["max_neuron_number"] = max(neurons[count : count +
layers_to_check])
,→
• out neuron number: The number of neurons present in the last layer of
the current layer group.
1
layers_dict[i]["out_neuron_number"] = neurons[count +
layers_to_check -1]
,→
• full output: Flag that indicates whether the layer group produces a full-
precision output or a binary one, used to tailor the output vector widths
and logic. This is useful to classify which neuron must behave as a MIMO
==PAGE:56==
46
Implementation
system and which can be instantiated as MISO systems (Section 3.2.2).
The other neurons and use two entries further distinguish the role of each
neuron inside a layer. other neurons is the number of neurons inside the
inferred layer that behave as standard MISO systems, while use two is
a Boolean set to true when the layer uses both types of neurons, false
otherwise.
1
layers_dict[i]["other_neurons"] =
layers_dict[i]["max_neuron_number"] -
layers_dict[i]["out_neuron_number"]
,→
,→
2
if i == len(layer_reuses) - 1:
3
if bit_sizes[2] > 1:
4
layers_dict[i]["full_output"] = True
5
else:
6
layers_dict[i]["full_output"] = False
7
else:
8
layers_dict[i]["full_output"] = False
If the user specifies that a given layer configuration should use fewer physical
neurons than required by the ONNX model, the system must compute the layer
over multiple hardware passes. To support this behaviour, the method extends
each entry in layers dict with additional keys and logic:
• The flag less neurons is set to true to indicate that not all neurons required
by the ONNX layer are available simultaneously on hardware at once.
• The number of physical neurons available in the fixed architecture is read
from onnx dict[”serialized neurons”] and stored as fixed neurons num.
1
layers_dict[i]["less_neurons"] = True
2
layers_dict[i]["fixed_neurons_num"] =
self.onnx_dict["serialized_neurons"][i]
,→
3
...
• A loop over the number of logical layers to check (layers to check) accumu-
lates a range max value, representing the total number of virtual neurons
that will be scheduled across all passes. If a layer requires more neurons
than the available fixed neurons num, the code computes how many full
chunks (each the size of fixed neurons num) are required with an integer
division and remainder operation. Whenever the remainder is non-zero,
the last chunk is categorized as ”partial”, while all preceding chunks are
considered ”full”. This classification allows slicing operations to be stati-
cally defined within the VHDL templates.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Python Generator Core
47
1
layers_dict[i]["range_max"] = range_max
2
...
3
for j,neurs in enumerate(neurons[count : count +
layers_to_check]):
,→
4
full_chunks = neurs // layers_dict[i]["fixed_neurons_num"]
5
remainder = neurs % layers_dict[i]["fixed_neurons_num"]
6
layer_steps = []
7
for chunk in range(full_chunks):
8
start_bit = layers_dict[i]["max_neuron_number"] -
layers_dict[i]["fixed_neurons_num"] * (chunk + 1)
,→
9
end_bit = layers_dict[i]["max_neuron_number"] -
layers_dict[i]["fixed_neurons_num"] * chunk - 1
,→
10
layer_steps.append({
11
"start_bit": start_bit,
12
"end_bit": end_bit,
13
"slice_type": "full"
14
})
15
if remainder > 0:
16
end_bit = layers_dict[i]["max_neuron_number"] -
layers_dict[i]["fixed_neurons_num"] * full_chunks - 1
,→
17
start_bit = end_bit - remainder + 1
18
layer_steps.append({
19
"start_bit": start_bit,
20
"end_bit": end_bit,
21
"slice_type": "partial",
22
"partial_range": (layers_dict[i]["fixed_neurons_num"]
- 1, layers_dict[i]["fixed_neurons_num"] -
remainder)
,→
,→
23
})
24
chosen_layers.append(layer_steps)
• The maximum number of execution steps required to process any sin-
gle logical layer is tracked in max overflow steps, which is then stored as
max overflow count to determine the depth of the FSM’s repeat loop.
When is serialized is false, the construction of the dictionary becomes much
simpler, as an entry is always created for each of the model layers.
4.1.2.2
The create neurons dict Method
Like the previous method, it is divided into different blocks of code, one for
each design. The dictionary it generates contains data for all neurons of the
network. For the serial design, it can generate either one or two entries per layer.
For example, given a neural network with two layers: the first containing 24
==PAGE:58==
48
Implementation
neurons and the second containing three. If the user implements it using a single
hardware layer of 24 physical neurons, only a subset of neurons, specifically
three, must produce multiple outputs to match the requirements of the second
layer. The remaining ones, each produce a single output. As a result, two types
of neuron instances are required: those capable of generating multiple outputs
and those with a standard single-output configuration. On the other hand, if the
user implements it using one hardware layer made of two physical neurons, then
only the multi-output neuron is required. This is the reason why the entries of
these dictionaries are initialized as shown below:
1
if self.onnx_dict["is_serialized"] is True:
2
layer_reuses = self.onnx_dict["layer_reuses"]
3
if layer_reuses == "max":
4
layer_reuses = [self.onnx_dict["num_layers"]]
5
neurons_dict = [{} for _ in range(2*len(layer_reuses) -
self.layer_max_counter)]
,→
6
for i in range(2*len(layer_reuses) - self.layer_max_counter):
7
...
By default, two neurons are assigned to each serial layer. When a single output
type is required, a class counter updated in the create layers dict method is
subtracted accordingly. The only keys worth noting are sum logic, which takes
its value from a handshake check in the class’s
init
method, and num stages,
whose value is computed via the calculate num stages function of the helper
module. The role of num stages is explored in Section [X]. The remaining ones
are used to customize the definitions of ports and signals within the templates.
The differences between the two parallel generation methods are marginal. In
the first approach, each neuron is instantiated as a separate entity, with a unique
index ranging from 0 to the total number of neurons in the network. In contrast,
the second approach groups all neurons within the same layer under a shared
entity, assigning them the index of their respective layer.
1
neuron_sum = sum(neurons)
2
layer_neuron_target = neurons[layer_idx]
3
for i in range(neuron_sum):
4
neurons_dict[i]["name"] = "neuron"
5
neurons_dict[i]["neur_idx"] = i
6
...
7
for idx, _ in enumerate(layers):
8
neurons_dict[idx]["name"] = "neuron"
9
neurons_dict[idx]["neur_idx"] = idx
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Python Generator Core
49
4.1.2.3
The create pkg dict Method
This method generates the dictionary for the constants and types package. It
works in conjunction with other methods responsible for reshaping the network
data; specifically, flattening matrices and padding arrays with zeros. For paral-
lel network designs, it calls the get all weight columns flattened method, which
flattens the weight matrices column-wise, and the get flattened biases method,
which aggregates all bias values into one continuous array.
The rows of the
weight matrix represent the inputs to the layer, while the columns correspond
to the individual neurons. Therefore, flattening the matrix column-wise means
concatenating the weights for each neuron sequentially, matching the way neu-
rons are processed in hardware. No extra zero-padding is needed in this case as
each neuron physically exists and is never reused. In the case of serial designs,
however, zero padding must first be applied to align all matrices column-wise and
ensure that, row-wise, each matrix has a number of elements that is a multiple
of the number of instantiated neurons. Figure 4.4 illustrates this process with
a small example: a neural network composed of two layers, with three and one
neurons, respectively, is implemented using a single hardware layer with three
neurons. Figure 4.5, on the other hand, shows the same network implemented
with a single hardware layer of only two neurons.
Figure 4.4: First zero-padding example for an NN of two layers.
The logic that performs these operations is provided by the get padded weight
columns and get padded biases methods. They both take as input arguments the
number of layers that share the same physical neurons, the number of physical
neurons shared, and the less neurons flag.
==PAGE:60==
50
Implementation
Figure 4.5: Second zero-padding example for an NN of two layers.
The create net memory dict method is tightly linked to the previously discussed
one, as it takes its output dictionary as input and prepares the data for ROM
storage when such memory is used in the design. With respect to create pkg dict,
it performs two additional operations.
It begins by merging the weight and
bias arrays: once the weights for a neuron are exhausted, the corresponding
bias is appended, and the pattern repeats for subsequent neurons. After this,
the function ensures proper alignment with the 32-bit ROM cell width. Since
weights and biases are stored as 8-bit values, if the total number of elements per
neuron is not a multiple of four, zero-padding is added to fill the remaining bits
of the register. These two operations are carried out using the helper functions
insert at intervals and pad to multiple of four, defined in the helper.py module.
Additionally, the ROM depth is computed by dividing the total number of
stored elements by four (the number of bytes per memory word) and derives the
corresponding address width as ⌈log2(mem depth)⌉. This results in a resizable
ROM whose dimensions adapt dynamically to the network configuration.
1
for (key, value) in (pkg_dict.items()):
2
if isinstance(value, list):
3
for i,subdict in enumerate(value):
4
if isinstance(subdict, dict) :
5
gen_rows = subdict["generated_rows"]
6
b_array = subdict["bias_array"]
7
max_width = subdict["max_width"]
8
max_neurons = subdict["max_neurons"]
9
ram_values = help.insert_at_intervals(gen_rows, b_array,
max_width, max_neurons)
,→
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Python Generator Core
51
10
memory_dict["ram_values"] +=
help.pad_to_multiple_of_four(ram_values, max_width
+ 1 )
,→
,→
11
div = int(memory_dict["word_size"] / memory_dict["file_bitwidth"])
12
mem_depth = help.calculate_mem_depth(len(memory_dict["ram_values"]),
div)
,→
13
memory_dict["end_RAM"] = mem_depth
14
memory_dict["addr_size"] = help.calculate_ROM_address(mem_depth)
15
self.rom_weights_length = memory_dict["addr_size"]
4.1.2.4
Additional Dictionary Creator Methods
The other methods shown in Figure 4.3 are mostly straightforward and will not
be covered in as much detail as the ones previously discussed. Only a brief
summary of their roles is provided.
• create NN Model dict: Creates the dictionary for the neural network tem-
plate (NN dict).
Its keys include layer count, layer names, and layer
generics, which are used for specifying the number of layer entities to in-
stantiate and their configuration parameter. In addition, the dictionary
contains keys that define the input and output port signals for the overall
design.
• create iloader dict: Creates the dictionary for the input loader template.
This is where the THRESHOLD parameter from the YAML file is used
as a key. It also enables modifying the input loader entity to accept input
values wider than 8 bits.
• create process controller dict: The dictionary created by this method spec-
ifies the start and end addresses of the memory regions where the inputs
and outputs of the neural network are stored, as well as the size of the
memory address space.
• creat top level dict: Creates a simple dictionary used to define the signal
dimensions in the top-level entity of the project.
• create TB dict: The dictionary created by this method is used exclusively
for simulation purposes. It formats data appropriately as input for the
testbenches. The output file is stored in the project’s ”Unused” folder.
==PAGE:62==
52
Implementation
4.1.3
Templates and NeuronModel Class
The templates serve as the point of contact between the Python-based struc-
ture and the VHDL code. Their creation process begins with prototyping the
final output of the generator and then works backward toward a more abstract
representation of it. This reverse engineering approach involves identifying the
core structural backbone of the target entity and systematically parameterizing
all its variable elements. This, of course, has influenced the hardware design
process in itself, encouraging the creation of more modular network components
that, for example, make use of finite-state machines to sequence their behaviour.
To simplify template management, a behavioural approach to VHDL coding has
been adopted, allowing each component to be described at a high level of ab-
straction.
This means that a single template is often enough for each type
of component, instead of requiring multiple structural variations. To further
support this one-template-per-component approach, Jinja2 is used as the tem-
plating engine. Jinja2 inherits Python’s expressiveness, thus allowing templates
themselves to encode loops, conditions, and parameter substitutions, enabling
the generation of multiple configurations of the same hardware entity, such as
varying input sizes, control logic, or port definitions without needing separate
templates. In addition, it is designed to accept configuration data in the form
of dictionaries, making it the ideal fit for this context.
The NeuronModel class, along with the neuron templates, best illustrates the
interaction between Python, Jinja2, and VHDL. For this reason, it is the only
case covered in detail, serving as an example for the development of the other
templates.
Figure 4.6: NeuronModel class.
The NeuronModel class is instantiated within the LayerModel class, once for
each entry in the neuron dictionary previously assembled by the Manager class.
Rather than passing the entire dictionary, each individual entry is provided as
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Python Generator Core
53
a separate argument during instantiation. Inside NeuronModel, this entry is
referred to as n dict and stored as an internal attribute. Alongside this, several
additional arguments are required to construct an instance of the class, which
are outlined below.
• template dir and final dir: The folder paths previously constructed in the
init
method of the Manager class.
• data width: The number of inputs of the neuron.
• weight matrix idx: This value indicates which weight array should be used
when the weights are stored as constants. Since each group of layers that is
inferred as a single physical layer has its own distinct weight array, separate
arrays are created in the constant package to maintain clear differentiation.
Inside the
init
method, these values are assigned as attributes, and the four
methods shown in Figure 4.6 are called. In this class, the first three methods
follow a consistent pattern. They generate predefined VHDL lines, store them
in lists, and add them as entries in a dictionary. This approach to template
rendering makes it possible to exclude loops and complex data handling from the
final generated code. The template’s role is limited to specifying the placement
of each line of code and the overall structure of the VHDL file, while data fill
in the necessary details. The following code snippet of the neuron template
illustrates this effect.
1 elsif rising_edge(clk) then
2
{%- if is_serialized is true or handshake is true %}
3
if start ='1' then
4
{%- endif %}
5
-- Load initial values (weights)
6
{%- for line in weight_loading %}
7
{{ line }}
8
{%- endfor %}
9
10
-- Perform reduction addition
11
{%- for line in reduction_addition %}
12
{{ line }}
13
{%- endfor %}
14
...
15 end if;
It highlights the templating syntax used by Jinja2, which closely resembles
Python and uses expressions enclosed in curly braces.
Each variable inside
these curly braces corresponds to entries in Python dictionaries, allowing the
==PAGE:64==
54
Implementation
template engine to replace them with the appropriate values during render-
ing. Here weight loading and reduction addition are the entries in the n dict
attribute of NeuronModel, produced by the generate weight loading and addi-
tion logic methods, respectively. To fully understand the construction of the
lines list, it is essential to first examine how the sum operation of the neuron is
implemented.
The addition performed by neurons in a Binarized Neural Network (BNN) is
a critical operation and must be optimized for hardware efficiency. Given n
elements to sum, adding them sequentially would require a total of n steps.
Therefore, a tree reduction approach to addition is considered, as it completes
the sum in log2(n) steps by performing
n
2k parallel sums at each stage k, for
k = 1, 2, ..., log2(n) [20]. In hardware implementations, each value to be summed
is stored in a register. After each addition stage, the resulting sums are stored in
a subsequent set of registers, forming a structure analogous to a register matrix.
This organization is illustrated in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Reduction tree addition example.
In the VHDL code developed for this work, this register matrix is named
“stages”. Within the Python framework, the term num stages corresponds to
the length of a column in this matrix, which is, of course, calculated as log2(n),
as shown below.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Python Generator Core
55
1
def calculate_num_stages(n_inputs):
2
return math.ceil(math.log2(n_inputs))
Inside the addition logic method, a line of VHDL code is created for each reg-
ister in the matrix and appended to the overall list of lines under the reduc-
tion addition entry. The code below regulates this process.
1
for stage in range(1, num_stages + 1):
2
step = 2 ** (stage - 1)
3
for j in range(self.data_width):
4
if j % (2 ** stage) == 0:
5
if j + step < self.data_width:
6
line = f"{indent}stages({stage}, {j}) <=
stages({stage-1}, {j}) + stages({stage-1},
{j+step});"
,→
,→
7
else:
8
line = f"{indent}stages({stage}, {j}) <=
stages({stage-1}, {j});"
,→
9
else:
10
line = f"{indent}stages({stage}, {j}) <= (others => '0');"
11
reduction_addition.append(line)
The inner loop iterates over the columns of the matrix (i.e., the bit positions)
and determines which line to append for each register. Three possibilities exist:
• If the index j corresponds to the start of a pair (that is, j % 2stage == 0)
and the next value exists within bounds, the register at position (stage, j)
is assigned the sum of two registers from the previous stage.
• If the next value is out of bounds, the register simply copies the corre-
sponding value from the previous stage.
• In all other cases, the register is assigned zero to neutralize it in the com-
putation.
The generate weight loading method implements the conditional masking oper-
ation described in Section 2.2.2 by generating VHDL lines that conditionally
assign weights to the initial stage of the addition matrix. Specifically, it iterates
over the input bit width and, for each bit, checks whether the corresponding bit
in the input register is set to ‘1’. If so, the corresponding weight is loaded and
resized to match the target bit width; otherwise, a zero vector is assigned. This
operation is translated into a single line of code, as shown below.
1
for i in range(self.data_width):
2
...
==PAGE:66==
56
Implementation
3
lines.append(f"{indent}stages(0, {i}) <= resize(first_regs({i}),
{self.n_dict['w_bitwidth']}) when inputs({self.data_width - i
-1}) = '1' else (others => '0');")
,→
,→
The activation func method also performs a similar role by writing VHDL lines
to define the neuron’s activation behaviour. Specifically, it generates logic based
on the activation type defined in the n dict configuration. When the neuron
is serialized (is serialized = True), uses a handshake protocol (handshake =
True), and is responsible for producing the full output (full output = True
and other neuron = False), the method appends two key lines to the activa-
tion logic list. The first line stores the raw output of the addition operation
in output reg 1 next. The second line applies a binary threshold function to
determine the activation result, writing ‘1’ when the sum is positive and ‘0’
otherwise. Both of them are shown in the next code section.
1
elif self.n_dict["is_serialized"] == True and self.n_dict["handshake"]
== True:
,→
2
if self.n_dict["other_neuron"] == False and
self.n_dict["full_output"] is True:
,→
3
line = f"output_reg_1_next <= sum;"
4
activation_logic.append(line)
5
if activation_type == "threshold":
6
line = f"output_reg_2_next <= '1' when sum > to_signed(0,
{self.n_dict['o_bitwidth']}) else '0';"
,→
7
elif activation_type == "Sigmoid":
8
line = f"output_reg_2_next <= '1' when sum > to_signed(0,
{self.n_dict['o_bitwidth']}) else '0';"
,→
9
...
This method is designed with extensibility in mind, allowing for future support
of diverse activation functions. However, in the current implementation of the
generator, only the ”threshold” activation is actively used.
Finally, the generate vhdl method is tasked with preparing and initializing the
Jinja2 templating engine environment. It does so by specifying the template
directory and loading the appropriate template file. Once the environment is
configured, the method renders the template using the internal n dict dictio-
nary. The rendered output is then written to the specified output directory and
file. This method effectively serves as the last step in the neuron code genera-
tion pipeline, transforming Python-side logic and data into synthesizable VHDL
source code. It is used across all classes involved in hardware generation, except
for Manager and ModelParser.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
57
4.2
VHDL Hardware Implementation
With the core functionality of the Python-based generator established, in this
section, the hardware implementation in VHDL is detailed. Where appropri-
ate, finite-state machine diagrams are included to illustrate the control flow and
highlight differences arising from various configuration options. All the gener-
ated VHDL code is compliant with the VHDL-2008 standard.
4.2.1
Neuron Implementation
With regard to its fundamental structure, the main execution unit of the net-
work can be handled in two different ways: one using a state machine to control
execution timing, and the other without one, where all operations, from weight
loading to summation, are constantly being performed on the same clock edge,
as already described in Chapter 3. The latter approach is relatively straight-
forward, relying on a single process that updates each stage of the reduction
addition tree on every clock cycle. In contrast, the first version requires the
creation of two separate finite-state machines: one for the case where weights
and biases are provided as constant arrays, and another for when these values
are stored in ROM memory. Both are shown below:
Figure 4.8: FSM of a layer with statically defined weights via constant arrays.
==PAGE:68==
58
Implementation
Figure 4.9: FSM of a neuron with weights stored in ROM.
They are Mealy state machines, as all the others created for this work, with
states reflecting the natural progression of the neuron’s operations. The follow-
ing list describes all the states present in both Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.9.
• IDLE: In this state, the neuron remains inactive while monitoring the start
signal. Once the signal transitions to a high level, the neuron exits the
IDLE state and begins its operations.
• LOAD: For configurations without a ROM, this state populates the first
row of the stages matrix with weight values, but only if the corresponding
input value is ‘1’; otherwise, the weight is ignored.
The transition to
the next state occurs immediately after this operation is completed. In
configurations with a ROM, the LOAD state instead populates a group of
registers called first regs with weight values, without applying any input-
driven conditional filtering. In this case, the state is maintained as long as
both the load enable and done load signals are high (‘1’). These signals are
driven by the ROM controller entity and regulate the loading of weights
into the neurons.
• BINARIZE: A state only present in neural network configurations that
use a ROM for weight storage. It complements the behaviour described
in the LOAD state. It performs a masking operation similar to the non-
ROM case, populating the first row of the stages matrix with weight values
==PAGE:69==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
59
only when the corresponding input value is ‘1’; otherwise, the weights are
ignored.
• COMPUTE STAGE k: For each row of the stages matrix, there is a cor-
responding state that performs the summation of that row. Each state
completes its calculation and immediately transitions to the next.
• ADD BIAS: In this state, the neuron’s bias term is added to the value of
the first element in the last row of the stages matrix.
• ACTIVATE: In this state, the output ports of the neuron are assigned
the result, which may be the raw sum, the binarized sum, or both. Addi-
tionally, the done signal is asserted high to indicate the completion of the
computation.
• FINISH: This state confirms that the neuron has completed its operations.
It is maintained until the start signal is reset to a low state, at which point
the machine transitions back to IDLE. The control of this transition is
managed externally by the layer entity to ensure proper state switching.
In VHDL, the FSMs were realized using a two-process state machine structure,
separating the combinatorial next-state logic from the sequential state and out-
put updates. In particular, the stages, output reg, current state, and done reg
signals have a next counterpart that is updated in the combinatorial process.
This structure is shown in the following code snippet.
1 process(clk)
2
begin
3
if rising_edge(clk) then
4
if rst = '1' then
5
current_state <= IDLE;
6
sum <= (others => '0');
7
...
8
else
9
current_state <= next_state;
10
...
11
if current_state = LOAD then
12
...
13 end process
14 process(current_state , start ,stages , sum , inputs ,output_reg , done_reg)
15
begin
16
next_state <= current_state;
17
...
18
case current_state is
19
when IDLE =>
20
...
21 end process
==PAGE:70==
60
Implementation
In the combinatorial process, when the non-ROM neuron configuration is used,
the LOAD state simply assigns the next state without performing any weight-
related computation. Instead, the actual operation of assigning weight values
to the first row of the matrix occurs in the clocked process. This choice avoids
unnecessary logic duplication during synthesis, as it prevents the inference of
additional LUT-based multiplexers. Conditional assignments to weights within
the combinatorial process are typically interpreted by the synthesizer as extra
multiplexers rather than flip-flops (FDCEs or FDREs). In contrast, all COM-
PUTE STAGE k operations are performed within the combinatorial process
because they do not involve conditional assignments.
Their results are then
latched into the appropriate registers by the clocked process, as can be seen
below.
1 process(clk)
2
begin
3
...
4
stages <= stages_next;
5
if current_state = LOAD then
6
stages(0, 0) <= resize(weight_matrix_0( weights_idx_0(
start_weight + current_neuron) + 0 ), 32)
when inputs (63) = '1' else (others => '0');
7
...
8 process(current_state , start ,stages , sum ,output_reg_1 , output_reg_2 ,
done_reg)
9
begin
10
...
11
when LOAD =>
12
next_state <= COMPUTE_STAGE_0;
13
when COMPUTE_STAGE_0 =>
14
stages_next (1, 0) <= stages(0, 0) + stages(0, 1);
15
stages_next (1, 1) <= (others => '0');
16
...
This approach results in a reduction in LUT usage of approximately 20–25%,
accompanied by an increase of 10% in flip-flop (FF) usage.
In the ROM-based neuron configuration, the LOAD stage in the combinatorial
process is modified to accommodate two additional control signals: load enable
and done load. When the FSM is in this state, the sequential process handles
the actual data assignment by loading the 8-bit values into a new set of registers
called first regs. This setup ensures proper coordination between the ROM con-
troller and the neuron. The BINARIZE state, on the other hand, performs the
same function as the LOAD state did in the non-ROM configuration. The rest
of the FSM remains unchanged. The same considerations regarding LUT usage
apply in this approach as well, since the same separation between combinatorial
and sequential logic is maintained. The following code attests to that fact.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
61
1 process(clk)
2
begin
3
...
4
if current_state = LOAD then
5
if load_en = '1' then
6
first_regs(input_idx) <= data;
7
end if;
8
end if;
9
if current_state = BINARIZE then
10
stages(0, 0) <= resize(first_regs (0), 32) when inputs (63) =
'1' else (others => '0');
11
...
12 process(current_state , start ,stages , sum ,output_reg_1 , output_reg_2 ,
done_reg)
13
begin
14
...
15
when LOAD =>
16
if load_en = '1' then
17
if done_load = '1' then
18
next_state <= BINARIZE;
19
end if;
20
end if;
21
when BINARIZE =>
22
next_state <= COMPUTE_STAGE_0;
23
...
4.2.2
Layer Implementation
Among the generated entities, the layer modules exhibit the greatest degree of
variability. Depending on the architecture, whether fully parallel, synchronized,
or serialized, different VHDL implementations are created. For each of these
configurations, the layers may differ based on their position in the network
and on how weights and biases are provided, either through constant arrays or
stored in a ROM. In total, eight core combinations are generated, with additional
variations arising from differences in output format, binary or otherwise.
Regardless of how the layer is implemented, its code always includes a sec-
tion dedicated to neuron port mapping, which is particularly straightforward to
generate using the Jinja2 templating language through a simple for loop. The
specific generics and ports used in each neuron instance naturally vary depend-
ing on the configuration. An example of this port-mapping operation is provided
below and illustrates how, in a parallel configuration without ROM, information
about the position of weights and biases in the array is communicated to each
neuron.
==PAGE:72==
62
Implementation
1 neuron_inst_9 : entity work.neuron_3
2
generic map (
3
current_neuron => 9,
4
bias_index
=> 32,
5
start_weight
=> 43296,
6
DATA_WIDTH
=> 32
7
)
8
port map (
9
clk
=> clk ,
10
rst
=> rst ,
11
inputs => released_inputs ,
12
output_final => neuron_outputs (0)
13
);
The other code sections of the layer implementation are used for entity and signal
declaration, with the processes naturally emerging as the core part to examine.
Starting from the parallel configuration shown in Figure 3.4, the input layer is
implemented as a clocked process, shown below, that realizes the multiplexer
depicted there.
1 PROCESS(clk , rst)
2
BEGIN
3
if (rst = '1') then
4
released_inputs <= (others => '0');
5
elsif(rising_edge(clk)) THEN
6
if start='1' then
7
released_inputs <= inputs;
8
end if;
9
end if;
10
end PROCESS;
11
outputs <= neuron_outputs;
12 end architecture behavioural;
The remaining layers are composed of simple concurrent assignments that man-
age the connection between the input and output ports of the layer.
1
released_inputs <= inputs;
2
outputs
<= neuron_outputs;
The other parallel configuration, illustrated in Figure 3.6, uses a single layer type
throughout the network, with a minor variation introduced when weights are
stored in a ROM. In this case, each layer includes a clocked process responsible
for managing the start signals of the neuron instances port-mapped within it.
The start and done signals of each layer facilitate communication between layers,
==PAGE:73==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
63
where the done signal of one layer triggers the start of the next. Additionally, a
conditional check monitors the termination of all neurons to set the done signal
high accordingly. The code implementing what has just been described is as
follows.
1 PROCESS(clk , rst)
2
BEGIN
3
if (rst = '1') then
4
released_inputs <= (others => '0');
5
start_neurons
<= '0';
6
done
<= '0';
7
outputs
<= (others => '0');
8
elsif (rising_edge(clk)) then
9
done <= '0';
10
if start='1' and start_neurons = '0' then
11
released_inputs <= inputs;
12
start_neurons
<= '1';
13
elsif neuron_done_vector = ALL_ONES then
14
start_neurons
<= '0';
15
done
<= '1';
16
outputs
<= neuron_outputs;
17
end if;
18
end if;
19
end PROCESS;
20 end architecture behavioural;
When the overall neural network architecture includes a ROM for weight storage,
the process described above is modified by adding the req rom signal, which acts
as a trigger for the ROM controller to begin loading the weights and biases for
the neurons instantiated by the requesting layer.
1 PROCESS(clk , rst)
2
BEGIN
3
if (rst = '1') then
4
released_inputs <= (others => '0');
5
start_neurons
<= '0';
6
done
<= '0';
7
req_ROM
<= '0';
8
...
9
if start='1' and start_neurons = '0' then
10
released_inputs <= inputs;
11
start_neurons
<= '1';
12
req_rom
<= '1';
13
...
The remaining four layer types are all implemented using finite state machines.
Each FSM is developed following the same two-process architecture employed
==PAGE:74==
64
Implementation
for neuron management. However, unlike the FSMs of neurons, variables are
also employed here. This decision proved beneficial during development, as these
FSMs are the largest and most complex to implement. They have undergone
the most significant changes and optimizations, and the use of variables helped
to better manage timing and signal tracking throughout this process. Inside
the combinatorial process, variables are first declared, then assigned the current
values of signals, manipulated throughout the process, and finally, their values
are assigned to the corresponding next-state signals, as depicted here.
1 process(state , start , start_neuron ,...)
2 variable tmp_state
: state_type;
3 ...
4 begin
5
tmp_state
:= state;
6
tmp_start_neuron
:= start_neuron;
7
...
8
(Finite -state machine)
9
...
10
next_state
<= tmp_state;
11
...
Figure 4.10: FSM of a serial layer using array-based weights, representing the
largest layer in a user-defined group.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
65
The FSM illustrated in Figure 4.10 corresponds to the serial configuration in
which one physical layer is used to implement the layer containing the largest
number of neurons within a user-specified layer group. Here, no ROM is used
for storage. This FSM transitions through the following states:
• IDLE: The layer remains in this state until the start signal is asserted
(‘1’). Upon this event, the inputs are loaded into the connection in signal,
representing the neuron input registers, and the FSM proceeds to the next
state.
• INITIATE: The start neurons signal is set to ‘1’, triggering all neurons
instantiated by the layer to begin processing, and the last layer signal is
set to ‘1’ if the last layer is to be computed. After this operation, the FSM
immediately transitions to the next state.
• WAIT L DONE: The layer waits for all neurons to finish their operations
by checking the neuron done array. Once all its elements are ‘1’ the FSM
transitions to the next state.
• CLEAR INPUTS: All elements of the connection in signal are set to zero,
and the FSM transitions to the next state.
• COPY OUTPUTS: The outputs of the neurons, stored in the connec-
tion out signal, are copied in selected slices of the connection in signal,
depending on the value of the layer count counter that keeps track of the
number of layers already executed. The slicing range used for this opera-
tion is pre-computed by the Python generator and directly embedded in
the VHDL as shown below.
1 case layer_count is
2 when 0 =>
3
tmp_connection_in (63 downto 40) := connection_out (23 downto 0);
4 when others =>
5
tmp_state := IDLE;
• COMPLETE: The last layer signal is evaluated. If it is set to ‘1’, the FSM
transitions to the TERMINATE state. Otherwise, the layer count signal
is incremented, and the FSM proceeds to the UPDATE INDEXES state.
• UPDATE INDEXES: The start weight and bias index signals, which are
used by the neurons to retrieve their corresponding weight and bias values,
are updated in this state. The FSM then transitions back to the INITIATE
state.
==PAGE:76==
66
Implementation
• TERMINATE: The start weight and bias index signals are reset to 0. The
layer’s output is assigned the last computed value from connection out, and
the done flag is asserted. Finally, the FSM transitions back to the initial
IDLE state.
The FSM corresponding to the same serial layer configuration, now employing
a ROM for weight storage, is shown below:
Figure 4.11: FSM of a serial layer using a ROM for weight storage, represent-
ing the largest layer in a user-defined group.
In this configuration, the UPDATE INDEXES state is omitted, along with the
start weight and bias index signals, as weights are no longer accessed through
index-based arrays. Instead, they are provided directly to neurons when needed.
The req ROM signal is introduced as an output from the INITIATE state, as-
serted for a single clock cycle before being immediately reset to ‘0’. Another
notable difference is that, due to the sequential nature of ROM weight loading,
only the last neuron is explicitly monitored for completion. This is because it
is guaranteed to finish last, making it a reliable indicator of the completion of
the entire layer.
The remaining two layer configurations are used when the user explicitly de-
fines the number of neurons to be physically instantiated for a given group of
layers. Compared to the previous two FSM schemes, these introduce four addi-
tional states while retaining all the key characteristics described for the ROM-
==PAGE:77==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
67
based configuration. In particular, the absence of the UPDATE INDEXES state
and the start weight, and bias index signals remains, along with the use of the
req ROM signal and the optimization of tracking only the last neuron’s comple-
tion status. This shared behaviour is also the main reason only one of the two
FSMs is shown, particularly the one that relies on a ROM for weights, as the
other closely follows the same logic already explained above.
Figure 4.12: FSM of a serial layer with ROM-based weight storage, enabling
user-defined neuron counts below the group’s maximum capacity.
The four additional states are responsible for the following tasks.
• WAIT N DONE: It waits for the current batch of neurons to complete
their execution by monitoring the neuron slice done signal of the last neu-
ron in the batch. Once this signal is asserted, the FSM transitions to the
CHECK REPEAT state.
• CHECK REPEAT: Based on the layer currently being processed (indi-
cated by the layer count signal) and the value of the overflow counter, this
state assigns the outputs of the neurons, stored in neuron slice out, to the
appropriate range within the connection out signal. The overflow counter
tracks how many batches are required to fully compute the current layer.
==PAGE:78==
68
Implementation
When layer count reaches the final layer in the repeated group, the con-
tents of neuron slice out are instead copied to the outputs cp signal, as
they represent the final outputs of the group. As in the COPY OUTPUTS
state, all slicing ranges are pre-computed by the Python generator. An
example of a slice assignment inside this state is provided below.
1 case layer_count is
2
when 0 =>
3
case overflow_counter is
4
when 0 =>
5
tmp_connection_out (127 downto 126) :=
neuron_slice_out;
6
tmp_state := UPDATE_REPEAT;
7
...
8
when others =>
9
tmp_state := IDLE;
10
end case;
11
when 1 =>
12
case overflow_counter is
13
when 0 =>
14
tmp_outputs_cp (9 downto 5) := output_part;
15
tmp_state := UPDATE_REPEAT;
16
...
17
when others =>
18
tmp_state := IDLE;
19 end case;
• UPDATE REPEAT: This state is reached every time there are still more
neuron slices to be computed in the model layer being currently executed.
It updates the overflow counter and makes the FSM transition back to
the INITIATE state.
• UPDATE DONE: This state is entered once the final connection out array
contains all results for the current layer. It resets the overflow counter to
zero and transitions the FSM to the CLEAR INPUTS state.
As a final note, each layer configuration used within a neural network employing
ROM-based weight storage defines two constant signals: NEURON INPUTS
and NEURON NUM. The NEURON INPUTS constant specifies the number of
weights required by each instantiated neuron, including the bias term, while
NEURON NUM denotes the total number of neurons instantiated within the
layer. These constants are passed as input break and neuron break signals to
the ROM controller entity whenever it is accessed by a given layer. The layer
entity itself always drives these signals with the following statements.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
69
1 input_break <= NEURON_INPUTS;
2 neuron_break <= NEURON_NUM;
The neural network entity subsequently determines which of these signals should
be routed to the ROM controller, as explained in the following section.
4.2.3
Neural Network Entity Implementation
The primary role of the neural network entity is to structurally integrate all
required components through port mapping, thereby enabling the functional
realization of the complete network. In most configurations, this entity primarily
consists of a hierarchical list of component instantiations, where each internal
layer and control module is port-mapped and interconnected according to the
system’s architectural specification, as shown in the following code section.
1 entity neural_network is
2
port (
3
clk
: in std_logic;
4
rst
: in std_logic;
5
enable
: in std_logic;
6
inputs
: in unsigned (7 downto 0);
7
ending
: out std_logic;
8
outputs : out output (9 downto 0)
9
);
10 end neural_network;
11 architecture Structural of neural_network is
12
-- Intermediate signals
13
signal ending_reg
: std_logic := '0';
14
signal layer_output_0 : std_logic_vector (23 downto 0) ...;
15
signal done_0
: std_logic := '0';
16
signal inp_out
: std_logic_vector (63 downto 0) ...;
17
signal ready
: std_logic := '0';
18 begin
19
ending
<= ending_reg;
20
input_loader_inst : entity work.input_loader
21
port map(
22
clk
=> clk ,
23
rst
=> rst ,
24
ready => ready ,
25
...
26
-- Layer 0: Takes input from the network
27
MatMul_0_serial_inst : entity work.MatMul_0_serial
28
generic map (
29
layer_number => 1,
30
)
31
port map (
32
clk
=> clk ,
==PAGE:80==
70
Implementation
33
rst
=> rst ,
34
inputs
=> inp_out ,
35
start
=> ready ,
36
done => done_0 ,
37
outputs => layer_output_0
38
);
39
...
A process is instantiated within the neural network entity only when a ROM
is present in the design. In such cases, a dedicated clocked process named se-
lect layer is responsible for routing the appropriate input break and neuron break
signals from the individual layers to the ROM controller. This process evalu-
ates, on every rising edge of the clock, which layer is currently requesting new
data to be loaded.
Naturally, layers cannot simultaneously issue ROM access requests, as their
activity is mutually exclusive and governed by their respective finite state ma-
chines. To manage ROM access, the start ROM signal is defined as the logical
OR of all individual ROM start requests, such as start ROM 0, start ROM 1,
and so forth. This effectively aggregates the ROM activation signals from mul-
tiple layers into a single request line directed to the ROM controller. The logic
is illustrated in the VHDL snippet below.
1 start_ROM <=start_ROM_0 or start_ROM_1 or start_ROM_2;
2 select_layer : process(clk)
3 begin
4 if rising_edge(clk) then
5
if start_ROM_0 = '1' then
6
input_break
<= NEURON_INPUTS_0;
7
neuron_break <= NEURON_NUM_0;
8
elsif start_ROM_1 = '1' then
9
...
10 rom_inst : entity work.network_weights
11
port map(
12
clk
=> clk ,
13
addr
=> addr_ROM ,
14
dout
=> out_ROM
15 );
16 rom_control_inst : entity work.rom_control
17
port map(
18
clk
=> clk ,
19
rst
=> rst ,
20
start
=> start_ROM ,
21
ram_dout
=> out_ROM ,
22
input_break
=> input_break ,
23
neuron_break
=> neuron_break ,
24
ram_addr
=> addr_ROM ,
25
...
==PAGE:81==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
71
4.2.4
ROM Implementation
In configurations where ROM-based weight storage is employed, two additional
entities are instantiated within the neural network: network weights and rom
control. The ROM component itself is based on a template proposed in the
Vivado Guide to Synthesis [21].
During code generation, Python populates
the memory cells directly within the VHDL template using data computed as
described in Section 4.1.2.3, and organized according to the following structure.
1 architecture rtl of network_weights is
2
type ram_type is array(0 to 11346) of signed (31 downto 0);
3
signal RAM : ram_type := (
4
0 =>
to_signed (-112, 8) &
5
to_signed (-62, 8) &
6
to_signed (85, 8) &
7
to_signed(3, 8),
8
1 =>
to_signed (49, 8) &
Weights are packed into 32-bit words, with four 8-bit signed values per memory
cell. These values are stored in little-endian order, so that the most significant
byte holds the last listed weight. For instance, in the first memory word, the
unpacked weights are interpreted in the order 3, 85, -62, -112, starting from the
least significant byte to the most significant one. The ROM controller reads and
unpacks the weights in this exact order during execution, guided by an FSM
implemented using the same two-process architecture adopted until now. The
states of the FSM shown in Figure 4.13 are:
• IDLE: This is the initial state of the controller. When the start signal
is asserted, the internal counters, inp idx, byte cnt, and neuron idx are
reset, and the FSM transitions to the READ state. The inp idx counter
is used by neurons to index data in the first regs buffer. The byte cnt
signal represents the same value as inp idx, but is used internally within
the controller’s logic. The neuron idx counter tracks how many neurons
have already had their weights read from memory.
• READ: In this state, a 32-bit word is read from memory and stored in a
register. The FSM then transitions to the SPLIT 0 state.
• SPLIT 0 through SPLIT 3: Each of these states asserts the load enable
bit corresponding to the neuron currently receiving weights. The FSM
compares byte cnt with the (input break −1) signal, which indicates the
number of required input bytes per neuron. If byte cnt is less than this
threshold, an 8-bit slice is extracted from the 32-bit register loaded in the
READ state, and both inp idx and byte cnt are incremented.
==PAGE:82==
72
Implementation
Figure 4.13: FSM of the ROM controller entity
If byte cnt equals the threshold, the final byte is still processed, the done
signal is asserted, and only byte cnt is incremented before transitioning to
the next SPLIT state. If byte cnt exceeds the threshold, the FSM deasserts
load enable and transitions to the CHECK state without incrementing
byte cnt. SPLIT 3 is the only exception: it always increments byte cnt
and proceeds to CHECK, applying the same comparison logic to determine
whether to assert done or increment inp idx. Overall, these states serve
to signal the neuron of a given layer to start receiving data that they are
reading from memory.
• CHECK: This state serves as a transition phase following the weight read-
ing from memory.
The FSM first checks whether byte cnt is equal to
input break, signaling that a complete input set has been processed for
the current neuron. If this condition holds and neuron idx is less than
(neuron break −1), the FSM advances to the next neuron by increment-
ing neuron idx, resetting both byte cnt and inp idx, and transitioning to
the DUMMY state. If, instead, the current neuron is the final one (i.e.,
==PAGE:83==
4.2 VHDL Hardware Implementation
73
neuron idx has reached (neuron break −1), the flag temp signal is asserted
and the FSM transitions to the COMPLETE state, indicating the end of
the current layer’s weight loading. In the case where byte cnt has not yet
reached input break, the FSM simply transitions to DUMMY without up-
dating the neuron index or resetting the counters. Independent of these
checks, if addr counter is inferior to its maximum value, it is incremented
to prepare the next memory address for subsequent reads.
• DUMMY: This state serves as a temporary wait stage that allows all con-
trol and data signals to settle correctly before the next reading operation
begins. It immediately makes the FSM transition to the READ stage.
• COMPLETE: All neurons in the current layer have been assigned their
respective weight values. The done signal is asserted, and the FSM returns
to the IDLE state, awaiting the next start trigger.
4.2.5
Input Loader Implementation
The input loader is the simplest component instantiated within the neural net-
work architecture. It binarizes each input value received from the process con-
troller entity whenever its enable signal is asserted. The input values passed
through the neural network entity are individual elements read by the pro-
cess controller from data received via UART communication. The controller
enables the input loader each time a new value needs to be processed. The ar-
chitecture consists of a single synchronous process. On each rising clock edge,
when the enable signal is high, the incoming value is binarized and stored in
internal registers. Once all expected input values have been received, the ready
signal is asserted, and the output port is updated with the contents of the
registers.
1 process(clk)
2
begin
3
if rising_edge(clk) then
4
if rst = '1' then
5
...
6
elsif enable = '1' then
7
if (195 - count) >= 0 then
8
if inputs (7 downto 0) > to_unsigned (0, 8) then
9
internal_temp (195 - count) <= '1';
10
else
11
internal_temp (195 - count) <= '0';
12
end if;
13
end if;
14
if count = 195 then
15
ready_reg
<= '1';
==PAGE:84==
74
Implementation
16
done
<= '1';
17
else
18
count <= count + 1;
19
end if;
20
...
21
end if;
22
end if;
23 end process;
24 ready <= ready_reg;
25 inp_out <= internal_temp;
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
This chapter evaluates the Python-based hardware generator presented in this
work by analyzing both the individual components it produces and the complete
neural network architectures synthesized from pre-trained models. It should be
pointed out, however, that before conducting these experiments, the generator
itself was carefully tested to ensure that the created VHDL files did not present
any errors. This verification followed an iterative process: the Python code was
first debugged to produce syntactically and logically correct VHDL files. These
files were then synthesized in Vivado to verify that the generated components
could be successfully implemented in hardware. If synthesis failed or revealed
issues, the Python code or the VHDL templates were modified accordingly, and
the process was repeated. This cycle of synthesis and refinement continued until
the generated hardware designs were confirmed to be both correct and synthe-
sizable. Only after this point, once the components were ready for hardware
implementation, were the tests described in this chapter carried out.
The first set of tests focused on simulating the fundamental building blocks,
namely the neuron, the layer, and supporting components, to verify their cor-
rect functionality and internal behaviour. Following this, three neural network
models trained on the MNIST dataset were tested. All neural networks used in
this evaluation share a common two-layer architecture but differ in the number
of neurons per layer and the number of inputs to each neuron. These variations
are used to explore how the generator adapts to different configurations and to
==PAGE:86==
76
Evaluation
evaluate the corresponding use of hardware resources. To further assess scal-
ability, a deeper neural network composed of four layers was also synthesized
and tested. For all configurations, key hardware metrics, such as LUT and flip-
flop usage, execution time, and estimated power consumption, are reported, as
measured using the Nexys4 DDR FPGA development board [22]. The chap-
ter concludes with a final discussion that summarizes the results obtained and
reflects on the overall effectiveness of the proposed approach.
5.1
Network Components Analysis
Each hardware component developed in this work was verified using dedicated
testbenches. To support this, the Python generator includes a dictionary and
a dedicated class, called TestBenchModel (Figure 4.1), specifically designed to
produce the necessary input data for simulation. This automation was essential,
particularly for larger networks that require handling of a significant number of
input values. The simulation results are presented using waveform diagrams
generated by Vivado, which illustrate the internal behaviour and signal transi-
tions of the components under test.
5.1.1
Neuron Behaviour
The two neuron implementations discussed in Chapter 4 are analyzed in this
section. The evaluation focuses on their timing behaviour, specifically on how
many clock cycles each requires to produce a result. In addition, the analysis
considers how changes in input values impact their operation, the sequence
of stages in the FSM-based design, and the functional differences between the
two approaches.
The test is conducted on a neuron with 64 inputs and 64
corresponding weight values, plus an additional bias term, for a total of 65
values. Two input sets are applied: the second set begins three or four clock
cycles after the first. The inputs, weights, and resulting total sums are as follows.
input 1 = [1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, ...]
input 2 = [0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, ...]
weights = [−14, 14, 4, −8, −2, 2, 6, −7, 3, −8, 3, 5, −4, −1, −3, 7, −12, −10, ...]
bias = 21
total sum 1 = 53
total sum 1 = −46
==PAGE:87==
5.1 Network Components Analysis
77
Starting with the neuron implemented without an FSM, operating in a fully par-
allel and non-time-controlled configuration, its corresponding waveform diagram
is shown below.
Figure 5.1: Waveform diagram of the neuron architecture without FSM.
The first noticeable outcome is that all results are correct. A closer analysis
shows that at the falling edge of the reset signal, the first set of inputs is acti-
vated. At the first valid rising edge of the clock, the first row of the stages matrix
already stores the corresponding weight values, each conditionally masked by
its associated input signal. If the inputs are set precisely on the rising edge, the
matrix updates immediately. The sum signal is also instantly set to 21. This
occurs because the neuron performs all its operations on every rising edge of the
clock, and the bias is added to the first element of the final row at each cycle,
which is zero at this point in time, making it appear from the start. Since the
sum is positive, the output bit is set high one clock cycle later, although this is
not yet the final result.
With the first row stored, each subsequent rising clock edge propagates the sum
through the matrix. As there are 64 values to add, log2(64) = 6 clock cycles are
required for the addition tree to complete. Two extra cycles are needed: one to
add the bias and one for binarization. Thus, the neuron takes a total of eight
clock cycles to produce the correct result after the initial input row is loaded.
The effects of the second input set are also immediately visible: as soon as the
inputs change, the first row of the stages matrix is updated accordingly, and the
new values propagate through the matrix. Due to the three-clock-cycle offset
between the two input sets, their corresponding outputs are also separated by
the same delay. In this case, the final value of the output bit of the neuron is
zero, as expected. The incorrect result observed at the very beginning of the
neuron’s operation is automatically corrected as the computation progresses
==PAGE:88==
78
Evaluation
and does not reappear unless the neuron is explicitly reset. This temporary
inaccuracy introduces a brief settling period at the start of execution, during
which the layer, and consequently the entire network, may momentarily exhibit
incorrect outputs before stabilizing to the correct result, something that is to be
expected from pipelined designs such as these. The analysis now turns to the
second neuron architecture (shown in Figure 4.8), which features an FSM-based
control mechanism.
Figure 5.2: Waveform diagram of neuron architecture with an FSM.
In this case, the input sets are applied with a four clock cycle difference between
them.
Most importantly, neuron operation is explicitly triggered by a start
signal. In the testbench, this signal is named start TB to distinguish it from
the internal start signal used within the design; functionally, however, they are
equivalent. After the reset signal is deasserted and before the start signal is
asserted, the neuron remains in its IDLE state. During this phase, no changes
occur within the internal structures: neither the stages matrix nor the final
accumulated sum (output final) is modified.
At the first valid rising clock edge after the start signal is asserted, the neuron
enters the LOAD stage, which lasts for one clock cycle. During this stage, the
weights are masked based on the current input values, and the resulting data
is stored as the first row of the addition matrix. However, since this update
is performed inside a clocked process and is subject to VHDL’s delta delay
semantics, it takes effect only at the end of the LOAD cycle, that is, at the
delta cycle before the transition to the next FSM state. This detail is crucial
==PAGE:89==
5.1 Network Components Analysis
79
because it determines whether or not the first row will change in response to
input variations during the load phase.
Subsequently, the neuron enters the COMPUTE STAGE phase.
Unlike the
previous design, where all rows were processed simultaneously, here the neuron
computes one row per clock cycle, sequentially propagating the partial sums
through the matrix. After completing all computation stages, the FSM advances
to the ADD BIAS state, where the accumulated sum is combined with the bias.
Finally, the result is passed to the ACTIVATION stage for binarization, and
both the binary output and the final sum are made available on the output
ports.
If the start of the neuron operation is considered to be the rising edge of the
clock immediately following the start signal assertion, the neuron takes nine
clock cycles to produce its output, one more than the non-FSM version due to
the additional LOAD state. However, when measuring from the moment the
matrix is first populated with data, both versions require the same eight cycles
to compute the final result.
Figure 5.3: Waveform diagram of neuron architecture with an FSM when
restarted.
A key difference in this design is the isolation from subsequent input changes.
Once the LOAD stage has completed, the neuron becomes insensitive to further
modifications on the input lines until it returns to the IDLE state. As a result,
==PAGE:90==
80
Evaluation
the second input set does not affect the current operation, leading to a cleaner
and more deterministic execution, free of intermediate or invalid outputs. New
inputs will only be taken into consideration when the FSM returns to its IDLE
state, as shown in Figure 5.3. The output changes no longer reflect the clock
cycle difference between input sets, but instead depend on how long the start
signal remains high while the FSM is in the FINISH state. In the case shown,
it takes 11 clock cycles for the output values to update.
The final diagram (seen in Figure 5.4) demonstrates how modifying the inputs
up until the end of the LOAD stage affects the final results. The initial set of
inputs is completely ignored, and only the result corresponding to the second
input set is computed. This behaviour may lead to unintended effects during the
execution of the entire network. For this reason, the next section is dedicated
to explaining how the layer component operates to address this issue.
Figure 5.4: Waveform diagram of neuron architecture with an FSM when in-
puts are ignored.
5.1.2
Layer Behaviour
This section presents the evaluation of the layer architectures, with a particular
focus on the operational differences between parallel and serial configurations.
The goal is to illustrate what it means for the neurons within a layer to execute
in parallel, and to compare the execution time between a serial and a parallel
layer configuration. The input set input 1, previously used in the individual
==PAGE:91==
5.1 Network Components Analysis
81
neuron analysis, is also used here. Both layers with binary and integer outputs
are evaluated. The first one consists of 24 neurons, while the other includes 10
neurons, producing 24 and 10 outputs, respectively. In contrast, the serialized
layer uses a single neuron instance to sequentially compute the outputs for
both configurations, effectively performing the computations for all 34 neurons
in a time-multiplexed manner. For reference, the expected integer and binary
outputs from the parallel implementation are:
Integer layer outputs = [−379, 212, 72, −44, 45, −241, −494, 21, −43, 35]
Binary layer outputs = [1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1]
The first layer evaluated is the input layer of the parallel configuration that
uses neurons without an FSM. In this setup, when the start signal is high, the
layer directly updates neuron inputs without managing their execution timing,
resulting in continuous output generation.
Figure 5.5: Waveform diagram of a layer without neuron execution control.
Following the release of the reset signal, the layer immediately begins producing
outputs, although initially invalid, as predicted during the neuron analysis. The
parallel nature of execution is clearly observable: upon receiving a new input
coinciding with an active start signal, all 24 neurons (seven of which are shown
in Figure 5.5) begin processing simultaneously. Each neuron reacts concurrently
to new input data. In this instance, the input 1 set drives the layer for a single
clock cycle before being replaced by a new input, introduced just one cycle after
the start signal is asserted. The valid output appears nine clock cycles after the
start event, indicating that the layer itself contributes a processing delay of only
one clock cycle. The next layer is the one that actively controls neuron activity
through the start neurons and neuron done vector signals.
==PAGE:92==
82
Evaluation
Figure 5.6: Waveform diagram of a stateless layer controlling neuron execu-
tion.
This is the layer that consists of 10 neurons and produces integer outputs.
Its input is the valid output of the layer previously discussed when input 1 is
applied. It behaves exactly as designed. The assertion of the start signal triggers
the start neurons signal, which in turn activates all neurons and copies the input
data into the released inputs signal on the same rising clock edge. The layer
then actively monitors the neuron done vector signal, waiting for all neurons to
complete their computations. Once finished, it resets the neurons to their idle
state and waits for the next start signal. This controlled approach ensures input
consistency during computation and prevents any new input values from being
ignored. From the initial start trigger, valid outputs are produced after 10 clock
cycles, implying that the layer itself introduces a processing latency of 2 clock
cycles.
The layer belonging to the serial configuration highlights the impact of using
fewer neurons to perform the computations of the network. In this case, an ex-
treme example is presented in which the operations of both previously discussed
layers are carried out by a single layer composed of just one neuron. Figure5.7
illustrates the behaviour of the serial configuration, in which the layer is also
controlled by an FSM. When the start signal is asserted, the layer’s FSM is
triggered first, and then transitions to the INITIATE state, during which the
input values are latched. Only once this phase is completed does the control
shift to the neuron’s FSM, introducing an initial delay of three clock cycles be-
tween the start signal and the start of neuron execution. The layer then enters
a wait state lasting 11 clock cycles, during which its single neuron completes the
computation. This results in a total latency of 13 clock cycles from the start
signal to the appearance of the first valid output, while the full cycle, from one
INITIATE activation to the next, spans 14 clock cycles.
==PAGE:93==
5.1 Network Components Analysis
83
Figure 5.7: Waveform diagram of the initial state transitions of an FSM-
controlled layer.
Since this single neuron is responsible for sequentially executing the tasks of all
34 neurons from the earlier parallel layers, this execution loop must be repeated
34 times. The final FSM cycle is illustrated in Figure 5.8, where the COM-
PLETE and TERMINATE states are reached before the layer returns to IDLE
mode and makes its outputs available.
Figure 5.8: Waveform diagram of the last state transitions of an FSM-
controlled layer.
A total of 24325−75
50
= 485 clock cycles separate the initial start signal from the
final output of the layer, highlighting how time-expensive this configuration can
become. Naturally, if the same layer included two or more neurons, allowing
==PAGE:94==
84
Evaluation
multiple batches of computations to proceed in parallel per cycle, this number
would be significantly reduced. This highlights the importance of offering such
a configuration option within the hardware generator.
5.1.3
ROM Controller Behaviour
Only two diagrams are included in this section. The first is included solely to
illustrate the FSM behaviour of the ROM controller entity, whose architecture
is already presented in Section 4.2.4 (see Figure 4.13).
The second diagram
demonstrates the timing behaviour of a network that utilizes a ROM for weight
storage, offering insight into how weights are distributed to neurons across both
parallel and serial configurations. The analysis begins with the first diagram,
shown below.
Figure 5.9: Waveform diagram of the ROM controller activity.
The start signal activates the controller, which transitions into the READ state
to fetch the 32-bit word at address 0. Following this, a series of split stages,
each executing in a single clock cycle, extract specific values and send them to
the corresponding neurons, as indicated by the bits set to one in the load enable
array. In this particular case, 24 neurons need to be populated with values.
During the CHECK state, no weights are transmitted, and the load enable signal
is cleared to zero to prevent any loading.
Figure 5.9 also clarifies the role of the DUMMY state, which introduces a neces-
sary delay. This ensures that the next memory address is read at least one clock
cycle after the address register has been incremented. Without this delay, the
controller would mistakenly reread the previous value. The weight-loading pro-
cess continues until each bit in the load enable array has been asserted at least
once. At the end of the sequence, the DUMMY state is replaced by a COM-
==PAGE:95==
5.1 Network Components Analysis
85
PLETE state. The behavior of this final state is trivial, and for that reason, it
has been intentionally omitted from the diagram.
A complete read and transmission operation for a single memory address re-
quires seven clock cycles. For a single neuron with 64 input values, this results
in a total wait time of 64
4 × 7 = 112 cycles, as each 32-bit word contains four
8-bit weights. Therefore, the neuron must wait 112 cycles to receive all its input
weights before it can proceed with the computation. Figure 5.10 presents a seg-
ment of a timing diagram of a parallel neural network configuration that utilizes
a ROM to populate neurons with their respective weight values. Although all
neurons are nominally started at the same time, their actual execution is delayed
due to the serialized nature of memory access. Specifically, the first regs regis-
ters do not update simultaneously, and the registers associated with the second
neuron remain idle as they wait for their input weights. The ROM controller
can only provide weight data to one neuron at a time, which means that neu-
rons, while technically active, are stalled until all of their required inputs have
been received. In the example shown, each neuron requires 64 inputs, resulting
in a delay of 112 clock cycles per neuron, as calculated earlier. Consequently,
each neuron begins execution 112 cycles after the previous one. Regardless of
how many neurons are physically instantiated in hardware, their execution will
always be serialized due to data loading.
Figure 5.10: Waveform diagram of a weight loading scenario for a parallel
neural network configuration.
Parallel configurations still have an advantage over serialized ones in terms of
timing, as the ROM controller operates continuously until all neurons in the
layer are fully loaded. In contrast, a serialized network configuration requires the
==PAGE:96==
86
Evaluation
controller to be restarted multiple times, once for each neuron batch, introducing
additional overhead. For example, implementing the same network from the
previous diagram with only seven neurons would cause the ROM controller to
remain idle for 17 clock cycles after completing the first layer’s weight-loading
phase, as illustrated in the following figure. This number comes from observing
how long the address counter remains constant after issuing the last weight to
the batch.
Figure 5.11: Waveform diagram showing the overhead introduced by restart-
ing the ROM controller.
5.2
MNIST Inference
Having verified the behavior of individual components using manually crafted
test inputs designed to stress specific features of the hardware (e.g., weight
loading, activation propagation, and layer sequencing), the evaluation now pro-
gresses to a more realistic and comprehensive scenario. This marks a significant
transition from controlled, low-level validation to full-system inference using
complete neural networks trained on real-world data.
In this section, three
distinct neural network models trained for digit recognition using the MNIST
dataset are considered.
These networks are exported in ONNX format and
parsed by the generator, which automatically produces hardware descriptions
tailored to each architecture. This shift from test cases to actual trained models
serves as a rigorous trial for both the code generator and the resulting hard-
ware designs. Each network is evaluated through a series of inference runs on
input data representing grayscale images. The inputs are stored in .txt files,
with pixel values ranging from 0 (black) to 255 (white), listed sequentially from
the top-left to the bottom-right of the image. For visual reference, Figure 5.12
displays several representative 28×28 pixel samples from the MNIST dataset.
==PAGE:97==
5.2 MNIST Inference
87
Figure 5.12: MNIST dataset samples.
The metrics evaluated for each hardware configuration refer to the entire struc-
ture synthesized on hardware, including the input interface, USART, clock di-
vider, and input storage, unless otherwise specified. Each metric and its corre-
sponding source are specified in the list below.
• LUTs: The number of Look-Up Tables (LUTs) used by the entire system
is obtained from the Vivado post-implementation utilization report. The
LUT usage of a single neuron is also considered for comparative analysis
in Section 5.2.3. The maximum LUT count for the Nexys 4 DDR is 63400.
• FFs: The total number of flip-flops used is likewise taken from the post-
implementation utilization report. As with LUTs, the flip-flop usage of a
single neuron is also recorded. The maximum number of flip-flops available
in a Nexys 4 DDR is 126800.
• BRAM tiles: The usage of BRAM tiles is extracted from the post-
implementation utilization report provided by Vivado.
• NN execution time: Measured from the post-implementation timing
simulation. Although a 100 MHz clock is defined in the constraints file
(XDC), the design includes a clock divider that reduces the operating
frequency of the neural network core to 50 MHz. Therefore, the execution
time is captured using a 20 ns clock period. The Worst Negative Slack
(WNS) is also recorded to provide a rough indication of potential timing
violations.
• Power consumption: Estimated power consumption (in Watts) is re-
ported by the Vivado Power Analyzer tool. All power estimates are per-
formed post-implementation for greater accuracy. Switching activity is
captured using .saif files generated from timing simulations and provided
==PAGE:98==
88
Evaluation
as input to the vectorless estimation engine [23]. Results were found to be
largely consistent with those produced by the default toggle rate assump-
tions of the vectorless algorithms.
5.2.1
MNIST 8×8 Images
The neural network model used in this case features 24 neurons in the input layer
and 10 neurons in the output one. To evaluate the functionality and correctness
of the hardware-implemented neural network, we consider an input correspond-
ing to the digit 1 from the MNIST dataset, resized to an 8×8 grayscale image.
The expected output vector produced by the network is the following:
[−647, 371, −80, −82, −9, −137, −282, −6, −54, −105]
As this is the first neural network configuration presented, a representative
waveform is included to illustrate the simulation process and validate the output.
Figure 5.13: Waveform diagram for a neural network.
In addition to validating the output, the waveform offers a clear view of how the
input values are provided by the input loader entity. Before presenting a table
summarizing all metrics for the evaluated configurations, the following naming
conventions, applied across all MNIST networks, are defined:
• P 1 and P 2 refer to the two parallel configurations discussed in this
work: the former without control over neuron execution and the latter
with control logic included.
==PAGE:99==
5.2 MNIST Inference
89
• S N denotes a serial configuration with N instantiated neurons.
• S N M indicates a serial configuration with N neurons in one layer and
M in another.
• S max refers to a serial configuration in which the number of neurons
matches the largest layer in the network (which in this case contains 24
neurons). This version uses the FSM-based architecture shown in Fig-
ure 4.10.
• An appended R indicates that ROM is used for weight storage.
From table 5.1, the following considerations can be made. The three parallel
configurations, P 1, P 2, and P 2 R highlight the impact of synthesis opti-
mizations and ROM-based weight storage on performance and resource usage.
Both P 1 and P 2 are fully parallel implementations where each neuron oper-
ates independently with weights stored in distributed logic. The slight increase
in LUTs and flip-flops from P 1 to P 2 is attributed to improved synchroniza-
tion logic, with P 2 achieving lower power consumption despite a minor increase
in execution time. In contrast, P 2 R replaces distributed constant arrays with
ROM blocks for weight storage. This change prevents the synthesis tool from
performing constant propagation and folding optimizations typically available
when using hardcoded constants. As a result, despite having the same degree
of parallelism, P 2 R incurs significantly higher resource usage and a dramatic
increase in execution time. This overhead reflects the combined cost of removing
constant folding and introducing dynamic memory accesses.
A similar explanation applies when comparing the S max configuration to its
parallel counterparts.
Although S max uses hardcoded constant arrays for
weights, neurons are reused across cycles, and therefore, the indices used to
access weights are dynamic rather than static.
This prevents the synthesis
tool from applying constant folding, leading to increased LUT consumption.
In contrast, S max R uses ROM-based weight storage with sequential access,
eliminating both the need for constant arrays and their associated dynamic
indexing logic. As a result, S max R achieves lower area cost in terms of LUTs
and FFs, despite its longer latency due to serialized weight access.
Configurations S 14 and S 4 10 both implement a total of 14 neurons, but differ
in how they are distributed across the network layers, which directly affects their
input size and hardware cost. In S 14, all 14 neurons are placed in the first
layer, where each neuron processes 64 inputs. In contrast, S 4 10 allocates 4
neurons to the first layer and 10 to the second layer, where neurons only receive
24 inputs. This distribution significantly reduces logic utilization, dropping the
usage of LUTs and FFs from 22,386 and 25,866 in S 14 to 11,112 and 14,807
==PAGE:100==
90
Evaluation
in S 4 10, with only a minor increase in execution time (from 3.59 µs to 4.61
µs), while power consumption remains identical. These results highlight the
advantages of a customizable hardware generator capable of flexibly allocating
neurons across network layers to balance performance and area efficiency.
Configurations
LUTs
FFs
BRAM Time
(µs)
Power
(W)
WNS
(ns)
P 1
28156
40806
2
2,93
0.454
8.964
P 2
28511
44408
2
3.03
0.258
7.103
P 2 R
38754
66933
2.5
68.47
0.441
5.474
S max
44286
43523
2
3.23
0.243
8.784
S max R
33608
57608
3
115.37
0.349
5.682
S 1
2367
2827
2
12.27
0.205
8.785
S 2
3713
4599
2
7.51
0.205
3.662
S 3
5984
6479
2
6.11
0.208
5.096
S 5
9553
10136
2
4.71
0.21
5.279
S 11
20389
21062
2
3.89
0.221
9.615
S 14
22386
25866
2
3.59
0.221
7.357
S 20
29965
35690
2
3.59
0.226
5.393
S 24
43527
43893
2
3.31
0.246
9.422
S 1 R
1984
3409
2.5
89.09
0.209
8.79
S 2 R
3336
5798
2.5
85.69
0.215
8.062
S 3 R
4789
8189
3
90.17
0.221
7.030
S 5 R
7462
12977
3
86.03
0.232
6.885
S 11 R
15703
27291
3
106.49
0.252
7.251
S 14 R
19827
34366
3
101.61
0.268
6.793
S 20 R
28197
48523
3
143.73
0.302
6.334
S 24 R
33613
57953
3
115.45
0.344
5.682
S 4 10
11112
14807
2
4.61
0.221
6.601
Table 5.1: Hardware metrics of MNIST 8×8 neural network configurations
Due to the shared serial architecture across the S 1, S 2, S 3, S 5, S 11,
S 14, and related configurations, which differ only in the number of concurrently
instantiated neurons, it becomes possible to evaluate their behaviour from a
broader perspective. Rather than analyzing each configuration in isolation, a
more insightful approach involves observing how resource usage and performance
metrics evolve as the degree of parallelism increases. To this end, MATLAB-
generated plots are used to visualize the trends in LUTs, flip-flops, and execution
time.
==PAGE:101==
5.2 MNIST Inference
91
0
5
10
15
20
25
Neurons
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
LUTs
#104
LUTs of the 64 input net
No weight ROM
With weight ROM
(a) LUTs
0
5
10
15
20
25
Neurons
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
FFs
#104
Flip Flops of the 64 input net
No weight ROM
With weight ROM
(b) FFs
0
5
10
15
20
25
Neurons
0
50
100
150
Time (7s)
Execution time of the net
578578612 595
748
714
1020
816
No weight ROM
With weight ROM
(c) Execution times
0
5
10
15
20
25
Neurons
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
Power (W)
Power consumption
No weight ROM
With weight ROM
(d) Power consumption
Figure 5.14: MATLAB plots of the resources used by serialized configurations
of the neural network trained to recognize 8×8 MNIST images.
The figures related to LUT and FF usage highlight how the constant array ap-
proach to weight storage relies heavily on the synthesis tool’s ability to perform
constant folding optimizations. As a result, resource usage varies unpredictably
with the number of instantiated neurons. In contrast, the ROM-based approach
demonstrates much more stable behaviour, with LUT and FF usage increasing
almost perfectly linearly as the neuron count increases.
Notably, the ROM
approach consistently requires fewer LUTs than the constant array counter-
part, while using more flip-flops.
This increase in FFs can be attributed to
each neuron’s reliance on additional registers (e.g., first regs) in ROM-based de-
signs. Power consumption increases steadily for both weight storage strategies as
the neuron count grows, though ROM-based networks generally consume more
power overall. A significant divergence between the two approaches emerges
when considering their execution time. The constant array approach exhibits a
strong inverse correlation between execution time and neuron count. To quan-
==PAGE:102==
92
Evaluation
tify this behaviour, a curve fitting was performed using a hyperbolic model of
the form f(x) = a
x + b where x represents the number of neurons. The fitting
resulted in the parameters a = 9.246 and b = 2.979 , as illustrated in Figure
5.15.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Neurons
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Time (7s)
Execution Time Fit
Data
Fit: a/(x)+b
Figure 5.15: Result of the fitting operation on the execution time points.
As x →0, the execution time diverges to infinity, reflecting the impracticality
of having zero neurons. Conversely, as x →∞, the function asymptotically ap-
proaches b = 2.979, which is consistent with the execution times observed in the
fastest parallel implementations. This result reinforces the intuition that greater
parallelism reduces latency and suggests an inherent timing limit achievable by
the architecture.
However, the ROM-based weight loading strategy exhibits an entirely different
trend. Execution times vary irregularly and tend to increase along with the
number of neurons. This behaviour arises because performance now also de-
pends on the size of the memory used to store weights. Specifically, execution
time is affected by how zero-padding is applied to align memory layout with
the architectural constraint that neurons, individually or in groups, must be
executed as atomic units, without being split or interleaved. To better illustrate
this, Figure 5.14 includes annotations showing the depth of the ROM at each
configuration point. When the number of instantiated neurons divides evenly
into the total number of neurons to be computed in a given layer, memory
addresses are used more efficiently, reducing the required number of memory
==PAGE:103==
5.2 MNIST Inference
93
accesses and therefore lowering execution time.
The final step involves validating the physical implementation of the neural
network in the FPGA. After the device is programmed, the input values are
transmitted via UART from a PC. Execution is initiated by pressing a but-
ton on the board, and upon completion, an LED is activated to signal the end
of computation. The resulting output data are then sent back to the PC via
UART. The received results match the expected outputs produced during simu-
lation, as can be seen in Figure 5.16, confirming the correctness of the hardware
implementation.
Figure 5.16: FPGA results for the neural network trained to recognize 8×8
MNIST images.
5.2.2
MNIST 14×14 Images
The neural network used in this implementation is trained to classify MNIST
digits resized to a 14×14 resolution. As in the previous case, the network fea-
tures 24 neurons in the first layer and 10 neurons in the output layer. However,
each first-layer neuron now receives 196 inputs, corresponding to the 14×14
grayscale pixel values of the input image. For this particular test, the input cor-
responds to an image of the digit ’7’, and the expected output from the network
is:
[−320, −72, −123, 12, −196, −271, −527, 401, −117, −96]
As done before, the following table reports the synthesis and performance results
of the tested configurations.
==PAGE:104==
94
Evaluation
Configurations
LUTs
FFs
BRAM Time
(µs)
Power
(W)
WNS
(ns)
S 5
31952
27895
2
10.91
0.25
2.706
S 1 R
4981
8631
4
252.81
0.223
2.829
S 2 R
9253
15966
4
248.73
0.238
4.134
S 3 R
13413
23302
4
261.45
0.25
5.222
S 5 R
21757
37985
4
253.29
0.293
3.656
S 7 R
30114
52666
6
301.77
0.318
4.409
S 8 R
34289
60008
4
287.61
0.326
5.327
S 10 R
42668
74689
4
287.37
0.375
3.101
Table 5.2: Hardware metrics of MNIST 14×14 neural network configurations
Parallel configurations were omitted because they required more resources than
the Nexys 4 DDR board could support, exceeding the limits of LUT and FF
usage (Figure 5.17). The maximum number of neurons that the first layer can
physically contain before running out of on-chip space is 10.
Figure 5.17: Parallel configuration result of the net trained for 14×14 MNIST
image recognition.
Additionally, only one configuration using constant values as weight storage
was tested due to a purely technical limitation. As the number of constants
increases, the synthesis process becomes extremely slow and resource-intensive,
and may even cause Vivado or the entire system to crash, depending on the
computational power of the machine running the synthesis. Nevertheless, this
approach remains perfectly viable from a design standpoint.
The MATLAB
plots for the listed configurations are shown below. Overall, they confirm the
observations made in the previous network implementations.
==PAGE:105==
5.2 MNIST Inference
95
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Neurons
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
LUTs
#104
LUTs of the 196 input net
With weight ROM
(a) LUTs
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Neurons
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
FFs
#104
Flip Flops of the 196 input net
With weight ROM
(b) FFs
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Neurons
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
Time (7s)
Execution time of the 196 input net
1700
1700
1800
1750
2100
2000
2000
With weight ROM
(c) Execution times
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Neurons
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
Power (W)
Power consumption of the 196 input net
With weight ROM
(d) Power consumption
Figure 5.18: MATLAB plots of the resources used by serialized configurations
of the neural network trained to recognize 14×14 MNIST images.
Figure 5.19: FPGA results for the neural network trained to recognize 14×14
MNIST images.
==PAGE:106==
96
Evaluation
In this case, FPGA tests were also carried out to verify the validity of the
theoretical outputs, and as before, the results were confirmed to be correct, as
shown in Figure 5.19.
5.2.3
MNIST 28×28 images
The largest network model tested for MNIST image recognition consists of an
input layer with 128 neurons, each accepting 784 inputs, and an output layer
of 10 neurons, each receiving 128 inputs. The network’s inputs are now proper
28×28 grayscale MNIST images. For this example, an image representing the
digit ‘4’ is used as input. The expected result is the following.
[−375, −1020, 91, −929, 1180, −469, −466, −229, −448, 237]
Without accounting for zero-padding, a total of 128∗784+128∗10+138 = 101770
weights and biases are needed for the network to operate.
Moreover, since
each neuron in the input layer must handle 784 8-bit input values, the resource
requirements are substantial. Therefore, it is not surprising that the maximum
number of instantiated neurons that could be implemented as physical units
of the first layer were limited to two. Naturally, this evaluation considers only
configurations in which the weights are stored using ROM. The table below
summarizes the results obtained.
Configurations
LUTs
FFs
BRAM Time
(µs)
Power
(W)
WNS
(ns)
S 1 R
18935
31406
34
3870.69
0.288
1.933
S 1 7 R
37825
64725
34
3657.03
0.401
1.784
S 1 9 R
43224
74177
34
3675.35
0.377
1.817
S 2 R
35606
60223
34
3851.37
0.349
1.332
S 2 2 R
40919
69877
34
3621.45
0.417
1.769
S 2 3 R
43625
74599
34
3630.39
0.438
0.473
Table 5.3: Hardware metrics of MNIST 28×28 neural network configurations
The maximum number of neurons that can be instantiated in this case is ten,
with one neuron in the first layer and the remaining nine in the final layer. It is
also noteworthy that the configuration with a single neuron occupies nearly one-
third of the total area of the chip. Having discussed all three MNIST networks
tested in this work, it becomes possible to compare the resource footprint of a
single neuron by analyzing configurations where only one neuron is instantiated.
Information regarding the resources used by this single neuron in each of the
==PAGE:107==
5.2 MNIST Inference
97
three configurations can be found in the Netlist section of the implemented
design in Vivado.
(a) 64 input neuron
(b) 196 input neuron
(c) 784 input neuron
Figure 5.20: Resource usage for a single neuron across the three MNIST net-
work configurations.
LUTs for neurons
1984
4981
18935
1418
4280
17027
8x8 MNIST
14x14 MNIST
28x28 MNIST
Inputs
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
LUTs
#104
NET LUTs
NEURON LUTs
(a) LUTs
FFs for neurons
2827
8631
31406
2390
7338
28802
8x8 MNIST
14x14 MNIST
28x28 MNIST
Inputs
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Flip flops
#104
NET FFs
NEURON FFs
(b) FFs
Time for neurons
89.09
252.81
3870.69
8x8 MNIST
14x14 MNIST 28x28 MNIST
Inputs
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Time (7s)
Time
(c) Execution times
Power for neurons
0.209
0.223
0.288
8x8 MNIST
14x14 MNIST 28x28 MNIST
Inputs
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Power (W)
Power
(d) Power consumption
Figure 5.21: Hardware resource usage of neurons in MNIST networks.
The neuron is the most expensive hardware component in all tested implementa-
tions. Not only that, but its contribution to the overall resource usage increases
==PAGE:108==
98
Evaluation
significantly with the number of inputs. Specifically:
• For the smallest configuration (8×8 MNIST), the neuron accounts for
approximately 71.4% of total LUTs ( 1418
1984) and 84.5% of FFs ( 2390
2827).
• For the 14×14 MNIST network, the neuron occupies 85.9% of LUTs ( 4280
4981)
and 85.0% of FFs ( 7338
8631).
• For the 28×28 MNIST network, the neuron consumes 90.0% of LUTs
( 17027
18935) and 91.7% of FFs ( 28802
31406).
As with all previously tested neural networks, the output of this configuration
running on the FPGA is presented below to validate its correct deployment.
Figure 5.22: FPGA results for the neural network trained to recognize 28×28
MNIST images.
5.3
Deep Neural Network
This is the largest network, in terms of both layer and neuron count, created
and configured using the generator developed in this work. It consists of four
layers and a total of 234 neurons, distributed as follows: 128 in the first layer
(accepting 256 inputs), 64 in the second, 32 in the third, and 10 in the final
output layer. Unlike the networks presented in the previous section, this con-
figuration does not serve a specific functional purpose; instead, it represents a
generic deep neural network ([11]) used solely to assess the scalability of the
==PAGE:109==
5.3 Deep Neural Network
99
generated architectures. The input selected for this test is designed to produce
the following output.
[−203, 306, −559, −254, −376, −519, 139, −435, −331, 112]
The tests performed for this network are meant to highlight the different ways
in which neurons can be instantiated in different layer groups. The following
small legend details the configurations considered, with each using a ROM for
data storage.
• C 1: Two layers are physically deployed on the FPGA. The first one is
used to produce the results of the first two model layers with 4 neurons.
The other computes the output of the neural network with 9 neurons.
• C 2: Two layers are physically implemented on the FPGA. The first is
used to produce the results of the first two layers of the model with 6
neurons. The other computes the output of the neural network with 4
neurons.
• C 3: Three layers are physically deployed on the FPGA. The first two
correspond directly to their counterparts in the original model, producing
outputs with 3 and 4 neurons, respectively. The third implements the
final two layers of the model, generating the network’s output using 10
neurons.
• C 4: Each layer has its physical counterpart, with 4 neurons instantiated
per layer, except for the last, which contains 5 neurons.
Configurations
LUTs
FFs
BRAM Time
(µs)
Power
(W)
C 1
35316
60717
18
1889.17
0.293
3.129
C 2
39229
67509
18
1917.53
0.302
5.17
C 3
42443
72856
18
1604.27
0.447
3.013
C 4
42798
73918
18
1563.59
0.45
4.019
Table 5.4: Hardware metrics of the deep neural network configurations.
The comparison between these configurations highlights how strategically dis-
tributing neurons across layers can significantly reduce LUT and FF usage.
Specifically, Configuration C 1 places most of its neurons in the final part of the
network, which processes the 64 input values and therefore requires fewer LUTs
and FFs per neuron. In contrast, Configuration C 2 distributes more neurons in
==PAGE:110==
100
Evaluation
the first layers, where each neuron incurs higher resource usage. Despite these
architectural differences, the execution time, similarly to the other configura-
tions, remains primarily influenced by memory depth, with C 1 requiring 13398
memory addresses compared to the 13618 used by C 2.
Configurations C 3 and C 4 further distribute neurons across additional layers.
Configuration C 4, in particular, instantiates neurons in a way that avoids zero-
padding of the memory block, achieving the best execution time among all
configurations.
This broader distribution also contributes to a reduction in
LUT and FF usage: both C 3 and C 4 deploy more neurons than C 2 while
maintaining a comparable resource footprint. As the largest network tested,
C 4 was also evaluated more thoroughly with respect to timing requirements.
While timing analysis was previously performed on other networks, it relied
solely on the WNS parameter. In this case, multiple tests were conducted by
increasing the target clock frequency. The highest frequency achieved before
failure was 182 MHz, with a WNS of 0.221 ns. Lastly, the results of the network
running on the FPGA are presented to validate the expected output of the
model.
Figure 5.23: FPGA results for the deep neural network.
5.4
Final Discussion
The extensive evaluation conducted throughout this chapter confirms that the
generator successfully meets its foundational design principles, particularly those
of flexibility and correctness. Every network architecture and hardware compo-
nent generated by the tool provides a sufficiently diverse set of functionalities,
==PAGE:111==
5.4 Final Discussion
101
allowing users to tailor configurations based on their specific goals and con-
straints.
When not limited by hardware resources, the most advantageous option remains
a fully parallel one. These configurations offer the best performance in terms
of execution time, albeit with increased resource usage. In such configurations,
weights and biases are ideally stored in constant arrays within the VHDL code.
This approach not only reduces access latency but also often results in more
efficient synthesis, depending on the capabilities of the synthesis toolchain to
optimize constant logic structures. However, in scenarios where the available
hardware imposes strict limitations, the generator enables users to explore a
wide range of alternative configurations.
Users can fine-tune the number of
instantiated neurons per layer, control the degree of serialization across layers,
and adjust the total number of active layers present in the final design.
Furthermore, the generator allows for full customization of how the weights and
biases of the network are exposed to the architecture. When using constant
arrays, synthesis tools may sometimes achieve better timing and area optimiza-
tions. Nevertheless, this remains a synthesis-dependent optimization and, in
certain cases, may not be the most suitable solution. For designs that involve
higher degrees of serialization, either due to resource constraints or architectural
preferences, the use of a ROM as storage for weights becomes more appropriate.
This is especially true considering the sequential nature of memory access (see
Figure 5.10) and the lower execution times observed in configurations with a
smaller number of neurons, which avoid having to load extra zero values, such
as the C 4 configuration of Table 5.4.
The remaining two design principles, modularity and accessibility, though not
explicitly evaluated through benchmarks, are inherently embedded in the struc-
ture of the generator. Modularity is reflected in the clear separation of concerns
across classes and templates, which allows for straightforward extension or mod-
ification of individual components. Accessibility, on the other hand, is ensured
by the intuitive interface of the system, which, once provided with an ONNX
model of a BNN and a few user-defined settings, enables the generator to oper-
ate autonomously. The wide variety of networks produced in this work further
attests to its ease of use.
==PAGE:112==
102
Evaluation
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis by summarizing the work carried out and
outlining potential improvements and future directions for extending the capa-
bilities of the realized VHDL generator.
6.1
Summary
This thesis main accomplishment is the development of a fully functional hard-
ware generator that can support Binarized Neural Network deployment on
FPGA platforms. In doing so, complete designs for neurons and layers, support-
ing the various configurations handled by the generator, were carefully studied,
implemented, and validated. To guarantee the quality of the proposed results,
this work proceeded through the following main steps.
• We conducted a thorough study of FPGA architecture and the tools re-
quired to program it. This included reviewing state-of-the-art neural net-
work hardware generators and understanding key hardware optimization
strategies.
Special attention was given to the principles and structure
of Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs), laying the groundwork for their
efficient implementation in hardware.
==PAGE:114==
104
Conclusion
• Designed a fully capable Python-based generator alongside the correspond-
ing VHDL hardware components required for its operation. The design
process began with the definition of neuron entities, considered the fun-
damental execution units of the resulting networks.
• Developed the generator from the ground up using a structured class-based
architecture to logically separate its core functionalities. The associated
hardware modules were implemented in VHDL and then translated into
reusable templates using the Jinja2 templating system.
• Detailed testbenches were created for each hardware component, verifying
both functional correctness and timing behaviour through simulation.
• Numerous neural network configurations have been extensively tested,
with a focus on MNIST classifiers. More than 50 test cases were executed,
with only the most representative ones reported, to highlight performance
trade-offs and resource utilization on the Nexys A7 DDR4 platform. These
results demonstrate the wide range of configurations enabled by the gen-
erator.
• All tested networks were successfully synthesized and deployed on physical
hardware, proving that the generator produces functional implementations
that are capable of running on real FPGA devices.
6.2
Future Work
This thesis lays the groundwork for further research into automated hardware
generation for neural network acceleration. Future developments in this field
may focus either on enhancing the proposed accelerator or on designing more
comprehensive and flexible hardware generators capable of handling a wider
range of neural network architectures and deployment scenarios. The following
list outlines potential directions for future research that may be worth exploring.
• Support for Additional Layer Types: While the current generator
targets fully connected layers, a natural evolution would involve the in-
clusion of convolutional, pooling, and normalization layers. This would
enable the generation of more complex and widely used architectures such
as CNNs.
• Refining the Neuron Granularity: The neuron has been established
as the main building block of a network. Future work may explore finer
granularity by considering neuron slices as the foundational unit of com-
putation within the network.
==PAGE:115==
6.2 Future Work
105
• Automated Design Space Exploration: Integrating a mechanism for
exploring various hardware configurations (e.g., number of parallel neu-
rons, memory bandwidth, pipeline depth) would allow the generator to
automatically optimize for area, latency, power consumption, or a trade-
off between them, based on user-defined constraints.
• Hybrid CPU–FPGA Integration: Adding automatic generation of
communication interfaces (e.g., AXI or custom protocols) between the
FPGA accelerator and an external processor would make the generator
suitable for embedded systems and real-world applications, particularly in
edge environments.
==PAGE:116==
106
Conclusion
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[1] Yuanxin Su, Kah Phooi Seng, Li Minn Ang, and Jeremy Smith. Binary neu-
ral networks in fpgas: Architectures, tool flows and hardware comparisons.
Sensors, 23(22), 2023.
[2] Longlong Zhang, Xuebin Tang, Xiang Hu, Tong Zhou, and Yuanxi Peng.
Fpga-based bnn architecture in time domain with low storage and power
consumption. Electronics, 11(9), 2022.
[3] Zechun Liu, Wenhan Luo, Baoyuan Wu, Xin Yang, Wei Liu, and Kwang-
Ting Cheng. Bi-real net: Binarizing deep network towards real-network
performance. International Journal of Computer Vision, 128, 01 2020.
[4] A.L.S. Braga, C.H. Llanos, M. Ayala-Rincon, and R.P. Jacobi. Vanngen: a
flexible cad tool for hardware implementation of artificial neural networks.
In 2005 International Conference on Reconfigurable Computing and FPGAs
(ReConFig’05), pages 8 pp.–13, 2005.
[5] Anouar Nechi, Lukas Groth, Saleh Mulhem, Farhad Merchant, Rainer
Buchty, and Mladen Berekovic.
Fpga-based deep learning inference ac-
celerators: Where are we standing? ACM Trans. Reconfigurable Technol.
Syst., 16(4), October 2023.
[6] Andrej Trost and Andrej ˇZemva. Configurable hardware components gen-
erator in python.
In 2015 4th Mediterranean Conference on Embedded
Computing (MECO), pages 96–99, 2015.
[7] Martin Schoeberl,
Hans Jakob Damsgaard,
Luca Pezzarossa,
Oliver
Keszocze, and Erling Rennemo Jellum. Hardware generators with chisel. In
==PAGE:118==
108
BIBLIOGRAPHY
2024 27th Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD), pages
168–175, 2024.
[8] Clive Maxfield. The Design Warrior’s Guide to FPGAs: Devices, Tools
and Flows. Newnes, USA, 1st edition, 2004.
[9] Umer Farooq, Zied Marrakchi, and Habib Mehrez. FPGA Architectures:
An Overview, pages 7–48. Springer New York, New York, NY, 2012.
[10] Geeks
for
Geeks.
Webpage:
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/
introduction-to-logic-family/.
[11] IBM. Webpage: http://ibm.com/think/topics/neural-networks/.
[12] Walinga J 1.Stangor C. The Neuron Is the Building Block of the Nervous
System, page 1. BCcampus, BC Open Textbook Project, 2014.
[13] Geeks
for
Geeks.
Webpage:
https:
//www.geeksforgeeks.org/machine-learning/
what-is-perceptron-the-simplest-artificial-neural-network/.
[14] Marius-Constantin Popescu, Valentina Balas, Liliana Perescu-Popescu, and
Nikos Mastorakis. Multilayer perceptron and neural networks. WSEAS
Transactions on Circuits and Systems, 8, 07 2009.
[15] Luca Mennoia. Identification and intelligent control. Unpublished material
shared by the author, 2018.
[16] Haotong Qin, Ruihao Gong, Xianglong Liu, Xiao Bai, Jingkuan Song,
and Nicu Sebe. Binary neural networks: A survey. Pattern Recognition,
105:107281, 2020.
[17] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition, 2015.
[18] Ying Wang, Jie Xu, Yinhe Han, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. Deepburn-
ing: Automatic generation of fpga-based learning accelerators for the neu-
ral network family. In 2016 53nd ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation
Conference (DAC), pages 1–6, 2016.
[19] hls4ml. Webpage: https://fastmachinelearning.org/hls4ml/.
[20] Michela Variale. Hardware acceleration for ai-based noise removal in audio
signals. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby,
Kongens Lyngby, 2024.
[21] Xilinx Inc. Vivado Design Suite User Guide: Synthesis (UG901). Xilinx,
2021. Page 178.
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
109
[22] Digilent Inc.
Nexys 4 ddr reference manual.
https://digilent.com/
reference/programmable-logic/nexys-4-ddr/start, 2016.
[23] Xilinx, Inc.
Vivado Design Suite User Guide: Power Analysis and Op-
timization (UG907), December 2021. Accessed via Xilinx documentation
portal.
==PAGE:120==
110
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:121==
Appendix A
Generator Templates
This appendix presents all the relevant templates, referenced in Chapter 4, used
by the generator. Their inclusion is intended to provide an in-depth view of how
Jinja2 is used to dynamically generate VHDL code, showcasing the flexibility
and modularity of the template-based approach adopted in this work.
Listing A.1: neuron with bias.vhd
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
3 use IEEE.NUMERIC_STD.ALL;
4 use IEEE.math_real.ALL;
5 use work.TYPE_DEF.ALL;
6
7 entity {{ name }}_{{ neur_idx }} is
8
generic (
9
{%- if different_files is false %}
10
current_neuron : natural;
11
{%- endif %}
12
{%- if is_serialized is false %}
13 --
num_stages
: natural;
14
{%- if weight_file is true %}
15
{%- if different_files is false %}
16
bias_index
: natural;
17
{%- endif %}
18
start_weight
: natural;
19
{%- endif %}
20
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:122==
112
Generator Templates
21
data_width
: natural
22
);
23
port (
24
clk
: in std_logic;
25
rst
: in std_logic;
26
inputs
: in std_logic_vector(data_width -1 downto 0);
27
{%- if weight_file is false %}
28
weights
: in weight(data_width -1 downto 0);
29
biases
: in bias(data_width -1 downto 0);
30
{%- else %}
31
{%- if is_serialized is true %}
32
bias_index
: in natural;
33
start_weight
: in natural;
34
{%- endif %}
35
{%- endif %}
36
{%- if is_serialized is true %}
37
start
: in std_logic;
38
{%- if full_output is true%}
39
last_layer
: in std_logic;
40
{%- endif %}
41
done
: out std_logic;
42
{%- else %}
43
{%- if handshake is true %}
44
start
: in std_logic;
45
done
: out std_logic;
46
{%- endif %}
47
{%- endif %}
48
{%- if last_layer is true %}
49
{%- if full_output is true %}
50
output_final : out signed ({{ o_bitwidth -1}} downto 0)
51
{%- else %}
52
output_bit
: out std_logic
53
{%- endif %}
54
{%- else %}
55
{%- if full_output is true %}
56
output_final : out signed ({{ o_bitwidth -1}} downto 0);
57
{%- else %}
58
output_bit
: out std_logic
59
{%- endif %}
60
{%- endif %}
61
);
62 end entity {{ name }}_{{ neur_idx }};
63
64 architecture Behavioral of {{ name }}_{{ neur_idx }} is
65
{%- if handshake is true %}
66
type state_type is (IDLE , COMPUTE , DONE);
67
{%- endif %}
68
type matrix_type is array ( 0 to {{ num_stages }}, 0 to data_width
-1 ) of signed ({{ w_bitwidth -1}} downto 0);
69
signal stages : matrix_type := (others => (others => (others =>
'0')));
70
signal sum
: signed ({{ w_bitwidth - 1}} downto 0);
71
{%- if handshake is true %}
72
variable state : state_type := IDLE;
73
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:123==
113
74
75 begin
76
process (clk , rst)
77
begin
78
if rst = '1' then
79
sum <= (others => '0');
80
{%- if last_layer is true %}
81
{%- if full_output is true %}
82
output_final
<= (others => '0');
83
{%- else %}
84
output_bit <= '0';
85
{%- endif %}
86
{%- else %}
87
{%- if full_output is true %}
88
output_final
<= (others => '0');
89
{%- else %}
90
output_bit <= '0';
91
{%- endif %}
92
{%- endif %}
93
{%- for line in weight_rst %}
94
{{ line }}
95
{%- endfor %}
96
elsif rising_edge(clk) then
97
{%- if is_serialized is true or handshake is true %}
98
if start ='1' then
99
{%- endif %}
100
-- Load initial values (weights)
101
{%- for line in weight_loading %}
102
{{ line }}
103
{%- endfor %}
104
105
-- Perform reduction addition
106
{%- for line in reduction_addition %}
107
{{ line }}
108
{%- endfor %}
109
110
-- Add the bias
111
sum <= stages ({{ num_stages }}, 0) + resize(biases ({%- if
different_files is true %}{{ neur_idx }}{%- else %} bias_index +
current_neuron {%- endif %}), {{ w_bitwidth }});
112
113
-- Activation function
114
{%- for line in activation_logic %}
115
{{line}}
116
{%- endfor %}
117
{%- if is_serialized is true or handshake is true %}
118
done <= '1';
119
end if;
120
{%- endif %}
121
end if;
122
end process;
123 end Behavioral;
Listing A.2: neuron with states.vhd
==PAGE:124==
114
Generator Templates
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
3 use IEEE.NUMERIC_STD.ALL;
4 use work.TYPE_DEF.ALL;
5
6 entity {{ name }}_{{ neur_idx }} is
7
8
generic (
9
{%- if different_files is false %}
10
{%- if is_serialized is true %}
11
current_neuron : natural range 0 to {{ neuron_number }};
12
{%- else %}
13
current_neuron : natural;
14
{%- endif %}
15
{%- endif %}
16
{%- if is_serialized is false %}
17
{%- if weight_file is true %}
18
{%- if different_files is false %}
19
bias_index
: natural;
20
{%- endif %}
21
start_weight
: natural;
22
{%- endif %}
23
{%- endif %}
24
data_width
: natural
25
);
26
27
Port (
28
clk
: in std_logic;
29
rst
: in std_logic;
30
inputs
: in std_logic_vector( data_width - 1 downto 0);
31
32
{%- if is_serialized is true %}
33
{%- if weight_file is false %}
34
load_en
: in std_logic;
35
input_idx
: in natural;
36
data
: in signed (7 downto 0);
37
done_load
: in std_logic;
38
{%- else %}
39
bias_index
: in natural;
40
start_weight : in natural;
41
{%- endif %}
42
{%- endif %}
43
44
{%- if is_serialized is false %}
45
{%- if weight_file is false %}
46
load_en
: in std_logic;
47
input_idx
: in natural;
48
data
: in signed (7 downto 0);
49
done_load
: in std_logic;
50
{%- endif %}
51
{%- endif %}
52
53
start
: in std_logic;
54
done
: out std_logic;
==PAGE:125==
115
55
{%- if is_serialized is true %}
56
{%- if full_output is true %}
57
58
{%- if other_neuron is false %}
59
output_final : out signed ({{ o_bitwidth -1}} downto 0);
60
output_bit
: out std_logic
61
{%- else %}
62
{%- if one_layer is true %}
63
output_final : out signed ({{ o_bitwidth - 1 }} downto 0)
64
{%- else %}
65
output_bit : out std_logic
66
{%- endif %}
67
{%- endif %}
68
69
{%- else %}
70
output_bit : out std_logic
71
{%- endif %}
72
73
{%- else %}
74
{%- if full_output is true %}
75
output_final :
out signed ({{ o_bitwidth -1}} downto 0)
76
{%- else %}
77
output_bit : out std_logic
78
{%- endif %}
79
{%- endif %}
80
);
81 end entity {{ name }}_{{ neur_idx }};
82
83
84 architecture Behavioral of {{ name }}_{{ neur_idx }} is
85
type state_type is (IDLE , LOAD , {%- if weight_file is false %}
BINARIZE , {%- endif %}{% for i in range(num_stages) %}
COMPUTE_STAGE_ {{ i }}, {% endfor %} ADD_BIAS , ACTIVATE , FINISH);
86
signal current_state , next_state : state_type := IDLE;
87
88
{%- if is_serialized is true and other_neuron is false %}
89
{%- if full_output is true %}
90
signal output_reg_1 , output_reg_1_next : signed ({{ o_bitwidth - 1
}} downto 0) := (others => '0');
91
signal output_reg_2 , output_reg_2_next : std_logic := '0';
92
{%- else %}
93
signal output_reg , output_reg_next
: std_logic := '0';
94
{%- endif %}
95
96
{%- elif is_serialized is true and other_neuron is true %}
97
{%- if full_output is true %}
98
{%- if one_layer is true %}
99
signal output_reg , output_reg_next
: signed ({{ o_bitwidth - 1
}} downto 0) := (others => '0');
100
{%- else %}
101
signal output_reg , output_reg_next
: std_logic := '0';
102
{%- endif %}
103
{%- else %}
104
signal output_reg , output_reg_next
: std_logic := '0';
105
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:126==
116
Generator Templates
106
107
{%- else %}
108
{%- if full_output is true %}
109
signal output_reg , output_reg_next
: signed ({{ o_bitwidth -1 }}
downto 0) := (others => '0');
110
{%- else %}
111
signal output_reg , output_reg_next
: std_logic := '0';
112
{%- endif %}
113
{%- endif %}
114
115
signal done_reg , done_reg_next
: std_logic := '0';
116
117
type matrix_type is array ( 0 to {{ num_stages }}, 0 to data_width
-1 ) of signed ({{ w_bitwidth -1}} downto 0);
118
{%- if weight_file is false %}
119
type reg_bank is array (0 to data_width) of signed (7 downto 0);
120
signal first_regs
: reg_bank := (others => (
others => '0'));
121
{%- endif %}
122
signal stages , stages_next
: matrix_type := (others =>
(others => (others => '0')));
123
signal sum
: signed( {{ w_bitwidth - 1
}} downto 0) := (others => '0');
124
125 begin
126
127
-- State register
128
process(clk{%- if is_serialized is false and weight_file is true
%}, rst {%- endif %})
129
begin
130
131
{%-if is_serialized is false and weight_file is true %}
132
if rst = '1' then
133
current_state <= IDLE;
134
sum
<= (others => '0');
135
{%- if weight_file is false %}
136
first_regs
<= (others => (others => '0'));
137
{%- endif %}
138
stages
<= (others => (others => (others => '0')));
139
done_reg
<= '0';
140
{%- if is_serialized is true and other_neuron is false %}
141
{%- if full_output is true %}
142
output_reg_1
<= (others => '0');
143
output_reg_2
<= '0';
144
{%- else %}
145
output_reg
<= '0';
146
{%- endif %}
147
148
{%- elif is_serialized is true and other_neuron is true %}
149
{%- if full_output is true %}
150
{%- if one_layer is true %}
151
output_reg
<= (others => '0');
152
{%- else %}
153
output_reg
<= '0';
154
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:127==
117
155
{%- else %}
156
output_reg
<= '0';
157
{%- endif %}
158
159
{%- else %}
160
161
{%- if full_output is true %}
162
output_reg
<= (others => '0');
163
{%- else %}
164
output_reg
<= '0';
165
{%- endif %}
166
{%- endif %}
167
168
elsif rising_edge(clk) then
169
170
current_state <= next_state;
171
stages <= stages_next;
172
done_reg <= done_reg_next;
173
174
{%- if is_serialized is true and other_neuron is false %}
175
{%- if full_output is true %}
176
output_reg_1 <= output_reg_1_next;
177
output_reg_2 <= output_reg_2_next;
178
{%- else %}
179
output_reg
<= output_reg_next;
180
{%- endif %}
181
182
{%- elif is_serialized is true and other_neuron is true %}
183
output_reg <= output_reg_next;
184
{%- else %}
185
186
{%- if full_output is true %}
187
output_reg <= output_reg_next;
188
{%- else %}
189
output_reg <= output_reg_next;
190
{%- endif %}
191
{%- endif %}
192
193
{%- if weight_file is true %}
194
if current_state = LOAD then
195
{%- for line in weight_loading %}
196
{{ line }}
197
{%- endfor %}
198
end if;
199
200
if current_state = ADD_BIAS then
201
{%- if is_serialized is true %}
202
sum <= stages ({{ num_stages }}, 0) + resize(biases_ {{
bias_idx }}({%- if different_files is true %}{{ neur_idx }}{%- else
%} bias_index + current_neuron {%- endif %}), {{ w_bitwidth }});
203
{%- else %}
204
sum <= stages ({{ num_stages }}, 0) + resize(biases ({%- if
different_files is true %}{{ neur_idx }}{%- else %} bias_index +
current_neuron {%- endif %}), {{ w_bitwidth }});
205
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:128==
118
Generator Templates
206
end if;
207
208
{%- else %}
209
210
if current_state = LOAD then
211
if load_en = '1' then
212
first_regs(input_idx) <= data;
213
end if;
214
end if;
215
216
if current_state = BINARIZE then
217
{%- for line in weight_loading %}
218
{{ line }}
219
{%- endfor %}
220
end if;
221
222
if current_state = ADD_BIAS then
223
sum <= stages ({{ num_stages }}, 0) + resize(first_regs(
data_width), {{ w_bitwidth }});
224
end if;
225
{%- endif %}
226
end if;
227
228
{%- else %}
229
230
if rising_edge(clk) then
231
232
if rst = '1' then
233
current_state <= IDLE;
234
sum
<= (others => '0');
235
{%- if weight_file is false %}
236
first_regs
<= (others => (others => '0'));
237
{%- endif %}
238
stages
<= (others => (others => (others => '0'))
);
239
done_reg
<= '0';
240
{%- if is_serialized is true and other_neuron is false
%}
241
{%- if full_output is true %}
242
output_reg_1
<= (others => '0');
243
output_reg_2
<= '0';
244
{%- else %}
245
output_reg
<= '0';
246
{%- endif %}
247
248
{%- elif is_serialized is true and other_neuron is true
%}
249
{%- if full_output is true %}
250
{%- if one_layer is true %}
251
output_reg
<= (others => '0');
252
{%- else %}
253
output_reg
<= '0';
254
{%- endif %}
255
{%- else %}
256
output_reg
<= '0';
==PAGE:129==
119
257
{%- endif %}
258
259
{%- else %}
260
261
{%- if full_output is true %}
262
output_reg
<= (others => '0');
263
{%- else %}
264
output_reg
<= '0';
265
{%- endif %}
266
{%- endif %}
267
else
268
269
current_state <= next_state;
270
stages <= stages_next;
271
done_reg <= done_reg_next;
272
273
{%- if is_serialized is true and other_neuron is false
%}
274
{%- if full_output is true %}
275
output_reg_1 <= output_reg_1_next;
276
output_reg_2 <= output_reg_2_next;
277
{%- else %}
278
output_reg
<= output_reg_next;
279
{%- endif %}
280
281
{%- elif is_serialized is true and other_neuron is true
%}
282
output_reg <= output_reg_next;
283
{%- else %}
284
285
{%- if full_output is true %}
286
output_reg <= output_reg_next;
287
{%- else %}
288
output_reg <= output_reg_next;
289
{%- endif %}
290
{%- endif %}
291
292
{%- if weight_file is true %}
293
if current_state = LOAD then
294
{%- for line in weight_loading %}
295
{{ line }}
296
{%- endfor %}
297
end if;
298
299
if current_state = ADD_BIAS then
300
{%- if is_serialized is true %}
301
sum <= stages ({{ num_stages }}, 0) + resize(biases_ {{
bias_idx }}({%- if different_files is true %}{{ neur_idx }}{%- else
%} bias_index + current_neuron {%- endif %}), {{ w_bitwidth }});
302
{%- else %}
303
sum <= stages ({{ num_stages }}, 0) + resize(biases
({%- if different_files is true %}{{ neur_idx }}{%- else %}
bias_index + current_neuron {%- endif %}), {{ w_bitwidth }});
304
{%- endif %}
305
end if;
==PAGE:130==
120
Generator Templates
306
307
{%- else %}
308
309
if current_state = LOAD then
310
if load_en = '1' then
311
first_regs(input_idx) <= data;
312
end if;
313
end if;
314
315
if current_state = BINARIZE then
316
{%- for line in weight_loading %}
317
{{ line }}
318
{%- endfor %}
319
end if;
320
321
if current_state = ADD_BIAS then
322
sum <= stages ({{ num_stages }}, 0) + resize(
first_regs(data_width), {{ w_bitwidth }});
323
end if;
324
{%- endif %}
325
end if;
326
end if;
327
{%- endif %}
328
end process;
329
330
-- Next state logic
331
process(current_state , start ,{%-if is_serialized is true %}{%- if
weight_file is false %}load_en , done_load , input_idx , data ,{%-
endif %}{%- else %}{%- if weight_file is false %}load_en , done_load
, input_idx , data ,{%- endif %}{%- endif %}stages , sum , {%- if
is_serialized is true and other_neuron is false %}{%- if
full_output is true %} output_reg_1 , output_reg_2 {%- else %}
output_reg {%- endif %}{%- elif is_serialized is true and
other_neuron is true %} output_reg {%- else %}{%- if full_output is
true %} output_reg {%- else %} output_reg {%- endif %}{%- endif %},
done_reg)
332
begin
333
next_state <= current_state;
334
stages_next <= stages;
335
done_reg_next <= done_reg;
336
{%- if is_serialized is true and other_neuron is false %}
337
{%- if full_output is true %}
338
output_reg_1_next <= output_reg_1;
339
output_reg_2_next <= output_reg_2;
340
{%- else %}
341
output_reg_next
<= output_reg;
342
{%- endif %}
343
344
{%- elif is_serialized is true and other_neuron is true %}
345
output_reg_next <= output_reg;
346
{%- else %}
347
348
{%- if full_output is true %}
349
output_reg_next <= output_reg;
350
{%- else %}
==PAGE:131==
121
351
output_reg_next <= output_reg;
352
{%- endif %}
353
{%- endif %}
354
355
case current_state is
356
when IDLE =>
357
if start = '1' then
358
next_state <= LOAD;
359
end if;
360
361
{%- if weight_file is true %}
362
363
when LOAD =>
364
next_state <= COMPUTE_STAGE_0;
365
{%- else %}
366
367
when LOAD =>
368
if load_en = '1' then
369
if done_load = '1' then
370
next_state <= BINARIZE;
371
end if;
372
end if;
373
374
when BINARIZE =>
375
next_state <= COMPUTE_STAGE_0;
376
{%- endif %}
377
378
{% for i in range(num_stages) %}
379
when COMPUTE_STAGE_ {{ i }} =>
380
{%- for line in reduction_addition %}
381
{%- if loop.index0 >= i*limit and loop.index0 <= (i+1)*
limit -1 %}
382
{{ line | replace("{{ i+1 }}", (i+1)|string) | replace(
"{{ i }}", (i)|string) }}
383
{%- endif %}
384
{%- endfor %}
385
{% if loop.last %}
386
next_state <= ADD_BIAS;
387
{% else %}
388
next_state <= COMPUTE_STAGE_ {{ i+1 }};
389
{% endif %}
390
{% endfor %}
391
392
when ADD_BIAS =>
393
next_state <= ACTIVATE;
394
395
when ACTIVATE =>
396
{%- for line in activation_logic %}
397
{{line}}
398
{%- endfor %}
399
done_reg_next <= '1';
400
next_state <= FINISH;
401
402
when FINISH =>
403
if start = '0' then
==PAGE:132==
122
Generator Templates
404
done_reg_next <= '0';
405
next_state <= IDLE;
406
else
407
done_reg_next <= '1';
408
next_state <= FINISH;
409
end if;
410
411
when others =>
412
next_state <= IDLE;
413
end case;
414
end process;
415
416
done <= done_reg;
417
418
419
{%- if is_serialized is true and other_neuron is false %}
420
{%- if full_output is true %}
421
output_final <= output_reg_1;
422
output_bit
<= output_reg_2;
423
{%- else %}
424
output_bit
<= output_reg;
425
{%- endif %}
426
427
{%- elif is_serialized is true and other_neuron is true %}
428
{%- if full_output is true %}
429
{%- if one_layer is true %}
430
output_final <= output_reg;
431
{%- else %}
432
output_bit
<= output_reg;
433
{%- endif %}
434
{%- else %}
435
output_bit <= output_reg;
436
{%- endif %}
437
438
{%- else %}
439
440
{%- if full_output is true %}
441
output_final <= output_reg;
442
{%- else %}
443
output_bit
<= output_reg;
444
{%- endif %}
445
{%- endif %}
446 end Behavioral;
Listing A.3: layer all.vhd
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
3 use IEEE.NUMERIC_STD.ALL;
4 use work.TYPE_DEF.ALL;
5
6 entity {{ layer_name }}_{{ layer_idx }} is
7
port (
8
clk
: in std_logic;
9
rst
: in std_logic;
==PAGE:133==
123
10
inputs
: in std_logic_vector ({{ input_width - 1 }} downto 0);
11
{%- if first_layer is true or handshake is true%}
12
start
: in std_logic;
13
{%- endif %}
14
{%- if weight_file is false %}
15
input_idx
: in natural;
16
neuron_data
: in signed (7 downto 0);
17
load_n
: in std_logic_vector ({{ inferred_neurons_max
- 1 }} downto 0);
18
done_load
: in std_logic;
19
req_ROM
: out std_logic;
20
input_break
: out natural;
21
neuron_break
: out natural;
22
{%- endif %}
23
{%- if handshake is true%}
24
done
: out std_logic;
25
{%- endif %}
26
{%- if last_layer is true %}
27
outputs : out output ({{ output_width - 1 }} downto 0)
28
{%- else %}
29
outputs : out std_logic_vector ({{ output_width -1 }} downto 0)
30
{%- endif %}
31
32
);
33 end {{ layer_name }}_{{ layer_idx }};
34
35 architecture Behavioral of {{ layer_name }}_{{ layer_idx }} is
36
{%- if last_layer is true %}
37
{%- if full_output is true %}
38
signal neuron_outputs : output ({{ output_width - 1 }} downto 0) :=
(others => ( others => '0'));
39
{%- else %}
40
signal neuron_outputs : std_logic_vector ({{ output_width - 1 }}
downto 0) := (others => '0');
41
{%- endif %}
42
{%- else %}
43
signal neuron_outputs : std_logic_vector ({{ output_width - 1 }}
downto 0) := (others => '0');
44
{%- endif %}
45
signal released_inputs: std_logic_vector ({{ input_width -1 }}
downto 0 ) := (others => '0');
46
{%- if handshake is true %}
47
signal start_neurons : std_logic := '0';
48
signal neuron_done_vector : std_logic_vector ({{ output_width - 1 }}
downto 0) := (others => '0');
49
{%- if weight_file is true %}
50
constant ALL_ONES : std_logic_vector( {{ output_width - 1 }} downto
0) := (others => '1');
51
{%- else %}
52
constant NEURON_INPUTS
: natural := {{
input_width + 1 }};
53
constant NEURON_NUM
: natural := {{
output_width }};
54
{%- endif %}
55
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:134==
124
Generator Templates
56
57
58 begin
59
60
{%- if weight_file is false %}
61
input_break <= NEURON_INPUTS;
62
neuron_break <= NEURON_NUM;
63
{%- endif %}
64
65
-- Neuron instantiations
66
{%- if different_files is true %}
67
{% set start = neuron_idx
%}
68
{%- for i, j in neuron_pairs %}
69
{%- set rev_j = neurons_idx -1 -j %}
70
neuron_inst_ {{ i }} : entity work.neuron_ {{ i }}
71
generic map (
72
{%- if weight_file is true %}
73
start_weight
=> {{ start_weights[j] }},
74
{%- endif %}
75
DATA_WIDTH
=> {{ data_width }}
76
)
77
port map (
78
clk
=> clk ,
79
rst
=> rst ,
80
inputs => released_inputs ,
81
{%- if handshake is true %}
82
{%- if weight_file is false %}
83
load_en
=> load_n ({{ loop.index0 }}),
84
input_idx
=> input_idx ,
85
data
=> neuron_data ,
86
done_load
=> done_load ,
87
{%- endif %}
88
start => start_neurons ,
89
done => neuron_done_vector ({{ rev_j }}),
90
{%- endif %}
91
{%- if last_layer is true %}
92
{%- if full_output is true %}
93
output_final => neuron_outputs ({{ rev_j }})
94
{%- else %}
95
output_bit => neuron_outputs ({{ rev_j }})
96
{%- endif %}
97
{%- else %}
98
output_bit => neuron_outputs ({{ rev_j }})
99
{%- endif %}
100
);
101
{%- endfor %}
102
{%- else %}
103
{%- for i in range(output_width) %}
104
neuron_inst_ {{ i }} : entity work.neuron_ {{ layer_idx }}
105
generic map (
106
current_neuron => {{ i }},
107
{%- if weight_file is true %}
108
{%- if different_files is false %}
109
bias_index
=> {{ bias_indexes }},
110
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:135==
125
111
start_weight
=> {{ start_weights[i] }},
112
{%- endif %}
113
DATA_WIDTH
=> {{ data_width }}
114
)
115
port map (
116
clk
=> clk ,
117
rst
=> rst ,
118
inputs => released_inputs ,
119
{%- if handshake is true %}
120
{%- if weight_file is false %}
121
load_en
=> load_n ({{ loop.index0 }}),
122
input_idx
=> input_idx ,
123
data
=> neuron_data ,
124
done_load
=> done_load ,
125
{%- endif %}
126
start => start_neurons ,
127
done => neuron_done_vector ({{ i }}),
128
{%- endif %}
129
{%- if last_layer is true %}
130
{%- if full_output is true %}
131
output_final => neuron_outputs ({{ output_width - i - 1 }})
132
{%- else %}
133
output_bit => neuron_outputs ({{ output_width - i - 1 }})
134
{%- endif %}
135
{%- else %}
136
output_bit => neuron_outputs ({{ output_width - i - 1 }})
137
{%- endif %}
138
);
139
{%- endfor %}
140
{%- endif %}
141
142
{%- if handshake is true %}
143
144
PROCESS(clk , rst)
145
BEGIN
146
if (rst = '1') then
147
released_inputs <= (others => '0');
148
start_neurons
<= '0';
149
done
<= '0';
150
{%- if weight_file is false %}
151
req_ROM
<= '0';
152
{%- endif %}
153
{%- if last_layer is true %}
154
outputs
<= (others => (others => '0'));
155
{%- else %}
156
outputs
<= (others => '0');
157
{%- endif %}
158
elsif (rising_edge(clk)) then
159
done <= '0';
160
{%- if weight_file is false %}
161
req_ROM
<= '0';
162
{%- endif %}
163
if start='1' and start_neurons = '0' then
164
released_inputs <= inputs;
165
start_neurons
<= '1';
==PAGE:136==
126
Generator Templates
166
{%- if weight_file is false %}
167
req_ROM
<= '1';
168
{%- endif %}
169
{%- if weight_file is true %}
170
elsif neuron_done_vector = ALL_ONES then
171
{%- else %}
172
{%- if different_files is true %}
173
elsif neuron_done_vector (0) = '1' then
174
{%- else %}
175
elsif neuron_done_vector ({{ output_width - 1 }}) = '1' then
176
{%- endif %}
177
{%- endif %}
178
start_neurons
<= '0';
179
done
<= '1';
180
outputs
<= neuron_outputs;
181
end if;
182
end if;
183
end PROCESS;
184
{%- elif first_layer is true %}
185
PROCESS(clk , rst)
186
BEGIN
187
if (rst = '1') then
188
released_inputs <= (others => '0');
189
elsif(rising_edge(clk)) THEN
190
if start='1' then
191
released_inputs <= inputs;
192
end if;
193
end if;
194
end PROCESS;
195
outputs <= neuron_outputs;
196
{%- else %}
197
released_inputs <= inputs;
198
outputs
<= neuron_outputs;
199
{%- endif %}
200 end architecture Behavioral;
Listing A.4: layer with states.vhd
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
3 use IEEE.NUMERIC_STD.ALL;
4 use work.TYPE_DEF.ALL;
5
6 entity {{ layer_name }} is
7
generic(
8
layer_number: natural{%- if layer_reuses | length >= 2 %};
9
start_index : natural
10
{%- endif %}
11
12
);
13
14
Port (
15
clk
: in std_logic;
16
rst
: in std_logic;
==PAGE:137==
127
17
inputs
: in std_logic_vector ({{ max_data_width -1}}
downto 0);
18
{%- if first_layer is true or handshake is true %}
19
start
: in std_logic;
20
{%- endif %}
21
{%- if weight_file is false %}
22
input_idx
: in natural;
23
neuron_data
: in signed (7 downto 0);
24
load_n
: in std_logic_vector ({{ inferred_neurons_max
- 1 }} downto 0);
25
done_load
: in std_logic;
26
req_ROM
: out std_logic;
27
input_break
: out natural;
28
neuron_break
: out natural;
29
{%- endif %}
30
{%- if handshake is true %}
31
done
: out std_logic;
32
{%- endif %}
33
{%- if full_output is true %}
34
outputs
: out output ({{ out_neuron_number - 1}}
downto 0)
35
{%- else %}
36
outputs
: out std_logic_vector ({{ out_neuron_number
- 1}} downto 0)
37
{%- endif %}
38
);
39 end {{ layer_name }};
40
41 architecture Behavioral of {{ layer_name }} is
42
43
type state_type is (IDLE , INITIATE ,{%- if less_neurons is true %}
WAIT_N_DONE , CHECK_REPEAT , UPDATE_REPEAT , UPDATE_DONE ,{%- else %}
WAIT_L_DONE ,{%- endif %}{%- if one_layer is false %} CLEAR_INPUTS ,
COPY_OUTPUTS ,{%- endif %}{%- if one_layer is true and output_bit is
true %} COPY_OUTPUTS ,{%- endif %} COMPLETE ,{%- if weight_file is
true %} UPDATE_INDEXES ,{%- endif %} TERMINATE);
44
signal state , next_state
: state_type := IDLE;
45
signal start_neuron , start_neuron_nxt
: std_logic := '0';
46
signal connection_in , connection_in_nxt
: std_logic_vector ({{
max_data_width - 1 }} downto 0) := (others => '0');
47
48
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
49
{%- if output_bit is true %}
50
signal connection_out , connection_out_nxt
: std_logic_vector ({{
max_neuron_number - 1 }} downto 0) := (others => '0');
51
{%- endif %}
52
{%- else %}
53
{%- if output_bit is true %}
54
signal connection_out
: std_logic_vector ({{
max_neuron_number - 1 }} downto 0) := (others => '0');
55
{%- endif %}
56
{%- endif %}
57
58
{%- if weight_file is true %}
59
signal start_weight , start_weight_nxt
: natural range 0 to
==PAGE:138==
128
Generator Templates
{{ range_max - 1 }} := 0;
60
signal bias_index , bias_index_nxt
: natural range 0 to
{{ range_max - 1 }} := 0;
61
{%- endif %}
62
63
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
64
{%- if output_bit is true %}
65
signal neuron_slice_out
: std_logic_vector ({{
fixed_neurons_num -1 }} downto 0) := (others => '0');
66
{%- endif %}
67
{%- if output_f is true %}
68
signal output_part
: output ({{
fixed_neurons_num
-1}} downto 0) := (others => (others => '0' ));
69
{%- endif %}
70
signal neuron_slice_done
: std_logic_vector ({{
fixed_neurons_num
-1}} downto 0) := (others => '0');
71
72
signal overflow_counter , overflow_counter_nxt : natural range 0 to
{{ max_overflow_count - 1 }} := 0;
73
{%- endif %}
74
signal layer_count , layer_count_nxt
: integer range 0 to
layer_number := 0;
75
signal last_layer , last_layer_nxt
: std_logic := '0';
76
{%- if less_neurons is false %}
77
signal neuron_done
: std_logic_vector ({{
max_neuron_number - 1 }} downto 0) := (others => '0');
78
{%- endif %}
79
80
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
81
{%- if full_output is true %}
82
signal outputs_cp , outputs_cp_nxt
: output ({{
out_neuron_number - 1}} DOWNTO 0) := (others => (others => '0'));
83
{%- endif %}
84
{%- else %}
85
{%- if full_output is true %}
86
signal outputs_cp
: output ({{
out_neuron_number - 1}} downto 0) := (others => (others => '0'));
87
{%- endif %}
88
{%- endif %}
89
90
{%- if weight_file is true %}
91
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
92
constant ALL_ONES
: std_logic_vector ({{
fixed_neurons_num - 1 }} downto 0) := (others => '1');
93
{%- else %}
94
constant ALL_ONES
: std_logic_vector ({{
max_neuron_number - 1 }} downto 0) := (others => '1');
95
{%- endif %}
96
{%- endif %}
97
98
{%- if weight_file is false %}
99
constant NEURON_INPUTS
: natural := {{
max_data_width + 1 }};
100
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
101
constant NEURON_NUM
: natural := {{
==PAGE:139==
129
fixed_neurons_num }};
102
{%- else %}
103
constant NEURON_NUM
: natural := {{
max_neuron_number }};
104
{%- endif %}
105
{%- endif %}
106
107
108 begin
109
110
{%- if weight_file is false %}
111
input_break <= NEURON_INPUTS;
112
neuron_break <= NEURON_NUM;
113
{%- endif %}
114
115
-- === Neuron Instantiations ===
116
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
117
118
{%- for i in range(fixed_neurons_num) %}
119
neuron_inst_ {{ i }} : entity work.neuron_ {{ layer_idx }}
120
generic map (
121
current_neuron => {{ i }},
122
data_width
=> {{ max_data_width }}
123
)
124
port map (
125
clk
=> clk ,
126
rst
=> rst ,
127
inputs
=> connection_in ,
128
{%- if weight_file is false %}
129
load_en
=> load_n ({{ i }}),
130
input_idx
=> input_idx ,
131
data
=> neuron_data ,
132
done_load
=> done_load ,
133
{%- else %}
134
bias_index
=> bias_index ,
135
start_weight => start_weight ,
136
{%- endif %}
137
start
=> start_neuron ,
138
done
=> neuron_slice_done ({{ i }}),
139
{%- if output_f is true %}
140
output_final => output_part ({{ fixed_neurons_num - i - 1
}}){% if output_f and output_bit %},{% endif %}
141
{%- endif %}
142
{%- if output_bit is true %}
143
output_bit
=> neuron_slice_out ({{ fixed_neurons_num - i -
1 }})
144
{%- endif %}
145
);
146
{%- endfor %}
147
148
{%- else %}
149
150 {%- for i in range(out_neuron_number) %}
151 neuron_inst_ {{ i }} : entity work.neuron_ {{ neur_idx }}
152
generic map (
==PAGE:140==
130
Generator Templates
153
current_neuron => {{ i }},
154
data_width
=> {{ max_data_width }}
155
)
156
port map (
157
clk
=> clk ,
158
rst
=> rst ,
159
inputs
=> connection_in ,
160
{%- if weight_file is false %}
161
load_en
=> load_n ({{ i }}),
162
input_idx
=> input_idx ,
163
data
=> neuron_data ,
164
done_load
=> done_load ,
165
{%- else %}
166
bias_index
=> bias_index ,
167
start_weight => start_weight ,
168
{%- endif %}
169
start
=> start_neuron ,
170
done
=> neuron_done ({{ i }}),
171
{%- if output_f is true %}
172
output_final => outputs_cp ({{ out_neuron_number - i - 1 }}){%
if output_f and output_bit %},{% endif %}
173
{%- endif %}
174
{%- if output_bit is true %}
175
output_bit
=> connection_out ({{ max_neuron_number - i - 1 }})
176
{%- endif %}
177
);
178 {%- endfor %}
179
180 -- === Other Neurons (no output_final) ===
181 {%- for i in range(out_neuron_number , max_neuron_number) %}
182 neuron_inst_ {{ i }} : entity work.neuron_ {{ neur_idx + 1 }}
183
generic map (
184
current_neuron => {{ i }},
185
data_width
=> {{ max_data_width }}
186
)
187
port map (
188
clk
=> clk ,
189
rst
=> rst ,
190
inputs
=> connection_in ,
191
{%- if weight_file is false %}
192
load_en
=> load_n ({{ i }}),
193
input_idx
=> input_idx ,
194
data
=> neuron_data ,
195
done_load
=> done_load ,
196
{%- else %}
197
bias_index
=> bias_index ,
198
start_weight => start_weight ,
199
{%- endif %}
200
start
=> start_neuron ,
201
done
=> neuron_done ({{ i }}),
202
output_bit
=> connection_out ({{ max_neuron_number
- i - 1
}})
203
);
204 {%- endfor %}
205 {%- endif %}
==PAGE:141==
131
206
207
-- === FSM Process ===
208
209 process(clk ,rst)
210 begin
211
if rst = '1' then
212
state
<= IDLE;
213
start_neuron
<= '0';
214
connection_in
<= (others => '0');
215
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
216
{%- if output_bit is true %}
217
connection_out <= (others => '0');
218
{%- endif %}
219
{%- endif %}
220
221
layer_count
<= 0;
222
last_layer
<= '0';
223
{%- if weight_file is true %}
224
start_weight <= 0;
225
bias_index
<= 0;
226
{%- endif %}
227
228
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
229
{%- if full_output is true %}
230
outputs_cp
<= (others => (others => '0'));
231
{%- endif %}
232
{%- endif %}
233
234
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
235
overflow_counter <= 0;
236
{%- endif %}
237
238
{%- if full_output is true %}
239
outputs
<= (others => (others => '0'));
240
{%- else %}
241
outputs
<=
(others => '0');
242
{%- endif %}
243
244
{%- if handshake is true %}
245
done
<= '0';
246
{%- endif %}
247
248
elsif rising_edge(clk) then
249
state
<= next_state;
250
start_neuron
<= start_neuron_nxt;
251
connection_in
<= connection_in_nxt;
252
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
253
{%- if output_bit is true %}
254
connection_out
<= connection_out_nxt;
255
{%- endif %}
256
{%- endif %}
257
layer_count
<= layer_count_nxt;
258
last_layer
<= last_layer_nxt;
259
{%- if weight_file is true %}
260
start_weight
<= start_weight_nxt;
==PAGE:142==
132
Generator Templates
261
bias_index
<= bias_index_nxt;
262
{%- endif %}
263
264
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
265
{%- if full_output is true %}
266
outputs_cp
<= outputs_cp_nxt;
267
{%- endif %}
268
overflow_counter <= overflow_counter_nxt;
269
{%- endif %}
270
if state = TERMINATE then
271
{%- if full_output is true %}
272
outputs
<= outputs_cp;
273
{%- else %}
274
outputs
<= connection_in ({{ data_widths [0] - 1 }}
downto
{{ data_widths [0] - out_neuron_number }});
275
{%- endif %}
276
{%- if handshake is true %}
277
done
<= '1';
278
else
279
done
<= '0';
280
{%- endif %}
281
end if;
282
end if;
283 end process;
284
285
286 process(state , start , start_neuron , last_layer ,{%- if less_neurons is
true %} neuron_slice_done ,{%- if output_bit is true %}
neuron_slice_out ,{%- endif %} overflow_counter , {%- if full_output
is true %}outputs_cp , output_part ,{%- endif %}{%- else %}
neuron_done ,{%- endif %} layer_count , inputs ,{%- if weight_file is
true %} bias_index , start_weight ,{%- endif %} connection_in {%- if
output_bit is true %}, connection_out {%- endif %})
287
288
variable tmp_state
: state_type;
289
variable tmp_start_neuron
: std_logic;
290
variable tmp_connection_in
: std_logic_vector ({{ max_data_width
- 1 }} downto 0);
291
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
292
variable tmp_connection_out
: std_logic_vector ({{
max_neuron_number - 1 }} downto 0);
293
{%- endif %}
294
variable tmp_layer_count
: integer range 0 to layer_number;
295
variable tmp_last_layer
: std_logic;
296
{%- if weight_file is true %}
297
variable tmp_start_weight
: natural;
298
variable tmp_bias_index
: natural;
299
{%- endif %}
300
301
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
302
{%- if full_output is true %}
303
variable tmp_outputs_cp
: output ({{ out_neuron_number - 1 }}
downto 0);
304
{%- endif %}
305
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:143==
133
306
307
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
308
variable tmp_overflow_counter : natural := 0;
309
{%- endif %}
310 begin
311
312
tmp_state
:= state;
313
tmp_start_neuron
:= start_neuron;
314
tmp_connection_in
:= connection_in;
315
316
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
317
{%- if output_bit is true %}
318
tmp_connection_out
:= connection_out;
319
{%- endif %}
320
tmp_overflow_counter := overflow_counter;
321
{%- endif %}
322
323
tmp_layer_count
:= layer_count;
324
tmp_last_layer
:= last_layer;
325
{%- if weight_file is true %}
326
tmp_start_weight
:= start_weight;
327
tmp_bias_index
:= bias_index;
328
{%- else %}
329
req_ROM
<= '0';
330
{%- endif %}
331
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
332
{%- if full_output is true %}
333
tmp_outputs_cp
:= outputs_cp;
334
{%- endif %}
335
{%- endif %}
336
337
case state is
338
339
when IDLE =>
340
if start = '1' then
341
tmp_connection_in := inputs;
342
tmp_state := INITIATE;
343
end if;
344
345
when INITIATE =>
346
tmp_last_layer
:= '1' when (layer_count + 1 =
layer_number) else '0';
347
tmp_start_neuron := '1';
348
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
349
tmp_state
:= WAIT_N_DONE;
350
{%- else %}
351
tmp_state
:= WAIT_L_DONE;
352
{%- endif %}
353
{%- if weight_file is false %}
354
req_ROM
<= '1';
355
{%- endif %}
356
357
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
358
359
when WAIT_N_DONE =>
==PAGE:144==
134
Generator Templates
360
{%- if weight_file is true %}
361
if neuron_slice_done = ALL_ONES then
362
{%- else %}
363
if neuron_slice_done ({{ fixed_neurons_num - 1 }}) = '1'
then
364
{%- endif %}
365
tmp_start_neuron := '0';
366
tmp_state := CHECK_REPEAT;
367
else
368
tmp_start_neuron := '1';
369
tmp_state := WAIT_N_DONE;
370
end if;
371
372
when CHECK_REPEAT =>
373
case layer_count is
374
{%- for layer_idx , layer in enumerate(chosen_layers) %}
375
{%- if not (full_output is true and loop.last) %}
376
when {{ layer_idx }} =>
377
case overflow_counter is
378
{%- for step_idx , step in enumerate(layer) %}
379
when {{ step_idx }} =>
380
{%- if step.slice_type == "full" %}
381
tmp_connection_out ({{ step.end_bit }}
downto {{ step.start_bit }}) := neuron_slice_out;
382
tmp_state := {% if not loop.last %}
UPDATE_REPEAT {% else %} UPDATE_DONE {% endif %};
383
{%- else %}
384
tmp_connection_out ({{ step.end_bit }}
downto {{ step.start_bit }}) := neuron_slice_out ({{ step.
partial_range [0] }} downto {{ step.partial_range [1] }});
385
tmp_state := UPDATE_DONE;
386
{%- endif %}
387
{%- endfor %}
388
when others =>
389
tmp_state := IDLE;
390
end case;
391
{%- endif %}
392
{%- endfor %}
393
{%- if full_output is true %}
394
when {{ chosen_layers | length - 1 }} =>
395
case overflow_counter is
396
{%- for r in range(last_repeats) %}
397
when {{ r }} =>
398
tmp_outputs_cp ({{ out_neuron_number - 1 - r
* fixed_neurons_num }} downto {{ out_neuron_number - (r + 1) *
fixed_neurons_num }}) := output_part;
399
tmp_state := {% if last_remainder == 0 and
r == last_repeats - 1 %} UPDATE_DONE {% else %} UPDATE_REPEAT {% endif
%};
400
{%- endfor %}
401
{%- if last_remainder > 0 %}
402
when {{ last_repeats }} =>
403
tmp_outputs_cp ({{ last_remainder - 1 }}
downto 0) := output_part ({{ fixed_neurons_num - 1 }} downto {{
fixed_neurons_num - last_remainder }});
==PAGE:145==
135
404
tmp_state := UPDATE_DONE;
405
{%- endif %}
406
when others =>
407
tmp_state := IDLE;
408
end case;
409
{%- endif %}
410
when others =>
411
tmp_state := IDLE;
412
end case;
413
414
when UPDATE_REPEAT =>
415
tmp_overflow_counter := overflow_counter + 1;
416
{%- if weight_file is true %}
417
tmp_start_weight
:= start_weight + {{ fixed_neurons_num
}};
418
tmp_bias_index
:= bias_index + {{ fixed_neurons_num
}};
419
{%- endif %}
420
tmp_state
:= INITIATE;
421
422
when UPDATE_DONE =>
423
tmp_overflow_counter := 0;
424
{%- if one_layer is true %}
425
{%- if output_bit is true %}
426
tmp_state := COPY_OUTPUTS;
427
{%- else %}
428
tmp_state := COMPLETE;
429
{%- endif %}
430
{%- else %}
431
tmp_state := CLEAR_INPUTS;
432
{%- endif %}
433
{%- else %}
434
435
436
when WAIT_L_DONE =>
437
{%- if weight_file is true %}
438
if neuron_done = ALL_ONES then
439
{%- else %}
440
if neuron_done ({{ max_neuron_number - 1 }}) = '1' then
441
{%- endif %}
442
tmp_start_neuron := '0';
443
{%- if one_layer is true and output_bit is true %}
444
tmp_state
:= COPY_OUTPUTS;
445
{%- elif one_layer is true %}
446
tmp_state
:= COMPLETE;
447
{%- else %}
448
tmp_state
:= CLEAR_INPUTS;
449
{%- endif %}
450
else
451
tmp_start_neuron := '1';
452
tmp_state
:= WAIT_L_DONE;
453
end if;
454
455
{%- endif %}
456
==PAGE:146==
136
Generator Templates
457
{%- if one_layer is false %}
458
459
when CLEAR_INPUTS =>
460
tmp_connection_in := (others => '0');
461
tmp_state := COPY_OUTPUTS;
462
463
when COPY_OUTPUTS =>
464
case layer_count is
465
{%- set total_width = data_widths [0] %}
466
{%- for idx in range(1, layer_number + 1 ) %}
467
when {{ idx - 1 }} =>
468
tmp_connection_in ({{ total_width - 1 }} downto {{
total_width - data_widths[idx] }}) := connection_out ({{
max_neuron_number - 1 }} downto {{ max_neuron_number - data_widths[
idx] }});
469
{%- endfor %}
470
when others =>
471
tmp_state := IDLE;
472
end case;
473
tmp_state := COMPLETE;
474
{%- endif %}
475
476
{%- if one_layer is true and output_bit is true %}
477
478
when COPY_OUTPUTS =>
479
{%- set total_width = data_widths [0] %}
480
tmp_connection_in ({{ total_width - 1 }} downto {{
total_width - out_neuron_number }}) := connection_out ({{
max_neuron_number - 1 }} downto {{ max_neuron_number -
out_neuron_number }});
481
tmp_state := COMPLETE;
482
{%- endif %}
483
484
when COMPLETE =>
485
if last_layer ='1' then
486
tmp_layer_count := 0;
487
tmp_state := TERMINATE;
488
else
489
tmp_layer_count := layer_count +1;
490
{%- if weight_file is true %}
491
tmp_state
:= UPDATE_INDEXES;
492
{%- else %}
493
tmp_state
:= INITIATE;
494
{%- endif %}
495
end if;
496
497
{%- if weight_file is true %}
498
when UPDATE_INDEXES =>
499
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
500
tmp_start_weight := start_weight + {{ fixed_neurons_num }};
501
tmp_bias_index
:= bias_index + {{ fixed_neurons_num }};
502
{%- else %}
503
tmp_start_weight := start_weight + {{ max_neuron_number }};
504
tmp_bias_index
:= bias_index + {{ max_neuron_number }};
505
{%- endif %}
==PAGE:147==
137
506
tmp_state
:= INITIATE;
507
{%- endif %}
508
509
when TERMINATE =>
510
tmp_last_layer
:= '0';
511
{%- if weight_file is true %}
512
tmp_start_weight := 0;
513
tmp_bias_index
:= 0;
514
{%- endif %}
515
tmp_state
:= IDLE;
516
517
when others =>
518
tmp_state := IDLE;
519
end case;
520
521
next_state
<= tmp_state;
522
start_neuron_nxt
<= tmp_start_neuron;
523
connection_in_nxt
<= tmp_connection_in;
524
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
525
{%- if output_bit is true %}
526
connection_out_nxt
<= tmp_connection_out;
527
{%- endif %}
528
overflow_counter_nxt <= tmp_overflow_counter;
529
{%- endif %}
530
layer_count_nxt
<= tmp_layer_count;
531
last_layer_nxt
<= tmp_last_layer;
532
{%- if weight_file is true %}
533
start_weight_nxt
<= tmp_start_weight;
534
bias_index_nxt
<= tmp_bias_index;
535
{%- endif %}
536
{%- if less_neurons is true %}
537
{%- if full_output is true %}
538
outputs_cp_nxt
<= tmp_outputs_cp;
539
{%- endif %}
540
{%- endif %}
541
542
end process;
543 end Behavioral;
Listing A.5: neural network.vhd
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
3 use IEEE.NUMERIC_STD.ALL;
4 use work.TYPE_DEF.ALL;
5
6
7 entity {{ network_name }} is
8
port (
9
clk
: in std_logic;
10
rst
: in std_logic;
11
enable
: in std_logic;
12
inputs
: in unsigned ({{ t_bitwidth - 1 }} downto 0);
13
{%- if handshake is true %}
14
ending
: out std_logic;
==PAGE:148==
138
Generator Templates
15
{%- endif %}
16
outputs : out output ({{ output_width - 1 }} downto 0)
17
);
18 end {{ network_name }};
19
20 architecture Structural of {{ network_name }} is
21
22
-- Intermediate signals
23
{%- if handshake is true
%}
24
signal ending_reg
: std_logic := '0';
25
{%- endif %}
26
{%- for i in range(layer_count - 1) %}
27
signal layer_output_ {{ i }}
: std_logic_vector ({{
layer_output_widths[i] - 1 }} downto 0) := (others => '0');
28
{%- if handshake is true %}
29
signal done_{{ i }}
: std_logic := '0';
30
{%- endif %}
31
{%- endfor %}
32
signal inp_out
: std_logic_vector ({{ input_width - 1
}} downto 0) := (others => '0');
33
signal ready
: std_logic := '0';
34
{%- if weight_file is false %}
35
36
{%- if layer_count > 1 %}
37
{%- for i in range(layer_count) %}
38
signal start_ROM_ {{ i }}
: std_logic;
39
signal NEURON_INPUTS_ {{ i }} : natural;
40
signal NEURON_NUM_ {{ i }}
: natural;
41
{%- endfor %}
42
{%- endif %}
43
signal start_ROM
: std_logic;
44
signal out_ROM
: signed (31 downto 0);
-- The memory
i use always has a 32 bit word
45
signal addr_ROM
: std_logic_vector ({{ addr_size - 1 }}
downto 0);
46
signal input_break
: natural;
47
signal neuron_break
: natural;
48
signal neuron_w
: signed (7 downto 0);
-- Also when
using memory i always assume 8 bit values
49
signal input_idx
: natural;
50
signal load_n
: std_logic_vector ({{
inferred_neurons_max - 1 }} downto 0);
51
signal done_load
: std_logic;
52
{%- endif %}
53
54
55
56 begin
57
58
{%- if handshake is true %}
59
ending
<= ending_reg;
60
{%- endif %}
61
62
{%- if weight_file is false and layer_count > 1 %}
63
start_ROM <=
==PAGE:149==
139
64
{%- for i in range(layer_count) -%}
65
start_ROM_ {{ i }}{{ ' or ' if not loop.last else '' }}
66
{%- endfor %};
67
68
select_layer : process(clk , rst)
69
begin
70
if rising_edge(clk) then
71
{%- for i in range(layer_count) %}
72
{%- if i == 0 %}
73
if start_ROM_ {{ i }} = '1' then
74
{%- else %}
75
elsif start_ROM_ {{ i }} = '1' then
76
{%- endif %}
77
input_break
<= NEURON_INPUTS_ {{ i }};
78
neuron_break <= NEURON_NUM_ {{ i }};
79
{%- endfor %}
80
else
81
input_break
<= input_break;
82
neuron_break <= neuron_break;
83
end if;
84
end if;
85
end process select_layer;
86
{%- endif %}
87
88
input_loader_inst : entity work.input_loader
89
port map(
90
clk
=> clk ,
91
rst
=> rst ,
92
enable => enable ,
93
inputs => inputs ,
94
ready => ready ,
95
inp_out => inp_out
96
);
97
98
{%- if weight_file is false %}
99
rom_inst : entity work.network_weights
100
port map(
101
clk
=> clk ,
102
addr
=> addr_ROM ,
103
dout
=> out_ROM
104
);
105
106
rom_control_inst : entity work.rom_control
107
port map(
108
clk
=> clk ,
109
rst
=> rst ,
110
start
=> start_ROM ,
111
ram_dout
=> out_ROM ,
112
input_break
=> input_break ,
113
neuron_break
=> neuron_break ,
114
ram_addr
=> addr_ROM ,
115
neuron_in_data
=> neuron_w ,
116
neuron_in_index => input_idx ,
117
load_enable
=> load_n ,
118
done
=> done_load
==PAGE:150==
140
Generator Templates
119
);
120
121
{%- endif %}
122
123
{%- if layer_count > 1 %}
124
-- Layer 0: Takes input from the network
125
{{ layer_names [0] }}_inst : entity work .{{ layer_names [0] }}
126
{%- if layer_generics [0] %}
127
generic map (
128
{%- for g_name , g_value in layer_generics [0]. items () %}
129
{{ g_name }} => {{ g_value }}{% if not loop.last %}, {%
endif %}
130
{%- endfor %}
131
)
132
{%- endif %}
133
port map (
134
clk
=> clk ,
135
rst
=> rst ,
136
inputs
=> inp_out ,
137
start
=> ready ,
138
{%- if weight_file is false %}
139
input_idx => input_idx ,
140
neuron_data => neuron_w ,
141
load_n => load_n ,
142
done_load => done_load ,
143
req_ROM => start_ROM_0 ,
144
input_break => NEURON_INPUTS_0 ,
145
neuron_break => NEURON_NUM_0 ,
146
{%- endif %}
147
{%- if handshake is true %}
148
done => done_0 ,
149
{%- endif %}
150
outputs => layer_output_0
151
);
152
153
-- Intermediate layers
154
{% for i in range(1, layer_count - 1) %}
155
{{ layer_names[i] }}_inst : entity work .{{ layer_names[i] }}
156
{%- if layer_generics[i] %}
157
generic map (
158
{%- for g_name , g_value in layer_generics[i]. items () %}
159
{{ g_name }} => {{ g_value }}{% if not loop.last %}, {%
endif %}
160
{%- endfor %}
161
)
162
{%- endif %}
163
port map (
164
clk
=> clk ,
165
rst
=> rst ,
166
inputs
=> layer_output_ {{ i - 1 }},
167
{%- if handshake is true %}
168
start => done_{{ i - 1 }},
169
{%- endif %}
170
{%- if weight_file is false %}
171
input_idx => input_idx ,
==PAGE:151==
141
172
neuron_data => neuron_w ,
173
load_n => load_n ,
174
done_load => done_load ,
175
req_ROM => start_ROM_ {{i}},
176
input_break => NEURON_INPUTS_ {{ i }},
177
neuron_break => NEURON_NUM_ {{ i }},
178
{%- endif %}
179
{%- if handshake is true %}
180
done => done_{{ i }},
181
{%- endif %}
182
outputs => layer_output_ {{ i }}
183
);
184
{% endfor %}
185
186
-- Final layer connects to network output
187
{{ layer_names [-1] }}_inst : entity work .{{ layer_names [-1] }}
188
{%- if layer_generics [-1] %}
189
generic map (
190
{%- for g_name , g_value in layer_generics [-1]. items () %}
191
{{ g_name }} => {{ g_value }}{% if not loop.last %}, {%
endif %}
192
{%- endfor %}
193
)
194
{%- endif %}
195
port map (
196
clk
=> clk ,
197
rst
=> rst ,
198
inputs
=> layer_output_ {{ layer_count - 2 }},
199
{%- if handshake is true %}
200
start => done_{{ layer_count - 2 }},
201
{%- endif %}
202
{%- if weight_file is false %}
203
input_idx => input_idx ,
204
neuron_data => neuron_w ,
205
load_n => load_n ,
206
done_load => done_load ,
207
req_ROM => start_ROM_ {{ layer_count - 1 }},
208
input_break => NEURON_INPUTS_ {{ layer_count - 1 }},
209
neuron_break => NEURON_NUM_ {{ layer_count - 1}},
210
{%- endif %}
211
{%- if handshake is true %}
212
done => ending_reg ,
213
{%- endif %}
214
outputs => outputs
215
);
216
{%- else %}
217
218
{{ layer_names [0] }}_inst : entity work .{{ layer_names [0] }}
219
{%- if layer_generics [0] %}
220
generic map (
221
{%- for g_name , g_value in layer_generics [0]. items () %}
222
{{ g_name }} => {{ g_value }}{% if not loop.last %}, {%
endif %}
223
{%- endfor %}
224
)
==PAGE:152==
142
Generator Templates
225
{%- endif %}
226
port map (
227
clk
=> clk ,
228
rst
=> rst ,
229
inputs
=> inp_out ,
230
start
=> ready ,
231
{%- if weight_file is false %}
232
input_idx => input_idx ,
233
neuron_data => neuron_w ,
234
load_n => load_n ,
235
done_load => done_load ,
236
req_ROM => start_ROM ,
237
input_break => input_break ,
238
neuron_break => neuron_break ,
239
{%- endif %}
240
{%- if handshake is true %}
241
done => ending_reg ,
242
{%- endif %}
243
outputs => outputs
244
);
245
{%- endif %}
246
247
248 end Structural;
Listing A.6: rom control.vhd
1 library ieee;
2 use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
3 use ieee.numeric_std.all;
4
5 entity rom_control is
6
port (
7
clk
: in
std_logic;
8
rst
: in
std_logic;
9
start
: in
std_logic;
10
ram_dout
: in
signed ({{ word_size - 1 }} downto 0);
11
input_break
: in
natural;
12
neuron_break
: in
natural;
13
ram_addr
: out std_logic_vector ({{ addr_size - 1 }}
downto 0);
14
neuron_in_data
: out signed ({{ file_bitwidth - 1 }} downto
0);
15
neuron_in_index
: out natural;
16
load_enable
: out std_logic_vector ({{
inferred_neurons_max - 1 }} downto 0);
17
done
: out std_logic
18
);
19 end entity;
20
21 architecture Behavioral of rom_control is
22
type state_type is (IDLE , DUMMY , READ , SPLIT_0 , SPLIT_1 , SPLIT_2 ,
SPLIT_3 , CHECK , COMPLETE);
23
signal state , state_next : state_type := IDLE;
24
==PAGE:153==
143
25
signal addr_counter , addr_counter_next : natural range 0 to {{
end_RAM - 1 }} := 0;
26
signal input_idx , inp_idx_next
: natural range 0 to {{
data_per_neuron_max }} := 0;
27
signal neuron_idx , neuron_idx_next
: natural range 0 to {{
inferred_neurons_max }} := 0;
28
signal byte_cnt , byte_cnt_next
: natural range 0 to {{
data_per_neuron_max }} := 0;
29
30
signal load_enable_temp
: std_logic_vector ({{
inferred_neurons_max - 1 }} downto 0) := (others => '0');
31
signal temp_word
: signed ({{ word_size - 1
}} downto 0) := (others => '0');
32
signal temp_data
: signed ({{ file_bitwidth -
1 }} downto 0);
33
signal flag_temp
: std_logic := '0';
34
35 begin
36
37
ram_addr
<= std_logic_vector(to_unsigned(addr_counter , {{
addr_size }}));
38
neuron_in_data
<= temp_data;
39
neuron_in_index <= input_idx;
40
load_enable
<= load_enable_temp;
41
done <= flag_temp;
42
43
44
process(clk)
45
begin
46
if rising_edge(clk) then
47
if rst = '1' then
48
state
<= IDLE;
49
addr_counter
<= 0;
50
temp_word
<= (others => '0');
51
neuron_idx
<= 0;
52
input_idx
<= 0;
53
byte_cnt
<= 0;
54
else
55
state
<= state_next;
56
addr_counter
<= addr_counter_next;
57
neuron_idx
<= neuron_idx_next;
58
input_idx
<= inp_idx_next;
59
byte_cnt
<= byte_cnt_next;
60
if state = READ then
61
temp_word
<= ram_dout;
62
end if;
63
end if;
64
end if;
65
end process;
66
67
68
process(state , start , addr_counter , neuron_idx , input_idx , byte_cnt
, input_break , neuron_break , temp_word)
69
begin
70
state_next
<= state;
==PAGE:154==
144
Generator Templates
71
addr_counter_next
<= addr_counter;
72
neuron_idx_next
<= neuron_idx;
73
inp_idx_next
<= input_idx;
74
byte_cnt_next
<= byte_cnt;
75
temp_data
<= (others => '0');
76
load_enable_temp
<= (others => '0');
77
flag_temp
<= '0';
78
79
80
case state is
81
when IDLE =>
82
if start
= '1' then
83
neuron_idx_next
<=
0;
84
inp_idx_next
<=
0;
85
byte_cnt_next
<=
0;
86
state_next
<= READ;
87
end if;
88
89
when READ
=>
90
state_next
<= SPLIT_0;
91
92
when SPLIT_0 =>
93
load_enable_temp(neuron_idx)
<= '1';
94
if byte_cnt < input_break then
95
temp_data
<= temp_word (7 downto
0);
96
if byte_cnt < input_break -1 then
97
inp_idx_next
<= input_idx + 1;
98
else
99
flag_temp
<= '1';
100
end if;
101
byte_cnt_next
<= byte_cnt + 1;
102
state_next
<= SPLIT_1;
103
else
104
state_next
<= CHECK;
105
end if;
106
107
108
when SPLIT_1 =>
109
load_enable_temp(neuron_idx)
<= '1';
110
if byte_cnt < input_break then
111
temp_data
<= temp_word (15 downto
8);
112
if byte_cnt < input_break -1 then
113
inp_idx_next
<= input_idx + 1;
114
else
115
flag_temp
<= '1';
116
end if;
117
byte_cnt_next
<= byte_cnt + 1;
118
state_next
<= SPLIT_2;
119
else
120
state_next
<= CHECK;
121
end if;
122
123
when SPLIT_2 =>
==PAGE:155==
145
124
load_enable_temp(neuron_idx)
<= '1';
125
if byte_cnt < input_break then
126
temp_data
<= temp_word (23 downto
16);
127
if byte_cnt < input_break -1 then
128
inp_idx_next
<= input_idx + 1;
129
else
130
flag_temp
<= '1';
131
end if;
132
byte_cnt_next
<= byte_cnt + 1;
133
state_next
<= SPLIT_3;
134
else
135
state_next
<= CHECK;
136
end if;
137
138
when SPLIT_3 =>
139
load_enable_temp(neuron_idx)
<= '1';
140
temp_data
<= temp_word (31 downto
24);
141
byte_cnt_next
<= byte_cnt + 1;
142
if byte_cnt < input_break -1 then
143
inp_idx_next
<= input_idx + 1;
144
else
145
flag_temp
<= '1';
146
end if;
147
state_next
<= CHECK;
148
149
150
when CHECK =>
151
if byte_cnt = input_break then
152
if neuron_idx < neuron_break - 1 then
153
154
neuron_idx_next
<= neuron_idx + 1;
155
byte_cnt_next
<= 0;
156
inp_idx_next
<= 0;
157
state_next
<= DUMMY;
158
else
159
160
flag_temp
<= '1';
161
state_next
<= COMPLETE;
162
end if;
163
else
164
state_next
<= DUMMY;
165
end if;
166
167
if addr_counter < {{ end_RAM - 1 }} then
168
addr_counter_next
<= addr_counter + 1;
169
end if;
170
171
when DUMMY =>
172
state_next <= READ;
173
174
when COMPLETE =>
175
flag_temp
<= '1';
176
state_next <= IDLE;
==PAGE:156==
146
Generator Templates
177
178
when others =>
179
state_next <= IDLE;
180
end case;
181
end process;
182 end Behavioral;
Listing A.7: rams init file.vhd
1 library ieee;
2 use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
3 use ieee.numeric_std.all;
4
5 entity network_weights is
6 port(
7 clk
: in std_logic;
8 addr
: in std_logic_vector ({{ addr_size - 1 }} downto 0);
9 dout
: out signed ({{ word_size - 1 }} downto 0)
10 );
11 end network_weights;
12
13 architecture rtl of network_weights is
14
15
type ram_type is array(0 to {{ end_RAM - 1 }}) of signed ({{
word_size - 1 }} downto 0);
16
signal RAM : ram_type := (
17
{%- for i in range(end_RAM) %}
18
{%- set val0 = ram_values [4*i + 0] if (4*i + 0) < ram_values|length
else 0 %}
19
{%- set val1 = ram_values [4*i + 1] if (4*i + 1) < ram_values|length
else 0 %}
20
{%- set val2 = ram_values [4*i + 2] if (4*i + 2) < ram_values|length
else 0 %}
21
{%- set val3 = ram_values [4*i + 3] if (4*i + 3) < ram_values|length
else 0 %}
22
{{ i }} =>
to_signed ({{ val3 }}, {{ file_bitwidth }}) &
23
to_signed ({{ val2 }}, {{ file_bitwidth }}) &
24
to_signed ({{ val1 }}, {{ file_bitwidth }}) &
25
to_signed ({{ val0 }}, {{ file_bitwidth }}){% if not loop.
last %},{% endif %}
26
27
{%- endfor %}
28
);
29
attribute rom_style : string;
30
attribute rom_style of RAM : signal is "block";
31
32 begin
33
process(clk)
34
begin
35
if rising_edge(clk) then
36
dout <= RAM(to_integer(unsigned(addr)));
37
end if;
38
end process;
39 end rtl;
==PAGE:157==
147
Listing A.8: input loader.vhd
1 library IEEE;
2 use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
3 use IEEE.NUMERIC_STD.ALL;
4 use work.TYPE_DEF.ALL;
5
6 entity input_loader is
7
8
port (
9
clk
: in std_logic;
10
rst
: in std_logic;
11
enable
: in std_logic;
12
inputs
: in unsigned ({{ t_bitwidth - 1 }} downto 0);
--
t_bitwidth/input_size (1, 8, 16 ,...) is the number of words passed
13
ready
: out std_logic;
14
inp_out
: out std_logic_vector ({{ input_width -1 }} downto
0)
15
);
16 end input_loader;
17
18 architecture Behavioral of input_loader is
19
signal internal_temp : std_logic_vector ({{ input_width -1 }} downto
0) := (others => '0');
20
{%- set result = input_width / (t_bitwidth // input_size) %}
21
signal count
: natural range 0 to {{ result | int }} := 0;
22
signal done
: std_logic := '0';
23
signal ready_reg
: std_logic := '0';
24
25 begin
26
27
process(clk)
28
begin
29
if rising_edge(clk) then
30
if rst = '1' then
31
{%- set bits_per_cycle = t_bitwidth // input_size %}
32
count
<= 0;
33
ready_reg
<= '0';
34
internal_temp <= (others => '0');
35
elsif enable = '1' then
36
{%- for i in range(bits_per_cycle) %}
37
{%- if bits_per_cycle == 1 %}
38
if ({{ input_width - 1 + i }} - count) >= 0 then
39
{%- else %}
40
if ({{ input_width - 1 + i }} - count * {{
bits_per_cycle }}) >= 0 then
41
{%- endif %}
42
{%- if binarize %}
43
if inputs ({{ input_size*i+input_size -1 }} downto {{
input_size*i }}) > to_unsigned ({{ THRESHOLD }}, {{ input_size }})
then
44
{%- if bits_per_cycle == 1 %}
45
internal_temp ({{ input_width - 1 + i }} - count
) <= '1';
46
{%- else %}
==PAGE:158==
148
Generator Templates
47
internal_temp ({{ input_width - 1 + i }} - count
* {{ bits_per_cycle }}) <= '1';
48
{%- endif %}
49
else
50
{%- if bits_per_cycle == 1 %}
51
internal_temp ({{ input_width - 1 + i }} - count
) <= '0';
52
{%- else %}
53
internal_temp ({{ input_width - 1 + i }} - count
* {{ bits_per_cycle }}) <= '0';
54
{%- endif %}
55
end if;
56
{%- else %}
57
{%- if bits_per_cycle == 1 %}
58
internal_temp ({{ input_width - 1 + i }} - count) <=
inputs ({{ input_size*i+input_size -1 }}); -- store msb or modify
for full data
59
{%- else %}
60
internal_temp ({{ input_width - 1 + i }} - count *
{{ bits_per_cycle }}) <= inputs ({{ input_size*i+input_size -1 }});
-- store msb or modify for full data
61
{%- endif %}
62
{%- endif %}
63
end if;
64
{%- endfor %}
65
{%- set max_cycles =
input_width
// bits_per_cycle %}
66
if count = {{ max_cycles - 1 }} then
67
ready_reg
<= '1';
68
done
<= '1';
69
else
70
count <= count + 1;
71
end if;
72
elsif done = '1' then
73
ready_reg <= '0';
74
done
<= '0';
75
end if;
76
end if;
77
end process;
78
79
ready <= ready_reg;
80
inp_out <= internal_temp;
81
82 end Behavioral;
