==PAGE:1==
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
Iso­Surface Extraction, Implicit­Field Modelling
Gradient­Based Volume Shading
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
Iso­Surface Extraction, Implicit­Field Modelling Gradient­Based Volume Shading
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Giorgio Vallesi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Giorgio Vallesi ­ s230094
Signature
Date
ii
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Volume rendering has long been an essential technique in fields such as medical imag­
ing, fluid dynamics, and material analysis, where it enables the visualization of complex
3D scalar fields like CT scans, pressure distributions, or simulation data. While Blender
supports basic volumetric effects, such as clouds and smoke, its current approach to
volume rendering makes it nearly impossible to display clear and well­defined surfaces.
This presents a significant limitation for users aiming to visualize scientific data with pre­
cision and clarity. Consequently, Blender is not yet suitable for use cases that require
structured, surface­aware rendering, such as the interpretation of implicit fields or high­
resolution simulation volumes.
The goal of this project is to extend Blender’s volume rendering capabilities by introducing
modular shader nodes and new volume primitives specifically designed for iso­surface vi­
sualization. At its core, the add­on replaces the built­in Principled Volume shader with a
custom node group that enables surface­based lighting models, such as emission, ab­
sorption, and specular highlights, to be applied directly to iso­surfaces within volumetric
data. These effects are driven by a user­defined density input and an estimation of the sur­
face normals, which can be computed analytically for procedural fields or extracted from
OpenVDB voxel grids using gradient operators. To support both technical and creative
workflows, the add­on also includes nodes and menu integrations for generating common
SDF­based primitives (e.g., spheres, boxes, and tori) as well as 3D noise volumes with
automatic normal estimation.
The report discusses the principles of light transport in participating media, the algorithms
used for gradient estimation and surface shading, the key limitations of Blender’s cur­
rent volume rendering pipeline, and the design of the add­on within Blender’s shader
and geometry system. The system focuses on the visualization of surfaces embedded
in volumetric fields, rather than amorphous effects, enabling precise and readable rep­
resentations of implicit geometry. Results show that the add­on produces sharper, more
informative outputs than Blender’s default tools, offering a practical solution for both sci­
entific visualization and procedural modeling.
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Giorgio Vallesi, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Author.
J. Andreas Bærentzen, Professor, DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
Supervisor.
Jeppe Revall Frisvad, Associate Professor, DTU Compute, Department of Applied Math­
ematics and Computer Science
Co­Supervisor.
iv
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Related Work
3
2.1
Volume Rendering Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Iso­surfaces and Scalar Fields
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Signed Distance Fields and Procedural Volumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Blender’s Volume Rendering System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Related Tools and Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
System Overview
17
3.1
Design Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Implementation
21
4.1
Iso­Surface Volume Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Input Nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Gradient Extraction for VDB Volumes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
New Primitives Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Testing and Results
33
5.1
Visual Demonstrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Comparison with Blender Metaballs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
VDBs and Performance Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Conclusion And Future Work
45
Bibliography
49
A Blender Testing Scripts
51
A.1 iso_testing.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.2 volumetomesh_testing.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Volume rendering is a fundamental technique for visualizing three­dimensional scalar
fields, widely used in domains such as medical imaging, computational fluid dynamics,
and materials science. In these contexts, it is often insufficient to view only the raw vol­
umetric density; instead, users are interested in extracting and visualizing specific data
thresholds,known as iso­surfaces, which represent critical structures in the dataset. For
example, in CT or MRI scans, iso­surfaces may delineate organs or tumors, whereas in
simulation data they may define shock fronts or material boundaries.
Blender, a popular open­source 3D­creation suite, offers built­in volume­rendering support
via its Cycles and Eevee engines. These systems excel at handling semi­transparent
media by simulating light propagation through a participating medium, based on particle­
scattering models. In this paradigm, volumes are treated as diffuse clouds of data in
which color and opacity accumulate as light is absorbed and scattered along rays. This
works well for rendering smoke, fire, or fog, where soft transitions in density are visually
significant; however, the approach inherently lacks sharply defined internal features.
While Blender is highly advanced for surface­based rendering with polygonal meshes,
offering a rich shading system, modifiers, and real­time visualization, several limitations
arise once one steps outside the mesh environment and works directly with volumetric
scalar fields. Notably, Blender does not natively support iso­surface shading within vol­
umes: there is no provision to extract or interactively visualize a surface defined by a
constant scalar value, nor a mechanism to compute or assign surface normals to such
a structure. In addition, the platform lacks first­class support for signed distance fields
(SDFs), analytic scalar fields widely used in procedural modeling and scientific visualiza­
tion thanks to their well­defined gradients and implicit surfaces.
This project addresses these limitations by introducing a novel, shader­based system for
iso­surface rendering within Blender. The goal is to demonstrate that real­time iso­surface
visualization is not only feasible but also lightweight, modular, and intuitive. The aim of
the project is to leverage Blender’s existing infrastructure and extend it via a custom add­
on. Unlike traditional approaches such as Marching Cubes, which convert scalar fields
into static meshes before visualization, the proposed method operates entirely within the
shading pipeline. Users can smoothly explore scalar fields and adjust the isovalue on the
fly, revealing internal surfaces without interrupting the workflow.
To this end, the system introduces a suite of tools:
• A modular shader­node group that mimics surface shading inside volumetric data,
supporting both procedural fields and imported OpenVDB grids.
• Analytic and numerical normal­estimation techniques for lighting iso­surfaces.
• A UI button that interfaces with an external executable to perform enhanced normal­
vector computations on OpenVDB files directly within Blender.
• A library of parametric SDF primitives and volumetric noise fields for procedural
experimentation.
Implicit modelling is rapidly gaining traction as a core technique in both procedural con­
tent creation and scientific visualization. Yet many existing pipelines still rely on external
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
1
==PAGE:10==
libraries or standalone applications. A secondary objective of this project is therefore prag­
matic: to prove that advanced implicit­surface workflows can live entirely inside Blender.
By packaging every component as a single, easily downloadable add­on, we show that
iso­surface extraction, normal estimation, and SDF­based experimentation need not leave
the familiar Blender environment, and can be extended further by the community. Build­
ing on this capability, enabling iso­surface shading directly inside the volume­rendering
pipeline bridges a critical gap in Blender’s toolset. The resulting workflow opens new pos­
sibilities in both scientific visualization and creative design, particularly in domains where
internal structure matters more than external form. Applications range from medical imag­
ing and physics simulations to procedural modeling and generative design.
This report is structured as follows: Chapter 2 introduces the theoretical background of
volume rendering and iso­surface extraction, including light­transport and shading mod­
els. Chapter 3 reviews related work, encompassing Blender’s native capabilities and ex­
ternal tools. Chapter 4 presents the implementation of the proposed system, detailing
shader design, normal computation, and the volume­generation pipeline. Chapter 5 eval­
uates the method through practical examples and performance comparisons. Finally,
Chapter 6 discusses limitations and future development directions, including possible ex­
tensions to Blender’s native shader architecture.
2
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Volume Rendering Principles
2.1.1
Historical Context and Applications
Volume rendering is the process of generating two­dimensional (2D) images from three­
dimensional (3D) scalar fields without first extracting explicit surfaces or geometry. It
plays a crucial role in visualizing data where internal structures, rather than external sur­
faces, carry essential meaning. Originally developed for medical imaging and scientific
visualization, volume rendering enables observers to analyse tissue density in CT scans,
turbulence in fluid flows, and electron densities in quantum simulations [1, 2]. Compared
with surface rendering, which reveals only the outermost layer, volume rendering exposes
interior transitions, gradients, and the full spatial distribution of scalar quantities.
Historically, the technique emerged during the late 1980s and early 1990s, when in­
creased computational power made it feasible to process dense volumetric datasets.
Seminal work by Levoy [2] and Drebin et al. [1] introduced ray­casting and voxel­compositing
methods that form the basis of modern approaches. Since then, volume rendering has
proved valuable in medicine, engineering, seismology, astrophysics, and more recently
also real­time applications such as video games and visual effects [3].
The technique is particularly relevant whenever the distribution of internal properties must
be understood. In biomedical imaging, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic reso­
nance imaging (MRI) scans produce 3D scalar fields that capture tissue density or signal
intensity. In computational fluid dynamics, volume rendering allows scientists to explore
flow velocity, vorticity, and turbulence within simulations [4]. Consequently, volume ren­
dering has become foundational across both scientific and artistic disciplines.
2.1.2
Participating Media and Light Transport Models
The core physical model underlying most volume­rendering techniques is that of partici­
pating media, in which the interior of a volume is treated as a continuous medium through
which light travels and interacts with matter. Unlike surface rendering, where light reflects
or refracts off discrete interfaces between solids and air, volume rendering considers the
cumulative effects of absorption, emission, and scattering as light moves through a region
filled with material.
Participating­media models are particularly suitable for simulating amorphous phenom­
ena such as fog, smoke, fire, and clouds, where there is no well­defined surface but
rather a gradual transition in optical density. The appearance of such volumes arises
from how light is attenuated, scattered, and sometimes emitted internally as it traverses
the medium. These models have found broad application in both scientific visualization
and visual effects [4, 5, 6].
The formal description of light transport in participating media is given by the Radiative
Transfer Equation (RTE), which models how radiance L(x) changes along a path through
a volume:
L(x) =
! D
0
T(t) σe(t) Le(t) dt,
T(t) = exp
"
−
! t
0
σa(s) ds
#
.
(2.1)
Here:
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
3
==PAGE:12==
• L(x): radiance received at position x along the ray;
• σe(t): emission coefficient at point t;
• Le(t): emitted radiance at point t;
• σa(s): absorption coefficient at point s;
• T(t): transmittance—the fraction of light surviving from t to the viewer.
In the special case where a participating medium neither emits light nor returns any of the
incident energy to the eye (no in­scattering), the full Radiative Transfer Equation collapses
to the Beer–Lambert law. In differential form this reads
dL(s)
ds
= −σt(s) L(s),
(2.2)
where L(s) is the radiance after travelling a distance s and σt = σa + σs is the extinction
coefficient, i.e. the probability per unit length of a photon being absorbed (σa) or scattered
out of its path (σs). Integrating Eq. (2.2) from the camera (s = 0) to any distance s gives
the optical depth
τ(s) =
! s
0
σt(u) du,
(2.3)
and the corresponding transmittance
T(s) = L(s)
L(0) = exp
$
−τ(s)
%
.
(2.4)
Equations (2.2)–(2.4) provide a closed­form solution for pure extinction and form the an­
alytic core of every fixed­step ray marcher: at each step of length ∆s a renderer such as
Blender’s Cycles samples σt once and multiplies the path throughput by exp(−σt ∆s).
Real media, of course, also emit and scatter light. After applying the Beer–Lambert factor
from Eq. (2.4), a path tracer therefore adds two further source terms for the current step:
(i) a deterministic self­emission σeLe ∆s, and (ii) a stochastic single­scattering contribu­
tion σs Φ(θ, g) Lin ∆s. The angular redistribution of scattered light is almost universally
described by the Henyey–Greenstein phase function
ΦHG(cos θ, g) =
1 −g2
"
1 + g2 −2g cos θ
#3/2 ,
(2.5)
where θ is the angle between the incoming and outgoing directions and g ∈[−1, 1] is
the asymmetry parameter. Setting g = 0 produces isotropic scattering, g > 0 favours
the forward lobes characteristic of smoke, and g < 0 yields the back­scattering typical of
clouds or fog. During ray marching the renderer Monte­Carlo samples Eq. (2.5) once per
step, scales the result by σs ∆s, and weights it by the accumulated transmittance from
Eq. (2.4). In this way extinction, self­emission, and anisotropic single­scattering are com­
bined inside a single march loop whose accuracy and cost are governed by the choice of
step size: coarse steps accelerate rendering at the risk of banding or energy loss, while
fine steps converge to the continuous solution of the full radiative­transfer equation.
Because Henyey­Greenstein is strictly single­lobed, its width and skew are governed by
the same scalar g; there is no degree of freedom to sharpen the peak while suppressing
its opposite flank, nor to tilt the axis independently of its anisotropy. Even at |g| →1 the
half­width of the peak remains in the 10◦–15◦range, producing a soft bloom rather than
4
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:13==
the razor­sharp glint familiar from mirror or clear­coat surfaces. In addition, a bidirectional
reflectance distribution function (BRDF), which represent the ratio of reflected radiance Lo
to incident irradiance Li on an infinitesimal surface patch, only needs to conserve energy
over the outward hemisphere, whereas a volume phase function must do so over the
entire sphere; roughly one half of any specular­style lobe is therefore unavoidably wasted
in directions a closed surface can never emit toward (see Sec. 2.2.2).
Directional waste. Even if the lobe could be made arbitrarily narrow, a convex iso­shell
would still discard ≈50% of its radiant power: only the outward hemisphere (2π sr) is
visible to the camera, so half the energy is launched into self­occlusion on the interior
side of the surface.
Missing normals. True specular reflection is enforced in a BRDF by the factor (⃗n·⃗h)s;
unless the half­vector ⃗h aligns with the surface normal ⃗n, the contribution is zero. A phase
function has no access to ⃗n: every scattering event is treated as an un­oriented particle,
so it cannot aim energy along the mirror direction ⃗r.
Figure 2.1: Qualitative comparison of surface rendering and volume rendering. Adapted
from [7].
Participating­media models are best understood as an extension of the rendering equa­
tion [8] to volumetric domains. They enable the depiction of continuous, optically active
materials and are widely used in visual effects and scientific illustrations. However, a no­
table limitation is that they smooth over internal structures, making it difficult to distinguish
sharp transitions or embedded surfaces within the volume.
This limitation motivates the introduction of iso­surfaces, mathematical constructs that
delineate regions of constant scalar value inside a volume. While participating media in­
tegrate optical effects along the entire ray, iso­surfaces isolate specific spatial thresholds,
offering a complementary way to visualize volumetric data. The next subsection explores
the voxel­based discretization of volume data and the challenges involved in evaluating
and sampling these scalar fields.
2.1.3
Voxel Grids and Sampling Techniques
To make continuous scalar fields suitable for rendering and computation, they are typ­
ically discretized into a structured grid of volumetric elements called voxels, the three­
dimensional analogue of pixels. Each voxel occupies a small region of space and stores
a scalar value sampled from the underlying field, such as density, temperature, emissivity,
or distance. These values are commonly arranged in a regular Cartesian grid with uni­
form spacing between cells. This structure provides a natural foundation for interpolation,
gradient estimation, and ray traversal during rendering.
The most direct approach is to use a dense grid, where every voxel in the domain is
stored explicitly. While simple to implement and fast to access, dense grids are memory­
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
5
==PAGE:14==
intensive, especially when dealing with large or mostly empty volumes. To overcome this,
sparse formats store only the relevant or non­zero parts of the field. A widely adopted
solution is OpenVDB [9], a hierarchical data structure designed for efficient storage and
traversal of sparse volumes. OpenVDB organizes space into a tree of nested grids, al­
lowing large empty regions to be skipped while still supporting high­resolution data where
needed. It enjoys broad use in scientific computing and production rendering pipelines
because it strikes a pragmatic balance between compactness, performance, and flexibil­
ity.
Regardless of how the volume is stored (densely or sparsely), rendering relies on evalu­
ating the scalar field at arbitrary points in space, not just at voxel centres. This is essential
in ray­based methods, where rays move continuously through the volume. To estimate
values between samples, interpolation is applied. The most common technique is trilin­
ear interpolation, which blends the eight voxel values surrounding a point to produce a
smooth scalar field. This prevents visible discontinuities and ensures consistent shading
across voxel boundaries.
Figure 2.2: Trilinear interpolation inside a unit voxel cube: eight corner samples are
blended to evaluate the interior point.
Sampling strategy plays a central role in determining both the quality and efficiency of
volume rendering. In ray marching, the renderer steps along a ray at fixed or adaptive
intervals, sampling the volume at each point and combining those values according to the
rendering model. A large step size speeds up computation but risks missing fine details
or introducing aliasing; a small step size improves accuracy but increases render time. To
balance these concerns, many rendering engines adopt adaptive sampling, where step
size varies according to local field variation or accumulated opacity. Additional techniques
such as early­ray termination, which stops ray traversal once opacity reaches saturation,
and empty­space skipping, which avoids sampling regions known to contain no relevant
data, are widely used to accelerate rendering, particularly for sparse or high­resolution
volumes.
Accurate sampling is also essential for computing gradients, which are required for surface­
lighting effects like those applied to iso­surfaces. Gradients are typically estimated via
central finite differences, which involve evaluating the scalar field at multiple nearby po­
sitions. The precision of this process depends on both grid resolution and interpolation
accuracy. In sum, voxel grids form the computational backbone of volume rendering, and
careful sampling determines how scalar fields are reconstructed and used. These foun­
dations support the rendering algorithms discussed in the next section.
While the techniques discussed above focus on integrating light through a volume to rep­
resent its overall density or emission, they offer limited support for visualizing sharp in­
6
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:15==
ternal boundaries. An alternative approach is to treat the volume not as a continuous
fog but as a mathematical object that contains implicit surfaces, well­defined structures
embedded within scalar fields. These iso­surfaces offer a fundamentally different way
of interpreting volume data: instead of accumulating contributions along a ray, we iden­
tify and visualize regions where the field crosses a specific threshold. The next section
explores this idea in detail.
2.2
Iso­surfaces and Scalar Fields
2.2.1
Definition and Mathematical Formulation
A scalar field is a real­valued function defined over a spatial domain, typically R3, that
assigns a scalar value to each point in space:
f : R3 −→R,
⃗x %→f(⃗x),
where ⃗x = (x, y, z) denotes a point in three­dimensional space. Scalar fields are used in
science and engineering to represent spatially varying quantities such as density, pres­
sure, temperature, or signed distance. These fields may arise from simulations, imaging
data, or procedural definitions.
An iso­surface is the set of points where the scalar field equals a constant threshold c ∈R:
Sc = { ⃗x ∈R3 | f(⃗x) = c }.
This describes an implicit: a surface defined not through explicit geometry but as the zero­
level set of f(⃗x) −c. Under basic smoothness conditions on f (e.g. differentiability and a
non­vanishing gradient at the level set), the iso­surface forms a locally smooth 2­manifold
[10, 11].
Iso­surfaces are widely used in visualization. In medical imaging, they delineate struc­
tures such as organs or tumours in CT or MRI scans; in fluid dynamics, they highlight
pressure fronts or vortices. Across disciplines, they provide a concise way to extract and
analyse geometric features embedded in volumetric data.
Because they are defined implicitly, iso­surfaces do not require meshing up front, mak­
ing them well suited to procedural workflows and direct evaluation. Still, to be visualized
they are often polygonised (e.g. via Marching Cubes [11]) or rendered using shading tech­
niques that simulate surface lighting within the volume.
2.2.2
Surface Shading Within Volumes
Defining iso­surfaces is only part of the challenge; making them visually meaningful re­
quires lighting. In dense or feature­rich volumes, simply thresholding the scalar field of­
ten produces flat, low­contrast results. To highlight geometric structure, we can apply
surface­shading techniques commonly used in mesh rendering: these models account
for light direction, surface orientation, and material properties.
We interpret the iso­surface f(⃗x) = c as a surface with a local normal given by the gradient
of the scalar field:
⃗n =
∇f(⃗x)
∥∇f(⃗x)∥.
Once the normal is known, classical lighting models can be applied. A generic local­
illumination model at point ⃗x is
L(⃗x) = La + Ld + Ls,
(2.6)
where La is ambient lighting, Ld the diffuse term, and Ls the specular term. Lambertian
diffuse reflection is
Ld = kd I max
"
0,⃗n·⃗l
#
,
(2.7)
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
7
==PAGE:16==
with kd the diffuse reflectance, I the light intensity, and ⃗l the light direction. Specular
highlights can be added with the Blinn­Phong model:
Ls = ks I max
"
0,⃗n·⃗h
#s,
(2.8)
where ks is the specular coefficient, s the shininess exponent, and ⃗h = (⃗l +⃗v)/∥⃗l +⃗v∥the
halfway vector between light and view.
Figure 2.3: Effect of local illumination on an iso­surface extracted from the same scalar
field. Left: ambient term only, giving a flat silhouette; centre: Lambertian diffuse shading
reveals overall shape; right: adding Blinn–Phong specular highlights further accentuates
curvature and surface detail.
Applying these models within volumes reveals curvature, depth, and orientation, features
that usually get lost in standard density­based rendering. This makes surface lighting
valuable in domains such as medical or scientific visualization, where understanding in­
ternal structure is crucial.
However, most volume renderers, built on the radiative­transfer equation, do not expose
surface orientation. Shading must therefore be confined to narrow regions around the
iso­value, using field gradients to approximate normals. This blend of volume sampling
and surface lighting is central to the method explored in this thesis.
2.2.3
Gradient­Based Normal Estimation
Normals are essential for applying surface shading, and when they cannot be computed
analytically they must be estimated from the gradient of the scalar field. If the field is
defined analytically, gradients can often be derived in closed form. This is typical for
signed distance functions (SDFs), where ∇f naturally points away from the surface and
its magnitude ∥∇f∥is ideally 1.
When dealing with sampled data (e.g. CT scans or numerical simulations), gradients must
be approximated numerically. A widely used approach is central finite differences. For a
regular grid with spacing ϵ,
∂f
∂x ≈f(x + ϵ, y, z) −f(x −ϵ, y, z)
2ϵ
,
8
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:17==
and analogously for y and z. The full gradient is therefore
∇f(⃗x) ≈


f(x + ϵ, y, z) −f(x −ϵ, y, z)
2ϵ
f(x, y + ϵ, z) −f(x, y −ϵ, z)
2ϵ
f(x, y, z + ϵ) −f(x, y, z −ϵ)
2ϵ


.
This approximation is sufficient for lighting in most cases, though its accuracy depends
on grid resolution and field smoothness. In noisy or low­res volumes the gradient may
fluctuate, producing shading artefacts.
For sparse volumes such as OpenVDB grids, many toolkits provide built­in gradient fil­
ters that estimate derivatives from the voxel neighbourhood, offering efficiency on large
datasets. For procedural fields and SDFs, shaders can compute finite differences at run­
time or use analytical gradients when available.
In all cases, computing ∇f is the enabling step that brings surface shading into volumetric
domains: with normals in hand, the iso­surface becomes a visible, lit entity rather than an
invisible threshold.
2.2.4
From Marching Cubes to Direct Rendering
Historically, iso­surfaces have been rendered in two fundamentally different ways, each
with distinct workflows, performance profiles, and visual trade­offs. Below we review (i)
the classic Marching Cubes polygonisation pipeline and (ii) the more recent family of di­
rect iso­surface rendering techniques.
Marching Cubes. Proposed by Lorensen and Cline in 1987, Marching Cubes (MC) pro­
cesses the scalar field one lattice cell at a time. For every cube, the eight corner samples
fijk are compared with the threshold c and encoded as an 8­bit index. A pre­computed
case table (256 entries) maps that index to a local triangle pattern that is topologically
consistent across neighbouring cells. Edge­intersection points are obtained by linear in­
terpolation
⃗p = ⃗p0 +
c −f0
f1 −f0
(⃗p1 −⃗p0),
where ⃗p0, ⃗p1 are the edge vertices and f0, f1 their scalar values. The resulting vertices
inherit normals via central­difference gradients and can therefore be fed directly into any
rasterisation or ray­tracing engine. MC meshes are compact, support hardware instanc­
ing, decouple shading from sampling rate, and can be cached or transmitted once for
repeated use. Drawbacks include a costly rebuild whenever c or the field changes, mem­
ory spikes at high resolutions, and aliasing or faceting where voxel size is coarse relative
to curvature. Extensions such as marching tetrahedra, dual contouring, and adaptive oc­
tree MC mitigate some issues but retain the same preprocessing bottleneck.
Direct iso­surface rendering. In contrast, direct approaches treat the iso­surface as a
thin participating­medium shell that is shaded on­the­fly [12]. During ray marching, each
pixel ray advances through the volume until the scalar field changes sign with respect to
c. A root is then located by Newton or bisection refinement along that ray segment, the
gradient ∇f supplies the surface normal ⃗n, and illumination is evaluated with the local
model of Eq. (2.6).
Because no triangles are generated, the iso­value can be tweaked interactively; proce­
dural fields render without discretisation artefacts; and the method blends naturally with
volumetric effects such as fog, smoke, or attenuation. Its cost, however, scales with the
number of rays and steps rather than with surface area, so real­time performance hinges
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
9
==PAGE:18==
on step size and early­termination heuristics. High­frequency noise in f can also desta­
bilise normals unless the field or gradient is filtered.
In this thesis we adopt the direct strategy inside Blender’s shader nodes, leveraging
signed­distance fields for stable normals and allowing artists or analysts to scrub the iso­
value in real time while retaining physically based lighting and full volumetric context.
2.3
Signed Distance Fields and Procedural Volumes
A signed distance field (SDF) is a scalar field that encodes the shortest distance from any
point in space to the surface of a shape, with the sign indicating whether the point lies
inside or outside. Formally, for a region Ω⊂R3 with boundary ∂Ω, an SDF f : R3 →R is
defined as
f(⃗x) =







−d(⃗x, ∂Ω),
⃗x ∈Ω,
0,
⃗x ∈∂Ω,
d(⃗x, ∂Ω),
⃗x /∈Ω,
where d(⃗x, ∂Ω) is the Euclidean distance to the closest point on ∂Ω. The zero­level set
{⃗x | f(⃗x) = 0} is the iso­surface itself. Because SDFs are continuous and often differ­
entiable, they provide exact normals and curvature, unlike sampled fields such as VDB
grids or noise textures. Defined by compact analytic expressions, they remain resolution­
independent until evaluation and are common in real­time rendering, procedural mod­
elling, and constructive solid geometry (CSG) [13].
Figure 2.4: Signed­distance field of a 2­D circle: values are zero on the circumference,
negative inside, positive outside, and equal in magnitude to the shortest Euclidean dis­
tance from each point to the circle.
One of the most attractive properties of SDFs is their expressive compactness. A sphere
of radius r centred at the origin, for example, is defined by f(⃗x) = ∥⃗x∥−r. More intri­
cate shapes arise by combining primitives with min/max operations, distance blending, or
spatial transforms. These constructions enable flexible workflows that require no explicit
geometry and stay resolution­agnostic until render time. For iso­surface shading, SDFs
are an ideal source: the zero­level set is explicit, gradients for lighting come “for free,” and
10
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:19==
the field is evaluable at arbitrary points in space, making SDFs perfectly aligned with the
direct­rendering technique.
2.3.1
Procedural Modelling with SDFs
The procedural modelling power of SDFs follows from their function­based definition. In­
stead of manipulating polygons, an artist or developer describes geometry with algebraic
expressions, gaining parametric control over shape construction, animation, and compo­
sition. Basic primitives as spheres, boxes, cylinders or tori, each reduce to a compact
distance function. For instance, a rounded box with half­extents ⃗b and corner radius r is
f(⃗x) =
00max
"
|⃗x| −⃗b, 0
#00 −r.
Such definitions yield smooth, watertight surfaces without polygonal tessellation, and the
distance metric avoids aliasing and topological artefacts common in mesh workflows.
Constructive operations. Complex forms arise by combining primitives point­wise with
the min and max operators:
• Union: fA∪B(⃗x) = min
"
fA(⃗x), fB(⃗x)
#
• Intersection: fA∩B(⃗x) = max
"
fA(⃗x), fB(⃗x)
#
• Difference: fA\B(⃗x) = max
"
fA(⃗x), −fB(⃗x)
#
Because the operations are applied per­point, the signed­distance property and hence the
gradient ∇f are preserved exactly. Where sharp seams are undesirable, smooth unions
replace the hard minimum with a soft blend, e.g.
fsmooth min(a, b, k) = −1
k ln
"
e−ka + e−kb#
,
which yields a C∞transition controlled by fall­off k while retaining analytic gradients [13].
Beyond Booleans, high­level operations such as symmetry, repetition, and non­linear
deformation merely modify the input coordinates before evaluating the base function,
enabling highly detailed, animated, or self­similar structures with no manual modelling.
These qualities make SDFs a staple of generative design, creative coding, and real­time
effects, where flexibility and performance are paramount. In this thesis, SDFs act both
as a stress­test for the volume renderer and as a procedural bedrock for producing iso­
surfaces that can be lit directly inside Blender.
2.3.2
Normal Computation in SDFs
A crucial advantage of signed­distance functions (SDFs) over other volumetric inputs,
such as noise textures or OpenVDB grids, is the ability to compute surface normals ana­
lytically. Because an SDF encodes the signed Euclidean distance to the nearest surface,
its gradient ∇f(⃗x) at any point ⃗x inherently points toward (or away from) that surface.
Thus, evaluating the unit normal ⃗n = ∇f(⃗x)/∥∇f(⃗x)∥on the zero­level set f(⃗x) = 0
yields the correct orientation.
For simple primitives this gradient is closed­form. A sphere defined by f(⃗x) = ∥⃗x∥−r
has ∇f = ⃗x/∥⃗x∥, providing a normal with no mesh or lookup data.
More generally,
gradients propagate symbolically through differentiable operations, and even when non­
differentiable constructs such as min, max, or sharp CSG Booleans are introduced, an
analytic normal is still obtained by selecting the gradient of the branch that delivers the
active distance: e.g. ∇f = ∇f1 if f1 < f2 in a union, ∇f = ∇f2 if f2 < f1, with analogous
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
11
==PAGE:20==
rules for intersection or subtraction.
Central finite­difference estimates remain only a fallback: it’s useful when the base prim­
itive lacks a gradient or when a cheap approximation suffices. They are not required
merely because a min/max appears. Since ∇f (or its optional finite­difference) can be
evaluated at any point in space, SDFs enable highly dynamic shading workflows in which
iso­surfaces are ray­marched and lit in real time, eliminating preprocessing or mesh con­
version and underpinning the fully procedural iso­surface­shading pipeline presented here
for Blender.
2.4
Blender’s Volume Rendering System
2.4.1
Principled Volume Shader and Cycles Architecture
Blender renders participating media exclusively with the Cycles path­tracing engine, which
employs a stochastic, fixed­step ray marcher. For every camera ray that intersects a vol­
ume’s axis­aligned bounding box, Cycles advances the ray in increments of length ∆s
(user­controlled via the Step Size and Max Steps settings). A per­ray random jitter in the
first step suppresses banding, while an early­termination test aborts the march once accu­
mulated transmittance drops below a threshold; the latter is evaluated with the exponential
factor of Eq. (2.4), using the step­wise proxy exp(−σt ∆s) derived from the Beer­Lambert
differential form (Eq. (2.2)). At each step the shader returns three closures: an extinction
coefficient σt = σa +σs, an emitted radiance Le, and, when σs > 0, a Henyey–Greenstein
phase function ΦHG(cos θ, g) (Eq. (2.5)) that governs single scattering. Cycles then per­
forms decoupled shading: the Beer–Lambert transmittance up to the end of the step
(Eq. (2.4)) is applied deterministically, after which Multiple Importance Sampling (MIS)
chooses probabilistically between adding self­emission, injecting a single­scattering es­
timate weighted by ΦHG, or continuing the march, thereby controlling variance even in
bright, anisotropic clouds.
All of this behaviour is wrapped in the Principled Volume node, whose parameters map
cleanly to the physical coefficients: Density scales both σa and σs; Color specifies the
scattering albedo σs/(σa+σs); Anisotropy feeds the asymmetry parameter g in Eq. (2.5);
Emission Strength adds to Le; and Blackbody Intensity converts a temperature field
to wavelength­weighted emission via an RGB­integrated Planck lookup. Internally the
node outputs a single volume closure, so artists can treat density, colour, and tempera­
ture as ordinary scalar fields driven by procedural textures or OpenVDB grids. During ray
marching, Cycles samples these fields once per step, applies the Beer–Lambert extinc­
tion of Eq. (2.4), injects emission and HG­weighted single scattering, and composites the
accumulated radiance and alpha into the path throughput. Because the algorithm is em­
barrassingly parallel and runs on both CPU and GPU back­ends, Cycles can interactively
preview complex smoke, fire, or cloud simulations while preserving physical plausibility.
2.4.2
Limitations of Blender’s Volume Shading Architecture
Lack of Support for Surface­Based Volume Shading
Crucially, the model we just discussed does not account for discrete surface interactions.
Volume shaders in Blender are not designed to simulate light bouncing off surfaces em­
bedded within a volume, but rather to accumulate contributions through the medium itself.
As a result, nodes typically used for surface shading, such as those handling normal vec­
tors or view­dependent highlights, have no meaningful effect in a volumetric context. Ray
hits are never registered as entering or exiting a surface, since the volume is treated as a
continuous field with no explicit boundaries. This renders lighting models like Lambertian
or Blinn–Phong inapplicable within the standard volume­shading system.
Blender indeed excels when working with meshes. Its shading, lighting, and modifier
12
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:21==
systems are highly optimised for surface­based geometry, and most workflows are built
around polygonal objects. In principle, volumetric data can be converted to a mesh, for
example by extracting an iso­surface via Volume to Geometry modifier, and then shaded
using traditional surface materials. However, this conversion is a static and computa­
tionally expensive operation that must be recomputed every time the threshold changes.
Similarly, the Principled Volume shader provides no mechanism for dynamically isolating
and visualising specific density thresholds as it operates uniformly across the entire vol­
ume, without the ability to highlight localised structures based on interactive criteria (see
Section 2.1.2). Even if a Map Range node can be used to select the density thresholds
to shade, the absence of normal­based shading and highlights remains a significant limi­
tation. In contrast, enabling direct shading of iso­surfaces within the volume would allow
real­time exploration of scalar fields, dynamically revealing internal features by simply
adjusting the iso­value.
Many scientific and technical datasets contain internal regions that are best interpreted
as iso­surfaces. What gives these surfaces meaning is not just their location in space, but
their geometry: curvature, thickness, and orientation relative to light. These are features
that traditional surface shading can reveal but which Blender’s volume system overlooks
almost entirely. Without native support for surface­aware rendering, Blender treats the
entire volume as a homogeneous field, generally smoothing over even field transitions.
This results in visuals that may look soft or cinematic but fail to communicate the structural
richness of the data. Users are currenntly missing tools to isolate or visually interrogate
specific thresholds unless they extract a mesh through polygonisation—an inflexible and
static process. What is missing is the ability to interactively probe scalar fields and dy­
namically reveal meaningful features using light, something this thesis aims to enable by
treating iso­surfaces as shading­aware entities within the volume itself.
Iso­Surface Blind Spot: Principled Volume and Read­Only VDB Grids
As detailed in Section 2.1.3, Blender imports volumetric data as OpenVDB grids and ren­
ders them with Cycles’ Principled Volume node, which applies only Beer–Lambert extinc­
tion plus optional Henyey–Greenstein single scattering. The entire grid is treated as a
continuous density field; no surface intersections are detected and no normals are pro­
duced. Because the ray marcher accumulates only absorption, emission, and scattering,
surface­oriented BSDFs (Lambert, Blinn–Phong, Fresnel, clear­coat, etc.) do not exe­
cute inside a volume. Consequently Cycles cannot light thin iso­surfaces or highlight
view­dependent features without first converting the field to a static mesh.
This limitation becomes critical when attempting to visualise iso­surfaces within volumetric
data. Unfortunately, Blender’s volume shader architecture lacks any mechanism to detect
or isolate these surfaces dynamically. There is no built­in support for computing gradients
of voxel fields in shaders, nor any node that can perform localised surface detection or
lighting.
In particular, while Blender does support importing OpenVDB files as Volume objects,
their functionality is restricted. Grids are read­only and accessible only via the Attribute
or Volume Info nodes, which evaluate the scalar field at the current shading point but of­
fer no way to sample it at arbitrary positions. This precludes gradient estimation, a key
requirement for normal­based shading, and makes surface­aware rendering effectively
impossible for imported volumetric data.
In sum, Blender’s handling of volumes—and particularly OpenVDB data—is limited to
static, density­driven rendering. While this suffices for many artistic effects, it falls short
for scientific visualisation and procedural modelling, where interactive exploration, iso­
surface shading, and field analysis are essential. These shortcomings motivate the cus­
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
13
==PAGE:22==
tom shading architecture presented in this thesis, which aims to enable lighting­aware
iso­surface visualisation directly inside Blender.
Metaballs
Metaballs, or “blobby objects,” are among the earliest and most intuitive examples of
implicit­surface modelling. Given a set of control points (centres) {⃗ci}N
i=1 and associated
influence functions fi(r), one defines the scalar field
F(⃗x) =
N
1
i=1
fi
"
∥⃗x −⃗ci∥
#
,
and the surface as the level set
S =
2
⃗x ∈R3 | F(⃗x) = T
3
,
where T is a user­chosen threshold that governs the “merging” or “repulsion” of individual
blobs [14, 15]. Typical kernels are Gaussians
fi(r) = σi exp(−αir2),
or compactly supported polynomials
fi(r) =



σi
"
1 −(r/Ri)2#k,
r ≤Ri,
0,
r > Ri,
which expose local control over the blob radius Ri and smoothness exponent k.
Metaballs excel at producing smooth, organic blends which are ideal for droplets, soft
bodies, or amorphous characters, yet they reveal their limits as soon as sharp ridges, thin
creases, or high­magnification shots are required. Because every blob influences the
entire domain, fine detail is smeared and the iso­surface must be voxelised at very high
resolution to approximate tight features. Even then, the Marching­Cubes mesh that users
ultimately work with carries staircase facets and “lattice” artefacts that crawl as either the
threshold or the camera distance changes. Each tweak forces a full re­polygonisation
pass, followed by normal rebuilding, and highlight fidelity still hinges on vertex density.
Moreover, F is not a true signed­distance function: its gradient
∇F(⃗x) =
N
1
i=1
f′
i(ri) ⃗x −⃗ci
ri
,
ri = ∥⃗x −⃗ci∥,
must be renormalised per vertex, and where two blobs overlap the magnitude ∥∇F∥fluc­
tuates, yielding blotchy specular response.
Crucially, the metaballs are effectively meshed in Blender: the user now manipulates a
conventional mesh, and any subsequent shading relies on Blender’s highly developed
surface pipeline. The thesis at hand tackles the opposite problem: how to obtain surface­
quality lighting inside Blender’s volume shading system, which provides no native tools
for normals or view­dependent highlights. We therefore adopt methods that guarantee
traditional surface shading methods inside the volume, such as signed­distance functions
(SDFs) d(⃗x), whose unit­length gradients ensure ∥∇d(⃗x)∥= 1 almost everywhere and
whose zero level set defines a crisp iso­surface without polygonisation. Analytic normals
⃗n = ∇d/∥∇d∥are evaluated on­the­fly, injected directly into Cycles as a BRDF closure,
and rendered in real time, sidestepping the global influence, rebuild costs, and mesh
artefacts inherent to metaballs while remaining entirely within Blender’s volume­shader
context.
14
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:23==
2.5
Related Tools and Frameworks
While Blender currently lacks full support for surface­aware volume shading, iso­surface
visualisation itself is hardly new. Across science, procedural modelling, and web­based
data exploration, a number of applications already treat scalar fields and their iso­surfaces
as first­class, lighting­aware objects. Understanding what those tools let their users do
and why the same experience is still difficult inside Blender, helps to frame the design
goals of this thesis.
2.5.1
VTK: Scientific Visualisation
The Visualization Toolkit (VTK) powers ParaView, 3D Slicer and countless in­house re­
search apps, and its volume pipeline now solves several long­standing pain­points for
Blender artists. A terabyte­scale CT or CFD field can be ray­cast directly on the GPU with
adaptive bricking, gradient­based shading and multi­volume fusion, or contoured interac­
tively via the ultra­fast vtkFlyingEdges3D filter, so iso­values scrub in real time without
rebuilding geometry. Transfer­function widgets expose histogram­guided opacity, pre­
integration and gradient opacity that Cycles still lacks, while out­of­core streaming keeps
only visible bricks in VRAM, something Blender’s native volume cache cannot do. Since
VTK 9 the OpenGL backend also ships a physically­based renderer, and one­click OS­
PRay or OptiX path tracing lets users mix refractive meshes with participating media, es­
sential for realistic fog, glass­filled phantoms or smoke­and­fire validation. In short, VTK
fills Blender’s gaps in large­scale, scientifically­accurate volume rendering while dovetail­
ing with Blender GUIs through Python wrappers and USD exports.[16]
2.5.2
MagicaCSG: Real­Time SDF Modelling
MagicaCSG [17] demonstrates what happens when the entire modelling core is built on
signed­distance fields and GPU ray marching. Every primitive, sphere, box, gyroid, or
noise volume, is an analytic SDF; Booleans, smooth blends, and deformations are eval­
uated on the fly; and the iso­surface refits at hundreds of frames per second as the user
drags a slider. Because normals are taken directly from the SDF gradient, highlights
stay crisp no matter how close the camera gets and no matter how coarse the on­screen
voxel grid. The lighting stack is intentionally simple, principled PBR with environment or
Sunshine lighting, yet the application proves that live parameter scrubbing, unit­length
normals, and surface­quality shading can coexist in a fully procedural volume workflow,
all without a single polygon.
2.5.3
Unbound.io: Interactive Volume Browsing
At the opposite end of the spectrum lies Unbound.io [18], a WebGL viewer aimed at ra­
diologists and simulation scientists who simply need to look inside data. A CT, MRI, or
LES dataset is streamed to the browser, then explored with an iso­value slider, linked
axial­coronal­sagittal slices, and a histogram­based transfer­function widget that updates
in real time. Camera bookmarks and rendering settings are encoded in the URL so that a
colleague opens the exact same view. The renderer is a classic GPU volume ray­caster
with silhouette enhancement, adequate for inspection if not for cinematics, but the key
lesson is that threshold scrubbing, gradient­based shading, and interactive clipping are
presented in an interface so lightweight that it runs on a tablet.
Why Blender still falls short?
Blender already imports OpenVDB files, supports pro­
cedural noise, and offers a physically based path tracer; yet the route from a raw scalar
field to a lit iso­surface remains surprisingly narrow. VDB grids arrive read­only; the At­
tribute and Volume Info nodes can sample a single scalar component at the shading point
but have no socket to request offset samples, so finite­difference gradients, vector grids,
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
15
==PAGE:24==
and derived fields are out of reach. A volume closure in Cycles accumulates only Beer–
Lambert extinction and Henyey–Greenstein single scattering, never producing the surface
normal that a BRDF needs. Users who want crisp highlights must therefore march back
to an external tool, polygonise the field, re­import the mesh, and abandon the ability to
scrub the iso­value or to blend seamlessly with surrounding smoke. The work presented
in this thesis widens that path by evaluating an analytic signed­distance field directly in­
side a Cycles volume, extracting unit normals on the fly, and feeding them into a true
BRDF closure, bringing to Blender the live, surface­quality iso­surface shading that users
already enjoy in VTK, MagicaCSG, and Unbound.
16
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:25==
3
System Overview
3.1
Design Objectives
This add­on serves as a modular and flexible alternative to Blender’s native Principled
Volume node, with a specific focus on enabling iso­surface visualisation within volumet­
ric data. Traditional volume shaders in Blender are primarily designed for rendering soft,
amorphous media such as smoke or fog, relying on smooth density gradients and light
scattering to define appearance. In contrast, this system is tailored to reveal sharp tran­
sitions and surface­like features embedded within scalar fields, offering a fundamentally
different approach to volume rendering. It achieves this by repurposing the density at­
tribute as a means to extract iso­surfaces, introducing an Isovalue parameter that acts
as a cutoff to isolate specific regions of interest within the volume where the scalar field
matches a target value. This functionality is particularly relevant in scientific and medical
contexts, where the composition of the dataset often correlates directly with scalar­field
intensities, allowing users to explore internal structures such as tissues, fluid boundaries,
or material phases by simply adjusting the isovalue. The system is designed to be com­
patible with different types of inputs, supporting both procedurally defined fields, such
as those generated from signed­distance functions (SDFs) or noise functions, and exter­
nally baked OpenVDB volumes, all processed through a unified shading logic. Despite
certain limitations in Blender’s internal handling of VDB grid attributes, the architecture en­
sures consistent shading behaviour across all input types. Replacing Blender’s existing
volume­rendering technique is beyond the scope of this project, as modifying the source
code would not only introduce significant complexity but also require users to install and
maintain a custom build of the software, which is very impractical for most artists and
developers. Instead, the proposed add­on seeks to expose some of Blender’s current
limitations in volume shading and addresses them through simple yet effective examples
that demonstrate how iso­surface rendering can be meaningfully achieved within the ex­
isting framework. It integrates seamlessly into the Cycles rendering engine by introducing
custom node groups that reinterpret the role of the density attribute in shading, enabling
visualisations that are not possible with Blender’s standard volume shaders. This ap­
proach maintains full compatibility with official Blender releases while offering users new
tools to explore structured, surface­like features in volumetric data.
3.2
System Architecture
3.2.1
User Interface Integration
The add­on provides a lightweight but organised system for rendering iso­surfaces within
volumes, fully integrated into the Blender user interface. Through the Shader Editor, 3D
Viewport, and Volume menus, users can access custom node groups and create ready­
made volumetric primitives such as spheres, boxes, tori, capsules, and procedural­noise
volumes. Additionally, the Volume menu includes a tool to bake normal vectors directly
into imported VDB volumes, enabling true surface lighting. Materials and shading net­
works are assigned automatically, so users can focus on visualisation rather than manual
setup.
3.2.2
Core Components and Workflow Integration
The system centres on the Iso­Surface Volume node, which extracts and shades iso­
surfaces inside volumetric data. It is designed for the Cycles engine in OSL mode with
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
17
==PAGE:26==
CPU rendering (OSL is not yet supported on the GPU) ensuring compatibility while en­
abling a powerful shading workflow. To accommodate different field types, the add­on
supplies dedicated tools: procedural SDFs connect via custom OSL scripts, noise­based
fields use the Noise Normal Estimator node, and imported OpenVDB volumes gain nor­
mals through a baking utility in the Volume sidebar.
These features are tightly woven into Blender’s interface: nodes appear automatically
in the Shader Editor (Figure 3.1b); volumetric primitives and field types are available via
the 3D Viewport’s Add > Volume menu (Figure 3.1a); and the VDB normal­baking button
sits in the same sidebar panel (Figure 3.1c). This streamlined workflow lets users mix
procedural models, analytic fields, and simulation data with iso­surface shading.
(a) 3D Viewport — Add > Volume
(b) Shader Editor — Add > Group
(c) Sidebar panel — Volume menu
Figure 3.1: Locations of the add­on’s key interface elements. Panels (a)–(c) correspond
to the volume­primitives menu, shader­group menu, and VDB normal­baking tool, respec­
tively.
3.2.3
Component Structure and File Roles
The system is packaged as a single binary Python file accompanied by a minimal set
of OSL scripts, designed for ease of installation and portability. The core Python file,
iso_surface_volume_addon.py, is organised in three layers originating from the top­level
entry point. It handles registration, user­interface integration, dynamic node­group cre­
ation, and runtime logic for node and material assignment. When the add­on is activated,
it checks whether the required node groups exist in the current .blend file and gener­
ates them automatically if they are missing, ensuring the system is ready to use without
manual setup. Each OSL script corresponds to a specific procedural SDF volume and en­
ables both field and normal creation entirely within the Script shader. The normal­baking
18
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:27==
tool relies on an external executable, bake_normals.exe, built against specific OpenVDB,
Blender, and OS versions. For this reason, users may need to compile a compatible build
if the provided binary fails. Together, these components form a lightweight yet robust in­
frastructure that adds iso­surface rendering to Blender without altering the core application
or disrupting existing workflows.
3.2.4
Shader Architecture and Rendering Scope
While earlier sections describe how fields and shading components are structured, it is
equally important to understand how this architecture affects rendering behaviour and
practical usage. OSL­based SDFs are evaluated dynamically at each shading point; this
may increase render time but avoids preprocessing and supports highly flexible workflows.
In contrast, OpenVDB volumes with pre­baked normals render more efficiently but can
require substantial time and memory to prepare, especially for high­resolution grids where
normal baking becomes a computational bottleneck. This trade­off lets users choose
between real­time procedural generation and pre­baked data, depending on a project’s
performance and visual requirements. Maintaining a clear separation between input fields
and the shading system is critical: it allows any input source to be modified or swapped
without touching the shading logic, while preserving consistent visual output. Although
the add­on currently operates exclusively with CPU­based Cycles rendering (required
for OSL), this deliberate constraint guarantees stable results and full use of Blender’s
procedural shading capabilities.
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:29==
4
Implementation
4.1
Iso­Surface Volume Node
Our rendering system centers around the Iso-Surface Volume node group, which han­
dles the extraction and visualization of iso­surfaces embedded within scalar volumes.
We construct this node group programmatically using Python, building it exclusively from
Blender’s native shader nodes. The result is a unified volume shader that merges emis­
sion and absorption effects, enabling rich surface representations within volumetric datasets.
Throughout this chapter, every add­on feature, node name, input, and output is presented
in teletype.
4.1.1
Input Parameters and Functionality
The Iso-Surface Volume node group relies on a carefully selected collection of inputs
that govern iso­surface extraction, visual styling, and physics­based shading. Each in­
put serves a specific function, affecting either the structural or aesthetic qualities of the
rendered surface:
• Density (float): This serves as our primary scalar field across the volume. It repre­
sents a continuous spatial function sampled at each voxel, typically derived from pro­
cedural functions (such as noise generators), Signed Distance Functions (SDFs),
or pre­computed OpenVDB volumes. Unlike Blender’s Principled Volume shader,
which treats density as a medium’s concentration for light scattering and absorp­
tion, our approach uses density to identify and establish a thin iso­surface shell,
functioning more as a geometric threshold than volumetric fog. We only render vox­
els close to the target isovalue as surfaces, leaving the remaining volume invisible
or transparent.
• Iso Value (float): This establishes the target scalar level that our density field must
reach for visualization. We calculate the absolute difference between each voxel’s
density and this isovalue to determine whether that voxel belongs to the iso­surface.
Voxels that exactly match the isovalue receive full weighting for both emission and
absorption; values beyond the falloff region fade toward zero.
• Falloff (float): This creates a small numerical buffer around the iso­value, estab­
lishing the thickness of our rendered shell. Rather than creating a harsh binary
cutoff, we generate a smooth transition zone around the isovalue to blend edge
areas and minimize aliasing artifacts. This approach also improves visual quality
when working with low­resolution grids or noisy procedural data.
• Absorption Strength (float): This parameter controls the absorption intensity ap­
plied to voxels within the iso­surface shell. While it doesn’t affect emission lighting,
it directly influences the volume’s darkness and depth perception. Higher settings
produce stronger silhouettes and denser shading effects, while lower values yield
more translucent appearances.
• Absorption Color (color): We apply this base color uniformly to both emission and
absorption shader components. Though not derived from actual material physics, it
enables artistic stylization of the iso­surface, particularly useful when working with
untextured fields or procedural datasets.
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
21
==PAGE:30==
• Light Intensity (float): This parameter controls the overall brightness of the syn­
thetic shading applied to the iso­surface.
It acts as a global multiplier for both
the diffuse and specular lighting components computed inside the shader. Unlike
Blender’s built­in lighting system, which relies on scene lights and global illumination,
our shader uses this scalar value, and the next parameter, to ensure consistent illu­
mination regardless of external factors. In the equations presented in Section 2.2.2,
this parameter corresponds to the light intensity term I.
• Light Direction (vector): This normalized vector establishes the direction of our
virtual light source.
Unlike the Principled Volume shader, which integrates with
Blender’s global lighting and scattering systems, our custom shader operates in­
dependently of scene lighting. Instead, we use this manually specified direction
to simulate lighting interactions with the iso­surface. This gives us complete con­
trol over highlight positioning and makes our shading independent of actual scene
lights, essential for consistent visualization or stylized rendering approaches. In
Equations (2.7) and (2.8), this parameter corresponds to the direction vector ⃗l used
in both diffuse and specular lighting computations.
• Diffuse Color (color): This parameter (kd in Equation (2.7)) defines the base sur­
face color used in the Lambertian diffuse reflection model. It determines how the
iso­surface responds to incoming light in terms of body shading, acting as the pri­
mary albedo under directional illumination.
• Specular Color (color): This parameter defines the hue and intensity of the light
reflected in the specular component of the shading model. It tints the highlight pro­
duced by the Blinn–Phong term and allows for stylized or material­specific rendering
of the iso­surface. In Equation (2.8), it modulates the result of the specular term Ls,
effectively replacing the scalar reflectance ks with a color­valued quantity to support
colored highlights.
• Specular Strength (float): This scalar controls the intensity of the specular reflec­
tion computed using the Blinn–Phong model. It acts as a multiplier on the specular
term in Equation (2.8), corresponding directly to the coefficient ks. Adjusting this
value affects how prominently the highlight appears on the iso­surface, helping to
emphasize surface curvature and material shininess.
• Shininess (float): This parameter defines the exponent s in the Blinn–Phong model
shown in Equation (2.8). It controls the concentration of the specular highlight: low
values yield broad, diffused reflections, while high values produce sharp, focused
highlights. This allows fine­tuning of the surface’s visual texture, from matte­like to
glossy appearances.
• Normal (vector): This represents the estimated surface normal at each voxel. Since
volumetric fields don’t inherently provide geometric surface data, we must derive
these normals from scalar gradients or calculate them analytically. They’re crucial
for computing both diffuse and specular shading components. This marks a signif­
icant departure from standard volumetric shaders in Blender, which treat volumes
as homogeneous media rather than surfaces. By incorporating normals and light
direction into our shader, we simulate traditional surface­based lighting, creating
iso­surface highlights and shading within the volume domain.
Our output is a single Volume shader that combines emission and absorption using Blender’s
Add Shader node.
22
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.1: Node layout of the Iso-Surface Volume group. The network incorporates
falloff logic, Lambertian diffuse shading, Blinn–Phong specular highlights, and absorption
modeling.
4.1.2
Iso­Surface Extraction via Density Masking
At the core of our shading pipeline lies a masking mechanism that extracts a narrow iso­
surface shell from the full volumetric domain. This mask determines which voxels are
considered part of the visualized surface and thus eligible for emission and absorption
shading. The basis of this selection is the Density input, which represents a scalar field,
typically derived from procedural functions, Signed Distance Fields (SDFs), or OpenVDB
volumes, that encodes spatial variation in the volume.
Rather than using density to model absorption or scattering through a medium, as done in
Blender’s Principled Volume shader, we reinterpret it as structural information that defines
the geometry of an implicit surface. The user defines a target IsoValue, which specifies
the scalar level at which the iso­surface should appear. Voxels with density values close
to this threshold are considered to lie on or near the iso­surface, and are thus emphasized
during shading.
To create a soft shell around this iso­value, we compute a weight function w using the
following expression:
w = 1 −clamp
4 |D −I|
F
, 0, 1
5
• w: Iso­surface weight (1 at the iso­surface, 0 far from it)
• D: Density value at the current voxel
• I: Target iso­value defining the surface
• F: Falloff parameter, which controls shell thickness
• clamp(x, 0, 1): Restricts x to the [0, 1] range
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
23
==PAGE:32==
This formula computes the normalized distance of the current voxel’s density from the de­
sired iso­value, scales it by the Falloff parameter, and clamps it to 1. We then invert the
result to produce a mask that is highest at the iso­surface and fades smoothly outward.
The parameter acts as a tolerance band, determining how thick the iso­surface shell ap­
pears in the final render. Smaller values yield thinner, more precise contours, while larger
falloffs produce smoother transitions suitable for low­resolution or noisy fields.
This weight w is used throughout the shader to modulate both emission and absorption
intensity. Only voxels with nonzero weight contribute visibly to the final render, allowing
us to isolate specific scalar thresholds and suppress irrelevant regions of the volume. This
masking mechanism enables iso­surface visualization without requiring explicit mesh ex­
traction, and is fundamental to all downstream shading computations, including lighting
and attenuation.
Figure 4.2: Plot of the iso­surface weight function w = 1−clamp
6
|D−I|
F
, 0, 1
7
. The curves
illustrate how different falloff values F define the width of the shell surrounding the iso­
surface. The dashed line marks the iso­value I = 0.5, where the mask weight is maximal.
4.1.3
Absorption and Volume Composition
Before applying surface lighting, our shader calculates volumetric absorption using Blender’s
Volume Absorption node. The absorption density is computed by multiplying the iso­
surface mask, defined by the Density, Iso Value, and Falloff inputs, with the user­
defined Absorption Strength. This mechanism restricts absorption to a narrow shell
around the iso­surface and allows users to control how much light is attenuated as it
passes through that region.
The absorption color is user­configurable via the respective input, enabling both neutral
and stylized attenuation effects. When set to black, absorption darkens the iso­surface
uniformly across all wavelengths, enhancing depth perception and structural contrast.
This absorption component is combined additively with the emission output using an Add
Shader node. The result is connected to the Volume output, completing the shader. This
additive composition ensures that emission­based surface shading and volumetric ab­
sorption are layered together, producing lit iso­surfaces that still exhibit volume­aware
light attenuation. The setup also preserves full compatibility with Cycles’ volume render­
ing pipeline while operating independently of Blender’s global lighting.
4.1.4
Lighting Models: Lambert and Blinn–Phong
The node group simulates iso­surface lighting by combining two physically inspired shad­
ing components: diffuse and specular reflection. Both are computed explicitly inside the
24
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:33==
shader using user­defined inputs, and are scaled by the isosurface mask to restrict shad­
ing to regions near the selected iso­value.
• Lambertian diffuse shading is calculated using the dot product between the nor­
malized Normal and Light Direction vectors. This value, clamped to the [0, 1]
range, determines the cosine falloff of light across the surface. It is then scaled by
the Light Intensity and modulated by the user­defined Diffuse Color, simulat­
ing soft directional lighting on the iso­surface.
• Blinn–Phong specular highlights are generated using the half­vector method. We
compute a normalized halfway vector between the incoming view direction and the
Light Direction, then take its dot product with the Normal. This result is raised
to the power of Shininess, producing a sharper or broader highlight depending on
the exponent value. The result is scaled by both Specular Strength and Light
Intensity, and modulated by the Specular Color.
These two components are summed to form the final lighting contribution and blended us­
ing the specular factor to interpolate between the Diffuse Color and Specular Color.
The combined result is multiplied by the isosurface mask which ensures that only vox­
els within the falloff band around the Iso Value are affected, and finally passed to an
Emission shader node for output.
Unlike Blender’s standard volume shaders, which extract light data from the global scene
and simulate effects like scattering via phase functions, our system operates entirely
within a local, self­contained shading model. This shift is not optional: Blender’s shader
nodes do not expose access to scene lights or their properties inside the volume context.
As a result, our shader cannot respond to any external lights in the scene, including direc­
tional, point, or area sources. To overcome this limitation, we explicitly introduce Light
Direction and Light Intensity as manual inputs, giving users direct control over the
lighting configuration.
While this setup might appear limiting when compared with fully physically based lighting,
it actually offers a decisive benefit: complete reproducibility and consistent visual out­
put, no matter how the broader scene changes. Users can simulate lighting conditions
with precision, generating iso­surface visualizations that stay unaffected by external en­
vironment lights, camera exposure, or render settings, a major advantage for scientific
workflows, technical previews, and stylized renders where clarity and consistency out­
weigh photorealism. If a project still demands a directional light cue, the pipeline can
accommodate it: the user can indeed use an Object Info node (set to the lamp or any
reference object) to obtain its world­space location, subtract the shading point position
with a Vector Math →Subtract node, feed the result through a Normalize node to obtain a
unit light­direction vector, and then plug that vector into the directional­input socket of the
Iso-Surface Volume node. This simple node trio lets users introduce controlled, scene­
aware lighting without sacrificing the deterministic behaviour that makes the add­on so
robust.
4.2
Input Nodes
The Iso-Surface Volume node group is designed to be agnostic to the origin of its input
scalar field. Regardless of how it is generated, this field must define a continuous distri­
bution of values over 3D space, from which the system extracts iso­surfaces. In practice,
the field may come from imported OpenVDB volumes, procedural textures, or analytically
defined Signed Distance Functions (SDFs).
For the Density input, the differences among these sources are relatively minor. Open­
VDB volumes are accessed using Blender’s Attribute or Volume Info nodes by referencing
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
25
==PAGE:34==
a named scalar grid, typically labeled "density". Procedural fields, such as Perlin or cel­
lular noise, are generated using the Noise Texture node and related mapping controls.
Analytic SDFs are implemented as custom Open Shading Language (OSL) scripts, which
return scalar values based on the current shading position.
Where the choice of input becomes more consequential is in the computation of surface
normals. While all density sources are treated equivalently for iso­surface masking, nor­
mals are essential for shading and require very different handling depending on the field’s
origin. Procedural textures and OpenVDB grids do not support direct gradient access
inside Blender’s shading system, so normals must be approximated numerically through
finite differences, sampling the scalar field at multiple offset positions. This method can
be implemented, respectively, using shader nodes or precomputed and imported as an
auxiliary vector grid. In contrast, Signed Distance Functions are inherently differentiable:
their gradients are either known in closed form or easily computed within the OSL script
itself. This allows for direct and accurate normal evaluation during shading, making SDFs
the most elegant and precise input type for lighting­aware iso­surface rendering.
Ultimately, the system’s modularity accommodates all three cases. While SDFs offer the
cleanest integration and most precise results, OpenVDB and noise­based fields remain
fully supported, provided that appropriate normals are supplied or estimated externally.
This flexibility ensures that the system can operate effectively in both creative and scien­
tific workflows, regardless of the input format.
4.2.1
Noise Normal Estimator Group Node
When using a procedural noise texture node inside a shader graph, it is often necessary
to evaluate the same noise function at multiple nearby positions in order to approximate
its gradient and compute surface normals. This is a standard requirement for finite differ­
ence methods. However, in Blender’s shader system, particularly in Cycles and OSL, it is
not possible to reuse the built­in noise function across arbitrary positions within a single
node. The noise is implicitly tied to the current shading point, making it inaccessible for
multi­point sampling inside the same evaluation context.
To work around this limitation, the add­on provides a dedicated Noise Normal Estimator
node group. This group evaluates the scalar field at six offset positions around the current
point and uses central differences to approximate the gradient numerically. The result­
ing vector is normalized and used as an estimated surface normal. This enables surface
shading techniques such as Lambert and Blinn–Phong lighting to be applied to procedu­
rally defined fields, even though the underlying function cannot provide analytical deriva­
tives.
Input and Output Parameters
The Normal Estimator node group takes a small number of inputs, but each plays an
essential role in computing accurate normals for procedural scalar fields:
• Position (vector): The 3D point in space at which the noise field is evaluated.
Typically this is driven by the Generated output of the Texture Coordinates node,
whose object­local [0,1] space stays consistent under any transform and requires no
UV map. Using those stable coordinates keeps the sampled field perfectly aligned
with the volume, and the resulting vector, passed down from the volume shader,
serves as the central reference for all offset samples.
• Delta (float): A small offset, corresponding to the ε introduced in Section 2.2.3, used
to displace the Position along ±x, ±y, and ±z when sampling the field for finite­
difference gradient estimation. Acting as the denominator in the central­difference
26
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.3: Node group for estimating the normal of an iso­surface based on central differ­
ences. The function is evaluated at offset positions in the positive and negative directions
along each axis, and the partial derivatives are approximated via symmetric finite dif­
ferences. The Noise At Position group node visible in the figure simply contains the
built­in Noise Texture node.
ratio, a smaller ε yields higher theoretical accuracy but can amplify round­off noise,
whereas a larger value damps numerical noise at the expense of blurring fine details.
• Noise Scale (float): Controls the frequency of the procedural field (built­in Perlin
Noise) by scaling the spatial input. It is passed directly to each instance of the
NoiseAtPosition group used internally. This allows the user to control how fine or
coarse the noise pattern appears across the volume.
The group produces two outputs:
• Density (float): The scalar value of the field at the center position. This is the same
value used later by the iso­surface shader to determine whether the voxel falls within
the isovalue range.
• Normal (vector): An estimated surface normal derived from the partial derivatives
of the field in X, Y, and Z directions. These are computed using central differences,
then normalized to unit length. Although approximate, the resulting normal provides
sufficient accuracy for realistic shading in Cycles.
Gradient Estimation Logic
The Normal Estimator group applies the centred finite­difference scheme outlined in Sec­
tion 2.2.3: for each axis it samples the scalar field at p ± Δ via the NoiseAtPosition eval­
uator, assembles the three partial derivatives into a gradient, and normalises the result to
obtain a per­voxel normal. In the context of this thesis, that workflow is crucial because it
gives noise­driven iso­surfaces the same lighting fidelity as SDF­based volumes or VDBs
with pre­baked normals, yet stays entirely within Blender’s shader domain, no external
baking step, no extra dependencies.
Although the estimator introduces extra node complexity and locks the sampling distance
Δ to a user­defined constant, it aligns with the project’s guiding principles of reproducibility
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
27
==PAGE:36==
and modularity. The fixed, stateless offset guarantees that gradient evaluation behaves
identically across machines and Blender versions, while the self­contained node design
keeps analytic (SDF) and procedural (noise) pipelines interchangeable. More sophisti­
cated operations, adaptive Δ, curvature, or multi­scale gradients—are left for future work,
but the current implementation strikes a pragmatic balance: it supplies reliable normals
where analytic derivatives are unavailable and avoids the overhead of full VDB normal
baking, fitting neatly into the add­on’s lightweight, in­editor rendering strategy.
4.2.2
SDF Input Nodes
While procedural noise fields require external logic to estimate gradients, Signed Distance
Functions (SDFs) offer a more elegant and analytically robust method for defining scalar
fields, particularly in the context of iso­surface rendering. SDFs represent the shortest
distance from a point in space to the surface of a shape, typically with negative values in­
side and positive values outside. Because they are defined mathematically, SDFs can be
evaluated at arbitrary points and differentiated directly within shader code. In this project,
they are implemented using Open Shading Language (OSL), which provides full proce­
dural control over how scalar fields are defined and how their gradients are computed.
Each OSL script returns both a scalar value and a normal vector, making these functions
ideal for iso­surface extraction and shading. Compared to node­based procedural fields,
the OSL approach is significantly more compact, efficient, and accurate, especially when
working with shapes that have known analytic expressions.
The add­on currently includes four primitives implemented as SDFs: a sphere, a box, a
torus, and a capsule. Each is defined as a standalone OSL shader and can be dynami­
cally loaded into Blender’s node editor. These functions follow standard definitions found
in real­time graphics and computational geometry, many of which are drawn from the ref­
erence collection by Inigo Quilez [13] (https://iquilezles.org/articles/distfunctions/). Each
script defines the corresponding distance function and internally computes the gradient
using a centered finite difference scheme. This is possible because the function, be­
ing analytically defined, can be sampled at arbitrary coordinates within the same shader,
avoiding the need for external normal estimators and resulting in cleaner, more maintain­
able shader graphs.
1
shader SDF_Capsule(
2
point Position = P,
3
point A = point(0, -1, 0),
4
point B = point(0, 1, 0),
5
float Radius = 0.2,
6
output float Distance = 0.0,
7
output vector Normal = vector(0.0)
8
)
9
{
10
vector pa = Position - A;
11
vector ba = B - A;
12
float h = clamp(dot(pa, ba) / dot(ba, ba), 0.0, 1.0);
13
Distance = length(pa - h * ba) - Radius;
14
15
float eps = 0.001;
16
float dx = SDF_Capsule(Position + vector(eps,0,0), A, B, Radius);
17
float dy = SDF_Capsule(Position + vector(0,eps,0), A, B, Radius);
18
float dz = SDF_Capsule(Position + vector(0,0,eps), A, B, Radius);
19
Normal = normalize(vector(dx, dy, dz) - Distance);
20
}
Listing 4.1: OSL shader implementing an SDF capsule with internal normal estimation via
central differences.
28
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:37==
The inputs to these nodes are minimal and intuitive, typically just the dimensions and
positional features of the chosen geometry. For instance, the SDF for a box computes
the absolute offset from a given center and size, blending interior and exterior values
through vector arithmetic and conditional logic. The capsule SDF measures the distance
from a line segment defined by two endpoints, using vector projection to find the closest
point on the segment before calculating the radial distance. In both cases, the gradient is
still estimated by the central finite difference method, but entirely inside the Script node.
Using OSL in this way enhances clarity and performance while giving technically inclined
users the freedom to customize or define their own fields directly through scripting. This
is exactly what makes SDFs the perfect case for this project, both in terms of functionality
and precision.
The SDF Boolean Node
In addition to individual shape nodes, the system includes a Boolean operation node that
allows multiple SDFs to be combined procedurally within the shader network. This node
supports standard Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) operations such as union, inter­
section, and difference by applying simple mathematical rules to the scalar distance fields,
namely, min for union, max for intersection, and negated combinations for subtraction.
Since each SDF node outputs a scalar value representing the distance to its surface,
the Boolean node can operate purely on these values without any knowledge of the un­
derlying geometry. A dedicated Smoothness parameter is also provided, enabling soft
transitions between shapes by blending overlapping regions rather than producing sharp
edges. This feature is especially useful when designing organic or stylized forms, where
hard geometric cuts may appear too artificial. Overall, the node supports multiple in­
put fields and provides a dropdown to select the operation, making it a powerful tool for
building more intricate volumetric structures directly inside the node editor. This design
reinforces the modularity of the system: complex fields can be assembled by chaining
together simpler primitives, with full control over the result’s topology, surface continuity,
and composition.
(a) Shader graph used to define the
kettlebell volume material.
(b) Rendered output of the kettlebell using the
custom volume shader.
Figure 4.4: Example of SDF Boolean node usage. Panel (a) displays the shader graph
combining multiple primitives via Boolean logic; panel (b) shows the resulting volume
rendering.
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
29
==PAGE:38==
4.3
Gradient Extraction for VDB Volumes
When it comes to working with VDBs, things get a bit more complicated. It’s pretty clear
that Blender is still lacking important features when it comes to volume shading, especially
when it comes to handling VDBs effectively.
In particular, Blender is primarily designed for surface shading, and its tools reflect this
focus. When it comes to volumes, the approach is limited to VDB files, which are the
only type of volumetric data the software recognizes. However, VDBs come with a signif­
icant limitation: they are read­only, meaning that once imported, you cannot manipulate
the grids directly inside Blender. This makes it impossible to compute gradients or nor­
mals within the shader, which is essential for visualizing iso­surfaces and applying proper
lighting models based on surface orientation. There is no available function or node in
Blender, either through OSL or its attribute node, that allows sampling a grid at points
other than the current shading point. Furthermore, the attribute node can only read float
grids, leaving no way to compute normals or gradients from voxel data.
While procedural methods like Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) offer the flexibility to
compute gradients dynamically within Blender, VDBs are fundamentally different. This
gap in Blender’s functionality makes it difficult to work with volumes in a meaningful way,
especially for shading iso­surfaces.
To overcome this limitation, the add­on introduces a new tool: an external normal baker
for VDBs. The concept is straightforward yet highly effective. By taking a VDB file with a
scalar float grid (typically named density), the add­on utilizes Python and the OpenVDB
C++ API bindings to compute the gradient of the grid externally. This process generates
new normal grids, which are then reattached to the original VDB file before it is brought
back into Blender for use.
The Bake Normals Tool
The bake_normals.exe program is a small C++ utility that uses OpenVDB to enrich a
single–channel VDB file with per­voxel normals. In practice the executable plays three
roles: it opens the source VDB, traverses the density grid to calculate a gradient at every
active voxel, and writes the original grid back out together with three new grids, Nx, Ny,
and Nz, that store the X, Y, Z components of those normals. As previously mentioned,
using three separate float grids instead of a single vector grid is a necessary workaround,
because the Attribute node cannot retrieve non­float grids for shading.
OpenVDB makes this workflow straightforward. After the file is opened and the first scalar
FloatGrid is located, three empty grids are created to hold the normal components; each
inherits the transform of the density grid so all four fields stay perfectly aligned in world
space. The heart of the computation is OpenVDB’s gradient operator math::BoxStencil
[19]. By sliding this stencil through the active voxels and invoking its gradient() method,
the program obtains a centred­difference estimate of the local gradient directly in world
units. The resulting vector is optionally normalised to unit length and its components are
written into the corresponding normal grids.
When iteration finishes the program saves a new file whose name is derived from the orig­
inal by appending the suffix _with_Nxyz. From Blender’s perspective, nothing changes:
the updated VDB is ready to be imported and to replace the original file, now carrying
three additional float grids (Nx, Ny and Nz) that store the estimated normals. These extra
channels can later be referenced in shading, while the file remains compact and interac­
tive performance is unaffected because all processing occurred outside Blender.
One­Click VDB Normal Baking
Located in the Volume panel of Blender’s 3D Viewport sidebar, the Bake VDB Normals
button exposes the entire normal­baking workflow to the artist in a single click. When
the operator is executed, the add­on retrieves the file path of the active .vdb asset and
30
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:39==
launches the external bake_normals.exe. After the executable finishes, the add­on deletes
the original Volume object from the scene and immediately imports the newly written file,
which now carries three additional grids, Nx, Ny, and Nz, alongside density. From the
user’s perspective the volume remains in place; only its underlying data­block has been
updated.
To make the new channels usable without extra setup, the operator also constructs a
compact material. An Iso-Surface Volume group is wired directly to the Material Output,
and four Attribute nodes feed the group with grid values. The first node reads density,
defining the signed­distance field that extracts the surface. The remaining three nodes
read Nx, Ny, and Nz; their outputs are merged with a Combine XYZ node before being
connected to the shader’s normal input. If an imported scalar grid is named differently,
for instance temperature instead of density, the user can simply edit the first Attribute
node, leaving the rest of the network untouched.
By automating the file swap and material creation, the button reduces what would other­
wise be a multi­step pipeline to a single, reversible action, letting users iterate on VDB
content without breaking their creative flow inside Blender.
Figure 4.5: The Utah teapot after pressing Bake VDB Normals. The re­imported volume
carries three new float grids (Nx, Ny, Nz) and the material generated by the add­on.
Although the one­click workflow greatly streamlines volume shading, it highlights a broader
limitation: at present, computing normals for VDB data must occur outside Blender. The
standalone executable delivered with this add­on is statically linked against the exact
OpenVDB version that ships with the author’s Blender build. Should a user run a different
Blender release, or a custom build compiled against a newer or older OpenVDB, the bi­
nary may fail to launch or refuse to load the file because of ABI mismatches. In such cases
the artist must re­compile bake_normals.exe against the libraries bundled with their own
installation, or adopt another external tool capable of writing the three normal grids into
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
31
==PAGE:40==
the volume. Until Blender exposes grid sampling and differentiation in its shader system,
this external step remains the only reliable path to surface­lit volumetric rendering.
4.4
New Primitives Implementation
Blender provides an extensive set of surface­oriented primitives, such as the Cube, UV
Sphere, or Suzanne, each inserted with a default Principled BSDF material so that a
basic render is immediately possible. In contrast, volumetric workflows receive far less
native support. The sole built­in option, Add > Volume > VDB, merely imports an external
.vdb file, offering no tools for generating scalar fields, computing normals, or visualising
iso­surfaces. This asymmetry underscores that Blender’s default toolset is fundamentally
orientated toward surface shading rather than volume shading.
The add­on closes this tooling gap by introducing a new submenu, Volume Primitives,
positioned beside Blender’s existing Add > Volume > VDB entry. Selecting any of the five
presets, SDF Sphere, SDF Box, SDF Torus, SDF Capsule, or Noise Volume, instantiates
a unit­cube object whose material is already configured for iso­surface shading. Each pre­
set supplies its own scalar field (either an analytic OSL distance function or a Perlin­style
noise texture), an appropriate normal source (analytic gradient, pre­baked grid, or finite­
difference estimator), and the complete Iso-Surface Volume node group connected to
Material Output. Consequently, a first render appears immediately, offering novices an
instant visual reference while providing advanced users with a fully editable template that
can be inspected, rewired, or replaced without additional scripting.
A dedicated “VDB Primitive” is omitted deliberately. Blender’s native importer already
loads external .vdb files, and the Bake VDB Normals operator (Section 4.3) supplements
those files with normal grids and a ready­made material in a single step; duplicating that
functionality would add little practical value. Because the five presets share an identical
shader architecture, their components remain interchangeable: a custom OSL distance
function can replace the capsule’s script, or the noise field can be routed into the torus
preset, and the network continues to operate without modification.
By condensing what was previously a multi­step shader setup into a single menu action,
the new primitives illustrate how the add­on compensates for Blender’s limited volume­
shading capabilities. They place iso­surface rendering on the same practical footing as
Blender’s surface primitives, supply a reference node layout for best practice, and remain
fully editable for further experimentation.
32
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:41==
5
Testing and Results
This chapter brings together testing, results and their discussion, for the iso­surface shad­
ing system in three focused sections. Section 5.1 showcases pure SDF results, including
procedural primitives (spheres, boxes, tori, noise) and Boolean SDF operations (sub­
traction, smooth­union, hybrid blends). Section 5.2 compares these iso­surface volumes
against Blender’s Metaball workflow, examining surface­shading fidelity versus volume­
based shading, modeling ergonomics (object­drag versus node­driven), and mesh arti­
facts under matched lighting, camera and material settings. Finally, Section 5.3 bench­
marks performance on a real­world CT skull volume, measuring viewport interactivity and
final render times as isovalue and mesh extraction vary. Each experiment presents vi­
suals, tables and critical commentary to highlight the system’s strengths, limitations and
potential future work.
5.1
Visual Demonstrations
5.1.1
5.1.1 Volume Primitives Showcase
To evaluate the visual output of the proposed iso­surface shading system, several volu­
metric primitives were instantiated using the add­on’s preset node configurations. These
presets generate analytic scalar fields via Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) or procedu­
ral noise and render them in real­time through a dedicated OSL shader group.
(a) SDF Box
(b) SDF Capsule
(c) Noise Volume
Figure 5.1: Selected iso­surface primitives rendered directly from volumetric fields using
the custom OSL shader.
Three representative examples produced using the add­on are illustrated in Figure 5.1.
The SDF Box, shaded in green, shows well­defined faces with smoothly rounded edges,
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
33
==PAGE:42==
demonstrating the ability of the analytic gradient field to yield smooth surface normals and
continuous highlights. The red Capsule emphasizes the shader’s specular accuracy, with
visible Blinn­Phong reflections along the central bulge and soft terminator transitions at
the hemispherical caps. The Noise Volume, rendered in bronze­gold, showcases the out­
put of a Perlin­like scalar field and underlines the flexibility of the system when visualizing
amorphous or organic structures. All primitives were rendered with Cycles using identical
lighting and camera settings to enable consistent comparison. No geometry conversion
was performed: the system renders directly, shading only the iso­surface defined by a
chosen scalar threshold. The shader computes surface normals analytically where pos­
sible (Box, Capsule), or numerically using central finite differences in the case of noise
fields. While this subsection focuses on three primitives, additional examples are included
elsewhere in the thesis. Notably, the SDF Torus, another preset available in the add­on,
is shown in Figure 2.2. Due to its topology, the torus acts as a useful test for the shading
pipeline’s handling of curvature discontinuities and internal reflections, which are both ren­
dered correctly through the same OSL setup. However, despite the overall quality of the
results, some limitations remain inherent to Blender’s raymarching approach. Specifically,
in fields with fine structures or small­scale variation—such as low isovalue thresholds in
noise­based volumes—the gas­like nature of volume rendering becomes visible. In the
Noise Volume example, this effect manifests as isolated “islands” or partially transparent
blobs that fail to visually consolidate into a coherent surface. As such, care must be taken
when choosing iso­values and field parameters to ensure perceptually solid results.
Figure 5.2: Isosurface rendered with falloff set to 0.02, showing pronounced stratification
and surface “skinning” due to an overly narrow transition band.
Together, these results confirm that the proposed system is capable of shading a broad
variety of volumetric surfaces with realistic visual feedback. Even in the absence of mesh
extraction or geometry tessellation, users can preview and fine­tune complex shapes with
physically plausible lighting in real­time.
5.1.2
5.1.2 Compositional SDF Scenes
One of the core strengths of the system lies in its ability to procedurally combine scalar
fields within the shader editor, enabling complex shapes to be constructed from simple
primitives using Boolean operations. To demonstrate this, a series of test scenes were
created using the add­on’s dedicated Boolean node, which supports standard Construc­
tive Solid Geometry (CSG) operations such as union, subtraction, and intersection.
34
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:43==
(a) Box minus Sphere (Subtraction).
(b) Torus blended with Noise (Hybrid Field).
(c) Composition of Capsules, Cube and Torus to
create an earring (Smooth Union).
Figure 5.3: Compositional iso­surface scenes showcasing Boolean subtraction, smooth
union, and procedural distortion.
Figure 5.2 presents three distinct examples. In the first case, a sphere was subtracted
from a box using the Difference mode, producing a clean internal cavity and sharp
boundaries. The second scene blends a torus with a procedural noise field, resulting
in a porous, irregular surface that evokes natural rock formations. In the final example,
multiple primitive fields, a set of capsules, a cube and a torus, are combined via succes­
sive smooth­union operations to create an elegant, earring­like silhouette, demonstrating
the flexibility of the SDF Boolean node for creative form exploration. Each of these shapes
was constructed entirely procedurally within the shader network, without any mesh oper­
ations or modifiers. The Boolean node operates directly on scalar values, applying simple
mathematical rules (min, max, and their smooth counterparts) to compose more intricate
fields. Because the input fields are continuous and differentiable, the resulting surfaces
preserve shading smoothness and normal coherence across intersections. This compo­
sitional workflow is one of the key benefits of the system: it allows users to prototype
complex volumetric structures with minimal node setup and full artistic control over shape
logic and blending. Even in cases involving procedural noise, the output maintains phys­
ically plausible shading and surface definition.
Together, these examples confirm that the iso­surface shading system supports a rich
range of constructive workflows, enabling both geometric precision and expressive or­
ganic forms within the same node­based paradigm.
5.2
Comparison with Blender Metaballs
This section brings together our comparison goals and test setup in one coherent narra­
tive. We have two main aims: first, to pit Blender’s real­surface shading using Metaballs
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
35
==PAGE:44==
converted to polygonal meshes and lit by actual scene lights, against our volume­based
iso­surface shader, which relies on a single, hand­tuned light direction and intensity. In
doing so, we focus on how each approach handles light falloff, shadowing and material
models (diffuse, glossy, clearcoat) when applied to a true mesh surface versus an iso­
surface detected at render time. Second, we contrast the user workflows: Metaballs are
added, translated, scaled and automatically remeshed via their “Resolution” setting, while
the SDF system composes fields inside a node graph with explicit union, subtraction and
intersection nodes, offering precise control over blend smoothness and the availability of
Boolean operations.
To keep things fair and straightforward, we render the same simple arrangement, a sphere,
a cube and a cylinder, in both systems using identical camera angles, glossy material
settings, render resolution (e.g. 1080 × 1080) and sample counts (e.g. 64 samples).
For Metaballs, we vary the “Resolution” parameter to control mesh density; for the SDF
shader, complexity comes exclusively from the volume shader itself, which executes per
fragment. We then compare viewport interactivity and final render times under these
matched conditions. In the sections that follow, we will present side­by­side renders, delve
into shading nuances, examine the Blender Outliner versus our node graphs, and tabulate
performance measurements to reveal the trade­offs between photorealistic surface ren­
dering and technical volume shading, as well as between object­based and node­based
modeling paradigms.
(a) Iso­surface shading of three primitives using
the SDF­based volume shader.
Surface con­
tinuity is derived from the scalar field without
polygonal tessellation.
(b) Mesh­based shading of the same four
spheres arranged as Blender metaballs.
Ge­
ometry is generated via implicit union and
remeshed into polygons before shading.
Figure 5.4: Side­by­side comparison of (a) the proposed SDF iso­surface volume render­
ing and (b) Blender’s native metaball mesh shading under identical lighting, camera, and
material settings.
Surface Shading versus Iso­Surface Volume Rendering
In this first comparison we confront Blender’s full BSDF surface shading applied to a true
polygonal mesh with our prototype iso­surface volume shader, which implements only
Lambertian diffusion and a Blinn–Phong specular term. As a proof of concept, the SDF
add­on demonstrates that familiar surface lighting models can be approximated inside a
volumetric ray­marcher, but it remains intentionally minimal. Accordingly, the rendered
output appears visually simpler and more stylized than a conventional mesh shaded in
Cycles; features such as clearcoat, subsurface scattering or anisotropic highlights are
beyond its current scope. This simplicity, however, can be an advantage when a concise,
technical visualization is desired, in case of medical datasets or scientific simulations, for
example, where full photorealism may obscure underlying structure.
36
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:45==
A second key difference lies in how light is handled. Surface shaders in Blender auto­
matically integrate all scene lights, like area lamps, point lights, environment maps, so
that light falloff, indirect bounces and occlusion gradients arise naturally. In contrast, our
volume shader is driven by a single user­specified light direction and intensity vector, em­
bedded as node parameters. This approach ensures consistent illumination of curvature
and normals, but forfeits the convenience and expressiveness of moving a physical light
object in the viewport. In practice, shaping highlights requires manually editing shader
inputs rather than interactively repositioning a lamp, which can feel intricate when inte­
grating iso­surface volumes into a larger scene.
Perhaps the most glaring limitation of the current implementation is the absence of true
shadow casting. Mesh surfaces in Blender block light rays and cast crisp shadows onto
other geometry, reinforcing depth and spatial relationships. Volume­based iso­surfaces,
however, do not participate in the standard shadow pipeline: light passes through trans­
parent regions, and subtracted or occluded parts of the SDF field still receive illumination.
In our Boolean SDF examples, where one shape is carved out of another, specular high­
lights and diffuse lighting erroneously persist on “hidden” surfaces. This artifact not only
breaks realism but also hinders compositing iso­surfaces with standard geometry. Ad­
dressing occlusion and shadowing in a volumetric context would therefore be a valuable
direction for future work, whether through dual­pass rendering, depth sampling or integra­
tion with Blender’s shadow maps.
Metaballs versus SDF Boolean Workflow Comparison
In Blender’s Metaball system, primitives are first­class scene objects: you add a ball, move
it, scale it and watch it merge seamlessly with its neighbours. This object­based work­
flow feels natural and aligns perfectly with Blender’s general interface. By contrast, our
volume primitives cooperate exclusively as shader nodes, requiring translation of vector
inputs rather than direct viewport manipulation. While one could rig Empty objects to drive
those parameters, the process quickly becomes mechanical and unwieldy compared to
simply grabbing and dragging a Metaball.
A powerful feature of Metaballs is the effortless, implicit blending: regardless of how many
you place, their fields automatically fuse into a single organic form. Our SDF Boolean
node, in contrast, accepts only two fields at a time. Building more complex shapes de­
mands chaining multiple nodes and manually managing blend smoothness and connec­
tion order. Although functional, this approach lacks the fluid spontaneity of Metaballs.
Future work might extend the Boolean node to accept an arbitrary list of inputs or provide
a smooth­union operator that merges multiple fields at once, narrowing this usability gap.
Despite their seamless fusion, Metaballs rely on a triangulated mesh reconstructed at
render time. Unless the Metaball Resolution parameter is set very high, this underlying
tessellation remains visible: subtle facets and angular artifacts appear along curved re­
gions and at blob junctions. By contrast, the SDF iso­surface shader computes normals
directly from the continuous scalar field without mesh conversion. The result is perfectly
smooth shading at all scales, with curvature transitions defined purely by the field and
falloff parameter rather than by polygonal vertices. This distinction is crucial when ren­
dering organic or freeform shapes, where any hint of faceting can break the illusion of
continuity.
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.5: The Metaball scene at a low “Resolution” setting (0.05) showing visible tes­
sellation artifacts along the curved blends and junctions.
In addition, beyond simple union, our SDF Boolean node introduces explicit subtraction
and intersection modes, enabling precise volumetric sculpting. You might carve a spher­
ical cavity into a block or extract the overlapping region of two tori within a single node
network. These operations can be parameterized, for instance adjusting Boolean thresh­
olds and smooth­minimum falloff, to keep transitions controllable rather than automatic.
While chaining nodes can become verbose, this explicitness unlocks workflows, nested
cut­outs or conditional intersections, that are impossible with Metaballs alone.
(a) SDF node graph combining a box, torus and
capsule via successive Boolean nodes with dif­
ferent values of smooth­min falloff per interac­
tion.
(b) Resulting iso­surface volume render showing
a carved hole and merged formsm, an impossible
arrangement to achieve with Blender’s Metaballs
alone.
Figure 5.6: Advanced Boolean composition using the SDF Boolean node, demonstrating
precise subtraction and intersection workflows unavailable in the Metaball system.
Finally, because our primitives are volume­shaded rather than mesh­based, they afford
unique “see­through” interactions and interior visualizations. Animating an SDF subtrac­
tion over time reveals hidden structures without any mesh modifiers or remeshing steps.
By dynamically adjusting the iso­value and falloff, one can fade interior cross­sections in
and out, creating dissolving or peeling effects without extra geometry. This capability is
especially powerful for medical imaging, where understanding internal anatomy or hidden
38
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:47==
components is essential. In future iterations, coupling the volume shader with depth­
based clipping or custom transfer functions could further enhance these interior views,
bringing volumetric interactivity closer to domain­specific visualization tools.
One final note echoes the observations made in Section 5.1: volumetric iso­surface ren­
dering in Blender inevitably exhibits a certain “gassy” appearance.
Because we rely
on the volume tracer rather than a true surface, thin features or low­contrast regions
can break into discrete islands or appear semi­transparent, giving the impression of a
wispy, vaporous material. Unfortunately, this behavior is intrinsic to Blender’s volume
ray­marching implementation and cannot be remedied through shader tweaks alone; ad­
dressing it would require modifications to the core renderer. In practice, users must accept
these visual artifacts when choosing a volume­based workflow or consider baking out a
mesh if a perfectly solid surface is essential.
Performance note: As shown in Table 5.1, the classic Metaball surface workflow still
completes renders in roughly half the time of the SDF Boolean approach under identical
sampling settings.
Table 5.1: Testing benchmark: SDF volume vs. Metaballs surface shading, Cycles, CPU
Shading mode
Samples
Metaball resolution
Render time (s)
Mem (MB)
Vertices
SDF volume shading
64
02:20.12
150.38
8
Metaball surface shading
64
0.30
01:10.18
150.72
55,544
We observe that the SDF Boolean workflow needs roughly twice the render time of the
Metaball surface approach, despite introducing virtually no mesh vertices into the scene.
The volume tracer must ray­march through the scalar field for every sample, evaluating
the distance function dozens of times per pixel to locate the iso­surface and accumulate
shading. These repeated field evaluations dominate compute cost and cannot benefit
from the BVH acceleration that Cycles uses for mesh intersections. In contrast, Meta­
balls are polygonised once per frame; after that single tessellation step, each ray hits a
conventional triangle mesh that the renderer can intersect in a single test. The absence
of vertices in the SDF path therefore saves memory, but the continual per­ray distance
queries outweigh that advantage in render time. Because the SDF Boolean shader is
implemented in Open Shading Language (OSL), Cycles can evaluate it only on the CPU.
If the distance­field evaluation were ported to a native GPU kernel (or once GPU OSL
is supported), those thousands of per­ray queries could be parallelised across hundreds
of CUDA/Metal cores, likely slashing render times and pushing the SDF approach much
closer to, or even beyond, Metaball performance.
5.3
VDBs and Performance Benchmarking
To close the chapter we run a focused experiment on an anonymised CT volume (Skull.vdb,
with isovalue ρ = 42.0) that pits three shading pipelines against each other, first by eye
and then by stopwatch:
• Principled Volume : stock density shading that relies solely on the phase function,
therefore cannot generate true specular cues.
• Iso­Surface Volume node – the proposed gradient­normal node group that keeps
everything inside the volume object while feeding a micro­facet BRDF.
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
39
==PAGE:48==
• Volume to Mesh : Blender’s polygonisation modifier followed by a standard Princi­
pled BSDF on the extracted triangles.
All three are rendered at 20 samples under similar lighting (the Iso­Surface Volume node
requires a different frontal directional light, as noted earlier) so that qualitative differences
are limited to their ability to produce the highlight that guides depth perception. Quanti­
tatively we log four metrics on a Intel(R) Core(TM) i5­14500T CPU workstation running
Blender 4.4: (1) time to add and configure the modifier stack, (2) latency when the thresh­
old slider is updated, (3) execution time of the modifier­apply call (mesh extraction), and
(4) duration of a single viewport redraw in Rendered mode at 20 spp. These numbers,
shown in Section 5.3.2, reveal how the Iso­Surface Volume node matches the Volume to
Mesh workflow’s highlight fidelity.
5.3.1
Qualitative comparison of shading methods
Renders of the three different methods are shown below: a Map­Ranged Principled Vol­
ume, the Iso­Surface Volume node, and a Volume to Mesh conversion shaded with Princi­
pled BSDF. All three scenes share similar lighting, camera pose, colour map, and render
settings. To make the comparison more concrete we break the overview into two one­on­
one plates.
Iso­Surface Volume node vs. Principled Volume
(a) Iso­Surface Volume node
(b) Map­Ranged Principled Volume
(c) Iso­Surface Volume node — teeth crop
(d) Principled Volume — teeth crop
Figure 5.7: One­on­one comparison: the Iso­Surface Volume node reveals specular
ridges that remain flat in Principled Volume because the phase function contains no di­
rectional term.
The only deliberate asymmetry in our lighting setup lies in how each shader interprets
the key light. For Principled Volume and for the polygonised surface produced by Volume
to Mesh we place a single frontal point lamp one metre in front of the skull; its default
Cycles fall­off lets the source act as both key and fill. With the Iso­Surface Volume node,
however, we supply a purely directional front­on vector and compensate for the lack of
inverse­square attenuation by setting Intensity = 10.0, Specular Strength = 10.0,
40
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:49==
and Shininess = 5.0. These values yield comparable overall exposure while revealing
the specular term that Principled Volume cannot model.
From a workflow perspective almost nothing else changes: the user simply swaps the
Map­Range–tinted Principled Volume node for the ready­made Iso­Surface Volume node,
re­uses the same density field and colour map, and presses Render. What changes is the
shader’s treatment of light. Principled Volume integrates an isotropic Henyey–Greenstein
phase function, so brightness varies only with density. The Iso­Surface Volume node
instead converts the density gradient into a per­pixel normal and feeds that normal to a
micro­facet BRDF that respects both view and light direction. Clear specular edges there­
fore appear along the zygomatic ridge, tooth enamel, and cranial sutures, matching the
look of a conventional mesh while retaining the advantages of a volume representation.
These highlights are clinically relevant: they guide practitioners in assessing concavities,
surface curvature, and drill angles. Because the node derives normals directly from voxel
data, it provides these cues without intermediate processing, whereas Principled Volume,
limited to density mapping, cannot encode surface orientation reliably.
Iso­Surface Volume node vs. Volume to Mesh
(a) Iso­Surface Volume node
(b) Volume to Mesh + Principled BSDF
(c) Iso­Surface Volume node — teeth crop
(d) Volume to Mesh — teeth crop
Figure 5.8: The Iso­Surface Volume node attains the same highlight fidelity as the poly­
gonised mesh but without aliasing along thin sutures and with roughly one­tenth of the
preprocessing time (see Section 5.3.2).
Figure 5.8 places the Iso­Surface Volume node next to a surface extracted with Blender’s
Volume to Mesh modifier configured for maximum quality (Mode = Grid, voxel size 0.05 m,
Adaptivity = 0). At that resolution the modifier generates several million triangles—
enough to recover most sutures and tooth cusps, yet faint staircase artefacts persist where
one­voxel shells collapse into ledges. The Iso­Surface Volume node, by contrast, derives
normals analytically from the volume gradient and therefore shades smoothly even across
single­voxel ridges; specular lines run unbroken along the incisal edges and the infra­
orbital rim. Although the node currently implements only a Blinn–Phong lobe plus lamber­
tian diffusion, these basic terms already deliver the depth cues that the mesh achieves
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
41
==PAGE:50==
only through brute­force tessellation. Adding clear­coat, Fresnel, or subsurface compo­
nents would narrow the gap further while keeping memory use and preprocessing time
low. For medical datasets that require rapid threshold sweeps and viewpoint changes,
the Iso­Surface Volume node offers highlight fidelity comparable to a high­density mesh
without the VRAM surge or the aliasing that appears when voxel cells are frozen into fixed
triangles.
Render Times
To complete the evaluation we measured pure render time, excluding any preprocessing
or viewport­update cost, at a fixed budget of 20 Cycles samples on the same Intel work­
station used throughout Section 5.3.2. The goal is to answer a practical question: once
the scene has settled, how long does each workflow keep the GPU busy per frame, and
what VRAM does it occupy? The figures in Table 5.2 isolate this “steady­state” cost.
Table 5.2: Skull benchmark (20 Cycles samples, Intel(R) Core(TM) i514500T CPU):
render­time cost versus memory footprint for the three workflows.
Workflow
Samples
Render time (s)
Mem (MB)
Peak VRAM (MB)
Principled Volume
20
04:42.87
187.19
187.19
Iso­Surface Volume node
20
07:09.98
293.73
293.73
Volume to Mesh
20
00:28.10
357.85
357.85
The timings highlight a clear trade­off between preprocessing overhead and raw render
speed. Volume to Mesh is fastest once the geometry exists because Cycles traces con­
ventional triangles on the CPU, but the method incurs the highest VRAM footprint and,
as measured in the next section, several hundred milliseconds of mesh­build latency for
every isovalue change. Principled Volume renders more slowly than the mesh despite its
lower memory use, a consequence of marching through the full density field and evaluat­
ing the Henyey–Greenstein phase function per sample. The Iso­Surface Volume node is
slowest at 20 spp because the OSL segment that computes per­pixel normals currently
runs on the CPU, yet its memory footprint stays moderate and—crucially—the node re­
quires no mesh rebuild; an isovalue tweak is reflected in the very next viewport redraw.
In interactive medical visualisation, where threshold sweeps are frequent and visual fi­
delity is paramount, the extra seconds of render time are outweighed by the elimination
of preprocessing delays and by the availability of crisp specular cues.
5.3.2
Workflow benchmark: Volume to Mesh versus Iso­Surface Volume
node
From an user’s point of view the key ergonomic gain offered by the Iso­Surface Volume
node is that an isovalue change is a single slider move. With the traditional approach the
user must
1. add a new mesh object,
2. attach a Volume to Mesh modifier that targets the CT volume,
3. adjust the Threshold field, and
4. apply the modifier to generate triangles before rendering.
To quantify this difference we timed both workflows with the Python snippets listed in
Appendix A. Four voxel resolutions were tested for Volume to Mesh (Mode = Voxel Size),
while the Iso­Surface Volume node was probed at three consecutive thresholds. Table 5.3
and Table 5.4 report the breakdown.
42
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:51==
Table 5.3: Volume to Mesh timing per operation (threshold ρ = 42).
Voxel size (m)
Add mod (s)
Tweak (s)
Apply (s)
Total (s)
Viewport 20 spp (s)
0.30
0.0001
0.2832
0.2475
0.7517
2.4597
0.20
0.0000
0.2929
0.2595
0.7404
3.8315
0.10
0.0000
0.2595
0.2935
0.7146
3.7968
0.05
0.0000
0.2653
0.3263
0.7813
4.0741
Table 5.4: Iso­Surface Volume node timing per operation (single object, thresholds swept).
Threshold ρ
Tweak (s)
Material slot (s)
Total (s)
Viewport 20 spp (s)
42.0
0.0011
0.2018
0.2031
2.5605
43.0
0.0004
0.1836
0.1840
2.6382
44.0
0.0003
0.2056
0.206
2.5827
The measurements show a clear divergence in responsiveness between the two work­
flows. Tweaking the Threshold parameter inside Volume to Mesh modifier triggers a com­
plete rebuild of the intermediate voxel grid, resulting in latencies of roughly 0.26–0.29 s
even before the triangles are generated; applying the modifier then adds a further 0.25–0.33 s,
so the artist waits close to three­quarters of a second for every new isovalue. The Iso­
Surface Volume node avoids this overhead entirely: its threshold update is a single slider
write and propagates through the dependency graph in well under one millisecond, after
which only a routine material­slot refresh is required. Once either workflow reaches the
render stage the cost of a 20­sample viewport redraw is comparable, about 2.5–4 s, be­
cause the expense is dominated by path tracing rather than data format. Nevertheless,
the total interaction loop is an order of magnitude shorter with the shader (below 0.21 s
versus ∼0.75 s), and the shader maintains a stable VRAM footprint without the alias­
ing artefacts that appear when thin volumetric shells are frozen into high­density triangle
meshes. For medical datasets in which users sweep thresholds repeatedly to isolate
anatomical features, the cumulative time saved and the cleaner visual result make the
Iso­Surface Volume node the more practical choice.
The tests in Section 5.3 showcase interesting results among the three workflows eval­
uated. Principled Volume is easy to set up and memory­efficient but lacks orientation
cues, limiting its usefulness for diagnostic visuals. Volume to Mesh recovers those cues
yet demands dense triangle counts, incurs a VRAM spike, and introduces a noticeable
pause each time the threshold changes. The Iso­Surface Volume node delivers the same
highlight fidelity as the polygon mesh while keeping memory requirements moderate and
reducing the isovalue­to­preview latency from hundreds of milliseconds to well below a
quarter of a second. For medical or scientific datasets, where rapid threshold sweeps
and accurate surface perception are both essential, the shader therefore offers the best
balance of visual quality, interactivity, and resource use. These findings motivate the
performance guidelines and future­work extensions presented in Chapter 6.
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:53==
6
Conclusion And Future Work
To conclude, it is worth restating the problem that motivated this study and the way we
dealt with it. This thesis aims to showcase important limitations in Blender’s rendering
engine for what concerns volume shaders, clearly less developed than surface ones:
volumes appear smooth and continuous, while generally scientific images, procedural
shapes, and realistic artwork demand crisp, well­defined edges. The Principled Volume
shader is able to render smoke, fog, and clouds convincingly, yet blurs the sharp contours
and inner detail required for CT slices, fluid interfaces, and algorithmic forms. Considering
all the mentioned limitations, the Attribute node, the read­only VDB ad so on, the path to
implement this add­on has been surprisingly narrow. By converting density thresholds into
thin surface skins and deriving normals from simple gradient estimates, we introduced
genuine surface lighting into the volume workflow while remaining within the standard
shader graph.
Our solution rests on four interconnected ideas that re­use Blender’s native tools while
extending them in new ways. First, the density is re­framed in order to be compared to
the isovalue and express a narrow density band where voxels shift from clear to opaque.
This viewpoint enabled an Iso­Surface Volume shader that slices a slender shell from a
continuous field. When the user chooses an isovalue, the density level at which a surface
should appear, the implemented node group measures the absolute difference between
that level and the local density, passes it through a smooth fall­off, and mixes emission and
absorption only inside that band. Because the transition zone is only a few voxels thick,
shell width is adjustable in real time, and the resulting membrane gets shaded with tradi­
tional surface shading methods, even though Blender still treats it as part of the volume.
Without normals, no weighted shell can yield correct diffuse shading, specular highlights,
or view­dependent reflections. To compute normals, the method has been developed for
each input type specifically. For analytic Signed Distance Functions (SDFs), formulae
for primitives such as spheres, boxes, tori, and capsules, we embedded the equations in
Open Shading Language, which made the mathematical definition very straightforward.
Because an SDF returns the distance to the nearest surface at every point, its gradi­
ent, found via analytic derivatives, supplies the normal. Passing these gradients to Cy­
cles’ ray­marcher gives smooth, physically sound lighting on procedural, non­polygonal
shapes. When no closed form exists, which is the case of noise fields, we implemented a
finite­difference estimator: a node that samples the density at six offsets and assembles
the gradient by central differencing. Normals derived in this way let any volumetric input
receive similar surface­aware lighting as analytic SDFs. Blender’s volume API, however,
exposes only one scalar density grid to shaders. Because extra grids cannot be sent
to carry pre­calculated normals or other attributes, such data must be generated outside
Blender. We therefore created a lightweight OpenVDB tool, bake_normals.exe. Given
a single­channel VDB, it computes voxel­wise normals by finite differences and stores
them in three additional grids, considered that Attribute node is not able to read Vector
grids for shading purposes. A matching Blender add­on then imports the enriched VDB,
constructs the Iso­Surface Volume shader, and links everything in one click. CT scans,
fluid density outputs, and many other volumes thus gain fully lit iso­surfaces without te­
dious file management or elaborate node networks. Consequently, these parts had to
be merged into an intuitive workflow. Instead of asking users to rebuild intricate node
graphs or write OSL by hand, we wrapped every feature in clear buttons and menus in­
side Blender’s interface, providing valid intro examples. A new Add →Volume panel lists
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
45
==PAGE:54==
SDF primitives, noise fields, and import commands. Once selected, the Shader Editor
spawns the relevant node groups and connects them automatically. The Volume sidebar
now contains a Bake VDB Normals button, reducing the route from raw data to a shaded
iso­surface to a single step. This arrangement preserves the speed and low entry barrier
that make Blender popular while opening domains that once required specialised external
tools. Experiments confirm that these choices pay off visually. Whereas the Principled
Volume shader blurs fine detail and fails to form specular caustics on thin layers, the Iso­
Surface Volume shader restores sharp highlights and view­dependent shading, providing
a volume shader much more similar to the Principled BDSF. High­resolution medical gain
in this way a solid, tactile quality without being converted to meshes. Procedural ribbing
on SDF tori and complex Boolean shapes shows gentle curvature shifts that density­only
rendering hides. This added clarity is not merely cosmetic but provides an efficient way
to precisely shade the internal structure of volume objects entirely inside Blender.
The method does have trade­offs. Because it relies on OSL, the Iso­Surface Volume
shader runs only on the CPU, trailing GPU­accelerated meshes or native volumes. In
tests, a medium scene needed about seven seconds per 20­sample frame, versus roughly
0.3 seconds for mesh renderings and 4.7 seconds for Principled Volume. Even so, view­
port previews remained responsive, and avoiding slow mesh­extraction loops improved
iterative work overall. Memory use also stayed favourable: implicit ray­marching of ana­
lytic primitives required far less RAM than finely tessellated meshes, and VDBs with baked
normals added only a modest, predictable overhead. Shadowing and occlusion also re­
main weak points. Volumetric shaders still cannot cast or receive standard shadows, so
iso­surfaces appear evenly lit, lacking the self­occlusion and contact shadows that are
essential to depth perception. Light wraps unrealistically around subtracted forms, and
mixed scenes of volumes and meshes do not cast shadows on one another as a physi­
cally based renderer should. Permitting extra volume grids or expanding Blender’s kernel
to handle multiple VDB channels would let baked normals guide shadow rays and restore
much of the lost realism. Additionally, the Iso­Surface Volume node is based on Light Di­
rection and Intensity inputs, and it cannot communicate with the existing scene’s lighting.
This has been another important obstacle for this project: to retrieve the scene’s lighting
information, the built­in Volume shaders and methods had to be used, which is exactly
what we challenged from the beginning. In this sense, the add­on results are slightly
more intricate to use, but there are no big downsides if the user aims to uniquely visualize
scientific data and is not interested in the volume objects to communicate with the scene.
Many avenues for future work are clear. Enable scene lighting information in Iso­Surface
Volume node, replace the SDF Boolean’s normal estimation to fix the artifacts, cast shad­
ows, or adding classic volume transfer functions would create hybrid displays: coloured,
semi­transparent regions that fade into crisp surfaces, letting viewers grasp context and
detail in one image. Extending the node groups to handle several isovalues and material
slots inside one volume would also enable layered views, showing bone, vessels, and tis­
sue at once, or assigning distinct materials to procedural sub­parts of complex models. In
sum, this research shows that volumes and surfaces need not remain separate. By treat­
ing density as geometry and extracting the gradients inherent in scalar fields, we restore
surface language to volumetric rendering. The Iso­Surface Volume shader, procedural
SDF primitives, finite­difference normal estimation, and external VDB normal baking to­
gether form a unified toolkit that returns sharp highlights and view­dependent reflections
to volumes without leaving Blender’s node graph or a single add­on. Taking inspiration
from other projects and software that already make use of implicits, this project has shown
important lack in Blender’s volume rendering methods, and proved that not an external
46
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:55==
tool but a downloadable add­on can already provide much more practical solutions for
a more precise visualization of medical data. The hope is that these implementations
will soon be obsolete and readily implemented by Blender, which is already an incredi­
ble open­source tool very complete for many other aspects of the 3D pipeline, and which
could become even more powerful by natively embracing iso­surface shading techniques
that bridge the gap between artistic flexibility and scientific precision.
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Robert A Drebin, Loren Carpenter, and Pat Hanrahan. “Volume rendering”. In: ACM
SIGGRAPH computer graphics 22.4 (1988), pp. 65–74.
[2]
Marc Levoy. “Display of surfaces from volume data”. In: IEEE computer graphics
and applications 8.3 (1988), pp. 29–37.
[3]
Klaus Engel et al. “Real­time volume graphics”. In: Course Notes SIGGRAPH (2006).
[4]
Charles D Hansen and Christopher R Johnson. Visualization Handbook. Elsevier,
2005.
[5]
Nelson Max. “Optical models for direct volume rendering”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics. Vol. 1. 2. IEEE. 1995, pp. 99–108.
[6]
Matt Pharr, Wenzel Jakob, and Greg Humphreys. Physically Based Rendering:
From Theory to Implementation. Morgan Kaufmann, 2016.
[7]
Anja C. Schunke et al. “TINA manual landmarking tool: Software for the precise
digitization of 3D landmarks”. In: Frontiers in Zoology 9.1 (2012), p. 6. doi: 10 .
1186/1742-9994-9-6. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/223961728_
TINA_manual_landmarking_tool_Software_for_the_precise_digitization_of_3D_
landmarks.
[8]
James T Kajiya. The rendering equation. Vol. 20. 4. ACM, 1986, pp. 143–150.
[9]
Ken Museth. “VDB: High­resolution sparse volumes with dynamic topology”. In:
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 32.3 (2013), pp. 1–22.
[10]
Stanley Osher and James A. Sethian. “Fronts Propagating with Curvature­Dependent
Speed: Algorithms Based on Hamilton–Jacobi Formulations”. In: Journal of Com­
putational Physics 79.1 (1988), pp. 12–49. doi: 10.1016/0021-9991(88)90002-2.
[11]
William E. Lorensen and Harvey E. Cline. “Marching Cubes: A High Resolution 3D
Surface Construction Algorithm”. In: Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ’87. Vol. 21. ACM
SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 4. 1987, pp. 163–169. doi: 10.1145/37401.37422.
[12]
Daniel Fiedler, Markus Steinberger, and Michael Wimmer. “Efficient Direct Isosur­
face Rasterization of Scalar Volumes”. In: Computer Graphics Forum 42.1 (2023),
pp. 123–135. doi: 10.1111/cgf.14670.
[13]
Inigo Quilez. Distance Functions. Accessed: 2025­06­14. 2013. url: https://iquilezles.
org/articles/distfunctions/.
[14]
James F. Blinn. “A Generalization of Algebraic Surface Drawing”. In: IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications 1.3 (1982), pp. 3–12. doi: 10.1109/MCG.1982.1674258.
[15]
Tom Duff and Rob Peachey. “An Adaptive Holographic Display of Implicit Surfaces”.
In: Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Inter­
active Techniques (SIGGRAPH ’89). Boston, MA: ACM, 1989, pp. 137–145. doi:
10.1145/74333.74346.
[16]
Inc. Kitware. VTK 9.5 Release Notes: GPU Volume Ray Casting, Physically Based
Rendering, and OptiX Path Tracing. https://discourse.vtk.org/t/vtk- 9- 5- new-
features/. Accessed 25 June 2025. 2025.
[17]
Jama Jurabaev. MagicaCSG. https://21corp.co.jp/magicacsg/. accessed 23 June
2025. 2021.
[18]
Unbound Visuals. Unbound.io – Interactive Volume Browser. https://unbound.io.
accessed 23 June 2025. 2024.
[19]
Ken Museth. “OpenVDB: An Open­source Data Structure and Toolkit for High­resolution
Volumetric Data”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics 32.3 (2013). Describes the
data structures and stencil operators (including BoxStencil) that underpin Open­
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
49
==PAGE:58==
VDB., 27:1–27:22. doi: 10.1145/2487228.2487235. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/
2487228.2487235.
50
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:59==
A
Blender Testing Scripts
A.1
iso_testing.py
1
import bpy, time
2
3
# Test parameters
4
iso_values
= [42.0, 43.0, 44.0]
# thresholds to test
5
material_name = "IsoSurfaceMat"
# your volume material
6
node_name
= "IsoValue"
# node holding the isovalue
7
output_index
= 0
# which output socket is the isovalue
8
samples_vp
= 20
# viewport samples for redraw
9
10
vol_obj = bpy.data.objects["Skull"]
11
mat
= bpy.data.materials[material_name]
12
node
= mat.node_tree.nodes[node_name]
13
14
if vol_obj.data.materials.get(material_name) is None:
15
vol_obj.data.materials.clear()
16
vol_obj.data.materials.append(mat)
17
18
for area in bpy.context.window.screen.areas:
19
if area.type == 'VIEW_3D':
20
area.spaces.active.shading.type = 'RENDERED'
21
bpy.context.scene.cycles.samples = samples_vp
22
23
for rho in iso_values:
24
# 1) Time the slider tweak + depsgraph update
25
t0_tweak = time.perf_counter()
26
node.outputs[output_index].default_value = rho
27
bpy.context.view_layer.update()
28
t1_tweak = time.perf_counter()
29
time_tweak = t1_tweak - t0_tweak
30
31
# 2) Time re-assigning the material slot
32
t0_mat = time.perf_counter()
33
vol_obj.data.materials[0] = mat
34
bpy.context.view_layer.update()
35
t1_mat = time.perf_counter()
36
time_mat = t1_mat - t0_mat
37
38
# 3) Time one viewport redraw
39
t0_vp = time.perf_counter()
40
bpy.ops.wm.redraw_timer('INVOKE_DEFAULT', type='DRAW_WIN_SWAP', iterations
=1)
41
t1_vp = time.perf_counter()
42
time_vp = t1_vp - t0_vp
43
44
print(
45
f"￿={rho:.2f} | "
46
f"tweak = {time_tweak:.4f}s, "
47
f"material = {time_mat:.4f}s, "
48
f"viewport@{samples_vp}spp = {time_vp:.4f}s"
49
)
Listing A.1: Iso­Surface Volume benchmark script
A.2
volumetomesh_testing.py
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
51
==PAGE:60==
1
import bpy, time
2
3
# Test parameters
4
iso_values
= [42.0]
# isovalues to test
5
voxel_sizes = [0.30, 0.20, 0.10, 0.05]
# voxel resolutions in meters
6
adaptivity
= 0.15
7
delta
= 1.0
# amount to bump threshold for tweak
timing
8
samples_vp
= 20
# viewport samples to test redraw
9
10
skull = bpy.data.objects["Skull"]
11
12
for rho in iso_values:
13
for vox in voxel_sizes:
14
# 1) Create a new cube mesh
15
bpy.ops.mesh.primitive_cube_add()
16
cube = bpy.context.active_object
17
18
# 2) Time adding & configuring the VolumetoMesh modifier
19
t0_add = time.perf_counter()
20
mod = cube.modifiers.new("V2M", type="VOLUME_TO_MESH")
21
mod.object
= skull
22
mod.threshold
= rho
23
mod.voxel_size = vox
24
mod.adaptivity = adaptivity
25
t1_add = time.perf_counter()
26
time_add = t1_add - t0_add
27
bpy.context.view_layer.update()
28
29
# 3) Time tweaking the threshold
30
t0_tweak = time.perf_counter()
31
mod.threshold = rho + delta
32
bpy.context.view_layer.update()
33
t1_tweak = time.perf_counter()
34
time_tweak = t1_tweak - t0_tweak
35
36
# 4) Time applying the VolumetoMesh modifier
37
bpy.context.view_layer.objects.active = cube
38
cube.select_set(True)
39
t0_app = time.perf_counter()
40
bpy.ops.object.modifier_apply(modifier=mod.name)
41
t1_app = time.perf_counter()
42
time_apply = t1_app - t0_app
43
44
# 5) Time a viewport redraw in Rendered mode @ samples_vp
45
bpy.context.scene.cycles.samples = samples_vp
46
for area in bpy.context.screen.areas:
47
if area.type == 'VIEW_3D':
48
area.spaces.active.shading.type = 'RENDERED'
49
t0_vp = time.perf_counter()
50
bpy.ops.wm.redraw_timer('INVOKE_DEFAULT', type='DRAW_WIN_SWAP',
iterations=1)
51
t1_vp = time.perf_counter()
52
time_vp = t1_vp - t0_vp
53
54
# 6) Total time from modifier add to mesh apply
55
total_time = t1_app - t0_add
56
57
print(
58
f"￿={rho:.2f} | voxel={vox:.2f} m →"
59
f"add = {time_add:.4f}s, "
52
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
==PAGE:61==
60
f"tweak = {time_tweak:.4f}s, "
61
f"apply = {time_apply:.4f}s, "
62
f"vp@{samples_vp}spp = {time_vp:.4f}s, "
63
f"total = {total_time:.4f}s"
64
)
65
bpy.ops.object.delete()
Listing A.2: Mesh to Volume benchmark script
Volume Rendering in the Blender Platform
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
