==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Learnable Masks for Time Series Explainability
Alicia García (s241931)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Over the past decade, Deep Learning (DL) models have been integrated into data-driven sectors such
as e-commerce and healthcare to assist humans in making informed decisions. In neuroscience, these
models have been utilized to analyze complex time series data, such as EEG and MEG, providing
valuable insights for diagnosis and treatment. However, the black-box nature of this technology makes
it challenging to provide the data foundation of those decisions and limits its trustworthiness. This
research aims to propose a new explainability method that generates an attribution mask based on
the multilevel discrete wavelet transform (DWT). Traditional approaches usually focus on the time
or frequency domain, but this method simultaneously preserves and analyzes both. Even though the
continuous wavelet transform (CWT) seems a better approach for signal processing and analysis, the
DWT is more suitable for this task. It provides a set of orthogonal mother wavelets that allows a
non-redundant and easily invertible transformation to frequency bands and time scales. The DWT has
an advantage over the CWT, as it provides a more compact representation of the signal and allows
for a more eﬀicient implementation. Acting as a quadrature mirror filter bank, the DWT decomposes
signals into approximation and detail coeﬀicients across multiple levels, preserving critical information at
various resolutions. To validate and evaluate the method, simulated datasets and the SleepEDF dataset
were used. Both have been used for classification; the first one provides a defined ground truth, and
the second establishes a well-defined classification problem, such as sleep staging. Additionally, various
wavelet families, including Daubechies, Symlets, and Coiflets, have been tested and analyzed both
qualitatively and quantitatively. The results show similar behavior between Symlets and Coiflets, due
to their nearly symmetric nature. However, based on the Quantus complexity metric, Coiflets are less
complex, which is preferred in the context of explainability. Moreover, the number of vanishing moments
allows us to fine-tune the trade-off between frequency and time resolution, as well as computational
cost. This research suggests that four vanishing moments offer a suitable balance between the various
properties. Then, results show that while the learned attribution masks accurately highlight features in
simulated scenarios, their performance on the real-world sleep staging task is limited. This is attributed
to the DWT’s coarse, dyadic frequency bands, which do not align well with the specific, non-dyadic
frequency bands of sleep physiology.
Therefore, this work introduces a promising framework, but
highlights that its practical effectiveness depends on the suitability of the chosen transform for the
specific problem domain.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of
Science degree in Data Science. The project was supervised by Professor at DTU Compute, Tommy
Sonne Alstrøm, and PHD at DTU Compute, Thea Brüsch.
Kongens Lyngby, July 3, 2025
Alicia García (s241931)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors for their immense support. To Tommy, thank
you for your invaluable guidance through the project and for consistently pushing me to think more
critically about my research. To Thea, I am incredibly grateful for your feedback and for being available
to discuss the complex details of the project’s definition. Your combined support provided the perfect
foundation for this work.
I would also like to thank the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science (DTU
Compute) for providing an excellent academic environment to conduct this research.
Finally, on a more personal note, I would like to thank my partner, family, and friends for their
patience in listening to me discuss the thesis and their unwavering support. Your belief in me has given
me strength.
Thank you,
Alicia García
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
ADCs Analog-to-Digital Converters iv, 8
AP Action Potential iv, 7
CAV Concept Activation Vectors iv, 2
CNNs Convolutional Neural Networks iv
CNS Central Nervous System iv, 5, 8
CSF CerebroSpinal Fluid iv, 5
CWT Continuous Wavelet Transform iv, 10, 12–15
DCSM Danish Center for Sleep Medicine iv, 19
DFT Discrete Fourier Transform iv, 3
DWT Discrete Wavelet Transform iv, 1, 2, 4, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 21, 22, 24
ECG Electrocardiogram iv, 19
EEG Electroencephalogram iv, 1, 4–8, 10–13, 19, 20
EMG Electromyography iv, 19
EOG Electrooculography iv, 19
EPSP Excitatory PostSynaptic Potential iv, 7
FFT Fast Fourier Transform iv, 14
FT Fourier Transform iv, 1, 10–12
GABA Gamma-AminoButyric Acid iv, 8
Grad-CAM Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping iv
HMC Haaglanden Medisch Centrum iv, 19
ICA Independent Component Analysis iv, 11
IG Integrated Gradients iv, 3
IPSP Inhibitory PostSynaptic Potential iv, 7
LAFM Low-Amplitude Mixed-Frequency iv, 8
==PAGE:8==
Acronyms
vi
LIME Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations iv, 3
LRP Layer-wise relevant propagation iv, 3
NEM Neural Explanation Masks iv, 4
NN Neural Network iv, 1, 11
NNs Neural Networks iv, 2
non-REM Non-Rapid Eye Movement iv, 6, 8
PCA Principal Component Analysis iv, 11
PSG PolySomnoGraphic iv, 19
PSP PostSynaptic Potential iv, 7
RDE Rate-Distortion Explanation iv, 4
RELAX Representation LeArning eXplainability iv, 3
REM Rapid Eye Movement iv, 6, 8, 9
SCN SupraChiasmatic Nucleus iv, 6
SGD Stochastic Gradient Descent iv, 21
SHAP SHapley Additive exPlanations iv
SHHS Sleep Heartn Health Study iv, 19
STFT Short-Time Fourier Transform iv, 14
SWS Slow-Wave Sleep iv, 9
TCAV Testing with CAV iv
WT Wavelet Transform iv, 10–14
XAI Explainable Artificial Intelligence iv, 1
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Acronyms
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Proposed method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
EEG and the sleep cycle
5
2.1
The brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
EEG signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
The sleep cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Background theory
11
3.1
Signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Fourier transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Wavelets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Explainable AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Methods and experimental setup
28
4.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
The model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Learnable mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Training setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Results
39
5.1
Simulated dataset results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
The Sleep EDF results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Discussion and future works
50
7
Conclusion
52
A An Appendix
53
==PAGE:10==
Contents
viii
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the rapid development of Artificial Intelligence (AI), particularly the
surge in deep learning-related connectionist approaches [54]. The rapid adoption of this technology in
fields such as health care [66] and autonomous systems has led humanity to an era of unprecedented
performance. However, the complexity that renders these models so effective also makes them fun-
damentally opaque, creating a ”black box” that even their creators cannot interpret.
This lack of
understanding of how the prediction is made is not just a technical inconvenience; it is a barrier to
trust and safety for its users. Consequently, the field of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has
emerged not as an academic curiosity but as a necessity. XAI is a field of research that aims to provide
human-understandable explanations for the results of a given Artificial Neural Network (ANN).
Several methods have been developed to tackle the problem presented [63, 28, 32]. These established
methods target mainly models with image data input, while time series data has been somewhat over-
looked. Time series data is prevalent in various domains, including the previously mentioned, and often
requires specialized techniques for analysis. Thus, explainability for time series models is necessary, as
it can help identify patterns and anomalies that are useful for decision-making, as well as assist users
in understanding a diagnosis in the medical domain. This domain uses Electroencephalogram (EEG),
Electrooculography (EOG), and Electrocardiogram (ECG) to detect diseases. There are already existing
methods for time series [17, 9, 8]. However, their focus is either on the time or the frequency nature of
the signal, leaving a gap in the literature for methods that effectively combine both. The approach of
combining both domains can provide a more comprehensive understanding of the data, specifically in
scenarios where both temporal and spectral information is relevant.
This thesis aims to address this gap by proposing a new method for time series explainability that
uses wavelet transforms to analyze data in the time-frequency domain. The proposed method will focus
on learning a mask that highlights the most relevant features in both domains, providing an interpretable
explanation of the model’s predictions. We evaluate the method on simulated data to ensure a known
ground truth, as well as in a specific real-world case study involving sleep staging classification operating
EEG data. We have made this choice because the sleep stages are well-defined in frequency bands and
exhibit a periodic nature. Both evaluations will serve as a practical application of the proposed method,
demonstrating its effectiveness in providing explanations for time series models.
More specifically, the proposed method will utilize the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) to analyze
the data in the time-frequency domain. The DWT is a tool for decomposing signals into their constituent
frequency components while preserving temporal information.
The transformation enables a more
nuanced understanding of the data, as it captures both the time-varying nature of the signal and its
frequency content, thereby overcoming the limitations of current state-of-the-art methods, which are
introduced shortly.
The thesis structure has different sections. In this introduction, we provide a literature review of
existing methods for explainability, presenting both global and local approaches, with a focus on the
latter, as our method falls into this category. It also discusses the limitations of current techniques and
the need for more localized explanations in the time-frequency domain, followed by a presentation of
the proposed method. The following Section 2 provides an overview of the brain and the EEG waves, as
it is the real data used for evaluation. Additionally, we dedicate Section 3 to the theoretical background
of the study, including signal processing, the , and the mathematical foundations of the . Moreover,
an overview of Neural Network (NN), XAI, and the evaluation metrics. Then, Section 4 describes
the experimental setup, including the datasets simulated and used, the model architecture, the mask
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Related works
2
definition, the chosen hyperparameters, and the training setup. Finally, we present and discuss the
results in section 5, highlighting the effectiveness of the proposed method in providing interpretable
explanations for time series models. Two additional sections address the limitations of the proposed
method: the future work section in Section 6 and the conclusion in Section 7.
1.1
Related works
Numerous explainability techniques have been developed to describe how ANN processes input data
and provides a specific decision. Most of these methods have been developed for images, as previously
mentioned, while time series might have been overlooked. This literature review aims to present dif-
ferent established methods. We categorize the methods into global or local explanations; as noted,
the proposed method provides a local explanation. These methods will be presented based on their
computation, along with information about the input domain.
1.1.1
Global methods
Global explainability methods help in understanding how a model generally makes decisions across
an entire dataset. These methods provide insight into the overall structure of the model rather than
focusing on individual predictions. They aim to explain how hidden layers in a neural network con-
tribute to the model’s decision. For instance, Activation Maximization [21] finds the optimal input that
maximally activates a specific neuron or a layer in the network based on gradient ascent iterations over
the input. Hence, since the neuron is responding maximally to that given input, it is considered a good
representation of the unit’s behavior.
Additionally, Concept Activation Vectors (CAV) [30] explains the internal state of the neural network
based on human-friendly defined concepts. Then, based on those vectors, Testing with CAVs (TCAV)
uses directional derivatives to quantify the sensitivity of a model prediction based on those concepts.
Regardless, this method requires predefined concepts, which is a time-consuming task or even considered
a limitation if a given problem does not have specific notions to base the decision on.
1.1.2
Local methods
Local methods, on the other hand, explain why the model made a specific decision for a single instance
rather than the entire dataset. They provide insights into the model’s reasoning for individual predic-
tions. This approach is advantageous in fields such as medical diagnosis, where a decision is made for
a single patient in a specific scenario. Following up, we present some of these methods.
1.1.2.1
Attribution-based
Attribution-based methods decompose the decisions made by the network into contributions from pre-
vious layers to the input. It is done by propagating activations from the neurons in the last layer to the
previous layer, repeatedly layer by layer, till the decision is distributed over the input features. Then,
analyzing how small changes in input features affect the output [42], the attributions are obtained.
One standard method is Saliency maps [56]. They represent the first-order approximation of the
attributions by directly computing the absolute gradient of the output with respect to the input. One
of the significant challenges of this method is the noise in the visualizations. The noise is due to the
fluctuation of the derivative of the class activation function on small scales. Therefore, to tackle this
weakness, other techniques have been developed. For instance, SmoothGrad [57] computes gradients
over multiple noisy copies of the input and averages them to reduce the noise and visual diffusion. Since
computing the local average in a high-dimensional input space can be computationally expensive, the
method calculates the average over random samples in the vicinity of a given input. Another improved
method is Integrated Gradients (IG) [58], which accumulates gradients in a given dimension, averaging
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Related works
3
all the gradients along a straight line between the baseline and the input. Visually, this method also
removes noise from the attribution map; however, since it relies on a reference value (the baseline), it
does not provide an optimal choice. Further, Spectral Gradients [23] is a novel interpretability method
that refines standard saliency maps by applying a low-pass filter in the frequency domain. It treats the
raw gradient as a noisy signal and cleans it up by removing high-frequency components via the Fourier
Transform. This results in smoother, more visually coherent attribution maps that are better aligned
with human intuition about what parts of a signal or image are essential for a model’s decision. To
apply any of these methods, the model must be differentiable, and the user must have access to the
gradients.
Another possible approach is Layer-wise relevant propagation (LRP) [5], which is based on the
conservation of the relevance at each layer. It distributes the information received by a layer from the
forward pass to the prior layer equally. Hence, it back-propagates the relevance scores from the output
layer to the input layer, ensuring that the total relevance is conserved across layers. Based on the
explained method, there is also the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) LRP [62], which, via a virtual
inspection layer, propagates the relevance scores through an invertible transformation to another domain.
In this case, the authors utilize the frequency domain, specifically the DFT, to analyze time series.
Additionally, there is DeepLIFT [55], which applies reference activations. It compares the activation of
each neuron to its reference activation, calculated during the forward pass with the baseline input, and
assigns contribution scores based on the difference between these two values.
1.1.2.2
Perturbation-based
These methods modify the input of a model and analyze how it affects the output. Based on these
observations, if the output changes extensively, the input is considered important [28].
Explainability for images One possible approach is Randomized Input Sampling for Explanation.
This method estimates the importance of features based on masked versions of the input and the
resulting output.
The masks are generated for a smaller portion of the image, then upsampled to
match the input shape, and finally, the masks are shifted by a random number of pixels in both
dimensions. This procedure allows for more iterations of the perturbed input. Then, based on this
approach, there is Representation LeArning eXplainability (RELAX) [63], which also measures the
change in the representation of an image compared to a masked version of itself. This method averages
numerous iterations of stochastic masks that remove input information to reveal the important regions
of the input based on its representation. Similarly, occlusion perturbation [67] masks out features of
the input systematically with a gray square and observes how the predictions of the model change. In
this matter, the monitored metric is the probability of the correct class; if it drops, the object being
classified has been localized. Another method that applies this technique is Local Interpretable Model-
Agnostic Explanations (LIME) [50]. In this case, the perturbations are random alterations to the input,
either setting it to zero or the average of its neighbors. To explain, an interpretable model, such as
linear regression, is fitted to the perturbations and their predictions. Next, weights are assigned based
on the proximity of the perturbation to the original sample, and from the trained model, the input
contributions can be understood. This method has some limitations; due to the randomness of the
perturbations and their locality, the response may differ. The trained model assumes linearity, which
may not fully capture complex interactions.
Additionally, Rate-Distortion Explanation (RDE) [32] seeks to optimize a mask that points out all
the suﬀicient features relevant for producing the output. The authors perform this computation by
optimizing the distortion measure, which quantifies the extent to which the explanation deviates from
the model’s original prediction after masking features with a perturbation from a given distribution.
Then, they also implement CartoonX, a method that applies wavelet transformations to extract piece-
wise smooth explanations of the image since it is more interpretable than pixel-level explanations. This
approach is further fine-tuned with WaveletX [33], where blurry areas are removed from the explanations
using a spatial penalty. Then Neural Explanation Masks (NEM) [39] is a framework that also introduces
a masking network to provide a self-explaining fixed model. It predicts occlusion masks based on a loss
function to provide explainability of a given model.
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Proposed method
4
Explainability for time series Methods like Dynamic Mask (Dynamask) [17] produce an instance-
wise importance score for each feature at each time step. As with the other methods, it fits a perturba-
tion mask to the input sequence; however, to account for the time dependency of the data, it studies
dynamic perturbation operators. The main difference is that the perturbations depend on both the
features and the time. Based on RISE, FreqRISE [9] produces the explanations in the frequency and
time-frequency domain. This approach allows us to explore other domains where salient information
can be found. The methods first map the input to the frequency domain through an invertible transfor-
mation, then mask out information, and finally transform the input back to the time domain. Another
method for this kind of input is Filterbank learning for explaining time series (FLEXtime) [8]. However,
in this case, the input is filtered in the time domain by a filter with a specific frequency component.
Then, the mask is learned by either removing or not removing that specific band based on its importance.
This method outputs an explanation that captures the saliency in the frequency domain. Therefore,
this thesis aims to explore the time-frequency domain using the wavelet transform, given the existing
gap in the literature for this combination.
1.2
Proposed method
This thesis proposes a novel method for time series explainability based on wavelet analysis. In Section
3.3, this mathematical technique is further detailed. The goal is to learn a mask based on the multilevel
DWT, which explains the model prediction in the time-frequency domain.
This method acts as a
recursive filter bank of low-pass and high-pass filters. It allows for the decomposition of the signal into
its frequency components with varying granularities while preserving the temporal information of the
signal.
The thesis work focuses on optimizing the mask to explain model predictions through the DWT
decomposition, generating an explanation based on interpretable parts. This is achieved by analyzing
simpler simulated datasets, detailed in Section 4.1, and then applying the results to a real-world scenario,
EEG for sleep staging classification, as previously indicated. The primary dataset explored is SleepEDF
[24], a publicly available dataset. The data preprocessing has been implemented using the PhysioEx
Python library [23]. We utilize this library to implement the data processing pipeline, the data loader,
and the model training due to the project’s time constraints.
Furthermore, we use FLEXtime [8] as a baseline. This method presents some limitations. FLEXtime
relies heavily on the definition of the filter bank, which typically requires prior knowledge of the signal
and the definition of the frequency bands. Additionally, those frequency bands are fixed and may not
optimally capture non-uniform frequency saliencies found in the signal, restricting resolution in regions
where more granularity might be needed. Hence, we aim to leverage these limitations by providing a
study on different wavelets and comparing the results to a reproduced version of FLEXtime.
The implementation of the method can be found in the following repository: https://github.com/
aliciags/learnable-masks-explainability-time-series.
1.3
Research question
The thesis centers around the following research questions:
• Which mother wavelet provides the most accurate learnable mask through DWT based on a
simulated ground truth? (Daubechies, Coiflets or Symlets)
• Which mother wavelet provides the least complex learnable mask through DWT? (Daubechies,
Coiflets or Symlets)
• Does DWT learnable mask with the coif4 mother wavelet provide a better localization than the
FLEXtime filterbank approach in the frequency domain, given the Sleep EDF dataset and the
model Chambon2018?
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
EEG and the sleep cycle
Sleep is a fundamental process as essential as food or water in the life of human beings. The quality
and amount of resting time are equally important, and a chronic lack of it can increase the probability
of certain diseases, for example, psychological disorders or cardiovascular diseases, such as diabetes,
obesity, or even high blood pressure [14, 1, 61].
Although the biological purpose of sleep remains
a mystery, it affects nearly all tissues and bodily systems. It even removes toxins in the brain that
accumulate during the awakening period [41]. The goal is to demonstrate the ability to explain sleep
stages through EEG, as this source of data can provide insights into other brain diseases. Therefore,
it will be presented how brain activity can be recorded through EEG and how the sleeping stages are
classified within a sleep cycle based on the data. However, first, an introduction to the brain is provided,
based on Carter et al. (2009) [11], unless otherwise referenced.
2.1
The brain
The brain is a complex organ enclosed within the skull. For a long time, it has been overlooked because
it was diﬀicult to investigate, and its processes are not visible to the naked eye. Additionally, its most
interesting outcome, consciousness, does not even feel like a physical process, making the brain invisible.
However, over the past century, thanks to imaging techniques and the discovery of the brain’s electrical
and magnetic activity, we have been able to generate a detailed map of it.
The brain and the spinal cord constitute the Central Nervous System (CNS), which is the body’s
main control center. It acts as the director and coordinator of all actions and activities throughout
the body. This is achieved through the spinal cord and the nerves that stem from the brain at various
points, branching out into a network that spans the entire body. This system allows every conscious and
unconscious movement of the body, such as breathing, heart rate, blood pressure, and walking. Finally,
the brain is responsible for processing all the information from both internal and external environments.
The average adult human brain weighs approximately 1.5 kg, accounting for 2% of the total body
weight. It comprises approximately 86 billion neurons, each forming thousands of synaptic connections.
These neurons, together with glial cells, compose the brain tissue, which is richly supplied with blood
vessels, making its composition mainly water, 77-78%. This water is also present in the CerebroSpinal
Fluid (CSF), which fills the ventricles of the brain. It is also rich in lipids, which are fatty molecules that
make up cell membranes. This is about 10-12% of its composition. The remaining 10-13% is mainly
protein, but there are other substances, too.
Anatomically, the brain is divided into several major regions: the cerebrum, cerebellum, and brain-
stem, as can be observed in 2.1. The cerebrum, the largest part, is further divided into the left and
right hemispheres and is responsible for higher-order functions such as thought, voluntary movement,
language, and sensory interpretation. Both hemispheres are similar; for most people, speech, language,
and reasoning are primarily based on the left side, while sensory inputs, such as auditory and visual
awareness, as well as creative abilities, are predominantly based on the right side. These hemispheres
are connected by the corpus callosum, a ’bridge’ of nerve fibers. Each of them has an inner core com-
posed of white matter and an outer surface composed of gray matter. The outer surface is the cerebral
cortex. It has a thickness of approximately 2 to 5 mm and is further divided into four lobes in each
hemisphere: the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes. Since the cortex is the outermost layer
==PAGE:16==
2.1 The brain
6
of the brain, the neurons that comprise this section are measured through EEG. This has allowed us
to map brain activity to each lobe based on the localization of this activity. More details on how these
brain impulses are measured will be provided later.
The cerebrum also comprises other elements relevant to the sleep cycle. The thalamus, located in
the middle of the brain, filters the sensory input during the Non-Rapid Eye Movement (non-REM)
sleep, and it is active during Rapid Eye Movement (REM) to send dream-related signals to the cerebral
cortex. Then, below, there is the hypothalamus containing the SupraChiasmatic Nucleus (SCN), which
controls the circadian rhythms based on light cues. The pineal gland produces melatonin in response
to SCN signals, helping the process of falling asleep. Finally, the brainstem manages the transition
between sleep and wakefulness, and it is also responsible for muscle relaxation during REM sleep [41].
This region of the brain also regulates vital involuntary functions, including respiration, heart rate, and
consciousness. The cerebellum then plays a critical role in motor control, balance, and coordination.
All the mentioned regions are mapped in 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Brains anatomy from [13], manually mapped.
Physiologically, the brain contains neurons, which are self-contained, functioning units. The internal
structures, or organelles, of a neuron include the nucleus—which contains the cell’s genetic material
(DNA)—as well as mitochondria that supply energy and ribosomes that produce proteins. Like in most
other cell types, these organelles are primarily located within the central cell body. A defining feature
of neurons, however, is the presence of neurites—long, slender extensions that project from the cell
body. The two primary types of neurites are dendrites and axons: dendrites typically receive incoming
nerve signals, while axons transmit them to other cells.
Furthermore, according to the location of
the cell body in relation to the axon and dendrites or the number of these branches, neurons can be
categorized structurally. As can be observed in Figure 2.2, there are unipolar, bipolar, and multipolar
neurons. Unipolar neurons have a single axon that extends from the cell body and divides into two or
more branches. The bipolar neuron has one set of dendritic extensions and one axonal extension. The
multipolar neuron has multiple sets of dendrites and a single central axon. Most of the human neurons
are multipolar.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The brain
7
Figure 2.2: Anatomy of the neuron and structural categories from public domain.
Neural communication within the brain occurs via electrical impulses and chemical signals, called
Action Potential (AP), primarily through neurotransmitters at synaptic junctions. The cells are not
usually in physical contact; a thin gap called the synaptic cleft separates them. There are different
types of synapses based on the sites where the neurons come into proximity. Then, the nerve impulse
is generated when chemical particles move across the cell’s outer membrane from one side to the other.
When a neuron is not sending a signal, it is considered at rest, and the interior of the neuron is negatively
charged compared to its exterior. This is due to a higher concentration of potassium ions (K+) inside
the neuron’s axon membrane and more sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) outside the cell. When a
stimulus is strong enough, it triggers the neuron, known as depolarization, causing the sodium ions
to flow through the channels in the neuron’s axon membrane from the outside to the inside. Once
the charge inside reaches a threshold, it fires an AP. The potassium ions exit the cell, repolarizing
the neuron and restoring the balance of electrical charges. In contrast, the spike of electrical activity
moves along the neuron’s axon till reaching its end.
There, it releases neurotransmitters into the
synapse. The described process can be visualized in 2.3. The chemicals then cross the synaptic cleft,
generating a PostSynaptic Potential (PSP) in the following neuron. This PSP can be either Excitatory
PostSynaptic Potential (EPSP) or Inhibitory PostSynaptic Potential (IPSP). If it is a EPSP and it
exceeds the threshold again, another AP will be triggered in that neuron; conversely, the IPSP will
lower the likelihood of APs. The synaptic currents associated with EPSPs and IPSPs initiated at the
exact location on a neuron would flow in opposite directions.
==PAGE:18==
2.2 EEG signal
8
Figure 2.3: Action potential cycle from [20].
The APs and PSPs that are primarily of interest are the ones that happen in the pyramidal neurons
of the cerebral cortex, since it is the main target of EEG studies, as previously mentioned. This kind
of neuron has a distinctive, vertically oriented structure. Each neuron has a pyramid-shaped cell body
similar to 2.2 with a long apical dendrite extending upward toward the brain’s surface and several
basal dendrites branching out near its base. These neurons are aligned in vertical columns, forming
what are known as cortical columns. Therefore, when activated together, the resulting PSPs create
synchronized electrical fields, which produce dipoles that align and sum constructively. The thalamus
primarily controls this synchronization, enabling the generation of a macroscopic organizational map
of the cortex in response to external stimuli. Nevertheless, in the absence of environmental inputs or
an explicit algorithm, the brain gives rise to self-organized activity that follows a complex trajectory in
time and neuronal space [10], which are known as sleep cycles.
2.2
EEG signal
Neurons communicate via electrical impulses that generate electrical potential on the scalp. When
a large group of neurons fires synchronously, they generate electrical fields.
An
is a noninvasive
neurophysiological method that records the electrical activity of the brain measured via scalp electrodes.
Electrodes are placed on the scalp, usually arranged in a net, to detect and amplify these signals.
Since the electrical conductivity of air is almost zero, a physical electrical bridge has to be formed
between the skin and the Electroencephalogram (EEG) electrode. Therefore, electrodes are placed either
with electroconductive gel or paste. Additionally, to minimize external electrical interference, EEG is
preferably measured inside a Faraday cage, as it dampens power-line artifacts and other electrical noise.
Through the recording, the subject is free to move, but that can cause artifacts and is discouraged.
One of the standardized systems for placing electrodes on the scalp is the International 10-20 system.
The electrodes are placed in a net-like pattern, with those at the top of the head positioned 10This
system also features a logical naming convention that facilitates the identification of each electrode’s
location. The letters in an electrode’s name correspond to the brain lobe it is over. The convention is
the following: F for Frontal, P for Parietal, T for Temporal, O for Occipital, and C for the Central part.
The numbers indicate the specific position and hemisphere. Odd numbers are used for the left side of
the head, even numbers for the right side, and the letter ’z’ (for zero) denotes a midline position. For
example, an electrode labeled ”Fp1” is over the left frontopolar region, ”Cz” is on the central midline,
and ”T4” is over the right temporal lobe. By combining this precise, proportional placement with a
==PAGE:19==
2.2 EEG signal
9
clear naming scheme, the 10-20 system allows for the accurate recording and analysis of brain activity
from specific cortical regions. Additionally, it allows the reproduction of the recording setup for future
comparison.
Figure 2.4: Electrode
placement
in
the
International
10-20
system from [4].
Figure 2.5: Electroencephalography recording with promi-
nent alpha-rhythm [64].
In EEG, electrodes are fixed to the scalp, and the voltage difference is measured between two
electrodes at a time. Typically, the scalp EEG signal has an amplitude of 50 to 100 µV. Then, the
signal can also be classified into frequency bands. EEG activity has been divided into the following
standard bands, which will later be associated with specific sleep stages. The bands are categorized
into five ranges that we present in Table 2.1.
Band name
Delta
Theta
Alpha
Beta
Gamma
Frequency range (Hz)
0.5-4
4-8
8-13
13-30
> 30
Table 2.1: Frequency bands of EEG in Hz.
In this study, the EEG data analyzed are from the Sleep-EDF dataset [24]; more details are in
Section 4.1. This dataset comprises a collection of polysomnographic recordings captured using two
different methodologies. The first one is a cassette-based recording methodology [40], and the second
one is a telemetry-based recording methodology [29]. Both methodologies are designed for ambulatory
sleep monitoring, which allows subjects to continue their normal activities at home while the data is
being recorded.
A digital telemetric system for EEG recording includes several essential components: scalp electrodes
that pick up weak electrical signals generated by the brain, low-noise amplifiers to boost these signals,
Analog-to-Digital Converters (ADCs) that digitize the continuous analog EEG waveforms into digital
data, and a telemetry module to transmit or store the data wirelessly or through cables. The electrodes
are carefully placed following standardized EEG montages presented in Figure 2.4, while the amplifiers
preserve signal integrity by minimizing distortion and interference. Telemetry enables mobility and
comfort during sleep recordings, whether in a laboratory or ambulatory setting. In the studies referenced,
such systems were used in conjunction with manual sleep staging according to the Rechtschaffen and
Kales criteria [65], which relies on additional physiological signals such as EOG and EMG, recorded
simultaneously, to classify sleep stages accurately. This scoring method involved classifying sleep stages
into Wake (W), Rapid Eye Movement (REM), Non-Rapid Eye Movement stages 1–4, and Movement
==PAGE:20==
2.3 The sleep cycle
10
time (M), and was not scored. The hypnograms, which are the annotations of the sleep stages, were
manually scored by well-trained technicians and are available in EDF format.
2.3
The sleep cycle
Firstly, in order to fall asleep, the neurons in the anterior hypothalamus release Gamma-AminoButyric
Acid (GABA). It is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter of the CNS. Then it binds to GABA-A
receptors in the brain, which inhibits wake-promoting regions in the hypothalamus and brainstem. This
subsection is based on [45] except if specified otherwise.
Next, a night of sleep can be divided into sleep cycles, which are further divided into two phases of
sleep: REM and non-REM sleep. Within the second case, four additional stages have been identified:
N1, N2, N3, and N4; however, the last two are typically grouped as a single stage. This outlines four
stages, each linked to specific brain wave patterns and neuronal activity. It might also include variations
in muscle tone. The sleep cycle goes from the non-REM stages to the REM stage and usually happens
several times through a sleep session, approximately 4 to 6 times each night and with an average
duration of 90 to 110 minutes per cycle [38]. It can be said that approximately 5% of the total sleep
time is light sleep (N1), 45% is deeper sleep (N2), 25% is deepest non-REM sleep (N3), and then 25%
is REM.
Following up a detailed explanation of the brain activity for each stage. Before entering a sleep
session, humans are awake and alert. In this stage, EEG records mainly beta waves, which are the
ones with the highest frequency and lowest amplitude. In relaxed wakefulness, alpha waves can also be
present in the brain activity. Next, N1 is primarily composed of theta waves, which have low voltage.
This is the lightest stage of sleep, starting when over half of the brain’s alpha waves are replaced by
Low-Amplitude Mixed-Frequency (LAFM) activity. Muscle tone remains in the skeletal muscles, and
breathing continues at a steady pace. This stage typically lasts between 1 and 5 minutes. Later comes
N2, which is defined by sleep spindles and K-complexes. Sleep spindles are brief and powerful bursts of
neuronal firing that occur in several parts of the brain. It induces calcium influx into cortical pyramidal
cells, which are part of the synapse, typically at a frequency of 11 Hz to 14 Hz. Then, K-complexes
are one of the most distinct brain waves. It is a long delta wave that lasts almost a second. This stage
is essential for memory consolidation and lasts approximately 25 minutes in the first cycle, with the
duration increasing with each successive cycle. This stage is followed by N3, which is also known as
Slow-Wave Sleep (SWS). It is characterized by delta waves, which is the band with the lowest frequency
and highest amplitude. It is considered the deepest stage of sleep and the most diﬀicult to awaken from.
For some people, loud noises above 100 decibels will not lead to an awake state. If someone is awoken
from this stage, there is a mental fogginess known as sleep inertia.
Additionally, it is the stage of the night when sleepwalking and bedwetting are most likely to occur.
Finally, the REM stage is characterized by beta waves, and it is similar to the brain activity of the
wakefulness period. At this stage, the skeletal muscles are not active; only the eyes and diaphragmatic
muscles remain active. Additionally, the breathing rate is more erratic and irregular. Similarly to N2,
each REM cycle increases throughout the night, lasting usually 10 minutes at the beginning of the night
up to 1 hour. It is the stage of the night associated with dreaming.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Background theory
This section strives to present the background theory and the methods employed in this thesis. The
first part introduces the mathematical concepts of signal processing. The second part presents the
Fourier Transform (FT) utilized to present the frequency domain of a signal. Ultimately, the third part
introduces wavelets and their transforms, Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) and , which are used
to examine signals in a time-frequency representation. The Wavelet Transform (WT) is particularly
valuable for analyzing non-stationary signals, such as EEG signals, which can exhibit time-varying
frequency content. The WT provides a powerful tool for analyzing complex signals by breaking them
down into simpler components, making it easier to understand their behavior in the frequency domain.
Lastly, we present the mathematical background of the learned mask and its learning objective.
3.1
Signal processing
Signal processing is a field of study that deals with the analysis, manipulation, and interpretation of
signals. Signals are functions that convey information, and they can take various forms, such as audio,
video, or biological signals. In this thesis, we focus on the analysis of EEG signals, which are electrical
signals generated by the brain. More details are in section 2.2. The goal of signal processing is to
extract meaningful information from these signals. Moreover, apply this knowledge to various tasks,
such as medical diagnosis or understanding human behavior.
This process involves several steps, including filtering, compression, transformation, and feature
extraction. Filtering is employed to remove noise and unwanted components from the signal. There
are various types of filters, including low-pass, high-pass, band-pass, and band-stop filters. By applying
these filters, specific frequency ranges can be isolated or removed from the signal. Even if the filters are
defined in the frequency domain, they can be applied either in the time domain using convolution or
in the frequency domain using transforms, such as the FT defined later. A low-pass filter only allows
frequencies below a certain threshold to pass through while attenuating high-frequency components,
which helps smooth signals.
In contrast, a high-pass filter only allows frequencies above a certain
threshold to pass through, attenuating low-frequency components; it is often used for edge detection or
to emphasize sudden changes in the signal. Band-pass filters allow a specific range of frequencies to pass
through while attenuating frequencies outside the range, while band-stop filters block a specific range of
frequencies and allow all others to pass, also known as notch filters. Band-pass filters are convenient for
isolating features in a known frequency band, while notch filters are employed to eliminate interference.
In this thesis, we employ low-pass and high-pass filters to reduce the noise introduced in the simulated
data, thereby focusing on the signal’s frequency content. This allows the generation of a specific ground
truth to analyze the performance of the implemented method, specifically wavelet masking. Additionally,
the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) acts as a filter bank of low-pass and high-pass filters, which
allows the decomposition of the signal into its frequency components; more details are provided later
in this section. Analogously, FLEXtime implements a filter bank that decomposes the signal into its
frequency components, made primarily of band-pass filters.
An essential theoretical foundation underlying digital signal processing and filtering is the Nyquist-
Shannon Sampling Theorem.
According to this theorem, a continuous-time signal can be perfectly
reconstructed from its samples if it is band-limited and the sampling rate is at least twice the maximum
frequency present in the signal.
This minimum sampling frequency is known as the Nyquist rate,
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Fourier transform
12
and half the sampling frequency is referred to as the Nyquist frequency. Mathematically, if a signal
contains frequency components up to fmax, then it must be sampled at a rate fs ≥2fmax to prevent
information loss. Failure to meet this requirement results in a phenomenon known as aliasing, where
higher-frequency components are incorrectly mapped into lower-frequency ranges, leading to distortion
that cannot be corrected after the sampling process is complete. To prevent aliasing, it is common
practice to apply an anti-aliasing low-pass filter before sampling or downsampling a signal. This filter
removes frequency components above the Nyquist frequency, ensuring that the sampled signal remains
faithful to the original.
Then, returning to the other possible steps, compression is used to reduce the size of the signal while
preserving its essential characteristics. This signal processing technique is crucial for applications where
storage space or bandwidth is limited, such as in wireless communication. Compression techniques can
be lossless, where no information is lost, or lossy, where some information is sacrificed for a smaller
file size. In this thesis, compression is not explicitly addressed, but it is an important aspect of signal
processing in general.
Transformation techniques are employed to convert the signal from one domain to another, such
as from the time domain to the frequency domain. This enables a more eﬀicient representation of the
signal and facilitates the analysis of its frequency content. The FT is a widely employed transforma-
tion technique that decomposes a signal into its constituent frequencies, providing a frequency-domain
representation of the original signal. Other transformation techniques, such as the WT, provide a time-
frequency representation of signals, allowing for the analysis of both stationary and non-stationary
signals. In this thesis, we utilize FT and WT to analyze the frequency content of EEG signals, provid-
ing insights into their behavior in the frequency domain.
Finally, feature extraction involves identifying relevant characteristics of the signal employed for
further analysis or classification.
This step is crucial for applications such as pattern recognition,
where specific features of the signal represent patterns or anomalies. Feature extraction techniques
can include statistical measures, such as the mean and variance, or more complex methods, such as
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) or Independent Component Analysis (ICA). In this thesis, feature
extraction is implicit in the optimization of the masks. We compute it to extract the attributions of
the features regarding the model’s prediction.
3.2
Fourier transform
The
is a mathematical operation that transforms a function of time (or space) into a function of
frequency. More precisely, it is the integral of a function f(t) multiplied by a complex exponential.
Then, the transformation expresses the signal as a sum of sinusoidal functions (sines and cosines).
This decomposition enables us to identify the frequencies present in the signal and their intensities,
as determined by the amplitudes, providing insight into its structure and behavior that may not be
apparent in its original form. Providing a frequency domain representation of the original function.
The Fourier Transform (FT) breaks a signal down into a sum of sine and cosine waves of different
frequencies, amplitudes, and phases. In the continuous setting, the FT is defined as:
F(ω) =
∫∞
−∞
f(t)e−iωtdt
(3.1)
where f(t) is the original function, F(ω) is the FT, ω is the angular frequency, related to Hz by ω= 2πf,
and i is the imaginary unit. The inverse FT allows us to recover the original function from its frequency
representation:
f(t) = 1
2π
∫∞
−∞
F(ω)eiωtdω
(3.2)
Ensuring that no information is lost in the transformation.
The FT is widely used in various fields, including signal processing, image analysis, and physics.
In this thesis, the FT is used to interpret a NN model by analyzing the frequency content of the
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Wavelets
13
input signals and the model’s output. The convolution theorem states that the FT of a convolution of
two functions is equal to the product of their individual FTs. This property is advantageous in signal
processing, as it allows us to analyze the effects of filtering and other operations in the frequency domain.
The authors of FLEXtime employ this technique, where the input signal is decomposed into its frequency
elements using a filter bank. Allowing them to compute a mask on this learned representation to explain
which frequency components are important for the model. However, the FT has some limitations. It
assumes that the signal is stationary, meaning that the mean, variance, and autocorrelation do not
change over time; they remain consistent at any segment of the signal. This assumption is not valid for
many real-world signals, such as EEG signals, which can exhibit non-stationary behavior. In these cases,
the FT may not provide an accurate representation of the signal’s frequency content. Additionally, the
FT provides a global frequency representation of the signal, meaning that it does not provide information
about the time localization of the frequency components. This makes it challenging to analyze signals
with time-varying frequency content, such as EEG signals.
For example, if a signal experiences a
sudden change in frequency content, the FT may not capture this change effectively, resulting in a
loss of information. Furthermore, FT is well-suited for periodic signals, which is a property that EEG
signals do not have.
To overcome this poor time resolution, the Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) was developed.
This transformation assumes a non-stationary signal is stationary in a short time interval. Given that
interval, since now it is stationary, the FT can be applied to it. The STFT is obtained through a
window function, which is a function that is non-zero only over a finite interval. The STFT is defined
as:
X(τ, ω) =
∫∞
−∞
x(t)w(t −τ)e−iωtdt
(3.3)
where x(t) is the original signal, w(τ) is the window function, X(τ, ω) is the STFT, τ is the time delay,
ω is the angular frequency, related to Hz by ω= 2πf, and i is the imaginary unit. Providing a time-
frequency representation of the signal, allowing for the analysis of both stationary and non-stationary
signals. However, this method still has some limitations, such as having a finite window, which can lead
to a decrease in frequency resolution. Moreover, the length of the window is fixed, which restricts the
analysis to a given time and frequency resolution. Hence, instead of knowing which frequencies exist at
a given time, the knowledge acquired is which frequency components are active at a given time interval.
The following principle limits this time-frequency uncertainty:
∆f∆t ≥1
4π
(3.4)
where ∆f is the frequency resolution and ∆t is the time resolution. So, the product of the frequency
resolution and the time resolution is always greater than or equal to 1/4π, which is a constant. Hence,
the time and frequency resolution are inversely related, meaning that as the time resolution increases,
the frequency resolution decreases, and vice versa. For these reasons, alternative techniques have been
developed to analyze non-stationary signals, such as the WT. The WT provides a time-frequency
representation of signals with a scaling window function that can be adjusted to analyze signals with
different time and frequency resolutions.
3.3
Wavelets
A wavelet is a small wave-like oscillation. Its amplitude begins at zero, increases or decreases, and then
returns to zero one or more times. It can be considered a pulse since it is localized in time. In order
to be a wavelet function, it has to comply with certain properties. By definition, let L2(R) denote the
collection of all measurable functions f defined on the interval (−∞, ∞). This is a space of functions
whose absolute value raised to the power 2 has a finite integral; this means that the function has finite
energy.
∫∞
−∞
|f(x)|2 dx < ∞
(3.5)
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Wavelets
14
Every function in L2(R) should decay to zero at ±∞, and for practical purposes, the decay should be
swift, so the function is as localized as possible. Then, in order to cover the whole range of real numbers
with a wave that has a fast decay, the function has to be shifted along R. Let us denote this function
as Ψ. If Z denotes the set of integers ..., −1, 0, 1, ..., a way for Ψ to cover all of R is to consider all the
integral shifts of Ψ.
Ψ(x −k),
k ϵ Z.
(3.6)
Additionally, as mentioned, its functionality is to analyze the frequency domain.
One approach is
to consider waves with frequencies partitioned into consecutive frequency bands. For computational
eﬀiciency, one option is using integral powers of 2 partitioning.
Ψ(2jx −k),
k, j ϵ Z.
(3.7)
Hence, we have a single wavelet function Ψ(x) with a binary dilation of 2j and a dyadic translation of
k/2j. This property applies to the wavelets for the DWT, as in the CWT, dilation and translation can
be any real number. The most general way to define the wavelet function is then the following:
ψa,b(t) =
1
√
|a|
ψ
(t −b
a
)
(3.8)
Where ψ(t) is the mother wavelet, which is the basic wavelet function used to generate the wavelet
coeﬀicients. The factor
1
√a ensures energy normalization across scales. The a parameter controls the
scale and b the translation. If a ≥1, the wavelet stretches, detecting better lower frequencies, which
usually require lower time resolution, and if a ≤1, the wavelet compresses, detecting better higher
frequencies, which are usually more localized in time. Then, b shifts the wavelet in order to cover all
the range of R as previously mentioned.
Another property is that the function has a zero average value, meaning its mean is equal to zero.
This ensures the wavelet captures changes or details in the signal rather than its overall constant
components. Mathematically, this property is expressed as:
∫∞
−∞
Ψ(x) dx = 0
(3.9)
Furthermore, to ensure perfect reconstruction, the prototype wavelet Ψ must satisfy the admissibility
condition for it to be a wavelet for the CWT, which states that the wavelet constant value is between 0
and ∞, so Cψ must be finite. Mathematically, to recover the original signal x(t), the first inverse CWT
is defined as:
x(t) = C−
ψ 1
∫∞
0
∫∞
−∞
Xw(a, b)
1
|a|1/2 ˜ψ(t −b
a
)db da
|a|2
(3.10)
Where Cψ is the wavelet constant and ˜ψ is the dual function of the wavelet function ψ. The constant
Cψ is defined as:
Cψ =
∫∞
−∞
ˆψ(w) ˆ˜ψ(w)
|w|
dw
(3.11)
Where
ˆ
ψ(w) is the Fourier transform of the wavelet function ψ. The admissibility condition ensures
that the wavelet function is well-behaved and can be used to analyze signals effectively. In practice, this
condition is often satisfied by choosing wavelet functions with appropriate properties, such as compact
support or smoothness. Additionally, if
˜
ψ(t) = ψ(t), then the admissible constant becomes:
Cψ =
∫∞
−∞
|
ˆ
ψ(w)|2
|w|
dw
(3.12)
The admissibility condition is not required for the DWT since it uses a specific set of wavelet functions
that are designed to ensure perfect reconstruction; more details are provided in Section 3.3.2. However,
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Wavelets
15
in most situations, ψ is restricted to be a continuous function with a higher number N of vanishing
moments for all integer n ≤N.
∫∞
−∞
tnψ(t)dt = 0,
n = 0, 1, ..., N −1
(3.13)
This means that the wavelet is orthogonal to all polynomials of degree less than N. This property
enables the analysis of signals with trends or low-frequency components, as it allows the wavelet to
focus on the high-frequency details of the signal. The number of vanishing moments is directly related
to the smoothness of the wavelet function, with higher-order wavelets being smoother and more suitable
for analyzing signals with complex structures.
The wavelet function can be chosen to have different shapes and properties. For example, some
wavelets are designed to be symmetric, while others are designed to be asymmetric. Some wavelets are
designed to have compact support, meaning that they are non-zero only over a finite interval, while
others are wider. The choice of wavelet function can significantly affect the performance of the WT and
the analysis of the signal. In this thesis, the focus is on the DWT, which uses a specific set of wavelet
functions to analyze signals hierarchically. Another technique to analyze signals in the time-frequency
domain is the CWT. This transformation provides a continuous representation of the signal in terms
of its wavelet coeﬀicients. The choice between CWT and DWT depends on the application and the
characteristics of the signal being analyzed. The main difference between transformations is that CWT
provides a continuous representation of the signal in terms of its wavelet coeﬀicients. In contrast, DWT
provides a hierarchical representation of the signal in terms of its frequency components. Then DWT
is always more eﬀicient than CWT, as it provides a more compact and non-redundant representation
of the signal. Moreover, DWT provides suﬀicient information to reconstruct the signal. Although we
present both in this section, the mask optimization is performed using the DWT.
3.3.1
The continuous wavelet transform
As previously mentioned, the WT is a powerful tool for analyzing signals in the time-frequency domain.
It improves the STFT by using variable-size windows. The CWT is a specific type of wavelet transform
that provides a continuous representation of a signal in terms of its wavelet coeﬀicients. The CWT
is defined as the convolution of the input signal with a family of functions derived from the mother
wavelet. This convolution can be computed eﬀiciently using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). The
output is normally a real value function except when the mother wavelet is complex, in which case the
output is a complex-value function. Being x(t) a signal, its CWT is defined as:
Wx(a, b) =
∫∞
−∞
x(t)ψa,b(t)dt
(3.14)
Where ψa,b(t) is the complex conjugate of the scaled and translated wavelet function ψ(t), a ∈R+∗is
the scale parameter and b ∈R the translation parameter. The scale parameter a is inversely related to
the frequency resolution, while the translation parameter b is directly related to the time resolution. We
define the wavelet function in equation 3.8. Hence, the CWT provides a time-frequency representation
of the signal, where each point in the time-frequency plane corresponds to a specific scale and translation
of the wavelet function. The resulting coeﬀicients Wx(a, b) represent the correlation between the signal
and the wavelet function at different scales and translations.
Next, based on [16], the mother wavelet that better fits the CWT for time series analysis is the Morlet
wavelet [26]. The Morlet wavelet can be defined either in its real or complex version, as presented
in Figure 3.1.
The difference is that the wavelet is either made of a real or complex exponential
modulated by a Gaussian window. Therefore, the real version only utilizes the fundamental part of
an exponential function, namely the cosine, thereby removing the phase information. An advantage of
this simplification is that the wavelet becomes symmetric, a property that can be useful when phase
neutrality is desired. Contrarily, the complex version is not symmetric. In both cases, the wavelet is
not orthogonal, as it is not a property of the CWT, which provides redundancy in the transformation.
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Wavelets
16
Figure 3.1: Real and complex Morlet wavelet in the time domain..
This can be particularly helpful when overlapping frequency bands are required. The Morlet wavelet is
defined as 3.15 for the real option and 3.16 for the complex option, with its FFT.
ψ(t) = cos(ω0t)e−t2
2
(3.15)
ψ(t) = π−1/4eiω0te−t2
2
(3.16)
Where ω0 is the central frequency of the wavelet, which controls the number of oscillations that occur
within the Gaussian window, this position is the global maximum of the function. It allows the trade-off
between time and frequency resolutions. The higher this value is, the more oscillations occur within
the window, allowing for a better frequency resolution but at the cost of a worse time resolution.
Conventionally, to comply with the admissibility condition, the number of wavelet cycles is set to either
5 or 6.
3.3.2
The discrete wavelet transform
Contrary to the CWT, the DWT decomposes a signal into a set of wavelet coeﬀicients using a discrete,
hierarchical, multiresolution analysis approach. It also captures both the time (localization) and fre-
quency (scale) information of the signal. The 1D DWT produces approximation and detail coeﬀicients
at each level of decomposition, which represent the low-frequency and high-frequency components of
the signal, respectively. This is done by passing the signal simultaneously through a low-pass filter with
impulse response g and a high-pass filter h. The two filters are related to each other and are known as
quadrature mirror filter pairs. In the context of this thesis, a quadrature mirror filter is a filter whose
magnitude response is the mirror image of the other filter around pi/2. Hence, a filter H1(z) is the
quadrature mirror filter of H0(z) if H1(z) = H0(−z). More precisely, the condition is given by the
following equation:
h[n] = (−1)ng[L −1 −n]
(3.17)
Where L is the length of the filter. Then, based on Nyquist’s theorem, after applying both filters, half
of the frequencies of the original signal are retained, while the other half is discarded. Therefore, half
of the samples can be removed. This downsampling is achieved by taking every second sample of the
filtered signal, which reduces the number of samples by a factor of 2, allowing for perfect reconstruction.
The transformation repeats this process recursively to obtain multiple levels of decomposition, resulting
in a hierarchical representation of the signal. The low-pass filtered signal is passed again through a new
low-pass filter g and a high-pass filter h to obtain the output of the DWT. The output of the DWT
can be defined as follows:
a[n] =
∞
∑
k=−∞
x[k]g[2n −k]
(3.18)
d[n] =
∞
∑
k=−∞
x[k]h[2n −k]
(3.19)
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Wavelets
17
where a[n] and d[n] are the low-pass and high-pass filtered signals, respectively, x[k] is the original
signal, the low-pass filter is associated with the scaling function ϕ and the high-pass filter is associated
with the wavelet function ψ. This decomposition has halved the time resolution of the signal while
doubling the frequency resolution. To visualize this decomposition more clearly when it is repeatedly
applied to the signal, it can be represented as a binary tree 3.2, also known as a filter bank. However,
in this case, contrary to FLEXtime, the bands are not fixed. Going back to the concept of a tree, each
node represents a level of decomposition. The root node represents the original signal, and each child
node represents the low-pass and high-pass filtered signals at the next level of decomposition. The
leaves of the tree represent the final approximation and detail coeﬀicients. The output of the DWT
is the sequence [cAn, cDn, cDn−1, ..., cD2, cD1], where n denotes the level of decomposition. The first
element (cAn) of the result is the approximation coeﬀicients array, and the following elements (cDn -
cD1) are details coeﬀicients arrays.
Figure 3.2: A 3-level filter bank.
        
Figure 3.3: Time-frequency resolution of the
DTW.
Ideally, to have perfect reconstruction, the input signal should be a multiple of 2n where n is the
number of levels of decomposition. However, with real-world data, it is not always the case; for example,
the dataset used in this thesis consists of 3000 samples, as each signal is windowed into 30-second samples
with a sampling rate of 100 Hz. For this reason, the library used to implement the multilevel DWT, in
this thesis PyWavelets [35], use a padding strategy to ensure that the input signal is a multiple of 2n.
Each decomposition level is then downsampled following equation 3.20
level_length =
⌊N + L −1
2
⌋
(3.20)
N is the length of the input signal of the given level, and L is the length of the filter. Additionally, the
number of levels is directly related to the length of the filter. There is a maximum level of decomposition
based on the following rationale: at least one coeﬀicient in the output is uncorrupted by edge effects
caused by signal extension. This means that decomposition stops when the signal becomes shorter than
the Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filter length for a given wavelet [35]. The explanation corresponds
to the following equation:
max_level =
⌊
log2
N
L −1
⌋
(3.21)
Next, an introduction of the main wavelet families used in this thesis. The wavelet families are char-
acterized by their mother wavelet, which is the basic wavelet function used to generate the wavelet
coeﬀicients as introduced prior in this section. The choice of mother wavelet can significantly affect the
performance of the DWT and the analysis of the signal. For the discrete case, we have focused on the
three following families of wavelets: Daubenchies (db), Symlet (sym), and Coiflet (coif). Additionally,
the Haar wavelet falls into the db family, as it is equivalent to db1. The Haar wavelet is a step function
that takes the value 1 in the first half of the interval and -1 in the second half. It is not differentiable,
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Wavelets
18
but it is useful for understanding the implementation of the multilevel DWT. Regarding the db1 nomen-
clature, the value 1 represents the order of the wavelet. This value is directly related to the vanishing
moments of the wavelet mentioned in 3.3. A wavelet ψ(t) has N vanishing moments if:
∫∞
−∞
tnψ(t)dt = 0,
n = 0, 1, ..., N −1
(3.22)
The equation defines that the wavelet is orthogonal to all polynomials of a degree less than N. Meaning
that the wavelet coeﬀicients in the region where the signal behaves like such a polynomial will be either
zero or very close to zero.
The value of vanishing moments is directly related to the length of the filter, which is 2N for db
and sym and 6N for coif. Therefore, a counterpart of this is that the higher the value of N, the longer
the filter, worsening the time localization of the signal. It also increases the computational cost, as
the convolution involves more operations to compute. Additionally, it can introduce ”ringing” artifacts
around very sharp discontinuities, which are oscillations that occur when reconstructing the signal
around those discontinuities. These sharp discontinuities are not usually present in EEG signals, so to
study the trade-off between the different effects mentioned, we have chosen values between 1 and 10
given the restriction presented in 3.21.
Before presenting the properties of the different wavelet families, let us define the discrete set of
child wavelets given a mother wavelet ψ (t(. Given the definition of the wavelet function of the equation
3.8 and the dyadic scale, the set of child wavelets is defined as:
ψj,k(t) =
1
√
2j ψ
(t −k2j
2j
)
(3.23)
Where j is the scale parameter, and k is the shift parameter, both of which are integers. Being
the wavelet coeﬀicients γ of a signal x(t), the projection of the signal onto a wavelet, based on the set
defined above, we obtain equation 3.24.
γjk =
∫∞
−∞
x(t) 1
√
2j ψ
(t −k2j
2j
)
dt
(3.24)
Fixing the scale parameter j, the wavelet coeﬀicients γjk become a function of the time-shift param-
eter k. These coeﬀicients can be calculated by convolving the signal x(t) with a filter h(t), which is
a dilated, reflected, and normalized version of the mother wavelet: h(t) =
1
√
2j ψ
( −t
2j
)
. The final coef-
ficients are obtained by sampling the result of this convolution at discrete points in time, k2j. Hence,
the detail coeﬀicients of the filter bank correspond precisely to the wavelet coeﬀicients of a discrete set
of child wavelets for a given mother wavelet ψ(t).
The Daubechies wavelets are a family of wavelets that are characterized by their compact support
and orthogonality, developed by the mathematician Ingrid Daubechies [18]. The number of vanishing
moments defines the function, which determines the smoothness of the wavelet function. The Daubechies
wavelets are denoted as dbN, where N is the number of vanishing moments. The higher the value of
N, the smoother the wavelet. For each vanishing moment, there are two coeﬀicients associated with
the low-pass and high-pass filters, so the filter length is 2N. One of the advantages of this family is
that it has the highest value of vanishing moments. The initial limit defined by the author is 20, but
the library used in this thesis, PyWavelets [35], supports up to 38 vanishing moments. Moreover, the
wavelets are not symmetric, except for db1. This property can introduce phase distortion in the signal,
which is not ideal. We present some examples of the scaling and wavelet function used in this thesis, as
well as their respective amplitudes of the continuous FT in Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Wavelets
19
Figure 3.4: Daubechies wavelets with different number of vanishing moments and its corresponding
amplitudes of the continuous FT.
As an example, to visualize the filter bank, consider the Haar wavelet, db1. Its mother wavelet is
ψ = [1, −1]. Then the dilated, reflected, and normalized version of this wavelet is h[n] =
1
√
2[−1, 1],
which is the high pass decomposition of the discrete Haar wavelet transform. The low pass decomposition
is then g[n] =
1
√
2[1, 1] since it is the quadrature mirror filter defined in equation 3.17 and L = 2. We
display both filters in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Filters for db1 wavelet.
The Symlets are a family of wavelets that are similar to the Daubechies wavelets but are designed
to be nearly symmetric [19]. The name is short for ”symmetrized Daubechies wavelets.” They are also
defined by the number of vanishing moments, denoted as symN. The Symlets have better symmetry
properties than the Daubechies wavelets, which makes them more suitable for applications where the
user desires phase neutrality. The first possible value for N is two, and the filter length is also 2N.
Some examples can be observed in 3.6. Wavelets sym2 and sym3 are respectively equivalent to db2 and
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Wavelets
20
db3. Hence, we start the study at the order 4, N = 4.
Figure 3.6: Symlet wavelets with different numbers of vanishing moments and their corresponding
amplitudes of the continuous FT.
Lastly, another family of wavelets characterized by their compact support and orthogonality, the
Coiflet family [19]. The notation of this family is coifN, where again, N is the number of vanishing
moments. The Coiflets have better symmetry properties than the Daubechies and Symlet wavelets.
However, in this case, the filter length is 6N, which enhances their smoothness and approximation
capabilities but at the cost of a slightly higher computational complexity. An additional property of
this family is that the scaling function has N −1 vanishing moments. This property enables us to
preserve the signal with higher accuracy in the lower frequency bands, as the scaling function is used
for the low-pass filter. Hence, over the three families, it is the one with higher frequency resolution. In
the following Figure 3.7, we display the wavelets tested.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Wavelets
21
Figure 3.7: Coiflet wavelets with different numbers of vanishing moments and their corresponding
amplitudes of the continuous FT.
Our focus is comparing the different wavelets in terms of their abilities to localize time-frequency
components in simulated datasets, as well as their complexity. Based on this analysis, we have chosen
one mother wavelet to evaluate the method against FLEXtime.
To conduct this analysis, we need to define the concept of scalogram and its associated meaning.
The scalogram is a time-frequency representation of a signal, where each point in the time-frequency
plane corresponds to a specific scale and translation of the wavelet function. The resulting coeﬀicients
W x (a, b) represent the correlation between the signal and the wavelet function at different scales and
translations.
Figure 3.8: Scalogram of signals from the third simulated dataset, with coif4 and 5 levels of decom-
position.
==PAGE:32==
3.4 Deep Learning
22
3.4
Deep Learning
Before the arousal of , the sleep stages were manually classified. Only experts in the field could perform
this classification, people who understand the nature of the EEG recordings and can distinguish the
patterns found in the data. However, with the development of Deep Learning (DL), computers can
emulate this behavior. DL is a specific type of Machine Learning (ML) that we used to train complex
and multi-layered structures called ANN. ANN is a computational model inspired by the human brain
that processes data and learns to identify patterns in it.
There are two main techniques for learning these patterns: supervised learning and unsupervised
learning. The prior learns the patterns based on labeled data. Each sample includes both the input and
a corresponding output, and the goal is then to learn a mapping between them. The former learns the
patterns based on unlabeled data. In this scenario, the goal is to uncover patterns, whether structured
or groupings, rather than a direct mapping. Our focus is on supervised learning, as our datasets are
labeled. Based on the nature of the output, we can further categorize the problem as either a regression
or a classification problem. The difference lies in the output being either a continuous numerical value
or a discrete set of labels, respectively. Thus, given the nature of our real-data scenario, sleep staging
classification, we analyze the second learning process more thoroughly.
Shortly, an introduction of DL and, more specifically, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which
is the type of ANN that we employ in this study.
3.4.1
The perceptron
To emulate a neuron, Frank Rosenblatt designed the perceptron [51]. It is the simplest form of NN
designed for binary classification, specifically for classifying data as either 0 or 1. The Perceptron is
a single-layer network that works with linearly separable data. The artificial neuron takes a vector of
input values, x, and combines it with some weights, w, that are local to the neuron. Equation 3.25
represents the net input of the neuron, denoted as z, where b is as bias. The net input passes through
a step function g(ů) to produce the output ˆ(y), defined in Equation 3.26.
z =
( K
∑
k=1
wkxk
)
+ b
(3.25)
ˆy =
{
1
if z > 0
0
if z ≤0
(3.26)
Following up, the Perceptron learns by iteratively adjusting its weight and bias to correct misclassi-
fication based on a learning rate. This update is defined by wk(new) = wk(old) + α (y −ˆy) xk. Where
α denotes the learning rate, a small positive constant that controls the step size of the update.
Nevertheless, this approach is restrictive; it only guarantees to converge if the data is linearly
separable. Given this restriction, multi-layered models were developed, starting with the Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP) [52].
As its name indicates, the MLP overcomes the Perceptron’s limitation by stacking multiple layers
of neurons. This allows it to learn non-linear relationships in data. The model consists of at least
three types of layers: the input layer, which receives the raw input data x; the hidden layer, which is
responsible for learning intermediate feature representations between the input and the output; and the
output layer, which produces the final prediction ˆy. To learn intermediate feature representations, the
step function is replaced by non-linear, differentiable activation functions, such as the sigmoid or the ,
shown in Figure 3.9. The information then flows forward through the three described layers; there may
be many additional hidden layers.
Then mathematically, the output of a layer is described by h, and the output of the model by ˆy see
Equations 3.27 and 3.28.
hl = ϕ(Wlx + bl)
(3.27)
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Deep Learning
23
Figure 3.9: The sigmoid and ReLU activation function.
Where hl is the output of the l-th layer, ϕ is the activation function, Wl is the weight matrix, bl is
the bias vector, and x is the input.
ˆy = σ(WLhL−1 + bL)
(3.28)
Where ˆy is the output of the network, σ is the output activation function, WL is the weight matrix
for the output layer, bL is the bias vector for the output layer, and hL−1 is the output of the last hidden
layer.
In this scenario, we cannot directly calculate the error of the hidden neurons. However, the back-
propagation algorithm solves this issue through the chain rule [52]. Given a loss function that computes
the error between the model’s predictions ˆy and the true labels y, the backpropagation algorithm allows
us to compute the gradients of the loss function with respect to every weight and bias in the network,
propagating the difference from the output to the input. An optimization algorithm, typically a variant
of Gradient Descent, uses these gradients to update the weights and biases in the opposite direction of
the gradient, thereby minimizing the loss. This structure addressed the limitations of the Perceptron,
but other limitations remain.
3.4.2
Convolutional Neural Network
One of the limitations of the
is the number of parameters it requires and also the loss of spatial
structure [34, 43]. Given an image or a temporal signal, the data needs to be flattened into a vector
to be processed by the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). This process loses the spatial structure of the
data, making it less effective for tasks such as image classification or time series analysis. Additionally,
this raises the issue known as the curse of dimensionality, where the number of parameters required to
represent the data grows exponentially with the number of features. To address this issue, the
was
developed.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) are a type of MLP that are designed to process the data just
mentioned. They are based on the idea that the data can be represented as a grid of pixels or time
==PAGE:34==
3.5 Explainable AI
24
points and that the structure of the data can be learned through a series of filters [34]. The common
layers of a CNN are the convolutional layers and the pooling layers. The convolutional layer uses a local
receptive field, referred to as kernel, to extract features from the input data. The kernel slides across
the input data, computing the dot product between the kernel and the input data at each position, as
presented in Figure 3.10. The output of the sliding operation is a feature map, which is then passed to
the next layer. To include non-linear relationships, activation functions can be applied to the output
of the convolutional layer. The pooling layer reduces the spatial dimensions of the feature map by
down-sampling the data. It also slides a window across the feature map, computing the maximum or
average value within the window. This process reduces the number of parameters while preserving the
data structure.
Figure 3.10: Convolutional process given a 2D input and 5x5 kernel.
To comply with either a regression or classification task, the output of the last layer is then flattened
into a vector and passed to the output layer. The output layer is usually a fully connected layer that
produces the final prediction ˆy.
3.5
Explainable AI
is a field of that seeks to develop models and techniques that produce results that we, humans, can
understand. As Artificial Intelligence (AI) models, mostly deep learning models, become complex, they
often operate as black boxes. We know they are highly accurate, but we do not know why they make a
specific decision. We introduce many of these methods in Section 1.1. Next, we provide a more detailed
explanation of the black box problem, perturbation-based methods, and FLEXtime [8], the baseline of
the study.
3.5.1
The black box problem
Deep Neural Network (DNN) models are essentially complex non-linear functions fX →y mapping from
an input space X to an output space Y [28]. DNN are considered black boxes because the respective
mapping function is obtained through an opaque learning process [22]. This lack of transparency means
we cannot be sure whether a model’s correct prediction is due to genuine learning of essential features
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Explainable AI
25
(such as identifying a plane by its wings) or if it has simply memorized an irrelevant, spurious correlation
from the training data. This situation is known as shortcut learning. Lin et al. [36] present its effect
on medical image segmentation. They demonstrate different shortcut learning mechanisms, one being
the ultrasound case mirrors from image classification, where models use text and calipers to guide
segmentation decisions. Such a model is untrustworthy because it cannot be generalized reliably and
will fail in the segmentation process when presented with an ultrasound lacking clinical annotations.
Additionally, AI researchers consider this black box problem to generate a feeling of intellectual
dissatisfaction, as the lack of understanding of the DNN reduces the development of better models to
a trial-and-error approach [67].
3.5.2
Perturbation-based methods
Next, an overview of how perturbation-based methods work, considering that the end goal is to under-
stand the importance of an input feature. The baseline of this method is to evaluate how much the
model’s output changes when the input values are modified. Firstly, a given sample is fed to the model,
and its output is recorded. Then, a set of new versions of the original sample is generated by perturb-
ing the feature. The perturbation can be achieved through various techniques, including masking out
information by occluding or blurring it in an image or removing words in a text. Another approach is
to replace pixels or words with a random value. Then, this new instance is fed to the model, and the
prediction is recorded. For each perturbation, we then calculate the change in prediction from the origi-
nal one, considering that a significant change indicates the perturbed feature was important. Following
up, the explanation is generated by aggregating the results. The features whose perturbation caused
the most significant changes in the prediction are considered the most important. An advantage of this
technique is that it can be considered model-agnostic, meaning it can be applied to any model without
needing access to its internal architecture, making it more versatile and powerful than model-dependent
techniques.
3.5.3
The baseline: FLEXtime
FLEXtime aims to explain a given model through interpretable parts. The authors rely on the fact
that a signal can be decomposed into its frequency components. Then, the goal is to learn a mask M
that optimally explains the output, masking out elements of a defined dictionary. This dictionary is
constructed using a filter bank of band-pass filters, each with an impulse response hl, to separate the
signals into their respective frequency bands. Specifically, L FIR filters that split the frequency axis
into equal size binds, see Figure 3.11. The filterbank that we show in the figure has been generated
with L = 10, fs = 8000 Hz, and a bandwidth of fb = 400 Hz.
X ≈
L
∑
l=1
hl ∗X
(3.29)
Next, the aim is to minimize the difference between the original model’s output and the masked
model’s output. This difference can be quantified as a distortion term D. This term is usually defined
based on the given problem, either regression or classification. Given a classification problem, a common
choice is the cross-entropy loss, detailed in the next section. This approach is insuﬀicient, as it may
result in all information being considered equally important, thereby minimizing the distortion term.
For this reason, the authors control the sparsity of the mask through the l1-norm metric. The objective
described can be minimized by initializing the mask M and optimizing the values through gradient
descent.
==PAGE:36==
3.6 Evaluation Metrics
26
Figure 3.11: FLEXtime filterbank.
3.6
Evaluation Metrics
To assess the performance of the results, we must define what constitutes a good performance of a
model and what constitutes a good explainability method. For this reason, in this section, we present
the metrics employed to evaluate the performance of the models. Additionally, we introduce the metrics
used to evaluate the explanation provided for the predictions.
3.6.1
Evaluation of model performance
Firstly, we need to define what the outcome of a classification prediction is. The outcome of either a
binary or a multi-class classification falls in True Positive (TP), False Positive (FP), False Negative
(FN) and True Negative (TN). This determines whether the model correctly classifies a sample with its
actual value. For a faster understanding, a visualization of its relationship is presented in the form of
a table 3.1, commonly referred to as a Confusion Matrix.
Predicted: Positive
Predicted: Negative
Actual: Positive
True Positive
False Negative
Actual: Negative
False Positive
True Negative
Table 3.1: Confusion matrix.
First, we want to evaluate the correctness of the model.
To achieve this goal, we compute the
accuracy, which is the percentage of correct predictions a model makes out of all predictions, see 3.30.
It is a value between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates that the model has not made any predictions correctly,
and 1 indicates that the model has made all predictions correctly. Usually, the higher, the better, but
this can be misleading in classification when the classes are unbalanced. In the simulated scenario, the
classes are perfectly balanced; however, in the real-life scenario, this is not the case, as the time spent
in different sleep stages is not equal. For this reason, it is not the only metric considered.
Accuracy = Number of correct predictions
Total number of predictions
(3.30)
The second metric is F1 score 3.33, which is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, also
bounded between 0 and 1. The precision takes into account the number of predicted positive samples
that are positive. At the same time, the recall considers the number of actual positive samples that
==PAGE:37==
3.6 Evaluation Metrics
27
are correctly predicted, as defined in 3.31 and 3.32, respectively. This means that to achieve a high F1
score, both precision and recall must be high. Hence, given a class imbalance, if one of the minor classes
is correctly predicted, the F1 score will be lower. The following equations present the metrics for binary
classification. The implemented version for the Chambon2018 output takes the weighted average of the
F1 score. It calculates the percentage of each class and determines the overall score based on these
proportions, taking into account the imbalanced nature of the dataset.
.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.31)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.32)
F1 score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(3.33)
Further, the metric is loss is also taken into account. The loss represents the difference between
the predicted probability distribution and the actual distribution.
The following equation gives its
definition.
LCE = −
C
∑
i=1
yi log(ˆyi).
(3.34)
3.6.2
Evaluation of explainability
   
Similarly, to evaluate the performance of the proposed method and answer the research questions,
various metrics have been employed. One of these metrics is complexity, which has been computed
through the Quantus library [7]. This metric is based on the Shannon entropy, which measures
the average amount of information produced by a stochastic data source. We compute the complexity
based on 3.35. It is computed for every attribution mask and then averaged, obtaining a single scalar
that reflects how spread out or concentrated the attribution is. Higher entropy indicates a more diffuse
attribution, while lower entropy denotes a more focused or sparse one. Since the focus is on explaining
the model’s decision, a more concentrated attribution is preferred, therefore, with lower complexity.
H(X) = −
C
∑
i=1
pi log2(pi)
(3.35)
Being pi, the probability distribution of a random variable X with C possible outcomes that occur
at the i −th possible class. The particularity of the Shannon entropy is the base used for the logarithm.
Base 2 gives the unit of bits, also known as Shannons.
Another metric computed is faithfulness. This metric measures the alignment between an explana-
tion and the model’s prediction [7, 2]. For this study, we have computed faithfulness for various values
of the retained information. In each iteration, we retain a percentage of the information while masking
the rest. Then, we compute the mean true class probability based on the masked information, as shown
in equation 3.36. The metric enables us to assess the model’s sensitivity to the explanation based on
the provided information. For an explanation that identifies the most important features, we expect to
have a high faithfulness.
E [P (ˆy = y)] = 1
N
N
∑
k=1
pk,yk
(3.36)
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4
Methods and experimental
setup
This chapter describes the experimental setup used in this study. The following topics are covered:
simulation of datasets, description of real-world data, processing, and use for training and evaluation,
model architecture, and training procedures.
4.1
Datasets
The method is evaluated on both simulated and real-world datasets to fully understand the perfor-
mance of the method implemented in this thesis. We generate simulated datasets to define a ground
truth, while the real-world dataset provides a practical evaluation of the methods’s performance. This
approach enables a comprehensive evaluation of the method’s capabilities in both controlled and real-
world scenarios, as well as providing the opportunity to compare the method with other established
techniques, such as FLEXtime.
4.1.1
Simulated datasets
We have generated multiple synthetic datasets to evaluate the method’s performance in the time-
frequency domain. We construct the datasets using a combination of different parameters, such as
the frequency components, the number of components, the time at which they are active, and the
sampling rate, following the method presented below. Additionally, it generates variability between
samples, including noise, phase shifting, and signal jitter. We have simulated four datasets to analyze
the localization of the method in both the time and frequency domains and also to compare different
mother wavelets.
1 def generate_signal(frequencies , times, amplitudes , noise_level=0.1, jitter=0.2, fs: int =
100, T: int = 1):
2
3
N = fs * T
# Number of samples
4
t = np.linspace(0, T, N)
5
6
signal = np.zeros_like(t)
7
8
for f, t_center, A in zip(frequencies , times, amplitudes):
9
# Introduce random variations
10
f_var = f * np.random.uniform(1 - jitter, 1 + jitter)
# Frequency variation
11
t_var = t_center + np.random.uniform(-0.1, 0.1)
# Timing jitter
12
A_var = A * np.random.uniform(0.8, 1.2)
# Amplitude variation
13
phase = np.random.uniform(0, 2*np.pi)
# Random phase
14
15
# Gaussian window to localize the frequency component
16
window = np.exp(-((t - t_var)**2) / (2 * (T/10)**2))
17
signal += A_var * np.sin(2 * np.pi * f_var * t + phase) * window
18
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Datasets
29
19
# Add different noise to each sample
20
signal += noise_level * np.random.randn(N)
21
22
return signal
.
All datasets contain signals that are manually labeled as either 0 or 1, allowing for binary classifi-
cation. The classes are perfectly balanced. For each scenario, we generate a training and test dataset,
each containing 5 × 104 and 1 × 101 samples, respectively. As can be seen in the provided code, the
signals are sine waves with the specified frequency and then multiplied by a Gaussian window to focus
the component within the specified time.
For the first case, we define the classes with a low-frequency component and the other with a high-
frequency component, all within the same time window. We characterize these classes by a frequency
component of 2 Hz and 6 Hz, with a sampling rate of 16 Hz, at the time of 0.3 seconds. The frequency
component lasts 0.1 seconds since we have defined it as T/10, and the signal has a total length of 1
second. Figure 4.1 presents samples from this dataset and its FT. Furthermore, to prevent unexpected
components from being considered important by the method, the signal is filtered through either a
low-pass filter or a high-pass filter with cutoff frequencies of 3 Hz and 5 Hz, respectively. The idea is to
keep the problem as simple as possible to prove whether the mask learned through wavelets is detecting
both components correctly.
Figure 4.1: First dataset samples from both classes and its corresponding FFT.
The second dataset also has two classes. However, in this case, the difference between the classes
extends beyond the frequency components.
The classes differ in the time domain as well.
A low-
frequency component of 2 Hz characterizes the first class, whereas a high-frequency component of 6 Hz
characterizes the second class. The sampling rate is also 16 Hz, and the frequency components occur
at 0.3 seconds and 0.7 seconds, respectively. The length remains 1s. Figure 4.2 displays samples from
both classes. We generate the simulation in the same way as the first dataset. Nevertheless, in this
case, the signals are not filtered to retain all the information regarding whether they are noise or not.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Datasets
30
Figure 4.2: Second dataset samples from both classes and its corresponding FFT.
Moreover, we simulated a third dataset with a higher resolution to determine which mother wavelet
is most suitable.
These classes are characterized by the frequency components of 80 Hz and 300
Hz, sampled at 1000 Hz and lasting 1 second.
The time localization is then 0.3 seconds and 0.7
seconds, respectively. Figure 4.3 displays some simulations of the different classes and its FT. In this
circumstance, since the sampling frequency is higher, we can exploit mother wavelets with different
filter lengths to learn the saliency maps. Therefore, we can compare their performance. The mother
wavelets used are db1-db10, sym4-sym10 and coif1-coif5. This sampling frequency and these wavelets
enable us to compare all the mother wavelets with the maximum number of decomposition levels and
also to fix this value at 5 levels. We present both analyses and the discussion of the results in the next
section.
Figure 4.3: Third dataset samples from both classes and its corresponding FFT.
Ultimately, we have simulated another dataset to truthfully assess the method’s performance in the
presence of different frequency elements. The dataset is based on the third one but with additional
frequency components in both classes. This introduced information consists of a 50 Hz component at
0.5 seconds with an amplitude of 0.7, followed by another component of 200 Hz at 0.2 seconds with an
amplitude of 0.5. The signals can be seen in Figure 4.4.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Datasets
31
Figure 4.4: Fourth dataset samples from both classes and its corresponding FFT.
In table 4.1, we provide an overview of the different dataset parameters.
Id, Class
Frequencies (Hz)
Times (s)
Amplitudes
Sampling frequency (Hz)
1, 0
2
0.3
1
16
1, 1
6
0.3
1
16
2, 0
2
0.3
1
16
2, 1
6
0.7
1
16
3, 0
80
0.3
1
1000
3, 1
300
0.7
1
1000
4, 0
[50, 80, 200]
[0.5, 0.3, 0.2]
[0.7, 1, 0.5]
1000
4, 1
[50, 200, 300]
[0.5, 0.2, 0.1]
[0.7, 0.5, 1]
1000
Table 4.1: Dataset configuration, with a period of 1 second, noise level of 0.001, and jitter of 0.
4.1.2
Real-world dataset
In this study, the EEG data analyzed is from the Sleep-EDF dataset [24], which contains 197 whole-night
PolySomnoGraphic (PSG) recordings, primarily from healthy subjects aged 25-101 years. They include
EEG signals, horizontal EOG, submental chin Electromyography (EMG), and an event marker. They
obtained these recordings using two distinct methodologies: cassette-based recordings [40] and telemetry-
based recordings [29]. They designed both methods for ambulatory sleep monitoring. There are 153
recordings made using a modified Oxford Medilog 4-24 cassette recorder. It enables subjects to continue
their normal activities at home. The recorder utilized four channels with a frequency response ranging
from 0.5 to 100 Hz and sampled at 100 Hz per second. For the second methodology, they performed
44 recordings over two complete nights in 22 subjects who had sleep complaints.
They performed
the recordings using a miniature telemetry system that digitized the brain activity with the Pz-Oz
electrode configuration. It captures the signals from the parietal to occipital regions. The frequency
response range is from 0.03-1000 Hz, allowing to accurately capture slow-wave activity characteristic
of deep sleep, as well as faster EEG components.
The signals were also sampled at 100 Hz with
a 14-bit resolution, ensuring precise digitization with minimal noise.
They measured the signal at
approximately two microvolts peak-to-peak. In this second case, the subjects took 20g of temazepam,
a sedative-hypnotic drug, in a randomized, double-blind crossover design to facilitate sleep on one of
the two nights. Assuming an average person sleeps eight hours, Figure 4.5 represents a whole nit of the
EEG signal and its respective hypnogram.
Next, we can not directly feed this PSG into the model, so it is necessary to preprocess the data.
The preprocessing steps are based on the implementation of PhysioEx [23]. This library provides a
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Datasets
32
Figure 4.5: EEG signal from SleepEDF dataset of 960 consecutive epochs and its respective hypno-
gram.
suite of tools for signal processing, along with a pipeline for training state-of-the-art models for sleep
staging. They store the SleepEDF raw data in .edf files for each recording. These files are a standardized
data format for storing physiological signals, such as EEG, EOG, and EMG signals. They stow the
data in a binary format, which makes it eﬀicient to store and transfer. However, the channel naming,
sampling frequency, and annotations can differ significantly across datasets. Hence, PhysioEx provides
a standard preprocessing pipeline that reads and formats the data for further analysis. The library has
many well known datsets integrated as Haaglanden Medisch Centrum (HMC) [3], Danish Center for
Sleep Medicine (DCSM) [46] and Sleep Heartn Health Study (SHHS) [68, 49]. If the data is publicly
available, as is the case for some sources listed in [24], the pipeline also downloads the data to the
provided folder path. However, in this thesis, the focus will be on SleepEDF, as it is the dataset used
in [8], ensuring the correct implementation of the baseline and allowing for a comparison of results with
the same real data.
The steps taken by PhysioEx to preprocess the data are as follows. Firstly, the pipeline reads the
data from the .edf files, and the signals such as EEG, EOG, EMG, and ECG are extracted. For the
EEG signal, the pipeline standardizes the signal to a single channel by selecting electrodes Fpz-Cz,
which measures the frontal-to-central regions of the brain. For the EOG signal, the horizontal channel
is selected, which is the measurement of the horizontal eye movements. The pipeline extracts the EMG
signal from the submental chin channel, which measures muscle activity in the chin area. Nevertheless,
we do not use these signals in the thesis; only the EEG signal is used. Next, the signal is filtered with
a bandpass filter between 0.3 Hz and 40 Hz, as mentioned in Section 2, since the established frequency
bands start at 0.5 Hz (delta waves) and frequencies above 40 Hz are not typically reached (gamma
waves). So, all frequencies outside this range can be considered noise from the recording and safely be
==PAGE:43==
4.2 The model architecture
33
filtered out. Then, the data is resampled at 100 Hz and windowed into 30-s segments, each associated
with its corresponding sleep stage, which is specifically W, 1, 2, 3, 4, and R. Additionally, if wake epochs
are overrepresented compared to sleep stage epochs, the module automatically reduces the number of
wake epochs. Then, if needed, we can expand the module with custom preprocessing. Nonetheless, we
have not explored this option in this thesis. The pipeline stored the data in a separate .npy file per
subject. This file format is the binary file format used by NumPy, which stores data eﬀiciently while
preserving metadata, including data types, and allows for easy loading through the Python library. We
present this pipeline in Figure 4.6. This process also generates a .csv file that assigns each subject to a
specific dataset, either training, validation, or testing, ensuring that both recordings of the same person
are in the same set. The division is roughly 68%, 19%, and 13%, respectively.
Figure 4.6: Preprocessing pipeline based on [23].
Following up, the data module handles how the preprocess data is loaded and organized for training
and evaluation. The module first converts the data into PyTorch-compatible tensors. Then, since the
library supports sequence-to-sequence and sequence-to-epochs models, each batch returned by the data
loader is structured as a tensor with dimensions, batch size, and sequence length and features. We
can set all custom parameters when running the pipeline.
Before feeding the data into the model,
the pipeline normalizes each sleep epoch to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. This
normalization step ensures that the model can learn effectively, as it helps to stabilize the training
process and improve convergence.
4.2
The model architecture
The model architecture used in this thesis for the simulated datasets is based on the implementation
of [8, 43]. The model is a one-dimensional CNN that takes as input a signal and outputs the predicted
class. This model architecture is particularly convenient for sequential data, which is especially relevant
in our target scenario of time-series signals, where the order of data points is crucial. The architecture
consists of a sequential series of layers, where the output of one layer is passed directly as input to the
next. The implementation also allows for the configuration of parameters, such as the number of input
and output channels, the number of neurons in the hidden layers, and the size of the convolutional
kernel.
Initially, we designed a feature extraction block to identify patterns in the input sequence.
The first layer is then a one-dimensional convolution that slides a filter of the specified size across the
input data, enriching the signal into a feature map of the same size as the hidden layer. The padding
technique used is ’same’ padding, which ensures the length of the sequence remains unchanged after
the operation. Following up, to introduce non-linearity, the activation function used is Rectified Linear
Unit (ReLU). Hence, we allow for the extraction of more complex relationships. To finish this block, we
apply a one-dimensional max pooling layer to downsample the sequence, reducing the length by half.
Therefore, we make the model more computationally eﬀicient by reducing the number of parameters.
After feature extraction, the data undergoes a second one-dimensional convolutional layer that takes
the feature maps and transforms them into the number of classes specified by the classification problem.
Unlike the previous convolutional layer, this one does not use padding, which reduces the sequence
length. Following up, the next component in the architecture is a one-dimensional adaptative average
pooling that reduces the variable sequence length to one by computing the average of all values in
each channel. This technique summarizes the information in the sequence into a single value for each
output channel, making the model robust to inputs of different lengths. We flatten the final layer in
==PAGE:44==
4.2 The model architecture
34
the sequence into a two-dimensional tensor, which is the final feature vector for each item in the batch
used then for classification. The output is the logits of each class. We have displayed this architecture
in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: 1D-CNN architecture for binary classification of a signal.
Then, for the real data, a more complex model is used, which is one of the architectures implemented
by the PhysioEx [23] library. The library implements four different deep-learning architectures based on
state-of-the-art models. However, two of the models implemented have time-frequency images as input,
SeqSleepNet [47], and SleepTransformer [48]. Our study aims to analyze the time-frequency domain of
the signal based on the attributions made to the raw signal, so this approach is not ideal. Therefore,
we discarded these implementations. Then, two more options remain, the first one being Chambon2018
[12] and the second being TinySleepNet [60]. In this case, both models use the raw time series as input,
which is more suitable for this study. The performance of these two models cannot be directly compared,
as Chambon2018 is a sequence-to-epoch model, while TinySleepNet is a sequence-to-sequence model.
The models take a sequence of 30s segments as input and output the predicted sleep stage for either the
target epoch or each epoch in the sequence, respectively. Based on the AASM Manual for the Scoring
of Sleep and Associated Events [6], which recommends classifying sleep stages, we have selected the
Chambon2018 model. Preferring then to have a sequence of epochs to predict the sleep stage of the
target one. The target epoch predicted is the one in the center of the sequence.
The Chambon2018 architecture consists of the following components. Foremost, a primary pipeline
for EEG and EOG signals and a separate one for EMG signals. The authors based this choice on the
similarity of electrical properties between EEG and EOG, which differs from EMG. In both cases, the
pipeline is followed by an identical feature extractor. The feature extractor begins with a spatial filtering
layer that linearly combines input channels to increase the signal-to-noise ratio, a method inspired
by ICA and spatial filtering in EEG processing. Then, they implement a block of one-dimensional
temporal convolution as a two-dimensional convolution with a kernel shape of (1, 64). They apply a
ReLU function to the output of the convolution layer to learn complex, non-linear relationships. The
output is passed to a max pooling layer to downsample the time-series representation. This layer makes
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Learnable mask
35
the features more robust to their exact position in time, reducing the computational load. They add
this block twice consecutively. The stacking of this block builds a hierarchical representation of the
features. The model in the first block learns simple, low-level features and then, in the second block,
combines them into more complex, abstract, and temporally more extended features. After processing
through the two temporal convolution blocks, the resulting feature maps are flattened into a single
feature vector. When both EEG/EOG and EMG signal pipelines are employed, their respective vectors
are concatenated to form a unified representation. To reduce the risk of overfitting, a dropout layer is
applied, which randomly prevents updates of 25% of its output neurons at each gradient step during
training.
The network then passes the concatenated feature vector to a fully connected layer with
five output neurons, each corresponding to a specific sleep stage (W, N1, N2, N3, REM). Lastly, they
employ a softmax activation function to convert these outputs into a probability distribution across the
five classes.
Figure 4.8: The architecture of the trained Chambon2018 CNN model.
Furthermore, the sleep stages are not independent of the stages that precede and follow them. So,
to incorporate temporal context, the authors extend the architecture into a time-distributed version.
As mentioned, the model is a sequence-to-epoch classification. To achieve this classification, the model
is fed a sequence of 2k + 1 consecutive epochs centered on Xt, which is the target epoch. For instance,
when k = 1, the input to the model becomes the sequence Xt −1, Xt, Xt + 1, representing 90 seconds of
data. The feature extraction network detailed is applied independently to each epoch. The network uses
the same weights across all epochs, effectively forming a time-distributed layer that learns consistent
features throughout the sequence. As a result, the model transforms each epoch into a feature vector and
concatenates it into a single, comprehensive representation. This aggregated vector, which encapsulates
both the target epoch and its surrounding temporal context, is then passed through a final softmax
classifier to determine the sleep stage of the central epoch.
4.3
Learnable mask
The idea behind the explainability method is to compute a mask based on interpretable parts. Following
a perturbation-based approach, the goal is to learn the saliency map of the prediction based on these
interpretable parts. Thus providing these attributions over defined elements that are inherently simpler
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Learnable mask
36
to understand, given the nature of the time series data. We deliver the representation in the time-
frequency domain.
We consider a time series X consisting of N data points over time.
This series can be either
univariate, having a single variable V = 1, like an audio signal, or multivariate, having V > 1 variable,
like EEG data from multiple sensors. Mathematically, we represent this as a matrix X ∈RNxV . The
goal is to predict an associated output y, which is a C dimensional vector, y ∈RC. Given a classification
task, y could represent the probabilities for C different classes. In this investigation, we will focus on
the single-variable case V = 1 since the real data has only one channel for the EEG signal.
Given a black box model f that predicts ˆy from the input series defined previously, the goal is to
explain the model’s prediction in terms of the input X. The model definition is f : X →ˆy. The method
should identify the most important features of the input for the model in predicting a given sample.
Next, the idea is to represent the signal as a linear combination of interpretable elements. Equation
4.1 represents this dictionary as {ζs}s
n=1.
X =
S
∑
s=1
θsζs
(4.1)
where ζs ∈C.
Our method explains a prediction by learning which of our dictionary components is the most
important. To do this, we generate a saliency mask, M, defined as M = (ms) ∈[0, 1]S, that assigns
importance score ms to each component of the dictionary. If a component’s score is close to 1, it means
that the model relied heavily on it. If the score is near 0, the component was not influential in the
prediction. We use these scores to create a new signal X, masking out elements through elementwise
multiplication.
XM =
S
∑
s=1
(ms · (θsζs) + (1 −ms) · ps)
(4.2)
Where ps is a perturbation applied to the component of the dictionary s, we then obtain the output
of the model as ˆyM = f(XM). The next step is to automatically learn the optimal mask M that best
explains the model’s output. Hence, we set up an optimization problem with two clear objectives that
define a good explanation. Firstly, the explanation must be faithful. The new prediction based on the
perturbed data should remain as close as possible to the original prediction. We measure any deviation
as a distortion or error, D.
However, minimizing only this distortion is insuﬀicient.
A mask that
keeps every single component would have zero distortion, but it would not explain anything because it
tells us that everything is important. The second objective is then sparsity. The explanation should
be as concise as possible, highlighting the fewest necessary components. We enforce this by adding a
regularization penalty, R(M), which increases as the mask becomes less sparse. Ultimately, our overall
learning objective is a combination of these two goals, with control over the trade-off between D and R
represented by λ.
min
M D(ˆy, ˆyM) + λR(M)
(4.3)
At its core, this balancing act exemplifies a well-known concept known as the rate-distortion trade-
off [32]. Here is how to think about it in our context. The distortion term D quantifies the cost of our
explanation by measuring the extent to which the model’s prediction deviates from the actual value.
We want to minimize this to ensure our explanation is faithful. The rate term R quantifies the amount
of signal that M allows to pass. A sparser mask corresponds to a lower rate, which provides a more
straightforward explanation. More on the optimization process and the initialization of the mask in
section 4.5.
Then, to explain the time series classification model, we have chosen the upsampled wavelet coeﬀi-
cients of the DWT as the dictionary of interpretable elements ψl.
X ≈
N
∑
n=1
ψl
(4.4)
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Hyperparameters
37
Where N is the number of bands, the number of levels of decomposition, L, of the DWT plus
one since the detailed coeﬀicients and the additional approximated coeﬀicients represent each band.
Perfect signal reconstruction is not an objective, as we base the methodology on learning a sparse mask.
Consequently, we treat L as a user-defined hyperparameter.
The next step is to define the learning objective. Since it is a classification task, we use the cross-
entropy loss, defined in Equation 3.34, to measure the distortion caused by the mask. On the other
hand, for sparsity, we use the l1-norm.
This term penalizes the mask if its average absolute value
exceeds the ratio parameter r ∈[0, 1]. We define the overall learning objective as:
L = −
C
∑
i=1
ˆyi log(ˆyM
i ) + λmax
(||M||1
N
−r, 0
)
(4.5)
Where N is the number of bands and λ determines the balance between the two terms.
4.4
Hyperparameters
Model hyperparameters For the model used for the simulated data, the hidden size of the convolu-
tional layers has been set to 64 and the kernel size to 5. The experiments are a binary classification with
a single input channel. Thus, the number of input channels is 1, and the number of output channels is
2. Then, we assign the value of 0.001 to the learning rate of the Adam optimizer.
For the Chambon2018, we have set the batch size to 64 due to memory limitations. After cross-
validating different values 5.3, we have set the number of sequences to 7. This means that the input
sequences consist of 2k + 1 segments, each 30 seconds long, being k 7. Thus having a total of 450
seconds of data per input sequence. Following up, as the input is a single-channel EEG signal, we set
the number of features to one. We set these parameters also when running the data module. Again, we
assign the value of 0.001 to the learning rate of the Adam optimizer.
Mask hyperparameters We have set the learning rate and the ratio parameter to 10−2. We chose
this ratio parameter to have a mask as sparse as possible while truly retaining the most important
features. Additionally, λ is set at 1, considering both losses optimization equally important.
Furthermore, after trying different values for the mask initialization between 0.1 and 0.5, we have
set it to 0.1. We evaluated this range of values for the following reasons. If we initialize the mask at
0, it means that any feature is important. Therefore, it is harder for the mask to identify where the
important features are. Similarly, if we initialize the mask at 1, it means that all features are equally
important, making it harder for the mask to distinguish between non-important and important features.
We have not considered options like initializing it randomly. Another important factor is to initialize
the mask uniformly, ensuring there is no bias towards any particular feature.
Finally, the number of bands depends on the experiments presented in Chapter 5.
4.5
Training setup
For reproducibility purposes, the training environment is seeded, with a seed value of 42. Regardless of
the simulated dataset, the model’s hyperparameters remain the same. Then, for the real-data scenario,
the model is trained and then evaluated with FLEXtime and the DWT learned mask. In this section,
we also explain how we obtain the mask.
4.5.1
Simulation setup
For every simulated dataset, we train a model with the architecture presented in Figure 4.7. We train the
models for 500 epochs, implementing early stopping. This technique enables the automatic termination
of the training process if the improvement in loss falls below a specified threshold for a given number
==PAGE:48==
4.5 Training setup
38
of epochs. This number is often associated with patience. We compute the loss based on cross-entropy,
presented in Equation 3.34. The stopping threshold is set to 0.001, and the patience to 5. Given the
simplicity of the data, the accuracy reached in all the models for the training set is 1.
4.5.2
Real-world setup
After the preprocessing of the data, the splitting of the Sleep EDF and class counts are present in Table
4.2. As before, the loss function used is cross-entropy. In this situation, we train the Chambon2018
model for different input sequences; the results are present in 5.3. Once the training process is complete,
we apply the explainability methods to the test set.
Dataset
Wake
N1
N2
N3
REM
Total
Training
40646
14489
47842
10413
17652
131042
Validation
15958
4249
11343
915
4147
36612
Testing
7844
2784
9947
1711
4036
26322
Table 4.2: Sleep stages counts.
4.5.3
Mask setup
Then, the parameters used for mask optimization are as follows: for each iteration, the mask is
optimized for 250 epochs unless the early stopping condition is met. To meet this condition, the loss
can not improve by more than 10−5 for 10 epochs.
Then, the mask is optimized using the Adam
optimizer. This optimizer has been chosen over Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) since it is more
eﬀicient and has been proven to outperform it in most cases [31]. Contrarly to SGD, the Adam optimizer
uses adaptative learning rates, which means that it can adjust the learning rate during training based
on the gradient of the loss function. This can help to converge faster and avoid getting stuck in local
minima. For these reasons, we have considered a more robust and faster approach.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Results
To evaluate the performance of the proposed methods and answer the research questions, we have
conducted various analyses. The first analysis is based on the different simulated datasets, followed by
an analysis of real data. Results are computed on an Apple M2 or an HPC cluster with NVIDIA V100
GPUs.
5.1
Simulated dataset results
To properly understand the results, we first need to define the concept of scalogram and what it
represents. The scalogram is a time-frequency representation of a signal, where each point in the time-
frequency plane corresponds to a specific scale and translation of the wavelet function. The resulting
coeﬀicients Wx(a, b) represent the correlation between the signal and the wavelet function at different
scales and translations. Figures 5.1 and 5.2 show the average scalograms of the simulated data for
class 0 and class 1, respectively, using the db1 wavelet, which can be seen in Figure 3.4. As a quick
reminder, this simulation features a sinusoid with either a 2 Hz or 6 Hz frequency component, windowed
by a Gaussian function to localize it in a specific time interval. As can be observed in the figures, the
scalogram is more spread out for the 2 Hz sinus wave and more localized for the 6 Hz sinus wave in
terms of time. This is due to the uncertainty principle, which states that the more localized a signal is
in time, the less localized it is in frequency, and vice versa. To properly capture the 6Hz component,
the wavelet is used, which means that the wavelet is physically short in time. Hence, the component
is tightly localized in time but with a lower frequency resolution; the band spans from 4 Hz to 8 Hz.
Contrarily, to detect the 2 Hz component, the high-scale wavelet is used, which means that the wavelet
is physically long in time. Hence, the component is tightly localized in frequency but with a lower time
resolution; the predominant band spans from 1 Hz to 2 Hz. Additionally, to have different samples,
noise is introduced in the data simulation, which affects the class with the lowest frequency.
Figure 5.1: Avg scalogram of class 0.
Figure 5.2: Avg scalogram of class 1.
The goal of this experiment is to show that the mask learned through the wavelet transform can
localize the frequency of the signal. The only difference between the classes is the frequency component
of the sinus wave. As can be seen in the masks, the frequency resolution is given by the wavelet bands.
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Simulated dataset results
40
It is a limitation of the DWT since it is a dyadic decomposition and has a fixed scale. The bands,
therefore, are from 0-1Hz, 1-2Hz, 2-4Hz, and then from 4-8Hz. Nevertheless, for class 0, the attribution
for the band 2Hz to 4Hz at around 0.33s is 1, and the attribution for class 1, which corresponds to
the higher range of frequencies at 0.26s, is also 1. Then, as it can be observed, the mask presented in
5.3 is more localized in time and frequency than the mask presented in 5.4. The observed difference
in attribution localization between class 0 (2Hz) and class 1 (6Hz) can be primarily explained by the
inherent properties of the discrete wavelet transform and the choice of wavelet. Since the wavelet used is
db1, which is very short and discontinuous, it is better suited for detecting abrupt changes than smooth
oscillations like sinusoids. This makes it more effective at capturing the low-frequency 2Hz component
of class 0, resulting in a cleaner and more localized attribution.
In contrast, the higher-frequency 6Hz component of class 1 is not well-matched to db1’s structure,
leading to broader and more diffuse attribution across time and frequency. Additionally, as the reso-
lution of the signal increases, the number of bands is directly proportional to the number of samples.
Consequently, the mask will be able to localize the frequency with greater precision, as well as the time,
since the number of samples determines the time resolution. However, overall, the mask can localize
the simulated components.
Figure 5.3: Avg attribution mask for Class 0.
Figure 5.4: Avg attribution mask for Class 1.
Next, we use the second dataset, where the sinus wave is localized at different moments, 0.3 seconds
and 0.7 seconds, to analyze how this affects the learned mask. In figures 5.5 and 5.6, it can be observed
the same behavior as before. The class with the lower frequency has a more spread-out scalogram, while
the class with the higher frequency has a more localized scalogram, as expected in the time domain.
Figure 5.5: Avg scalogram of class 0.
Figure 5.6: Avg scalogram of class 1.
As can be observed in Figures 5.7 and 5.8, the mask can localize the frequency of the signal around
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Simulated dataset results
41
the time it is active, but with poor precision. We can state that in this simulation, the mask for class
1 is more concise than before, which may be due to the absence of overlap between the scalograms.
Previously, in the simulated dataset, there was an overlap between the scalograms in the frequency
bands, which made it more complex to optimize the mask. However, the difference in the localization
between the classes remains.
Figure 5.7: Avg attribution mask for Class 0.
Figure 5.8: Avg attribution mask for Class 1.
Then, after analyzing both prior simulated datasets and their attribution masks, the conclusion is
that the mask can localize the frequency of the signal around the time it is active but with minimal
precision. This is due primarily to the resolution of the signal but also since the wavelet chosen to
compute the mask is not the best for this task. As mentioned, the wavelet used is db1, which is the
simplest one and a discontinuous function that best detects sharp edges, unlike the simulated data.
Additionally, this mother wavelet has only one vanishing moment, which makes it possible to remove
only the constant component of the signal. For all these reasons, several mother wavelets are tested on
an additional dataset to compare their performance in the learning of the mask. The dataset used is
the third described in section 4.1.
We have undertaken two different experiments to qualitatively compare the performance of the mask
learned through the multilevel DWT. On one side, compute the highest number of decomposition levels
for the signal. This value depends on the filter length of the mother wavelet and the number of samples
per signal. On the other side, fix the number of levels of decomposition to 5. We chose this value since
it is the maximum for the wavelets of higher order tested.
Firstly, let us compare which of both approaches is better. Figures 5.9 and 5.10 show the mask
learned for class 0, with the maximum number of levels of decomposition on the left, at 10, and the
fixed value of 5 on the right. Through visual inspection of these figures, it is evident that with a higher
number of decomposition levels, the mask introduces more noise in the lower frequency bands. This
behavior is also observed in Class 1, as represented in Figures 5.11 and 5.12. Furthermore, if we make
the comparison between mother wavelets with the maximum level of decomposition, this value changes
through the different mother wavelets and the number of vanishing moments.
This can produce a
misleading comparison since the computation differs for the results being compared. For those reasons,
the option to use the maximum level of decomposition has been discarded. Then, we undertake the
analysis of the different mother wavelets with a fixed value of 5 levels of decomposition.
Before comparing the different mother wavelets, let us first analyze how they affect the behavior of
the mask and the increase in the number of vanishing moments. This effect is the same regardless of
the mother wavelet used. The increase in the number of vanishing moments is directly proportional to
the increase in the filter’s length. This means that as the value increases, more signal is being analyzed
since the wavelet transform is the convolution of the filter with the signal. This has a direct negative
impact on the time resolution because the mask has more diﬀiculty localizing the signal in time due to
the increased signal analyzed. Moreover, for the same reason, the computational cost increases, too, as
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Simulated dataset results
42
Figure 5.9: db1 class 0 with 10 levels of de-
composition.
Figure 5.10: db1 class 0 with 5 levels of de-
composition.
Figure 5.11: db1 class 1 with 10 levels of de-
composition.
Figure 5.12: db1 class 1 with 5 levels of de-
composition.
the convolution has more operations to compute. However, not everything is disadvantageous since the
increase in the number of vanishing moments also increases the frequency resolution. This is because
the higher the number of vanishing moments, the more effectively the filter can remove higher-order
degree polynomials from the signal. Additionally, stretching the filter to higher frequency bands allows
for the capture of the signal’s oscillations as the band isolation increases as well. This generates a better
matching and representation of smooth signals. The goal is then to find the best balance between time
and frequency resolution. An example of the scalogram of this dataset is shown in Figure 3.8, computed
with coif4.
Different mother wavelets have been tested to compare their performance in learning the mask, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. The mother wavelets used, given a range of vanishing moments from 1
to 10 when possible, are db1-db10, sym4-sym10, and coif1-coif5. Given a data length of 1000 samples
per signal, all the multilevel DWT can be computed for five levels based on the equation 3.21. An
important factor in this decision is that the frequency resolution is the same for all the mother wavelets
tested and fixed to the frequency bands presented in Table 5.1.
Frequency bands (Hz)
0-15.62
15.62-31.25
31.25-62.5
62.5-125
125-250
250-500
Table 5.1: Frequency bands used.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Simulated dataset results
43
The first family tested is the db family. As shown in Figure 5.13, the mask successfully localizes the
signal in the time-frequency domain, as expected, for the 80 Hz component at 0.3 seconds for class 0 and
the 300 Hz component at 0.7 seconds for class 1. Then, as the number of vanishing moments increases,
the frequency resolution of the signal increases, too. However, the time resolution does not seem to
decrease as expected, which can be because the signal is localized in time. Meaning that it cannot
worsen since the signal is zero, except when it is active. However, the precision gain in the frequency
domain above six vanishing moments appears to be minimal regarding the increase in computational
cost. We present the missing cases in the Appendix A.
Figure 5.13: Attribution map of the db family.
Next, sym are tested, which is a nearly symmetric function. This is one of the main differences with
the db family. As before, as the number of vanishing moments increases, the frequency resolution of the
signal increases, too, but the time resolution of the main component remains the same. Then, through
the qualitative analysis, sym seems to be a slightly better choice for this task, based on Figures 5.13 and
5.14. If the wavelets with the same number of vanishing moments are compared, the sym family seems
to be slightly more localized in the frequency domain than the db family. For example, if the focus is
on sym6 and db6, for class 1, the predominant frequency band in this attribution mask is darker than
in db6.
Figure 5.14: Attribution map of the sym family.
However, the coif family introduces another advantage. This wavelet family supports N vanishing
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Simulated dataset results
44
moments in the wavelet function, but it also supports N −1 vanishing moments in the scaling function.
This allows us to preserve the signal with higher accuracy in the lower frequency bands. However, in
this case, to make a direct comparison, the focus is set on wavelets db6, sym6, and coif4 due to the
difference in filter lengths. This allows us to compare the same time and frequency resolution. A closer
look is taken at class 0, the 80Hz component. The coif family is slightly more localized in the time
domain, ranging from 0.2s to 0.5s, whereas the other two cases span approximately from 0.18s to 0.55s.
Additionally, for the same class, sym6 captures more importance on the 31.25Hz to 62.5Hz band than
coif4, which is not ideal since the only predominant component is the 80Hz sinus signal. Contrarily,
for class 1, the 300Hz component, comparing sym6 and coif4, the masks learned present little to no
difference between them.
Figure 5.15: Attribution map of the coif family.
Overall, the qualitative analysis reveals minimal differences between families.
Nevertheless, due
to the scaling function properties of the coif family and its capability to retain more information in
the lower frequency bands, it is the best choice for this task. This provides an answer to the first
research question. However, the increase in the vanishing moments does affect the learned mask. When
comparing coif2, coif4 and coif5, frequency-wise in class 0, there is an improvement between coif2 and
coif4, but not between coif4 and coif5. For this reason, and considering the increase in computational
cost, coif4 is considered the most appropriate choice for this study.
Then, regarding the quantitative analysis, the metrics presented in 3.6 have been computed. The
first metric to evaluate is complexity. An explanation should be as simple as possible so it is easy for
humans to understand. Therefore, low complexity is preferred, but if complexity is the only metric
taken into account, it could be misleading. A saliency map of a single frequency component, as in
our scenario, could have minimal complexity, meaning it is simple to understand but not particularly
informative. For this reason, we consider the complexity in conjunction with the faithfulness metric.
This metric measures the alignment between an explanation and a model’s prediction. The metric has
been computed keeping only the 5% of the most important features identified by the explanation. Then,
it represents the mean actual class probability of the model on the importance-masked data. Hence,
for an explanation, a high value is expected, considering that the most important information has been
correctly identified.
Analyzing 5.2, it can be noticed that for each wavelet family, as the number of vanishing moments
increases, the complexity decreases in most of the cases. This is expected since the number of vanishing
moments leads to a more sparse representation of the signal in the wavelet domain. This means the
signal’s important features are concentrated into fewer high-magnitude coeﬀicients. The resulting attri-
bution map becomes similarly concentrated, which corresponds to a lower Shannon entropy. However,
comparing the families to each other, the coif has lower complexity values in all cases. Next, it must
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Simulated dataset results
45
be said that the faithfulness for the wavelets tested is high. This is probably due to the simplicity of
the problem.
Method
Complexity
Faithfulness
FLEXtime
1.38
0.99
db1
5.56
0.98
db2
5.53
0.98
db3
5.49
0.99
db4
5.46
0.98
db5
5.43
0.99
db6
5.40
0.99
db7
5.41
0.99
db8
5.37
0.99
db9
5.37
0.99
db10
5.35
0.99
sym4
5.44
0.98
sym5
5.45
0.99
sym6
5.40
0.99
sym7
5.41
0.99
sym8
5.37
0.99
sym9
5.35
0.99
sym10
5.35
0.99
coif1
5.26
0.98
coif2
5.11
0.99
coif3
5.09
0.99
coif4
5.06
0.99
coif5
5.05
0.99
Table 5.2: Evaluation metrics for each wavelet and FLEXTime evaluating dataset 3.
Nevertheless, being less complex does not imply higher faithfulness. For example, db10 has the
highest faithfulness value for all the cases, but it is not the least complex. The following most faithful
wavelet is coif5, with a faithfulness value of 0.99948, the less complex one.
Hence, to answer the
second research question, the coif5 is the mother wavelet with the best balance between complexity
and faithfulness.
Still, it is a simple problem, and the explainability method is not being truly evaluated since the only
information provided to the model is the detected information. For this reason, an additional analysis is
done before entering the real-world data. The data being analyzed now is the prior binary classification
but with two additional frequency components. Since these components are present in both classes, they
are considered noise and do not provide additional information about the class. Another model has
been trained on this data and then evaluated with the explainability method. Due to the computational
time and cost, a selection of wavelets based on previous results has been made rather than evaluating
all of them. The selected wavelets are db4, sym4, coif4 and coif5.
The averaged saliency maps are presented in Figure 5.16 and 5.17. Although the wavelets being
compared do not have the same length as those in the previous comparison, it can be stated that the
analysis remains similar.
Overall, there is no predominant wavelet, but coif still are slightly more
localized in the time domain, and for class 1 coif is more localized in the frequency domain, not
assigning any importance to the highest band at 0.2s. However, all wavelets fail to detect only the
main components of the class. For class 0, it detects the 50Hz component while correctly ignoring the
200Hz component. For class 1, it detects different bands. There are two possible hypotheses to explain
this behavior: either the model is not learning the correct features and is considering the components
introduced as noise, or the explainability method is not concise enough. To reject the first hypothesis,
the model is fed with the third simulated dataset, which contains only the main components of each
==PAGE:56==
5.2 The Sleep EDF results
46
class, and the class probabilities are compared. If the class probability of the actual label decreases, the
model takes into account the different frequency components of the data. The results show that the
class probability remains unchanged regardless of the input; the probability of the correct class remains
1 in both scenarios. Discarding the first hypothesis, this suggests that the proposed method does not
correctly explain the model’s predictions and could be further improved.
Figure 5.16: Attribution maps of the selected wavelets for class 0.
5.2
The Sleep EDF results
For real-life datasets, the method is analyzed on the test set of the SleepEDF dataset. The model to be
explained is Chambon2018. One of the design hyperparameters of this model is the number of sequences
the model will be fed simultaneously, which is a sequence of 30s windows. Then, cross-validation is
used to find the best length. Since the target sequence is in the middle, all the evaluated values are odd
numbers. Table 5.3 shows the results of the cross-validation. Due to time constraints, the model was
trained for a maximum of 10 epochs only.
Based on the three metrics — accuracy, F1 score, and loss — detailed in Section 3.6, the best
model is the one with k = 19 sequences. However, the longer the sequence, the more computationally
expensive it is. For this reason, the second-best model, based on both accuracy and F1 score, is selected.
The explainability method is then applied to the trained model with seven input sequences.
Based on the results of the simulated dataset, the wavelet used is coif4. The explainability method
is then applied to the trained model with seven input sequences. The first conclusion that can be drawn
based on the results in Figure 5.18 is that the data analyzed is not truly localized in time. This is
because the data is windowed in 30s samples. The sleep cycle has a stage progression, but given the
size of the windows, it is not possible to localize the different stages in time. So, a given stage in a
30s window does not have a precise time localization. Next, when the frequency bands are analyzed
based on the stated ground truth, it becomes clear that the attribution mask effectively localizes the
==PAGE:57==
5.2 The Sleep EDF results
47
Figure 5.17: Attribution maps of the selected wavelets for class 1.
# sequences
Accuracy
F1 score
Loss
3
0.782
0.769
0.652
5
0.789
0.777
0.637
7
0.798
0.789
0.624
9
0.797
0.786
0.620
11
0.794
0.784
0.642
13
0.795
0.784
0.620
15
0.791
0.779
0.616
17
0.782
0.775
0.685
19
0.799
0.789
0.603
21
0.788
0.781
0.665
Table 5.3: Cross-validation sequence length results for Chambon2018.
signal’s frequency, providing a clearer view of the results. The attributions have been integrated into
the time domain; see Figure 5.19. This representation illustrates the integration over time for the mean
frequency of each band, where a single value represents each band.
For the Wake stage, the saliency map is correctly attributing importance to the beta waves, 13-30Hz,
since it does not directly map to one of the bands of the DWT, both higher bands, from 12.5-50Hz
have about the same attribution. Nevertheless, the lowest band, from 0 to 4 Hz, has been assigned
the most importance, which was not expected from a theoretical standpoint. Contrarily, N1 does not
follow the theoretical foundation, which is to give more importance to the theta waves, the band from
4-8Hz, although there is a slight increase around 10Hz. Then, N2 characterized by sleep spindles and K
complexes, 12-14Hz and 0.5-4Hz, respectively, should have the most attribution given to those bands.
The K complexes are detected based on the attribution given to the lowest band but not the sleep
spindles. Then, N3/N4 is the most accurate explanation, given the attribution to the lowest band,
==PAGE:58==
5.2 The Sleep EDF results
48
Figure 5.18: Average attribution maps across all correctly classified samples within each of the five
classes for the test set of the SleepEDF dataset.
the delta waves, characterizing the SWS stage, as they are also the ones with the higher amplitude,
as shown in 5.19. Then, the REM stage should be characterized by higher frequencies, similar to the
awakened state, which is not detected by the explainability method. Overall, the attribution mask
effectively localizes the frequency components in two of the five stages, as supported by the literature.
Figure 5.19: Average attribution maps across all correctly classified samples within each of the five
classes for the test set of the SleepEDF dataset integrated over time.
The results in Figure 5.20 present the saliency maps computed by the reproduction of FLEXtime.
The method explains the same model and the same test set of the SleepEDF dataset. In this scenario,
the approach differs; the mask is computed based on a filter bank composed of 64 filters with a fixed
bandwidth. The results demonstrate the importance of attributing the frequency components to the
different sleep stages, normalized across the various stages. In this scenario, the attributions comply
with the theoretical foundation. The Wake state presents a peak between 15-20Hz, which is part of the
beta band, although it also presents another peak around 40Hz, which is also part of the Wake state
but should not be as predominant as the beta band. Then, for the N1 stage, the attribution is localized
in the theta band, with a peak of 0.5 at around 4 Hz. Then, for the N2 stage, it perfectly presents
the sleep spindles, with a peak of 0.5 around 12 Hz, and the K-complexes, with a peak of 0.6 around
0-5 Hz. Then, for the N3/N4 stage, it is the less reliable attribution, as it misses the attribution of
importance to the delta band from 0-4 Hz. Finally, the REM stage presents similar attributions as the
==PAGE:59==
5.2 The Sleep EDF results
49
Wake stage, with brain activity around 20 Hz. Hence, overall, the attribution mask can localize the
frequency components in the different sleep stages.
Ultimately, comparing now both approaches, the FLEXtime method provides a more precise analysis
in the frequency domain. Responding to the third research question. There is some overlap between
the methods for stage N1. However, for the other classes, the mask learned through wavelets fails to
detect the predominant frequencies. Nonetheless, for this precise comparison, the wavelet approach
only provides six values, one per band, whereas FLEXtime provides one bin for half of the data points.
This limitations are further discussed in the next section.
Figure 5.20: Average attribution maps across all correctly classified samples within each of the five
classes for the test set of the SleepEDF dataset integrated over time using FLEXtime.
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion and future works
The research presented in this thesis has established a novel approach to learning masks for time series
explainability by identifying interpretable parts. While the results are promising, they also spotlight
several outlets for future investigation and improvement.
When comparing our DWT-based attributions to the FLEXtime baseline, the superior performance
of FLEXtime becomes evident. As shown in Table 6.1, there is a significant mismatch between the
DWT’s coarse, dyadic frequency bands and the specific physiological bands relevant to sleep staging.
For instance, sleep spindles (12-14Hz) fall on the edge of the DWT’s third band (12.5-25Hz), making
them diﬀicult to isolate. In contrast, FLEXtime’s finer-grained filter bank can create filters that are pre-
cisely centered on these crucial frequencies. This fundamental limitation of the DWT’s fixed frequency
decomposition is the primary reason for our method’s lower performance in this real-world scenario.
Physiological Band
Frequency (Hz)
DWT coif4 Band (5 Levels)
Frequency (Hz)
Delta
0.5 - 4 Hz
Band 0
0 - 1.56 Hz
Theta
4 - 8 Hz
Band 1
1.56 - 3.12 Hz
Alpha
8 - 13 Hz
Band 2
3.12 - 6.25 Hz
Spindles
12 - 14 Hz
Band 3
6.25 - 12.5 Hz
Beta
13 - 30 Hz
Band 4
12.5 - 25 Hz
Gamma
> 30 Hz
Band 5
25 - 50 Hz
Table 6.1: Frequency bands of sleep stages and the coif4 5 level dwt.
Therefore, one option is to adapt the sampling frequency and the number of levels to fit these bands.
However, this option still requires previous knowledge of the studied domain. Hence, future work should
explore more flexible transforms, such as the CWT, which offers a continuous scale representation at
the cost of higher computational load and redundancy, or the Dual-Tree Complex Wavelet Transform
(DTCWT). The DTCWT is particularly promising as it is nearly shift-invariant and provides phase
information, which could lead to more robust and meaningful explanations. Another approach is to
revisit the STFT, which, although it has a fixed granularity in the time-frequency domain, can be
manually fine-tuned to give more weight to one of the domains or even make the window size a learnable
parameter.
Moreover, the case study’s analysis of sleep staging appears to lack fine-grained temporal localization,
thereby losing one of the method’s key advantages. Due to its 30-second windowing, the temporal
component of the signal is lost despite the inherent cyclicity of the sleep stages being well known. A
compelling future direction is either to analyze more expansive time windows or to apply this method to
a classification scenario where the target class is defined by a temporally localized event and frequency
components. This enables us to assess the method’s performance in various scenarios and examine its
robustness across different datasets.
This study focused on single-channel EEG data. A natural extension is to adapt the framework
for multivariate time series, such as multi-channel EEG, or taking into account the ECG and EOG
signals.
This would require developing techniques to handle inter-channel dependencies within the
time-frequency domain.
==PAGE:61==
6 Discussion and future works
51
Additionally, to reconstruct the signal, the actual method sums up the upsampled wavelet bands
before the mask optimization. This technique does not allow for perfect reconstruction of the signal,
which could lead to artifacts in the explanation. However, this potential issue is mitigated by our goal
of finding sparse masks, which inherently focus on highlighting the most relevant regions of interest.
Then, since the raw DWT coeﬀicients directly represent the signal’s information content in each time-
frequency bin, by masking and summing these coeﬀicients, the optimization learns which elements are
most critical to the model’s prediction. Nevertheless, future research should be directed to evaluate the
impact of perfect reconstruction of the signal on the resulting explanations.
Another limitation of the method is its computational eﬀiciency. Due to the inherent nature of the
multilevel DWT, it cannot be directly stored in a Torch variable. The DWT has different lengths for
each band, resulting in an inconsistent structure. For this reason, the only library we have found that
implements this transform in a one-dimensional space does so using a NumPy array. This approach
significantly slows the process, as the data must be transferred from the GPU to the CPU. This has
been a problem in the debugging process due to the length of the process. To reduce this waiting period,
one approach has been to test the code using one batch of data and then run the complete experiments.
Thus, another approach, such as manually implementing the DWT, must be explored.
Finally, to have a broader overview of the method’s performance, it would be interesting to test it
against other interpretability methods.
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This thesis introduced and evaluated a novel explainability method for time-series models using learnable
masks over a decomposition. The study focused on three research questions, leading to an understand-
ing of the method’s strengths and limitations.
The first research question aimed to identify the most accurate mother wavelet based on a simulated
ground truth. A qualitative analysis of the attribution maps produced by the Daubechies, Symlets, and
Coiflet families revealed no significant performance difference between the families themselves; at similar
orders, they produced visually comparable explanations. However, the analysis demonstrated that the
order of the wavelet is an important factor.
Increasing the wavelet order, and thus its number of
vanishing moments, consistently reached more localized and less noisy frequency attributions. This is
because higher-order wavelets are more effective at suppressing polynomial-like trends in the signal,
resulting in a sparser and more focused representation of the core signal components.
Building on this, the second research question aimed to identify the wavelet that provides the
least complex explanation. The quantitative analysis confirmed that while higher orders are generally
beneficial, the Coiflet family consistently produced the least complex masks, as measured by Shannon
entropy, while maintaining high faithfulness. Specifically, coif5 was identified as the optimal choice,
based on the mentioned metrics. However, the difference regarding coif4 is considered minimal compared
to the increase in the computational cost. Thus, selecting coif4 as the best option for the last analysis
performed.
The final research question investigated whether the proposed method offers superior localization
compared to the FLEXtime baseline on the real-world SleepEDF dataset. The results indicate that
the FLEXtime approach is the most effective. The Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT)-based method
failed to reliably identify key physiological markers, such as sleep spindles in the N2 stage. One of the
reasons for this event is the dyadic decomposition of the DWT. These coarse, fixed bands do not align
with the specific frequency ranges that define sleep stages in medicine. FLEXtime, with its finer-grained
filter bank, generates a more precise and significant explanation.
In summary, this work demonstrates that the proposed method is functional in controlled environ-
ments where signal features align with the wavelet’s decomposition structure; its utility is limited when
applied to real-world problems with specific, arbitrary frequency bands. This highlights the need to
fine-tune the method further. Therefore, the most promising direction for future work is to consider the
DWT decomposition level a learnable parameter, as testing more flexible time-frequency transforms,
such as the CWT or learnable filter banks, which can adapt their frequency resolution to the unique
characteristics of the data being explained.
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore
et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut
aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum
dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui oﬀicia
deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.
Figure A.1: Attribution map of the class 0 of the third simulated dataset using the db family.
Figure A.2: Attribution map of the class 1 of the third simulated dataset using the db family.
==PAGE:64==
A An Appendix
54
Figure A.3: Attribution map of the class 0 of the third simulated dataset using the sym family.
Figure A.4: Attribution map of the class 1 of the third simulated dataset using the sym family.
Figure A.5: Attribution map of the class 0 of the third simulated dataset using the coif family.
Figure A.6: Attribution map of the class 1 of the third simulated dataset using the coif family.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Bruce M Altevogt and Harvey R Colten. “Sleep disorders and sleep deprivation: an unmet public
health problem.” In: (2006).
[2]
David Alvarez Melis and Tommi Jaakkola. “Towards robust interpretability with self-explaining
neural networks.” In: Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018).
[3]
Diego Alvarez-Estevez and RM Rijsman. “Haaglanden medisch centrum sleep staging database
(version 1.0. 1).” In: PhysioNet (2021).
[4]
Claudio Babiloni et al. “Classification of single normal and Alzheimer’s disease individuals from
cortical sources of resting state EEG rhythms.” In: Frontiers in neuroscience 10 (2016), p. 47.
[5]
Sebastian Bach et al. “On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise
relevance propagation.” In: PloS one 10.7 (2015), e0130140.
[6]
Richard B Berry et al. “The AASM manual for the scoring of sleep and associated events.” In:
Rules, Terminology and Technical Specifications, Darien, Illinois, American Academy of Sleep
Medicine 176.2012 (2012), p. 7.
[7]
Umang Bhatt, Adrian Weller, and José MF Moura. “Evaluating and aggregating feature-based
model explanations.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00631 (2020).
[8]
Thea Brüsch et al. “FLEXtime: Filterbank learning for explaining time series.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.05841 (2024).
[9]
Thea Brüsch et al. “FreqRISE: Explaining time series using frequency masking.” In: Northern
Lights Deep Learning Conference 2025. 2025.
[10]
György Buzsáki. Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2006.
[11]
Rita Carter et al. The Human Brain Book: An Illustrated Guide to its Structure, Function, and
Disorders. Dorling Kindersley, 2009.
[12]
Stanislas Chambon et al. “A deep learning architecture for temporal sleep stage classification
using multivariate and multimodal time series.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering 26.4 (2018), pp. 758–769.
[13]
Brittany Cheung. Labeled Lateral and Sagittal Views of the Brain. Portfolio page, B Cheung
Biomedical Illustration. Accessed: 2025-06-16. 2020.
[14]
Sudhansu Chokroverty. “Overview of sleep & sleep disorders.” In: Indian Journal of Medical
Research 131.2 (2010), pp. 126–140.
[15]
Charles K. Chui. An introduction to wavelets. Academic Press, 1992.
[16]
Mike X Cohen. Analyzing neural time series data: Theory and practive. 1st. The MIT Press, 2014.
[17]
Jonathan Crabbé and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. “Explaining time series predictions with dynamic
masks.” In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2021, pp. 2166–2177.
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
56
[18]
Ingrid Daubechies. “Orthonormal bases of compactly supported wavelets.” In: Communications
on pure and applied mathematics 41.7 (1988), pp. 909–996.
[19]
Ingrid Daubechies. Ten lectures on wavelets. SIAM, 1992, pp. 167–289.
[20]
Molecular Devices. What is Action Potential, Membrane Potential, Action Potential Chart. Ac-
cessed: 2025-06-16. 2025.
[21]
Dumitru Erhan et al. “Visualizing higher-layer features of a deep network.” In: University of
Montreal 1341.3 (2009), p. 1.
[22]
Ruth C Fong and Andrea Vedaldi. “Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful
perturbation.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 2017,
pp. 3429–3437.
[23]
Guido Gagliardi et al. “PhysioEx, a new Python library for explainable sleep staging through
deep learning.” In: Physiological Measurement (2025).
[24]
Ary L. Goldberger et al. PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components of a new research
resource for complex physiologic signals. Accessed: 2025-03-13. 2000.
[25]
Google. Gemini. Web Page. Model: [Gemini 2.5 Pro]. 2025.
[26]
Alexander Grossmann and Jean Morlet. “Decomposition of Hardy functions into square integrable
wavelets of constant shape.” In: SIAM journal on mathematical analysis 15.4 (1984), pp. 723–736.
[27]
Riita Hari and Aina Puce. MEG - EEG primer. 2nd. Oxford University Press, 2023.
[28]
Maksims Ivanovs, Roberts Kadikis, and Kaspars Ozols. “Perturbation-based methods for explain-
ing deep neural networks: A survey.” In: Pattern Recognition Letters 150 (2021), pp. 228–234.
[29]
Bob Kemp et al. “Analysis of a sleep-dependent neuronal feedback loop: the slow-wave microconti-
nuity of the EEG.” In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 47.9 (2000), pp. 1185–1194.
[30]
Been Kim et al. “Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept ac-
tivation vectors (tcav).” In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2018, pp. 2668–
2677.
[31]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.” In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[32]
Stefan Kolek et al. “A rate-distortion framework for explaining black-box model decisions.” In: In-
ternational Workshop on Extending Explainable AI Beyond Deep Models and Classifiers. Springer.
2020, pp. 91–115.
[33]
Stefan Kolek et al. “Explaining image classifiers with multiscale directional image representation.”
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2023,
pp. 18600–18609.
[34]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, et al. “Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time series.”
In: The handbook of brain theory and neural networks 3361.10 (1995), p. 1995.
[35]
Gregory R Lee et al. “PyWavelets: A Python package for wavelet analysis.” In: Journal of Open
Source Software 4.36 (2019), p. 1237.
[36]
Manxi Lin et al. “Shortcut learning in medical image segmentation.” In: International Conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer. 2024, pp. 623–633.
[37]
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.” In:
Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
57
[38]
Pejman Memar and Farhad Faradji. “A novel multi-class EEG-based sleep stage classification
system.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 26.1 (2017),
pp. 84–95.
[39]
Bjørn Leth Møller et al. “Finding NEM-U: Explaining unsupervised representation learning
through neural network generated explanation masks.” In: Forty-first International Conference
on Machine Learning. 2024.
[40]
MS Mourtazaev et al. “Age and gender affect different characteristics of slow waves in the sleep
EEG.” In: Sleep 18.7 (1995), pp. 557–564.
[41]
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Brain Basics: Understanding Sleep. Ac-
cessed: 2025-04-18. 2025.
[42]
Ian E Nielsen et al. “Robust explainability: A tutorial on gradient-based attribution methods for
deep neural networks.” In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 39.4 (2022), pp. 73–84.
[43]
Keiron O’shea and Ryan Nash. “An introduction to convolutional neural networks.” In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.08458 (2015).
[44]
OpenAI. ChatGPT. Web Page. Model: GPT-4o mini. 2025.
[45]
Aakash K. Patel et al. Physiology, Sleep Stages. Updated 2024 Jan 26. In: StatPearls [Internet].
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 Jan–. Accessed: 2025-04-18. 2024.
[46]
Mathias Perslev et al. DCSM Sleep Staging Dataset. https://erda.ku.dk/public/archives/
db553715ecbe1f3ac66c1dc569826eef/published-archive.html. Accessed: 2025-06-01. 2021.
[47]
Huy Phan et al. “SeqSleepNet: end-to-end hierarchical recurrent neural network for sequence-to-
sequence automatic sleep staging.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering 27.3 (2019), pp. 400–410.
[48]
Huy Phan et al. “Sleeptransformer: Automatic sleep staging with interpretability and uncertainty
quantification.” In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 69.8 (2022), pp. 2456–2467.
[49]
Stuart F Quan et al. “The sleep heart health study: design, rationale, and methods.” In: Sleep
20.12 (1997), pp. 1077–1085.
[50]
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “” Why should i trust you?” Explaining
the predictions of any classifier.” In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international confer-
ence on knowledge discovery and data mining. 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[51]
Frank Rosenblatt. “The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage and organization
in the brain.” In: Psychological review 65.6 (1958), p. 386.
[52]
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. “Learning representations by
back-propagating errors.” In: nature 323.6088 (1986), pp. 533–536.
[53]
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju et al. “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-
based localization.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 2017,
pp. 618–626.
[54]
Zhou Shao et al. “Tracing the evolution of AI in the past decade and forecasting the emerging
trends.” In: Expert Systems with Applications 209 (2022), p. 118221.
[55]
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. “Learning important features through
propagating activation differences.” In: International conference on machine learning. PMlR. 2017,
pp. 3145–3153.
[56]
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. “Deep inside convolutional networks:
Visualising image classification models and saliency maps.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034
(2013).
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
58
[57]
Daniel Smilkov et al. “Smoothgrad: removing noise by adding noise.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03825 (2017).
[58]
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. “Axiomatic attribution for deep networks.” In:
International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2017, pp. 3319–3328.
[59]
Eric Suni. Stages of Sleep. Sleep Foundation. [Online; updated 11-August-2023; accessed 30-June-
2024]. August 2023.
[60]
Akara Supratak et al. “DeepSleepNet: A model for automatic sleep stage scoring based on raw
single-channel EEG.” In: IEEE transactions on neural systems and rehabilitation engineering 25.11
(2017), pp. 1998–2008.
[61]
Eleonora Tobaldini et al. “Sleep, sleep deprivation, autonomic nervous system and cardiovascular
diseases.” In: Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 74 (2017), pp. 321–329.
[62]
Johanna Vielhaben et al. “Explainable AI for time series via virtual inspection layers.” In: Pattern
Recognition 150 (2024), p. 110309.
[63]
Kristiffer K. Wicktstrøm et al. “RELAX: Representation Learning Explainability.” In: Int J Com-
put Vis 131 (2022), pp. 1584–1610.
[64]
Wikipedia contributors. Electroencephalography — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online;
accessed 30-June-2024]. 2024.
[65]
Edward A Wolpert. “A manual of standardized terminology, techniques and scoring system for
sleep stages of human subjects.” In: Archives of General Psychiatry 20.2 (1969), pp. 246–247.
[66]
Yaojue Xie, Yuansheng Zhai, and Guihua Lu. “Evolution of artificial intelligence in healthcare: a
30-year bibliometric study.” In: Frontiers in Medicine 11 (2025), p. 1505692.
[67]
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks.” In:
Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
2014, Proceedings, Part I 13. Springer. 2014, pp. 818–833.
[68]
Guo-Qiang Zhang et al. “The National Sleep Research Resource: towards a sleep data commons.”
In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 25.10 (2018), pp. 1351–1358.
