==PAGE:1==
Quantification of measurement errors
in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
Escalona Trujillo, Pablo
July, 2025
DTU Space
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facil­
ity
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Escalona Trujillo, Pablo
Supervised by:
Supervisor: Samel Arslanagic, Associate Professor, Ph.D.
Co­Supervisor: Javier Fernández Álvarez, Postdoctoral Researcher.
Co­Supervisor: Jeppe Majlund Bjørstorp, MSc in Engineering.
Electromagnetic Systems, DTU Space.
Co­Supervisor: Ulrich Gothelf, Ph.D.
Cobham Satcom.
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Ørsteds Plads, Building 357,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I am profoundly grateful to my supervisors: Associate Professor Samel Arslanagic,
Postdoctoral Researcher Javier Fernández Álvarez, Mr. Jeppe Majlund Bjørstorp, and
Dr. Ulrich Gothelf, for their unwavering commitment, time, and insightful contributions to
this project. The opportunity to learn from their expertise has been an invaluable aspect
of my research journey.
A heartfelt thanks to my grandparents, Justa, Josefa, Eliseo and Pedro, for being my
roots and for having given me their love since I was born.
Thanks to Eulalia, my aunt, godmother and guardian angel. For guiding me, protect­
ing me and helping me from wherever you are. This is for you.
My deepest gratitude goes to my parents, Juana and Gregorio, for having always
given everything for me, for having supported me in every decision of my life and for
having tucked me in with their love and affection when I needed it. Without you, this
would not have been possible. I have missed you every day during these two years.
Thank you from the bottom of my heart.
A very special thanks to Alejandra for her love and support from afar. It has been a
little easier with you.
And my final thanks to all the people, colleagues and friends who have helped me on
my way to becoming the engineer I am today. Thanks to all of them.
ii
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Spherical near­field antenna measurements are a common method of measurements
when far­field measurements for an antenna are physically impractical due to the required
measurement distance, typically hundreds of meters. Near­field systems are based on
the use of either a single probe, or multiple probes, which are scanned in a regular grid
across a spherical measurement surface in the near field of the test antenna. Since the
far­field radiation pattern is for most antennas the characteristic of greatest interest, it can
be derived by applying suitable processing techniques to the near­field data obtained from
the scanning process.
One of these techniques is the spherical wave expansion. It allow the field to be
expressed as a sum of modes i.e., vector wave functions each weighted by a certain co­
efficients. By obtaining the coefficients from the near­field measurement, the field can be
obtained at any other distance with these coefficients. The far­field acquisition involves
numerous numerical transformations of the near­field data, which are influenced by vari­
ous measurement inaccuracies. The evaluation of the near­field influence of these inac­
curacies implies an advantage in terms of computational and mathematical simulations
over the far­field evaluation, and is therefore the primary objective of this project.
This thesis project focuses on the estimation of antenna measurement uncertainty
at the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility. The research consists of the creation of
mathematical models, which, together with real life measurements, allow the quantitative
and qualitative comparison of antenna radiation patterns. This allows, firstly, to estimate
the effect in the near­field data of different uncertainty factors separately, and finally, to
quantify the total uncertainty of the far­field pattern based on the factors addressed. Most
of these uncertainty factors are related to physical factors in the anechoic chamber, such
as a misalignment (depointing) of the DUT on the θ­axis, a small offset at the intersection
between axes, or the differences between each probe, called channel balance.
The analysis and results presented in this project are a basic tool for future measure­
ments and collaborations between the university and companies. This allows for in­depth
knowledge of the quality of the measurements made at this facility, verifying that they
comply with the estimates provided by the manufacter and ensuring greater accuracy in
future data to be obtained.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
iii
==PAGE:6==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the DTU Electromagnetic Test
Centre (DTU­ETC), Department of Space Research and Space Technology, at the Tech­
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Escalona Trujillo, Pablo ­ s212157
Signature
Date
iv
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
30/06/2025
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and justification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Radiation Integrals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Mathematical Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Spherical wave expansion and Q coefficientes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Uncertainty factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Set Up Description
19
3.1
DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
DTU­ESA Spherical Near­Field antenna test facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Antennas under test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Error Limit Evaluation
29
4.1
Axis Intersection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Depointing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Channel Balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Results discussion
47
5.1
Depointing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.2
Axis Intersection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.3
Channel Balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
6
Conclusion
81
Bibliography
85
A Appendix
87
A.1 BL206 Ideal Array Model vs Q­coefficient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.2 Cross­polar BL206 Ideal Model Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
A.3 MVG vs DTU­ESA Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and justification
Accurate and precise antenna characterisation has become increasingly relevant and
important as more complex antenna design concepts have emerged. And, in particular,
spherical measurements in near­field ranges have become an industry standard owing
to the many advantages of the technique, such as the crucial ability to perform measure­
ments in the controlled environment of an anechoic chamber [1]. One of such near­field
ranges is the new DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility, which is the primary focus of this
work. Uncertainty of antenna measurements is a critical parameter for assessing the qual­
ity of a result, and to enable meaningful comparison of results. This thesis project aims
to provide a rigorous uncertainty quantification procedure to ensure measurements at the
aforementioned facility meet the precision demands of industrial and academic partners.
Although there are now a few studies that address the accuracy of near­field spher­
ical measurements [2], there are not many due to the complexity of the spherical versus
planar or cylindrical system. A chapter with the analysis of different types of errors in
this type of measurement can be found in Hansen [3] . Sources of uncertainty include
mechanical misalignments (e.g., depointing of the device under test or positional offsets
in the chamber’s axes), probe calibration inconsistencies (e.g., channel balance errors
between multi­probe systems),and environmental factors (e.g., reflections between the
antenna under test (AUT) and the probe). It is not realistic in the time frame of this project
to analyse all of them. Therefore, the estimation of uncertainty in near­field spherical
measurements is commonly summarised in 18 points [2], where only s few of them are
analysed in this project.
The spherical near field measurements in the framework of this project are performed
using the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility [4] ,which is a multi­probe system based
on a ring of probes antennas which are electrically scanned to provide measurements in
one of two angular directions, the elevation axis (θ).
In particular, some of the factors that have served as motivation for the realisation of
this project can be summarised as follows:
• Lack of combination of computational modelling together with real­world measure­
ment data in existing projects.
• The need to analyse the influence of different uncertainty factors for the DTU­ETC
Fast Antenna Test Facility and gain a deeper understanding of its functioning.
• The need to validate manufacturer specifications, ensuring compliance with mea­
surement standards, and fostering trust in collaborations between DTU and industry
stakeholders.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Purpose
The primary objective of this thesis is to establish a rigorous and standardized method­
ology for quantifying measurement uncertainties in spherical near­field antenna charac­
terizations conducted at the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility.
To achieve this, the project integrates computational modeling (using MATLAB and
Python) with experimental validation to systematically analyze key sources of uncertainty
inherent to the multi­probe spherical near­field system. The work focuses on identifying,
isolating, and quantifying dominant error contributors, such as mechanical misalignments
or probe calibration inconsistencies (e.g., channel balance errors).
The specific objectives of this project include the modeling and measurement of three
different types of antennas, which can be classified according to their directivity as: low,
medium and highly directive, enabling a comprehensive characterization of uncertainty
factors across diverse radiation patterns. This approach ensures robustness in identifying
how errors scale with antenna properties, such as beam­width and side­lobe levels. Other
important specific objectives are:
• Quantify the magnitude of the studied errors by means of experimental measure­
ments at the MVG range.
• Evaluate the effects of these errors in the far­field measurements using the modelled
ad measured antennas.
• Derive an uncertainty budget based on the results of this evaluation.
Therefore, this project aims to study and analyze the accuracy of near­field measure­
ments of the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility, where after the evaluation of the differ­
ent parameters of uncertainty established, the measurements at the anechoic chamber
are characterized by a single value of uncertainty.
1.3
Overview
Chapter 2 establishes the mathematical and electromagnetic foundations for spher­
ical near­field measurements, covering radiation integrals derived from Maxwell’s equa­
tions, dipole array modeling for antenna apertures, spherical wave expansion theory for
near­to­far­field transformation using Q­coefficients, and the theoretical addressing of un­
certainty factors (channel balance, axis intersection and depointing).
Chapter 3 describes the experimental setups, including the DTU­ETC multi­probe
system (0.4–18 GHz), the DTU­ESA roll­over­azimuth facility (0.4–60 GHz), and three
antennas under test: low­directivity SH800, medium­directivity BL206, and high­directivity
SAILOR 600 XTR Ku, selected to evaluate uncertainty impacts across diverse radiation
patterns.
Chapter 4 describes the methodologies for quantifying uncertainty factors: axis in­
tersection via flip­test phase slope analysis, depointing via flip­test quadratic amplitude
fitting, and channel balance through statistical characterization of intra/inter­probe varia­
tions, all integrated into Monte Carlo simulations for error estimation. The error limit for
each uncertainty factor is also calculated.
2
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 5 analyzes the results of applied uncertainty factors limit errors across dif­
ferent antenna models, evaluating their impact on radiation patterns, especially the dif­
ference on the on­axis directivity. It quantifies the individual contributions of three sys­
temic error sources (depointing, axis intersection, channel balance) to the total measure­
ment uncertainty for each AUT. The root sum square (RSS) method is applied to ag­
gregate component uncertainties into a unified budget per AUT. Validation is performed
through cross­facility comparison: DTU­ETC measurements are statistically evaluated
against DTU­ESA reference results to determine consistency within combined uncertainty
bounds.
Chapter 6 consolidates the research outcomes through a systematic synthesis of
project findings. It formalizes conclusions derived from quantitative error analysis, es­
tablishes validated uncertainty boundaries and addresses discrepancies between exper­
imental and manufacturer­provided uncertainty metrics,
As appendix are included the radiation pattern comparisons (ideal vs. Q­coefficient
models), cross­polarization analyses for the BL206 AUT, and direct measurement com­
parisons between DTU­ESA and MVG facilities.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:13==
2
Theoretical Background
This chapter establishes the theoretical foundation for quantifying uncertainties in
spherical near­field antenna measurements.
It begins with a systematic framework for modeling electromagnetic radiation, starting
with radiation integrals to describe field patterns from current sources, which underpin the
ideal dipole array model used to simulate real antennas in this project. The analysis
then transitions to spherical near­field theory, where the spherical wave expansion and
Q coefficients are derived as critical tools for transforming near­field data into far­field
patterns. These equations form the methodological backbone of the DTU­ETC facility’s
measurement process, enabling precise characterization of antenna performance.
Finally, the chapter concludes with a rigorous classification of uncertainty factors, de­
tailing their mathematical origins and impact on measurement accuracy.
2.1
Radiation Integrals
2.1.1
Maxwell´s Equations
Maxwell’s equations are the foundation of classical electromagnetism. They explain
how electric and magnetic fields interact with each other and what creates them. Given
some time­harmonic electric and magnetic fields, the Maxwell’s equations in differential
form are given below:[5]:
∇× ⃗E = −jω ⃗B −⃗
Jm
(2.1)
∇× ⃗H = jω ⃗D + ⃗Je
(2.2)
∇· ⃗D = ρe
(2.3)
∇· ⃗B = ρm
(2.4)
where E and H are the electric and magnetic fields,D is the electric displacement field and
B is the magnetic flux density. Je and Jm are the electric and magnetic current densities
respectively. Similarly, ρe and ρm refer to the electric and magnetic charge density. If the
previous equations are particularized for only electric sources (i.e., Jm=0 and ρm = 0),
they can be expressed as
∇× ⃗Ee = −jω ⃗Be
(2.5)
∇× ⃗He = jω ⃗De + ⃗Je
(2.6)
∇· ⃗De = ρe
(2.7)
∇· ⃗Be = 0
(2.8)
Given the absence of magnetic monopoles (equation (2.8)) and owing to the second
null identity of divergence­less fields the magnetic flux density can be expressed as
⃗Be = ∇× ⃗A
(2.9)
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
5
==PAGE:14==
where A is a magnetic vector potential. However, since ∇× (∇ϕ) = 0 based on the null
first identity principle, equation (2.9) can also be written as
Be = ∇× ( ⃗A + ∇ϕe)
(2.10)
where ϕe is an arbitrary electric scalar potential. Substituting the previous equation into
Faraday’s Law (equation (2.5)) yields:
∇× ⃗Ee = −jω∇× ( ⃗A + ∇ϕe) ⇒∇× ( ⃗E + jω( ⃗A + ∇ϕe)) = 0
(2.11)
E = −jωA −∇ϕe
(2.12)
Taking into account the relations De = εEe and He = Be
µ , equation (2.6) is expressed as
∇× Be = jωµε ⃗E + ⃗Je
(2.13)
Substituting equations (2.10) and (2.12) into the previous equation leads to :
∇× ∇× ⃗A = jωµε(−jω ⃗A −∇ϕe) + µ ⃗Je
(2.14)
where using the vector identity ∇× (∇× ⃗A) = ∇(∇· ⃗A) −∇2A, this is restated as:
∇(∇· ⃗A) −∇2A = jωµε(−jω ⃗A −∇ϕe) + µ ⃗Je
(2.15)
Developing the multiplication of that equation, and grouping the ∇2A and ω2µεA terms of
the resulting equation, the equation (2.15) is equivalent to
∇(∇· ⃗A) + jωµε∇ϕe −µ ⃗Je = ∇2A −j2ω2µε ⃗A
(2.16)
Then, the following simplifications have to be considered:
• Since ω2µε = k2, the right part of equation (2.16) can be expressed as
∇2 ⃗A + k2 ⃗A
(2.17)
where k is the wave number.
• Substituting Lorenz’ condition ∇· A = −jωεµϕe in the left part of equation (2.16),
yields to :
∇(∇· ⃗A + jωµε∇ϕe) = 0
(2.18)
Thus, equation (2.16) is reduced to
∇2 ⃗A + k2 ⃗A = −µ ⃗Je
(2.19)
which is known as the Helmholtz equation. The general solution to equation (2.19), is
defined as the vector potential A for an electric current source Je, which is expressed by
the integral over the source volume v′:
A(r) =
Z
v′ µJe(⃗r′)e−jβR
4πR dv′ =
Z
v′ µJe(⃗r′) e−jk|r−r′|
4π |r −r′|dv′
(2.20)
where β is the propagation constant defined as β =
2π
λ , and R is the vector from the
source point to the field point P, as shown in figure 2.1.
6
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:15==
r′ denotes the position vector of a source point within the radiating volume V , where
the current density Je(r) is localized, and r corresponds to the vector position to the ob­
servation point.
Figure 2.1: Vectors diagram [5]
Based on the electromagnetic duality principle, where the inherent symmetry in Maxwell’s
equations under the exchange of electric and magnetic quantities is highlighted, the equa­
tion analogous to the equation (2.19) for the magnetic field can be expressed as
∇2F + k2F = −εJm
(2.21)
where F is a vector electric potential. Analogously to the previous case, if this equation
is solved, F is obtained
F(r) =
Z
v′ εJm(⃗r′)e−jβR
4πR dv′ =
Z
v′ εJm(⃗r′) e−jk|r−r′|
4π |r −r′|dv′
(2.22)
Based on the geometry shown in figure 2.1, the electric field Ee at an arbitrary point gen­
erated by an electric current density Je can be expressed as
Ee = −jkη
Z
V
( 
Je(r′) −Je(r′) · ˆR ˆR

−
j
k|R|

Je(r′) −3Je(r′) · ˆR ˆR

−
1
k2|R|2

Je(r′) −3Je(r′) · ˆR ˆR
 )
e−jk|R|
4π|R| dΩ
(2.23)
where ˆR is the unit vector of R. Under far­field conditions (kR ≫1, r ≫max (r′)), the
distance R simplifies to R ≈r −ar · r′, where ar is the unit radial vector
R = r −r′ = (x −x′)ˆx + (y −y′)ˆy + (z −z′)ˆz
(2.24)
Note that due to the spherical coordinate geometry, the vector r previously defined in
Cartesian coordinates, can be converted into Spherical coordinates as
⃗r = xˆx + yˆy + zˆz = (r sin θ cos ϕ)ˆx + (r sin θ sin ϕ)ˆy + (r cos θ)ˆz
(2.25)
The factor
1
k2|R|2 emerges from the far­field simplification of higher­order terms in the
dyadic Green’s function expansion [6], while the term e−jk|R|
4π|R|
represents the spherical
wave propagation.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
7
==PAGE:16==
Thus, and analogously to the analysis made above for the electric field Ee,the mag­
netic field He at an arbitrary point generated can be expressed due to the electromagnetic
duality principle as
He = k
j
Z
V
(
bR × Je
 r′ 
1 +
1
jk|R|
 )
e−jk|R|
4π|R| dΩ
(2.26)
whose electric field Em is given by the expression
Em = −Heη = −kη
j
Z
V
(
bR × Je
 r′ 
1 +
1
jk|R|
 )
e−jk|R|
4π|R| dΩ
(2.27)
2.1.2
Hertzian dipole
Based on the theoretical principle [7] that any type of antenna can be decomposed
into continuous current filaments (ideal dipoles), the field radiated by an antenna at an
arbitrary point can be found as the sum of the contributions of all the ideal dipoles into
which that antenna has been divided. Having addressed equations (2.20) and (2.22)
previously, since the the current distribution for a Hertzian dipole is given by δ(⃗r′), the
current density can be particularized as
J = ρδ(⃗r′)ˆa
(2.28)
where ρ refers to the excitation amplitude, and ˆa to an arbitrary polarization vector. There­
fore, previous equations (2.20) and (2.22) can now be stated for a Hertzian dipole as:
A(r) =
Z
v′ µJe(⃗r′) e−jk|r−r′|
4π |r −r′|dv′ = ρeˆa e−jk|r−r′|
4π |r −r′|
(2.29)
F(r) =
Z
v′ εJm(⃗r′) e−jk|r−r′|
4π |r −r′|dv′ = ρmˆa e−jk|r−r′|
4π |r −r′|
(2.30)
The electric field E can be derived from A and F;
⃗Ee = −jωA −
j
ωµϵ∇(∇· A)
(2.31)
⃗
Em = −1
ε∇× F
(2.32)
8
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Mathematical Modelling
Once the general expression for calculating the electric field Ee and Em has been
derived, the aim of this section is to model the aperture of a horn antenna as an array of
dipoles placed in the xy­plane. This dipole array is modeled as a Huygens source, which
is based on the combination of crossed electrically small electric and magnetic dipoles
that produces a purely linearly polarized field [8], and whose scattered field interfere to
yield “zero” backscattering.
Figure 2.2: Huygens source configuration
If ⃗Je and ⃗
Jm are the electric and magnetic dipole current densities, this configuration
makes the +z­axis as the preferred broadside direction since ˆy × −ˆx = +ˆz.
For instance, due to the internal geometry of the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facil­
ity explained in 3.1, the analysis of a x­oriented infinitesimal dipole is considered in this
section.
The electric current density is defined as Je(r′) = ρeˆxδ(r′) where ρe refers to the
excitation amplitude, and ˆx indicates that the orientation of the dipole is parallel to the x­
axis. Particularizing the equation (2.23) for a dipole with the above mentioned orientation,
the final equation expressing the electric field Ee for a Hertzian dipole at an arbitrary point
P is:
⃗Ee ⃗
(r) = jωη0
" 
ˆxρe −ρe
(x −x0)
R2

((x −x0)ˆx + (y −y0)ˆy + (z −z0)ˆz)
−j
kR

ˆxρe −3ρe
(x −x0)
R2

((x −x0)ˆx + (y −y0)ˆy + (z −z0)ˆz)
−
j
(kR)2

ˆxρe −3ρe
(x −x0)
R2

((x −x0)ˆx + (y −y0)ˆy + (z −z0)ˆz)
#
e−jk|R|
4π|R|
(2.33)
where (x0, y0, z0) defines the point where the dipole is placed, and η0 =
q
µ0
ε0 refers to the
free space intrinsic impedance.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
9
==PAGE:18==
Analogously, the electric field related to the magnetic currents is defined as :
⃗
Em ⃗
(r) = jkη
4πR2
"
ρm [(z −z0) ˆy −(y −y0) ˆz]

1 −
1
jk|R|
 #
e−jk|R|
R
dΩ
(2.34)
It is then finally concluded that the total electric field E is given by the addition of
equations(2.33) and (2.34)
⃗E = ⃗Ee + ⃗
Em
(2.35)
Since this mathematical model is only used to model the aperture of a pyramidal horn
antenna centered with respect to the origin in the xy­plane, this aperture is divided into Nx
number of dipoles in the x­direction and Ny dipoles in the y­direction. These parameters
are obtained by the mathematical model as a function of the physical parameters of the
antenna and its operational frequency, since the criterion is established that the distance
between elements in the x­axis dx, and the distance between elements in the y­axis dy,
both must be less than λ
2, to avoid grating lobes as established in planar array theory [8].
The amplitude excitation for each array element should correspond to the approxi­
mation of the electric field distribution E at the pyramidal horn antenna aperture, which is
expressed as
E′
y (x, y) = E0 cos πx
a1
e−jk0(x2/ρ2+y2/ρ1)/2
(2.36)
where a1, ρ1 and ρ2 are physical parameters of the antenna which refer to the dimension
of the aperture in the x­direction, the E­plane flare length and the H­plane flare length
respectively. In addition, x is defined in [−a
2 , a
2] and y in [−b
2 , b
2].
Figure 2.3: Pyramidal horn dimensions
Therefore, the total field generated at an arbitrary point can be expressed as the sum
of the electric field generated by all the electric dipoles distributed along the aperture:
⃗E(r,θ,ϕ) =
N
X
i=1
Ei
dip(r,θ,ϕ)
(2.37)
where N is the total number of dipoles distributed along the aperture, and Edip(r,θ,ϕ) is
given in expresion 2.35.
10
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:19==
This mathematical model, implemented in Python, calculates the sum of the individual
contributions of the electric field generated by each dipole (2.27), for each point (θ, ϕ) of
the spherical coordinate system, where θ = [0, 180] and ϕ = [0, 360].It is a fundamental
tool to compare the results obtained in real measurements, as well as to apply in the
analysis of each of the isolated uncertainty factors addressed in this document, which
allows to have a deeper understanding of the impact of each one of them in the radiation
pattern.
2.3
Spherical wave expansion and Q coefficientes
The DTU­ESA and DTU­ETC fast Antenna Test Facility is an indoor anechoic cham­
bers in which the radiation pattern of the antennas can be characterized by measuring
tangential components of the the electric field radiated by the antennas in the near­field
region over a spherical surface that encloses the antenna under test (AUT). The near­
field region is defined as the region where the distance from the antenna R satisfies the
following criteria:
0.62
r
D3
λ < R < 2D2
λ
(2.38)
where λ is the wavelength of the radiated electromagnetic field and D is the largest di­
mension of the antenna.Thus, from the above equation it follows that the far­field region
is defined for an antenna if the distance R from it meets:
2D2
λ < R
(2.39)
The following part of this section is a summary of [3]. When a spherical near­field mea­
surement is performed, the far­field characteristics can be obtained by applying suitable
processing schemes to the near­field data. This is in the form of a spherical wave expan­
sion (SWE). SWE is a fundamental mathematical technique for representing electromag­
netic fields radiated by antennas in terms of an orthogonal basis of spherical wave func­
tions. This approach is particularly useful in near­field measurements, as it allows com­
plex electromagnetic fields to be modeled by a truncated series of spherical modes, fa­
cilitating the transformation of near­field measurements to far­field patterns.It is based on
solving Maxwell’s equations in spherical coordinates, where the solutions are expressed
as superpositions of vector spherical harmonics multiplied by appropriate radial functions
(spherical Bessel or Hankel functions). These modes are classified into two types: Trans­
verse Electric (TE) and Transverse Magnetic (TM) modes, which describe the structure
of the electromagnetic field in source­free regions
Having defined E and H in equation (2.1) and (2.2), in a source­free region i.e.,Je =
Jm = 0, those equations imply that both E and H satisfy the vector wave equation
∇× (∇× ⃗C) −k2 ⃗C = 0
(2.40)
where k = ω√µε = 2π
λ is the propagation constant, and ⃗C and arbitrary vector. As a
consequence, each component of the field vectors satisfies the scalar Helmholtz equation
(2.19). Let f be a solution of the scalar Helmholtz equation
(∇2 + k2)f = 0
(2.41)
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
11
==PAGE:20==
the vector functions ⃗n and ⃗m, which are solutions to the vector Helmholtz equation (2.19),
are defined through:
⃗m = ∇f × ⃗r
(2.42)
⃗n = k−1∇× ⃗m
(2.43)
The function f, that fulfills equation 2.41 in spherical coordinates, is obtained using sep­
aration of variables as given in [3]
f(c)
eomn(r, θ, ϕ) = z(c)
n (kr)P m
n (cos θ)cos
sin mϕ
(2.44)
where n = 1, 2, 3... and m = 0, 1, 2..., n are used to generate ⃗m and ⃗n. The index e
and o refer to even and odd parts, respectively, of the ϕ dependence of the trigonometric
function. P m
n (cos θ) refers to the Legendre polynomial, while z(c)
n (kr) is a radial function
where the upper index c specify one of the following equations
z1
n = jn(kr)
Spherical Bessel function
(2.45)
z2
n = nn(kr)
Spherical Neumann function
(2.46)
z3
n = h1
n(kr) = jn(kr) + inn(kr)
Spherical Hankel function of first kind
(2.47)
z4
n = h2
n(kr) = jn(kr) −inn(kr)
Spherical Hankel function of second kind
(2.48)
However, in order to simplify the notation, Hansen [3] introduced a small variation of (2.44)
, defined as
g(c)
mn(r, θ, ϕ) = z(c)
n (kr)P |m|
n
(cos θ)eimϕ
(2.49)
where n is defined as before, but m is now defined as m = −n, n + 1, ..., 0, ..., n −1, n.
This notation allows to introduce the generating function
F (c)
mn(r, θ, ϕ) =
1
√
2π
1
p
n(n + 1)

−m
|m|
m
z(c)
n (kr) ¯P |m|
n
(cos θ)eimϕ
(2.50)
where its substitution in (2.42), defines the power normalized spherical functions
⃗F (c)
1mn(r, θ, ϕ) = ∇F (c)
mn(r, θ, ϕ) × ⃗r
(2.51)
⃗F (c)
2mn(r, θ, ϕ) = k−1∇× ⃗F (c)
1mn(r, θ, ϕ)
(2.52)
The spherical modes F1mn and F2mn are solutions to the Helmholtz vector equation,
and therefore to Maxwell’s equations, in spherical coordinates. Thus, the electric field ⃗E
radiated by an antenna circumscribed by a minimum sphere of radius ro in any source­
free region of space r > ro can be expressed as a superposition of spherical modes in
terms of a spherical wave expansion, centered at the origin of the coordinate system as
[3]:
⃗E(r, θ, ϕ) = k
√η
X
csmn
Q(c)
smn ⃗F (c)
smn(r, θ, ϕ)
(2.53)
where ⃗F (c)
smn are the power normalized spherical vector wave functions, and Q(c)
smn are the
spherical expansion coefficients. From equation (2.53), the associated magnetic field is
defined by
⃗H(r, θ, ϕ) = −ik√η
X
csmn
Q(c)
smn ⃗F (c)
3−smn(r, θ, ϕ)
(2.54)
12
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:21==
As can be observed, the amplitudes of the spherical mode coefficients Qcsmn depend
on four different indexes:
• The index s (s ∈{1, 2}) denotes a transverse electric (s = 1) or transverse magnetic
waves (s = 2).
• The index m (−n≤m≤n) describes the azimuthal variation (ϕ) of the field.
• The variation in θ depends on both the degree n = 1...∞and the order m
The summation in (2.53) is defined in this way
X
csmn
=
4
X
c=3
2
X
s=1
∞
X
n=1
n
X
m=−n
(2.55)
where generally, the choice of one or two values of c, guarantees a complete represen­
tation of all solutions to Maxwell’s equations. For instance, n free space conditions, only
c = 3 is considered, denoting waves travelling outwardly from the origin of coordinates.
Thus the summation in c is omitted.
Although the number of modes in (2.53) is theoretically infinite, the spectrum is band­
limited in practice.Thus, the summations are always truncated . N and M are used to
establish the maximum value of n and m in the sums. The index N, depending on the
physcial simensions of the AUT, can be calcultaed by
N = [kr0] + n1
(2.56)
where r0 is the radius of the smallest sphere enclosing the AUT, k is the wave number,
and n1 is constant that determines the accuracy, but is commonly stated as 10 [9].In the
same way, M must fulfill M ⩽N but in most cases, M = N since a full set mode in m is
usually needed.
The spherical wave expansion in (2.53) provides a framework for reconstructing an­
tenna far­field patterns from near­field measurements. This process involves two critical
steps:
• Determination of Q­Coefficients from Near­Field
The Q­coefficients Q(c)
smn are computed by inverting the relationship in (2.53).During
spherical near­field measurements, the tangential electric field components ⃗E(r, θ, ϕ)
are sampled on a spherical surface enclosing the AUT. Using the orthogonality of the
spherical vector wave functions ⃗F (c)
smn, the Q­coefficients can be efficiently extracted
via a least­squares projection or Fourier­based methods. A prominent technique for
this inversion is the Spherical Near­Field to Far­Field Transformation (SNIFTD) [10].
SNIFTD leverages the orthogonality of spherical harmonics to decouple the modes,
allowing the Q­coefficients to be calculated as:
Q(c)
smn =
√η
k
ZZ
Ω
⃗E(r, θ, ϕ) · ⃗F (c)
smn(r, θ, ϕ)dΩ
(2.57)
where the integration is performed over the spherical measurement surface Ω. The
truncation limit N (2.56) ensures the series is finite while maintaining accuracy, as
higher­order modes decay rapidly beyond the AUT’s minimum sphere.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
13
==PAGE:22==
• Far­Field Pattern via Asymptotic Evaluation
Once the Q­coefficients are determined, the far­field pattern is obtained by evalu­
ating (2.53) in the asymptotic limit r →∞. For large kr, the radial function (2.47),
representing outgoing waves, approximate to:
h(1)
n (kr) ∼(−i)n+1eikr
kr
(2.58)
Substituting this asymptotic form into ⃗F (3)
smn the angular dependence separates from
the radial term,leaving a 1
r decay and a phase factor eikr.The far­field electric field
then simplifies to :
⃗Efar(θ, ϕ) = lim
r→∞
⃗E(r, θ, ϕ) = eikr
r
X
smn
Q(3)
smn ⃗fsmn(θ, ϕ)
(2.59)
where ⃗fsmn refers to the angle­dependent vector functions derived from the asymp­
totic limit of ⃗F (3)
smn
2.4
Uncertainty factors
Each antenna measurement is inherently associated with an uncertainty in the results
obtained. Although the study of uncertainty in near­field spherical measurements is a
developing research topic [11], there is a lack of analytical studies, as most of them are
based on simulations.
A chapter on errors in spherical near­field measurements is provided in [3], and a
number of important errors are listed in [12]. It is however not feasible to analyze all of
them in this project. Therefore, only the following uncertainty factors have been analyzed,
which are deemed to have the greatest influence on the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test
Facility, based on previous measurement experiences.
2.4.1
Channel Balance
In a multi­probe spherical near­field (SNF) measurement system, like the SG 64 se­
ries described in 3.1, the presence of multiple receiving probes positioned along an ele­
vation arch introduces a significant source of measurement uncertainty known as channel
balance. This uncertainty arises from the inherent hardware variations across the mea­
surement channels associated with each probe. Each channel comprises not only the
probe itself but also the entire signal path including RF cables, connectors, and the signal
routing through the transfer switch matrix [4].
Channel balance uncertainty manifests as systematic amplitude and phase devia­
tions between different measurement channels. Each probe in the array, positioned at
2.5­degree increments along the elevation arch, represents a unique signal acquisition
path with distinct electrical characteristics. Despite careful design and manufacturing pro­
cesses, small variations inevitably exist in:
• Probe radiation characteristics and gain
• RF cables connecting the probe to the transfer switching unit
• Connector insertion loss and return loss
• Transfer switch path differences
14
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:23==
• Connections to the receiver chain (NPAC or Vector Network Analyzer)
These variations result in different complex transfer functions for each channel, which,
if not properly characterized and compensated for, directly impact the accuracy of the
spherical near­field measurements and subsequent far­field transformations.
For a given frequency, the channel balance uncertainty can be mathematically mod­
eled as the complex transfer function of the i­th channel
Hi(f) = Ai(f)ejϕi(f)
(2.60)
where Ai(f) represents the amplitude response of channel i at frequency f, and ϕi(f)
represents the phase response of channel i at frequency f. The relative channel balance
between any two channels i and j can be expressed as
∆i,j(f) = Hi(f)
Hj(f) = Ai(f)
Aj(f)ej(ϕi(f)−ϕj(f))
(2.61)
For a total number of channels N, the total channel balance uncertainty can be charac­
terized by the standard deviation across all channels:
σA(f) =
v
u
u
t
1
N −1
N
X
i=1
 Ai(f) −¯A(f)
2
(2.62)
σϕ(f) =
v
u
u
t
1
N −1
N
X
i=1
 ϕi(f) −¯ϕ(f)
2
(2.63)
where ¯A(f) and ¯ϕ(f) represent the mean amplitude and phase responses across all chan­
nels at frequency f.
The datasheet [4] reports peak gain accuracy specifications ranging from ±0.5dB to
±1.1dB depending on frequency range and antenna under test (AUT) gain. These spec­
ifications inherently include channel balance uncertainty contributions. For high­gain an­
tennas (30 dBi), the gain accuracy is optimized to ±0.5 dB across most of the frequency
range, indicating effective channel balance compensation techniques.Channel balance
uncertainty becomes particularly evident in sidelobe measurements, where signal levels
are significantly lower than the main beam. The datasheet shows:
• For ­10 dB sidelobes: Accuracy ranges from ±0.4 dB to ±1.0 dB.
• For ­20 dB sidelobes: Accuracy ranges from ±0.5 dB to ±3.2 dB.
• For ­30 dB sidelobes: Accuracy ranges from ±0.7 dB to ±3.2 dB
Based on the SG 64 system specifications, the channel balance uncertainty can be
classified as a significant contributor to the overall measurement uncertainty budget. Anal­
ysis of the system specifications demonstrates that this uncertainty is particularly pro­
nounced in sidelobe measurements, where signal levels are significantly lower than the
main beam. The documented accuracy ranges clearly illustrate how channel balance ef­
fects progressively degrade measurement precision as signal levels decrease. By prop­
erly characterizing the individual channel transfer functions and applying appropriate cor­
rection factors, the overall measurement uncertainty can be minimized, but never com­
pletely eliminated. This systematic approach to quantifying channel balance uncertainty
provides essential confidence limits for antenna measurements in this facility, as well as
the analysis of the manufacturer’s calibration of each probe, so its research is of great
value.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
15
==PAGE:24==
2.4.2
Axis Intersection
Axis intersection uncertainty refers to deviations in the alignment of rotational axes in
a positioner used within spherical near­field antenna measurement systems. When the
elevation and azimuth axes are misaligned, phase errors may be introduced into the col­
lected near­field data. Such errors are not confined to the near­field measurements but
are also propagated to the far­field results, leading to inaccuracies in calculated parame­
ters such as directivity, sidelobe levels, and cross­polarization.
In the context of the MVG SG64 anechoic chamber (equipped with an elevation arch
of probes 2.5 ° apart and a mechanical phi (ϕ) rotation system) the axis intersection er­
ror manifests itself as a displacement of the AUT during rotational scans, perturbing the
spherical sampling geometry.
The AUT in the SG64 [4] is rotated mechanically in ϕ while the elevation θ is sampled
via a fixed multi­probe arch. Thus the θ­axis is not a physical axis of rotation, but it is
defined by the center of the circle that contains the probe antennas. As derived in [11],
since the AUT is rotated about the ϕ­axis, the AUT moves in the x­direction due to the
alignment error and the change in the x­position of the AUT is given by:
∆x = ∆I · sin(θ)
(2.64)
where ∆I is the axes misalignment distance. This displacement disturbs the spherical
sampling grid, causing phase errors proportional to sin(θ). This lack of intersection be­
tween the different coordinate axes can be shown in a more visual way in the next diagram.
Figure 2.4: Axes Intersection diagram
In an ideal measurement scenario, the fixed measurement coordinate system defined
by (x, y, z) must initially coincide with the antenna coordinate system defined by (u, v, w),
positioned relatively with respect to the coordinate system of the anechoic chamber, which
remains fixed for different measurements. However, mechanical imperfections or mis­
alignments in the positioner system can displace these axes, as depicted by the θ and
ϕ axes in Fig 2.4. For instance, the azimuth axis (v) might be offset by a given lateral
displacement, defined in 2.64, from the ideal coordinate system’s origin, causing the AUT
to translate undesirably during ϕ scans.
16
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:25==
The cumulative effect of these errors depends on the scanning strategy employed:
• 360­Degree Phi Span: In this method, ϕ spans 0°–360° with θ fixed in the positive
hemisphere. Phase errors accumulate constructively across the sphere, leading to
significant on­axis directivity deviations [11].
• 180­Degree Phi Span: Here, θ spans both positive and negative angles (e.g., ­90° to
+90°), with ϕ limited to 0°–180°. Phase errors on opposite sides of the pole (negative
vs. positive θ) cancel in the on­axis direction, reducing directivity uncertainty but
amplifying sidelobe and cross­polarization errors [11]
Since the SG64 measurements have been performed in phi full sphere format, as
mentioned above, this measurement format is influenced by the axis intersection uncer­
tainty factor.Therefore, some key factors influencing the error in the SG64 are:
• Probe Spacing: The 2.5 ° spacing between the probes in the elevation arch requires
precise alignment to avoid cumulative phase errors during ϕ scans. With 2.5° spac­
ing, interpolation between sampling points may not capture rapid near­field varia­
tions, especially at high frequencies. This amplifies cumulative phase errors, since
a small displacement of ∆I, generates a quite significant phase error ∆ϕ, distorting
spherical wave coefficients (SWC) during near­to­far­field transformation.
• Mechanical Phi Rotation: The SG64’s mechanical ϕ rotation system (with 0.02° az­
imuth accuracy [4]) is prone to non­intersection errors if the AUT’s rotational axis de­
viates from the elevation arch’s geometric center. Mechanical imperfections (loose­
ness, wear) may cause the axis of rotation ϕ of the AUT not to coincide with the ge­
ometric center of the probe arc. For example, if a lateral displacement ∆I = 0.5mm
is assumed, for a distance R = 2.1m between the AUT and the probe, the angular
error introduced is equivalent to :
∆θ ≈arctan
∆I
R

≈0.01◦
(2.65)
which, although small, results in systematic errors in the sampling position, critical
in high gain measurements [11].
2.4.3
Depointing
In SNF antenna measurements, the depointing or θ­zero error is a critical alignment
imperfection that arises when the commanded angular position of the AUT at θ=0° does
not align the probe and AUT coordinate systems. Specifically, this error occurs when the
z­axis of the probe coordinate system does not coincide with the z­axis of the AUT coor­
dinate system at the nominal θ=0° position [13]. This misalignment introduces systematic
angular offsets in the sampled near­field data, leading to inaccuracies in the reconstructed
far­field radiation patterns.
θ­zero errors are primarily caused by mechanical misalignments in the positioner sys­
tem, such as imperfect calibration of the azimuth axis or residual offsets after mechanical
alignment. Even minor angular deviations (e.g., 0.01°) can significantly degrade mea­
surement accuracy, particularly for high­frequency antennas with narrow beamwidths.
The theta­zero error manifests as a constant angular offset, Δθ, in the sampled near­field
data. Let the nominal angular sampling positions be defined as:
θ′ = θcommanded + ∆θ
(2.66)
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
17
==PAGE:26==
where θcommanded is the positioner’s intended angular setting, and ∆θ is the theta­zero
error.
Figure 2.5: θ­zero Error diagram
As shown in figure 2.5 , two coordinate systems are represented: the probe coordi­
nate system (colored blue) and the AUT coordinate system (colored red). The diagram
shows the roll­over­azimuth positioner, emphasizing the rotational axes (azimuth and roll)
responsible for orienting the AUT, where the roll axis acts as the phi axis and the azimuth
as the theta axis. At the commanded θ = 0° position, the z­axis of the AUT does not align
with the w­axis of the probe (z′­axis), creating a new θ′ pointing direction, which is defined
in the equation 2.66. Therefore, there is an θ ̸= 0 value, namely θ′, that can make the
w­axis parallel to the z­axis of the AUT, fulfilling the definition of the θ­zero error [14].
The near­field signal w(θ, ϕ), measured by the probe, is a band­limited periodic func­
tion in θ. When shifted by ∆θ, the perturbed signal w′(θ, ϕ) can be expressed by its Fourier
series:
w′(θ, ϕ) =
N
X
p=−N
cpejp(θ−∆θ) =
N
X
p=−N

cpe−jp∆θ
ejpθ
(2.67)
where cp are the Fourier coefficients of the unperturbed signal, and N s the highest mode
order required to characterize the AUT. The exponential term e−jp∆θ represents the phase
shift introduced by the theta­zero error.
Since perfect alignment, whether electrical or mechanical, will never be possible in a
near­field spherical measurement system, the error analyzed in this section will always
be present. Therefore, this source of uncertainty is addressed in this project by analyzing
and performing different tests, explained in depth in 4.2, in order to quantify its influence
on the measurements and results obtained in SG64.
18
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:27==
3
Set Up Description
In this chapter, the two anechoic chambers used during this project are described:
the DTU­ESA spherical near­field antenna test facility and the DTU­ETC fast antenna
test facility. It covers the anechoic chamber, the mechanical system and the probes that
are used for the antenna measurements.
Having made a detailed description of these two systems, this chapter ends with
the presentation and description of the three different types of antennas that have been
measured in both installations discussed above. These three antennas can be classified
according to their directivity as: low directivity, medium directivity, high directivity. The
measurement of these three different antennas in these installations allows the study in
depth of how the uncertainty factors explained in the previous chapter affect the results
obtained as a function of the directivity of the antenna under measurement.
3.1
DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
The DTU­ETC fast antenna test facility is an indoor antenna test range where spher­
ical measurements of near­field antennas are carried out. It should be recalled that the
near field of an antenna is defined by the equation 2.38, and whose far field can be ob­
tained using the procedure described in 2.3.
The DTU­ETC fast antenna test facility is a high­precision multi­probe antenna mea­
surement system, which supports frequencies from 0.4 GHz to 18 GHz, making it suit­
able for advanced applications in 5G, satellite communications, and radar systems. The
inside dimensions of the anechoic chamber are l × w × h = 5.0m × 5.0m × 5.0m [4]. The
chamber is lined with with pyramidal absorbers to suppress electromagnetic reflections
down to ­50 dB in normal incidence conditions [15]. The system is divided into a shielded
room (housing the Device Under Test (DUT), probes, and RF equipment) and a control
room (containing the vector network analyzer (VNA), touchscreen interface, and NPAC
receiver).
Figure 3.1: DTU­ETC system overview [4]
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
19
==PAGE:28==
It includes amplification units (20 dB gain), a mixer unit for frequency conversion,
and the NPAC (Near­field Phased Array Controller) for real­time signal processing. The
NPAC drives electronic probe switching, reducing measurement time to <3 minutes for 11
frequencies.
Regarding the mechanical system used in this installation, double interleaved probe
sets are used, placed in a circular arch containing an array of 2 x 68 probes:
• Low­Frequency Array: 0.4–6 GHz, using wideband dipole probes (DP 400­6000)
• High­Frequency Array: 6–18 GHz, utilizing ultra­wideband probes (DP 6000­18000).
The standard arch has an internal/external diameter of 3.2 m/4.194 m, optimized for spher­
ical near­field (SNF) scanning, where probes are spaced 2.5° intervals. The elevation tilt
is implemented as a rotation of the probes in the arc (which is used for oversampling). The
DUT positioner is a motorized mast that enables azimuth rotation (360°), with a maximum
speed of 30°/s, achieving angular resolution of ±0.02° azimuthal accuracy. The length of
this telescopic mast can be adjusted up to 80 cm.The maximum antenna size and weight
are 2.5 m (in diameter) and 250 kg, respectively. Although measurements can be per­
formed with the AUT in receive or transmit mode, only transmit mode is considered in the
measurements performed in this project.
Finally, the system is controlled by a software called “MVG WaveStudio” that auto­
mates probe sequencing, data acquisition and near­field to far­field transformations.In
addition, it uses various parameters for the correction of the data obtained, which can be
queried and retrieved. In this way, the output data of the system can be obtained at differ­
ent post­processing stages, which is very useful for investigating the influence of different
uncertainty factors.
3.1.1
Probes
The probes are based on the crossed dipole antenna architecture, a design first con­
ceptualized in the 1930s as the turnstile antenna [16]. This configuration consists of two
orthogonal dipoles arranged in a cross shape, which are independently fed, enabling si­
multaneous horizontal (H) and vertical (V) polarization measurements without mechanical
adjustments.
Figure 3.2: Crossed dipole structure
20
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:29==
The geometry of these probes is suitable for this system due to different factors:
• Minimal Mutual Coupling: Symmetrical geometry reduces coupling between adja­
cent probes in the array, preserving measurement integrity [17].
• High Isolation: >30 dB isolation between H and V ports, minimizing cross­polarization
interference [18]
As mentioned above, there are two types of probes that allow measurements at two
frequency bands of 0.4 GHz ­ 6Ghz and 6GHz ­ 18GHz. Table 3.1 shows that ”aperture
size” correlates with the wavelength range each probe is designed to handle [19].
Probe Reference
Frequency Band
Aperture Size
DP 6000­18000
6–18 GHz
22 mm × 22 mm
DP 400­6000
0.4–6 GHz
63 mm × 63 mm
Table 3.1: Probe Specifications
In the context of the crossed dipole probes, the term ”aperture size” describes the
physical dimensions or footprint of the probe element within the array. Thus, it specifies
the width and height of the probe structure.
3.2
DTU­ESA Spherical Near­Field antenna test facility
As in the previous case, the DTU­ESA Spherical Near­Field Antenna Test Facility is
also an indoor antenna range to determine the radiation in the near­field of an antenna.
Measurements at this facility are carried out in the frequency range 0.4­60 GHz. In the
measurements performed in this project, the AUT is always in transmit mode, although it
is also possible to perform measurements with the AUT in receive mode.
The inside dimensions of the anechoic chamber are l×w×h = 12.0m×10.0m×8.0m,
where all the distances are measured between the tips of the absorbers [20]. As can be
seen in figure 3.3, two lifts provide access to the antenna and probe tower, respectively.
There is also a crane in case heavy antennas need to be mounted. The walls, the ceiling,
the probe tower and the sliding door are covered by absorbers of different length.
Figure 3.3: ESA Facility Side­view [20]
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
21
==PAGE:30==
This facility employs a roll­over­azimuth antenna positioner since the upper part of the
antenna tower is rotated in the horizontal plane (θ­rotation), and the AUT is also rotated in
the vertical plane (ϕ­rotation). The receiver measures two signals (reference and signal)
in amplitude and phase, while the simultaneous rotation in these two planes takes place.
In turn, this rotation in two planes results in the antenna being scanned on a spherical
surface, since the probe is fixed in its tower. The centre of this sphere is determined by the
intersection of the vertical and horizontal axis. The rotational movements are performed
by two precise angular encoders, visible in figure 3.4.They are responsible for obtaining
the exact values for the two angular coordinates at each point the sphere is sampled.
Due to the aforementioned rotation that the AUT undergoes, the tangential electric
field is measured on­the­fly at discrete points on the sphere, depending on the sampling
parameters that were set at the start of the measurement. Therefore, the total time it
takes for the system to sample the entire sphere is conditioned by the maximum speed
of the servo motors (3°/seconds), as well as the angular resolution set for sampling by
the user. Thus, the user is able to have full control of the system through the PC, which
performs the plotting of the curves of the results obtained, as well as the transformation
of the near field to the far field, in addition to applying the probe correction or other types
of operations.
The near­Field to far­field transformation is carried out by using a dedicated software
called ”SNIFTD” from TICRA [10]. It employs a probe­corrected spherical wave expan­
sion algorithm to decompose near­field measurements into spherical vector harmonics,
eliminating distortions introduced by the measurement probe while ensuring numerical
stability even for large antennas. This approach is based on the basic concepts of spher­
ical near­field theory, as outlined in Hansen [3] which provides solid math support.
Regarding the accuracy of the measurements made in this installation, co­ and cross­
polar components are derived from near­field measurements and extrapolated to far­field
conditions, with polarization reference axes decoupled from the measurement coordinate
framework. Polarization properties, such as axial ratio and angular orientation are quan­
tified via synchronized dual­polarized probe measurements, minimizing temporal drift er­
rors and incorporating probe­specific polarization corrections. Directivity is computed by
integrating full­spherical near­field datasets to establish the ratio of peak radiation intensity
to aggregate radiated power.
Before any measurements can be taken, the system must be mechanically aligned
and calibrated for the results to be valid. This procedure is performed before the AUT is
mounted on the antenna tower, following a clearly established procedure for this facility
[21]. This process involves the use of a theodolite, as well as mirrors and levels, in order
to perform this task with great precision.
22
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: ESA Facility control diagram [20]
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
23
==PAGE:32==
3.2.1
Probes
The SH800 measurements employed a specialized probe known as the ”SMOS probe”.This
probe was specifically developed and manufactured for the SMOS­Miras project con­
ducted at DTU. The defining characteristics of the SMOS probe are its significantly re­
duced length and weight relative to conventional probes; however, this miniaturization
necessitates a trade­off in terms of reduced bandwidth. Constructed as a first­order coni­
cal horn antenna, the SMOS probe retains functional similarities to the other conical horn
probes in regular use within the facility.
Regarding the SAILOR 600 XTR Ku aut, the P1­band conical horn probe was em­
ployed, having an operation frequency band within the 12.41–14.06 GHz. This probe
features a circular waveguide with a diameter of 15.80 mm and a center frequency of
13.230 GHz. The probe incorporates an orthomode transducer (OMT) to separate the
two orthogonally polarized electromagnetic fields received from the AUT, enabling si­
multaneous measurement of co­polar and cross­polar components in orthogonal linear
polarizations.
3.3
Antennas under test
As mentioned above, the use of three different types of AUT throughout the project
corresponds to the objective of analyzing the influence of the uncertainty factors covered
for different directivity patterns.For this reason, in this section an introduction and descrip­
tion of each one of them is made.
3.3.1
Low directivity
The SH800 dual­ridge horn antenna, manufactured by MVG [22], is one of the three
AUT in this thesis project. It operates over a wide frequency range of 0.8–12GHz, making
it ideal for broadband applications, although during this project, it has been operated in
the lower part of this frequency range so that its radiation pattern corresponds to that of
a low directivity antenna. It delivers a gain between 6–15dB, ensuring consistent signal
strength across the band. Its single linear polarization and high cross­polar discrimination
(>45 dB) enhance measurement accuracy by reducing interference from orthogonal polar­
ization components. This is crucial since this mechanical precision ensures measurement
repeatability.
The SH800 features a compact and lightweight aluminum construction, with dimen­
sions of 270mm(H) × 149.1mm(W) × 225mm(L) and a weight of approximately 1.2kg.
This portability facilitates easy handling and mounting in experimental setups. The an­
tenna incorporates a 3.5 mm Female connector (with an optional N­type connector), en­
suring compatibility with high­precision coaxial interfaces. Its circular mounting interface
(110mm) and precision alignment pins enable repeatable positioning, critical for compar­
ative measurements.
24
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:33==
(a) Frontal plane
(b) Lateral plane
Figure 3.5: AUT low directivity pictures
As mentioned above, it is dual­ridge horn antenna as shown in photo 3.5b. The ridges
in the horn’s throat region modify the waveguide’s cutoff frequency by effectively reducing
the dominant mode’s (TE10) cutoff. This enables wideband operation by supporting lower
frequencies within a compact aperture. The ridges also suppress higher­order modes
(e.g., TE20, TE30) that typically arise at higher frequencies. By confining the electric field
between the ridges, the design ensures a single dominant mode propagation, minimizing
pattern distortion and maintaining a smooth radiation profile across the band (as noted
in [22] “unique design preventing unwanted mode excitation”). Unlike conventional horn
antennas with metallic walls, the SH800 features reflector surfaces on its lateral sides.
These reflectors are engineered to direct energy forward, enhancing the antenna’s for­
ward gain and reducing sidelobes. The reflective design minimizes backward scattering
and diffractive losses at the aperture edges, contributing to the antenna’s high cross­polar
discrimination (>45 dB) and stable radiation pattern.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
25
==PAGE:34==
3.3.2
Medium directivity
The BL206 Model 12­3.9, part of Scientific­Atlanta’s Series 12 Standard Gain Horns
[23], is a precision­calibrated antenna designed for use as a gain reference in microwave
measurement systems.In the framework of this project, it is used as a medium directivity
AUT with respect to the other two described in this section.
The horn antenna operates over a frequency range of 3.95 to 5.85GHz, delivering a
nominal gain of 18.0dB with an accuracy of ±3 dB. The horn features a rectangular waveg­
uide (RG­95/U) with internal dimensions of 4.7 × 2.2cm, optimized to support dominant
mode propagation while suppressing higher­order modes, while the aperture dimensions
are 21.6 × 16cm. Mechanically, the horn measures 30.8cm in length, with a total weight of
3kg.
The beamwidths of 23° in the E­plane and 22° in the H­plane provide a balanced
trade­off between directivity and angular coverage, making the horn suitable for near­field
and far­field test ranges.
(a) Frontal plane
(b) Upper plane
Figure 3.6: AUT medium directivity pictures
26
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:35==
3.3.3
High directivity
The SAILOR 600 XTR Ku [24], manufactured by Cobham Satcom, is a mid­sized
parabolic VSAT antenna system designed for maritime broadband communications. It
employs a parabolic reflector to achieve high gain and directional radiation patterns, which
makes this antenna to be considered as the highest directive model of the three different
AUTs of this project. The antenna operates in the Ku­band, with a receive frequency range
of 10.70–12.75 GHz and an extended transmit range of 13.75–14.50GHz .
The 65 cm reflector dish focuses incoming electromagnetic waves onto a sub­reflector
at the focal point, ensuring high directivity and gain. Conversely, during transmission, the
reflector collimates divergent waves from the feed into a narrow beam, maximizing effec­
tive isotropic radiated power (EIRP). The ring focus design (reflector/sub­reflector configu­
ration) minimizes feed blockage and aperture loss compared to prime­focus systems, im­
proving efficiency and sidelobe suppression. The antenna’s sub­reflector redirects waves
between the primary reflector and the feed horn, enabling a compact feed structure while
maintaining optimal phase alignment. The feed system uses linear polarization (X­Pol
and Co­Pol) to align with Ku­band satellite standards, ensuring compatibility with global
VSAT services.
Electrically, the SAILOR 600 XTR Ku delivers a transmit gain of 37.6dBi at 14.25GHz
and a receive gain of 35.8dBi at 11.70GHz, inclusive of radome losses. However, all
the measurements performed with this antenna have always been in transmission mode,
without ever using the radome. Mechanically, the antenna implements a 3­axis stabilized
pedestal to maintain continuous satellite tracking. The antenna is 91 cm high and weighs
36.5 kg.
(a) Frontal plane
(b) Back plane
Figure 3.7: AUT low directivity pictures
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:37==
4
Error Limit Evaluation
This section details the methodology for quantifying three dominant uncertainty fac­
tors inherent to the SNF antenna measurement system described in 3.1 : Axis Intersec­
tion, Depointing, and Channel Balance.
For each factor, the procedure involves: rigorously defining the underlying error mech­
anism and its physical origin within the SNF setup; establishing deterministic Error Lim­
its representing the maximum plausible deviation under controlled conditions; and finally
applying the resulting error limits to diverse AUT models to evaluate the aggregate un­
certainty in on­axis directivity measurements, thus deriving its uncertainty contribution
(Uncertainty Estimation).
Since the three errors analyzed—Axis Intersection, Depointing, and Channel Balance—
are inherent to the measurement system rather than the AUT, the uncertainty contributions
derived from these factors are universally applicable. The data used in this section were
obtained from measurements of the BL206 horn antenna (described in Section 3.3.2), but
the resulting error limits and uncertainty estimates are valid for any antenna measured
in the same spherical SNF setup. This is because the uncertainties originate from the
alignment, positioning and calibration of the facility, not from the specific characteristics
(e.g., directivity or radiation pattern) of the AUT.
4.1
Axis Intersection
The axis intersection error limit (∆L) quantifies the lateral displacement between the
azimuth and elevation axes. It is derived from the linear phase slope difference in flip test
measurements.
4.1.1
Error Limit
Based on [21], two θ­scans were performed, where the AUT was initially placed ϕ = 0◦
and then manually rotated, so that ϕ = 180◦; these two scans constitute a flip test. In the
absence of errors, the ϕ = 0◦scan should be identical to the ϕ = 180◦measurement
flipped around θ = 0◦. If they are not, then we can extract the values of ∆L and ∆θ from
the differences. Thus, the phase slope (dϕ/dθ), is calculated for each scan via linear
regression. Performing polynomial regression on measured phase data to characterize
systematic errors, phase data fitted to linear polynomial can be described as :
ϕno­flip (θ) = a0,no−flip + a1,no−flipθ
(4.1)
ϕflip (θ) = a0,flip + a1,flipθ
(4.2)
Since the non­intersection of the two axes creates a difference in path length (see Fig.(2.64)),
this induces a phase shift:
∆ϕ = 4π
λ ∆Iθ
(4.3)
where ∆I is the axes misalignment distance. For instance, phase vs. θ has slope:
a1 = 4π
λ ∆I
(4.4)
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
29
==PAGE:38==
Therefore, (4.1) and (4.2) can be rewritten as :
ϕno­flip (θ) = a0 +
4π
λ ∆L

θ
(4.5)
ϕflip (θ) = a0 −
4π
λ ∆L

θ
(4.6)
where the axis intersection error limit (∆L) can be found by using:
∆L = λ
4π(a1,no−flip −a1,flip)
(4.7)
This procedure was applied to the flip test data acquired within the frequency band
of 5.2 GHz to 5.4 GHz, parameterized with a step size of Δf = 2 MHz. The error limit ∆L
was calculated at each discrete frequency point and for each theta­scan across the entire
elevation range, spanning from 0° to 177° in 3° increments (∆ϕ = 3◦). Finally, after the
calculation of the error at the specified points, it is characterized by the following mean
value and standard deviation:
• Mean value (µ) : ­0.5140 millimeters
• Standard deviation (σ) : 0.4448 millimeters
In addition, the histogram in Figure 4.1 of the error distribution along the different points
mentioned is shown. Although such a distribution does not exactly replicate a Normal
distribution, since it is more interesting to study the magnitude of the errors than the dis­
tribution they follow, a Gaussian distribution is still considered valid for the purpose of this
experiment.
Figure 4.1: Histogram of axis intersecting error ∆L
30
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:39==
This turns out to be quite important, since it allows modeling the distribution of this
error as a normal distribution for use in the following section, where the estimation of the
influence of these values is intended.
4.1.2
Uncertainty estimation
Once the distribution of the error obtained has been characterised, the effect in the
measured field is investigated by simulating a near­field measurement affected by said er­
ror. This is implemented as a series of rotations and translations of the different coordinate
systems involved in the measurement system.There are two key coordinate systems:
• MCS (Measurement Coordinate System): Global reference frame, formed by:
– Origin: O = [0, 0, 0]
– Three perpendicular axis x = [1, 0, 0], y = [0, 1, 0] and z = [0, 0, 1]
– Probe location: Q = [0, 0, 2.1] in terms of the MCS.
• ACS (Antenna Coordinate System): Local frame attached to the AUT, formed by :
– Positioner location: P =[0,0,0] (initially)
– Three vectors u,v and w initially parallel to vectors x,y and z.
Mechanical errors are modelled by the various rotations and/or translations applied
to this coordinate system.
When a scalar value, coming from the previously established distribution, is intro­
duced into the model as an axis intersection error, different operations relative to the
coordinate axes take place:
• The axis intersection error is modelled by shifting the ACS relative to the MCS origin,
along the MCS x­axis.
1
P = self.P + [-inter, 0, 0]
# New ACS origin
2
OP = P - O
# Vector from MCS origin to ACS
3
Listing 4.1: Axis intersection calculation by shifting ACS
where inter is the axes intersection error introduced in the system.
• For each nominal θ defined in [0◦,180◦] with ∆θ = 1◦, and ϕ in [0◦,360◦] with ∆ϕ = 1◦,
the positioning in the measurement sphere is modelled in the following way::
– Rotation of the ACS of ϕ degrees about its own w­axis (ϕ positioning).
– Rotation of the ACS about MCS y­axis (θ movement). It is noted that this rep­
resents not just a rotation of the UVW system, but also a translation of point P
around point O.
– A new vector from the ACS origin to the probe is calculated, as the vector from
point P to point Q.
– The erroneous θ and ϕ are determined by projecting this vector onto the axes
of the transformed ACS
* Erroneous θ: by calculating the scalar product between the probe­AUT
vector and the Z −axis of the ACS.
* Erroneous ϕ: calculated with the arctangent of the components of the vec­
tor projected in the XY plane of the ACS
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
31
==PAGE:40==
After these transformations, the rotation algorithms output two vectors: θ­angles and
ϕ­angles, representing the error­distorted spherical coordinates from the AUT’s perspec­
tive. An error measurement is then created by sampling a near­field model of an antenna
over a sphere of radius 2.1m in these erroneous positions. To this end, one of the two near­
field models discussed in Section 2 (dipole model or Q­coefficient model) can be used.
This error measurement is then transformed into the Far­Field and compared against an
error­free reference pattern, with particular focus on the impact to on­axis directivity.
To statistically quantify the error impact, this transformation and analysis procedure
is embedded in a Monte Carlo loop of N iterations. In each iteration:
• A new random axis intersection error value is sampled from the previously defined
normal distribution (characterized by µ = ­0.5140 mm and σ = 0.4448 mm).
• The full coordinate transformation algorithm is executed with this unique error value.
• The resulting far­field pattern is calculated and compared against the reference pat­
tern. It is important to mention that the reference pattern does not change between
iterations, and remains unchanged throughout the test.
This approach offers three fundamental advantages that ensure the robustness of the
results obtained.
• It captures the full statistical distribution of potential outcomes rather than a single
error realization, enabling robust uncertainty quantification.
• It generates sufficient data for sensitivity analysis, revealing how error magnitude
correlates with directivity degradation.
• It mitigates random sampling bias, ensuring the reported on­axis directivity vari­
ations (∆D) represent true systemic effects rather than artifact of a specific error
instance.
4.2
Depointing
Analogously to the procedure used in the axis intersection analysis in section 4.1.1,
the depointing error limit (∆θ) is extracted from quadratic amplitude fitting of flip test data.
Therefore, the same flip test data set as above is used for the analysis of this uncertainty
factor.
4.2.1
Error Limit
Based on [21], performing a flip test as part of the depointing analysis makes it pos­
sible to observe whether the amplitude measured at ϕ = 180◦overlaps perfectly with
the amplitude measured when the AUT was ϕ = 0◦, with the θ­axis reversed. Correct
alignment ensures that the main lobes coincide exactly; any discrepancy indicates a mis­
alignment.
This difference is clearly visible in Figure 4.2 , where it can be seen that the flip test
amplitude trace does not perfectly coincide with the blue trace, which represents the non­
flip amplitude, indicating the existence of a ∆θ error.
32
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.2: BL206 flipped and unflipped amplitude for ϕ = 0◦
Amplitude data fitted to quadratic functions can be described as :
Amplitudeno­flip (θ) = a0,no−flip + a1,no−flipθ + a2,no−flipθ2
(4.8)
Amplitudeflip (θ) = a0,flip + a1,flipθ + a2,no−flipθ2
(4.9)
Using a1,flip, a1,no−flip and a2,no−flip, the absolute pointing error can be obtained by :
∆θ = a1,no−flip −a1,flip
4a2,no−flip
(4.10)
Evaluating (4.10) in the same frequency band and elevation range, with the same ∆f
and ∆ϕ that for the axis intersection analysis, the total error limit is characterized by the
following mean value and standard deviation:
• Mean value : −0.0665◦
• Standard deviation : 0.0362◦
Finally, the histogram of the distribution of the calculated error, together with a normal
distribution of mean and standard deviation calculated previously, both shown in Figure
4.3 allows us to determine that this error can be treated as if it were a normal distribution.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.3: Histogram of Depointing error ∆θ
4.2.2
Uncertainty estimation
The estimation of the uncertainty of the depointing error is very similar to the one
explained in relation to the axes intersection, as it is also based on the calculation of
the near field of an AUT using some sampling points of the sphere where an error has
been introduced. Therefore, use is made of the same algorithm based on the rotations of
different coordinate systems, detailed above, in order to obtain two vectors of erroneous
angles with which to sample the sphere.
However, the introduction of a depointing error in the system causes an initial rota­
tional displacement of ACS, which in the algorithm is expressed as an initial rotation of
ACS around the y­axis of MCS:
1
Ry = R.from_rotvec(-point*ey,degrees=False).as_matrix()
2
# Initial orientation of ACS
3
ACS0 = Ry.dot(ACS)
Listing 4.2: Depointing calculation by an initial rotation
where points refers to the scalar introduced to the system as the depointing error, and ey
to the unit vectors of MCS y­axis defined as [0, 1, 0].
Once this initial rotation has been performed, the rest of the steps and transformations
that the algorithm performs are exactly the same as those described in section 4.1.2, with
the exception of 4.1, which is replaced by 4.2 as explained above.
34
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:43==
Therefore,the uncertainty estimation for the depointing error follows a methodology
analogous to that employed for the axes intersection uncertainty. This involves performing
N iterative comparisons between the on­axis directivity of the reference far­field radiation
pattern and the pattern generated by introducing a single error sampled from a defined
distribution, characterized by a mean µ = −0.0665◦and a standard deviation σ = 0.0362◦
.
4.3
Channel Balance
Due to the multi­probe nature of the spherical near­field measurement setup de­
scribed in 3.1, the analysis of this parameter quantifies the influence of the use of different
physical probes on the measurement by two parameters:
• The relationship between the field measured by two channels (H and V ) of the same
probe, since each probe is composed of two orthogonal dipoles, as described in
3.1.1. This quantifies inherent hardware asymmetry between channels of identical
probes, and is characterized by the channel balance term (or amplitude­phase term
[3]) as AHV . Ideally and with a perfect polarization alignment, both channels of the
probe should measure the same incident field. If not, it due to different cable lengths
or fabrication differences between them. Therefore, the term AHV can be described
as:
wV · AHV = wH
(4.11)
where wV and wH are the signals measured by channel V and H respectively.
• The relationship between the field measured by the V −channel of one probe,referred
to as probe i, and the field measured by the V −channel of an adjacent probe, re­
ferred to as probe j. In the same way, the analysis can be performed by comparing
the field measured by the H −channel of two neighboring probes. This character­
izes hardware variation across probes i and j and is identified as Aij throughout the
document. It can be descibed as :
wV j · Aij = wV i
(4.12)
where wV i and wV j are the signals measured by channel V of the probes i and j
respectively.
Therefore, for the analysis of this section, first of all, the arc of the system has been
forced to place the top­most probe of the low­frequency (0.4 GHz ­ 6 GHz) array at exactly
θ = 0◦, thus making the probe axis coincide with the ϕ­axis of the AUT positioner. Then,
two measurements are made for ϕ = 0◦and ϕ = 90◦, in a frequency range of 5.2­5.4
GHz. This allows the comparison of the field measured by the two dipoles of the same
probe at the same spatial point, which is the pole of the measurement sphere. From the
two measurements at ϕ = 0/90 the AHV term can be derived as detailed above.
Next, the arc containing the probes is rotated 2.5◦, so that the neighboring probe is
placed at θ = 0◦. This allows to perform exactly the same measurement as before, but
using a different probe, which allows the derivation of the Aij parameter.
Due to the physical limitations of the system, where the arc of probes has a maximum
displacement of 2.5◦, it is assumed that the ratio obtained between the two neighboring
probes measured is the same between the rest of the probes, since it is impossible to
rotate the arc further and measure with other different probes.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
35
==PAGE:44==
4.3.1
Error Limit
In order to analyze the AHV parameter, as mentioned above, the difference between
the phase and amplitude of the electromagnetic field measured by the two channels that
make up a probe must be compared.The amplitude measured over the specified fre­
quency range is shown in Figure 4.4, where the non­overlapping of the two is clearly
observed, thus indicating an uncertainty in the measurement between channels.
Figure 4.4: AHV Amplitude
In order to quantify the uncertainty in the measurement of amplitude over frequency,
the ratio of the amplitude of one channel over the amplitude of another is calculated for
each frequency, particularising the equation (4.11) for amplitude:
AHV Amplitude = |H −Channelϕ=90◦|
|V −Channelϕ=0◦|
(4.13)
36
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:45==
The result obtained from the previous formula is represented in the form of a his­
togram, in order to observe how the difference in amplitude between the two electromag­
netic fields is distributed along the frequency.
Figure 4.5: AHV Amplitude Histogram
Finally, from the statistical study carried out on AHV Amplitude, shows that this param­
eter can be characterized numerically with a :
• Mean value (µ) : ­0.0024 dB
• Standard deviation (σ) : 0.0122
Since the histogram observed in Figure 4.5, is represented quite reliably by the normal
distribution ( with µ and σ specified above) plotted on top of it, the amplitude of the AHV
parameter is characterized as a normal distribution with mean and standard deviation as
specified above.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
37
==PAGE:46==
The same analysis is performed for the phases, which are plotted along the frequency
in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: AHV Phase
In order to quantify the difference between the two phases obtained along the fre­
quency, the difference between the phase of a measured electromagnetic field minus the
phases of the other field, for all the points of the frequency range, is performed.
AHV Phase = arg(H −Channelϕ=90◦) −arg(V −Channelϕ=0◦)
(4.14)
where the result obtained, shown as a histogram, shows how the difference between
the two phases is distributed along the frequency. Numerical analysis reveals that this
distribution has :
• Mean value (µ) : 0.1164◦
• Standard deviation (σ) : 0.5464◦
38
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:47==
Finally, plotting the distribution of this error as a histogram in Figure 4.7, we can see
that it has a pattern in the shape of its distribution very similar to that of a normal distri­
bution, so this parameter is specified as a normal distribution with mean and standard
deviation specified above.
Figure 4.7: AHV Phase Histogram
Therefore, once the amplitude and phase terms for the parameter AHV have been
encompassed, it can be defined as a vector, of length equal to the number of points at
which θ is sampled in the model:
AHV = N (µA, σA) exp [j · N (µϕ, σϕ)]
(4.15)
where µA, σA, µϕ and σϕ represent the amplitude and phase distributions, respectively,
specified before.
Once the term corresponding to the uncertainty introduced by a single probe has
been fully characterized, the same analysis has to be performed in terms of amplitude and
phase for the Aij term.Figures 4.8 and 4.9 show a comparison between the V −channel
amplitude of probe i and j, and between the H −channel amplitude of probe i and j
respectively.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.8: Amplitude Probei vs Probej for ϕ = 0◦
Figure 4.9: AmplitudeProbei vs Probej for ϕ = 90◦
40
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:49==
In order to quantify the difference in amplitude between each of the two traces of the
two previous graphs, a ratio between amplitudes similar to the one expressed in equation
(4.13) is performed over the entire frequency range, but now establishing the relationship
between the same channel of two different probes:
AijChannel−VAmplitude = |V −ChannelProbei|
|V −ChannelProbej|
(4.16)
AijChannel−HAmplitude = |H −ChannelProbei|
|H −ChannelProbej|
(4.17)
(4.18)
where the statistical results resulting from such analysis are shown in the following table
µ [dB]
σ[dB]
AijChannel−VAmplitude
­0.0145
0.0048
AijChannel−HAmplitude
­0.0013
0.0403
Table 4.1: Amplitude Statistical Results
The distribution of that error is shown in the form of a histogram, together with a
theoretical normal distribution of mean and standard deviation specified in the table above,
reveals that the pattern of the shape of both histograms fits remarkably well with that of
their respective normal distributions. It is therefore concluded that the amplitude of the
parameter can be modeled in the code as a normal distribution.
Figure 4.10: Amplitude Histogram Probei vsProbej for ϕ = 0◦
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.11: Amplitude Histogram Probei vs Probej for ϕ = 90◦
Finally, there is a significant difference of magnitude between the two mean val­
ues shown in table 4.1. Therefore, in order to apply the most restrictive case through­
out the project, the parameter used to represent the amplitude of parameter Aij is the
AijChannel−V , which is modeled as already argued as a normal distribution of mean and
standard deviation specified in table 4.1.
42
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:51==
In order to fully characterize the Aij parameter, the same analysis has to be performed
for the Aij phase. Therefore, the phase measured by the same channel (for the two
different channels) of probe i and j is shown in the following graphs
Figure 4.12: Phase Probei vsProbej for ϕ = 0◦
Figure 4.13: Phase Probei vs Probej for ϕ = 90◦
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
43
==PAGE:52==
For the purpose of quantifying the phase difference between each of the two traces
of the two previous graphs, a difference between phases similar to the one expressed in
equation (4.14) is performed over the entire frequency range, but now establishing the
relationship between the same channel of two different probes:
AijChannel−VP hase = arg(V −ChannelProbei) −arg(V −ChannelProbej)
(4.19)
AijChannel−HP hase = arg(H −ChannelProbei) −arg(H −ChannelProbej)
(4.20)
where the statistical results resulting from such analysis are shown in the following table
µ [deg]
σ[deg]
AijChannel−VP hase
­0.1180
0.2243
AijChannel−HP hase
­0.0674
0.2480
Table 4.2: Phase Statistical Results
Analogous to the previous phase analysis, it is useful to observe the distribution of
both errors in the form of a histogram, as shown in figures 4.14 and 4.15.
Figure 4.14: Phase Histogram Probei vs Probej for ϕ = 0◦
44
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.15: Phase Histogram Probei vs Probej for ϕ = 90◦
Due to the difference in the magnitude of the two mean values shown in table 4.2,
and based on the same criteria discussed above, where the most restrictive value is al­
ways the one used, the value AijChannel−V is the one used to characterize the phase of
parameter Aij. Similarly, as can be seen in the histogram in Figure 4.14, the pattern of
the histogram appears to closely resemble the theoretical normal distribution of µ and σ
previously obtained. Therefore, it is concluded that the phase component can be modeled
as a normal distribution, whose µ and σ are those obtained above.
Finally, once the amplitude and phase terms for the parameter Aij have been encom­
passed, it can be defined as a vector, of length equal to the number of points at which θ
is sampled in the model:
Aij = N (µA, σA) exp [j · N (µϕ, σϕ)]
(4.21)
where µA, σA, µϕ and σϕ represent he amplitude and phase distributions, respectively.
4.3.2
Uncertainty estimation
There are two dominant error sources —inter­probe variations (Aij) and intra­probe
variations (AHV ) which influence the radiation pattern in the far­field of the AUT, and
whose perturbation is valued as the on­axis directivity difference. This perturbation is not
symmetrical for different θ angles, so its influence as a function of this angular position is
also evaluated as a function of the EES metric.
The rigorous modeling of the systematic uncertainties inherent to the multiprobe ar­
chitecture in relation to the Channel Balance requires the application of the two factors
AHV and Aij analyzed in the previous section.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
45
==PAGE:54==
This Aij term models gain/phase variations between different physical probes in the
multiprobe array. Each probe exhibits unique amplitude and phase responses due to
manufacturing tolerances, cable length differences, and amplifier characteristics. The
statistical parameters for Aij, both amplitude and phase, are derived from repeated mea­
surements across two different probes. Crucially, Aij affects both polarization compo­
nents (θ and ϕ) equally for a given probe, as it represents systemic errors inherent to
the entire probe assembly. Consequently, it is applied multiplicatively to both near­field
components Eθ and Eϕ.
The AHV term quantifies imbalances between orthogonal polarization channels (θ vs
ϕ) within a single probe. Such imbalances arise from asymmetries in probe circuitry, such
as differential cable losses. Critically, this error manifests only in the Eϕ component rela­
tive to the Eθ, since its numerical analysis comes from observing how the measurement
of the electromagnetic field for the same theta angle changes as a function of two differ­
ent ϕ angles (ϕ = 0◦and ϕ = 90◦) as explained in the previous section. Therefore, the
hierarchical application of this error in the near field calculation can be described as :
• The AUT near­field (Eθ,Eϕ) is perturbed by the probe’s global amplitude/phase error
Aij.
• The resulting Eϕ­component undergoes further distortion via the intra­probe channel
imbalance Aij, while Eθ­component remains unaffected beyond step 1.
This sequence ensures θ­polarization errors arise solely from inter­probe variations, whereas
ϕ­polarization errors incorporate both inter­probe and intra­probe effects. In a simplified
way, although very accurate to what is actually applied in the code, the influence of this
uncertainty factor can be expressed as :
EFFθ[p, t] =
X
FθQ · Aij[t]
(4.22)
EFFϕ[p, t] =
X
FϕQ · Aij[t] · AHV [t]
(4.23)
where the FθQ and FϕQ are the vector wave function expansions derived from spheri­
cal harmonic coefficients. Indices p and t are related to the angular discretization of the
sphere on which the electromagnetic field is calculated. Index t enumerates these θ po­
sitions while p enumerates ϕ positions.
As can be seen in the formula (4.22) and (4.23) , both errors Aij and AHV are only
dependent on t, related to different positions of θ, since the multi­probe array is mounted
on an on a arc spanning θ = 0◦to 180◦. It is only dependent onθ since every ϕ­scan
of constant θ is measured by one single probe, and therefore these parameters do not
depend on ϕ. Aij[t] and AHV [t] corresponding to each probe are values drawn from the
statistical variables defined in (4.13) and (4.19).
Therefore, the total uncertainty estimation of this parameter is made after N com­
parisons between the on­axis directivity of a reference model, free of any error, and the
pattern of a model to which this uncertainty factor has been applied as explained above.
46
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:55==
5
Results discussion
This section presents a rigorous analysis of measurement uncertainty contributions
for three distinct AUT , employing on­axis directivity deviation as the primary evaluation
metric. Although the uncertainty evaluation can be done as a function of many differ­
ent parameters such as main beamwidth or side lobes, the selection of this parameter is
justified by its critical importance in antenna specification compliance and customer ac­
ceptance criteria, where zenith­direction performance represents a fundamental figure­
of­merit. The quantification methodology employs a deterministic difference approach
defined as:
∆D = |Dref(0◦, 0◦) −Derror(0◦, 0◦)|
(5.1)
where Dref denotes the reference directivity at boresight (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦) computed
from an error­free electromagnetic measurement, while Derror represents the perturbed
directivity under introduction of a specific uncertainty factor.
While ∆D quantifies peak performance degradation, it provides limited insight into
spatial error distribution. To address this, the equivalent error signal (EES) metric is intro­
duced:
EES(θ, ϕ) = ||Eref(θ, ϕ)| −|Eerror(θ, ϕ)||
(5.2)
where Eref is the reference far­field pattern and Eerror is the perturbed field. The EES
computes the relative magnitude difference at each angular position between the refer­
ence far­field pattern Eref and the distorted pattern Eerror, providing a spatial error distri­
bution across the radiation sphere.
Finally, a brief description of the modeling process for each AUT is provided, where,
in all cases, the final far­field has been obtained using the SNIFTD software:
• The model used to characterize the SH800 antenna is based on obtaining the near­
field by implementing spherical wave expansion, using the Q­coefficients obtained
from a measurement of the AUT performed at the DTU­ESA Spherical Near­Field
Antenna Test Facility. It operates at 1.4 GHz.
• In addition to the BL206 dipole model based on the radiation integrals, all the uncer­
tainty factors have been also applied to an spherical wave expansion model using
measured Q­coefficients from the DTU­ESA Spherical Near­Field Antenna Test Fa­
cility. This dual­model approach enabled cross­validation of the theoretical frame­
work and provided complementary uncertainty quantification. Both models operate
at 5.35 GHz.
• Since the Q coefficients obtained for the Sailor pattern representation by implement­
ing spherical wave expansion had its maximum directivity at θ = 63◦,a coordinate
rotation via ROSCOE software has been applied to reorient the main beam to θ = 0◦.
This allows to evaluate the dependencies of the uncertainty factor depending on the
pointing angle of the main beam. Both models operate at 14 GHz.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
47
==PAGE:56==
5.1
Depointing
This section allows to understand and analyze the effect of applying this uncertainty
factor on the radiation pattern of each AUT, as well as its difference in on­axis directiv­
ity after N iterations. Therefore, throughout this section, only the depointing error has
been applied to the models, ignoring the rest, for possible comparison with respect to the
reference models.
5.1.1
SH800
Figures 5.1 and 5.2 show its co­polar and cross­polar component, both for the ref­
erence pattern and for the pattern containing the induced error. Since this AUT has a
low directivity, it is expected that due to its large 3dB beamwidth, its radiation pattern as
well as its on­axis directivity difference will not be as affected as it could be in the case
of antennas with a more directive pattern. This fits with what is observed in the figure, as
it can be seen how the red trace, corresponding to the pattern with error, overlaps with
the blue one, corresponding to the reference model, both for the co­polar and cross­polar
component. This indicates that the impact of this factor, at the general level of observation
of the radiation pattern, is not very decisive
Figure 5.1: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx patterns
48
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.2: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx patterns
Therefore, in order to perform a deeper analysis of the influence of this error, in figure
5.3 the reference pattern is plotted together with the EES parameter obtained through
the equation (5.2). It allows to observe the relative pattern distortion at each angular
coordinate (θ, 90), expressed as a ratio, converted to dB.
Figure 5.3: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Depointing error EES distribu­
tion
The EES metric at (θ = 0◦) in figure 5.3 exhibits a value of −37 dB, indicating minimal
directivity deviation between ideal and depointing­affected patterns. Since the ideal co­
polar directivity at θ = 0◦is 9.25 dB, this error induces a negligible mean directivity loss
of 0.037 dB—statistically validated over 50 Monte Carlo iterations.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
49
==PAGE:58==
Therefore , this can be interpreted as meaning that the error produced in the on­axis
directivity when a relative depointing error is introduced is 46.45 db below the value of the
directivity of the reference model.
The EES distribution in Figure 5.3 exhibits main deviations only within the main beam
region (θ ∈[−70◦, 70◦]), correlating with the angular sector containing the main radiated
power. Beyond this interval, EES values fall below ­60 dB, indicating uncertainty lev­
els that are insignificant relative to typical spherical near­field measurement noise floors.
This angular dependence demonstrates that depointing errors primarily affect radiation
patterns regarding this AUT within the main lobe while inducing negligible distortion in
side­lobe and null regions.
5.1.2
BL206
Regarding the analysis of the influence of the depointing error on the radiation pattern
of the BL206 horn aperture antenna, Figures 5.4 and 5.5 show the co­polar and cross­
polar component of both the ideal model and the pattern affected by the error.
Graphically, greater perturbations are observed in the cross­polar component, where
although the level of both signals is very similar for θ = 0◦(refer to Figure A.8 ), their
patterns differ visibly throughout the spectrum. However, these differences are not signif­
icant, since both maintain similar relative values.With respect to the co­polar component,
the difference between the reference pattern and the one containing the error is also
greater than for the previous AUT. These differences are larger for the main beam as well
as for the rest of the spectrum, where in certain regions the blue trace is distinguished
from the red trace.
Figure 5.4: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx patterns
50
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.5: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx patterns
Numerically, after the iteration of 10 different simulations, an average error in the on­
axis directivity of 0.106 dB has been obtained. This mean error is higher than that obtained
for the SH800 (0.037 dB) , which is perfectly in accordance with expectations, given that
the pattern of this antenna is more directive than the previous one. Figure 5.6 shows the
influence of the depointing error as a function of θ, which allows a more comprehensive
understanding of this error.
Figure 5.6: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Depointing error EES distribu­
tion
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
51
==PAGE:60==
The high level of the EES metric in figure 5.6 compared to its value in the side­lobe
region, indicates that the depointing effect is clearly negligible for other regions of the
radiation pattern other than the direction of maximum directivity. Specifically, for θ =
0◦, the EES parameter is 37.4 dB below the peak of the ideal pattern, indicating that
as it exceeds the ­40 dB threshold, this value can no longer be negligible, but has a
considerable influence.
In order to contrast the previous result, and to obtain more information in the anal­
ysis of this factor, the depointing error has been applied to the BL206 model where the
available Q­coefficients have been used to develop the spherical expansion. The co­
polar and cross­polar components of both the ideal pattern and the pattern affected by
the introduced error are shown in Figures 5.7 and 5.8.
The influence of the depointing error in this model is clearly visible in the side­lobes
of the pattern, as the red trace differs from the blue one. In the main beam region, this
difference is not so clearly visible, but numerically, after iterating 50 simulations of this
model, an average error in the on­axis directivity of 0.099 dB has been obtained. This
value is quite consistent with the value obtained using the dipole model based on the
radiation integrals, which corroborates the similarity of the behavior of both models under
the same depointing error perturbation.
Figure 5.7: BL206 Q­coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx
patterns
52
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.8: BL206 Q­coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx
patterns
Analogously to the previous procedure, the EES metric is also displayed versus the
ideal error­free pattern.It is noticeable how for θ = 0◦, the EES metric is 37.4 dB below
the maximum directivity peak of the ideal pattern. It describes a smaller relative influence
than in the previous case, since −40.72 < −37.4 dB.
Figure 5.9: BL206 Q­Coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Depointing error
EES distribution
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
53
==PAGE:62==
Finally, the comparison of the Figure 5.6 with respect to the Figure 5.9 reveals how
the influence of the depointing error when applied to the model that uses the Q coeffi­
cients affects a wider area of the main beam than when applied to the ideal dipole model,
where it can be seen that its perturbation occurs in a more specific area closer to θ = 0◦.
Specifically, it is observed that for θ = ±11◦, the influence of the error increases until the
EES metric is only 33.22 db below the directivity value of the model. This agrees with
what is observed in Figure A.1, where it can be seen how the pattern beam obtained with
the use of the Q coefficients is narrower than that obtained with the ideal model. It is
also noteworthy that higher EES values are obtained for values other than θ = 0◦, which
indicates that for this model, this uncertainty factor disturbs more in directions other than
the direction of maximum directivity. This did not occur in the previous case, where the
greatest disturbance coincided with the direction of maximum directivity.
5.1.3
Sailor
Finally, to complete the study of the influence of the depointing error, its disturbance in
the maximum directivity model, which corresponds to the SAILOR 600 XTR Ku antenna,
must be analyzed.Therefore, figure 5.10 allows to observe the co­polar and cross­polar
components of the ideal model and the radiation pattern once this error has been applied,
when the main beam is pointing to θ = 63◦.
Figure 5.10: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx patterns
54
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.11: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Zoomed Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx pat­
terns
After 10 iterations where a depointing error has been applied to the model that has
its main beam pointing to θ = 63◦, an average error in on­axis directivity of 0.012 dB has
been obtained.This value is notably lower than errors observed in less directive anten­
nas,contradicting theoretical expectations where narrower beams typically exhibit higher
sensitivity to pointing errors.
This is consistent with what was observed in Figure 5.12, where the EES metric has
a much lower value (­76.6 dB) for the direction of maximum directivity compared to the
two previous AUT. Moreover, in Figure 5.10 and Figure 5.12 a significant error contribution
is observed for θ = 0◦, which is an indicator that this uncertainty factor has a significant
influence when the main beam is pointing at the zenith.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.12: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Depointing error EES
distribution
Based on previous observations, and supported by study [25], which establishes that
zenith orientation amplifies alignment uncertainties more than equatorial orientation, after
a rotation of the Q­parameters, the co­polar and cross­polar components of the ideal
radiation pattern and the one containing the error are shown in Figure 5.13.
A significant difference in the disturbance in the side­lobe is noticeable with respect to
that observed in figure 5.10. Furthermore, the numerical difference in on­axis directivity is
much greater than the previous one, since after 10 iterations in the simulation, an average
difference of 0.49 dB has been obtained. This means that the mean error obtained when
the main beam points to θ = 0◦is greater than 40 times the mean error obtained when the
main beam points to θ = 63◦. This is clearly observable in the comparison of the influence
of this error on the main beam of the 5.11 and 5.14 figures, where the disturbance in the
side­lobes is very significant.
56
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.13: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx patterns
Figure 5.14: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Zoomed Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx patterns
The angular study of the influence of the error in the radiation pattern shown in Figure
5.15, shows how although the error mainly affects the direction of maximum radiation,
where the EES metric has a value of 24.7 dB, the influence on the side­lobes is very
noticeable, since the EES metric acquires significant values greater than 30 dB below
the reference.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.15: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Depointing error EES
distribution
The 24.7 dB EES value is the highest value obtained after the analysis of the 3
different AUTs, which corroborates that the depointing error affects in a more significant
way the more directive the radiation pattern of the antenna is. Finally, what was obtained
numerically is consistent with what was stated in [25], regarding the effect of uncertainty
factors depending on the pointing of the main beam of the antenna.
5.2
Axis Intersection
This section quantifies the impact of mechanical misalignment between rotational
axes on spherical near­field measurements, analyzing perturbation effects across an­
tenna radiation patterns. Through N Monte Carlo simulations, the axis intersection is
isolated to evaluate the on­axis directivity deviation. Consistent with the depointing error
methodology, all other uncertainty factors are suppressed during this analysis to enable
unambiguous comparison against reference antenna models.
5.2.1
SH800
The co­polar and cross­polar component, both for the reference pattern and for the
pattern containing the induced error are shown in Figures 5.16 and 5.17 for the SH800
AUT. No significant differences are observable in both components, which is consistent
with 50 simulation iterations, where an average error in on­axis directivity of 0.006 dB was
obtained. Both the co­polar and cross­polar components are very stable with respect to
the ideal pattern throughout the entire spectrum, demonstrating the minimal influence that
this error has on this AUT radiation pattern.
58
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.16: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
Figure 5.17: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
The analysis of the perturbation of this error with respect θ, shown in Figure 5.18,
demonstrates how the greatest perturbation occurs in the direction of maximum directivity
of the main beam. For θ = 0◦direction , the EES parameter is 47.75 dB below the peak
of maximum directivity of the radiation pattern, corroborating the negligible influence that
this error has relative to on­axis directivity. However, in a analogous manner to what was
analyzed in section 5.1.1, the observation of the EES metric suggests that the maximum
error induced by the lack of intersection of the axes does not coincide with the direction
of maximum directivity of the ideal pattern.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.18: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Axis Intersection error EES
distribution
5.2.2
BL206
The quantification of the error in the on­axis directivity measurement for the medium
directivity model is performed after applying the axis intersection error to the BL206 horn
aperture antenna pattern. The co­polar is shown in Figures 5.19 and 5.20.
In neither of the two components are significant disturbances obtained, since the erro­
neous pattern behaves in an almost identical manner, with very similar values with respect
to its ideal component. The Monte Carlo study simulation for N = 10 iterations reflects
an average deviation in on­axis directivity of 0.022 dB.
Figure 5.19: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
60
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.20: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
Figure 5.21: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Axis Intersection error EES
distribution
The comparison of the EES parameter with respect to the ideal pattern shown in
figure 5.21, reveals how for θ = 0◦, this parameter is 65.53 db below the peak of maximum
directivity of the ideal pattern. Furthermore, it is clearly noticeable that the influence of this
error is also significant in the first two side­lobes as well as in the direction of maximum
directivity, since EES metric shows similar level in both cases. However, its disturbance
is negligible in the rest of the spectrum.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
61
==PAGE:70==
In a similar way to how it has been carried out throughout the entire project, the quan­
tification of this error has also been carried out for the spherical expansion model with the
Q­coefficients of the BL206 antenna. As can be seen in Figures 5.22 and 5.23, the ap­
plication of this error to the model does not entail any significant alteration in its radiation
pattern, either in the co­polar or cross­polar component of the diagram.
Figure 5.22: BL206 Q­coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx
patterns
Figure 5.23: BL206 Q­coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error
co/cx patterns
62
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:71==
The result of the mean error in on­axis directivity after analyzing 10 interactions in the
model simulation is 0.013 dB. This value contrasts significantly with the value obtained
previously with the application of the ideal model, where the value obtained was 0.022 dB.
Similarly, the dependence of the error on θ has been shown in Figure 5.24 with the EES
metric, where it is observed, similarly to the previous case, that the greatest disturbance
produced coincides with the direction θ = 0◦.
However, and unlike what is observed in figure 5.21, in this graph it can be seen how
some disturbances also occur for θ = ±13◦. These are of a lower magnitude than the
disturbance produced for θ = 0◦, and due to their very low level, they can be considered
insignificant. For the particular case shown in the EES metric, it can be seen how this
value is 61.22 dB below the peak of maximum directivity of the ideal model for θ = 0◦.
Figure 5.24: BL206 Q­Coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Axis Intersection
error EES distribution
It should be noted that the EES metrics shown in Figures 5.21 and 5.24 represent
single Monte Carlo realizations, where axis intersection error is applied from a normal
distribution. Despite the ideal model has a higher mean on­axis directivity error than the Q­
coefficient model over N iterations, stochastic inversion can occur in singleton realizations
when analyzing the EES. Consequently, direct comparisons of the last two EES values
mentioned should not mislead the interpretation of the mean error previously obtained.
5.2.3
Sailor
The final point in the analysis of the influence of the lack of axis intersection involves
applying this error to the high directivity antenna models, corresponding to the SAILOR
600 XTR Ku AUT. Thus, both for the ideal pattern and for the perturbed pattern, the co­
polar and cross­polar components are shown in Figure 5.25, when the main beam is
steered at θ = 63◦.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
63
==PAGE:72==
Regarding the main beam, no major differences or disturbances are observed in the
co­polar component of the radiation pattern, as observed in 5.26. However, analogously
to what was analyzed in section 5.1.3, a large error is observed for θ = 0◦, which is
addressed with the subsequent study with the rotated Q­coefficients. No significant dif­
ferences are observed in the cross­polar component either, since after applying the error,
the pattern remains with the same shape and level throughout the entire spectrum.
Figure 5.25: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
Figure 5.26: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Zoomed Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx
patterns
64
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:73==
The analysis of the Monte Carlo study after carrying out N = 10 iterations has pro­
vided a result in the average error in the on­axis directivity of 0.002 dB. The influence
of this error, as shown by the EES metric in Figure 5.27, occurs mainly in the direction
of maximum directivity of the main beam, eventhough no significante differences regard­
ing the side­lobes are observable in Figure 5.26. In this direction, the EES parameter is
84.6 dB below the peak of maximum directivity of the ideal pattern, although for θ values
adjacent to θ = 63◦, values of 58.4 dB below the peak are reached.
Figure 5.27: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Axis Intersection error EES
distribution
Analysis of the EES metric in the graph above reveals that for θ = 0◦, the error pro­
duces a greater disturbance in the radiation pattern than that produced in the direction of
the main beam. For this reason, and in order to investigate the influence of this parameter
when the main beam is at θ = 0◦, the antenna radiation diagram is shown in Figure 5.28
and 5.29 for this specific case. This rotation does not imply significant disturbances in the
main beam of the co­polar component, nor in that of the cross­polar component.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 5.28: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
Figure 5.29: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Zoomed Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx
patterns
The statistical analysis after performing 10 iterations reveals a slight increase in the
magnitude of the average error relative to the difference in on­axis directivity, since the
value obtained in this case is 0.003 dB. This increase in the mean error compared to that
obtained when the main beam was pointing at θ = 63◦corroborates what was established
in [25]. However, this rotation does not imply significant differences in the side­lobes, as
can be seen in Figures 5.26 and 5.29.
66
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:75==
Finally, the analysis of the angular dependence of the error using the EES metric
shows how this error mainly affects the direction of the main beam. The EES co­polar
at θ = 0◦is 79.02 dB below the peak, while the EES maximum value occurs at θ = −2◦
with a level of 58.51 dB below the peak, indicating that the greatest disturbance in the
radiation pattern due to this uncertainty factor does not occur in the same direction in
which the pattern has its peak directivity (θ = 0◦).
Figure 5.30: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. axis­intersection­error EES
distribution
5.3
Channel Balance
This section quantifies the impact of the intra and inter­probe channel imbalance
in multi­probe spherical near­field measurement systems, analyzing systematic ampli­
tude and phase variations across different probes. the channel balance error is isolated
through N Monte Carlo simulations to evaluate disturbances in radiation patterns, as well
as the difference in on­axis directivity. Consistent with the depointing and axis intersection
methodologies, all other uncertainty factors are suppressed during this analysis to enable
analysis of this parameter separately.
5.3.1
SH800
Initially, the statistical distributions obtained from the analysis of the different mea­
surements made with different probes are applied to the low directivity model, in order
to study its influence on the radiation pattern. Thus, both the co­polar and cross­polar
components are shown for the ideal and the perturbed signal in Figures 5.31 and 5.32.
For the co­polar component, the graph shows that both for the main beam region and
for the region of the spectrum outside the main beam, this parameter has a significant
influence, as the perturbed pattern is visibly distinguishable from the ideal one. This is
corroborated after analysis of the Monte Carlo study for N = 50 iterations, where the mean
error obtained in the on­axis directivity deviation is 0.074 dB. Since this mean deviation
is the highest obtained for this model, within the three errors covered, the disturbance
visible in the graph is consistent. Smaller magnitude differences are observable in the
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
67
==PAGE:76==
cross­polar component, although because it maintains a similar level to the ideal, these
differences are considered insignificant.
Figure 5.31: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx patterns
Figure 5.32: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx patterns
The most significant deviation is found in the direction of maximum directivity θ = 0◦,
with the error being 40.85 dB below the peak directivity, as shown by the EES metric in
the following figure. However, it is also noticeable how the disturbance in the radiation
pattern also covers the whole of the main beam, although at a lower order of magnitude
than that observed in the direction of minimum directivity.
68
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:77==
Figure 5.33: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Channel Balance error EES
distribution
5.3.2
BL206
The application of this error to the medium directivity model allows us to observe the
co­polar component of the ideal and perturbed radiation pattern in Figures 5.34 and 5.35
when the ideal dipole model has been employed.
Figure 5.34: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
69
==PAGE:78==
The simulation results show no significant differences in the shape of the radiation
pattern in either the co­polar or the cross­polar component (refer to Figure A.8 and A.7).
Both perturbed patterns maintain very similar shapes and levels to their respective ideal
patterns. There is no θ angle for which a very pronounced error is observed, indicating
that overall, the error generated by this factor is not of a very high order of magnitude.
Figure 5.35: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx patterns
The previous observations in the patterns are corroborated numerically, as the mean
error obtained in the deviation of the on­axis directivity after 10 simulations is 0.027dB.
However, the study of the error induced by this factor based on theta reveals that the
largest error is not produced for θ = 0◦, where the error obtained is 83.78 dB below the
directivity peak. The maximun EES values obtained is at θ = ±21◦wit a level of 59.68
dB below the ideal pattern.
70
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:79==
Figure 5.36: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Channel Balance error EES
distribution
The analysis of this factor in the model of this AUT based on the use of the Q­
coefficients reveals that its effect is much greater, since after the same number of iter­
ations as before, the average error obtained is 0.08 dB, which means that this error is
approximately 3 times greater than in the use of the ideal model. However, this perturba­
tion does not generate any very significant and sudden error for any θ value, both for the
co­polar and the cross­polar component.
Figure 5.37: BL206 Q­Coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error
co/cx patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 5.38: BL206 Q­Coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error
co/cx patterns
The increase in error magnitude is clearly observable in the EES metric in Figure 5.39,
where a value of 39.92 dB below the directivity peak is obtained for θ = 0◦. Furthermore,
it can also be seen that the area where this error has the greatest influence is the area
corresponding to the main beam, where, for example, a value 48.22 dB below the ideal
pattern is obtained at θ = ±11◦.
Figure 5.39: BL206 Q­Coefficients (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Channel Bal­
ance error EES distribution
72
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:81==
5.3.3
Sailor
The last element to be analysed is the model with the highest directivity, which corre­
sponds to the SAILOR 600 XTR Ku AUT. The influence of this uncertainty factor on the
measurement can be seen for both the ideal and the perturbed radiation pattern in Figure
5.40, and the zoomed main beam in Figure 5.41.
It is observed that for the co­polar component, the error induced in the side­lobes
is much more significant than the one generated in the direction of maximum directivity,
as the wrong pattern differs more noticeably in these regions. This small influence on
the direction of maximum directivity is corroborated by the statistical study of the results
obtained after 10 iterations in the simulations, where a mean error in the on­axis directivity
of 0.002dB has been obtained.
Figure 5.40: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 5.41: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Zoomed Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx
patterns
The greater influence on the side­lobes rather than in the direction of maximum di­
rectivity is also observable through the EES metric in Figure 5.42. At θ = 0◦, the error is
73.2 dB below the maximun peak directivity, although in the side­lobes, the influence of
this error increases significantly to 49 dB below the value of the ideal pattern at the same
point. This increase of the EES parameter is quite significant, and reveals a greater influ­
ence of this error for regions relative to the side­lobes than for the direction of maximum
directivity, when the main beam points to θ = 63◦.
Figure 5.42: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Channel Balance error EES
distribution
74
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:83==
Finally, the influence of this parameter is also analysed when the main beam is steered
at θ = 0◦, as it can bee seen in 5.43. In this case, it can be seen that for the co­polar
component, the most significant differences with respect to the ideal pattern occur in a
region closer to the main beam than in the previous case. In turn, the difference in side­
lobes is an order of magnitude smaller than in the previous case. This is also observable
in the comparison between Figures 5.41 and 5.44. Furthermore, the statistical study of
the 10 simulations carried out for this model reveals that the average error obtained in
the on­axis directivity difference is 0.01 dB. This is an error 5 times bigger than when the
main beam was steered at θ = 63◦, which is corroborated by [25].
Figure 5.43: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx patterns
Figure 5.44: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Zoomed Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx
patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
75
==PAGE:84==
The EES value at θ = 0◦is 54 dB below the maximun directivity peak, being signif­
icantly higher than that obtained in the previous case. Furthermore, it is observed that
although close magnitude values to this one are also obtained for regions belonging to
side­lobes, the angular region affected by this parameter is much more concentrated than
in Figure 5.42. This indicates that the error induced by this parameter is much more con­
centrated with respect to the direction of maximum directivity when this main beam is
oriented at θ = 0◦than when it is oriented at θ = 63◦.
Figure 5.45: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal co pattern vs. Channel Balance error EES
distribution
76
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:85==
5.4
Summary
This section summarizes the numerical error values obtained from the parametric
studies conducted in this project. Table 5.1 quantifies the average uncertainties for AUT,
computed over N independent Monte Carlo iterations. The sample size N was dynami­
cally optimized per test case to balance statistical significance against computational con­
straints, primarily determined by simulation time requirements.
AUT
Depointing [dB]
Axis Intersection [dB]
Channel Balance [dB]
SH800
0.037
0.006
0.074
BL206 Q
0.099
0.013
0.082
BL206
0.106
0.022
0.027
SAILOR Dmax(θ = 63◦)
0.012
0.002
0.002
SAILOR Dmax(θ = 0◦)
0.495
0.003
0.01
Table 5.1: Mean error results for different AUT
To evaluate the overall uncertainty for each AUT in Table 5.1,the root sum of squares
(RSS) method is applied. This statistical approach combines independent uncertainty
contributions under the assumption of Gaussian error distributions, expressed as:
σtotal =
q
σ2
Depointing + σ2
Axis + σ2
Channel
(5.3)
where σDepointing , σAxis and σChannel denote the mean error in on­axis directivity (in dB) for
depointing, axis intersection, and channel balance, respectively. Therefore, the following
Table 5.2 expresses a comparison between the total uncertainty given by the manufacturer
[26] and the total value obtained through the simulations of the models. The deviation for
each AUT result is also computed as :
Deviation (%) =
σcalculated −σprovided
σprovided

× 100
(5.4)
where it quantifies the relative excess (+) or deficit (­) of σcalculated versus manufacturer
claims.
AUT
Provided σ [dB]
Calculated σ [dB]
Deviation [%]
SH800
0.166
0.083
−50.0
BL206 Q
0.119
0.128
7.7
BL206
0.119
0.112
−5.9
SAILOR Dmax(θ = 63◦)
0.095
0.012
−87.4
SAILOR Dmax(θ = 0◦)
0.095
0.495
421.0
Table 5.2: Comparison between the manufacturer’s total uncertainty and the calculated
uncertainty
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
77
==PAGE:86==
The deviation analysis exposes systematic mismatches between simulated and pro­
vided manufacturer uncertainties. The predominance of negative values of the devia­
tion indicates the conservative analysis performed by the manufacturer when quantifying
the uncertainty of the anechoic chamber.Conversely, the excessive deviation in the re­
sult shown for the SAILOR Dmax(θ = 0◦) AUT indicates firstly, the significant difference
obtained in the difference in on­axis directivity with respect to what is expected, and sec­
ondly, if compared to the deviation when the main beam is oriented at (θ = 63◦), the
significant difference in the influence on the radiation pattern of the different factors stud­
ied.
From Table 5.1 it can be seen that, except for SH800 AUT , the uncertainty factor
related to depointing is in all cases the factor causing the highest order of magnitude
error, and is therefore the main contributor to each σcalculated. Conversely, it is observed
that the lack of intersection of the axes is the factor that represents the smallest deviation
in the on­axis directivity, and therefore, the factor that influences to each σcalculated the
least.
Table 5.2 indicates that the two smallest measurement deviations correspond to the
BL206 AUT models. This result is notable because the chamber­specific error param­
eters (Depointing, Axis Intersection and Channel Balance ) derived in Section 4 – and
subsequently applied universally to all AUT models within this study – originated from
measurements performed specifically on the BL206 AUT. While these parameters are
inherent properties of the anechoic chamber measurement system and are therefore ap­
plicable to any AUT measured within it, the observed deviations suggest that the derived
error estimates yield the highest accuracy when applied to the specific AUT model used
for their initial characterization (i.e., the BL206). This observation is partially mitigated by
the SH800 antenna flip­test results: although not detailed in this report, the depointing and
axis intersection parameters extracted for the SH800 were consistent with those obtained
for the BL206, validating their broader application within this project.
Regarding the results obtained for the Channel Balance, since it is related to the
uncertainty in the polarisation both between the two channels of the same probe, and be­
tween two probes themselves, for each AUT, an analysis is carried out on the polarisation
purity for the Dmax direction as:
Rxp = 20 · log10

Co­polar
Cross­polar

(5.5)
AUT
Channel Balance error [dB]
Rxp [dB]
BL206 Q
0.082
48.34
SH800
0.074
53.26
BL206
0.027
128.26
SAILOR Dmax(θ = 0◦)
0.01
30.46
SAILOR Dmax(θ = 63◦)
0.002
55.34
Table 5.3: AUT Rxp analysis
78
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:87==
The sensitivity of the on­axis directivity measurement to Channel Balance uncertainty
exhibits a clear dependence on the AUT’s polarization purity in the Dmax direction. This
purity is quantified by the ratio Rxp (5.5), where a lower value indicates a higher relative
level of cross­polarization contamination. Analysis of the AUT, sorted in descending order
of Channel Balance error (Table 5.3), reveals an inverse correlation between Rxp and the
induced error:
• Antennas with lower Rxp (i.e., poorer polarization purity, higher relative cross­polar
component) exhibit higher Channel Balance error (e.g., BL206 Q­coefficients)
• Antennas with higher Rxp (i.e., superior polarization purity, lower relative cross­polar
component) exhibit lower Channel Balance error (e.g., BL206 Ideal Model )
The SAILOR antenna models, while exhibiting overall lower Rxp values compared to the
other AUT, confirm this trend when compared internally. Specifically:
• At SAILOR Dmax(θ = 0◦) (Rxp = 30.46 dB) the Channel Balance error is higher (0.01
dB).
• At SAILOR Dmax(θ = 63◦) (Rxp = 55.34 dB) the Channel Balance error is lower
(0.002 dB).
Thus, the systematic dependence of Channel Balance error sensitivity on polarization pu­
rity Rxp holds across the measured AUT: Lower polarization purity (lower Rxp) results in
greater sensitivity to Channel Balance uncertainty, manifesting as a larger potential er­
ror in on­axis directivity. However, the observation that the SAILOR models yield lower
Rxp values than other AUTs (e.g., BL206, SH800) yet do not exhibit proportionally higher
Channel Balance errors indicates an additional dependence beyond polarization purity
magnitude. The influence of the Channel Balance uncertainty is also governed by the
directivity of the AUT’s co and cross­polar components. Specifically, the inter­probe cou­
pling error term Aij scales inversely with the directivity of these components. The nar­
rower the main lobe beamwidth (higher directivity) is, the less a neighbouring probe is illu­
minated. Therefore, as each subsequent probe to the zenith is receiving a much smaller
signal, the error is progressively suppressed in the total diagram. This confinement min­
imizes the influence of the magnitude of the Aij factor, thereby mitigating the Channel
Balance error sensitivity even for AUTs with significant relative cross­polar power (low
Rxp). Given that the pattern for SAILOR is notably more directive than for the rest of the
AUT, as can be seen in the graphs in section A.3, this fact is potentially influencing the
results obtained for this case.
Finally, a comparison between the on­axis directivity values obtained in two different
measurements, one performed in the DTU­ESA facility and the other in the MVG, shows
that in all cases, the directivity obtained in the DTU­ESA facility is always higher than the
MVG. In addition, other differences in the shape of the radiation pattern between the two
measurements made at the two facilities can be seen in section A.3
To meaningfully compare the results obtained at these two very different facilities, the
values of peak directivity are given together with the associated values of uncertainty in
table 5.4 below. In the case of the the DTU­ESA Facility, these uncertainties are repre­
sentative values resulting from measurements of antennas of similar characteristics as
the corresponding AUT.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
79
==PAGE:88==
DTU­ESA
MVG
Max Directivity [dB]
σ [dB]
Max Directivity [dB]
σ [dB]
SH800
9.247
0.015
9.178
0.083
BL206
19.220
0.010
19.020
0.128
SAILOR Dmax(θ = 0◦)
38.413
0.040
38.34
0.495
SAILOR Dmax(θ = 63◦)
38.403
0.040
38.40
0.012
Table 5.4: DTU­ESA vs. MVG comparison
For each AUT, the validation criterion requires that the measured directivities agree
within their corresponding combined uncertainties, meaning the uncertainty intervals DDTU±
σDTU and DMV G ± σMV G must overlap. This overlap is a necessary condition to confirm
statistical compatibility between the results of the two facilities. As quantified in Table 5.4:
• SH800 satisfies the criterion (9.232<9.261), confirming statistical agreement within
combined uncertainties.
• BL206 exhibits a boundary violation (19.210>19.148, indicating a 0.062 dB discrep­
ancy. This is notable given that chamber error parameters (depointing, axis mis­
alignment, channel balance) were derived from BL206 characterization data.
• Sailor Dmax(θ = 0◦) marginally satisfies the inequality (38.373<38.835).
• Sailor Dmax(θ = 63◦) also marginally satisfies the inequality (38.363 < 38.412)
When this overlap occurs, the study carried out for the MVG range can be considered
representative of the uncertainty of the system. However, given that for BL206 the con­
dition is not met, it can be concluded that a more comprehensive study is needed. It is
clear that by including the additional sources of uncertainty not studied during this work
into the total uncertainty budget, a more representative result will be achieved.
80
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:89==
6
Conclusion
This project had the objective of studying the effect of a few key sources of mea­
surement uncertainty in a multi­probe near­field antenna measurement setup. In order
to achieve this, simulation models based on Maxwell’s equations were developed to im­
plement an ideal dipole array, specifically configured to represent the aperture field dis­
tribution of a rectangular horn antenna (BL206). This model enables the calculation of
the near­field at arbitrary points on a spherical surface. Validation was performed by
transforming the near­field to the far­field by using SNIFTD software, and comparing this
far­field pattern against a reference measurement of the AUT conducted at the DTU­
ESA Spherical Near­Field Antenna Test Facility. Furthermore, SWE theory was used
to develop two additional antenna models (SH800, Sailor) utilizing their respective Q­
coefficients. For the Sailor antenna, whose original Q­coefficients described a main beam
pointing at θ = 63◦, a spherical harmonic rotation was performed using the ROSCOE soft­
ware to reorient the beam to zenith (θ = 0◦).
Characterization measurements for the BL206 AUT were performed at the MVG spher­
ical near­field range. Key procedures included a full AUT flip­test and controlled rotation
of the positioning system’s elevation arc. Subsequent rigorous analysis of the acquired
data enabled the quantification of the systematic uncertainty contributions inherent to the
facility arising from three factors: Channel Balance, Depointing and Axis Intersection. As
these contributions represent fundamental measurement system limitations, the derived
limit errors for each uncertainty factor were applied uniformly to all developed AUT models
(BL206, SH800, Sailor). For the Sailor model, both original (θ = 63◦) and rotated (θ = 0◦)
Q­coefficient sets were evaluated to quantify orientation­dependent effects on directivity
uncertainty. This approach enabled isolation and assessment of individual disturbances
on calculated on­axis directivity, specifically addressing variation in uncertainty impact
between zenithal and offset beam orientations. Consequently, three distinct quantitative
analysis procedures were established for evaluating these uncertainty sources.
The following list compiles the main results and conclusions drawn from the analysis
of the numerical values obtained.The order in which they are listed does not reflect any
priority of importance.
1. The mean value obtained for the error limit ∆L = −0.514 mm in section 4.1.1,
relating to the non­intersection of the axes, is consistent with the value provided
by the manufacturer [27]:
“The positions and the orientations of the probes must define a center of
the measurement sphere with an extension less than 0.5 mm and inter­
secting the AUT positioner axis of rotation within the same tolerance”.
2. The analysis demonstrates that the three investigated parameters exhibit signifi­
cantly greater influence on the on­axis directivity accuracy for the SAILOR AUT
when its main beam is oriented at zenith (θ = 0◦) compared to θ = 63◦. This phe­
nomenon aligns with the theoretical framework presented in [25], which establishes
that zenith­pointing configurations amplify alignment uncertainties.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
81
==PAGE:90==
3. The analysis in section 5.4 between the relationship of the Rxp parameter and the
influence of the Channel balance factor on the on­axis directivity shows that the
smaller the cross­polar component in the direction of maximum directivity of the
antenna, the smaller the influence of the Channel balance on this AUT. However,
it has also been analysed how the influence of this factor is not only governed by
the Rxp ratio, but there is also a dependence on the directivity (main beamwidth) of
its co­polar and cross­polar components. The more directive it is (the narrower the
main beam is), the less the influence the inter­probe error Aij, as each subsequent
probe to the zenith is receiving a much smaller signal, so the error is progressively
suppressed in the total diagram.
4. The analysis reveals a significantly reduced sensitivity of the Channel Balance pa­
rameter in the ideal dipole array model of the BL206 compared to the Q­coefficient­
based model, which aligns with first­principles electromagnetic theory. This dis­
crepancy arises because the dipole array model, derived from exact solutions to the
radiation integral equations (2.29) and (2.30) inherently assumes:
• Perfect current confinement in dipole elements, since it does not take into ac­
count aperture wall currents.
• Free­space propagation, since there is no edge diffraction or scattering effects.
Consequently, the model produces theoretically zero cross­polarization components
in the principal planes, as evidenced by the −110 dB cross­polar (refer to figures in
Section A.2). This result corroborates the established inverse relationship between
Channel Balance sensitivity and cross­polarization magnitude (Section 5.4), thereby
validating the observed parameter behavior across BL206 models.
5. Depointing error is the primary contributor to total uncertainty (σtotal) for all AUTs
except SH800 (Table 5.1). Conversely, Axis Intersection error exhibits the lowest
impact on each AUT (σtotal).
6. Predominantly negative deviations (Table 5.2) indicate systematic overestimation
of uncertainty by the manufacturer for 3/5 AUT, suggesting conservative chamber
characterization by the manufacturer.
7. Smallest deviations in σtotal occur for BL206 variants (−5.9% and +7.7%), confirming
highest accuracy when error parameters (derived from BL206 measurements) are
applied to the source AUT.
8. Due to the wide variety of results obtained, it is concluded that the DTU should have
an independent uncertainty table for each AUT, and also for each pointing angle.
Caution should be exercised when making generalisations in the quantification of
uncertainties for different AUT, so it is more convenient to perform dedicated results
in the quantification of uncertainties.
9. The significant discrepancy between the calculated uncertainty values and the un­
certainties provided by the manufacturer for the SAILOR antenna (Table 5.2) is prob­
ably due to the fact that the manufacturer’s uncertainty specification is calibrated for
antennas with a directivity of approximately 30 dB. Since the SAILOR antenna op­
erates with a directivity of 38.4 dB ­ a deviation of 8.4 dB from the reference value ­
the uncertainty metric provided by the manufacturer might be inappropriate for this
higher directivity AUT.
82
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:91==
10. The 75% validation success rate (only BL206 fails) in Table 5.4 demonstrates that
the uncertainty budgets σMV G (Eq.5.3) and σDTU adequately encompass inter­
facility discrepancies in on­axis directivity measurements. Notably, the BL206 bound­
ary violation (19.210 > 19.148, ∆= 0.062dB) presents a critical paradox, since the
uncertainty factors (σDepointing, σAxis, σChannel ) have been derived from BL206 data
measurements. This anomaly might suggests the presence of unmodeled system­
atic error sources in this project, so a more comprehensive study of uncertainty
quantification for these cases should be carried out.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
83
==PAGE:92==
84
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
O. Breinbjerg. “Spherical Near­Field Antenna Measurements ­ The Most Accurate
Antenna Measurement Technique”. In: 2016 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Soci­
ety International Symposium (APSURSI). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1019–1020. ISBN: 978­
1­5090­2886­3.
[2]
G. Hindman and A. C. Newell. Simplified Spherical Near­Field Accuracy Assess­
ment. Tech. rep. Nearfield Systems Inc., 2007.
[3]
J. E. Hansen. Spherical Near Field Antenna Measurements. IET, 1998.
[4]
MVG. Multi­probe Systems SG 64. URL: https://www.mvg-world.com/en/products/
antenna-measurement/multi-probe-systems/sg-64.
[5]
S. Arslanagic. Lecture No. 2 Slides: Electromagnetics of Antennas ­ A Summary.
Course slides for 30430 Advanced Antenna Techniques and Measurements. 2023.
[6]
K. Sarabandi. Dyadic Green’s Function. Tech. rep. University of Michigan, EECS
Department, 2009.
[7]
S. M. Mikki and A. A. Kishk. “Theory and Applications of Infinitesimal Dipole Mod­
els for Computational Electromagnetics”. In: IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation 55 (2007). Corrige un espacio faltante entre ”of” e ”infinitesimal” del
título original, pp. 1325–1337. DOI: 10.1109/TAP.2007.898618.
[8]
W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele. Antenna Theory and Design. Wiley, 2012.
[9]
IEEE. IEEE Recommended Practice for Near­Field Antenna Measurements. Stan­
dard IEEE Std 1720­2012. New York, NY, USA: Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Dec. 2012. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6387297.
[10]
TICRA. SNIFT: Precision Measurements of Antennas – A New Era Starts. https:
//www.ticra.com/snift-precision-measurements-of-antennas-a-new-era-starts/. 2021.
[11]
A. C. Newell, G. Hindman, and C. F. Stubenrauch. The Effect of Measurement Ge­
ometry on Alignment Errors in Spherical Near­Field Measurements. Tech. rep. An­
tenna Measurement Techniques Association (AMTA), 1999.
[12]
M. H. Francis and R. C. Wittmann. Uncertainty Analysis for Spherical Near­Field
Measurements. Tech. rep. AMTA, 2003.
[13]
K. Kaslis et al. Simulating θ­Zero and Axes Intersection Errors in Spherical Near­
Field Antenna Measurements. Tech. rep. Technical University of Denmark, 2021.
[14]
K. Kaslis et al. “Revising the Theory and Practice of Electrical Alignment Proce­
dures for Spherical Antenna Measurement Facilities”. In: 42nd Antenna Measure­
ment Techniques Association Meeting and Symposium. 2020.
[15]
MVG. Pyramidal Absorbers. URL: https : / / www . mvg - world . com / media / 2191 /
download/reference.
[16]
G. Brown. The Turnstile. Electronics, 1936.
[17]
H. D. Hristov et al. “Low­Profile X Antenna with Flat Reflector for Polarization Di­
versity Applications”. In: Microwave and Optical Technology Letters 51.6 (2009),
pp. 1508–1512.
[18]
Z. Bao, Z. Nie, and X. Zong. “A Novel Broadband Dual­Polarization Antenna Utilizing
Strong Mutual Coupling”. In: IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation 62.1
(2014), pp. 450–454.
[19]
MVG. SG Evo Multi­probe Spherical Near­field Antenna Measurement System Datasheet.
Available: https://www.mvg-world.com. 2023.
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
85
==PAGE:94==
[20]
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). Introduction to DTU­ESA Test Facility. Ac­
cessed: 2023­11­15. 2023. URL: https : / / www . space . dtu . dk / english / research -
divisions / electromagnetic - systems / research - test - facilities / dtu - esa - test - facility /
introduction.
[21]
S. Pivnenko. Measurement Procedure at the DTU­ESA Spherical Near­Field An­
tenna Test Facility. Tech. rep. RR02. Technical University of Denmark, 2009.
[22]
MVG. Dual­Ridge Horn Antennas Datasheet. Product datasheet for SH800 an­
tenna. 2024. URL: https://www.mvg-world.com (visited on 03/15/2024).
[23]
Scientific­Atlanta. Series 12 Standard Gain Horn Product Sheet. Technical specifi­
cations for Model 12­3.9. 2024. URL: https://www.scientificatlanta.com (visited on
03/15/2024).
[24]
Cobham Satcom. SAILOR 600 XTR Ku Product Sheet. Technical specifications
and system overview. 2024. URL: https : / / www . cobhamsatcom . com (visited on
03/15/2024).
[25]
M. Dich and H. E. Gram. “Alignment Errors and Standard Gain Horn Calibrations”.
In: Proceedings of the 18th Annual Meeting & Symposium of the Antenna Measure­
ment Techniques Association (AMTA). Document pages 425, 426, 429 provided in
context. Seattle, WA, USA, 1996, pp. 425–429.
[26]
MVG Industries SAS. Preliminary Design Review: Delivery and Installation of the
SG69L Antenna Test Range for DTU Project. Preliminary Design Report PDR.254.1.20.MVGF.B.
Issue B (30 September 2020). Prepared by Jérôme Luc, Checked by Nicolas Gross,
Approved by Fabien Henry. Confidential document. 17, avenue de Norvège, 91953
Courtaboeuf, France: MVG Industries SAS, Sept. 2020.
[27]
MVG Industries. Compliance Matrix Prel­A1: Proposal for Spherical Near­Field Ane­
choic Chamber. Technical Report. Document Reference: Compliance Matrix Prel­
A1.pdf. DTU Elektro, Ørsteds Plads, Building 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark:
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), n.d.
86
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:95==
A
Appendix
A.1
BL206 Ideal Array Model vs Q­coefficient
The radiation diagrams in this section allow a comparison of the result obtained from
the development of the ideal dipole model for modelling BL206 against an actual mea­
surement of BL206 in the DTU­ESA.
Figure A.1: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal Dipole Array Model vs. Q­coefficients Model
Figure A.2: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs.Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
87
==PAGE:96==
A.2
Cross­polar BL206 Ideal Model Component
The aim of this section is to show the cross­polar component after the application of
the different errors in the ideal dipole array model of BL206, in order to justify graphically
some of the analyses performed during this project.
Figure A.3: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Depointing error co/cx patterns
Figure A.4: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs.Depointing error co/cx patterns
88
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.5: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
Figure A.6: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs.Axis Intersection error co/cx patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
89
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.7: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx patterns
Figure A.8: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): Ideal vs. Channel Balance error co/cx patterns
A.3
MVG vs DTU­ESA Comparison
The radiation diagrams in this section allow a comparison of the radiation patterns of
the three different AUT addressed in this project.
90
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.9: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): MVG vs. DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
Figure A.10: SH800 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): MVG vs.DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
91
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.11: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): MVG vs. DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
Figure A.12: BL206 (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): MVG vs.DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
92
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:101==
Figure A.13: SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): MVG vs. DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
Figure A.14: Zoomed SAILOR (θ = 63◦, ϕ = 90◦): MVG vs.DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure A.15: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): MVG vs. DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
Figure A.16: Zoomed SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 0◦): MVG vs.DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
94
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.17: SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): MVG vs. DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
Figure A.18: Zoomed SAILOR (θ = 0◦, ϕ = 90◦): MVG vs.DTU­ESA co/cx patterns
Quantification of measurement errors in the DTU­ETC Fast Antenna Test Facility
95
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 357
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
