==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Feature-driven non-linear decision 
frameworks for trading wind power
Jan Christopher Leisbrock
DTU Wind-M-0899
July 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0899
July 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Jalal Kazempour
Yannick Heiser
Farzaneh Pourahmadi
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Jan Christopher Leisbrock
Title:
Feature-driven non-linear decision frameworks for 
trading wind power
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Energy Markets and An­
alytics, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Jan Christopher Leisbrock ­ s232812
Signature
Date
ii
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Electricity market participants, and in particular operators of renewable energy assets,
are exposed to imbalance risk because final settlement is determined in a single price
balancing market whose direction and magnitude cannot be forecasted with certainty.
This thesis investigates whether data driven policy models can improve a wind farm’s day
ahead volume decision in the Danish DK2 zone for the years 2019 – 2020.
The bidding task is formulated as a contextual optimisation problem: a policy maps a vec­
tor of market features directly to a bid that maximises the profit, while an ℓ1 penalty controls
model complexity. Linear models, non­linear feature expanded models, hourly variants,
and kernel based policies are trained in a rolling scheme of fifteen days for training, two
days for validation, and one day for testing. To limit tail losses four Conditional Value
at Risk (CVaR) formulations are introduced, targeting either imbalance volume or imbal­
ance value, and either absolute imbalance or absolute forecast deviation. Regularisation
weights and CVaR thresholds are selected within the same rolling window framework.
Over the entire evaluation period all learned policies achieve profits broadly comparable to
the forecast­bidding benchmark, with no single strategy emerging as a clear outperformer.
The alternative trading approaches entail higher risk, and the non­linear variants deliver
only marginal profit gains compared to the linear models.
The study concludes that, under the investigated DK2 conditions, bidding the unbiased
production forecast remains the most robust strategy. Future work should extend the
framework to a multi stage problem by adding an explicit intraday bidding stage, which
would naturally incorporate intraday information while choosing the dummy benchmark
for the day­ahead market.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Disclaimer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Preliminaries
5
2.1
Contextualised optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Conditional Value at Risk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Kernel Trick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
DK2 electricity market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Data
13
3.1
Imbalance vs. day­ahead prices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Feature engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Non­linear transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Forecast smoothing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Methodology
21
4.1
General model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Dummy model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Model definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
CVaR Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Regularization & Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Rolling window & hyper parameter optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Results
27
5.1
Profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Hyper parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Conclusion
35
6.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.2
Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Bibliography
39
A Appendix
41
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Renewable electricity is no longer a niche within electricity markets. Two decades ago,
researchers debated which technologies would become mature and dominate future mar­
ket shares, while only energy enthusiasts installed rooftop photovoltaic systems on their
own buildings. Since then, the landscape has changed dramatically. In 2023, nearly 70%
of Denmark’s electricity generation came from renewable energy sources [1]. The focus
has shifted from whether renewables will play a role to how to efficiently operate both the
assets and the grid under conditions of high renewable penetration.
A defining feature of electricity markets with a high share of renewables is the uncertainty
in production. Unlike conventional generators and nuclear plants, whose output is largely
controllable or even inflexible to curtail, the production from renewable energy sources
depends on variable weather conditions such as wind and solar irradiance. As a result,
bids from renewable generators in the day­ahead market are typically based on forecasts
available 12 to 36 hours before delivery. Weather forecasts, however, are inherently un­
certain, and forecast errors can be substantial. In systems with a high penetration of
renewables or even high concentration in one technology, such as wind; these forecast
errors can lead to significant deviations between scheduled and actual generation. If
such deviations do not cancel each other out across the system, ancillary services must
be activated to maintain grid stability. Any imbalance between forecasted and actual con­
sumption or production is settled on the balancing market. For operators of renewable
energy assets, this often results in substantial costs due to forecast inaccuracies [2].
This context highlights the critical importance for renewable energy operators such as
wind farm operators of accurately determining the volume to bid into the day­ahead mar­
ket. Since production forecasts are subject to uncertainty, the bid submitted may differ
from the actual electricity generated, resulting in imbalances that are financially settled in
the balancing market. In electricity systems with increasing shares of variable renewable
energy, such imbalances are becoming more frequent and significant. For operators, this
creates both a challenge and an opportunity. The challenge lies in minimizing costs aris­
ing from deviations, while the opportunity lies in exploiting the structure of the market to
optimize revenues. In a one­price market design, where imbalances are settled at the
balancing market price, it is theoretically possible to arbitrage between the day­ahead
and balancing markets. This means operators can strategically decide their day­ahead
bids in anticipation of potential imbalance costs or revenues, effectively managing risk
and seeking profit across both markets. As renewable penetration rises and volatility in
the system increases, this kind of market­aware bidding becomes not only beneficial but
essential.
1.1
Literature review
Bidding approaches for renewable electricity generators are widely discussed in the aca­
demic literature. While electricity market bidding is not a new topic—conventional gener­
ators have participated in these markets for decades—renewable energy sources present
unique challenges. In particular, their maximum electricity production in any given hour is
uncertain. Moreover, renewable assets typically exhibit negligible marginal costs, which
compels them to bid their entire available volume in the day­ahead market.
Various methods have been proposed to address the problem of bidding in the day­ahead
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
1
==PAGE:9==
market and settling all imbalance over the imbalance market neglecting the intraday mar­
ket.
Two­stage stochastic optimization problems are among the most widely studied
methodologies [3]. While this approach incorporates uncertainty explicitly by modeling
scenarios, it comes with several drawbacks.
First, it requires a carefully constructed
scenario tree, which can be both computationally expensive and sensitive to misspeci­
fication. Second, stochastic models are often computationally intensive, especially when
applied to large­scale systems like electricity markets. Finally, despite their theoretical
rigor, stochastic optimization solutions can sometimes be difficult to interpret, limiting their
practical adoption by market participants.
Another promising technique is contextualized optimization. Contextualised optimization
is introduced in chapter 2. For a more comprehensive overview of this area of research,
the reader is referred to [4]. A subset of contextualized optimization are policy models,
which have been explored in [5] and [6]. Policy models are typically simple, computation­
ally efficient, and interpretable, as emphasized by [7]. The trade­off between predictive
performance and interpretability is also highlighted by [8]. Unlike complex deep learn­
ing or black­box approaches, policy models maintain transparency, keeping users well
informed.
In [5], policy models are applied to schedule electrolyser consumption and determine bid
volumes for the day­ahead market. The model’s performance is benchmarked against a
hindsight­optimal model. The underlying electricity market assumes a two­price balancing
mechanism, representing a classical newsvendor problem, in which any deviation from
the contracted day­ahead volume either incurs a penalty or yields the same revenue.
Additionally, a real­time adjustment algorithm is implemented to mitigate deviations from
the day­ahead schedule, assuming the electrolyser is capable of ramping up or down.
In contrast, [7] adapts the market structure to a one­price balancing market. In the ab­
sence of risk­mitigation strategies, this market design can result in ”all­or­nothing” bidding
decisions, depending on whether the system is in a state of surplus or shortage. Given
the inherent uncertainty of system forecasts, and thus of whether imbalances will lead
to profits or losses, the authors introduce Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) constraints.
These constraints limit the average of the worst 5% of imbalance volumes to a predefined
threshold. When this risk constraint is applied during model training, the resulting bid­
ding distribution becomes more concentrated around actual production, particularly when
a low CVaR threshold is selected. It is important to note, however, that this constraint is
only enforced during training, which means that larger imbalance volumes may still occur
during testing.
[6] reports remarkable results in improving the aggregated wind power forecast for the
DK1 region and the corresponding trading strategy using policy models. By training a
policy, the original forecast can be enhanced with respect to minimizing the imbalance vol­
ume, quantified by the Mean Absolute Error (MAE). Given the two­price balancing market
setup—where all deviations from the day­ahead schedule are penalized—this forecast im­
provement strategy directly translates into increased revenues. Both [6] and [7] highlight
the potential of non­linear policies and recommend further research in this direction.
Rather than employing other machine learning models that inherently capture non­linear
dependencies, kernel methods offer a way to introduce non­linearity into otherwise linear
models. This approach has also been explored in energy systems, particularly in bidding
strategy design, as demonstrated by [9]. The study shows that, under specific condi­
tions, strategic deviations from forecast values can yield higher revenues—a conclusion
supported by a case study based on the IEEE test system.
2
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:10==
Kernel methods can be implemented in two principal ways. The first involves explicitly
transforming each input feature using multiple kernel functions, thereby expanding the
feature space and introducing non­linearity. This approach, adopted by [9], is typically
combined with ℓ1­regularization to prevent overfitting. The second method utilizes the so­
called Kernel Trick, originally introduced by [10], which implicitly maps the original features
into a higher­dimensional space without the need for explicit transformation. A detailed
introduction to the Kernel Trick is provided in chapter 2.
This kernel­based technique is further applied in the context of data­driven optimization by
[11], who conclude that a kernelized policy function for the decision variable outperforms
other benchmark models, while maintaining reasonable computational efficiency.
A similar CVaR­based risk management approach to that of [7] is employed by [12], who
investigates risk­constrained bidding strategies for a stochastic generation unit operating
in a one­price balancing market. His model yields a modest improvement in revenue
compared to a baseline strategy that simply submits the point forecast as the bid. The
model tends to adopt a long position in the market to mitigate the risk of price spikes
during electricity shortages. However, given the limited accuracy of system state forecasts
and the fact that substantial revenue gains are only achievable with significantly higher
imbalance volumes, the overall effectiveness of this strategy should be critically assessed.
In light of the skewed distribution of imbalance prices during the study period, even a
basic strategy that consistently bids slightly below the forecast could outperform the point
forecast baseline.
The difficulties associated with predicting the system state or the balancing price are com­
mon challenges for market participants. [13] employs an agent­based modelling approach
to examine bidding behaviour in electricity markets. Similar to the aforementioned strate­
gies, agents tend to take small long positions to avoid high imbalance costs—driven by
typically higher costs for up­regulation compared to down­regulation. Under ideal market
conditions, this leads to a market tendency toward system surplus and more frequent acti­
vation of down­regulation, rather than an even distribution between surplus and shortage.
Further evidence is provided by [14], who reaches similar conclusions regarding the pre­
dictability of balancing market prices. Significant forecast improvements are only ob­
served for intra­day predictions with a lead time of less than three hours. With longer
lead times, the model performs comparably to day­ahead forecasts, which in turn only
marginally outperform the naive assumption that the balancing price equals the day­ahead
price. However, the slight improvements in balancing price forecasts do not necessarily
translate into increased revenues in the testing period. The only model that achieves a
substantial revenue increase is the intra­day model.
These findings are corroborated by [15], who attempts to predict imbalance prices 30
minutes before delivery. None of the proposed models outperform a naive benchmark
that simply uses the most recent intraday price as a predictor for the balancing price. This
result underscores the inherent difficulty of forecasting balancing prices and highlights the
high efficiency of the intraday market—at least within the 30­minute pre­delivery window
in Germany.
1.2
Research questions
The goal of this work is to extend the research by [7] and [5]. In this context and based
on the literature review the following research questions arise:
• Is it possible to outperform a dummy model, which is just bidding the forecast on
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
3
==PAGE:11==
the day­ahead market and allow arbitrage trades between day­ahead market and
balancing market?
• Can non­linear models improve the bidding decision for the day­ahead market com­
pared to linear methods?
• What is the effect of different risk definitions on the trading decision and what are
the advantages and disadvantages of these definitions?
The remainder of this thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 introduces the key theo­
retical concepts relevant to the study, including contextualized optimization, Conditional
Value at Risk (CVaR), and kernel methods. Chapter 3 presents the dataset and details
the feature engineering and preprocessing steps used to prepare the input for the models.
Chapter 4 outlines the methodological framework, describing the model formulations, the
optimization setup, and the implementation of risk constraints. Chapter 5 evaluates the
models in terms of profitability and risk, comparing the results against a benchmark strat­
egy. Finally, Chapter 6 summarizes the key findings, discusses limitations, and proposes
directions for future research.
The code is made available in a github repository [16].
1.3
Disclaimer
This master’s thesis was originally titled “Feature Driven Non­linear Decision Frameworks
for Trading Wind Power and Hydrogen”, as it was expected to be a continuation of the
work presented in [7] and [5]. After three months of research on this initial topic, the overall
methodology for hydrogen was reconsidered.
The operation of an electrolyser can result in either financial gains or losses while it is
producing. Therefore, the problem is more accurately formulated as a classification task
to determine whether the electrolyser should be switched on or off, rather than as a re­
gression problem with a continuous output. Even when electrolyser efficiency is taken
into account, the optimal operation strategy remains a classification problem, potentially
with multiple classes, since the unit achieves its best efficiency at a partial load rather
than at nominal capacity. This pattern was also observed in the hindsight model under
the constraints used in [7].
Another important aspect is the constraint requiring a minimum daily hydrogen production.
This constraint was already present in the earlier work and creates interdependencies
between the hourly decisions, since the model must ensure production during the least
costly hours of the day. The policy setup used, however, does not account for such inter
temporal relationships and would therefore tend to stop production entirely when prices
are high compared to the training dataset.
Due to these methodological concerns, the supervising team and the author decided to
focus the thesis on the day ahead bidding problem. One possible modelling approach
could express the decision variable as the proportion of electricity, ranging from zero to
one hundred percent, to be committed in the day ahead market, with the remainder settled
in the balancing market. This formulation is independent of the electrolyser and allows a
broader investigation into bidding under uncertainty. In this paper the decision variable
models the day­ahead volume itself.
4
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:12==
2
Preliminaries
In the following chapter, the main concepts underlying this work are discussed from a
theoretical perspective. First, an introduction to contextualized optimization is provided,
with a particular focus on policy models. Another key element of the chapter concerns
the use of CVaR constraints, including how these constraints can be adjusted and which
performance metrics can be regulated. Furthermore, the Kernel Trick is presented from
mathematical standpoint and the two used kernels are introduced. Finally, the design of
electricity markets in the DK2 bidding zone is described, with special attention given to
the balancing market. This includes a discussion of the recent transition from a two­price
to a one­price settlement scheme, as explored in [7].
2.1
Contextualised optimization
A subcategory of data analytics is prescriptive analytics, which focuses on improving
decision­making based on analytical insights. Contextualized optimization is a form of
prescriptive analytics in which decisions are optimized based on quantitative analysis.
More specifically, it bridges the gap between machine learning and classical optimiza­
tion. Although machine learning inherently involves optimization, both fields have evolved
independently and garnered significant attention in their own right. Contextualized opti­
mization introduces methodologies that condition decisions on observable and correlated
variables, in contrast to stochastic optimization where uncertainty is typically modelled as
exogenous via probability distributions or scenario sets.
In the context of energy markets, uncertainty is rarely purely exogenous; instead, it often
exhibits systematic dependencies on weather conditions and other market­related data.
This motivates the use of contextualized methods that exploit such relationships.
According to [4], three major methodological approaches have been established in this
research field:
• Decision Rules: Also referred to as policies, decision rules—used in this thesis—
are learned to directly optimize the objective function. These rules can range from
simple parameterized mappings, such as linear regressions, to more complex struc­
tures like neural networks. The model output is the decision itself. The learning
problem typically takes the form:
min
θ
1
N
N
∑
i=1
c(πθ(xi), yi)
where πθ is the decision rule mapping features xi to decisions, and c is a cost func­
tion evaluating the quality of the decision against the observed outcome yi.
• Predict­then­Optimize: In this approach, uncertainty is first reduced via a sepa­
rate predictive model that incorporates relevant observable features. The resulting
forecast (e.g., a conditional stochastic forecast) is then used as an input for a con­
textualized stochastic optimization problem:
z∗(x) ∈arg min
z∈Z Efθ(y|x) [c(z, y)]
where fθ(y|x) denotes the conditional predictive model and z the decision variable
optimized for the predicted cost.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
5
==PAGE:13==
• Integrated Learning and Optimization: While superficially similar to decision
rules—in that predictions are embedded within the optimization—the key difference
lies in the model output. Whereas decision rule models output the action itself,
integrated learning models output inputs for a subsequent decision function. Im­
portantly, these models are not optimized to minimize prediction error but rather to
maximize the final decision quality. A general training objective is:
min
θ
E(x,y)∼ˆPN
[
c
(
arg min
z∈Z ˆcθ(z, x), y
)]
where ˆcθ is a learned cost approximation and z is optimized using the model­internal
cost surrogate.
Focusing on decision rules, one might assume that a predictive model—such as a re­
gressor trained to predict the hindsight­optimal action—would yield the same result as
a decision rule optimized within a profit­maximizing framework. However, this equiva­
lence does not generally hold, particularly in markets such as one­price balancing markets
where optimal actions tend to be binary without risk constraints or exhibit high sensitivity
to forecast errors. A regressor trained to replicate historical optimal actions seeks to max­
imize prediction accuracy, without accounting for the consequences of forecasting errors
(e.g., costly balancing penalties). In contrast, a decision rule trained to maximize profit
inherently learns to hedge against forecast uncertainty, potentially accepting lower pre­
dictive accuracy in favour of more robust and conservative behaviour. Such models often
produce smoother decision boundaries and implicitly incorporate risk management—even
in the absence of explicit risk constraints.
This phenomenon is illustrated in the following example and in fig. 2.1. The true optimal
decision is located at the right boundary, x = 2.85. A predictive model trained to estimate
this optimal decision, but achieving less than perfect accuracy, may incorrectly predict
x = 2.25. Conversely, a decision policy optimized for profit could learn that although x =
2.85 yields the highest profit in hindsight, it is also a high­risk decision. Instead, the policy
may favour a conservative choice, such as x = 0, having learned that consistently bidding
on the left boundary maximizes expected profit across scenarios. While this may result
in lower profits than the hindsight­optimal strategy, it avoids overreliance on unreliable
forecasts and emphasizes robustness over theoretical optimality.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
30
40
50
60
Decision x
Profit Landscape f(x)
Profit curve
Optimal decision
Inaccurate prediction of optimal decision
Decision policy
Figure 2.1: Caption
6
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Conditional Value at Risk
The success of an investment is typically measured by the profit it generates. Common
key performance indicators (KPIs), such as the Internal Rate of Return (IRR), Net Present
Value (NPV), or cumulative profit, are widely used to assess investment performance.
While these metrics may be sufficient from an ex­post perspective, decision­makers are
often equally concerned with the level of risk incurred to achieve such returns. Since
returns are inherently correlated with risk, it is essential to evaluate the trade­off between
the two.
In the context of electricity markets, persistently betting on elevated balancing market
prices may lead to substantial profits, but also exposes market participants to significant
downside risk. Even if the expected return is positive, the strategy may result in consider­
able losses in worst­case scenarios. Thus, risk must be incorporated into the evaluation
of such strategies.
One of the most widely used risk measures for assessing the risk of investments and
trading strategies is the Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR), also referred to as Expected
Shortfall. This concept was introduced by [17]. CVaR estimates the expected loss (or
profit) in the worst­case scenarios beyond a given quantile, thereby offering a more com­
prehensive view of tail risk. It is closely related to Value at Risk (VaR), which specifies the
maximum expected loss (or profit shortfall) at a given confidence level.
The mathematical definition of the Value at Risk V aRα at confidence level α is:
V aRα = inf {l ∈R | P(L ≤l) ≥α}
(2.1)
where L denotes the random variable representing the profit (or loss).
Conditional Value at Risk CV aRα is then defined as the expected profit (or loss) in the
worst α­quantile of outcomes:
CV aRα = E [L | L ≤V aRα]
(2.2)
While VaR captures only a single quantile threshold and does not provide insights into the
distribution of losses beyond that point, CVaR extends the analysis by incorporating the
expected value of losses in the tail. Therefore, CVaR can be viewed as a refinement of
the VaR metric.
In fig. 2.2, both metrics are illustrated using an exemplary normally distributed profit den­
sity function. The VaR is represented by the dashed line and denotes the threshold below
which the worst α = 0.05 fraction of outcomes lie—i.e., in 95% of scenarios, the profit
exceeds this value. The choice of α is driven by the decision­maker’s risk tolerance. Al­
ternatively, one could define a minimum acceptable profit threshold and use the VaR to
evaluate the likelihood of meeting this requirement.
However, VaR has significant limitations, primarily due to its inability to account for the
magnitude of losses beyond the threshold. For example, a scenario with extremely large
losses—potentially severe enough to threaten the solvency of an entire company—could
still result in a positive expected return and even a positive VaR. In contrast, CVaR cap­
tures such tail risks, making it a more robust metric for risk­sensitive decision­making.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
7
==PAGE:15==
­4
­3
­2
­1
0
1
2
3
4
CVaR
Profit
Probability Density
Profit Distribution
CVaR Region (shaded)
VaR at α = 0.05
Figure 2.2: Visualization of Value at Risk (VaR) and Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) on
a standard normal profit distribution. The VaR at confidence level α = 0.05 is marked with
a dashed red line, and the CVaR region (profits less than VaR) is shaded in red.
By introducing the CVaR the whole tail behind the defined CVaR barrier is quantified. The
CVaR is simply the expected profit of the marked area in fig. 2.2. In a case with an ex­
treme outlier loss the expected profit of the area below the VaR threshold is much lower
and indicates the higher risk. Apart from these practical improvements, the CVaR has
theoretical advantages compared to the VaR. CVaR can be seen as coherent risk mea­
sure, because it fulfils all proposed four properties (Monotonicity, Translation Invariance,
positive Homogenity and Subadditivity) by [18]. For Subadditivity, CVaR allows summing
separated risks and the combined risk is lower as it should be, whereas VaR might get
even a higher risk.
The example and explanation is tailored to a profit use case, which is mostly used for
CVaR. Nevertheless, risk can be quantified in many different ways. In the domain of
electricity markets, imbalance volume, imbalance value or the deviation from the forecast
can express risk. In chapter 4 different approaches to assess the risk of the proposed
trading strategies are presented. The choice of the regulated risk is again subject to
personal preference, but is also evaluated in terms of profits.
2.3
Kernel Trick
Linear regression is often used as a benchmark model when predicting a continuous vari­
able. As the name suggests, the model captures linear relationships between the input
features and the target variable. In eq. (2.3) β0 represents the intercept and βi is the co­
efficient for the respective xi. To map from the input feature space to the target variable,
the input feature and the coefficient is pairwise multiplied plus an error term ε.
y = β0 +
p
∑
i=1
βixi + ε
(2.3)
Capturing only linear relationships may not yield the best prediction results, especially
when non­linear patterns exist in the underlying data. The advantage of linear regression
8
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:16==
compared to models like neural networks lies in its fast and efficient computation and its
straightforward, easily interpretable nature.
One way to introduce non­linearity into a linear regression is to transform the input fea­
tures. In eq. (2.4), the model remains linear in form, as in eq. (2.3), but is extended with a
summation over pairwise products between coefficients and transformed input features.
In this case, each input feature is transformed using a polynomial function, as shown in
eq. (2.5).
y = β0 +
p
∑
i=1
βixi +
q
∑
j=1
γjϕj(x) + ε
(2.4)
ϕj(x) = xdj
k(j)
(2.5)
This approach maps the input data into a higher­dimensional space, proportional to the
number of transformations. However, it can become computationally expensive when
there are many features and transformations.
To avoid this explicit mapping, reproducing kernels were introduced by [10]. The core idea
is that the inner product between two data points is computed in the high­dimensional
space and stored in a kernel matrix. This kernel matrix, shown in eq. (2.7), consists of
all pairwise inner products of data points in the transformed space. Each inner product is
a single value, making the kernel matrix independent of the transformed space’s dimen­
sionality. Even infinite­dimensional feature spaces can be represented in the same way
as one­dimensional ones, making this method extremely efficient.
Moreover, the inner product in the high­dimensional space does not need to be computed
explicitly. Instead, it can be expressed directly through a kernel function, as shown in
eq. (2.6).
K(xi, xj) = ⟨ϕ(xi), ϕ(xj)⟩
(2.6)
K =


K(x1, x1)
K(x1, x2)
. . .
K(x1, xn)
K(x2, x1)
K(x2, x2)
. . .
K(x2, xn)
...
...
...
...
K(xn, x1)
K(xn, x2)
. . .
K(xn, xn)


(2.7)
Kernel regression is based on the kernel matrix rather than the input features. The result­
ing model for the target variable, shown in eq. (2.8), is known as the representer theorem.
Rather than learning parameters in the original feature space, the model expresses the
solution in terms of kernel values.
f(x) =
n
∑
i=1
αi, K(xi, x)
(2.8)
There are as many parameters to optimize as there are data points in the training set.
Consequently, it’s important to note that the kernel trick becomes computationally expen­
sive for large datasets. To address this, a rolling window approach is used, as described
in chapter 4. Another key consideration is the need for regularization. Since the model
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
9
==PAGE:17==
has as many tunable parameters as training data points, it can perfectly fit the training
set—leading to severe overfitting. In the following the two used kernels are presented.
2.3.1
Polynomial Kernel
The polynomial kernel captures all possible monomials up to a degree d. Like that not only
polynomial relationships are considered, but also interconnected relationships. Often low
degrees of 2 and 3 are already sufficient for improving the models performance. The
polynomial kernel is shown in eq. (2.9)
K(xi, xj) =
(
γ x⊤
i xj + r
)d
(2.9)
That corresponds to the dot product of the two data points in the transformed feature
space with a degree of two, which is shown in eq. (2.10).
ϕ(x) =
[
x2
1, x1, x1x2, x2, x2
2, 1
]⊤
(2.10)
2.3.2
Radial Basis Function Kernel
The radial basis function kernel is the most flexible kernel as it corresponds to an infinite
dimensional space. Due to the kernel trick the computational costs are as high as simple
linear kernel. In eq. (2.11) the distance is measured between two data points and scaled
with a γ­factor.
K(xi, xj) = exp
(
−γ ∥xi −xj∥2)
(2.11)
2.4
DK2 electricity market
This chapter focuses on the electricity market in the DK2 bidding zone. As in all liberalized
electricity markets across Europe, the market structure in DK2 is organized into several
submarkets. The most prominent of these is the day­ahead market, where generation and
consumption are scheduled one day in advance. Market participants—both producers
and consumers—submit their bids by 12:00 (CET), after which the EUPHEMIA algorithm
clears the market for all coupled European bidding zones. Day­ahead prices are published
no later than 14:00 on the day prior to delivery.
This publication time also marks the start of the short­term trading phase, beginning with
the first of two intraday auctions, as well as the opening of the continuous intraday market.
These mechanisms allow participants to refine their market positions based on updated
information, which is particularly relevant for operators of renewable energy assets. Fore­
casts made up to 36 hours before delivery are typically associated with significant uncer­
tainty. As lead times shorten, forecast accuracy improves, enabling better alignment of
contracted volumes with expected production.
Following physical delivery, any deviations from scheduled positions are settled in the
balancing market. For example, consider a wind farm operator who, based on a forecast
available before the day­ahead gate closure, expects to produce 10 MWh in a specific
hour. The operator bids this quantity into the day­ahead market and does not subse­
quently adjust the position in the intraday market. If the actual production turns out to
be only 5 MWh, the shortfall of 5 MWh must be procured at the imbalance price. This
balancing action is performed automatically by the system operator.
10
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:18==
00:30
07:30
08:00
12:00
14:00
15:00
17:00
t-1h t-45mint-25min
t
FCR-N
FCR-D
aFRR CM
mFRR CM
FCR
DA market
FCR-N
FCR-D
FFR
IDC
mFRR EAM
aFRR EAM
D
D - 1
Figure 2.3: Overview of the electricity markets and balancing products (even spacing, no
empty labels)
The balancing price in electricity markets is determined based on the cost of activated
ancillary services. The exact methodology for calculating the balancing price has evolved
over recent years and has been subject to multiple revisions. Ancillary services are pro­
cured independently by system operators and may vary even within the same country—
for instance, Denmark is split into two distinct balancing zones. DK1 participates in the
continental European ancillary service market, whereas DK2 is integrated into the Nordic
balancing market.
An overview of the different ancillary services utilized in DK2 is provided in fig. 2.3. In this
zone, five ancillary services are employed to ensure stable grid operation. The fastest
frequency response is the Frequency Restoration Reserve (FRR), followed by Frequency
Containment Reserves for Disturbances (FCR­D) and for Normal Operation (FCR­N). For
the purpose of determining the balancing market price, the most relevant services are the
automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR) and the manual Frequency Restora­
tion Reserve (mFRR).
Under the current market design, the balancing price in DK2 is set by the marginal pricing
rule, corresponding to the most expensive activated aFRR or mFRR unit. However, there
are ongoing discussions about transitioning to a methodology based on the weighted
average price of all activated aFRR and mFRR units.
Regardless of the specific pricing mechanism, balancing markets across Europe can gen­
erally be categorized into single­price and dual­price systems. In recent years, the Eu­
ropean Union has actively promoted the harmonization of balancing markets, favouring
the adoption of the single­price scheme [19]. The main differences between these two
schemes are outlined in the following section.
2.4.1
Two­Price Scheme
Until 2021, the two­price scheme was in effect in the DK2 balancing market. Under this
market structure, any deviation from the scheduled generation or consumption was sys­
tematically penalized, regardless of whether it was beneficial or harmful to the system.
A comparison between balancing prices and day­ahead prices is provided in table 2.1.
The two rightmost columns of the table illustrate prices and financial outcomes under the
two­price mechanism.
In this setup, system­beneficial imbalances—for example, being short when the system
is in surplus, or being long when the system is in deficit—are not rewarded beyond the
day­ahead price. In these cases, the market participant simply settles at the day­ahead
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
11
==PAGE:19==
price. This is an external intervention by the market operator, which can be seen as
one argument for a one price scheme. In contrast, system­harmful imbalances—such as
being short during a system shortage or long during a system surplus—are penalized.
This occurs either through purchasing at a higher price or selling at a lower price than the
day­ahead rate.
Such a structure provides strong incentives for market participants to schedule their en­
tire expected production or consumption in the day­ahead market. There is no strategic
advantage to participating in the balancing market, as any deviation entails risk without
upside potential. For a wind farm operator, this means minimizing forecast errors and
avoiding imbalances as much as possible by improving day­ahead forecast accuracy and
aligning scheduled volumes closely with expected real­time generation.
Table 2.1: Payout comparison in single­ and dual­price balancing market settlements.
Additional revenue fields marked in green and lower revenues marked in red.
Single­Price Market
Dual­Price Market
Shortage
Excess
Shortage
Excess
Short (Buying)
λIM > λDA
λIM < λDA
λIM > λDA
λDA
Long(Selling)
λIM > λDA
λIM < λDA
λDA
λIM < λDA
2.4.2
One­Price Scheme
Contrary, the one­price scheme offers a possibility to earn additional revenue from the
balancing market. The second and third column from the left show two possible situations,
where the market participant can gain and two situation, in which he can loose revenue.
The relevant condition is, if the deviation is beneficial for the grid or not. Due to higher
wind production output in a moment, where there is an overall shortage of electricity, this
additional production reduces the required amount of activated ancillary services and the
wind farm operator receives a higher price for his electricity compared to the day ahead
market. Respectively for the situation, if the overall system has too much electricity and
the wind farm is under producing, the missing volume can be bought for a price lower than
the day­ahead market, leaving the difference as additional profit for the wind farm operator.
The harmful imbalances are settled in the same way as in the two­price balancing scheme
and the market participant is getting penalized. Multiple implications can be derived from
this methodology. First, the scheme seems to be fair in the sense that harmful imbalance
is getting penalized and beneficial imbalance enumerated. The imbalance market should
be in the best case a ”zero­sum­game” and harmful imbalance causer are paying the
costs, either in form of other market participants compensating with beneficial imbalance
or by the activation of ancillary services. A situation with no activated ancillary services
leads to a situation that day­ahead price and imbalance price are equal. Due to newly
introduced deadband the imbalance market relevant ancillary services are only getting
activated, if a certain frequency deviation is exceeded. Second, due to the opportunity of
earning additional revenue a arbitrage bidding behaviour could get incentivised of holding
the opposite position than the grid.
12
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:20==
3
Data
In the following chapter, the used input data is presented. During this presentation some
key empirical findings in the data are highlighted, which can influence the model results.
In addition to that input features are transformed with non­linear functions, which are later
used as regular input feature in the non­linear policy models. To further enhance the
variety of input data, lagged variables and and lagged error terms are defined in a data
engineering pipeline. The used data is based on the data set provided by [5] and [7] and
covers 2019 and 2020. During that time DK2 had implemented a two­price scheme, but
Energinet published post­ex the corresponding imbalance price in a one­price scheme.
The data set got extended by mFRR market data from Nordpool and detailed generation
and load data and their respective forecast from entseo­e transparency platform [20].
3.1
Imbalance vs. day­ahead prices
In the end the trading decision for bidding a specific volume in a one­price scheme market
comes down to the question, if the day­ahead or balancing price is higher. Therefore the
day­ahead prices and imbalance prices are investigated descriptively. As mentioned in
chapter 2, the imbalance price is higher than the day ahead price, if the grid in deficit and
requires additional electricity and the other way around. The imbalance price can also
equal the day ahead price for example in situations, where the grid is in balance and no
ancillary services are activated. The grid is never in 100% balance, but mFRR and aFRR
are getting only activated, if the deviation exceeds a specific threshold. In table 3.1 the
distribution of the different grid states is shown for the analysed period in DK2. In around
42% of the time, the grid is in excess and therefore in need for down­regulation. In 34%
of the moments the gird is in balance and the day­ahead price equals the balancing price.
Only in 25% of the hours the grid needs to up­regulate and activates additional generators
or curtails consumers. Assuming that the system state is only driven by errors of unbiased
forecasts the share excess and deficit should be rather equal. Market participants seem
to tend to be in a long position and sell on the imbalance market, rather than being short
and forced to buy missing volume.
Table 3.1: System state distribution over 17,416 samples
System State
Count
Percentage
Average price difference
Grid Excess
7,159
41%
12.61€
Grid In Balance
5,990
34%
0
Grid Deficit
4,267
25%
­25.28€
The reason for this behaviour could be explained by the distribution of the absolute price
difference between day­ahead price and imbalance price.
If the grid is in deficit and
no renewable assets, due to negative day­ahead prices are curtailed and ready for up­
regulation, the activated generation are flexible and often very expensive generators. This
can be seen in fig. 3.1, for which the data got filtered to maximum 250€ absolute price
difference to allow a better readability. Only upregulation prices are left out, due to this
filter. If the grid is in excess, the price difference is closer to zero. If the grid is in deficit the
price difference has a bigger tail and a couple of very high outliers. The highest value is
709.75€/MWh, which means that the imbalance price was 709.75€/MWh higher than the
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
13
==PAGE:21==
day­ahead price. Market participants fear to pay such high penalties for under­production
and therefore choose a strategic over­production, which avoids high costs, but let the pro­
ducer for example still receive a reasonable amount of money, because the imbalance
price is only a little bit lower than the day­ahead price.
Figure 3.1: Relative frequency distribution of the absolute difference between day­ahead
price and imbalance price
The clear strategy of taking a long position can not be consistently concluded out of this
analysis. Due to the high share of the grid in excess, the weighted imbalance price is
­1.15€, which is not a very strong indicator and probably varies over time. Another im­
portant aspect is that the assumption of being a price taker needs to hold for an arbitrage
strategy. As seen in [21], the strategy can only work, if the imbalance direction is not set by
yourself. This doesn’t need to be a single market participant, but can be for example also
a type of generation like wind or solar. If wind was forecasted higher at day­ahead stage
it might have impacted more wind farm operators, leading to such a high forecast error
and therefore imbalance that the system state is defined by wind farms in this moment.
3.1.1
Correlation analysis
The performance of contextualised optimization is dependent on the input feature (the
context), which is provided to the model. Even though the decision is directly made by
the policy, another model with the same input features should be able reduce the under­
lying uncertainty. In the case of the problem to allocate volume to the day­ahead market
or imbalance market, the uncertainty is if the balancing price is higher or lower than the
day­ahead price. This can be expressed as system state, as already seen in the previous
section. The difference between the day­ahead prices and the imbalance prices, is either
positive if the grid is in excess or negative, if the grid is in deficit. The absolute difference
between the market prices can quantify how risky a decision was. In fig. 3.2, the correla­
tion between the output variables and the used input features is shown. Overall it can be
seen that, there is no strong correlation between any of the input features and the output
feature. The lowest correlation values can be seen for the difference between day­ahead
and balancing price. The strongest correlation can be seen for the accepted up regulation
volumes for DK1 and DK2. Both have a negative correlation, which means that the bal­
ancing price is relatively higher than the day­ahead price. This result makes sense, as the
grid operator is procuring more capacity in moments, where he believes bigger imbalance
14
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:22==
volumes might be possible. In contrast to that, the correlation values for DK1 and DK2
accepted up volumes in respect to the absolute difference still show a negative correla­
tion. Meaning, the more volume is accepted and procured by the TSO, the smaller the
absolute difference between day­ahead and imbalance price. The strongest correlation
with the absolute price difference is seen for the lagged rolling average of the absolute
difference between the two markets in the same hour over the last 30 days. Aiming for
a well performing linear model, high correlation values must be detected here, especially
for the difference between the two market prices.
Figure 3.2: Correlation matrix between input and output features
A correlation matrix can only capture linear relationships and is only easily interpretable for
continues output variables. Another way of detecting relationships between two features
are scatter plots. As an example, the scatter plot for the lagged missing capacities for
the respective hour over the last 30 days and the difference between day­ahead price
and balancing price in respect to the system state is shown in fig. 3.3. Missing capacity
represents the sum of scheduled outages in this specific hour. Unscheduled outages
can not be included, due to the unavailability of this information at day­ahead stage. As
these reported scheduled outages are mostly from conventional plants, it could give an
indication how much capacity is available to bid into the mFRR market. The smaller
the available capacity, the more likely the situation that expensive generators are getting
activated. From the correlation matrix a small positive correlation between the lagged
rolling average of missing capacities and the absolute difference of the market prices
supports this argument. Nevertheless, almost no input feature has a high correlation with
the system state, which is not due to the linearity. In fig. 3.3 it becomes obvious that
for each system state values for the lagged missing capacities exist. The scatter plot is
representative for all input features, as they look very similar.
It can be concluded that no input feature, which is available at day­ahead stage can ex­
plain the system state itself reliably alone. How it would look like, if this would be the case
is illustrated by the scatter points in fig. 3.3 for the difference between day­ahead price
and balancing price. The balancing price is not available at day ahead stage and pub­
lished even after delivery. Therefore, the difference can also not be known at day­ahead
stage and not be used later in the model. Nevertheless, it explains the relationship in a
single price scheme again, that a positive difference, so a higher day­ahead price com­
pared to the balancing price, only occurs if the grid is in excess and there is a need for
down­regulation.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Scatterplot for the lagged rolling average of missing capacities and the system
state
3.2
Feature engineering
Due to the limited explanatory power of the used input feature in [7], additional features
are generated. Apart from new input features, like for example the loadFC or realized
generation per production type, lagged variables are introduced. The realization of pro­
duction volumes per generation type can not be used in the policy model, as the policy
makes the decision before day­ahead clearing and therefore without the knowledge or the
realization. In case of renewable electricity generators the output is not even known after
market clearing, but just in real­time or at least close to delivery. The creation of lagged
variables is dependent on the hour of the day, as the realized value of solar production
for 15:00 is also not known on the previous day, as it is three hours after market closing.
Therefore, all realized values after 12:00 are lagged by 48 hours and all realized values
before 12:00 are only lagged with 24 hours.
Imbalance is either caused by deviations on the production side or on the consumption
side. There are various reasons for such deviations like for example outages or forecast
errors. Both is only known in real­time and can not be used in the day­ahead policy.
Forecast errors for the production of renewable assets, could possibly have some struc­
tural errors, if their models are not perfectly forecasting or retrained regularly. A potential
situation could be an unseen weather scenario, which lets the forecast provider under­
or overestimate the production. This knowledge would have an impact on the imbalance
prices and could benefit the model. Another aspect are directly lagged imbalance price to
day­ahead price differences. If for example, the imbalance price is on average higher than
the day­ahead price, the bid at day­ahead stage can get at least reduced or completely
withheld.
Hourly lagged variables are introduced for both forecast errors and imbalance market­
specific features, as outlined in algorithm 1, following a similar approach to [21].
16
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:24==
Algorithm 1 Hourly Rolling Mean for Selected Columns Over Past n Days
1: Define list of columns to apply rolling average
2: for each column in the list do
3:
Initialize empty list for hourly rolling averages
4:
for each timestamp t in the data do
5:
Extract the hour of t
6:
Define a time window covering the past n days with the same hour
7:
if window contains data then
8:
Compute mean value within the window
9:
else
10:
Assign None
11:
end if
12:
Append result to the rolling average list
13:
end for
14:
Save rolling average as new column column_hourly_rollavg
15: end for
16: return updated data
3.3
Non­linear transformations
The most intuitive and simplest way to integrate non­linearity is by expanding the input
feature space to a higher dimension and using transformed features. This approach is
used for the non­linear policy models without the kernel trick. Suggested by [9], a Gaus­
sian kernel function is implemented and applied on selected input features. The formula
for the transformation can be found in eq. (3.1).
ϕj,k,l(x(i)
j ) = exp
(
−ζl · (µk −x(i)
j )2)
(3.1)
where:
• i ∈{1, . . . , N} is the sample index,
• j ∈{1, . . . , d} is the feature index,
• k ∈{1, . . . , K} is the index of the center µk,
• l ∈{1, . . . , L} is the index of the kernel width ζl.
The kernel is applied on input features, which are scaled between zero and one. This
leads again to an output between zero and one. In fig. 3.4 the transformations are shown
for different µ and ζ. The original input is on the diagonal as no transformation is per­
formed. As a example for µ = 0.66, the transformed input feature would take the value
1, if the original feature is equal to 0.66. Like this, a coefficient for this transformed input
feature is affecting especially the region around the the quantile 0.66 in the original space,
giving the model more flexibility.
The biggest effect of such a transformation could be seen, if the input feature is distributed
uniformly and each transformed feature tailors only one specific area. In reality most of
the input features are not uniformly distributed. The wind energy forecast for the farm has
high peaks at the left and right end of the range. This happens due to the mechanics of
a windmill. In moments with no wind or very little, the wind farm is just not producing.
For higher wind speeds the windmill can adjust the angles of the blades optimizing the
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
17
==PAGE:25==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
x
ϕ(x)
µ = 0.00
µ = 0.33
µ = 0.66
µ = 1.00
Original feature x
Figure 3.4: Radial basis kernel functions for ζ = 10 and various µ values, compared to
the original linear feature.
electricity output to its maximum capacity and limiting the speed of the rotations. For such
an input feature, where most of the data points are clustered around a specific value, the
transformation has not a huge impact, as all these data points have the same value in the
the transformed space and are not very diverse. This methodology is limited by the the
growing size of the model.
3.4
Forecast smoothing
The forecast for the produced electricity by the wind farm and the day­ahead price fore­
cast got both created by [5]. A real production and price forecast were made available
by Siemens Gamesa, but remain under a non­disclosure agreement. On this provided
data, the error term distribution for both target variables got measured. Based on this
distribution, forecasts were synthetically generated by adding to the realized value a ran­
dom error, which follows the given distribution. This error term can be described as white
noise, as there is no autocorrelation between each error term.
For wind production forecast this methodology is arguably possible, as wind speeds can
vary a lot over time. For electricity prices, the forecasted error term can lead to unusual
price forecasts. For example, on a day with rather constant high electricity prices and
low volatility the allocated random error term might be one of the negative outliers in the
distribution. That would result in an hour having a extremely low electricity price, whereas
the neighbouring hours are both very expensive. Instead of implementing a new forecast
generation with a mean­reverting stochastic process like the Ornstein­Uhlenbeck process,
spikes in the forecast are smoothed. The advantage of the Ornstein­Uhlenbeck process
would be to have a partly autocorrelated error term, which would allow the policy model
to learn this error. Yet, the error term could follow the same distribution, which was found
in the original data.
The smoothing process is done by calculating the difference between the forecasted price
of hour t and the electricity price in hour t−1 and in hour t+1. If both absolute differences
are higher than three times the standard deviation of the electricity price forecast on a
rolling 24­hour window, the price forecast in that specific hour gets substituted by the
average of the previous and next hour. In total 186 spikes are getting smoothed in the
18
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:26==
two whole years for a threshold of three times the standard deviation.
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Hour of day
Electricity price [€/MWh]
Realized prices
Original forecast
Smoothed forecast
Figure 3.5: Spike smoothing on a electricity price curve. A midday spike is replaced using
local smoothing based on neighbouring values.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
19
==PAGE:27==
20
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:28==
4
Methodology
In the following chapter, the model itself and main characteristics of the setup are pre­
sented in more detail. The first part is about the objective function and constraints, which
are describing the use case. In total six different models have been analysed, which re­
quire unique constraints and are shown in separate subsections. As already introduced
from a theoretical point of perspective in chapter 2, different approaches for CVaR imple­
mentations are defined. Due to the computational costs of the Kernel models, a rolling
window methodology is used and presented in the last subsection together with the struc­
ture of the hyper parameter tuning.
4.1
General model
Objective function
The overarching goal is to maximise the profit of the wind farm operator under a price taker
assumption. Maintenance and operating costs are discarded in this model as they are
assumed to be independent from the trading strategy. Therefore, the objective function
is the sum over all time periods T of the day­ahead revenue and the imbalance market
revenue, which is the product of traded volume and price respectively. The day­ahead
volume is given as vDA
t
and the day­ahead price as λDA
t
. lambdaIM
t
represents the price
of balancing market and vIM
t
the imbalance volume of the wind farm. Each variable is
defined for every hour t. Moreover, the regularization term reg is subtracted from the
objective value to penalize high coefficients in the model. This term is further described
in section 4.5.
max
T
∑
t=1
(
λDA
t
· vDA
t
+ λIM
t
· vIM
t
)
−reg
(4.1)
Power balance
Every generator and consumer has the be balanced every moment in the market. This
means that in our case all the generated electricity is sold either in the day­ahead market
or in the imbalance market. The imbalance volume is not a separate decision, but rather
the consequence of the decision made for the day­ahead market. The third option is to
curtail the wind farm and stop producing. This scenario is happening in recent years more
often, due to negative electricity prices. The sum of these three volumes has to equal the
realized production volume ERE
t
for every t.
vDA
t
+ vIM
t
+ ct = ERE
t
∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(4.2)
Variable boundaries
The market bidding on the day­ahead market follows the common ground rules. A bid
can not go below zero and can not exceed the capacity of the wind farm. In other words,
every bid should be covered by real production and not a financial instrument to cause
imbalance in the imbalance market. This implies that the imbalance is between the nega­
tive and positive capacity of the wind farm. The former would occur if the maximum wind
farm capacity was accepted in the day­ahead market, but due to a technical failure, for
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
21
==PAGE:29==
example, no production was available for this hour. The latter could happen in an hour
for which no wind was predicted the previous day, but a strong breeze arrived, allowing
the wind farm to produce at maximum capacity. The curtailment can range from zero up
to the capacity of the wind farm.
0 ≤vDA
t
≤capwind
∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(4.3)
−capwind ≤vIM
t
≤capwind
∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(4.4)
0 ≤ct ≤capwind
∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(4.5)
4.2
Dummy model
As a reference for the proposed models, a simple dummy model is constructed. The
achieved profit and the caused imbalance are the benchmark for the policy models and
either the profit should get increased or the imbalance(risk) reduced. In the dummy model,
the allocated volume on the day­ahead market is equal to the forecasted produced energy.
All deviations between the forecasted produced energy and the realized produced energy
is settled on the imbalance market. Assuming an unbiased and highly accurate forecast
for the energy production would lead in a two price scheme for the balancing market
to nearly perfect results, as nothing can be gained on the balancing markets and the
imbalance is reduced as much as possible. In the scenario with a one price scheme, the
forecast error might not even be bad for the profit maximisation, if the caused imbalance
is beneficial. The dummy model never curtails.
vDA
t
= EFC
t
∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(4.6)
vIM
t
= ERE
t
−EFC
t
∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(4.7)
ct = 0
∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(4.8)
4.3
Model definitions
Linear base model
The policy to determine the allocated volume on the day­ahead market is the output of a
function, which is basically identical to the classic regression function in eq. (2.3). The β­
vector is trained to maximise the profit, given the input data for each feature over all time
periods t. The index p represents the price domain. As an example, consider the two
domains (−∞, 0) and (0, ∞), which correspond to (qp, qp+1) each. For prices below zero
another policy is used than for prices above zero. Because of this a stepwise bidding curve
can get created, which can be submitted as a conditional bid. In the chosen example, the
policy could return zero for the first domain and the forecasted electricity volume as bid
for the day ahead market in the second domain. The domain setup has been especially
used in a setup, where the wind farm was combined with an electrolyser to allow some
kind of classification of the prices [7, 5].
vDA
t
= βDA
p
· xt
if
λDA
t
∈[qp, qp+1)
(4.9)
22
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:30==
One of the requirements by market regulation is the monotony increasing market volume
for increasing prices for producers. Hence, the bidding curve needs to be increasing for
prices within one price domain, but also between price domains. The following constraint
ensures that the bid volume is increasing over all consecutive price domains P. The
second constraint sets the lower boundary for the coefficient for λDA to zero, so that
the day ahead bid volume is increasing within one price domain. The feature vector is
constructed like in [7] with the realized day­ahead price as first element, why the first
element of the beta vector is constrained.
βDA
p
· x(qp+1) ≤βDA
p+1 · x(qp+1)
∀p ∈{1, . . . , P −1}
(4.10)
β(1)
p
≥0
∀p ∈{1, . . . , P}
(4.11)
Linear hourly model
The linear hourly model is build in a similar way as the linear base model. The only
difference is that for each hour of the day a separate policy is trained. In a setup of 10
price domains, this setup leads to 240 trained policies. The constraint to guarantee the
monotony increasing volume bids is just added by the hourly index and shown below.
vDA
t
= βDA
h,p · xt
if
t mod 24 = h,
λDA
t
∈[qp, qp+1)
(4.12)
βDA
h,p · x(qp+1) ≤βDA
h,p+1 · x(qp+1)
∀h ∈{1, . . . , 24}, ∀p ∈{1, . . . , P −1}
(4.13)
Kernel model
The Kernel model has a different setup and got partly already introduced in chapter 2.
The first part of the formula is the same as in the linear policy setup and a coefficient is
trained for the realized day­ahead price. Like this, constraints can get applied to ensure
again the increasing day ahead bid. This would not be possible in the second term of the
model definition as Kernel matrix is not in the original feature space. The one beta and
the α are the optimized variables.
vDA
t
= βDA · λDA
t
+
N
∑
i=1
αDA
i
· K(xt, xi)
(4.14)
4.4
CVaR Constraints
A major aspect of this work are the different applications of CVaR. As outlined in chapter 2
the definition of risk is subject to the individual investor and can be defined as imbalance
volume or the imbalance value. Table 4.1 shows four different risk metrics. They can
be divided in respect to two aspects. First, if they are restricting the imbalance or the
deviation from the forecast. To restrict the imbalance volume is intuitive as that brings
the uncertainty into the profit. This risk can only be assessed ex post and therefore the
decision maker doesn’t know in real­time how much imbalance his volume bid will cause.
Contrary, a definition, where the the deviation from the forecast is measured, expresses
the risk already at the stage of decision making. The downside is that it does not directly
capture the risk of imbalance, even tough one could argue that on average an unbiased
forecast should result in no imbalance on average.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
23
==PAGE:31==
CVaR Type
Imbalance
Forecast Deviation
Volume
|vIM
t
|
|vDA
t
−EFC
t
|
Value
(
λDA
t
−λIM
t
)
· vIM
t
(λDA
t
−λIM
t
) · (EFC
t
−vDA
t
)
Table 4.1: Definition of δt for different CVaR types and targets.
Whereas Energinet might be risk­averse of imbalance volume to avoid high activation of
ancillary service activation, the asset operator is afraid of its value. The second row of
table 4.1 shows definitions of risk, which are value based. First, the value difference of the
imbalance, which is calculated by the price difference of the two markets times imbalance
volume. This can be either positive or negative and therefore beneficial and penalizing for
the asset’s profit. The goal of the asset operator is to avoid high losses due to imbalance.
He would tolerate small losses, if there is a chance for high profits, resulting in higher
expected profits. In addition to that, a high imbalance volume is not risky itself, if the
imbalance price is equal to the day ahead price for example. Again this assessment can
only be done ex­post. The value based approach for the forecast deviation is ex­post as
well. By multiplying the price difference between the two markets times the deviation from
the forecast the risk of betting on beneficial balancing prices is quantified. The advantage
of an ex­ante risk assessment has been dropped in this case, but can be still valuable
for the use in a policy model setup like here during the training period. Assuming some
form of stationarity, all ex­post risk assessment should be able to control the risk during
the testing phase as well.
Subject to the CVaR is now a positive defined risk, for example, the higher the imbalance
the riskier. In chapter 2 the CVaR is applied on the left tail, as the metric is profit and
therefore small values should be avoided. Hence, the right tail is investigated and shall get
limited. The auxiliary variable ut is defined, measuring the amount of risk which exceeds
the VaR. The conditional value at risk is then the VaR plus the average of the amount of
risks per timestamp, which are exceeding the VaR. For α = 5%, 95% of all ut are equal
to zero, as the lower boundary of ut is equal to zero. To avoid a dilution of the average by
all the zeros, the denominator is adjusted by (1 −α). Beside deciding how much of the
tail in form of α should be regularized, the asset operator needs to define a acceptable
upper bound for the CVaR as τ. If a causality between risk and return exists like in market
theories, the τ not only regulates the risk, but also the profit.
ut ≥δt −V aR
∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(4.15)
CV aR = V aR +
1
T(1 −α)
T
∑
t=1
ut
(4.16)
CV aR ≤τ
(4.17)
4.5
Regularization & Feature selection
Regularization improves the generalization of a machine learning and achieving better
performance on unseen data. For simple models like a regular regression it is not a
necessity, since the risk of over­fitting is limited compared to complex neural networks.
For neural networks or kernel models regularization is mandatory in most cases.
24
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:32==
The most popular ways of regularization are Lasso and Ridge regularization. Lasso reg­
ularization penalizes the sum of the absolute coefficients of the policy. Ridge regression
penalizes the sum of squared coefficients of the policy. Both have the effect to reduce
the coefficients, but Ridge reduces the big coefficients stronger than Lasso, due to the
squared term. Lasso regularization can lead to a sparse coefficient vector with a lot of
values equal to zero, as they reduce the penalty term in the same way as reducing a
big term. By setting the coefficient to zero the feature is basically dropped from the in­
put feature set and feature selection is performed. As the overall goal is to keep the
optimization model computational simple and maintain a linear setup while introducing a
non­linearity, Lasso regularization is chosen as it keeps the model linear. Another advan­
tage is that, there is no need for additional feature selection methods. The regularization
term is presented below and requires the hyperparameter ρ, which controls the strength
of penalization and needs to be carefully tuned.
reg = ρ ·
∑
k
zk
(4.18)
|ck| ≤zk,
zk ≥0
(4.19)
The ck is a general definition to keep the formulation clean. For each model ck is defined
differently, why k depends on the number of coefficients in the policy and shown below
in table 4.2. It is important to note, that the regularization only works as expected, if the
input data has the same scale. Otherwise, features with generally small values receive
a higher penalty, because the respective coefficient is likely to be high to have an effect.
Therefore, the data is scaled to values between 0 and 1 for each input feature, except the
λDA.
Model
Coefficient ck
Sum indices
Policy model
βDA
j,p
j, p
Hourly policy model
βDA
h,j,p
h, j, p
Kernel model
αDA
i
i
Table 4.2: Definition of ck and summation indices for regularization in different policy mod­
els.
4.6
Rolling window & hyper parameter optimization
As mentioned in the two previous sections, the CVaR threshold and the penalty factor for
the regularization need to be tuned. One could argue, that the CVaR threshold is getting
tuned to earn the risk certificate to take long or short positions in the balancing market as in
[21]. A high CVaR is allowed, if the trained model achieves good results on the validation
set, implying high explanatory context in the training data. If no good performance can be
achieved on the validation set, the model gets risk restricted and bids the forecast, if the
risk is defined as forecast deviation.
For time series data often rolling or growing windows are used or some kind of online
learning. Due to the computational costs of the kernel models, which are proportional
to the number of data points, a rolling window approach is selected. The training period
is chosen to be 15 days. The model is getting validated on two days, before the model
retrains on the training and validation set and is tested on an out­of­sample test set. The
rolling window procedure is shown in fig. 4.1.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
25
==PAGE:33==
· · ·
0
5
10
15
20
Days
Training
Validation
Testing
Figure 4.1: Rolling window cross­validation setup.
This methodology makes sure that the model gets retrained with the most recent data and
is easily adaptable to market changes. Recent methodology market changes, which lead
to higher imbalance prices compared to day ahead prices, could be quickly tracked by the
retrained policy. A risk of such a short training period is the limited number of data points
and therefore a higher risk of overfitting or a general problem of learning something.
The hyperparameter CVaR and the penalty term factor are tuned with a Grid Search. For
every combination of CVaR and penalty term factor a model is trained on the training set
and tested on the validation set. Out of all these models, the model is chosen, which
achieves the highest objective value on the validation set. The used hyperparameter for
this model are then saved and used to retrain the model on the aggregated training and
validation set. Finally the trained model is tested on the out of sample test set. This
process is shown in algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Hyperparameter and CVaR Grid Search
1: for each window in rolling windows do
2:
for each γ in hyperparameter array do
3:
for each CVaR in CVaR array do
4:
Train model on training set with (γ, CVaR)
5:
Evaluate model on validation set, get objective
6:
Save (γ, CVaR, objective)
7:
end for
8:
end for
9:
Select best (γ∗, CVaR∗) from validation results
10:
Retrain model on training + validation set with best combination
11:
Evaluate on test set
12: end for
26
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:34==
5
Results
The following chapter is presenting the results for the different models and compares them
to the dummy model to assess primarily the profitability. Another aspect is the assessment
of the risk exposure of different trading strategies, regarding differently defined risks.
5.1
Profit
The cumulative profit can be seen as the most important profit measure as it states the
overall profit of the investigated time horizon. In fig. 5.1, the profit for the linear, non­
linear, the hourly models and the kernel models with a deviation CVaR setup is shown.
Every model is following a very similar slope and there can not be one model be identified,
which clearly outperforms the other models. Only the polynomial model is performing a
bit worse and resulting in a lower cumulative profit. The models, which are defined in the
input feature space (all except of the kernel models) are replicating most of the time the
trading behaviour of the dummy model, by just bidding the forecasted volume for the wind
park. This is achieved, due to the deviation CVaR methodology and adding the option
for zero deviation to the hyperparameter set. If no improvement can be achieved on the
validation setup, with the trained strategy on the train set, the zero strategy is the default,
which should at least perform as good as the dummy. There is still the chance that a model
performs worse on the test set than the dummy, as the validation setup is quite small and
a good performance on the validation set can happen due to randomness rather than a
well trained model. In this case, not the default strategy is chosen, but a model setup with
deviations from the forecast and the model is overfitting.
The two kernel models do not have these default strategies as they are not build in the
original features space. There is no opportunity to build the forecasted energy volume
with the distances in the kernel matrix. Consequently, the kernel models face the higher
chance of losing money in comparison to the dummy, as they are always deviating. This
is especially the case for the polynomial model, which is less regularized, due to compu­
tational issues replicating the forecast bid.
The outcome of this behaviour is better illustrated in table 5.1. All models achieve a cumu­
lative profit close to or a bit above the dummy model. No model is learning substantially
information from the input data to earn additional revenue and therefore no conclusion can
be derived from the input data regarding the price difference between day­ahead market
and imbalance price. This is confirmed by running a regression model on the same input
features to predict the difference between the two market prices and resulting in an R2
of just 0.01. At the time of the decision before gate closure of the day­ahead market, all
the available information is included in the day­ahead market bidding decision. This as­
sumption might be incorrect for very in­transparent and inefficient markets, but electricity
markets are relatively closer to efficient markets than other goods. Under perfect market
assumptions all available information are already priced into the market at this point. An­
other indication is that apart from the two auctions for the intraday market, the intraday
market is relatively calm until four hours before delivery, as then the forecasts for renew­
ables or imbalance market start to improve significantly. The prediction of the imbalance
price is even difficult at 30 min before delivery, as shown by [15].
Another way of stressing the poor performance of each model is the more detailed view
on the day­ahead bids. In fig. 5.2, the difference of the model bid compared to the dummy
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.1: Cumulative profit of each model
Model
Cumulative Profit [T€]
Percentage of Dummy
Dummy
2,079
100.00%
Linear
2,089
100.47%
Non­Linear
2,090
100.53%
Hourly­Linear
2,074
99.79%
Hourly­Non­Linear
2,080
100.06%
RBF Kernel
2,108
101.44%
Polynomial Kernel
2,000
96.20%
Table 5.1: Cumulative profit of each model compared to the Dummy baseline.
model bid is shown for every hour of the 20th of March in 2019. In addition to this, the
group of bars has a shadow according to the price difference between day ahead market
and balancing market. If the the day ahead price is higher than the imbalance price, a
red shadow is shown behind the bars. The ideal case would show high positive bars
for all red areas, committing to a high day ahead volume and then buying it cheaper
on the balancing market. Contrary, for the blue areas a negative bar should indicate a
reduced day­ahead volume and selling electricity on the balancing market. For this given
example the linear model is bidding the forecast and therefore no bar is seen. The non­
linear model bids slightly below the electricity production forecast volume and the RBF­
Kernel is bidding much less then the electricity production forecast. The polynomial model
is the only model, which is bidding more then the forecast and this quite substantially.
These bids are resulting in a better performance for the polynomial model compared to
the dummy and all other models reducing the profit compared to the dummy. None of the
models can capture the different states of price difference and adjust their bid accordingly.
28
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.2: Day­ahead bid volume difference of each model compared to the dummy
model
5.2
Risk
The profit of the trading strategy is not necessarily the only relevant aspect for the decision
maker. As discussed in chapter 2, the risk of the respective trading strategy is relevant as
well. The different CVaR constraints, which were introduced in section 4.4 are compared
to each other in the following paragraph. The RBF­Kernel model is chosen to investigate
the different CVaR strategies, as this model performs best in the previous section.
In fig. 5.3, the distribution of the imbalance volume is shown, given different CVaR con­
straints for the model. For both volume targeting constraint setups, a higher share of
smaller imbalance volumes can be observed. Between two and eight MWh of Imbalance
the model have similar densities. For the value restricted model setups, a higher share
of big outliers are detected. For the sake of a better visualization the dummy model is
left out. This is due to the fact, that the imbalance volume is relatively evenly spread out
over the possible range from zero to ten. The distribution density of all the RBF kernel
models never exceeds 0.19 has even at the upper limit of the imbalance volume a density
of at least 0.04 for every model. The dummy model has a density of up to 0.75 for values
between zero and 1. Over 6 MWh, the density is close to zero for the dummy. This is not
surprisingly, as the dummy model has no incentive to deviate from the forecast and the
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
29
==PAGE:37==
forecast was created with a distributed white noise error term. Therefore, the absolute
imbalance volume is matching the absolute error term distribution of the forecast.
Figure 5.3: Imbalance distribution plot for different CVaR constraints
For a direct comparison with the dummy model, the different CVaR values on a subset of
the test set are shown in table 5.2. The dummy model has by far the lowest risk metrics
in all categories. For the deviation CVaR formulations the dummy performance is trivial,
as the dummy is bidding the forecast and has therefore no deviation. The dummy also
achieves the lowest imbalance, both in respect to volume and value. This is in line with
the expectation of an unbiased forecast. Instead, the RBF­kernel model causes higher
imbalance both in regards to value and volume. A higher risk pattern, would have been
acceptable as long as the profits would have increased as well, which is not the case.
Apart from aiming for arbitrage between day­ahead and balancing market, the model
could have tried to further minimize the imbalance and therefore reducing the risk. This
indicates, that even tough a validation set has been introduced, the policy the model learns
on the train set, does not help to make a better decision on the test set.
In table 5.2 most of the risk metrics are in a similar range and volume constrained mod­
els appear to perform overall with lower risk values compared to value constrained risk
models. This picture is only drawn for the 90% quantile average and not for the general
average as presented in table 5.3. For the average over the whole analysed period, the
dummy still performs best in both aspects. The imbalance value is even negative, which
means that the forecast error has a positive impact on the profit and the model is earning
money compared to the theoretical case of bidding the realized energy in the day­ahead
market. For the other models, a distinction between volume and value constrained is
identified. The volume constrained models achieve the lowest risk values in the volume
categories and the value constrained models achieve the lowest risk in the value cate­
gories. Hence, even tough the different risk constraints do not impact the last quantile,
an overall impact is recognized. The policy seems to be able to detect hours with rather
30
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:38==
Imbalance
Forecast deviation
Model
Volume (MWh)
Value (€)
Volume (MWh)
Value (€)
Dummy
3.36
32.00
0.00
0.00
Imbalance Volume
9.35
113.52
9.42
116.60
Imbalance Value
9.59
115.84
9.62
118.13
Deviation Volume
9.39
114.72
9.44
117.58
Deviation Value
9.59
115.84
9.62
118.13
Table 5.2: CVaR values (α = 90%, right­tail) for RBF­Kernel models with different CVaR
constraints.
expensive imbalance and distinguish them from hours with higher imbalance volume in
direct comparison.
Imbalance
Forecast deviation
Model
Volume (MWh)
Value (€)
Volume (MWh)
Value (€)
Dummy
0.98
­0.52
0.00
0.00
Imbalance Volume
3.53
0.59
3.61
1.11
Imbalance Value
3.81
0.04
3.90
0.56
Deviation Volume
3.54
0.71
3.62
1.23
Deviation Value
3.81
0.04
3.90
0.56
Table 5.3: Comparison of mean values for different volume and value types.
In general all models, tend to risk arbitrage trade positions to benefit on the balancing mar­
ket. Apart from being unsuccessful in this aspect, the option to reduce the risk instead of
increasing the profit is not used by any model. This is due to the definition of the objective
function, as it just maximizes the profit and considers the risk just as a constraint. A possi­
bility could be to redefine the objective function and aim to minimize the imbalance value.
In this case, the only purpose of the policy is to improve the forecast and sometimes take
an arbitrage position to avoid high imbalance costs. With the current forecast creation
by [5], a policy model would most likely not be able to improve the forecast, as the error
term is added randomly. With a real wind energy forecast or a differently generated fore­
cast, some autocorrelation could be detected or that in specific market characteristics, the
forecast over­ or underestimates. In this case, the policy model might be at least able to
reduce the risk.
5.3
Hyper parameter
How different CVaR setups impact the risk metrics and profit is discussed in the previous
section. Apart from the definition of how to quantify risk, the CVaR threshold is a tunable
hyperparameter. As described in chapter 4, the regularization factor and the CVaR are
tuned in a grid search setup and evaluated on the validation set before the model is finally
trained with the optimal hyperparameter. In fig. 5.4, the total profit over the validation set
is shown as lines for each CVaR value and with the regularization factor on the x­axis.
The linear policy model with the CVaR definition as deviation from the forecast is cho­
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
31
==PAGE:39==
sen to illustrate the hyperparameter tuning. The model without risk restriction performs
the worst. Contrary, the model with CVaR threshold equal to zero is not allowed to devi­
ate and therefore constant for all regularization factors. This model performs as good as
the dummy model. All other models with lower CVaR values, perform for regularization
coefficients below or equal one, slightly better than the dummy. For even higher regular­
ization factors the performance decreases below the dummy performance. At some point
the increasing regularization has a bigger impact on the objective value, so that all policy
coefficients become zero and the whole generated electricity is imbalance.
Figure 5.4: Profit on the validation set in respect to CVaR­threshold and regularization
factor
These results indicate a different picture compared to the profits in section 5.1. In the
previous result section the model is choosing out of a broad set of hyperparameter for
each the CVaR and the regularization the optimal value after testing on the validation
set for each window separately. Even tough the hyperparameter choice is tested on the
validation set, the overall performance is worse compared to the case, where the best
hyperparameter would be selected for all periods. More precisely, a model setup with
a low CVaR theshold for all windows performs better overall. This can be explained by
structural difference between the validation setup and the test set. For example could
have been the balancing price in the validation set always higher than the day­ahead
price and then the model, which is bidding always zero performs best on the validation
set and is also chosen for test set. The test set might be a day, where the balancing price
is lower and therefore the zero bids in the day­ahead market result in lower profits. In
table 5.4 the profits are shown for different models with more restrictive CVaR thresholds
between zero and 1 and no regularization on the test set.
On the test set, no significant improvement in performance is observed for any of the
advanced models. The cumulative profits remain close to that of the dummy benchmark,
with none of the strategies demonstrating consistent outperformance. Due to numerical
instability during training, results for the polynomial kernel model could not be obtained
for such small CVaR thresholds.
32
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:40==
Model
Cumulative Profit (€)
Percentage of Dummy
Dummy
256,790
100.00%
Linear
256,554
99.91%
Non­Linear
257,521
100.28%
Hourly­Linear
255,806
99.62%
Hourly­Non­Linear
253,076
98.55%
RBF Kernel
253,755
98.82%
Table 5.4: Cumulative profit of different models relative to the forecast­bidding baseline.
Overall, these findings reinforce the earlier conclusion that the available day­ahead fea­
tures do not contain sufficient predictive information to support profitable arbitrage deci­
sions. Even with risk­aware formulations and flexible model classes, the learned bidding
strategies do not meaningfully surpass the baseline of bidding the forecast. This suggests
that, under the investigated market conditions, the forecast itself remains the most robust
signal for day­ahead bidding.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
33
==PAGE:41==
34
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:42==
6
Conclusion
This thesis investigated whether data­driven non­linear decision policies can improve
day­ahead bidding decisions for wind power compared to a simple benchmark model
that bids the forecast directly. A variety of linear, non­linear, and kernel­based models
are implemented and evaluated under a contextual optimization framework with different
CVaR­based risk constraints. The performance of these models is benchmarked against
a dummy model under realistic market conditions in DK2. Despite the methodological
differences, no proposed policy consistently outperformed the dummy model in terms of
profit, and in some cases, the alternative strategies entailed increased risk. These find­
ings suggest that under current conditions, the simple strategy of bidding the unbiased
forecast remains difficult to beat.
The problem of predicting imbalance prices is widely discussed in the literature. Even
for a short time horizon of less than four hours, for example, the imbalance price is hard
to predict. Contextualised optimization shall avoid this problem. Here, the goal is not to
make a point prediction, but to learn a policy which navigates the decision making. For
a use case, where the uncertainty can be easily reduced by a machine learning model,
a policy model can perform very well as well. Assuming the imbalance price would be
predictable at day­ahead stage, the policy model might also make the betting decision
and allocate the volume fully on the day­ahead market or the imbalance market. Since
this is not the case and all available information at day­ahead gate closing are considered
in the day­ahead market, assuming perfect market conditions, no betting on the imbal­
ance price should be possible. But already if the policy could learn in which moments
upward prices are very high but downward prices are very close to the day­ahead price,
an arbitrage position could be taken. In this situation, missing energy can be very costly,
but additional production returns almost the same revenue. Like this, the risk of facing
high imbalance cast can be reduced. However, none of the models can significantly out­
perform the dummy without increasing the risk significantly. At day­ahead stage no input
feature seems to add significant additional information about the difference between the
price of the day­ahead market or the balancing market.
Nevertheless, the results show that non­linearity at least improves the performance of the
policy models compared to the linear models. This improvement does not compensate
the whole risk, which is taken by any of the models. Therefore, it can be concluded that
bidding the electricity production forecast at day­ahead stage is the best solution out of the
investigated models. The dummy model achieves very similar profit results and creates
the smallest imbalance volumes.
The analysis of the different risk constraints does not give a very clear picture of one
of the definitions outperforming the others. Still, it can be seen that the different CVaR
constraints are targeting the specific risks. This can only be detected if the risk is assessed
over the whole testset and not only the α­quantile, which proves again that the model can
not identify the difference between day­ahead and balancing price. Nevertheless, the
value and volume based approaches lead to tailored risk measures. Overall, the focus on
the value of the imbalance or forecast deviation should be of more interest for the decision
maker. The value based approaches and the imbalance value based approach can only
be quantified post­ex the delivery. Therefore, the deviation volume based approach can
be at least before market closing a relevant risk measure.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
35
==PAGE:43==
6.1
Limitations
The original idea behind policy models is to keep them simple and explainable. In addition
to that, the policy model should not be computational expensive. This is still the case for
the policy models, where just transformed input features got added. The structure of the
models with the transformed input features is still as simple as before in the linear setup.
Contrary Kernel models require to calculate the distance between the new data point and
all the previous data points in the train­set. This is not a computational heavy step, but
requires for example the availability of all previous data points after receiving the input
features for the next day. In addition to that, the model is trained on a different feature
space than the input features. Because of this, it can not be argued that one specific input
feature has a higher importance than another.
These advantages are probably acceptable for an asset operator as he is mostly inter­
ested in the performance of the model rather than the reasoning behind it. If the focus is
on the reasoning or research studies are done to identify drivers, kernel models are not
the ideal choice.
The study is limited to artificially created forecasts for the wind production of the asset and
the day ahead prices. Some of the input features, e.g. the renewable electricity forecast
for the bidding zone, which have been used in previous and this study are published after
day­ahead closing. Since they are published right after the day­ahead closing it can be
argued that these forecasts could be acquired from another source already before the day
ahead market closing.
Moreover, the dummy model could be even further improved, by allowing curtailment.
In the current setup the dummy model is bidding the forecast for any price. Instead, a
conditional bid should be implemented, which says that the wind farm curtails, if the price
drops below zero.
In this work, a continues bidding curve is allowed, which violates most market rules in
Europe. A similar stepwise approach like in [7] would need to be implemented for an
application.
6.2
Future research
The biggest problem of the study is that no additional information compared to the day­
ahead stage are incorporated as the only decision is made before market closing at day­
ahead stage. The model would benefit for example a lot from an updated energy forecast
for the asset to be able to adjust the position in the intraday market and reduce the risk
of the taken position. This procedure does not necessarily mean that, the profit can be
increased, but at least the risk should be reduced by that. But even additional profits
might be possible, due to better knowledge about the moment of delivery. Nevertheless,
an arbitrage strategy of using day­ahead market and balancing market and to achieve
results close to the mentioned hindsight model in [7] seem unrealistic. But choosing the
dummy model for the day ahead market and creating a three­stage problem, where the
position can be adjusted in the intraday market plus a third stage for real­time adjustments,
like for example reducing the output of the asset, if positive imbalance is not favourable
according to imbalance price forecasts close to delivery. These two new stages would
incorporate new information and also allow to derive conclusions about the balancing
prices.
The model could most likely perform better, if the underlying energy and price forecasts
are not synthetic forecasts, but real forecasts, which might have some structural error
36
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:44==
patterns. This could be the case, if the model for the forecasts is not retrained regularly
and is generalizing too much. In the context of wind forecasts, you could think of special
weather phenomena, which are not existing in the training phase of the forecasts model
and therefore lead to a temporal over­ or underestimation of the electricity production.
The policy model would be able to detect these structural error terms and could avoid
imbalance by considering this bias.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
37
==PAGE:45==
38
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
International Energy Agency. Denmark ­ Countries & Regions. June 2025. URL:
https://www.iea.org/countries/denmark/electricity (visited on 06/28/2025).
[2]
Jakob Skouboe. Large fluctuations: Energinet acknowledges need to correct new
balancing model. en. Section: Policy & Trading. June 2025. URL: https://energywat
ch.com/EnergyNews/Policy___Trading/article18309615.ece (visited on 06/28/2025).
[3]
Hang Dai, Ni Zhang, and Wencong Su. “A Literature Review of Stochastic Program­
ming and Unit Commitment”. en. In: Journal of Power and Energy Engineering 03.04
(2015), pp. 206–214. ISSN: 2327­588X, 2327­5901. DOI: 10.4236/jpee.2015.34029.
URL: http://www.scirp.org/journal/PaperDownload.aspx?DOI=10.4236/jpee.2015.34
029 (visited on 07/01/2025).
[4]
Utsav Sadana et al. “A survey of contextual optimization methods for decision­
making under uncertainty”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 320.2
(Jan. 2025), pp. 271–289. ISSN: 0377­2217. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejor.2024.03.020. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221724002200 (visited on
05/31/2025).
[5]
Emil Helgren, Jalal Kazempour, and Lesia Mitridati. “Feature­driven strategies for
trading wind power and hydrogen”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 234 (Sept.
2024), p. 110787. ISSN: 0378­7796. DOI: 10.1016/j.epsr.2024.110787. URL: ht
tps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378779624006734 (visited on
02/03/2025).
[6]
Miguel Á Muñoz, Juan M. Morales, and Salvador Pineda. Feature­driven Improve­
ment of Renewable Energy Forecasting and Trading. arXiv:1907.07580 [math]. Jan.
2020. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1907.07580. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.07580 (vis­
ited on 06/01/2025).
[7]
Yannick Heiser, Farzaneh Pourahmadi, and Jalal Kazempour. Betting vs. Trad­
ing: Learning a Linear Decision Policy for Selling Wind Power and Hydrogen.
arXiv:2412.18479 [eess]. Dec. 2024. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2412.18479. URL: htt
p://arxiv.org/abs/2412.18479 (visited on 02/02/2025).
[8]
Cynthia Rudin. Stop Explaining Black Box Machine Learning Models for High
Stakes Decisions and Use Interpretable Models Instead. arXiv:1811.10154 [stat].
Sept. 2019. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1811.10154. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.10154
(visited on 04/01/2025).
[9]
Vladimir Dvorkin. “Regression Equilibrium in Electricity Markets”. In: Policy and
Regulation IEEE Transactions on Energy Markets (2025). Conference Name: Policy
and Regulation IEEE Transactions on Energy Markets, pp. 1–11. ISSN: 2771­9626.
DOI: 10.1109/TEMPR.2025.3530266. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/docu
ment/10844509?casa_token=3CncqZvuYvoAAAAA:8LZpzaIMU0hqDgRLTT8twjS0c_
qA1RrQ6v61KGw8sCvsYYsHN7LbrNBVPwm0j7Ua09ade6pz (visited on 02/06/2025).
[10]
N. Aronszajn. “Theory of reproducing kernels”. en. In: Transactions of the Ameri­
can Mathematical Society 68.3 (1950), pp. 337–404. ISSN: 0002­9947, 1088­6850.
DOI: 10.1090/S0002-9947-1950-0051437-7. URL: https://www.ams.org/tran/1950-0
68-03/S0002-9947-1950-0051437-7/ (visited on 04/01/2025).
[11]
Dimitris Bertsimas and Nihal Koduri. “Data­Driven Optimization: A Reproducing Ker­
nel Hilbert Space Approach”. In: Operations Research 70.1 (Jan. 2022). Publisher:
INFORMS, pp. 454–471. ISSN: 0030­364X. DOI: 10.1287/opre.2020.2069. URL:
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/opre.2020.2069 (visited on 04/01/2025).
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
39
==PAGE:47==
[12]
Jethro Browell. “Risk Constrained Trading Strategies for Stochastic Generation with
a Single­Price Balancing Market”. en. In: Energies 11.6 (June 2018). Number: 6
Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, p. 1345. ISSN: 1996­1073.
DOI: 10.3390/en11061345. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/11/6/1345
(visited on 05/11/2025).
[13]
Reinier A.C. Van Der Veen, Alireza Abbasy, and Rudi A. Hakvoort. “Agent­based
analysis of the impact of the imbalance pricing mechanism on market behavior in
electricity balancing markets”. en. In: Energy Economics 34.4 (July 2012), pp. 874–
881. ISSN: 01409883. DOI: 10.1016/j.eneco.2012.04.001. URL: https://linkinghub.el
sevier.com/retrieve/pii/S014098831200076X (visited on 05/10/2025).
[14]
Jethro Browell and Ciaran Gilbert. “Predicting Electricity Imbalance Prices and Vol­
umes: Capabilities and Opportunities”. en. In: Energies 15.10 (Jan. 2022). Num­
ber: 10 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, p. 3645. ISSN: 1996­
1073. DOI: 10.3390/en15103645. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/10/36
45 (visited on 05/11/2025).
[15]
Michał Narajewski. “Probabilistic Forecasting of German Electricity Imbalance
Prices”. en. In: Energies 15.14 (Jan. 2022). Number: 14 Publisher: Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing Institute, p. 4976. ISSN: 1996­1073. DOI: 10.3390/en15144976.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/14/4976 (visited on 05/11/2025).
[16]
Jan
Leisbrock.
Linkschris/Master_thesis_handin.
original­date:
2025­07­
01T19:16:34Z. July 2025. URL: https : / / github . com / Linkschris / Master _ thesis
_handin (visited on 07/01/2025).
[17]
R. Tyrrell Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev. “Optimization of conditional value­at­
risk”. en. In: The Journal of Risk 2.3 (2000), pp. 21–41. ISSN: 14651211. DOI: 10.2
1314/JOR.2000.038. URL: http://www.risk.net/journal-of-risk/technical-paper/21611
59/optimization-conditional-value-risk (visited on 06/06/2025).
[18]
Philippe Artzner et al. “Coherent Measures of Risk”. en. In: Mathematical
Finance 9.3 (1999). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/1467­
9965.00068, pp. 203–228. ISSN: 1467­9965. DOI: 10.1111/1467-9965.00068. URL:
https: / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com /doi / abs / 10. 1111 /1467 - 9965 . 00068 (visited on
07/01/2025).
[19]
EU Commisson. Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2195 of 23 November 2017 es­
tablishing a guideline on electricity balancing (Text with EEA relevance. ) en. Leg­
islative Body: COM, ENER. Nov. 2017. URL: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2017/2
195/oj/eng (visited on 07/01/2025).
[20]
ENTSO­E. ENTSO­E Transparency Platform. Apr. 2025. URL: https://transparency
.entsoe.eu/dashboard/show?loggedUserIsPrivileged=false (visited on 06/24/2025).
[21]
Max Bruninx et al. Day­Ahead Bidding Strategies for Wind Farm Operators under a
One­Price Balancing Scheme. arXiv:2505.05153 [eess]. May 2025. DOI: 10.48550
/arXiv.2505.05153. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.05153 (visited on 06/03/2025).
40
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
==PAGE:48==
A
Appendix
Specification
Details
Processor
12th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i7­1255U @ 1.70 GHz
Installed RAM
16.0 GB (15.7 GB usable)
System Type
64­bit operating system, x64­based processor
Table A.1: System specifications of the computer used for this work.
Feature­driven non­linear decision frameworks for trading wind power
41
==PAGE:49==
Electricity market participants, and in particular operators of renewable energy assets, are exposed
to imbalance risk because final settlement is determined in a single price balancing market whose
direction and magnitude cannot be forecasted with certainty. This thesis investigates whether data
driven policy models can improve a wind farm’s day ahead volume decision in the Danish DK2 zone
for the years 2019 – 2020.
The bidding task is formulated as a contextual optimisation problem: a policy maps a vector of market
features directly to a bid that maximises the profit, while an ℓ1 penalty controls model complexity.
Linear models, non­linear feature expanded models, hourly variants, and kernel based policies are
trained in a rolling scheme of fifteen days for training, two days for validation, and one day for testing.
To limit tail losses four Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) formulations are introduced, targeting either
imbalance volume or imbalance value, and either absolute imbalance or absolute forecast deviation.
Regularisation weights and CVaR thresholds are selected within the same rolling framework.
Over the entire evaluation period all learned policies achieve profits broadly comparable to the
forecast­bidding benchmark, with no single strategy emerging as a clear outperformer. The alter­
native trading approaches entail higher risk, and the non­linear variants deliver only marginal profit
gains compared to the linear models.
The study concludes that, under the investigated DK2 conditions, bidding the unbiased production
forecast remains the most robust strategy. Future work should extend the framework to a multi stage
problem by adding an explicit intraday bidding stage, which would naturally incorporate intraday
information while choosing the dummy benchmark for the day­ahead market.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
