==PAGE:1==
Development of a Camera System for On-
machine Measurements
Tool Geometry Measurement and Inspection
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
Tool Geometry Measurement and Inspection
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Moritz Genzwürker
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Moritz Genzwürker, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Produktionstorvet
B427, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over six months at the Section for Manufacturing Engineering,
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment of the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has knowledge in the areas of precision machining and
sensor technology.
Moritz Genzwürker - s223293
Signature
Date
ii
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
03.07.2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Characterisation and compensation of tool geometries are crucial steps in ensuring the
accuracy of manufactured parts in modern precision machining processes. The most ad-
vanced tool measurement systems currently on the market are expensive and require
tools to be removed from the machine, which is time-consuming and prohibitive for fre-
quent re-characterisation, particularly for research purposes or tool wear monitoring. Ad-
ditionally, these systems do not account for spindle and mounting errors. This thesis de-
velops an on-machine optical measurement system capable of accurately and repeatably
reconstructing cutting tool geometries while tools remain mounted in the spindle.
The system employs a transmitted light configuration with a telecentric lens and an in-
dustrial camera to capture tool silhouettes during rotation. Key innovations presented in
this study include: (1) an on-machine full response sensor calibration technique, (2) a
dictionary-based sub-pixel edge measurement method with a worst-case edge localisa-
tion accuracy of 9.8 µm (k = 2 for a 95.45 % confidence interval) and (3) a novel on-
machine camera alignment routine.
This work successfully demonstrates the 3D reconstruction of cutting tool geometry and
critical tool parameters, such as cutting edge radii and runout, laying the foundation for
a future advanced on-machine tool monitoring system. The developed prototype is eval-
uated following ISO 15530 part 3 and using a confocal chromatic probe for which an
on-machine alignment approach is implemented.
The thesis also includes a brief investigation into the possibility of using a camera-based
measurement system for quality control within a CNC machine. A computer vision algo-
rithm is developed to characterise drilled hole patterns in shell parts.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the writing of this thesis, I have received significant support from several in-
dividuals at the Technical University of Denmark. It has been a true pleasure to work on
this project and collaborate with the talented people at DTU Construct.
Thank you to my supervisors, Giuliano Bissacco and Matthias Geiselhart, for enabling my
work on this project and for providing your advice, feedback and expert knowledge over
the past months.
I would also like to extend my thanks to DTU’s Instrumentation Group, especially Haim Abi-
tan, whose insights into optics were invaluable in getting this project started.
Finally, I would like to thank Amrozia Shaheen for lending her calibrated artefact and for
sharing the insights she gained during her work.
AI Declaration
OpenAI’s ChatGPT 4o model was used in the editing and optimisation of the developed
algorithms. All ideas, methods, calculations and discussions presented in this report are
a product of the independent work of the author.
iv
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Measurement Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and The State of the Art
3
2.1
Tool Measurement Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
State of Industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
State of Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Camera-based Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
System Design
12
3.1
Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
System Modelling & Image Alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Tool Measurement Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Calibration and Edge Detection
32
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
Edge Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Compensating for Vertical Distortion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
System Testing and Evaluation
37
5.1
Validation of Machine Positioning Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
Stability and Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Empirical Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Part Inspection
47
6.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Working Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.4
Partial Conclusion and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7
Discussion
54
7.1
Technological Readiness Level (TRL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
8
Conclusion
56
Bibliography
57
A Lens Evaluation
63
B Confocal Runout Measurement
65
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
v
==PAGE:8==
C Enhancing Edge Direction Resolution
67
D Setup Procedure & Methods
69
D.1 Reference Artefacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
D.2 Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
D.3 Tool Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
D.4 Part Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
E
Bill of Materials
74
F
Algorithm Overview
75
G CMM Gauge Bar Characterisation
76
vi
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Modern manufacturing is seeing an increasing demand for precision machining systems.
The ever-growing need for better and more sustainable production is pushing demands on
cutting tools. Accurate quantification and compensation of their geometrical parameters
using sophisticated non-contact systems has become an essential step in CNC manufac-
turing. This process is enabled by tool presetting systems that facilitate the measurement
of parameters such as diameter, tool length, and runout of the cutting edges. The issue
is that these systems are essentially black boxes offering no insights into the functionality
of their algorithms and preventing optimization. This has led to a gap in manufacturing
research because better models of machining processes cannot be created or validated
without knowledge of tool geometry at resolutions beyond the capabilities of current sys-
tems. The following report aims to help overcome the lack of capable tool measurement
systems currently on the market.
The work presented in this thesis builds upon the findings from a feasibility study con-
ducted by the author in January 2025. Prior work included selecting a camera and lens,
as well as designing and conducting initial testing of the overall layout. Unless otherwise
specified, all concepts, algorithms and experiments presented in the following Chapters
constitute the work done as a part of this thesis.
The report begins with a review of relevant technology and literature and proceeds to
discuss the application of computer vision, optical and mechanical concepts in the de-
velopment of a prototype tool measurement system. The system rigorously tested and
limitations requiring future optimization are laid out.
1.1
Motivation
This thesis is driven by the need for increased resource-use efficiency, enhanced scientific
research, and improved technological capabilities in the industrial sector in line with the
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals 9.4 and 9.5 [1]. The research aims to
support four key objectives:
1. Extended Tool Life Accurate characterisation and compensation of tool geometry
can significantly extend tool life [2]. Avoiding unnecessary tool changes and down-
time is critical to manufacturers.
2. Better Surface Integrity and Quality Worn and out-of-specification cutting tools
degrade surface integrity and dimensional accuracy of machined parts [3]. Tools
with well-known geometries can be compensated to produce better surface finishes
and maintain tighter tolerances, leaving better parts with a longer usable life.
3. Improved Sustainability Optimising tool usage has the potential to make a sig-
nificant difference in the sustainability of modern manufacturing by reducing waste
and energy consumption. Tool condition directly affects machining quality and the
required cutting energy. Improving overall product quality will reduce the number
of cases requiring rework or post-processing, thereby advancing sustainability. Re-
placing tools only when needed to prevent premature scrapping will conserve re-
sources and critical raw materials [4].
4. Independence of European Manufacturing Tungsten carbide is a critical mate-
rial for high-performance machine tools. However, despite the EU’s efforts to sup-
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
1
==PAGE:10==
port domestic industry, China, Taiwan and Vietnam currently control 80 % of the
world’s supply [5, 6]. Recycling programs are being implemented, but improving
the longevity of machine tools is critical to protecting domestic manufacturing.
1.2
Measurement Task
Effective compensation requires knowledge of the tool’s length, effective radius and runout
[7]. In tool presetting systems, the latter two are computed as the maximum radial dis-
tance from the machine tool spindle axis and the difference between the largest and
smallest observed cutter radii, respectively [8]. However, the requirements for modern
tool measurement systems are moving beyond these capabilities. Future systems must
also include wear monitoring functionality beyond just changes in effective tool radius and
would ideally facilitate accurate 3D reconstruction of cutting tools [9, 10] to enable surface
prediction.
A modern online optical tool measurement system must be able to interface with CNC
machines and characterise even very high-speed, air-driven, spindle-mounted tools. The
measurement must be done accurately, better than or equal to surface roughnesses com-
monly seen on machine tools, around Ra 0.2 µm. There is an inherent tradeoff between
measurement accuracy and maximum tool size, so such systems target small precision
machine tools. Table 1.1 summarises the best-case capabilities expected of a new sys-
tem based on conversations with Giuliano Bissacco and Matthias Geiselhart of DTU.
Table 1.1: Idealised requirements for an optical macro view tool measurement system.
Requirements
Measurement Resolution
∼200 nm (in the axial and radial directions)
Max Speed
120 000 min−1
Tool Diameters
<4 mm
Tool types
Bull nose, Ball nose, Flat end, Reamers etc.
Circumferential Resolution
0.1°
Processing Time
<30 s
Datapoints
Tool identification, Runout, Tool Length, Effective Ra-
dius, 3D cutting edge data
1.3
Research Objective
The aim of this research is to conceptualise, construct and test a prototype optical mea-
surement system approaching the capabilities described in Chapter 1.2. This study aims
to develop the fundamental techniques and knowledge to lay the foundation for a new
advanced tool measurement system. A key part of this work is to find a way to obtain
metrological data from greyscale images in a repeatable and accurate manner.
2
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and The State of the Art
This chapter is intended to provide an overview of the landscape of currently available
technologies related to the research objective. The survey covers tool measurement sys-
tems in general (Chapter 2.1), and then dives into relevant camera-based systems across
Industry and Research (Chapters 2.2 and 2.3). This is followed by a brief dissection of
relevant topics in camera-based metrology (Chapter 2.4). Included in this analysis is a
pre-selection of methods, based on their merits in the context of this work, that will act as
a baseline for the developments presented in Chapters 3, 4 and 6.
2.1
Tool Measurement Systems
Mitigating some of the key errors in surface generation in dynamically stable machining
processes, namely tool geometry errors, tool/ tool-holder mounting errors, and tool wear,
requires frequent recharacterisation of each tool/tool-holder assembly [11]. A vast selec-
tion of measurement systems is currently available to characterise machine tools. These
fall into two categories: off-machine (requiring tool removal and fixation in an external de-
vice) and on-machine (in-situ measurements inside the CNC). The following will provide
a brief overview of both approaches.
2.1.1
Off-Machine
1. Tool Presetting Machines are very popular in the industry, and dozens of laser
and camera-based systems exist. Companies like Zoller, Haimer and Kelch, among
others, manufacture highly advanced tool measurement solutions that can quantify
tool diameter, length and runout, inspect cutting edges and interface directly with
CNC machines [12–14].
2. Laboratory Metrology Equipment encompasses high-precision instruments, e.g.
Coordinate Measuring Machines, Confocal Microscopes, and Scanning Electron Mi-
croscopes [8, 11]. With very high accuracy, these systems can quantify tool char-
acteristics, including tool wear, but are significantly limited in user-friendliness.
These approaches have advantages, such as increased accuracy compared to on-machine
systems and the option for the CNC machine to continue operating while a new tool is pre-
set. However, they cannot account for mounting errors on the machine spindle [8], and
re-setting a tool requires removal from the machine. Frequent tool wear monitoring cannot
be automated with these systems.
2.1.2
On-Machine
On-machine systems are mounted within a CNC machine’s working envelope, enabling
in-situ characterisation of installed tools without removal. Multiple technologies currently
enable this approach [11].
1. Laser Beam Interruption Systems perform measurements via triggered data ac-
quisition of the machines’ encoders when the laser’s line of sight is obstructed.
These systems enable measurement of tool diameter and length [15], but the posi-
tioning accuracy of the machine tool limits their accuracy.
2. Laser Scan Micrometers use rotating optical element(s) to detect the shadow of
machine tools [16]. There is no reliance on repositioning the tool, and they can
collect additional data points (tool profile and runout).
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
3
==PAGE:12==
3. Image-based Tool Setting Systems High-resolution cameras, usually set up in
a shadowgraph-esque configuration, capture a tool’s profile and extract relevant
data [17]. These systems can simultaneously analyse the entire silhouette of the
tool in one view, quantifying multiple parameters (length, diameter, edge profiles,
angles and runout). These systems achieve sub-micron repeatability (at 6σ) [18],
rivalling the precision of some offline measurement techniques in a laboratory.
All of the mentioned systems are designed to withstand the harsh environments in the
machining area and feature integration with the CNC controller, enabling automatic op-
eration. They are immunised towards measurement errors caused by oil, coolant mist
and stray chips [19, 20]. Beyond the mentioned contactless methods, a series of contact-
based technologies exist; however, they are not of interest in this analysis, as they return
fewer data points, risk damaging the tool and are much slower to operate [21, 22].
Advanced on-machine systems are becoming increasingly relevant, offering superior au-
tomation and wear monitoring capabilities while being able to account for more interface
errors. In this field, image-based systems appear superior to their laser-based counter-
parts due to their relatively low cost and ability to return a significant number of data points
in a short time.
2.2
State of Industry
Several on-machine camera-based tool measurement systems are currently on the mar-
ket. Table 2.1 provides a non-exhaustive overview of some currently available systems
and their capabilities. Note that the Keyence TM-X5000 is not strictly targeted towards
tool measurement (although it does have that capability) or rotating parts. Still, it works
based on the same principles as the other systems, while having a similar form factor
and is included to serve as a reference for what is currently possible. Examining the sys-
tems’ capabilities in Table 2.1, the market-leading tool presetters cannot yet reconstruct
or resolve cutting edges at the required resolution, whereas Keyence’s systems are pro-
hibitively expensive.
Table 2.1: Overview of existing on-machine systems and their capabilities according to
their respective datasheets.
1 Accuracy for tool wear measurement is limited to 5 µm.
2 Listed capabilities are according to the datasheet, the system was independently bench-
marked with different results, which will become relevant in Chapter 5.3. 3 Listed accuracy
is only in the radial direction. 4 System is currently priced at 36 639 EUR.
System
Accuracy
Repeatability
Runout
Length
Diameter
Corner Radius
HEIDENHAIN VT 121
2.00 µm 1
0.03 µm
x
x
x
x
[23]
Marposs VST
1.30 µm
0.80 µm
x
x
x
x
[24]
Conoptica CU2 Tool 2
0.99 µm 3
0.70 µm
x
x
x
x
[20]
Keyence TM-X5000 4
0.20 µm
0.03 µm
x
[25]
4
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:13==
2.3
State of Research
In research environments, various attempts at camera-based 3D tool reconstruction have
been publicised with accuracies reaching around 10 µm [10]. Other attempts have been
made, but none exceed the capabilities shown in Table 2.1 [26, 27]. High-resolution mea-
surement of rotating parts using conventional cameras and optics is actively being worked
on outside of tool measurement applications. For reference, two relevant examples have
been included in the overview.
It is clear that current systems fall short of the requirements for future on-machine tool
research and compensation. This thesis aims to take the initial steps towards developing
a more capable measurement tool platform.
Table 2.2: Overview of relevant developments across academia, their focus and achieved
accuracies.
1 The research is not machine-tool related; however, the shaft parts are
characterised on a rotary stage in a setup that is functionally very similar to the work of
this thesis. 2 This work is also not tool-related but utilises comparable optical components
and can serve as a benchmark for what is currently being done.
Topic
Focus
Accu-
racy
Year
Dimension measure-
ment of shaft parts 1
Transmitted Illumination,
2D camera-
based measurement of shaft parts.
3 µm
2025
[28]
3D Reconstruction of
Tool Geometry
On-machine,
transmitted
illumination,
tool measurement with a 1D camera.
Creation of a 3D model of the cutting
edges without focus on presetting.
10 µm
2022
[10]
Online Tool Wear In-
spection
On-machine, co-axial illumination, tool
wear characterisation from below the tool
using a 2D camera. No focus on tool pre-
setting.
7 µm
2018
[29]
High Precision Edge
Detection of Mechan-
ical Parts 2
Sub-pixel edge detection for small diam-
eter mechanical parts using transmitted
illumination and a 2D camera. Not tool-
related.
1.9 µm
2018
[30]
3D
Modelling
and
Measurement
of
Cutting Tools
On-machine,
transmitted
illumination,
tool measurement with a 2D camera,
calibrated inside the CNC.
35 µm
2013
[26]
2.4
Camera-based Measurement
Camera-based measurement systems have become increasingly relevant in modern man-
ufacturing because they provide a means of low-cost, rapid, non-contact acquisition of
two-dimensional features at micrometre-level repeatability. Most deployments of camera-
based measurement systems rely on high-resolution monochrome sensors, which avoid
the Bayer interpolation penalty of colour devices [31]. However, even with sophisticated
optics, these systems are limited by:
1. Pixel Pitch, which fixes the sensor’s Nyquist sampling frequency. In practice, this
expresses how many alternating dark and light lines (line pairs) can be resolved
within one millimetre of the image. A good estimate can be made according to
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
5
==PAGE:14==
Equation 2.1, with a Kell Factor of ∼0.7 to account for the space between pixels [32].
Nyquist Limit (lp mm−1) = 1
2(Kell Factor)(Sampling Frequency)
(2.1)
2. Diffraction Limit, which dictates when two Airy patterns are no longer distinguish-
able. This would limit even a sensor with an infinitely small pixel pitch. When the
limit is reached, the lens is physically incapable of resolving greater frequencies of
line pairs [33]. This limit can be expressed as a function of the lens’s numerical
aperture or calculated according to Equation 2.2, where λ is the wavelength and
(f/#) the f-number.
Diffraction Limit (lp mm−1) =
1
(f/#) · λ ·
1000 µm
1 mm

(2.2)
It should be noted that Equations 2.1 and 2.2 are theoretical limits. In practice, with im-
perfect optics and background noise, these limits are not easily reached. For a system
built from relatively low-cost optics, as in this research, the limit is in the order of microns
(more on this in Chapter 3.1). While this is far above the target accuracy (Table 1.1),
image processing methods exist that enable the extrapolation of higher resolution in the
case of edges and geometrically simple features [32]. Extracting metrological informa-
tion beyond these limitations, in a repeatable and accurate manner, is one of the main
objectives in this work.
2.4.1
Super Resolution
Tracking Based
Sub-Pixel Stepping
Traditional
Deep Learning
Microscopy
Super-Resolution
Techniques
Multi-Image
Single-Image
Optical Techniques
Dictionary
Reconstruction
Interpolation
Sub-Pixel
Techniques
SRGAN
SRCNN
FSRCNN
Photoactivated
Localization
Stimulated
Emission Depletion
Structured
Illumination
Figure 2.1: State of the Art Overview of Super Resolution Techniques. This is not an
exhaustive overview of the currently available technologies, as this is beyond the scope
of this report. Instead, it is limited to technology that is relevant to this research.
Super Resolution is an umbrella term for computational and hardware strategies that aim
to generate images that exceed sampling and diffraction limitations. SR-imaging is a
6
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:15==
very popular topic in research, and hundreds of approaches have been developed to
recover detail beyond the pixel level from an acquired image [34, 35]. All systems listed
in Table 2.1 use SR techniques [20, 23–25] since achieving their claimed resolutions with
traditional optics alone would either be impossible (Chapter 2.4) or prohibitively expensive.
The landscape of currently available technologies can be subdivided into single-image,
multi-image, and optical (hardware-assisted) methods (Figure 2.1). All approaches pur-
sue sub-micrometre detail but with increasing levels of information: single-frame statistics,
multi-frame reconstruction or engineered light-matter interactions, respectively.
Single-image Resolution Techniques attempt to reconstruct higher-frequency image de-
tail from a single low-resolution frame. Various methods exist in this space, including dic-
tionary methods, where low-resolution image patches are matched with high-resolution
patches acquired separately. Reconstruction methods model blur and downsampling to
resolve a higher-resolution image. Interpolation (usually bilinear or bicubic) based meth-
ods infer information between pixels and create a finer grid. Sub-pixel techniques estimate
intra-pixel positions, typically by fitting a model of the sensor response to light. More re-
cently, deep learning-based approaches have been developed to enhance the perceived
sharpness of low-resolution images [35]. However, their efficacy in dimensional metrology
is subject to much scrutiny, and they come at a high computational cost.
Multi-image Super-Resolution Techniques reconstruct a higher-resolution image from mul-
tiple low-resolution images. In tracking-based implementations, image registration algo-
rithms precisely align and fuse sequences of low-resolution frames. These approaches
require semi-controlled camera motion, i.e., handheld scanning. In contrast, sub-pixel
stepping methods usually rely on highly controlled displacement of the imaging sensor
via a piezo stage [36, 37]. In both methods, each shifted exposure samples the object at
slightly different offsets, thereby filling in gaps on a finer virtual grid.
Lastly, optical techniques exist in microscopy that truly push optical resolution [35]. How-
ever, they achieve this at the expense of the field of view and working distance. Very long
exposure times are also common across these methods.
For the development of a low-cost optical measurement system targeting the specifica-
tions listed in Table 1.1, only single-image techniques were considered. While capable of
achieving measurement accuracies beyond what is required for this application, the cost
and size of microscopy-based systems are problematic. Due to the size of machine tools
(in the millimetre range), a large field of view is also necessary. Multi-image systems are
interesting for this application, and while not directly implemented, their working principle
is applied later in this thesis.
2.4.2
Edge Detection
Many approaches exist to extract data from images; however, in the context of this thesis
and dimensional metrology as a whole, edge detection is the most relevant. Figure 2.2
illustrates how a camera observes a sharp edge. The observed blur occurs because the
pixels along the edge record an average intensity across their area, which is significantly
larger than the edge itself. The presence of the edge is also detected by adjacent pixels
due to diffraction, lens imperfections and sensor crosstalk, where photons falling onto one
pixel are falsely sensed by neighbouring pixels [38]. Each pixel records an intensity range
of 0-255, from dark to light (in the case of 8 bit resolution). Plotting the intensity across
the edge produces the system’s unique edge-spread function (ESF) (Figure 2.2).
Figure 2.3 then illustrates how the intensity profile from Figure 2.2 maps back onto a
theoretical, perfectly sharp edge. The purpose of a sub-pixel edge detection algorithm is
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
7
==PAGE:16==
11
17
25
41
64
83
100
12
18
28
46
68
87
102
13
21
33
51
72
90
104
15
23
35
54
76
94
104
15
25
40
56
78
97
103
21
33
51
72
90
I
12 µm
3.45 µm
Figure 2.2: Visualisation of camera-based edge perception on a greyscale image sampled
at 8 bit with a pixel pitch of 3.45 µm. From left to right: zoomed-in section of an image of a
cutting edge, intensity values recorded by the camera in the highlighted region, intensity
profile across the edge.
True
Signal
f(x)
f(x+1)
f(x+2)
f(x-1)
f(x-2)
x-2
x-1
x
x+1
x+2
Pixel Boundaries
Pixel
Intensity
δ
Figure 2.3: Sensor response at pixel-level to an observed edge. Figure adapted for this
report from Fisher [39].
to estimate the actual location of the edge, δ, from the recorded intensities.
Generally, sub-pixel edge detection techniques rely on at least the following underlying
assumptions.
1. Each pixel samples a linear transformation of the underlying scene, meaning the
following must be true [40]:
• Additivity Two point sources that separately have intensities I1 and I2 produce
an intensity of I1 + I2 when combined.
• Homogeneity Doubling the radiance of a point source will double the intensity
across all pixels recording the signal.
2. The transformation is identical in every frame (time-invariant) [41], meaning:
• Geometry The mapping from real world coordinates (X, Y ) to pixel coordinates
(i, j) is constant.
• Optics The point spread function, magnification and focus are constant across
all pixels.
8
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:17==
• Illumination field The entire field of view is illuminated evenly (in terms of
pattern and intensity).
• Sensor Gain & Offset All pixels have the same sensitivity.
Both assumptions are easily violated at sub-micrometre scales. Field-dependent distor-
tion (barrel, pincushion, uneven magnification) and time-dependent jitter through mechan-
ical vibrations and thermal drift will interfere with any sub-pixel interpolation.
A truly universal, fully accurate edge detection algorithm has not yet been developed. De-
signing an algorithm that works well in different contexts and captures the case-specific
requirements of subsequent processing stages is very difficult [42]. The hard require-
ments at sub-diffraction limit imaging motivate the development of an application-specific
strategy in this paper. Nevertheless, some conventional techniques will be employed
during development. Table 2.3 provides an outline and taxonomy of a part of the vast
selection of currently available methods and their advantages and flaws. It should be
noted that hybrids of the listed methods exist [43], which have advanced the performance
of individual approaches. However, these will not be discussed to limit the scope of this
review.
Reviewing table 2.3, many of the most popular edge detection methods are unsuitable
for the measurement task. In sub-micrometre measurement, imperfections in the optics
would detrimentally affect methods that make assumptions regarding the ESF. Similarly,
methods susceptible to illumination variations or noise would fail in this application. Deep
Learning methods, while powerful, are not considered here due to their complexity. Meth-
ods requiring prior knowledge of geometry or patterns, although unsuitable for measuring
machine tool geometry, have proven to be powerful alignment tools and will become rel-
evant later in this thesis.
Deconvolution and moment-based methods most closely match the requirements of the
measurement task. Both can, in principle, surpass the diffraction limit. However, decon-
volution is extremely noise sensitive [44], and moment-based methods are susceptible to
illumination variation. An illumination gradient of just 1 % over an edge window of 20 px
would translate to an error of ≈0.4 µm assuming a pixel pitch of 2 µm. Techniques to
compensate for these shortcomings have been developed [44], but have not yet been
proven to be effective in similar applications.
2.4.3
Calibration
In camera-based metrology, a relationship between the imaged point locations (i, j) and
the point positions in space (X, Y ) must be established to extract geometric information
quantitatively. This calibration needs to account not only for the magnification of the ac-
tual object by the vision system but also for systematic errors, such as lens distortion
and perspective shear deformation [50]. Relevant camera calibration methods for optical
measurement systems can be categorised into five primary approaches, Table 2.4.
In most applications, camera calibration approaches fall short of submicrometre-level ac-
curacy. This is usually because error models only consider lens distortion rather than
the entire system error [50]. Grid-based calibration, which is by far the most popular, is
inherently limited by the quality of the grid, which usually does not reach sub-micrometre
accuracy [50, 51]. Camera self-calibration based on feature correspondence is interesting
for this application, but is inherently very sensitive to noise. It should be noted that some
work has been done on camera calibration in CNC machine environments [26]. However,
the accuracy achieved in this work is not sufficient for this application.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
9
==PAGE:18==
Among the listed calibration concepts, displacement-based calibration stands out as the
most suitable for use in the measurement task. While very difficult to do in uncontrolled
environments, the consistent illumination, rigid setup and repeatable movements of a
CNC machine all favour displacement-based calibration. The machine’s inherent accu-
racy could be leveraged to calibrate a camera without external targets, using the CNC’s
stages to establish spatial relationships.
Table 2.4: Comparison of camera calibration methods.
Method
Principle
Advantages
Disadvantages
Grid-Based
Image known pattern
(e.g. checkerboard or
dots), fit camera
model
Standardised; fast;
corrects distortion
Interpolation errors;
pattern fabrication
[52–
54]
PSF /
Edge-Based
Align edge responses
between images and
schematic templates
Works without
physical targets;
enables
computational
de-blurring
Sensitive to noise;
requires precise
edge alignment
[55]
Displacement-
Based
Move object/sensor in
known steps; analyse
intensity changes
No grid needed;
empirical mapping;
sub-pixel accuracy
Requires
nano-positioning;
very slow
[56]
Hybrid
Combine coarse grid
with fine displacement
data
Reduced
interpolation error;
robust
Complex
implementation
[56]
Self-
calibration
Analyse feature
correspondences of
images taken of the
same scene from
different angles
No grid needed;
flexible for
uncontrolled
environments
Sensitive to noise;
feature matching
errors
[57]
10
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:19==
Table 2.3: A brief overview of subpixel edge detection methods [45–49].
Method
Description
Advantages
Disadvantages
Morphological
Methods
Use structuring
elements for edge
detection (erosion,
dilation, etc.).
Good with
binary/high-contrast
images, Robust to
noise
No subpixel accuracy;
sensitive to
illumination
Canny
Multi-stage algorithm
(smoothing, gradient,
non-max
suppression,
hysteresis).
Robust to noise;
Widely implemented
Parameter sensitive;
Not inherently
sub-pixel
Sobel, Kirsch,
Prewitt
First-order derivative
operators that
approximate image
gradients.
Fast computation;
Relatively Simple
Poor subpixel
accuracy; Noise
sensitive
Taylor Series
Approximation
Expands image data
locally to estimate
sub-pixel feature
positions
Robust
Limited to distinctive
features; Not accurate
for edges
Deconvolution
Methods
Measure or estimate
the ESF to deblur
images and enhance
edge localisation.
Work beyond
diffraction limit
Require exact PSF;
Sensitive to noise;
Require a significant
amount of light
Template/
Geometry
Matching
Fits known geometric
models to image
data.
High precision for
known shapes
Limited to predefined
geometries;
Computationally
intensive
Phase-Based
Methods
Use Fourier-domain
analysis to register
images or features at
sub-pixel accuracy.
Robust to texture
Limited to periodic
patterns; Require
windowing
Model-Based
Fitting Methods
Matches edge
profiles to theoretical
models (ESF/step
functions like
Gaussian, Erf).
High precision;
Semi-robust to blur
Requires accurate
ESF knowledge;
Computationally
intensive
Moment-Based
Methods
Uses spatial or
intensity moments
(center-of-mass) to
estimate edge
position.
Somewhat robust to
noise; accumulates
information from
multiple pixels
Sensitive to
illumination variations;
Requires uniform
backgrounds
Interpolation-
Based Methods
Fits continuous
curves (quadratic/
cubic) to pixel
intensities to estimate
edge position
between pixels.
Fast computation;
Simple
implementation
Sensitive to noise;
Assumes ideal edge
shape
Wavelet-Based
Methods
Multiscale edge
localisation using
wavelet transforms.
Adapts to edge scale;
robust to noise
Complex parameter
tuning;
Computationally
intensive
Deep Learning
Methods
Use neural networks
trained on edge
features.
Good for complex
scenes
Require large training
datasets;
Computationally
expensive
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
11
==PAGE:20==
3
System Design
Optics
Chapter 3.1
Tool Measurement
Chapter 3.4
Calibration
Chapter 4
11
17
25
41
64
83
100
12
18
28
46
68
87
102
13
21
33
51
72
90
104
15
23
35
54
76
94
104
15
25
40
56
78
97
103
System Modelling
Chapter 3.2
Sub-Pixel Refinement
Chapter 4
Alignment
Chapter 3.3.2
Post Processing
Chapter 3.4
Setup
Chapter 3.3.1
Figure 3.1: Chapter Overview. Based on camera and lens CAD files from [58, 59].
This chapter discusses the design and overall functionality of the prototype tool mea-
surement system, the layout of which can be seen in Figure 3.1. The reasoning for the
overall setup of the system as a transmitted illumination configuration (Figure 3.1) as well
as the selection of the Lens and Camera (Table 3.1) was made prior to the commence-
ment of this thesis and is detailed in Genzwürker [60]. The chapter begins by laying out
the optics-specific considerations concerning the available components. Following that,
some of the fundamental dynamics of the system are discussed. An overview of the
physical installation and the data acquisition setup is given. Lastly, the tool measurement
strategy developed over the past five months is presented.
Figure 3.2 provides a high-level overview of the overall process flow developed and tested
in this project. The details of each sub-routine will become apparent in the following
chapters.
12
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:21==
Calibration routine
Calibration post-
processing
Spindle axis
identification
Cutting Edge Profiles
Runout
Tool Length1
Acquire image
Calculation of data
acquisition parameters
Optical Tool Measurement System
Identification of
cutting edge
segments that
intersect focal plane
Pixel-level edge
detection
Dictionary (sub-pixel)
refinement and
scaling
No
Yes
All images acquired?
2
3
Illumination
Correction4
Figure 3.2: Overview of the workflow for the optical tool measurement system.
1 Tool
length measurement is not implemented at the time of writing due to a lack of reference
data. 2 Processes by definition happen simultaneously (Chapter 3.4). 3 Process is only
run once per system installation in a CNC machine. 4 Conceptualised and tested in Chap-
ter 3.1, but it is still unclear if this is a necessary step at the time of writing.
3.1
Optics
Table 3.1: Main Parts of Optical System.
Custom-made parts, fixtures and acces-
sories used in calibration are not listed
here.
Part
Name
Camera
Basler a2A1920-160umBAS
Lens
VS-TCH1.5-65
Collimator
/
Light
White LED Diode
Green LED Diode
Table 3.2: System Specifications [58, 59].
Note that these constitute the system’s
maximum settings.
For various reasons,
any of these parameters may appear throt-
tled during the coming chapters.
Parameter
Value
Working Distance
65 mm ± 2
Resolution
1936 × 1216 px
Magnification
1.5x
FPS
160
F/#
11.8
Pixel Size
3.45 µm
Spectrum
Visible Light (Mono)
Pixel Bit Depth
12 bit
Exposure Time
19 µs
Shutter
Global
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
13
==PAGE:22==
While the camera and lens (Table 3.1) were selected outside of this thesis, several critical
considerations were beyond the scope of the prior work. These are highlighted in the
following sections. Table 3.2 provides an overview of some of the key capabilities of
the optical system that will become important throughout this section. Additional details
regarding the components comprising the full system can be found in Appendix E.
3.1.1
Physical Limitations & Recovering Sub-Pixel Information
As described in Chapter 2.4, the resolution of a camera system is limited by the diffraction
limit, calculated as a function of the lens’s F/# and the wavelength of the incident light.
In the case of visible light this is 400-700 nm [61]. For the chosen lens (Table 3.1) this
works out to around 154 lp mm−1 or 3.25 µm. However, edge locations can be determined
with much greater accuracy, for which Gatherer [62] proposes a lower limit based on the
Cramer-Rao bound. Assuming an edge can be modelled according to x(t) = as(t −θ) +
n(t), where s(.) is the edge shape (in this case a step edge similar to Figure 2.3), the
lower limit for edge localization can be calculated according to Equation 3.1.
CRB =
Tσ2
T /a2
1
2Ls

1 −
3Ls
2(3|θ|−Ls)

(3.1)
For this optical system, the variables are roughly equal to the following. Their origin will
become apparent in the subsequent chapters.
Pixel Pitch
T
2.3 µm
(Appendix A)
Edge Amplitude
a
50
(Figure 3.3)
Noise Variance
σ2
T
1.46
(Chapter 5.2)
Ramp Half-Width
Ls
5
(Chapter 4)
Observation Window
|θ|
10
(Chapter 4)
0
20
40
60
454
456
458
460
Intensity [/]
i [px]
Edge Px = 455
Edge Px = 456
Edge Px = 457
Pixel Transitions
Figure 3.3: Intensity profiles captured at 150 FPS across an edge translated at a feed
of 0.9 mm min−1, resulting in 100 nm steps. In a given profile, the pixel with the steepest
local gradient is assumed to represent the edge, and curves are coloured accordingly.
14
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:23==
With these definitions, the lowest achievable edge localisation accuracy is 37 nm. It should
be noted that this limit assumes that the edge in reality is infinitely sharp, and does not
account for vibrations and digitisation errors. So while this is almost certainly impossible
to achieve, it indicates that locating edges with 200 nm resolution is theoretically possible
with the chosen setup. Figure 3.3 demonstrates how this is possible. In an experiment,
a uniform edge was swept across the camera’s field of view with a combination of feed
and fps such that the edge was imaged every 150 nm of displacement. The figure clearly
shows how the edge profiles remain distinguishable despite their sub-pixel spacing. This
is aided by the fact that the edge is registered by several pixels. For demonstration pur-
poses, the curves are coloured according to the horizontal index of the pixel, which is
currently best aligned with the edge. The figure shows how the edge takes up unique
positions within the width of a single pixel. The method for how geometric information can
be recovered from these curves is introduced in Chapter 4.
3.1.2
Illumination
Table 3.3: Etendue Table for the Optical Measurement System. Where the half-angle
θ = arcsin(NA), the solid angle Ω= 2π[1 −cos(θ)] and finally the etendue G = A · Ω.
The numerical aperture of the LED’s collimating lens is unknown, so the half angle was
estimated according to tan(θ) = r/∆x, where r is the spot radius and ∆x the distance
change from the focal plane. 1 Data from Vital Vision [59].
Element
Diameter (mm)
A (mm2)
NA
θ (deg)
Ω(sr)
G (mm2 sr)
LED emitter
5
19.6
/
9
0.077
1.52
Telecentric lens1
10
78.5
0.064
3.7
0.013
1.03
Margin
–
–
–
–
–
0.49
Due to the system’s novelty, no specialised light source has been acquired yet. During
the feasibility study [60], a standard LED provided sufficient illumination at short shutter
speeds. However, during early optics testing, it was shown that image contrast is signifi-
cantly affected by the illumination distance (distance between the LED and the camera).
This motivated the addition of a collimating lens to the LED (Table E.1), which is currently
on loan from DTU’s Instrumentation group. The suitability of the illumination hardware for
the camera’s lens was evaluated via Etendue Table 3.3. Suitability in this case refers to
the ability of the light to illuminate the entire field of view without vignetting. As shown,
GLED ≫GTel.Lens, meaning the lens does not clip the light cone from the LED. How-
ever, the large discrepancy in etendues implies that a lot of the light from the emitter is
”wasted”. While power consumption is not a main priority in this research, the scene will
appear dimmer than it would with a more appropriate collimating lens. Edmund Optics [33]
recommends a contrast of at least 20 %. Given that contrast is calculated according to
Equation 3.2, and the system acts as a shadowgraph with the pixels observing the tool’s
surface having zero intensity, this should not be a problem.
C = Imax −Imin
Imax + Imin
· 100%
(3.2)
To avoid recording the texture of the background, the backlight needs to be a good dis-
tance behind the tool [48]. Experimentally, around 15 cm were shown to be effective.
However, the background is not uniform (Figure 3.4a) due to a dark spot on top of the
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
15
==PAGE:24==
LED and a scratch in the collimating lens. To compensate for this, tool images (Fig-
ure 3.4b) can be normalised and clipped (Equation 3.3) based on a background image,
yielding an improved result - Figure 3.4c.
Icorrected(i, j) = clip

Itool(i, j)
max(Ibackground(i, j), ϵ) · 255, 0, 180

(3.3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.4: a) Unmodified exposure of the background, shutter speed 30 µs, b) Unmod-
ified exposure of the tool, shutter speed 30 µs and c) Illumination corrected background
according to Equation 3.3.
Since machine tools rotate during measurement, the images are subject to rotation-induced
blur (continued in Chapter 3.2). The tool should be exposed for as little time as possible
to mitigate this effect, but cameras with ultra-fast shutters and similar specifications are
much more expensive. Fortunately, the effective shutter speed can be reduced by only
illuminating the sensor for a fraction of its open time. Here, this is achieved via pulsing
the LED using a EU-38-TTL laser diode driver, which has a modulation frequency of up to
100 kHz [63]. In practice, this means that a minimum on-time of the LED of 10 µs can be
achieved. Figure 3.5a shows how the timing of the light works together with the camera’s
shutter to reduce the amount of tool rotation observed during image acquisition. During
operation, the LED blinks too fast to be observable by the human eye, so the timing was
verified using a digital oscilloscope. Figure 3.5b shows the synchronisation of the shutter
and the LED driver. It should be noted that this reduced effective shutter speed would
come at the expense of perceived intensity. Still, because the LED is only on for short
pulses, it can be overdriven to maintain the same light output without damage.
Frame Active
Exposure Active
Light
Active
Time
Signal Active
Tool
Angle
Angle
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
9.55
9.575
9.6
Voltage [V]
Time [ms]
(b)
Figure 3.5: a) Event timing (frame capture, shutter open and light active) and b) Cam-
era exposure active signal [red] and light active signal [green], recorded using a Pico-
Scope 4262 at 5000 kHz and wired according to Figure 3.12.
16
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:25==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
302
304
306
308
310
312
Normalized Intensity [/]
Horizontal Px, i [/]
Green - Not Pulsed - Environment
Green - Not Pulsed - No Environment
Green - Pulsed - Environment
Green - Pulsed - No Environment
White - Not Pulsed - Environment
White - Not Pulsed - No Environment
White - Pulsed - Environment
White - Pulsed - No Environment
Figure 3.6: Analysis of the effect of different lighting conditions. The intensity profiles were
captured across the edge of a Ø3 mm spindle-mounted gauge bar rotating at 6366 min−1.
All images were illumination corrected according to Equation 3.3 and intensities nor-
malised according to Ii,j/Imax. To account for runout, all curves are shifted in the i-
direction. Acquisition frequency 52.9 FPS and shutter speed 30 µs.
As previously mentioned, the diffraction limit (Equation 2.2) is a function of wavelength.
This implies that shorter wavelengths facilitate higher resolution and, by extension, pro-
duce sharper edges. Blue light is most suitable for visible-light metrology [64], but only a
green and a white LED were available for testing. Figure 3.6 shows normalised, background-
corrected intensity profiles recorded across the edge of a rotating gauge bar. Both LEDs
were tested in pulsed and continuous configurations, with and without environmental light-
ing. Due to its shorter wavelength, green light produces a sharper edge (steeper gradient).
Similarly, the profiles captured while the LEDs were pulsing are steeper for both colours.
This means that the rotation blur is effectively being reduced. It stands to reason that an
even faster pulse driver could reduce the blur further, but this could not be tested dur-
ing this work. Environmental lighting has a negligible effect, which makes sense as its
intensity is comparatively low.
3.2
System Modelling & Image Alignment
This section covers an analysis of some of the fundamental dynamics of the system.
3.2.1
Rotation-Induced Blur
The aforementioned rotation-induced blur follows Equation 3.4, where texp is the effective
shutter speed. At the diode driver’s maximum frequency (10 µs), and a spindle speed,
ω, of 6000 min−1, this corresponds of 0.36 deg of rotation during an exposure. While still
significant, this constitutes a significant improvement from using a setup with continuous
lighting and the camera running at its minimum shutter speed of 19 µs.
∆θexp = ω · 360 deg
60 · 106 · texp
(3.4)
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
17
==PAGE:26==
3.2.2
Aliasing
Since the spindle speed significantly exceeds the camera’s maximum sampling frequency
(160 FPS), the system is subject to aliasing. The amount of rotation between subsequent
frames is:
∆θframe = ωT = ω
f
(3.5)
Where T is the time between successive frames and f is the frame rate. To avoid aliasing
a repeating feature of size θ0, in this case, the flutes of the tool, the frame rate must satisfy
the Nyquist criterion:
∆θframe < θ0
2 ⇒f >
ω
θ0/2 = 2ω
θ0
(3.6)
For a 4-flute tool rotating at 6000 min−1, this means the minimum frame rate would be
>800 FPS, far beyond the capabilities of the camera. It is therefore interesting to de-
alias the signal. A true signal of frequency f0 folds into an aliased signal according to
Equation 3.7 [65], where m represents how many times the signal is folded into itself.
Noting this implies that de-aliasing requires an approximate guess regarding the spindle
speed.
falias =
 f0 −m f

(m ∈Z)
(3.7)
Converting to revolutions per minute and accounting for various numbers of flutes, n,
spindle speed relates to the camera’s sampling rate like:
ω = 60
n (m · f ± falias)
(3.8)
Equation 3.8 will become important later, but overall, aliasing is not an issue because the
desired cutting edge profiles can be obtained over multiple rotations.
3.2.3
Image Alignment
It has become apparent that a measurement aimed at characterising 360 deg of a tool’s
geometry must occur over several rotations. If sampled at an arbitrary frequency, the
images will have to be sorted in order of angle according to the time they were captured.
A more elegant approach is to adapt the sampling frequency to the spindle speed via
Equation 3.9.
fps(k) =
ω · 360 deg
α + 360 deg · k,
k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .
(3.9)
where α is the desired angular step between images and k the number of revolutions
that enable the step. Figure 3.7 visualises this relationship. Setting the camera’s acquisi-
tion frequency as shown also helps prevent duplicate exposures, which would otherwise
increase measurement time and computational load.
18
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:27==
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
120
240
360
Required FPS [/]
Alpha [deg/frame]
k=0
k=1
k=2
k=3
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
5
10
15
20
Required FPS
k [/]
5000 rpm
30000 rpm
55000 rpm
80000 rpm
(b)
Figure 3.7: Relationship between sampling frequency, angular step between images and
number of revolutions during measurement. a) FPS v. angular step (α) at 6000 min−1
and b) FPS v. number of revolutions (k) at α = 1 deg. The camera’s maximum sampling
speed is indicated in red.
Cutting Edges
Focal Plane at
t=1
Focal Plane at
t=0
Measured
Points at t=0
Measured
Points at t=1
Spindle Axis
Δj
Figure 3.8: Cutting Edge Measurement of a hypothetical 4-flute constant helix bull nose
cutting tool.
To resolve the cutting edges with the camera’s pixel pitch of 2.3 µm px−1 (Appendix A)
in the vertical direction, α needs to be adapted to the tool’s helix angle (β). Figure 3.8
illustrates why this is the case. Between exposures, the point along a given cutting edge
intersecting the focal plane moves vertically by a distance ∆j. If this distance is greater
than the pixel pitch, the full vertical resolution of the sensor is not utilised. Given that a
helix rises at 2πr/ tan β per turn, the vertical step along the cutting edge in pixels can be
calculated as follows:
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
19
==PAGE:28==
∆j =
πr
180 deg tan β α
(3.10)
where r is the tool radius and β the helix angle. Equations 3.4, 3.9, and 3.10 collectively
define the settings of the camera for tool measurement at any spindle speed. The rotation-
induced blur must be significantly smaller than the angle between images (∆θexp ≪α),
and the camera’s sampling speed must be defined such that ∆j ≤Pixel Pitch. This
means that the maximum spindle speed at which the tool measurement system can op-
erate is dictated by the effective shutter speed speed and by extension the speed of the
LED driver. This part of the system is currently not optimised for its application. Future
work must focus on reducing the minimum on-time of the LED.
3.2.4
Spindle Speed Measurement
Obtaining tool profiles over multiple durations is problematic if the exact spindle orientation
at the time of exposure is unknown. A machine tool’s 3D geometry cannot be accurately
reconstructed without knowing the tool orientation per image. Early testing while running
the spindle at a set speed of 6366 min−1 revealed that the spindle speed is not constant
and, on average, deviates from the set speed by up to 0.5 min−1. The spindle speed was
measured using the FANUC Servo Viewer, a PC application that enables real-time data
monitoring from the CNC, and visualised in Figure 3.9. There are significant fluctuations
both per rotation and intra-rotation. This means inferring tool orientation from the set
spindle speed limits the minimum achievable angular resolution.
6362
6367
6372
0
20
40
60
80
100
Speed [min]
Time [ms]
Servo Viewer
Set RPM
Fourier Analysis
(a)
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
0
20
40
60
80
100
Angle dev. [deg]
Time [ms]
Servo Viewer
Fourier Analysis
Set RPM
(b)
Figure 3.9:
Analysis of spindle motion overlaid with set rpm and speed ex-
trapolated from captured images.
a) Spindle speed v.
time measured using
FANUC Servo-Viewer at 4 kHz and b) Current tool orientation, θ, calculated according
to θ(i) = θ(i −1) +
 ω(i) · 2π
60

· ∆t.
20
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:29==
At a set speed, ˆω, of 6366 min−1, Figure 3.9a shows that the speed fluctuates in a sinu-
soidal pattern. It can be approximated as:
ω(τ) ≈ωavg + A sin(2πfmτ)
(3.11)
The true angle of the tool is then given by:
θ(t) =
Z t
0
ω(τ)dτ = A · sin(fmtπ)2
fmπ
+ ωavg · t
(3.12)
where A is the amplitude of the fluctuations of around 3.5 min−1 and fm the fluctuation
frequency, around 100 Hz. Assuming constant speed, the presumed angle of the tool is:
ˆθ(t) = ˆω · t
(3.13)
The estimation error can then be written as:
ϵ(t) = θ(t) −ˆθ(t) = A · sin(fmtπ)2
fmπ
|
{z
}
Fluctuation
+ (ωavg −ˆω) · t
|
{z
}
Bias Drift
(3.14)
In this case, the fluctuation of the spindle speed adds an error of around 0.067 deg. It
would be possible to correct for this error using spindle speed data from the servo viewer,
but would require interpolation since its minimum sampling cycle is far slower than that of
the camera’s shutter at 250 µs [66]. However, since the fluctuation is significantly smaller
than the rotation-induced blur (∆θexp, Equation 3.4), it is neglected in this study. Drift
bias, on the other hand, which in this case works out to 0.034 deg/frame, accumulates
over time. Knowing the true average speed is therefore critical.
It was investigated whether it would be possible to extrapolate the spindle speed from
the captured tool images. The hypothesis was that measuring the intensity over time
at a probe location at a point near the tool’s effective cutting radius, see Figure 3.10a,
could provide insight into the average spindle speed. Figure 3.10b shows the intensity
recorded by the probe for 10 s. The fluctuations are caused by the passing of the tools’
flutes. De-aliasing the Fourier transform of the signal (Figure 3.10c) using Equation 3.8
would then yield the spindle speed. While elegant in theory, not requiring any external
interface nor relying on the set speed, this method proved no more accurate than relying
on the set speed. At an average spindle speed of 6365.7 min−1, recorded using the Servo
Viewer, the image analysis yielded a speed of 6367 min−1. While impressively close to
the true value, this method would not aid image alignment. It should also be noted that
the accuracy of this method would suffer when used on tools with fewer flutes.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
21
==PAGE:30==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
200
400
600
Y [px]
X [px]
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
Intensity [I]
Time [s]
(b)
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
0
10
20
Amplitude [/]
Frequency [Hz]
(c)
Figure 3.10: Proposed method for camera-based spindle speed measurement. a) Probe
location near the edge of the effective cutting radius of a 4-flute tool at an arbitrary height.
b) Intensity v. Time measured by the probe at a set speed of 6366 min−1 at 52.9 FPS. c)
Fourier transform of the signal.
In the development of a similar system, Salaets [10] uses an external tachometer to track
the spindle speed. However, this increases the overall complexity of the system. For
this study, it is assumed that the spindle speed data from the Servo Viewer is reliable.
Validating the accuracy of the machine’s spindle encoder is left for future work.
3.3
Setup
Figure 3.11 shows the prototype tool measurement system. The optical components are
mounted on a frame constructed from 80x40 and 40x40 aluminium profiles, which itself
is rigidly fastened to the bed of the CNC machine via t-nuts. An exact description of the
setup procedure can be found in Appendix D.3.4. All presented experimental work was
conducted on the setup in the shown configuration. In its current state, the system lacks
environmental protection and must be dismounted and remounted between machining
operations. It is also too large for the machine as it hinders the full range of motion of
the machine’s 5th axis. The current size of the frame is intentional to prevent accidental
collisions with surrounding measurement equipment.
The camera and illumination are mounted on precision stages, facilitating their rotation
around the machine’s Y and Z axes. This is done to enable easy alignment according
to the method described in Chapter 3.3.3. A current point of concern are the interfaces
between the optical hardware and the aluminium frame, as they are 3D-printed. The
fixturing (Figure 3.11), especially on the illumination side, has a mild amount of wobble,
which could affect the repeatability of the system (more on this in Chapter 5.3). Most of
the materials currently comprising the prototype exhibit significant thermal expansion, and
the laboratory environment in which testing was conducted is not temperature-controlled.
Thermal effects on the results presented in this thesis are expected to be minimal, as the
system was calibrated within hours of measurement; however, future prototypes should
be constructed with thermal expansion in mind.
22
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:31==
Tx*
Ry
Rz
Y
X
Z
Camera + Lens
80x40 Aluminium
Frame
LED+
Collimating Lens
Machine bed
Tx*
Ry
Rz
Precision Stages
Figure 3.11: Overview of the prototype tool measurement system as mounted inside a
FANUC Robodrill αD21LiB5ADV. The frame facilitates large displacements of the illumi-
nation and camera along the X direction; degrees of freedom marked with (*) are not
enabled by precision stages. Setup instructions and additional images may be found in
Appendix D.3.4.
+Sync/Trig
-Sync/Trig
GND
Shield
TrigIn
GND
Ethernet
Out
24 VDV
GND
Shield
Sensor
1
Sensor
2
USB 3.0
GND
I/O Line 3
I/O Line 2
+
-
Camera
Confocal
IFS2407-3
FANUC α-D21LiB5 
Y02.6
0V
Y03.0
0V
LED+
LED-
MOD
Ub
GND
PC
USB
USB Ethernet
A
B
5V DC
24V DC
   LED
PicoScope 7
IFC2465/66
330 Ω
2000 Ω
*Only for validation
purposes, not part of
the final system
*
*
*Only for validation
purposes, not part of
the final system
*
Ethernet
*Functionality verified
but not implemented
at the time of writing
LED 
Ctrl.
Figure 3.12: System and instrumentation overview. The exact identifications of the de-
picted components are found in Table E.1.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
23
==PAGE:32==
3.3.1
Instrumentation
Figure 3.12 provides an overview of the connections of the camera-based measurement
system and associated instrumentation. The exact identifications of the components are
listed in the Bill of Materials in Table E.1. The PicoScope and Confocal sensor (highlighted
in green and red) are temporary accessories that were used to support the testing of the
LED driver in Chapter 3.1.2 and the calibration and verification process in Chapter 5,
respectively. The depicted interface between the CNC machine and the camera was
tested to ensure future automated operation of the system; however, it is not implemented
at the time of writing. A voltage divider (blue) is placed between the machine controller’s
24 V output and the camera’s 5 V digital input to prevent damage.
3.3.2
Control
A minimal graphical user interface (see Figure 3.13) was developed to facilitate system
operation. At the time of writing, the dashboard is capable of displaying the camera align-
ment application (Chapter 3.3.3) and performing tool data post-processing. The calibra-
tion (Chapter 4) and tool measurement (Chapter 3.4) processes are still performed outside
of the developed software, instead relying on the PylonViewer application and the manual
procedure outlined in Appendix D.3.4.
1
2
4
3
5
Figure 3.13: Graphical user interface (GUI) to facilitate image processing. 1 - Launches
alignment application shown in Figure 3.16 (Chapter 3.3.3). 2 - Define calibration folders.
3 - Define folder containing tool images. 4 - Choose between characterising the entire
section of the tool that is in the field of view or just a single pixel row. 5 - Cutting tool
information for single probe measurement.
24
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:33==
3.3.3
Alignment
YZ
XZ
XY
Calibration/Alignment Artefact
Camera Optical Axis
Illumination Axis
Confocal
Optical Axis
1
Figure 3.14: Overview of component alignment. 1 Confocal chromatic sensor alignment
becomes relevant in Chapter 5.1. Based on camera and confocal chromatic sensor CAD
files from [58, 59, 67].
FOV
(1085.4, 
-2151.2)
R: 3048.8
j [px]
i [px]
(a)
Ø 12 mm Sphere
Y
-X
Z
(b)
Figure 3.15: Camera alignment processing and setup. a) Illustration of the geometry
matching approach. A circle (larger than the FOV) is fitted to the contour of the sphere.
The algorithm returns the centre position in pixel coordinates. b) Physical setup and co-
ordinate system.
A robust alignment strategy for the camera is crucial to ensuring accurate and repeatable
measurement. For the tool measurement algorithm (Chapter 3.4) to work, the camera’s
focal plane must be well aligned with the spindle axis. Meanwhile, the accuracy of the
system’s calibration (Chapter 4) is heavily dependent on the alignment between the focal
plane and the machine’s Y Z plane. An on-machine camera alignment method has been
developed to facilitate this process.
The alignment strategy relies on a custom artefact, namely a Ø 12 mm steel ball bear-
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
25
==PAGE:34==
ing, which was epoxied to an Ø 8 mm pipe and mounted in one of the machine’s tool
holders (see Figure 3.15b). From the camera’s perspective, the ball bearing appears as
a view-invariant circular silhouette regardless of alignment. Using Python’s OpenCV 2
library, a circle is fitted to its contour, and the centre location is identified in pixel coor-
dinates (i, j). The ball bearing, being significantly larger than the field of view, means
the circle extends beyond the boundaries of the image (see Figure 3.15a). Due to the
known geometry, this process has excellent sub-pixel accuracy and is functionally sim-
ilar to the Geometry Matching Sub-Pixel edge detection method, first introduced in Ta-
ble 2.3. It should be noted that the accuracy of this approach could be improved further
if Dsphere < HFOV . However, since the main limitations in this technique are the rotary
stages supporting the camera, this improvement is left for future work.
With tracking in place, this means that if the sphere is displaced in the X direction, any
change in the fitted sphere’s image coordinates (i, j) must be due to misalignment of the
focal plane relative to the machine’s Y Z-plane. In other words, the camera can be con-
sidered well aligned when translation of the artefact in the X direction no longer provokes
changes in the sphere’s centre location from the camera’s perspective. This approach
should work with conventional and telecentric lenses, since magnification changes caused
by distance from the lens will only affect the size of the sphere, not its location.
Aligning the Spindle Axis and the Focal Plane involves exploiting the fact that the sphere’s
edge is most in focus when positioned precisely in the focal plane, becoming more blurry
when moved towards or away from the sensor. To quantify focus, a Sobel Gradient-Based
focus measure is implemented (first introduced as a sub-pixel edge detection method
in Table 2.3). It works by taking the sum of the partial derivatives of the intensity field
(Equations 3.15 and 3.16) for the pixels along the contour, which provides a very robust
focus metric [68].
Gi ≈∂I
∂i , Gj ≈∂I
∂j
(3.15)
Fedge = 1
N
X
(i,j)∈edge
(Gi(i, j)2 + Gj(i, j)2)
(3.16)
where N is the number of edge pixels. The focus metric and the aforementioned centre
tracking method have been implemented in a Python application that provides a live view
of all three variables. Manually translating the sphere in the machine’s X direction and
observing the response of the centre location allows fine-tuning of the camera’s alignment
using its precision stages. When the sphere’s centre location becomes insensitive to its
distance from the camera, the stages are locked.
For alignment with the focal plane, the spindle is run at very low rpm (60 min−1 has been
tested to work well). This accounts for the runout in the artefact and ensures that the
spindle axis is aligned with the focal plane, not the instantaneous axis of the artefact. The
sphere is then moved in the X direction until the focus metric reaches its peak. This ma-
chine position is saved and used for all tool measurements. Figure 3.16 shows the appli-
cation and how the centre-positions and focus metric respond to a translation of ± 200 µm
in the X direction for a poorly aligned system.
The stages supporting the camera have a significant amount of backlash. Alignment
within about 0.2 px and 0.5 px is currently possible for the i and j axes, respectively. As-
26
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:35==
suming a pixel pitch of ∼2 µm px−1 this corresponds to a residual misalignment 0.12 deg
and 0.28 deg. This can be significantly improved with better, adjustable camera fixturing.
200 μm +Z
Starting
Point
200 μm -Z
200 μm -Z
200 μm +Z
Center X shift
Center i
i
i
Center j [px]
Center i [px]
Center j
Figure 3.16: Annotated screenshot of the alignment application. The top two curves (red
and blue) show the centre position of the circle fitted to the sphere’s visible contour. The
bottom curve shows the Sobel Gradient-Based focus measure. In this screenshot, the
sphere was shifted back and forth in the X direction in 200 µm steps from a starting posi-
tion.
3.4
Tool Measurement Strategy
Following the successful tuning of camera parameters, setup, and alignment, a post-
processing approach is required to extract relevant data from the cutting tool images.
3.4.1
Identification of Measurement Points
Figure 3.17a shows the right half of a tool as it is observed by an aligned system with
all previously described considerations implemented (except illumination correction). In-
specting the contour of the tool, it can be seen that some parts are more in focus than
others. As previously mentioned, this is because focus decreases with distance from the
focal plane. Due to the tool’s geometry, some parts of the cutting edges will be blurred in
every image. From a measurement perspective, only the in-focus parts are of interest. It
is therefore interesting to develop a way of tracking where, along its cutting edge, a tool
is in focus at any given time. The Sobel-Gradient approach, as implemented in Chap-
ter 3.3.3, is not applicable here because it cannot distinguish very fine focus differences
between individual rows. Chapter 2.4 described how an edge is registered not just by the
pixel which covers it, but also its neighbouring cells. Seen row by row, these cells form
windows, within which all pixels are affected by the edge. The windows, [I0, I1, ..., Iw−1],
are defined by a width, w, and a position in the pixel grid. Here, the centre of the window,
which most fully captures an edge on a given row, is located at the pixel with the steepest
local gradient.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
27
==PAGE:36==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
500
1000
j [px]
i [px]
(a)
0
25
50
75
100
0
5
10
Intensity [I]
Extracted Point Index [/]
(b)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
50
100
150
j [px]
Focus Metric [/]
(c)
Figure 3.17: Algorithmic determination of which part of the cutting edge is in the focal
plane during exposure. a) Right half of a tool image taken at 6366 min−1, not illumination
corrected. b) Intensity profiles across 9 px wide edge-windows for every 200th row. c)
Pixel row vs. focus metric calculated using Equation 3.17.
Figure 3.17b shows the intensities across the windows best representing the edge for
every 200th pixel row. This is not yet useful for finding where the edge is in focus. How-
ever, computing the sum of the absolute intensity differences in each window as in Equa-
tion 3.17 (L1 Norm [69]) provides a robust new focus metric. This new metric is plotted
across all rows in Figure 3.17c.
Fedge =
w−1
X
i=1
(|Ii −Ii−1|)
(3.17)
Visual inspection of Figures 3.17a and 3.17c shows excellent agreement between where
the tool appears to be in focus. Given that the spindle axis is well aligned with the focal
plane, the widest part of the tool (as seen by the camera) should always be most in focus
(see Figure 3.19b). The steepness metric in (c) confirms this. Assuming a clockwise
rotation, as the helix of each cutting edge passes through the focal plane, the widest
section, and by extension, the row capturing the tool’s intersection with the focal plane,
moves upward.
Figure 3.18 shows the application of this principle to a live measurement. In the case of
a 4-flute tool, four points must simultaneously intersect the focal plane at any given time:
two points on each visible cutting edge and two on the bottom. The exact position of
each of the four points is determined by where the new focus metric peaks and is plotted
for a random frame in Figure 3.18a. Repeating this process for 500 images of a rotating
tool, and tracking the position of each point in pixel coordinates, yields Figures 3.18c and
3.18d. Figure 3.18b shows the local gradient for each point.
The motion of the focused points is exactly as expected. The points tracking the bottom
of the cutting edges (green and blue) don’t exhibit any significant vertical movement. This
28
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:37==
makes sense as they track the underside of the tool, which is flat in the case of the tested
endmill. Meanwhile, the points tracking the sides of the cutting edges (red and orange)
exhibit only minor lateral movement as they trace the widest part of the cutting edges in
the vertical direction.
Closer inspection of Figure 3.18 reveals some noise in the traces of the most in-focus
points. Ideally, the points tracing the tool vertically should not exhibit any lateral move-
ment, implying the opposite for the points tracing the bottom. The observed jitter could be
caused by residual misalignment of the tool, fluctuations in the lighting or even abnormal-
ities in the cutting edges. While not strictly speaking an issue, this will affect the fidelity of
the 3D reconstruction. More on this in Chapter 3.4.3.
0
400
800
1200
400
850
1300
1750
j [px]
i [px]
(a)
10
20
30
40
0
250
500
Focus Metric [/]
Frame [/]
(b)
250
750
1250
1750
0
250
500
i [px]
Frame [/]
(c)
0
400
800
1200
0
250
500
j [px]
Frame [/]
(d)
Figure 3.18:
Tracking of cutting edges of a 3 mm, flat end, 4-flute tool rotating at
6366 min−1 at 52.9 FPS for 500 images. a) The four most in focus points around the
contour at a random frame. b) The local gradient at each point per frame. c) The hori-
zontal (i) location of each point per frame. d) The vertical location (j) of each point per
frame.
3.4.2
Tool Characteristic Extraction
Two of the most important characteristics of a cutting tool are the effective tool radius
or diameter and runout. Machine tools experience runout, i.e. an offset between the
instantaneous tool axis and the spindle axis (Figure 3.19a), due to, e.g. clamping errors
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
29
==PAGE:38==
or improper balancing. This offset then widens the tool’s actual diameter to its effective
diameter.
Illumination
Camera
Effective Tool
Diameter
Z
Y
X
Spindle Axis
Tool
Circumference
Instantaneous
Tool Axis
(a)
θ = 0 deg
θ = 50 deg
θ = 90 deg
(b)
Figure 3.19: Tool characterisation principle. a) Relationship between runout and effective
tool radius. b) Relevant measurement row for various tool orientations. Figure adapted
for this report from Bisacco [7].
Axis Misalignment
0 deg
90 deg
180 deg
270 deg
Runout
Spindle
Centre Axis
Effective Tool Diameter
FOV Centre
Axis
Cutting Edge 1
Cutting Edge 2
Cutting Edge 3
Cutting Edge 4
Figure 3.20: Principle of cutting edge characterisation on any pixel row intersecting the
edge of a 4-flute tool.
Figure 3.20 illustrates how the optical system perceives the hypothetical cutting edges
of a 4-flute tool across a single pixel row in four different orientations. Cutting edge 1
(orange) is the largest and therefore defines the effective tool diameter. The runout can
be calculated from the difference between the largest measured diameter (in this case
at 0 deg) and the smallest measured diameter (90 deg) or from the distance between
the longest cutting edge to the shortest cutting edge relative to the spindle centre axis.
This presents an issue since the location of the spindle axis is unknown. It cannot be
assumed to be aligned with the centre axis of the field of view and will have some inherent
misalignment (Figure 3.20) that needs to be accounted for. A camera setup sees each
cutting edge twice, once as it travels away from the focal plane and once when it returns
30
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:39==
towards it. The horizontal position of the spindle axis must then be equal to the middle
distance of the two measurements of the same cutting edge. To make this process more
robust, this calculation can be performed for all four cutting edges and the result averaged.
3.4.3
3D Reconstruction
Knowing the location of the spindle axis, ci, the spindle speed and the pixel-level loca-
tions of the four most in-focus points along the contour in every frame, it is possible to
reconstruct a cutting tool’s 3D geometry. Mapping the data from Figure 3.18 to cylindrical
coordinates according to Equation 3.18, where (r = |i −ci|), yields the point-cloud shown
in Figure 3.21.
I = r cos(θ), K = r sin(θ), J = j
(3.18)
Critical tool data, such as the positions of the cutting edges, helix angle, tool type, and
runout, can all be recovered from this dataset provided that a robust strategy for map-
ping the pixel coordinates to physical points can be implemented. This is discussed in
Chapter 4.
A closer inspection of the figure reveals an issue related to the bottom of the tool. The
datapoints appear to be clustered around half of the tool’s radius. It is expected that
there are fewer points near the centre, since the cutting edges don’t extend this far (see
Figure 3.18a); however, the lack of points connecting to the bottom of the helix is con-
cerning. This is likely a consequence of the higher angular velocity near the outside of
the tool, which results in increased rotation-induced blur. The focus metric used to track
which part of the cutting tool currently intersects the focal plane cannot distinguish be-
tween blur caused by distance to the focal plane and blur caused by rotation. Hence, the
algorithm favours tracking the areas closer to the centre of the tool since they rotate more
slowly and do not travel as far from the focal plane. This is a complex problem to solve
in software since the two types of blur are indistinguishable in the images. Reducing the
effective shutter speed of the system, thereby limiting the influence of rotation-induced
blur, should significantly improve the fidelity of the model.
J [px]
I [px]
K [px]
Cutting
edges
J [px]
I [px]
K [px]
Cutting
edges
K [px]
I [px]
Figure 3.21: 3D reconstruction of a 4-flute 3 mm flat endmill at 6366 min−1 in pixel coordi-
nates. Data retrieved from 500 images captured at 52.9 FPS.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
31
==PAGE:40==
4
Calibration and Edge Detection
FOV
Calibration Direction
Intensity 
Horizontal Px
Probe 1
Probe 2
Probe 3
Probe 3
Probe 1
Probe 2
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the calibration concept (not to scale). Here, the sphere is swept
to the right (−i direction) and the intensity profiles for every pre-defined horizontal step of
the sphere are recorded.
To extract geometric information from the images, the tracked points thus far recorded in
pixel coordinates (i, j) need to be transformed into physical positions. Even though the
chosen lens is by far the most expensive part of the system, as calculated in Appendix A,
its distortion would introduce a geometric error of around 5 µm. The transformation must,
therefore, also compensate for lens distortion and ideally be robust toward lighting incon-
sistencies. The following sections first outline how spatial and pixel response relationships
are established and how this information is applied to tool images.
4.1
Method
Figure 4.1 illustrates how the proposed calibration strategy works. The sphere, first used
for sensor alignment in Chapter 3.3.3, is swept across the camera’s field of view at a
constant speed. Having aligned the camera with the machine axes using the previously
proposed method, and given that the sphere’s diameter is much larger than the FOV,
every image captured by the sensor contains a single, well-focused edge. Assuming that
the sphere is swept at a constant feed of 0.9 mm min−1, and recorded by the camera
sampling at 150 FPS, an image will be taken every 0.1 µm of travel. This assumption will
be validated in Chapter 5.1. The resulting dataset contains intensity profiles for every row,
similar to the curves initially shown in Figure 3.3. Repeating this process by sweeping right
and downwards across the focal plane, the local, direction-specific edge spread functions,
in 100 nm increments, across the full surface of the sensor are recorded.
Edge spread functions for both horizontal directions are established separately (direction-
specific) rather than mirrored in software to avoid introducing an additional error via the
pixels’ nonlinearity. CMOS sensors like the one employed by the system’s camera gen-
erally have poor linearity compared to their CCD counterparts [70]. Specifically, the cam-
era’s IMX392 sensor has been tested according to the EMVA 1288 standard to have a
nonlinearity of ± 0.5 %, within 5 % - 95 % saturation [58, 71]. While this is excellent for
most applications, the camera’s configuration as a shadowgraph means most of the in-
teresting pixels are underexposed and fall outside of the tested range. Since no data
32
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:41==
is available outside the range stipulated in EMVA 1288, linearity is not a safe assump-
tion. The lens itself will also contribute with a degree of asymmetry [72], meaning it is
advantageous to calibrate each edge direction independently.
The collected dataset from the three calibration sweeps contains information regarding
the sensors’ response to left, right and downwards facing edges anywhere across the
FOV, as well as position information with a resolution of 0.1 µm. In most CV applications,
this would not be useful; however, in the proposed tool measurement setup, where only
three types of edges (no top edge since the FOV clips the tool) exist on a time-invariant
background, geometric information can be accurately extracted from tool or machine part
silhouettes.
The proposed calibration procedure is extremely data-heavy since one image is taken
every 0.1 µm across the sensor in multiple directions. To reduce computational load,
pixels on the left-hand side of the sensor are deactivated when calibrating for right-facing
(dark/left-light/right) edges and vice versa. This is reasonable since it can be assumed that
a tool’s left edge will always be on the left and its right edge on the right. Approximately
50 000 images are captured during horizontal calibration alone, but the total file size is
reduced by half with this method. Most of the data in every image can then be discarded,
as only the window of width w around the edge, per row or column, per image, is relevant.
The profiles are stored in a dictionary and grouped by the pixel containing the edge. After
post-processing, approximately 23 edge profiles remain per pixel in both the horizontal
and vertical directions. This makes sense due to the profile spacing of 100 nm over a
pixel pitch of 2.3 µm (Appendix A). To enable distance measurement, the indices of the
profiles per row (in the case of left and right calibration sweeps) are zeroed at the centre
of the field of view. This also compensates for the curvature of the sphere.
4.2
Edge Measurement
0
40
80
120
160
200
300
320
340
360
Intensity [/]
i [px]
Edge Profile
Edge Segment
Matched Profile
Pixel Level Edge
Location
Figure 4.2: Intensity edge profile across pixel row 600 of the artefact shown in Figure 5.6a
overlaid with the most similar profile (according to Equation 4.1) recorded during calibra-
tion (w = 20). The pixel-level edge location based on the maximum gradient is shown in
orange.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
33
==PAGE:42==
The edge measurement process is performed as shown in Figure 4.2. When recording,
e.g. a left-facing vertical edge of a tool, the camera returns an intensity profile (black)
as shown. As outlined in Chapter 3.4, a window (VI.tool) of width w is identified around
the edge (red). The intensities recorded across the window are then compared to the
dictionary of edges acquired as the sphere was swept past the image using cosine sim-
ilarity (Equation 4.1 [73]). This comparison method is chosen due to its computational
efficiency and because it is insensitive to the magnitude of the edge profile. Variations
in the illumination system’s perceived intensity do not affect the comparison process; in-
stead, only the relative responses of edge pixels to each other matter. Equation 4.1 then
outputs a value between zero and one, representing the similarity between the calibration
profiles and the tool edge. The closest match is overlaid in blue on the plot.
Similarity =
VI.tool · VI.calibration
||VI.tool|| ||VI.calibration||
(4.1)
Each intensity profile is associated with a physical position due to the known feed during
the acquisition of the reference profiles; the index of the matched profile can be easily
converted to a physical location by a scale factor. This approach inherently compensates
for lens distortions, as the sensor responses are directly referenced with known physical
locations. Uneven lighting conditions and even residual misalignment between the tool
centre axis and the focal plane are also compensated for, assuming perfect repositioning
of the machine tool between measurements (see Chapter 5.1). Treating each pixel row
independently in this process means that the accuracy of the calibration is not affected
by the characteristics of the calibration artefact. This method is also immune to the grid
interpolation error of grid calibration approaches (Chapter 2.4.3). It is not dependent on
any assumptions regarding the sensor’s characteristics, the optical transfer function, or
the background. The most critical assumption in this approach is that the background is
time-invariant. This can be ensured with robust fixturing of the camera and illumination
system.
The biggest flaw of this approach, aside from being overall less computationally efficient
than some of the simpler sub-pixel approaches from Table 2.3, is that it assumes that the
edge across the calibration sphere is identical to the edge of a given machine tool. In a
static comparison, this would be a very reasonable assumption; however, the rotation-
induced blur discussed in Chapter 3.2.1 effectively widens the step of the local intensity
curve across the tool edge. An algorithm based on cosine similarity will still return a match;
however, its accuracy decreases with increasing blur, a phenomenon that applies to all
edge detection algorithms [74]. Using a faster LED controller and reducing the effective
shutter speed can substantially alleviate this issue.
Another issue with matching edge profiles in the proposed manner is window size-induced
bias. As shown in Figure 4.2, the effects of the edge can be seen roughly ± 10 px around
the pixel containing the edge. Therefore, the length of the tool edge vector (VI.tool) that
is compared to the calibration profiles (VI.calibration) should be ≥21 px to represent all
pixels that contain edge-location information. However, the intensity values of pixels far
from the edge are increasingly dominated by the background or the silhouette. In other
words, at a certain distance from the edge, pixels from VI.tool and VI.calibration have similar
intensities regardless of the actual position of the edge. This leads to an inflation of the
similarity score (Equation 4.1) and, consequently, inaccurate edge localisation. This issue
can be avoided by reducing the window’s width, while still keeping it wide enough to
distinguish between profiles clearly. The window width is currently defined by manual
34
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:43==
tuning to produce the desired results. As a long-term solution, this is not ideal, and a
better definition for this parameter will need to be created.
Figure 4.3 shows the application of the calibration method to the left-facing edges of a
rotating square bar with four edges and no helix (more on this in Chapter 5.3). Shown
in red is the index of the most similar profile per frame multiplied by the curve separation
factor (scale) of 100 nm. This is overlaid with the focus metric from Chapter 3.4 and the
cosine similarity of the match.
All three signals are in excellent alignment. This means it is possible to identify when
and where (at a pixel level) a cutting edge is in focus using the computationally cheap
focus metric developed in Chapter 3.4, then compare its encapsulating window with the
profiles from the calibration dictionary and extract an edge position based on peak cosine
similarity. The accuracy and repeatability of this approach are evaluated in Chapter 5.
This approach only works in the directions perpendicular to the tool’s edges, i.e. the
left, right and bottom. The resolution along the edge remains equal to the pixel pitch.
Appendix C covers a brief investigation into the possibility of employing a multi-image
super resolution technique to boost the edge resolution to 200 nm. Unfortunately, at the
time of writing, it has not been possible to prove that the method works, and it is therefore
not included in the main body of this work.
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
0
100
200
300
400
Cosine Similarity [/]
X Distance [mm]
Frame [/]
5
15
25
35
45
Focus Metric [/]
Period
Figure 4.3: Post processing of the left facing edges from images of a square bar (Fig-
ure 5.6b) rotating at 6366 min−1, sampled at 52.9 FPS.
4.3
Compensating for Vertical Distortion
The method thus far discussed only facilitates the conversion from pixel coordinates to
physical positions in the direction in which the intensity curves are matched (perpendicular
to the edge). This means that the vertical positions of the pixel rows are unknown, and lens
distortion in the tool’s axial direction is not compensated for. To solve this, the frame at
which every pixel in every row turns black during the calibration run used to establish the
sensor’s response to downward-facing edges can be analysed. Using the same scale
factor as in the previous chapter, the physical location of the sphere which causes the
pixels of every row in a column to turn black has been calculated and plotted in Figure 4.4.
To visualise the distortion, this is overlaid with the curve’s deviation from linearity in green.
The figure clearly shows the lens’s barrel distortion in the vertical direction and how it is
well approximated with a 2nd order polynomial. The fluctuations in the signal are likely shot
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
35
==PAGE:44==
noise: random fluctuations in pixel intensity that, even for a perfectly smoothly moving
edge, will lead to some pixels hitting zero one frame earlier or later.
Repeating this calculation across every column creates a map of the exact vertical location
of every pixel while accounting for lens distortion. Note that this, nor tool length measure-
ment (which occurs via profile matching in the vertical direction) are implemented in the
Tool Image Processor application from Chapter 3.3.2. This is due to a lack of reference
data (more on this in Chapter 5.3).
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
0
1
2
3
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Linearity Deviation [µm]
Y [mm]
j [px]
2nd Order Fit
Figure 4.4: Relative vertical position of each pixel row (Y ) v pixel row (j) overlaid with the
deviation from linearity for pixel column 100.
36
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:45==
5
System Testing and Evaluation
This chapter aims to confirm some of the assumptions made in the previous chapters
and prove the efficacy of the developed algorithm. The calibration method described in
Chapter 4 heavily relies on the CNC machine’s ability to translate the calibration artefact
at a constant speed. Therefore, the first part of this chapter focuses on validating the ma-
chine’s positioning systems. An evaluation of the camera-based measurement system’s
stability, accuracy, and repeatability follows.
5.1
Validation of Machine Positioning Systems
1
2
3
Validation Direction (Y)
4
(a)
Validation Direction (Z)
1
(b)
Figure 5.1: Setup of IFS2407-3 confocal chromatic sensor in the machine for a) Y axis
validation and b) Z axis validation. 1 - 3 mm gauge bar. 2 - IFS2407-3. 3 - CNC vice.
4 - Alignment/Calibration sphere mounted in an adjacent tool holder. Alignment performed
according to Chapter 5.1.1.
The CNC machine used during testing in this study is a FANUC Robodrill αD21LiB5ADV.
Despite the very low feed used during camera calibration, stick-slip should not be an is-
sue due to the machine’s use of recirculating ball bearings on its linear guides. However,
its default configuration does not have linear encoders on its axes [75]. Position control
is achieved via encoders on the motors, which means it is subject to errors in the drive
system [76]. It is, therefore, interesting to validate whether accurate and repeatable low-
feed translation is possible. If the feed is non-constant, the relevant question is whether
the machine’s rotary encoders can identify the relative position of the calibration artefact
with sufficient accuracy. The following sections aim to validate both using an IFS2407-3
confocal chromatic sensor installed according to Figure 3.12. The sensor is mounted in
the vice of the machine and measures translation against a 3 mm gauge bar as shown in
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.1. The setup quality for Z axis validation (b) suffers because the sensor mea-
sures the rough underside of the gauge bar. For both (a) and (b), a flat spindle-mounted
surface would be ideal and should be procured if the accuracy of this process is to be
improved.
5.1.1
Alignment
In this setup, the sensor’s optical axis must be precisely aligned with the axis subject
to validation. In other words, for validation of, e.g. the Y axis (a), the sensor’s optical
axis must be parallel with the XY and Y Z planes; see also Figure 3.14. An on-machine
approach has been adopted from Geiselhart [77] to ensure this is the case. The method
originally developed for detecting the origin and direction of laser beams has been adapted
to facilitate the accurate alignment of medium- to long-range confocal chromatic sensors
in a five-axis CNC environment.
As in Geiselhart [77], a sphere is needed for the alignment process. Here, the same arte-
fact from Chapters 3.3.3 and 4 is reused. Figure 5.2 shows how the process works to
align the sensor’s optical axis relative to the machine’s Y Z plane from a birds-eye view.
The sphere, still mounted to the machine spindle, is moved incrementally in the X direc-
tion past the sensor’s optical axis. Data acquisition is triggered via NC code such that
1500 samples are logged for every shown measurement point. This process is repeated
in five equidistant planes parallel to the XZ plane. Assuming the sphere is perfectly round,
a circle fits each set of average points as shown in Figure 5.3a. The X position is known
from the machine controller. Plotting the positions of the measurement planes against
the centres of the fitted circles yields Figure 5.3b. Fitting a straight line to the points facil-
itates quantification of the misalignment relative to the Y Z plane as ϕ = arctan(1/slope).
Based on the calculated ϕ, the relevant stage on the machine is adjusted (in this case,
the C axis). Repetition of this process showed that alignment within around 0.1 deg is
feasible using this method.
Alignment of the optical axis relative to other machine planes can be achieved by per-
forming the same operation but translating the sphere in the orthogonal direction to the
desired plane. A notable exception here is the alignment with the XY plane when the op-
tical axis is parallel to the Y Z plane. In its current configuration, the CNC machine lacks
the necessary degrees of freedom to adjust the sensor in the required direction. Since
this is not easily circumvented, the method described above will be used to determine the
misalignment and correct it mathematically during post-processing.
Z
Y
X
Confocal Sensor
Optical
Axis
Calibration
Sphere
Measurement
Points
β
Figure 5.2: Bird’s eye view of confocal alignment principle relative to CNC machine
Y Z plane. The sensor’s maximum measurement angle, β, is 30 deg [78].
38
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:47==
0
5
10
15
-5
0
5
10
Conf. Distance [mm]
X Position [mm]
Plane 1
Plane 2
Plane 3
Plane 4
Plane 5
(a)
0
1
2
2.4
2.45
2.5
Meas. Plane Position
[mm]
Circle Center, X [mm]
φ
(b)
Figure 5.3: Misalignment data post-processing. a) Averaged distances at each measure-
ment point for all five measurement planes overlaid with least squares fitted circles. b)
Relative measurement plane position v. relative X position of the centre of the fitted cir-
cle.
5.1.2
Measurement Comparison
Z Position [mm]
Time [s]
Servo Viewer
Confocal
90
60
30
0
0
1
2
3
Position 1
Position 2
Starting
Position
Figure 5.4:
Position measurements from the Z axis encoder obtained using the
Servo Viewer at 16 kHz overlaid with position measurements from the confocal chromatic
sensor sampled at 30 kHz.
To quantify the CNC machines’ positioning repeatability and dynamic position measure-
ment in a given axis, the gauge bar is cycled back and forth five times between Positions 1
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
39
==PAGE:48==
and 2 (Figure 5.4), spaced 2.5 mm apart. The range is limited to stay within the confocal
sensor’s maximum measurement range of 3 mm [78] while still fully enclosing half of the
width of the camera’s field of view. A wait time of 3 s has been set between direction
changes to allow stabilisation. The feed during this process is set to 30 mm min−1.
During the validation process, the Servo Viewer application and confocal sensor are simul-
taneously triggered via NC-code. In post-processing, both datasets are zeroed according
to their minimum values and overlaid, as shown in Figure 5.4. The signals appear rea-
sonably parallel, even during the accelerating and decelerating segments towards the
beginning and end of each sweep. Zooming in on the signals reveals that the tempo-
ral resolution of the Servo Viewer is limited by the machine’s cycle time, currently set to
1 ms. Reducing the cycle time to 250 µs is being discussed with FANUC’s technical sup-
port team. However, since this requires a significant intervention in the machine’s velocity
controller, this change has not been made at the time of writing.
To establish the dynamic position measurement accuracy of the machine, straight lines
are fitted to all ten motion segments between 5 % and 95 % of the maximum value. This
avoids the non-linear segments during acceleration and deceleration around each direc-
tion change (see Figure 5.4). Naturally, the camera calibration procedure also needs to
account for this, and the sphere needs to start and stop moving well beyond the camera’s
field of view.
Table 5.1 shows the average slope difference between the confocal sensor and the Servo
Viewer across all ten segments. It also shows the average root mean square (RMS) de-
viation between the confocal signal and its least squares-fitted straight lines. The RMS
deviation in both axes is deemed low enough to assume the machine’s feed to be con-
stant for the purposes of this thesis. Most of the fluctuations are likely caused by errors
in the drive system, but form errors in the gauge pin and residual misalignment of the
confocal may have inflated this value. Meanwhile, the slope deviations, especially in the
Y axis, are significant and cannot be explained by residual misalignment or curvature.
Based on the results of this test, the set feed of the machine alone cannot be trusted for
camera calibration. To compensate for this error, a gauge pin has been characterised on
a CMM (Appendix G) to have a minimum circumscribing diameter of 2.9991 mm. The pin
is measured using the camera system, and the data is used to back-calculate the actual
feed, which is then used to calculate the spacing between the calibration profiles.
Table 5.1: Dynamic Results Slope and
RMS Deviation between Confocal and
Servo Viewer Data for constant feed, sin-
gle axis translation in Y and Z. 1 Confocal
position measurements were multiplied by
cos(0.45 deg) to compensate for misalign-
ment as this degree of freedom was not ad-
justable on the machine.
Slope Deviation
RMS Deviation
Y1
0.0300 mm min−1
0.0003 mm
Z
0.0173 mm min−1
0.0003 mm
Table 5.2: Repositioning Results Stan-
dard deviation of 1000 sample averages
at Positions 1 and 2 (Figure 5.4).
This
analysis does not include the starting po-
sition, leaving five measurements at posi-
tion 1 and five at position 2.
Position 1
Position 2
Y
0.009 µm
0.015 µm
Z
0.039 µm
0.036 µm
The positioning repeatability in the Y and Z axes is here calculated as the standard devi-
ation between 1000 sample averages around each valley (Position 1) and plateau (Posi-
40
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:49==
tion 2). The results are shown in Table 5.2. Repositioning in the Y axis does not affect the
tool measurement process. However, returning to a correct Z position will affect future
tool length measurements. This feature is not implemented at the time of writing. Still, the
data shows that the machine’s positioning repeatability (<40 nm) will not obstruct accurate
tool length estimation. Repositioning in the X axis was not studied due to time constraints
but is relevant due to the alignment-dependent nature of the tool processing algorithm.
However, given that repositioning in the Y and Z axes is excellent, it is assumed that the
same applies to the X axis.
5.2
Stability and Noise
The system’s stability was briefly investigated. Figure 5.5a shows the intensities recorded
by a pixel near the edge of the field of view for 100 s while a tool was run at 6366 min−1
in the measurement position. The pixel does not directly observe the tool; nevertheless,
performing a Fourier analysis on the signal and de-aliasing the result, as in Chapter 3.2.4,
returns a dominant frequency corresponding to 6368 min−1. This implies that the observed
noise in the pixels surrounding the tool is caused by reflections of the light from the tool’s
surface. The phenomenon was observed to recur at various spindle speeds.
The verification of the accuracy and repeatability of the developed system in Chapter 5.3
is entirely performed at a spindle speed of 6366 min−1. This is because all available ref-
erence data is recorded at this speed. To ensure the prototype would work equally well
at different speeds, it was investigated whether spindle speed has any influence on the
magnitude of the noise. Figure 5.5b shows the standard deviation over 300 intensity mea-
surements of the same pixel for spindle speeds between 100 min−1 and 20 000 min−1. No
relationship is observed in this analysis; hence, it can be assumed that if rotation-induced
blur is kept under control, performance is independent of spindle speed.
68
71
74
77
80
0
25
50
75
100
Intensity
[I]
Time [s]
(a)
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
0
10000
20000
Std. Dev. Intensity [/]
Spindle Speed [rpm]
(b)
Figure 5.5: Analysis of system noise. a) Intensity variation over 100 s as observed by a
pixel near the edge of the field of view while a cutting tool is rotating at 6366 min−1 in the
measurement position. b) Standard deviation of intensity fluctuations over 300 images at
the same pixel between 100 min−1 and 20 000 min−1.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
41
==PAGE:50==
5.3
Empirical Verification
5.3.1
Method
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.6: Pictures of measured artefacts. a) 3 mm Gauge bar, b) Square cross-section
camera artefact for camera performance evaluation and c) 3 mm Flat end mill. Exact
artefact specifications in Appendix D.1.
The repeatability and bias of the prototype measurement system are assessed via mea-
surement of three artefacts:
1. A 3 mm ± 0.002 gauge bar (Figure 5.6a), which provides an orientation-invariant
focused edge. This part has been characterised on a CMM to have a minimum
circumscribing diameter of 2.9991 mm ± 0.0011 (k = 2) in Appendix G.
2. A square cross-section artefact (Figure 5.6b), developed, characterised and used for
establishing the traceability of a similar camera-based measurement system by Sha-
heen [8]. The radius of the square circumscribing circle and runout have been well
characterised (off-machine) to 1.9136 mm and 0.0257 mm, respectively, at a height
of 0.261 mm from the flat bottom of the artefact. The part is designed to represent
a machine tool without a helix (reamer), the corners of which simulate the cutting
edges. This works because the absence of a helix does not affect the fundamental
measurement principle from Chapter 3 or the calibration and sub-pixel refinement
from Chapter 4. Measurements of this artefact succeeded a 30 min warm-up period
where the spindle was run at measurement speed. This is to ensure consistency
with the reference measurements presented later.
3. A 3 mm flat endmill (Figure 5.6c). Although nothing is known about this tool, it can be
measured using an existing optical tool measurement system, the Conoptica CU2
Tool, and the results can be compared to those of the prototype.
The characterisation of these artefacts lays the groundwork for establishing a traceabil-
ity chain for the new system. Exact identifications for the tested parts may be found
in Appendix D.1. A total of 400 images were taken of all three artefacts at 6366 min−1
and 52.9 FPS. To establish the repeatability of the system, the gauge bar and the cross-
42
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:51==
section artefact were measured 20 times as per ISO 15530 part-3 [79]. Between measure-
ments, the spindle was moved to the top of the machine’s Z axis range and returned to the
measurement position. Since the reference measurements for both parts were made off-
machine and hence cannot account for spindle mounting errors, the confocal chromatic
sensor used for axis qualification in Chapter 5.1 is used to provide an additional point of
reference. The confocal measurement procedure is described in Appendix B.
5.3.2
Results
Ø 2.9991 mm
(CMM)
(a)
18.4 µm
(Confocal)
(b)
Figure 5.7: Statistical distribution of 20 measurements, 400 images each, of a) diame-
ter and b) runout of the 3 mm gauge bar at 6366 min−1, 0.261 mm from the flat bottom.
For reference, measurements from Appendices B (runout measurement using a confocal
chromatic probe) and G (gauge bar characterisation) are overlaid.
(a)
23.2 µm
(Confocal)
(b)
Figure 5.8: Statistical distribution of 20 measurements, 400 images each, of a) diameter
and b) runout of the square bar at 6366 min−1, 0.261 mm from the flat bottom. For refer-
ence, measurements of the same part using a Conoptica CU2 Tool from Shaheen [80]
and Appendix B are overlaid.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 5.3: Summary of results from Figures 5.7 and 5.8. In the case of the gauge bar,
the measurement relates to diameter, whereas for the square bar, it relates to the max-
imum distance from the spindle axis. The repeatability is calculated according to the
95.45 % confidence interval to maintain consistency with the results from Shaheen [8].
1 The magnitude of the diameter here is not of interest since, as described in Chapter 5.1,
the diameter of this pin is used to compensate for the feed error during calibration. The
measurements must, therefore, by definition, be accurate.
Distance
Runout
Average
Repeatability
Average
Repeatability
3 mm Gauge Bar
((((((
2.9992 mm 1
0.081 µm
19.491 µm
0.199 µm
Square Bar
1.9151 mm
0.074 µm
24.081 µm
0.178 µm
Figures 5.7 and 5.8 show the statistical distributions over 20 measurements of the gauge
bar and the square bar. Note that the magnitude of the measurements of the cylindrical
bar’s diameter is irrelevant (Figure 5.7a) as it is used for feed correction. The distribution
is included to provide insight into the repeatability of the system. The statistics have been
summarised in Table 5.3. The market-leading CU2 Tool measurement system has been
tested by Shaheen [8] to have a repeatability of 0.039 µm for radius measurements and
0.065 µm for runout. This significantly outperforms the prototype, indicating considerable
room for improvement. Better fixturing, thermal compensation, and reducing the effective
shutter speed should substantially improve the system’s performance.
The repeatability of the runout measurements is much worse than that of the radius/diam-
eter for both artefacts. This phenomenon affects both the developed prototype and the
CU2 Tool system. This makes sense since the radius is a single measurement, whereas
runout is the difference between two.
The figures showing the runouts are overlaid with measurements from the confocal chro-
matic sensor on the respective parts. A discrepancy of around 1 µm exists between the
measurements obtained using the camera system and those made with the probe. This
is almost certainly due to the method used to determine the bottom of the cylinder in the
confocal setup (Appendix B). Likely, the measurement planes differ significantly between
the two experiments, and the inclination error of the bar is the cause of this difference.
The repeatability across measurements of the square artefact is similar to that of the
gauge bar for both diameter and runout. This is despite the two parts having very distinct
surfaces. The gauge pin has a shiny, grounded surface, whereas the square artefact,
machined using wire EDM [8], has a rough, matte surface. The slightly worse repeatabil-
ity observed in measurements of the gauge pin may be attributed to increased reflections
that interfere with the measurement. Another explanation could be the fact that the gauge
pin does not have any edges. Since the sides of the part are in focus regardless of ori-
entation, any surface defects that are smaller than the angular step between images (α,
Chapter 3.2) can contribute to an increase in diameter between measurements. A part
with edges is somewhat more immune to this since measurements are only made when
the edge is in focus. This could also explain why the distribution of diameter measure-
ments for the gauge pin in Figure 5.7a is skewed to the right, whereas the measurements
of the square artefact appear to follow a Gaussian distribution (Figure 5.8).
44
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.9: Comparison of measurements for the radial distance from each edge of the
square artefact to the spindle axis. VP, CS and CU2 Tool data, obtained on the same
artefact, is from Shaheen [8].
Figure 5.9 shows the average measurement of all four edges of the square artefact over-
laid with data from Shaheen [8]. In the paper, the artefact was characterised using a
CMM through three approaches: contour scan (CS) and virtual plane (VP), with and with-
out edge correction—data from all three methods is provided for reference. It should be
noted that these measurements were made off-machine and, hence, do not account for
mounting errors. The data from the CU2 Tool system was obtained in 2024 (on the same
machine); however, the artefact has been dismounted and remounted several times since
then. It is also likely that different slots on the machine tool changer have been used in
both experiments, which may have introduced different mounting errors.
Another source of error in this comparison is the identification of the measurement plane
at 0.261 mm from the flat bottom of the artefact. Due to the absence of any cutting el-
ements at the bottom, which would otherwise act as knife edges coming in and out of
focus as described in Chapter 3.4, the bottom of the part is always blurred. This means
it is not possible to accurately locate the bottom of the artefact and, by extension, any
plane defined relative to it using the current system. The measurement plane was identi-
fied by binarising an image of the artefact and taking the pixel row 113 rows (calculated
as 261 µm/Pixel Pitch) above the bottom. In reality, the measurements made using the
prototype may have been made several microns (1-2 px) above or below the reference
data.
Table 5.4: Comparison of measurements of flat end mill using the prototype system and
the Conoptica CU2 Tool. 1 Measurement failed due to an unknown reason; the measure-
ment can likely not be trusted.
Tool Radius
Tool Runout
Prototype
1.4770 mm
20.3 µm
Conoptica CU2 Tool 1
1.4639 mm
11.1 µm
The attempt to characterise the flat endmill (Figure 5.6c) failed. The CU2 Tool system
(configured as shown in Appendix D.3.3) returned the radius and runout values of the
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
45
==PAGE:54==
tool shown in Table 5.4, but stated two critical errors: Level 3 recipe not approved and
Pre check failed; its measurements can therefore not be trusted. The prototype system re-
turned results, but inspection of the images during post-processing revealed large pieces
of debris stuck to the cutting edges. Since no digital tool cleaning solution is currently in
place, the results of this analysis should also be discarded. Future work must re-run this
experiment with a different, clean tool that is accepted by both systems.
5.3.3
Uncertainty Evaluation
The expanded uncertainty of the optical measurement system prototype, UM, can be
evaluated according to ISO 15530 part 3 [8, 79], which stipulates a method for uncertainty
evaluation for CMM measurements using a calibrated artefact (in this case, the square
bar). According to the standard, the uncertainty must, as a minimum, account for the
random and systematic errors summarised in Equation 5.1.
UM = k
q
u2
cal + u2
b + u2p + u2w
(5.1)
Here, ucal is the standard uncertainty of the square artefact according to Shaheen [8], ub
is the systematic bias, up = s/√n (s is the standard deviation across repeated measure-
ments and n the number of samples) and uw the workpiece variation during use. Since all
measurements were conducted in rapid succession, uw is assumed to be negligible. UM
is calculated for all four edges of the square bar for two of the three reference datasets,
and the results are presented in Table 5.5. The virtual plane approach without edge cor-
rection is not included since it does not constitute a realistic assessment of the artefact
geometry.
Table 5.5 shows a concerning lack of consistency between the uncertainties associated
with the measurement of each edge. The measurement of the back right edge (BR) stands
out by having a significantly higher systematic bias term (ub) than the other edges. Based
on the measurements of the edge radius of the artefact from Shaheen [8], there appears
to be no correlation between edge radius and measurement uncertainty. At the time
of writing, no explanation for this deviation can be given. The CU2 Tool measurement
system features an expanded uncertainty of 6.9 µm and 6.0 µm for the virtual plane and
contour scan approaches, respectively [8]. However, this is only for the biggest edge
(back left). Since the system does not return measurements for the other three edges, it
is unknown if it sees the same fluctuations in systematic bias.
For all edges, the error is predominantly caused by bias. If the systematic error can be
corrected, the system’s accuracy can be significantly improved.
Table 5.5: Calculation of the expanded uncertainty of the prototype system relative to
measurements of the square artefact using the virtual plane and contour scan approaches
from Shaheen [8].
Virtual Plane (VP) (edge corr)
Contour Scan (CS)
BR
BL
FL
FR
BR
BL
FL
FR
Measurement [mm]
1.9016
1.9151
1.9047
1.8910
1.9016
1.9151
1.9047
1.8910
ucal [µm]
0.93
0.74
ub [µm]
5.6
2.2
0.3
1.8
4.8
1.8
-1.6
2.9
up [µm]
0.04
uw
/
UM (k = 2) [µm]
11.4
4.8
2.0
4.0
9.8
3.9
3.5
6.0
46
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:55==
6
Part Inspection
Z
X
Y
FOV
Scan
Area
Neck
Figure 6.1: Flask Measurement. Based on CAD files from Geiselhart and [59, 81].
The work presented in this chapter is part of a larger research project at the Technical
University of Denmark. Unlike the rest of this report, this section does not focus on tool
characterisation; instead, it explores how the camera-based measurement system may
be useful in an in-situ quality control application.
The project in question concerns the inspection of a machined 3 mm thick aluminium shell
(Figure 6.1), into which, during machining, 16,000 Ø0.3 mm holes were drilled. As a part
of the overall quality control process of the product, it is of interest to verify the quality of
the holes, whether they are over or undersized, and to what extent burrs are a problem.
There is also a desire to study the efficacy of different cleaning and burr-removal meth-
ods that will be conducted post-machining. Due to the large number of holes, manual
inspection is not feasible, resulting in a demand for an automated solution. In response,
this chapter covers the development of a computer vision application for automatic drilled
hole characterisation on a rotating part.
6.1
Setup
Figures 6.1 and 6.2a show the physical setup. The shell is set up on the vice of a FANUC
Robodrill αD21LiB5ADV, which enables translation of the part in the X and Y directions
and rotation around Y and Z. The camera and backlight from the previous chapters
are mounted to a new aluminium extrusion-based frame (Figure 6.2a) and attached to
the machine’s spindle, which enables Z-translation. During all testing, the spindle was
electronically locked using the M19 command on the machine to protect the equipment.
The flask is mounted on a tower of precision stages (Figure 6.2b) to align the shell’s centre
axis with the machine’s Z axis when the 5th axis is at 0 deg. Custom G-code, developed by
Matthias Geiselhart of DTU, sweeps the part past the camera’s field of view, incrementally
scanning its surface. All holes are evenly spaced, and assuming correct shell alignment,
the hole pattern aligns with the circumference, which itself should be aligned vertically to
the FOV of the camera. The shell should feature 119 holes per axial level on its widest
section if there were no errors during machining.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
47
==PAGE:56==
1
2
3
4
5
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2: Pictures of the flask measurement setup. a) Measurement system as mounted
on the spindle, inside the CNC machine. 1 - Camera. 2 - Collimated backlight (white).
3 - Flask as set up on during measurement. 4 - Machine vice. 5 - Machine spindle.
b) Close-up of the flask on its precision stage platform.
6.2
Working Principle
6.2.1
Scanning the Surface
Z Axis
IMG 1
IMG 2 IMG 3
IMG 4 IMG 5
Burrs
608 px
200 px
Overlap
Flask Edge
Figure 6.3: Visualisation of the overlap across five binarized images taken in direct suc-
cession. All holes are shown to have unique burr formations and appear well aligned with
the camera.
Since the size of the hole pattern far exceeds the size of the FOV (no more than three holes
are visible simultaneously), any post-processing solution must consolidate data from a
large set of images. Initially, it was discussed whether the photos could be stitched into
a composite scan (similar to the illustration in Figure 6.3) of the entire surface before an
algorithm would classify each hole. For this purpose, the Microsoft Research Image Com-
posite Editor [82] was tested. However, it quickly showed that the computational cost of
stitching the more than 20,000 images that would be recorded during a scan is unjusti-
fiable. There were also several issues regarding the accuracy of the stitching process,
likely caused by the fact that there are relatively few distinct features in the images. In
48
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:57==
general, image stitching algorithms are developed for landscape images with a lot of de-
tail; the unique burr formations around each hole and otherwise black surroundings seem
to be insufficient for robust image alignment (in this case). Developing a custom image
stitching algorithm to align frames based on hole centre locations was considered, but
would have been too time-consuming.
In contrast, an algorithm that processes each image individually is more efficient but poses
several challenges that analysis of a composite scan would avoid:
1. Tracking of hole locations. Since each image only encapsulates ≤3 holes, there is
no inherent way of locating where the currently analysed hole is on the surface of the
shell.
Proposed solution: Adapt the frame rate to the feed so that there is a predefined
overlap between photos to track where any new hole is relative to previously scanned
holes.
2. Duplicates. The solution to point 1 introduces duplicates into the dataset. If the images
overlap, holes will appear multiple times, but they must not be counted more than once.
Proposed solution: Establish a filter/criterion for when a hole can be counted.
3. Data Load. At the time of writing, a full scan of the shell consists of around 25,000 im-
ages; recording this data directly without compression would require > 50 GB of stor-
age.
Proposed solution: Sacrifice some resolution by binning the image two times in
each axis. This is on top of cropping the FOV to 400 × 1216 px (see example image
in Figure 6.3). Data load is reduced to around 3 GB.
4. Row Transitions. After a row of holes is scanned, the Z-position of the camera is
adjusted, and the next row is scanned. This means a system needs to be put in place
to locate a hole around the circumference and in the shell’s axial direction.
Proposed solution: “Overrotation” of the shell. If the part is rotated far enough to
disappear from the FOV completely (a fully white image) for every sweep along the
circumference, an algorithm can be created to separate the scanned rows.
5. Failed Drill Operations. While unlikely, some holes may appear completely closed to
the camera (e.g. due to a failed machining operation or very large burrs).
Proposed solution: A workaround for this issue is discussed in Chapter 6.2.2. How-
ever, if there were three closed holes in series (i.e. one or several images are com-
pletely black), it may confuse the algorithm.
However, there are also key advantages to this approach:
1. Live Processing. Since the algorithm operates on a per-image basis, it can run live
alongside scanning. On an Intel i7-9750H CPU, it processes images at 70 Hz, lagging
only slightly behind the camera’s 100 Hz acquisition speed.
2. Sharp edges. Stitching-based approaches inherently introduce alignment error, mak-
ing hole contours appear blurry. A per-image method avoids this completely.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
49
==PAGE:58==
6.2.2
Processing Algorithm
The hole characterisation algorithm is developed for Python 3.12.3 and makes use of the
OpenCV 2 library. Figure 6.4 illustrates how the program works. The algorithm processes
the greyscale images taken by the camera and detects and classifies holes within a spec-
ified region (ROI). This is done as a precaution, since holes may be clipped by the FOV
(see right side of Figure 6.4), which would lead to incorrect measurement. Fundamen-
tally, the program works by binarising an image according to bin_threshold (Table 6.1)
and extracting external contours to identify initial hole candidates based on their size and
location. Circles are fitted to all closed contours, where min_radius is used to discard
holes below a specific size. This is to account for certain types of burrs (Table 6.2). For
each candidate, a fill ratio is calculated from the number of white pixels to the total pixels
in each circle. A search grid is fitted to the centres of all holes within the ROI to account
for potential closed holes. The algorithm registers a closed hole if there is not a single
white pixel within min_radius around a given node of the grid.
Note that the above approach creates a conflict, while min_radius is intended to exclude
certain types of burrs from being registered as holes, it may also override the detection
of significantly undersized holes. A reclass_ratio parameter has been established to
override the above when a grid-node expects a hole, but doesn’t find one.
Due to the shell’s curvature, measurements will be most accurate when the camera’s op-
tical axis is aligned with each hole’s centre axis. Timing this is not practically feasible,
however, through trial and error, a region of best alignment has been defined (see Fig-
ure 6.4). While all holes visible within the FOV will be registered, only holes within the ROI
are used to generate the search grid. Finally, hole characteristics are only logged when a
hole is in the region of best alignment. This requires tuning the camera’s sampling speed
to the feed rate, but is reasonably simple to do in practice. This approach also solves the
issue of duplicates from Chapter 6.2.1.
External Contour
ROI
Minimum
Enclosing Circle
Search Grid
Region of best
alignment
Flask Circumferentail Direction & Scan Direction
Fill Percentage
Flask Axial Direction
j [px]
i [px]
Figure 6.4: Visualisation of the hole algorithm running on a single image. Data acquisition
was performed at 100 FPS and 1000 µs shutter speed. The image has been binarised
according to bin_threshold (Table 6.1).
50
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:59==
Table 6.1: Adjustable parameters in the hole inspection algorithm.
Parameter
Set
Role
bin_threshold
30
Grayscale cutoff to separate background from holes (sub-pixel
information is lost in this step).
region_alignment
300, 350
Region within which a hole is counted as being sufficiently well
aligned for measurement.
min_radius
20
Minimum radius (in pixels) of a region to be considered a hole.
reclass_ratio
1.0
Fill ratio threshold above which a candidate hole is reclassified as
“open.”
6.2.3
Special Cases
Table 6.2: Overview of special cases and their handling by the algorithm.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Case
Descrip-
tion
Cause
Response
(a)
Seg-
mented
hole
Insufficient
Clean-
ing
The min_radius parameter (Table 6.1) ensures that the
largest part of the hole is used to fit the enclosing circle, yield-
ing the most accurate result.
(b)
Large Burr
Insufficient
Clean-
ing
Since the smallest enclosing circle is fitted to the external con-
tour, the presence of the burr is handled correctly and the hole
registers with a low fill ratio.
(c)
Very Burry
Insufficient
Clean-
ing
This hole type is handled just like cases (a) and (b), although
if the largest contour is small enough, accuracy may suffer.
(d)
Closed
Burr
Insufficient
Clean-
ing
Handled in the same way as case (a).
(e)
Mostly
obscured
or blocked
Failed Operation or
Misalignment
The binarisation will result in most of the grey areas being
counted as open parts of the hole, but in general, misaligned
holes cannot be accurately measured.
(f)
Over-
shadowed
Failed Operation or
Misalignment
The hole contour is entirely visible, but some obstruction casts
shadows through the hole. Since the image is binarised be-
fore processing, this case is handled correctly.
(g)
Cut off by
FOV
Incorrect timing
The ROI criterion introduced in Chapter 6.2.2 will not log data
from this hole until it is fully visible.
(h)
Closed
Hole
Failed Operation
Search grid is aligned along all open holes. If no hole is found
along grid nodes, the hole is registered as closed.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
51
==PAGE:60==
Table 6.2 shows some non-standard hole types (some of which were discussed in Chap-
ter 6.2.2) and details their handling.
6.3
Results
Table 6.3 shows part of the code’s output for a single scanned row along the flask’s cir-
cumferential direction. Note that the accuracy of these results has not yet been verified.
Time and planning constraints meant that the validation and the establishment of a trace-
ability chain for this setup are beyond what could be accomplished in this thesis.
However, an estimate of the largest uncertainty contributor can be made as follows. Let
rpx be the radius of the fitted circle in pixels; then the fill ratio F is
F = Nhole
Ncircle
= Nhole
πr2px
(6.1)
Assume that the binarisation introduces an uncertainty of δpx ≈1 at the boundary, i.e.
± 1 px may be wrongly inside or outside the contour. This depends on bin_threshold
(Table 6.1). The number of misclassified pixels along the circumference is then
∆Nhole = perimeter in px · δpx = (2πrpx)δpx
(6.2)
This leads to a fill ratio error, ∆F
∆F = ∆Nhole
πr2px
≈2πrpxδpx
πr2px
= 2δpx
rpx
(6.3)
Which at an average hole radius of 30 px corresponds to a fill ratio error of around 6.7 %.
It should be noted that this is a very rough estimate since burrs significantly extend the
perimeter of a given hole. Conversely, considering the images are overexposed and the
edges appear very sharp, δpx is likely much less than one.
Table 6.3: Inspection result along a single row in the circumferential direction, on the
surface of a shell that has not been cleaned post-manufacturing. A total of 119 holes
were machined along the observed path. Columns 2 and 3 refer to the measured hole
locations in their respective images. Only parts of the table are shown due to space
constraints.
Hole
ID
i
[px]
j
[px]
Radius
[px]
Fill Ratio
[%]
Status
Image ID
Frame
ID
0
89
301
30
89
Open
130155866_0088
88
1
90
323
32
93
Open
130155866_0097
97
2
90
319
32
94
Open
130155866_0105
105
3
92
315
33
92
Open
130155866_0113
113
4
93
313
35
92
Open
130155866_0121
121
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
53
93
314
20
0
Closed
130155866_0518
518
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
118
81
336
20
91
Open
130155866_1047
1047
52
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:61==
6.4
Partial Conclusion and Discussion
It was demonstrated that the shadowgraph-like measurement system, initially developed
for tool measurement, also has applications in quality control. A near real-time computer
vision application capable of characterising extremely large quantities of machined holes
was successfully developed. The system can handle special cases effectively and cor-
rectly locate and count holes.
The accuracy of the system was not quantified, but an estimate for the error in the fill
ratio of around 6.7 % was made. Since the camera is uncalibrated in this application, lens
distortions are not accounted for; however, the TV distortion of 0.1 % (Table A.1) would
have a negligible effect on this measurement.
As discussed in the previous chapters, the depth of field of the lens is very shallow at
0.4 mm. In this application that may be an issue since this lies significantly below the shells
thickness of 3 mm, meaning that burrs, depending on their location in a given hole may
not be equally in focus. Since blur causes the intensity curve around an edge to widen,
the error introduced during binarisation may increase. A standard lens was evaluated
for use in the tool measurement system in Appendix A. It was discarded in that context;
however, its larger depth of field could be an advantage in this application. The proposed
algorithm also has a failure mode that is currently not accounted for. If a series of closed
holes appear and the field of view is entirely black, fitting of the search grid fails, and the
closed holes are miscounted. There is no algorithmic way of solving this issue without
establishing a link between the orientation of the flask and a given frame, which would
significantly increase complexity. Using a standard lens with a wider field of view could
alleviate this issue.
While using a camera to characterise complex hole patterns is, in theory, very effective,
doing so in situ proved extremely difficult. Mounting the camera on the spindle and align-
ing it with the shell is highly time-consuming and challenging. The setup prevents any
machining from taking place without significant operator intervention and near complete
disassembly of the setup.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
53
==PAGE:62==
7
Discussion
The developed on-machine camera calibration approach, coupled with the window match-
ing edge detection technique, was shown to be functional but is severely inefficient. While
it should be possible to improve the calculation time associated with comparing tool edge
profiles with the reference profiles, the data-heavy nature of the calibration procedure is
problematic. Acquiring an uncompressed image every 100 nm of displacement in three
directions across the sensor in practice produces around 100 GB of data. If the edge
localisation resolution of the system were to be improved, e.g., to 50 nm, the data load
would double. Testing showed that window sizes of around 10 px are ideal, which means
most of the data acquired during calibration is discarded after acquisition. The possibility
of only activating 10 px (+ some safety margin) around where the edge is expected to be
during a calibration pass was investigated. The chosen camera does not natively support
this functionality, and finding a way to implement it was beyond the scope of this thesis.
If it is possible to dynamically adjust the camera’s region of interest to a narrow window
around a moving edge, the data load could be reduced dramatically. Implementing this
would also facilitate capturing images in 10 or 12 bit resolution, which may have a positive
effect on accuracy.
The accuracy of the runout measurements could not be adequately determined in this
work. The accuracy of the radius measurements can be well estimated in reference to
the off-machine measurements of the square artefact from Shaheen [8]. However, for
the runout, no good reference exists. An attempt to measure runout using a confocal
chromatic probe was made; however, as mentioned in Chapter 5.3 and Appendix B, the
method is flawed in that the measurement plane is not easily identified and that the spot
size is larger than the corner radii of the artefact. The runout validation method could
potentially be improved by using a confocal probe with a smaller spot size and by utilising
the camera to align the spot at an axial level corresponding to a known pixel row.
The effects of the improvements made to the illumination system (Chapter 3.1), such as
switching to an LED with a shorter wavelength, controlled flickering via an LED driver and
the development of an illumination correction method, were not related to the system’s
metrological capabilities. It is currently unclear to what extent these improvements affect
measurement accuracy or repeatability. The hardware changes were proven to have a
substantial effect on the sharpness of the tool edge, which theoretically improves accu-
racy; however, this needs to be proven to justify the changes.
A similar argument can be made for the dictionary edge detection principle as a whole. To
justify the computational cost, it would need to be benchmarked against other advanced
sub-pixel methods. This is not currently done as the method described in Chapter 4 only
indirectly establishes the camera’s intrinsic and extrinsic parameters. A direct pixel-to-
coordinate map would need to be established to facilitate direct comparison between the
chosen method and more conventional sub-pixel approaches.
More rigid fixturing of the camera and illumination could significantly improve the repeata-
bility and alignment of the system; however, as discussed in Chapter 5.3, the primary
contributor to the uncertainty is a systematic error. This needs to be addressed first. At
the time of writing, the source of the bias is unclear, but the deviations from linear trans-
lation (expressed as RMS deviation in Table 5.1) are likely a major contributor. To add to
this, any amount of wobble experienced by the optical parts during the calibration passes
54
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:63==
would result in the intensity profiles being allocated to incorrect physical positions. It was
shown that the different edges of the artefact have different biases. Since no relation-
ship between the bias and the edges could be identified, the expanded uncertainty of the
developed system must be equal to that of the least accurately measured edge (11.4 µm).
The quality of the 3D reconstruction of the cutting edges in Chapter 3.4.3 is not just de-
pendent on the accuracy of the radius measurements. It also heavily depends on very
exact knowledge of the spindle speed, which could not be validated during this work.
While fluctuations in speed due to the machine’s speed controller could be ruled out as a
significant source of error, knowledge of the true average speed is critical. The validation
approach presented in Chapter 5.3 does not account for incorrect angular alignment of
the measurement points, which may be significant if the readings from the ServoViewer
are inaccurate.
The validation of the machine positioning systems is inherently flawed. The confocal
probe should be aligned to a flat plane to prevent the geometry of the moving surface
from affecting the measurement. The assumption in the validation procedure, as it is, is
that the confocal alignment method is so robust that the curvature of the gauge pin would
have a negligible effect. The analysis validating whether the feed during calibration is
constant in Chapter 5.1 assumes that the feed error is not direction-dependent. This is
partly reasonable, since the feed error is likely dominated by errors in the drive system,
which should be the same in both directions (backlash would have no effect since linearity
is only evaluated between 5 and 95 % of travel). Nevertheless, more robust axis qualifica-
tion procedures exist, and the presented method should only be treated as an indication
of what is possible. Since the set-feed was shown not to be reliable, a 3 mm gauge bar
was characterised on a CMM and used to correct the curve separation. However, the
expanded uncertainty of the characterisation is significant at 1.1 µm (k = 2 for a 95.45 %
confidence interval). This introduces a large systematic error in the scaling factor used
to convert the indices of the reference profiles to physical positions. A more well-defined
artefact should be used to correct for feed errors.
7.1
Technological Readiness Level (TRL)
The technological readiness level of the developed system is evaluated to level 5 ac-
cording to Innovationsfonden [83] (Table 7.1). Future work must also focus on reducing
systematic errors in measurement and improving the hardware of the prototype, including
environmental protection and enhanced fixturing. A digital tool cleaning solution will also
need to be developed. As discussed in Chapter 5.3, chips stuck to the cutting edges dra-
matically affect the measurement quality, and a system to either compensate for or warn
of this must be developed.
Table 7.1:
Evaluation of technological readiness level according to Innovations-
fonden [83]. Levels 1-4 complete, level 5 is ongoing.
TRL Objective
Status
Missing
5
Component
validation
in
relevant environment
A
prototype
system
is
built, and basic functional-
ity is demonstrated inside
a CNC machine.
No successful compara-
tive tests have been run on
real cutting tools yet.
6
Component
validation
in
operational environment
Incomplete.
System
lacks
environ-
mental
protection
and
real-world,
production-
integrated tests.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
55
==PAGE:64==
8
Conclusion
A full prototype optical measurement system has been successfully built and tested for two
different applications inside a FANUC Robodrill αD21LiB5ADV. The system was demon-
strated to be capable of reconstructing 3D point clouds of rotationally asymmetric cutting
tool geometries. Its metrological performance was evaluated via measurement of a cali-
brated artefact according to ISO 15530 part 3 to have an accuracy UM = 11.4 µm and a
repeatability of 0.075 µm (at k = 2, 95.45 % CI), falling short of the target and tool preset-
ters like the Conoptica CU2 Tool (UM = 6.9 µm). However, the accuracy of the system
is comparable to some of the more complex tool measurement systems presented in
various research papers (Chapter 2.3). With some modifications, it has the potential to
enable surface generation and wear monitoring in the future. The observed bias is largely
systematic, which must be corrected for in future work. As a part of the development of
the measurement system, the thesis demonstrated that a camera can be calibrated using
CNC constant feed translation in a manner robust enough to facilitate accurate sub-pixel
measurement, provided that a known artefact is available to correct for feed deviations.
On-machine alignment methods for 2D cameras and confocal probes were developed
and successfully deployed to facilitate measurement and validation processes. This in-
cluded the qualification of the machine’s drive systems, which showed that while the feed
is approximately constant, it is not accurately measured by the controller.
56
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
The Global Goals. Goal 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure. URL: https://
globalgoals.org/goals/9-industry-innovation-and-infrastructure/.
[2]
Palbit. “How to Take Your Machining Capabilities to the Next Level”. In: Palbit
(2023). URL: https://www.palbit.pt/en/how-to-take-your-machining-capabilities-
to-the-next-level.
[3]
W. Li, Y.B. Guo, and M. Barkey. “Tool Wear Influence on Surface Integrity and
Fatigue Life of Hard Milled Surfaces”. In: Jan. 2011. DOI: 10.1115/IJTC2011-61264.
[4]
Markus Friedrich et al. “Towards Sustainable Machining: Synthetic Data Generation
for Efficient Optical Tool Wear Monitoring via Generative Adversarial Networks”. In:
Sustainable Manufacturing as a Driver for Growth. Lecture Notes in Mechanical
Engineering. Springer, 2025, pp. 544–552. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-77429-4\_60.
URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-77429-4_60.
[5]
Luigi Bidoia. “How the Chinese Market Influences the EU Market: The Case of Tung-
sten and Its Compounds”. In: PricePedia (June 2024). URL: https://www.pricepedia.
it/en/magazine/article/2024/06/10/how-the-chinese-market-influences-the-eu-
market-the-case-of-tungsten-and-its-compounds/.
[6]
Directorate-General for Trade and Economic Security. EU renews duties on dumped
metal compound from China, helping increase sustainability and reduce depen-
dence on imports of critical raw material. Accessed: 2025-05-31. Aug. 2023. URL:
https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/news/eu-renews-duties-dumped-metal-compound-
china-helping-increase-sustainability-and-reduce-dependence-2023-08-09_en.
[7]
Giuliano Bissacco. Tool Wear 2: Process Performance and Measurement. Pow-
erPoint presentation at DTU Construct. Course 41749: Precision Machining. Oct.
2024.
[8]
Amrozia Shaheen and Giuliano Bissacco. “Metrological characterisation of tool pre-
setting optical systems based on 2D imaging”. In: Measurement 228 (2024), p. 114327.
ISSN: 0263-2241. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2024.114327. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0263224124002112.
[9]
Bradley Betts, Qingyang Wu, and Chinedum E. Okwudire. “On-machine 3D recon-
struction of endmill tool wear using a laser line scanner”. In: Procedia CIRP 128
(2025), pp. 617–622. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . procir . 2025 . 05 . 118. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212827125001477.
[10]
Quentin Salaets et al. “Optical Cutting Tool Wear Monitoring by 3D Geometry Re-
construction”. In: Proceedings of the European Conference of the Prognostics and
Health Management Society. Vol. 7. 1. 2022. URL: https://papers.phmsociety.org/
index.php/phme/article/view/3351.
[11]
Amrozia Shaheen and Giuliano Bissacco. Performance characterization of camera-
based on-machine tool presetting and evaluation system. Presented at the 71st
CIRP General Assembly, Bilbao, Spain. STC P Technical Presentation, August 26,
2022. 2022. URL: https://www.cirp.net/.
[12]
ZOLLER GmbH & Co. KG. Presetting and Measuring Machines. Accessed: 2025-
05-18. URL: https://www.zoller.info/us/products/presetting-measuring.
[13]
HAIMER GmbH. Tool Presetting Technology - HAIMER Microset. Accessed: 2025-
05-18. URL: https://haimer.com/en/products/presetting-technology.
[14]
KELCH GmbH. Tool Presetters. Accessed: 2025-05-18. URL: https://www.kelch.
de/en/products/tool-presetters/.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
57
==PAGE:66==
[15]
Blum-Novotest GmbH. LaserControl – Laser Measuring Systems for CNC Machin-
ing Centres. Accessed: 2025-05-18. 2025. URL: https://www.blum-novotest.com/
en/products/measuring-components/lasercontrol/.
[16]
Mitutoyo Corporation. Laser Scan Micrometer. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025-05-18.
Mitutoyo Corporation, 2022. URL: https://www.mitutoyo.com/webfoo/wp-content/
uploads/2101_Laser-Scan-Mic.pdf.
[17]
Conoptica. Why camera-based measurement for machine tools? Accessed: 2025-
05-15. Aug. 2024. URL: https://conoptica.com/2024/08/22/why-camera-based-
measurement-for-machine-tools/.
[18]
Conoptica AS. Geometry Measuring Device - CU2 Tool. Accessed: 2025-05-15.
2025. URL: https://www.directindustry.com/prod/conoptica-as/product-83705-
2271981.html.
[19]
Blum-Novotest GmbH. LC50-DIGILOG: Premium Laser Measuring System for Tool
Measurement and Monitoring. Accessed: 2025-05-18. URL: https://www.blum-
novotest.com/us/products/measuring-components/lasercontrol/lc50-digilog/.
[20]
Conoptica. CU2 Tool. Accessed: 2025-05-17. 2025. URL: https://conoptica.com/
products/machine-tool/cu2-tool.
[21]
Elbo Controlli. Advantages of Contact-less Tool Presetters. Accessed: 2025-05-18.
2025. URL: https://www.elbocontrolli.it/en/announcements/blog/109-advantages-of-
contact-less-tool-presetters.
[22]
Presetters Produce Profit. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025-05-18. BIG DAISHOWA, 2017.
URL: https : / / www . bigdaishowa . com / sites / default / files / documents / 2017 - 09 /
presetters-produce-profit.pdf.
[23]
DR. JOHANNES HEIDENHAIN GmbH. Product Information: VT 121, VT 122 with
VTC. Tech. rep. 1324220 · 03 · B · 02. Accessed: 2025-05-17. DR. JOHANNES
HEIDENHAIN GmbH, Sept. 2024. URL: https://www.heidenhain.com/fileadmin/
pdf/en/01_Products/Produktinformationen/PI_VT121_ID1324220_en.pdf.
[24]
Marposs S.p.A. VISUAL TOOL SETTER FOR CNC MACHINES (VTS). Tech. rep.
D6C08800G0. Accessed: 2025-05-17. Marposs S.p.A., Jan. 2025. URL: https://
www.marposs.com/media/5110/d-1/t-file/D6C08800G0.pdf.
[25]
KEYENCE International Belgium NV/SA. Optical Micrometer / Digital Micrometer.
Accessed: 2025-05-17. 2025. URL: https://www.keyence.eu/products/measure/
micrometer/.
[26]
Xi Zhang et al. “A study on automatic on-machine inspection system for 3D model-
ing and measurement of cutting tools”. In: Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 24.1
(2013), pp. 71–86. DOI: 10.1007/s10845-011-0540-6.
[27]
Wenqi Wang et al. “Precise measurement of geometric and physical quantities in
cutting tools inspection and condition monitoring: A review”. In: Chinese Journal of
Aeronautics 37.4 (2024), pp. 23–53. DOI: 10.1016/j.cja.2023.08.011.
[28]
Wei Cheng et al. “A machine vision-based dimension measurement method of shaft
parts with sub-pixel edge”. In: Measurement Science and Technology 36.5 (2025),
p. 055026. DOI: 10.1088/1361-6501/adcc47.
[29]
Qiulin Hou, Jie Sun, and Panling Huang. “A novel algorithm for tool wear online
inspection based on machine vision”. In: The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology (2018). DOI: 10.1007/s00170-018-3080-9.
[30]
Zhenyun Duan et al. “High Precision Edge Detection Algorithm for Mechanical Parts”.
In: Measurement Science Review 18.2 (2018), pp. 65–71. DOI: 10.1515/msr-2018-
0010.
[31]
Opto Engineering. Monochrome vs Color Sensors. Accessed: 2025-05-17. 2025.
URL: https://www.opto-e.com/en/basics/monochrome-vs-color-sensors.
58
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:67==
[32]
Edmund Optics. Imaging Electronics 101: Camera Resolution for Improved Imaging
System Performance. Accessed: 2025-06-01. Edmund Optics. URL: https://www.
edmundoptics.com/knowledge-center/application-notes/imaging/camera-resolution-
for-improved-imaging-system-performance/.
[33]
Edmund Optics. The Airy Disk and Diffraction Limit. Accessed: 2025-06-01. Ed-
mund Optics. URL: https://www.edmundoptics.com/knowledge-center/application-
notes/imaging/limitations-on-resolution-and-contrast-the-airy-disk/.
[34]
Kamal Nasrollahi and Thomas B. Moeslund. “Super-resolution: A comprehensive
survey”. In: Machine Vision and Applications 25.6 (2014), pp. 1423–1468. DOI: 10.
1007/s00138-014-0623-4.
[35]
Baraka Maiseli and Abdi T. Abdalla. “Seven decades of image super-resolution:
achievements, challenges, and opportunities”. In: EURASIP Journal on Advances
in Signal Processing 2024.78 (2024). Accessed: 2025-06-01. DOI: 10.1186/s13634-
024-01170-y. URL: https://asp-eurasipjournals.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/
s13634-024-01170-y.
[36]
Physik Instrumente (PI). Imaging Resolution Enhancement with Pixel Sub-Stepping.
Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025-06-01. Physik Instrumente (PI) GmbH & Co. KG, 2008.
URL: https://www.pi-usa.us/fileadmin/user_upload/pi_us/files/catalogs/Imaging_
Resolution_Enhancement_Pixel_sub-stepping_C.pdf.
[37]
Stefan Vorndran and Scott Jordan. “Fast Motion Systems Improve Image Stability”.
In: Vision Systems Design (Jan. 2017). Accessed: 2025-06-01. URL: https://www.
vision-systems.com/home/article/16737646/fast-motion-systems-improve-image-
stability.
[38]
Edmund Optics. Imaging Electronics 101: Understanding Camera Sensors for Ma-
chine Vision Applications. Accessed: 2025-06-01. 2025. URL: https://www.edmundoptics.
com/knowledge-center/application-notes/imaging/understanding-camera-sensors-for-
machine-vision-applications/.
[39]
Robert B. Fisher. Sub-pixel Estimation. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025-05-17. Univer-
sity of Edinburgh, 2000. URL: https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/PAPERS/spedraft.
pdf.
[40]
David J. Heeger. Linear Systems. Lecture notes, New York University. n.d. URL:
https://www.cns.nyu.edu/~david/handouts/linear-systems/linear-systems.html.
[41]
European Machine Vision Association. EMVA 1288 Standard for Characterization of
Image Sensors and Cameras. Release 3.0. European Machine Vision Association
(EMVA). Nov. 2010. URL: https://www.emva.org/wp-content/uploads/EMVA1288-
3.0.pdf.
[42]
Djemel Ziou and Salvatore Tabbone. “Edge Detection Techniques - An Overview”.
In: 8 (June 2000).
[43]
P. K. Singh, V. K. Singh, and R. K. Singh. “A Hybrid Approach Using Sobel and
Canny Operator for Digital Image Edge Detection”. In: 2017 International Confer-
ence on Computing, Communication and Automation (ICCCA). 2017, pp. 1–5. DOI:
10.1109/CCAA.2017.8229838. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7938931.
[44]
Fernando Calamante. “Arterial Input Function in Perfusion MRI: A Comprehensive
Review”. In: Progress in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 74 (2013),
pp. 1–32. DOI: 10.1016/j.pnmrs.2013.04.002. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnmrs.
2013.04.002.
[45]
Anna Fabijańska. “A Survey of Subpixel Edge Detection Methods for Images of
Heat-Emitting Metal Specimens”. In: Metrology and Measurement Systems 19.4
(2012), pp. 695–708. DOI: 10.2478/v10006-012-0052-3.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
59
==PAGE:68==
[46]
John Canny. “A Computational Approach to Edge Detection”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 8.6 (1986), pp. 679–698.
[47]
K. Bala Krishnan, Shiva Prakash Ranga, and Nageswara Guptha. “A Survey on
Different Edge Detection Techniques for Image Segmentation”. In: Indian Journal
of Science and Technology 10.4 (2017), pp. 1–9. DOI: 10.17485/ijst/2017/v10i4/
108963.
[48]
Miroslav Hagara and Peter Kulla. “Edge Detection with Sub-pixel Accuracy Based
on Approximation of Edge with Erf Function”. In: Radioengineering 20.2 (2011),
pp. 516–524.
[49]
X. Bai and F. Zhou. “Edge Detection Based on Mathematical Morphology and Iter-
ative Thresholding”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computa-
tional Intelligence and Security. Guangzhou, China, 2006, pp. 1849–1852.
[50]
Ping Zhao, Wenzhen Zhao, and Zhenyun Duan. “A Calibration Method for High Pre-
cision Vision Measurement System”. In: Applied Mechanics and Materials 543–547
(2014), pp. 1005–1008. DOI: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMM.543-547.1005.
URL: https : / / citeseerx . ist . psu . edu / document ? repid = rep1 & type = pdf & doi =
26f44309aff10589305bbeaf022756f41bf41e22.
[51]
Dot Vision. Checkerboard Series – Chrome on Glass Calibration Target. 2025. URL:
https://www.dot-vision.com/Product/20171115202253.html.
[52]
Zhengyou Zhang. “A Flexible New Technique for Camera Calibration”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 22.11 (2000), pp. 1330–
1334. DOI: 10.1109/34.888718.
[53]
Calib.io. Calibration Patterns Explained. Accessed: 2025-05-18. 2018. URL: https:
//calib.io/blogs/knowledge-base/calibration-patterns-explained.
[54]
MathWorks. Calibration Patterns. Accessed: 2025-05-18. 2025. URL: https://se.
mathworks.com/help/vision/ug/calibration-patterns.html.
[55]
Peter Carr, Yaser Sheikh, and Iain Matthews. “Point-less Calibration: Camera Pa-
rameters from Gradient-Based Alignment to Edge Images”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). IEEE, 2012,
pp. 2654–2661. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2012.6247960. URL: https://iainm.com/assets/
pdf/Carr-2012.pdf.
[56]
Zhengyou Zhang. “Camera Calibration”. In: Handbook of Mathematical Models in
Computer Vision. Ed. by Nikos Paragios, Yunmei Chen, and Olivier Faugeras. Springer,
2006, pp. 85–105. DOI: 10.1007/0-387-28831-7_6. URL: https://people.cs.rutgers.
edu/~elgammal/classes/cs534/lectures/CameraCalibration-book-chapter.pdf.
[57]
Jingge Zhang et al. “Comprehensive Review of Camera Calibration Methods for
Three-dimensional Imaging Technology”. In: International Journal of Mechanical
and Electrical Engineering 2.3 (2024), pp. 69–76. DOI: 10.62051/ijmee.v2n3.08.
URL: https://doi.org/10.62051/ijmee.v2n3.08.
[58]
Basler AG. Basler ace 2 a2A1920-160umBAS. USB 3.0 monochrome camera with
Sony IMX392 CMOS sensor, 1920×1200 resolution, 160 fps, C-mount, global shut-
ter. 2025. URL: https://www.baslerweb.com/en/shop/a2a1920-160umbas/.
[59]
VS-TCH Series. 2020. URL: https : / / vst . co . jp / en / machine - vision - lenses - en /
telecentric-en/vs-tch-series/.
[60]
Moritz Genzwürker. Development of a camera system for on-machine measure-
ments. Feasibility Study, Special Course. DTU Construct, Department of Mechani-
cal Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2025.
[61]
Kayla Ye. Basic Information of The Visible Light. AGC Lighting Blog. Nov. 2022.
URL: https://www.agcled.com/blog/basic-information-of-the-visible-light.html.
60
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:69==
[62]
Alan Gatherer. The Cramer Rao Bound for Discrete-Time Edge Position Estimation.
Tech. rep. CSL-TR-93-560. Technical Report. Stanford, CA: Computer Systems
Laboratory, Departments of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Stanford
University, 1993. URL: http://i.stanford.edu/pub/cstr/reports/csl/tr/93/560/CSL-
TR-93-560.pdf.
[63]
Roithner LaserTechnik. EU-38-TTL Technical Data. June 2013. URL: https://www.
roithner-laser.com/datasheets/ld_driver/eu-38-ttl.pdf.
[64]
ZEISS Industrial Quality Solutions. White Light vs Blue Light 3D Scanning Tech-
nologies. Accessed: 2025-06-05. 2025. URL: https://www.zeiss.com/metrology/us/
explore/topics/white-light-vs-blue-light-3d-scanning.html.
[65]
SEG Wiki. Frequency Aliasing. Accessed: 2025-06-05. 2025. URL: https://wiki.seg.
org/wiki/Frequency_aliasing.
[66]
FANUC Corporation. FANUC SERVO VIEWER - OPERATOR’S MANUAL. Manual
No. B-65444EN/01. FANUC Corporation. 2016.
[67]
Micro-Epsilon GmbH & Co. KG. Micro-Epsilon confocalDT IFS2405 Universal Con-
focal Chromatic Sensor - CAD / Technical Drawing. Includes STEP/3D model for
universal confocalDT IFS2405 sensor. 2025. URL: https://www.micro-epsilon.com/
distance-sensors/confocal-sensors/sensors/universal-sensors/?sLang=en.
[68]
Moukthika. Autofocus using OpenCV: A Comparative Study of Focus Measures for
Sharpness Assessment. Accessed: 2025-06-09. Mar. 2025. URL: https://opencv.
org / blog / autofocus - using - opencv - a - comparative - study - of - focus - measures - for -
sharpness-assessment/.
[69]
Eric W. Weisstein. L1-Norm. MathWorld–A Wolfram Web Resource. Accessed:
2025-06-09. 2025. URL: https://mathworld.wolfram.com/L1-Norm.html.
[70]
Teledyne Vision Solutions. New Era in Dynamic Range and Linearity for Scientific
CMOS Cameras. Technical Note. Teledyne Vision Solutions (Princeton Instruments
/ Teledyne Scientific Imaging), 2025. URL: https://www.teledynevisionsolutions.com/
learn/learning-center/scientific-imaging/new-era-in-dynamic-range-and-linearity-for-
scientific-cmos-cameras/.
[71]
Basler AG. Basler ace 2 a2A1920-160umBAS USB 3.0 Camera—EMVA 1288 Datasheet.
Includes sensor linearity (±0.369% to +0.545%) in 5–95% range. Basler AG. Ahrens-
burg, Germany, 2025. URL: https : / / assets - ctf . baslerweb . com / dg51pdwahxgw /
2HwtoPqIOWQ9n2NvvlPYcy/7aa2def3cca6fb690a53d41d47adbfe4/BD00159101_daA1920-
160um_EMVA_Standard1288.pdf.
[72]
Wikipedia contributors. Optical transfer function. Accessed: 2025-06-14. URL: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_transfer_function.
[73]
Selva Prabhakaran. “Cosine Similarity - Understanding the Math and How it Works”.
In: Machine Learning Plus (2017). URL: https://www.machinelearningplus.com/nlp/
cosine-similarity/.
[74]
Feng Li and Jiyu Li. “Edge Detection of Motion-Blurred Images based on GANs”. In:
33rd British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC). London, UK: BMVA Press, 2022.
URL: https://bmvc2022.mpi-inf.mpg.de/0266.pdf.
[75]
Fanuc RoboDrill 21-Tool Long Bed Advanced. Accessed: 2025-06-21. 2025. URL:
https://www.methodsmachine.com/machines/robodrill-%CE%B1-dib-series-long-bed/.
[76]
Giuliano Bissacco. Machine Tool Components. PowerPoint presentation for Course
41749: Precision Machining. Oct. 2024.
[77]
Matthias Geiselhart et al. “Laser triangulation-based thermal characterization of
machine tool spindles according to ISO 230-3”. In: European Society for Preci-
sion Engineering and Nanotechnology, Conference Proceedings: 24th International
Conference and Exhibition, EUSPEN 2024. DTU Orbit: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
61
==PAGE:70==
publications/48e92eb3-5335-416d-ba7e-b5e07e07a173. euspen. June 2024, pp. 563–
566.
[78]
Micro-Epsilon. IFS2407 High precision sensors. Online. Accessed: 2025-06-21. 2025.
URL: https://www.micro-epsilon.com/distance-sensors/confocal-sensors/sensors/high-
precision-sensors/?sLang=en.
[79]
ISO 15530-3:2011. Geometrical Product Specifications (GPS) – Coordinate mea-
suring machines (CMM): Technique for determining the uncertainty of measurement
— Part 3: Use of calibrated workpieces or standards. International Organization for
Standardization, 2011.
[80]
Amrozia Shaheen et al. “Metrological characteristics of an on-machine tool opti-
cal measuring system”. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Through-life Engineering Services – TESConf2022. Cranfield, UK, Nov. 2022.
[81]
Basler AG. Basler ace 2 a2A1920-160umBAS USB3.0 Camera CAD / Technical
Drawing. Online document (CAD / Technical Drawing). Download from Basler “Doc-
uments” section for model a2A1920-160umBAS. Mar. 2025. URL: https://www.
baslerweb.com/en/downloads/documents/994069410/.
[82]
Microsoft Research. Image Composite Editor. Accessed: 2025-05-14. n.d. URL:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/image-composite-editor/.
[83]
Technology Readiness Levels (TRL). Tech. rep. PDF document, updated 7 March
2019. Innovation Fund Denmark, Mar. 2019. URL: https://innovationsfonden.dk/
sites/default/files/2019-03/technology_readiness_levels_-_trl.pdf.
[84]
OPT Lenses. 5MP Fixed Focal Length Lenses. Datasheet. OPT Machine Vision.
2021. URL: https://cdn.website-editor.net/b76e154a6cdd48bd9e20ecf74a830582/
files/uploaded/5MP.pdf.
[85]
Waveshare. 100X Industrial Microscope Lens, C/CS-Mount, Compatible With Rasp-
berry Pi HQ Camera. Accessed: 27 May 2025. URL: https://www.waveshare.com/
100x-microscope-lens-for-pi.htm.
[86]
Micro-Epsilon Messtechnik GmbH & Co. KG. Operating Instructions: confocalDT
2421/2422/2465/2466. Available online: https://www.micro-epsilon.com/. Orten-
burg, Germany, 2023.
[87]
ZEISS Industrial Quality Solutions. ZEISS PRISMO Family. Accessed: 2025-06-
20. 2025. URL: https://www.zeiss.com/metrology/en/systems/cmms/bridge-type-
cmms/prismo-family/zeiss-prismo.html.
[88]
Blankenhorn GmbH. Lehren Katalog. Stand: 10/2019. Available from: https://www.
blankenhorn.com. Blankenhorn Messtechnik. 2019.
62
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:71==
A
Lens Evaluation
(a) Conoptica
(b) VS-TCH
(c) OPT+35 mm
(d) OPT+40 mm
Figure A.1: Comparison of Optical Systems. Images b)-c) were captured using identical
camera settings and constant collimated white light at 0.2 W.
Two application-specific lenses were purchased in connection with this project. A low-
distortion telecentric lens (VS-TCH) and a standard lens (OPT) with matching extension
tubes to emulate a macro-lens. Figure A.1 shows an image of a tool taken with each lens
and an image taken using the Conoptica CU2 Tool optical tool presetter for reference.
The photos taken with the telecentric lens stand out as significantly darker compared to
those taken with the conventional lens. This does not necessarily mean that its optical
efficiency is worse; more likely, it means that a telecentric light source will be needed for
it to operate at peak performance.
Increasing the length of the extension tubes on the standard lens decreases its working
distance, thereby increasing the resolving power. However, as Figure A.1d shows, this
comes at the expense of depth of field and the amount of light transmitted to the sensor.
Table A.1 lists some of the relevant specifications of both lenses, as well as a low-cost
microscope lens that was purchased during the feasibility study conducted before this
project [60]. The latter was immediately discarded as it was impossible to transmit enough
light through to the camera sensor with the available LEDs at low shutter speeds. On top
of this, its distortion is not competitive with the other two lenses. The telecentric lens was
chosen despite being nearly three times as expensive as the standard lens option. This
was partially due to its lower distortion (though good calibration of the OPT lens could
compensate somewhat), but primarily because it does not suffer from perspective errors.
Features appearing larger or smaller depending on their position relative to the focal plane
would prove detrimental in a tool measurement application.
Table A.1: Comparison of lens options for optical edge measurement [59, 84, 85]. 1 Mea-
sured with collimated white light at 0.2 W (Imax–Imin/Cmax). 2 Including extension tubes.
Metric
Telecentric Lens
OPT Lens
100× Microscope Lens
Resolution
2.35 µm px−1
4.95 µm px−1
3.65 µm px−1
Contrast1
0.529
1.000
0.000
Distortion
0.01 %
0.05 %
−0.1 %
Depth of field
0.4 mm
0.25 mm
N/A
Magnification stability
100.0 %
99.773 %
N/A
Cost
626.85 EUR
199 EUR (+37.43 EUR 2)
25 EUR
Size (length)
74.4 mm
51.6 mm (+35 mm 2)
112 mm
Working distance
65 mm
94 mm
30 mm
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
63
==PAGE:72==
With the resolution stated in Table A.1, the physical dimensions of the field of view are:
FOVi = 1936 px · 2.3 px µm−1 ≈4.45 mm
FOVj = 1216 px · 2.3 px µm−1 ≈2.80 mm
The maximum distortion across the telecentric lens is then:
Distortion =
q
FOV 2
i + FOV 2
j · 0.01 % = 5.26 µm
Compared to the 200 nm accuracy target, this is significant; the lens must therefore be
carefully calibrated.
64
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:73==
B
Confocal Runout Measurement
To validate the runout measurements on the 3 mm gauge pin in Chapter 5.3, the confocal
chromatic sensor, set up as in Figure 3.12 and aligned as in Chapter 3.3.3, was used to
provide a reference measurement. Figure B.1 shows the results of the runout measure-
ments on the gauge pin (a) and the square artefact (b). Both artefacts were measured
approximately 0.261 mm and 1.261 mm from their bottom surfaces. In the experiment, the
bottom was identified by moving the spindle in the Z direction and finding the point where
the sensor signal cuts out. The spindle axis was aligned with the optical axis by finding
the minimum distance to the gauge bar and the circular section of the square artefact.
The signal’s noise inherently limits both alignment steps, but no better strategy has been
developed at the time of writing.
In the case of the gauge pin (Figure B.1a), the runout is expected to behave as a pure
sine wave. Fluctuations within the wave must be caused by form error in the pin or speed
fluctuations. To quantify the runout, a sine wave is fitted to the maxima and minima of the
signal via least squares. The runout is then computed from the amplitude. In the case
of the square bar, extracting the runout is slightly more difficult. The confocal signal (Fig-
ure B.1b) observes the passing of all four edges within a single period. The runout is then
extracted from the distance between the tallest and shortest valleys observed during a
single revolution in the signal. Computing the runout in this manner inherently assumes
its direction to be aligned with one of the four edges. This is almost certainly untrue, but
since the camera system makes the same assumption, this measurement can serve as
a solid reference.
In both measurements, more than 1000 revolutions were analysed to improve the robust-
ness of the measurement. The results of the tests have been summarised in Table B.1.
It should be noted that the runout measurement procedure on the square bar is inherently
flawed. According to Shaheen [8], the four edge radii of the square artefact fall between
5.67 µm and 9.02 µm. The IFS 2407-3 sensor used during this test has a spot size of
9 µm [78], meaning the measurements are averages across the edge regions and do not
fully capture the extremes of the artefact. This is alleviated somewhat by the fact that all
four edges are similarly affected by this phenomenon, so for a reference measurement,
the results are accurate enough.
Table B.1: Reference measurements for the 3 mm gauge bar and the square artefact
using an IFS 2407-3 confocal chromatic sensor at two measurement planes. The edge
distance measurements for the square artefact are relative to the shortest edge. Both
parts were mounted to the spindle and run at 6366 min−1 and recorded at 30 kHz.
Artefact
Measurement Plane
Runout
Relative Edge Distance [mm]
FR
FL
BR
BL
3 mm Gauge Bar
0.261 mm
18.4 µm
/
/
/
/
1.261 mm
18.4 µm
/
/
/
/
Square Artefact
0.261 mm
23.2 µm
0
0.01440
0.01100
0.02320
1.261 mm
23.7 µm
0
0.01405
0.01123
0.02373
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
65
==PAGE:74==
-12
-6
0
6
12
0
5
10
15
20
25
Conf. Distance [µm]
Time [ms]
Runout
(a)
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
0
5
10
15
20
25
Conf. Distance [µm]
Time [ms]
Runout
Period
(b)
Figure B.1: Mean centered distance measurement of a) the 3 mm gauge bar and b) the
square artefact. Both objects were captured at 6366 min−1 and 30 kHz.
66
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:75==
C
Enhancing Edge Direction Resolution
Motion Direction
IMG 1
IMG 2
IMG 3
Edge
Pixel
Surface
Profile
Figure C.1: Concept for improving the resolution along the edge direction via sub-pixel
stepping with known translation of the spindle.
The subpixel strategy developed in Chapter 4 only applies subpixel refinement in the di-
rection orthogonal to the edge, meaning the resolution along the edge is limited to the
pixel pitch of 2.3 µm. This falls significantly short of the desire to achieve a measurement
resolution of 200 nm in both the axial and radial directions (Table 1.1). To achieve this,
the feasibility of employing the multi-image super-resolution technique, first discussed in
Chapter 2.4, was studied. The process would work as shown in Figure C.1. Without ro-
tation, the tool would be swept in the Z direction at a slow, constant feed such that the
camera can capture overlapping images with offsets smaller than the pixel pitch. Since
each pixel essentially records the average location of the edge over its area, capturing
overlapping areas would make it possible to undo the moving average effect along the
cutting edge. The exact vertical location of the tool in any frame would always be known
since the technique from Chapter 4 also works on the bottom of the tool. It was hypothe-
sised that this would even work with the tool rotating.
To test this idea, the square artefact (Figure 5.6b) was aligned with the measurement
position and oriented such that two of its edges intersect the focal plane. The artefact
was then swept in the −Z direction at 1 mm min−1 with the camera capturing at 83.3 FPS,
which would result in an offset of 200 nm between images. The data was processed using
the Tool Image Processor (Chapter 3.3.2) for three adjacent pixel rows (400-402) and
plotted in Figure C.2. If the concept worked, there should be some agreement between
the patterns picked up by the adjacent rows as the topographical features of the edge
move from pixel to pixel. This does not appear to be the case. The surface roughnesses
were was calculated to Ra values of 0.27 µm, 0.47 µm, and 0.07 µm, in order of ascending
row. The actual roughness in the edge region is Ra 0.38 µm [8], though the roughness
exactly at the edge is unknown. While the measurements are in the correct range, there
appears to be no agreement between the rows.
The figure also reveals a suspicious phenomenon in the distribution of the measurements.
The system has a radial resolution, equal to the curve separation of 100 nm. Inspecting
the profiles, only 2-3 of the possible positions within each signal’s range are hit. In the case
of a true surface profile, fluctuations similar to what is shown in Figure C.1 are expected.
In practice, the signals are indistinguishable from noise. At the time of writing, this concept
has not been advanced beyond what is documented here.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
67
==PAGE:76==
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
15
20
Radial Deviation [µm]
Relative Z position [µm]
Row 400
Row 401
Row 402
Figure C.2: Roughness profile of the edge of the square artefact as measured by three
adjacent pixel rows. Data obtained by analysis of the position deviations in the X (radial)
direction as the artefact was swept in the −Z direction at constant feed.
68
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:77==
D
Setup Procedure & Methods
This appendix is intended to aid future recreation or development of the prototype sys-
tems and experiments detailed in this report. All testing was conducted on a FANUC Ro-
bodrill αD21LiB5ADV.
D.1
Reference Artefacts
Table D.1 provides an overview of all artefacts used during this project. The 3 mm ceramic
gauge block was used during initial development, but is not a necessary part of the current
system.
Table D.1: Reference Artefacts used during calibration and verification.
Item
Manufacturer
Reference
Ø 3 mm Steel Gauge Bar
Kolb & Baumann
KV30-09-001
3 mm Ceramic Gauge Block
Mitutoyo
515-345-60
Square Calibration Artefact
Technical University of Denmark
Shaheen [8]
Ø 14 mm Steel Sphere
Technical University of Denmark
/
D.2
Software
All software used to develop the camera-based measurement system, with the excep-
tion of the FANUC Servo Viewer, is available online for free. Table D.2 lists the used
software tools and Python libraries necessary to run the algorithms developed during this
Thesis (Appendix F) or recreate any of the measurements.
Table D.2: Software and Python libraries used during development.
Application
Version
Distributor
Python
3.12.3
Python Software Foundation
Anaconda 2.6.3
Anaconda Inc.
pypylon 2.2.0
Basler
cv2 (OpenCV-Python) 4.8.0
OpenCV.org
sensorTOOL
2.1.0.3234
Micro Epsilon
Pylon Viewer 64-Bit
8.0.2.16314
Basler
PicoScope 7 T&M
7.1.39.3737
pico Technology
Servo Viewer
2016
FANUC Corporation
PlotDigitizer
2025
PORBITAL
D.3
Tool Measurement
The content of this sub-appendix relates explicitly to the tool measurement system, includ-
ing an overview of sensor configurations, power supply settings, and the setup procedure.
D.3.1
Camera Configuration
Listing D.1 shows the camera’s configuration in PyPylon during measurement. Outside
of calibration, the camera’s sampling frequency was defined according to Equation 3.9.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
69
==PAGE:78==
Listing D.1: Camera configuration for tool measurement in PyPylon
1
# core imaging parameters
2
cam.ExposureAuto.SetValue('Off')
3
cam.ExposureTime.SetValue(30.0)
#microseconds
4
cam.GainAuto.SetValue('Off')
5
cam.Gain.SetValue(0.0)
#db
6
cam.ExposureMode.SetValue('Timed')
7
8
cam.AcquisitionFrameRateEnable.SetValue(True)
9
cam.AcquisitionFrameRate.SetValue(150.0)
#only during calibration
10
cam.AcquisitionStopMode.SetValue('AbortExposure')
11
12
cam.Width.SetValue(1936)
13
cam.Height.SetValue(1216)
14
cam.PixelFormat.SetValue('Mono8')
15
16
cam.TimerSelector.SetValue('Timer1')
17
cam.TimerTriggerSource.SetValue('ExposureActive')
18
cam.TimerTriggerActivation.SetValue('RisingEdge')
19
cam.TimerDelay.SetValue(0.0)
#microseconds
20
cam.TimerDuration.SetValue(10.0)
#microseconds
21
22
cam.LineSelector.SetValue('Line3')
23
cam.LineMode.SetValue('Output')
24
cam.LineSource.SetValue('Timer1Active')
25
cam.LineDebouncerTime.SetValue(0.0)
#microseconds
26
27
cam.MaxNumBuffer = 20000
#important
D.3.2
Confocal Configuration
Parameters set in the sensorTOOL parameter window accessed via Ctrl+Shift+F9 .
Additional instructions can be found in [86].
MEASRATE
30
Frequency in kHz
OUTPUT
ETHERNET
Connection to PC
SHUTTER
3
Shutter speed in µs
SHUTTERMODE
MANUAL
Override automatic exposure
STDUSER
PROFESSIONAL
System admin
TERMINATION
OFF
Termination resistor not necessary
TRIGGERAT
OUTPUT
Triggering measurement value output
TRIGGERCOUNT
INFINITE
Number of values to be output at trigger event
TRIGGERLEVEL
HIGH
Active at rising edge
TRIGGERMODE
EDGE
Edge triggering
TRIGGERSOURCE
TRIGIN
Physical trigger connection
TRIGINLEVEL
HTL
Trigger logic
UNIT
MM
Distance unit
DIGITS
6
Decimal places
D.3.3
Conoptica CU2 Tool Configuration
In the attempt to make a measurement for comparison using the Conoptica CU2 Tool
optical tool presetter, the following NC code was used. The system failed to create a
reference profile.
70
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:79==
Listing D.2: Unsucessful NC code for Conoptica CU2 Tool measurement of the flat endmill
in Chapter 5.
1
G49 T17 M6;
2
S6366 M3;
3
G65 P7502 I17 R1.5 T3 C4 Q0.2 S6366 M3 D100. E101. F102. B103. V104.;
4
G52 X0. Y0. Z0.;
5
G0 G53 X0 Y0;
6
M30;
D.3.4
Physical Installation
All optical surfaces must be cleaned with lens paper before setup. Cleaning the surface of
the 12 mm ball bearing used for calibration and alignment is critical; dust particles on the
surface will affect the edge spread function. Isopropyl alcohol should be avoided when
cleaning the sphere as it will dissolve the glue bonding it to the pipe and break the artefact.
Pressurised air should be used to clean cutting tools before measurement.
Electrical connections should be made according to Figure 3.12 with the power supplies
set as shown below.
Voltage
Current
Illumination System
10 V
0.05 A
Confocal Sensor
24 V
1 A
For application of the confocal sensor (runout and axis validation), the sensor is configured
according to Appendix D.3.2. A dark reference must be performed before measurement,
and a warm-up period of at least 30 min is recommended [86].
Setup Routine
PREPARATION OF CAL. ARTEFACT
The 12 mm calibration sphere is mounted in
a tool holder with an 8 mm collet and
indexed at any available slot on the
machine.
PREPARATION OF MACHINE BED
INTERFACE
As shown, two T-nuts and fitting threaded
rods are placed on the machine bed. Four
steel pins with a minimum diameter of
10 mm are laid out as shown.
SYSTEM INSTALLATION
As shown, the prototype frame is set down
on the steel pins and threaded rods. Two
nuts are tightened on the threaded rods.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
71
==PAGE:80==
CONNECTIONS
The cable harness attached to the prototype
system is run to the outside via the access
port at the back of the machine. This is
crucial as NC-code cannot be executed
while the door is open. Enough slack is left
in the cables to allow translation of the
machine bed. Connections are made
according to Figure 3.12.
SPHERE POSITIONING
Using the live view in Pylon Viewer, the
sphere is positioned in the FOV as shown.
CAMERA ALIGNMENT
Alignment of the camera using the
alignment application accessed via the
Tool Image Processor V0.1 according to
Chapter 3.3.3. Following satisfactory
alignment, the X location of the sphere is
used for all measurements (including
calibration).
CALIBRATION
For left horizontal calibration, the ROI of the
camera is set to 972x1216 px and aligned
with the left border. The camera is
configured as shown in Listing D.1. The
sphere is positioned at least 200 µm beyond
the right side of the field of view. Image
acquisition is started, and the machine is
set to execute the code in Listing D.3. For
right horizontal, the ROI is right-aligned and
the sphere starts its sweep from 200 µm
beyond the left edge.
TOOL MEASUREMENT
Tool images can now be recorded using
PylonViewer with the camera’s acquisition
speed defined according to Equation 3.9.
With tool images and calibration images
acquired, the Tool Image Processor V0.1 is
used to extract cutting tool information.
72
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:81==
D.3.5
Machine control during calibration
Listing D.3: NC code for constant feed translation when the sphere has been positioned
in the desired location.
1
G91;
#Incrimental mode
2
N0001;
#ServoViewer trigger for feed monitoring
3
G01Y-4F0.9;
#Relative position adapted to calib. direction
D.4
Part Inspection
The content of this sub-appendix exclusively relates to flask measurement.
D.4.1
Setup
The power supply was set as shown below. Due to the increased shutter speed in this
setup (see below), less light is necessary to achieve sufficient illumination of the sensor.
Due to the low feed, no pulsing of the LED is necessary, and the LED driver can be
bypassed.
Voltage
Current
Illumination System
3.5 V
0.06 A
The physical setup procedure of the flask as shown in Figure 6.2a is a work in progress
and subject to documentation outside of this thesis.
D.4.2
Camera Configuration
Listing D.4 shows the camera’s configuration in PyPylon during flask-related measure-
ments. The acquisition speed is tuned according to the selected feed.
Listing D.4: Camera configuration for flask measurement in PyPylon
1
# core imaging parameters
2
cam.ExposureAuto.SetValue('Off')
3
cam.ExposureTime.SetValue(1000)
#microseconds
4
cam.GainAuto.SetValue('Off')
5
cam.Gain.SetValue(0.0)
#db
6
cam.ExposureMode.SetValue('Timed')
7
8
cam.AcquisitionFrameRateEnable.SetValue(True)
9
cam.AcquisitionFrameRate.SetValue(100.0)
#tune to feed
10
cam.AcquisitionStopMode.SetValue('AbortExposure')
11
12
cam.Width.SetValue(400)
13
cam.Height.SetValue(1216)
14
cam.OffsetX.SetValue(768)
15
cam.BinningHorizontal.SetValue(2)
16
cam.BinningVertical.SetValue(2)
17
cam.PixelFormat.SetValue('Mono8')
18
19
cam.MaxNumBuffer = 20000
#important
D.4.3
Operation
Acquire images with the system set up as shown above and execute the Flask_Analysis.py
script on the directory containing the images.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
73
==PAGE:82==
E
Bill of Materials
Not included in the Bill of Materials (Table E.1) are small consumables, e.g. zip ties, cable
clips, Wago connectors and various M5 and M6 hardware. It is also assumed that a PC
with at least one Ethernet port and a USB 3.0 port is available.
Table E.1: Bill of Materials
Description
Name
Qty
Item #
Camera Measurement System
Camera
a2A1920-160umBAS
1
107820
Lens
VS-TCH1.5-65
1
Heat Sink
Heat sink for ace 2 and racer 2 S
1
2200000998
White LED
1
Green LED
1
LED Driver
EU-38-TTL
1
8018951
Thorlabs Extension Tube
1
Thorlabs Collimating Lens
1
Thorlabs 2DOF Alignment Fixture
1
PDV Rotary Stage
1
PDV Tilt Stage
1
Aluminium Profile 80x40
Aluminium Profile 40x40
90 deg Bracket
10
10 mm Steel pin
4
USB Cable
CAM ACC BAS USB3 MICRO B/A 3M
1
Trigger Cable
Power-I/O Cable, M8 6p/open, P, 5 m
1
2200000315
5 m Double Core Cable
2
Banana Connector
2
Variable Power Supply
1
Calibration
8 mm Steel Pipe
1
12 mm Ball Bearing
1
Axis Validation
Confocal Sensor
IFS2407-3
1
00009922
Conf. Controller
confocalIDT IFC2465/66
1
922110018
Variable Power Supply
1
5M Ethernet Cable
1
Flask Measurement
6 mm Spindle Adapter
1
6 mm Steel pin
1
PDV Tilt Stage
2
PDV Linear Stage
2
System Monitoring
Digital Oscilloscope
PicoScope 4262
1
741-8629
74
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:83==
F
Algorithm Overview
The following provides a brief overview of the algorithms delivered alongside this report.
Additional information regarding their functionality is found in the relevant chapters.
main.py
Description:
Launches Tool Image Processor V0.1 (Chapter 3.3.2). The option for full char-
acterisation does not work at the time of writing.
Inputs:
Paths to folders containing calibration files for left and right calibration passes
and tool images and a USB connection with the camera.
Outputs:
Runout and cutting edge lengths relative to the spindle axis as measured by any
pixel row.
Camera_Alignment.py
Description:
Application for on-machine camera alignment from Chapter 3.3.3. Requires the
spherical calibration artefact (Table D.1) to be in the field of view.
Inputs:
None, but the PC running the application must be connected to the camera via
USB 3.0 and any active instance of Pylon Viewer must be closed.
Outputs:
Live view of the sphere’s location in image coordinates (i, j) and the focus metric.
Confocal_Alignment.py
Description:
Alignment script for medium to long range confocal chromatic sensors from Chap-
ter 5.1.1, currently configured for 11 measurement points per plane.
Inputs:
”.csv” file exported from sensorTool.exe containing confocal measurements.
Outputs:
Sensor misalignment in degrees.
3D_Reconstruction.py
Description:
Algorithm for 3D reconstruction of cutting edges at pixel level as in Chapter 3.4.3.
Inputs:
”/path” to a folder containing the images acquired during tool measurement and
centre of rotation.
Outputs:
3D pointcloud of the tool.
Flask_Analysis.py
Description:
Script for evaluation of images captured of a rotating flask from Chapter 6.
The function is currently tuned for the optical system detailed in Table E.1.
Re-running with a different camera or lens may require tuning of min_radius,
region_alignment and bin_threshold.
Inputs:
”/path” to a folder containing the images acquired during the flask scan.
Outputs:
A table containing the location (i, j), radius (px) and fill ratio (%) of the observed
holes.
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
75
==PAGE:84==
G
CMM Gauge Bar Characterisation
Measurements were performed using a Zeiss Prismo CMM (MPE E(0) = (0.9+L/350)µm)
[87], with specifications verified according to ISO 10360 in the measurement and calibra-
tion centre of Carl Zeiss Industrielle Messtechnik GmbH following DIN EN ISO/IEC 17025.
The measurement planes were defined as shown in Figure G.1a, the measurement setup
is shown in Figure G.1b
Due to the temperature difference between the laboratory where the gauge bar was char-
acterised and the CNC machine, the measurements must be compensated for thermal ex-
pansion. The thermal expansion coefficient of gauge steel is 11.5 × 10−6 K−1 [88]. The pin
dimension measurements were performed at 21.2 °C and the temperature inside the CNC
was 25 °C. This leads to an increase of the pin’s diameter by approximately 0.131 µm.
Table G.1: Average minimum circumscribing diameter per plane over five repeated mea-
surements. Compensated for thermal expansion by 0.131 µm.
Avg. Min. Circumscribing Diameter
Corrected Diameter
Standard Deviation
Plane 1
2.9989 mm
2.9990 mm
0.000 283 mm
Plane 2
2.9989 mm
2.9990 mm
4.47 × 10−5 mm
Plane 3
2.9989 mm
2.9990 mm
/
Plane 4
2.9989 mm
2.9991 mm
4.47 × 10−5 mm
Plane 5
2.9990 mm
2.9992 mm
5.84 × 10−5 mm
Plane 6
2.9990 mm
2.9991 mm
/
Plane 7
2.9991 mm
2.9992 mm
/
Plane 8
2.9991 mm
2.9992 mm
/
Total
2.9990 mm
2.9991 mm
0.0001 mm
8X 0.261 mm
~3 mm
Chamfers
Measure-
ment
Planes
(a)
TOOLFIX
Assembly System
CMM
Stylus
Tool
Holder
Gauge
Bar
(b)
Figure G.1: Characterisation process of the 3 mm gauge bar. a) Definition of the mea-
surement planes relative to the bottom of the bar, and b) fixation of the bar in the CMM.
76
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:85==
Part name
Drawing number
Order number
Variant
Company
Department
CMM Type
PRISMO_USS2
CMM No.
212015
Operator
Text
Last 1 measurements
► Approval ≠ Blocked
Part ident
2
Time/Date
6/19/2025 3:32 PM
Run
All Characteristics
No. measured values
41
No. values: red 
0
Measurement Duration
00:18:41.0
ZEISS CALYPSO
7.8.00
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
22.5°
45°
67.5°
90°
112.5°
135°
157.5°
180°
202.5°
225°
247.5°
270°
292.5°
315°
337.5°
0°
2.0000 µm
5000 : 1
X
Y
Roundness @ -0,261
0.0010 mm
0.0000
0.0020
0.0000
0.0010
1.00
Points 607
Filter type No Filter  
Lc
upr
Vmess[mm/sec]
Probe radius 1.4998
Evaluation method Minimum Feature
Diameter @ -0,261 01
2.9994 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0006
Diameter @ -0,261 02
2.9988 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0012
Diameter @ -0,261 03
2.9988 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0012
Diameter @ -0,261 04
2.9988 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0012
Diameter @ -0,261 05
2.9987 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0013
Diameter @ -0,544 01
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ -0,544 02
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ -0,544 03
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ -0,544 04
2.9988 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0012
Diameter @ -0,544 05
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ -0,783 01
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ -0,783 02
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ -0,783 03
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ -0,783 04
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ -0,783 05
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ --1,044 01
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
(8.4_02) StandardProtocol
Page 1 of 2
3mm Gauge Bar
Moritz Genzwürker
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
77
==PAGE:86==
Part name
Order number
2
Part ident
Operator
6/19/2025 3:32 PM
Time/Date
ZEISS CALYPSO 
7.8.00
Page 2 of 2
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Diameter @ --1,044 02
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ --1,044 03
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,044 04
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ --1,044 05
2.9989 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0011
Diameter @ --1,305 01
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --1,305 02
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,305 03
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --1,305 04
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,305 05
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,566 01
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,566 02
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,566 03
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,566 04
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,566 05
2.9990 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0010
Diameter @ --1,827 01
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --1,827 02
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --1,827 03
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --1,827 04
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --1,827 05
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --2,088 01
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --2,088 02
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --2,088 03
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --2,088 04
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
Diameter @ --2,088 05
2.9991 mm
3.0000
0.0500
-0.0500
-0.0009
n.def.
Event
Text
3mm Gauge Bar
Moritz Genzwürker
78
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
==PAGE:87==
Development of a Camera System for On-machine Measurements
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Produktionstorvet B427
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
