==PAGE:1==
Improving nutrient and pollutant
removal with biochar-amended SMFC
A study of SMFC’s performance in a flow-through system
Master Thesis, submitted June 27, 2025
STUDENT:
Lara Schnuriger (s233841)
SUPERVISORS:
Stefan Trapp
Borja Valverde Pérez
Andreas Libonati Brock
==PAGE:2==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
Acknowledgements
The present project has been conducted with the precious help of my three supervisors,
Stefan Trapp, Borja Valverde Pérez and Andreas Libonati Brock. I am very grateful for
their availability and commitment to support me ,in this first field experiment of my aca-
demic journey. Thanks as well to Laura Marie Sveistrup Jørnsgard, for her most efficient
collaboration.
"It is not the goal but the way there that matters" (Wilfred Thesiger)
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Objectives and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Baseline
4
2.1
Ecological and chemical status of lake ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Damhus lake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Eutrophication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Seasonality in nutrient cycles and eutrophication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Nutrient dynamics and primary producers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Sediment microbial fuel cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Wastewater properties of Combined Sewer Overflows . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Material and Methods
12
3.1
Site description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Harrestrup creek and Damhuss lake characterization . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.2
Sediment microbial fuel cells in a flow-through system . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Monitoring and analytical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Temperature, pH, oxygen and conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.2
Voltage measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.3
Nutrient analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.4
Total organic carbon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.5
Biological oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand
. . . . . . .
18
3.3.6
Total Suspended Solids and Volatile Suspended Solids . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.7
Elemental analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.8
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.9
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.10 Hydrolic retention time (HRT) test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results
24
4.1
Harrestrup creek and Damhuss lake monitoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Study of SMFCs in a flow-through system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Working potentials and open circuit potentials . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.2
Biological oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand
. . . . . . .
40
4.2.3
Total suspended solids and total volatile suspended solids . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Hydrolic Retention Time test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
ii
==PAGE:4==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
Contents
5
Discussion
44
5.1
Harrestrup creek and Damhus lake monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Study of SMFCs in a flowthrough system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Hydrolic retention time test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Conclusion
47
List of references
I
iii
==PAGE:5==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
Lakes are freshwater bodies of central importance, as they provide habitats sheltering
high biodiversity, offer recreational activity, and sustain drinking water supply as well as
food production (Yindong et al., 2021).
However, the vast majority of freshwater bodies in Europe are not in good ecological and
chemical status, with eutrophication being one of the most preoccupying concerns. Accord-
ing to the latest report of the European Environment Agency, 57.8 % of Denmark’s surface
fresh water bodies are currently in low ecological status, among which 84% are Danish lakes
(European Commission, 2025), highlighting the vulnerability of the lake ecosystem to the
synergetic impact of climate change and anthropogenic pressures. Indeed, only 5 out of the
986 monitored lakes in Denmark currently achieve both good ecological and chemical status
(202, 2023).
The main obstacle in restoring lake ecosystems’ integrity lies in addressing eutrophi-
cation—a natural process triggered by excessive nutrient inputs. In particular, Phosphorus
(P) plays a critical role as a limiting nutrient for algal growth in lentic systems. When
introduced in large quantities, it can lead to harmful ecological imbalances, including algal
blooms and oxygen depletion (Pereira and Mulligan, 2023; Haxthausen et al., 2021; Ebrahimi
and Ojani, 2024). For over a century, the P release rate due to anthropogenic activities has
been exceeding the natural P removal rate, resulting in phosphorus accumulation in Danish
agricultural soils and sediments (Rubæk et al., 2013).
Historically, P release has mainly come from agricultural activities, via the percolation
of fertilizers in the groundwater and their wash-off in rivers and lakes, when the treatment
systems were not updated to control such casualties. Other sources, such as domestic and
industrial sewage waters, have been dramatically reduced thanks to the implementation in
Denmark of European law (Rubæk et al., 2013).
However, in case of moderate to heavy rain falls, sewage waters are still discharged directly
into the environment by combined sewer overflows (CSO) without treatment (Chrysochoidis
et al., 2025). In such a case, polluted run-off waters increase dramatically and are partly
discharged in combined sewers by a valve system (CSO) to prevent overflowing the hydraulic
capacity of the sewer (Chrysochoidis et al., 2025). This system is widely spread, both in de-
veloped and developing countries Xie et al. (2024), and present a real pollution issue. Indeed,
wastewater from combined sewer overflow contains high amounts of contaminants, including
Biological oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand(COD), total Phosphorus (TP),
total Nitrogen (TN) and suspended solids (SS).
CSO spills are therefore sporadic point sources of pollutants for many aquatic ecosystems that
have been a rising concern in European countries with increased environmental awareness.
In Denmark, growing urban areas have been increasing the amount of runoff and domestic
sewage water, highlighting the need to address the CSO pollution problem (Chrysochoidis
et al., 2025).
Page 1 of 47
==PAGE:6==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
1
Introduction
As a first solution, many Danish water facilities are currently replacing combined sewer
overflows with separated sewers for storm water and wastewater, but this costly process will
take decades to fully implement (Ahm et al., 2016). In that context, more research is needed
on other cost-effective methods that can help mitigate CSO spills’ adverse environmental
impacts.
1.1
Context of the project
Copenhagen municipality is currently investing in a pilot project using sediment micro-
bial fuel cells (SMFCs) to prevent pollutants leaching from the basin’s sediment in
Harrestrup creek.
A potential pollution issue arises, since CSO sporadically contaminate Harrestrup creek,
that is the only external water source supplying Damhus Lake, an artificial lake located in
the western part of Copenhagen municipality in Vanløse. Moreover, the total phosphorus
content in Harrestrup creek has been consistently exceeding the 60 (µg/L) threshold for
good ecological status (202, 2023). Regulating the water level of Damhus lake is an ongoing
challenge, as water losses to groundwater are not offset by natural precipitation.
When the weather is dry, a fair amount of Damhus’s lake water comes from Harrestrup creek,
via the means of a pumping facility located north of the lake. In the event of rainfall impor-
tant enough to activate the CSO valve system, pumping operations are suspended to avoid
releasing CSO-contaminated water into the lake. However, the risk of CSO spills persists,
as CSO can be activated outside of storm events (Perry et al., 2024) . A lack of hydraulic
capacity in the drainage system can indeed occur for different reasons than heavy rainfalls,
for example, by unplanned water infiltration, blockages, or operational errors (Perry et al.,
2024). CSO spills are therefore a factor to take into consideration when assessing Damhus
Lake water quality.
To tackle this pollution issue, the City of Copenhagen plans to construct two 382 m3
sedimentation basins upstream of the pumping station. Sedimentation basins are a conven-
tional method to mitigate CSO pollution (Xie et al., 2024), as they remove pollutants present
in suspended solids that are subject to settling. On the other hand, dissolved pollutants such
as nutrients are not eliminated.
An alternative method to account for nutrient pollution is sediment microbial fuel cells
(SMFCs). For a few year, sediment microbial fuel cells have been studied as a novel reme-
diation practice for eutrophic lakes and harbors, with promising results (Brock et al., 2023;
Haxthausen et al., 2021).
However, few studies have been conducted on SMFCs’ application in dynamic environ-
ments, such as CSO wastewater treatment systems.
Testing this possibility is the objective of the pilot project conducted by Copenhagen mu-
nicipality in collaboration with DTU. This pilot project is designed to imitate the intended
full-scale system with a scale-down factor of 1:1000. In case of conclusive results, the project
Page 2 of 47
==PAGE:7==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
1
Introduction
could be extended to the settling basins and provide a cost-effective method to mitigate
CSO’s nutrient pollution in Damhus Lake.
1.2
Objectives and research questions
The overarching goal of the present thesis is to investigate the applicability of SMFCs
for CSO wastewater treatment, with the potential to help mitigating Damehus lake contam-
ination by pumping water from Harrestrup creek.
To address this objective, the following research questions will be explored:
• What is the current state of Harrestrup creek and Damhuss lake water quality?
• What is the overall performance of SMFCs in nutrient and contaminant removal in the
pilot project flow-through system?
Both questions will be investigated by monitoring and analyzing the following param-
eters: organic matter content (BOD5, COD, TOC, TSS, VSS), nutrients (phosphates, ni-
trates, nitrites, ammonium, sulfates), toxic compounds (ammonia, sulfide, methane, heavy
metals), total suspended solids (TSS) and patricle size distribution. Additionally, physi-
cal parameters such as temperature, dissolved oxygen concentration, pH, and conductivity
will be monitored. To asses the performance of SMFCs, statistical tests will be conducted
to compare some of these parameters values between charcoal-amended and stainless steel
SMFCS against control reactors.
The focus of this thesis is directed at the setup phase as well as the first performance
analysis of the pilot project.
The main contaminant of interest is P, even though other
pollutants will be analyzed and discussed.
Page 3 of 47
==PAGE:8==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
2
Baseline
2
Baseline
2.1
Ecological and chemical status of lake ecosystems
Surface water bodies across Europe are regulated by the Water Framework Directive
(2000/60/EC) and by the Environment Quality Standards Directive (2008/105/EC ), which
set qualitative and quantitative objectives to protect and restore the health of the aquatic
ecosystems. Each state member has to incorporate those two directives within national laws
to ensure their implementation.
The health of aquatic ecosystems is determined by the chemical and ecological status of
water bodies, both statuses ranging from low to high according to an array of biological,
chemical, and physical quality elements. (European Commission, 2025)
The ecological status is defined by the WFD following indicators such as dissolved
oxygen concentration, biodiversity indexes, chlorophyll α (Chl. α ) and phytoplankton con-
centration, degradation state of the benthic habitat, light penetration depth, etc. These
indicators assess the structure and the function of a given ecosystem (European Environ-
ment Agency, 2021). The WFD also establishes a list of critical pollutants, including P, N,
that can strongly affect the ecosystem integrity (European Parliament and Council, 2000).
However, specific thresholds for these pollutants are found in the River Basins Manage-
ment Plans (RBMPs), as the importance of these pollutants depends on the characteristics
of each water body and has to be accounted for by national law.
The chemical status is defined by the EQS based on a list of priority chemicals posing
a significant risk to the aquatic ecosystem. Around 29 % of these chemicals are hazardous
because of their toxicity, their persistence, and/or their bio-accumulation potential. For ex-
ample, the first category includes nickel, lead, and fluoranthene (a PAH), while hazardous
chemicals can be Cadmium, Mercury, and their derivatives, or TBT. Good chemical status
is achieved only when the concentrations of each chemical remain below both the maxi-
mum allowable concentration and the annual average level set by the directive (European
Parliament and Council, 2013).
Since both chemical and ecological status are defined according to the "one out, all
out" principle concerning the quality elements, only 39.5% of European surface waters have
achieved good ecological status, and only 26.8 % have reached good chemical status, as
displayed in Figure 1 below (European Commission, 2025). Initially, European surface waters
were meant to attain good chemical and ecological statuses by 2015, but the deadline has
been postponed to 2027 (European Commission, 2025).
Page 4 of 47
==PAGE:9==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
2
Baseline
Fig. 1. Ecological status of water bodies across Europe per river basin, reviewed in July 2024. Figure taken
from European Environmental Agency maps and charts (https://www.eea.europa.eu/en/analysis/maps-and-
charts/proportion-of-classified-surface-water-7).
2.2
Damhus lake
This shallow lake of approximately 46 ha has a mean and maximum depth of 1.7 m and
2.3 m respectively, the deeper area is located on the western side of the lake. The shallow
depth and wind-driven mixing result in weak thermal stratification during summer. Seasonal
mixing in autumn and spring redistributes nutrients, oxygen, and possible contaminants in
the water column.
Regarding Damhus’ bottom profile, the continuous input of litter, of bird feces, and
of dead organisms has been creating a soft, dark, and rich in organic matter silt sediment.
Methane emissions regularly occur with the presence of methanogenic bacteria in the sedi-
ment.
Damhus waters are relatively clear, allowing macrophytes to grow and to provide hide-
outs for larger fish predators such as pike and perch. However, risks of CSO’s discharge and
eutrophication due to high nutrient levels deteriorate the ecological status of the lake, which
is currently ranked as moderate (Københavns Kommune, 2019).
Additionally, the bird population of cormorants has been a source of concern, as their feces
very rich in phosphate, are continuously released in the lake, favoring the eutrophication
process.
Efforts to protect and restore the Damhus ecosystem have led to the enforcement of
Section 3 of the Danish Nature Protection Act, as well as a Local Conservation Order. Both
the lake and its surrounding areas are protected, as any alterations to the ecosystem require a
special permit issued by the municipality. For instance, any construction, external discharge,
or uptake of water or sediment needs to be first validated by the competent authority. In
Page 5 of 47
==PAGE:10==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
2
Baseline
that context, the installation directly in the lake of large-scale SMFCs is prohibited, unless
a special permit is granted.
Additionally, Damhus Lake is a place of recreational activity (such as sailing ) that
would suffer from large-scale SMFCs implementation.
2.3
Eutrophication
Eutrophication refers a regime shift of the aquatic ecosystem, ie, an abrupt change of
environmental condition leading to a new equilibrium (Pereira and Mulligan, 2023). This
process is known to be triggered by large increase in P and N concentrations (Wang et al.,
2021).
Eutrophic conditions will favor fast-growing algae, such as cyanobacteria, blue/green
algae, or other phytoplankton species, that will out-compete other microphyte species that
provide hunting hide-out for larger fish predators. Besides being potentially toxic species,
these harmful algae blooms (HABs) monopolize the nutrient resources and reduce the light
availability in deeper waters, inhibiting photosynthesis. Combined with continuous organic
matter degradation at the bottom, this process will result in hypoxic conditions (dissolved
oxygen concentrations below 2 mg/L) or even anoxia (complete absence of oxygen), which
endangers benthic organisms and reduces biodiversity. Events of mass mortality of the ben-
thos have been recorded in the case of intensified hypoxia events in Danish coastal waters
(Conley et al., 2007).
Besides, excessive nutrient levels are stressors by their own, which can cause biological com-
munity simplification (Wang et al., 2021). Anoxic sediments are prone to release toxic com-
pounds (such as hydrogen sulfide and ammonia), greenhouse gases (for example, methane),
and phosphates, thereby stimulating HABs once again and further nourishing the eutrophi-
cation cycle.
Eutrophication is thus a positive feedback loop that is difficult to stop once established, and
the resulting hypoxia is unfortunately widely spread across Danish coastal and fresh waters.
2.4
Seasonality in nutrient cycles and eutrophication
Nutrient release through organic matter mineralization is a natural process within the
nutrient cycles (Essington and Carpenter, 2000). However, eutrophication occurs when this
release is applied at an increased rate to the receiving ecosystem, resulting in larger primary
production and larger subsequent organic matter degradation,(Pereira and Mulligan, 2023),
unbalancing the different processes that regulate the flow of nutrients between the water,
the vegetal cells, and the sediment. Indeed, in a balanced ecosystem, the nutrient uptake
and release processes are tuned together so that temporary accumulation of nutrients due to
seasonal variation can be offset later on. In other words, the seasonality related to nutrient
cycles (higher photosynthesis and higher nutrient uptake in spring and summer compared to
winter) doesn’t bring nutrient concentration to levels that will trigger a regime shift of the
ecosystem.
Page 6 of 47
==PAGE:11==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
2
Baseline
The main elements of concern are P and N, two macronutrients needed for primary
production. High levels of P and N in lakes are achieved by external and internal sources.
The first includes run-offs from contaminated watersheds or agricultural areas, direct release
of wastewater in case of CSO events, or unplanned operations.
Internal sources via nutrient cycling are the main contribution to N and P levels in lakes,
with pronounced seasonality effects (Yindong et al., 2021; Essington and Carpenter, 2000).
These internal sources stem from the legacy of external sources, as P and N have been accu-
mulating during decades in the soils and sediment and are released back in the water through
sediment microbial degradation (Pereira and Mulligan, 2023) .
The retention capacity of sediment with respect to phosphorus (P) depends on a complex
set of biological and chemical factors. Among others, the amount of clay and silt, the pres-
ence of redox insensitive binding sites, pH, and the quantity of iron, aluminum, or calcium
oxides play an important role in P absorption and storage within the sediment (Ebrahimi and
Ojani, 2024; Hupfer and Lewandowski, 2008). Additionally, the particle size of the sediment
has been shown to significantly influence the absorption of P, with an exponential increase of
P absorption as a response to smaller particle size, very likely due to increased surface area
available for P adsorption preceding the absorption reaction. The organic carbon content of
the sediment is also strongly positively correlated with the P absorption process (Ebrahimi
and Ojani, 2024).
Whether P is retained in the sediment or released into the pore-water depends mainly
on two key indicators: the equilibrium concentration of phosphorus (ECP) and the degree of
phosphorus saturation (DPS). These parameters are site-specific and typically assessed using
a range of empirical and theoretical approaches (Ebrahimi and Ojani, 2024). If phosphate
concentration in the pore water is lower than the ECP, the P bound to sediment particles
will be desorbed and diffuse into pore water. The sediment will thus act as a source of P for
pore-water, and the same process is valid in the other situation (phosphate concentration
dominating the ECP, triggering the absorption of P in sediment particles and thereby acting
as a sink for P in pore-water).
Moreover, the DPS itself is a critical factor influencing the risk of phosphorus leaching:
the closer the sediment approaches its maximum adsorption capacity, the greater the like-
lihood of phosphorus being released into the pore water. This underscores the complexity
of phosphorus dynamics between sediment and pore water, which must be evaluated on a
case-by-case basis.
2.5
Nutrient dynamics and primary producers
The bio-available forms of P and N for primary producers uptake are orthophosphates,
whereas N can be consumed as nitrate, nitrite, or ammonium. According to the theory of
the limiting element, growth will be controlled by the amount of the less abundant element
that is essential (Peter Blomqvist and Elmgren, 2004). Since there is seasonal variation in
the amounts of light, P, and N, the limiting element will also vary seasonally: scarce light
Page 7 of 47
==PAGE:12==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
2
Baseline
availability prevents photosynthesis, and storms mix the water layers. The first reduces the
uptake of nutrients while the second releases particles rich in P and N from the sediment,
resulting in an overall increase in bioavailable P and N.
During spring and summer, light is no longer a limiting factor, and phytoplankton consume
massive amounts of the available P and N, until those become the limiting factors. Even
though primary producers need 7 times more N than P according to the Redfield ratio es-
timation, P is in most cases the main limiting element (Haxthausen et al., 2021; Ebrahimi
and Ojani, 2024) For that reason, efforts to mitigate algae growth and eutrophication have
been mainly focusing on P removal (Bartram and Chorus, 2014).
It has been shown that primary producers can recycle the P bound within their biomass,
and that this process can be very rapid (within 5 to 100 min) (Bartram and Chorus, 2014).
Organic phosphorus is therefore an important contribution to the P that controls algae
growth, and this contribution is not directly measurable as dissolved phosphate.
When
monitoring P levels to assess potential HABs, dissolved phosphate is therefore not represen-
tative of the complete P sources for primary producers.
Total phosphorus (TP) can be a more accurate indicator for biomass production potential
(Bartram and Chorus, 2014; Ebrahimi and Ojani, 2024). This variable encompasses all the
forms of P, ie, the organic and inorganic P. The first consists of phosphate ions bound to
organic compounds and is recycled within the planktonic community. The second comprises
ortho-phosphates (all the forms of P coming from phosphoric acid dissolution) and P bound
to minerals.
Besides, algae and phytoplankton can store phosphorus internally, allowing them to
sustain growth for up to two to four cell divisions without external phosphorus input. This
internal storage mechanism enables them to increase their biomass by up to 16 times, even
when phosphate levels in the surrounding water are undetectable. When the light availabil-
ity is not a limiting factor (ie, in spring and summer), the presence of measurable phosphate
in a water body typically indicates that phosphorus is available in excess of what is needed
for algal growth (Bartram and Chorus, 2014).
2.6
Sediment microbial fuel cells
Sediment microbial fuel cells (SMFCs) are a type of microbial fuel cells, ie, a system
that catalyzes microbial degradation on organic matter and produces electricity (Logan et al.,
2006).
While most organisms rely on redox reactions occurring within a single cell to gener-
ate energy, some electrogenic micro-organisms can delocalize these reactions, allowing them
to exploit more favorable environmental conditions than the ones in their immediate vicin-
ity(Algar et al., 2020).
SMFCs are generally designed with the anode embedded in oxygen-depleted sediments
and the cathode positioned in well-oxygenated surface water.
These two electrodes are
Page 8 of 47
==PAGE:13==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
2
Baseline
connected by an external circuit containing a resistor, as shown in Figure 2 below :
Fig.
2.
Visual diagram showing a classic SMFCs setting, with the chemical reactions involved at the
electrodes, the resulting electron flux and protons diffusion from the sediment. Figure taken from (Jørnsgård,
2025).
The microorganism species capable of delocalizing their redox reactions will tend to
dominate, as the cathode offers an efficient sink for the electrons produced by the oxidation
of organic matter at the anode.
The redox potential of a given environment is defined empirically by measuring its elec-
trical potential against the H+/H2 redox couple (Søndergaard, 2009). In that regard, a
reducing environment will have a low redox potential and will be prone to give electrons
easily, whereas an oxidizing environment contains good electron acceptor compounds and
will present a high redox potential. Since oxygen is a very strong oxidant, the redox po-
tential profile of a given water body or sediment practically follows the dissolved oxygen
concentration profile (Søndergaard, 2009), and oxygen is often used as a proxy for the redox
potential or vice versa.
As mentioned in 2.3, hypoxic conditions are widely spread in Danish bottom waters. Low
oxygen levels inhibit the oxidation of compounds that can be toxic while remaining in their
reduced forms, such as the unfortunately common "marine dead zones" following the re-
duction of sulfates into toxic hydrogen sulfide. Reducing environments favor other harmful
processes, such as the reduction of nitrates to ammonia, or methane production (Ebrahimi
and Ojani, 2024).
The microbial community composition that performs the oxidation of organic matter will
shift towards species that can use other electron acceptors than oxygen, following a down-
ward redox potential gradient, as oxygen and its derivatives gradually disappear in anoxic
sediment layers. Indeed, the higher the potential difference between the two redox couples,
the larger the negative Gibbs energy will be, and the more favorable the reaction will be for
the microorganisms. As a result, the most favorable electron acceptors will transition from
oxygen to nitrates, nitrites, and are typically found in environments with lower and lower
redox potential, as displayed in Figure 3 below.
Page 9 of 47
==PAGE:14==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
2
Baseline
Fig. 3. Redox profile of simplified sediment layers undergoing oxic to anoxic conditions, with the associated
changes in the most favorable electron acceptors (Berner, 1981).
A situation of particular concern relates to the persistence in anoxic sediment of iron in
its reduced form. Indeed, iron can only bind with phosphates in its oxidized ferric (Fe 3+)
form, whereas ferrous iron (Fe 2+) has a high affinity with sulfid, resulting in the formation
of Fe/S or Fe/S2 minerals. In that case, soluble reactive phosphate (SRP) remains unbound
in the pore water of the sediment and will diffuse out back into the water column and further
enhance eutrophication.
Different remediation methods have been tested to inhibit this phenomenon. Among
others, such methods include sediment capping (to create a protective layer preventing pore-
water diffusion), or bottom waters forced re-aeration (to create a protective oxic sediment
layer) (Pereira and Mulligan, 2023). While these practices account quite efficiently for the
problem in the short run, they are not suited for long-run mitigation strategies, (Hupfer and
Lewandowski, 2008) as they require a continuous application.
On the other hand, SMFCs’ principle consists in increasing the redox potential of the
sediment to favor iron oxidation and to remove sulfide, by extracting the electrons at the
anode (and by fixing them into water molecules at the cathode, via oxygen reduction),
instead of injecting oxygen into bottom waters (Haxthausen et al., 2021). This process is by
far less costly and allows for mitigating toxic leaching due to reducing conditions in the long
run, until the sediment reaches its maximum retention capacity.
Page 10 of 47
==PAGE:15==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
2
Baseline
2.7
Wastewater properties of Combined Sewer Overflows
CSO wastewater presents highly variable physical, chemical, and biological characteris-
tics. Regardless of this variability, it poses a threat to both the receiving aquatic ecosystem
integrity and to human health (Chrysochoidis et al., 2025).
Physical characteristics of wastewater include litter, ie, solid macroscopic waste (visible
by eye, and largely constituted of macro plastic and sanitary products), heat (sewage wa-
ter can easily be 18°C higher than the receiving water body) and a large amount of inert
suspended solids, coming from the re-suspension of the sewer’s sediment. Due to their high
surface area favoring adsorption, suspended solids are the primary vehicle transporting pol-
lutants such as nutrients and toxins into aquatic ecosystems, increasing the water’s turbidity
before settling again (Ebrahimi and Ojani, 2024; Perry et al., 2024).
Waste water also contains charged ions, such as chloride or potassium, which directly
affect water conductivity. For that reason, conductivity is commonly used as a proxy indi-
cator for detecting wastewater discharges.
Wastewater is chemically characterized by contamination with hazardous chemicals of
known toxicity coming from domestic or industrial sewage. Biocides such as tributyltin and
Ticolosin are found in many products used for domestic or industrial purposes (agrochem-
icals, detergents, wood preservation, shampoo, toothpaste, etc.) that end up in the sewer
system(Perry et al., 2024). Polyfluoroalkyl (PFAS) can also be present in domestic wastew-
ater, as they are used in cookware, polishing products.
Additionally, urban runoff water introduces another range of toxic compounds into the
sewer system. Heavy metals such as cadmium, chromium, and nickel—often originating from
brake dust—are commonly present, along with persistent organic pollutants like polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
The presence of an array of living organisms (mainly bacterial colonies, protozoa, and
viruses) biologically characterizes wastewater. Among others, dangerous bacteria species for
human health include Aeromonas spp., Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., Streptococcus spp.,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterococcus spp. These protozoan parasites, viruses, and
bacterial species are all mentioned as microbial hazards by the World Health Organization
concerning drinking water standards(Perry et al., 2024).
Page 11 of 47
==PAGE:16==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
3
Material and Methods
3.1
Site description
The pilot project was constructed near the general pumping station that regulates
Damhus lake water level by pumping in water from Harrestrup Creek. A fraction of this
water was deviated to provide a water flow in the pilot project reactors, starting on the 30th
of January, that will be referred to later on as day zero of the experiment.
The setting consists of 15 reactors, representing triplicate for 5 different treatments.
The reactors are made of 350 L plastic containers, partly pressed into the ground. The
treatments investigated are the following:
• Charcoal-amended SMFC , connected to an external circuit with a 1000 Ωresistor
(SMFC charcoal).
Triplicates reactors 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3
• Charcoal-amended Open Circuit Potential (OCP charcoal), not connected.
Triplicates reactors 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3
• Steel SMFC , connected to an external circuit with a 1000 Ωresistor (SMFC steel).
Triplicates reactors 3.1, 3.1, 3.3
• Open Circuit Potential (OCP steel), not connected.
Triplicates reactors 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3
• Control reactors only subject to settling (Controls)
Triplicates 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3
The water is pumped from Harrestrup Creek, circulates in the 15 reactors with a parallel flow
distribution, and ends with a common outlet pipe discharging the water back into Harrestrup
Creek. The intensity of flow delivered to each reactor is not equally distributed, since the
last triplicate for each treatment (1.3, 2.3, 3.3, 4.3 and 5.3) receives an inlet flow that has
already delivered water to the 2 previous triplicates. To compensate for this issue, each
reactor was equipped with an inlet valve, allowing for a qualitative control of the flow.
The individual inlet and outlet pipe for each reactor are approximately 2 cm and 5.5
cm diameters, respectively. The pump (RGL 05) is equipped with a flowmeter (dijitron),
covering flow velocities from 0.1 to 10 m/s). All the previous pipe dimensions refer to the
inner parts of the pipe, ie, the volume that is available for water to flow and not in the pipe
material.
Figure 4 shows a visual representation of the flow distribution :
Page 12 of 47
==PAGE:17==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
Fig. 4. Diagram of the flow distribution in the pilot project. Figure taken from (Jørnsgård, 2025)
Regarding the electrical configuration of the setting , electrodes directly connected to
an external circuit were added to each reactor, except for the Controls.
The electrodes placed in all SMFC and OCP reactors were made of rectangular stain-
less steel (AISI 304) grids of approximately 0.24 m2 area. The diameter of the steel is 0,53
mm, with a grid mesh size of 12,7 mm. The anode was fixed to the bottom of a plastic
cassette (570x370x146 mm), while the cathode was attached to the upper part using plastic
tabs, establishing a vertical distance between the two electrodes of approximately 14,6 cm.
A copper wire of 0,75 mm diameter protected by a rubber sheath connects the electrodes
of each reactor to an external circuit with a 1000 Ωresistor. Plastic boxes were added to
protect the connection barrets linking the electrodes with the external circuit. Moreover,
all resistors were centralized in a elevated plastic box with a lid, allowing to measure the
working potential with a voltmeter at the edges of the resistor for each reactor.
The pictures below illustrate the structure of the electrodes, before their placement in the
reactors:
Page 13 of 47
==PAGE:18==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
(a) Steel electrode
(b) Charcoal amended electrode
Fig. 5. Structure of the two types of electrodes used.
Since charcoal buoyancy is high, stones were placed on top of the charcoal- amended
electrodes after being added to the reactors.
3.2
Experiments
3.2.1
Harrestrup creek and Damhuss lake characterization
The following water quality parameters were analyzed for both the lake and the creek:
• Nutrients content (PO3−
4 ,NO−
2 ,NO−
3 ,NH4+)
• Organic matter content (biological oxygen demand BOD5 and chemical oxygen de-
mand ratios, volatile suspended solid (VSS) and total suspended solid (TSS) ratios,
total organic carbon (TOC))
• Sulfate and sulfide
• Elemental composition
• Temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen and conductivity
The water samples were taken from the same sampling location over the complete mon-
itoring period, ie, from February to May 2025. A plastic bucket was used.
The sediment of the creek and of the lake was also analyzed for the following parameters:
• Total solid (TS), total volatile solid (TVS)
• Elemental composition
• Total organic carbon (TOC)
Page 14 of 47
==PAGE:19==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
To collect creek sediment, a small mesh size net was used, while the lake sediment was sam-
pled with Van Veen grabbers. Sampling locations were kept constant, except for the lake,
for which two additional location further in the lake requireing a boat were performed. All
sediment samples were stored in plastic containers in a 10°C room.
Additionally, Harrestrup Creek was monitored with an increased frequency on May 30,
2025, over 24 hours, using an autosampler (company) programmed to fill 24 bottles of creek
water every hour, with a volume of 990 (mL). The suction pipe of the instrument was placed
at the usual monitoring sampling location. A filter was fitted at the edge of the pipe to
prevent sampling dead leafs. All bottles were acidified to a target pH of approximately 4
with hydrochloric acid, to inhibit ammonia losses through evaporation and microbial activity
suceptible to alter the sample properties before analysis. Additionally, ice boxes were placed
in the center of the autosampler, to favor a cooled environment.
3.2.2
Sediment microbial fuel cells in a flow-through system
To investigate the performance of the system, several physical, chemical and biological
parameters were monitored, as well as the electric potential in all of the 15 reactors.
The water quality was investigated by analyzing the same parameters on a weekly basis:
• PO3−
4 ,NO−
2 ,NO−
3 ,NH4+
• TOC
• Temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen and σ
• Working potentials (WP) and open circuit potentials (OCP)
Other parameters were monitored approximately once per months:
• BOD5, COD
• TSS , VSS
• Some chosen elements
• SO3−
4
, S2−
To minimize natural variability, water samples were always taken at the same location,
being the surface water close to the individual outlet pipe of each reactor. For chemical
analysis, the samples were taken in 500 mL glass bottles, except for elemental analysis, for
which plastic containers were used.
The total inlet and total outlet water were also monitored. The first was collected at
the total inlet valve, while the second was sampled directly at the total outlet pipe. To avoid
sampling the accumulated matter (such as small leafs) at the total inlet valve with potential
Page 15 of 47
==PAGE:20==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
bias, a few seconds were given after opening the valve before sampling.
In order to avoid excessive gas losses through evaporation, all bottles were filled to the
top. Additionally, the water samples were placed in ice boxes immediately after sampling to
prevent temperature-driven changes in the sample properties. The samples were then carried
to DTU (a drive of approximately 25 minutes) and frozen in a - 21°C freezer. This procedure
was applied starting in the last week of March. Prior to that, temperatures were cool enough
(from approximately 0.5 to 6.9 °C) to be disregarded as a risk for sample properties alteration.
The initial plan regarding the sediment constitution necessary for the reactors to work
was to wait for natural sediment building via the settling of the particles present in Har-
restrup Creek water.
This would be aligned with the scale-down dimension of the pilot
project, as the intended full-scale system is meant to be settling basins with SMFCs.
However, the process was far too slow, and decision was made to artificially innocculate
sediment in all reactors, ideally coming from the same location to minimize natural vari-
ability. Due to practical issues, creek sediment was added first to reactors 4.1 and 3.1 only
on the 4th of March (day 33), the to reactor 1.1 and 2.1 on March 12 (day 41) and finally,
lake sediment was inoculated in all the remaining reactors on March 21 (day 50). It was
decided to leave reactor 5.3 (the last triplicate of the Controls) without any artificially added
sediment, to allow for natural settling.
Practically, the reactors were filled with approximated 10 L of sediment, using a 7 cm
diameter pvc pipe and a shovel. The pipe was placed vertically, allowing the sediment to
fall from the top edge to the lower exit of the pipe. This procedure was repeated until
sediment was added all around the cassette containing the electrodes, as evenly as possible,
and without triggering a massive increase of turbidity.
Some basic maintenance was conducted, mainly to avoid clogging issues. For example,
algae and dead leafs that were regularly accumulating in front of the outlet pipes were re-
moved. With rising temperatures as spring was settling, alage growth became a real obstacle
to get clean water samples. A first cleaning of the cathodes in all reactors was done on 2 th
of April, and a more thorough cleaning aiming at the removal of as much algae as possible
was done on the 21 th of May 2025. The wet weight and the dry weight of the algae was
recorded for each reactor.
Page 16 of 47
==PAGE:21==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
3.3
Monitoring and analytical methods
3.3.1
Temperature, pH, oxygen and conductivity
Temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen and conductivity were measured in each reactor, in
the creek and in the lake on a weekly basis. The measurements were done using a portable
multimeter Hach lage ( HQ2200 Portable multimeter, Hach Lag, Germany), that was before
hand calibrated. To minimize internal variability, sensors were placed each time in the same
location: in the reactors, sensors were placed close to the outlet pipe, at approximately 10 cm
depth. In the creek, the sensors were placed close to the shore, and in the lake, measurements
were taken from the same location, approximately 5 m from the shore and 10 cm depth.
• The temperature was registered as the mean temperature indicated by the three sen-
sors.
• The dissolved oxygen (DO) sensor was recurrently showing unstable values, therefore
measurements were taken after waiting around 2 min. DO concentration were regis-
tered both in [mg/L] and in percentage saturation.
• Conductivity was measured in [µs/cm]
3.3.2
Voltage measurements
Working potentials(WP) and open circuit potentials (OCP) were recorded at least once
per week, using a 6000 counts true RMS ISO calibrated voltmeter (Voltcraft company).
The wire connections were periodically checked for any kind of water infiltration, or miss-
connection. Both WPs and OCPs were determined by measuring the potential difference
potential between the cathode and the anode. Practically, this was done by connecting the
voltmeter to the two sides of the 1000 (ohm) resistor.
To verify the voltmeter measurements, both the anode and cathode electrodes were
tested against the standard silver chloride electrode (247 (mV)).
To submit the standard electrode to a similar environment as for the anode and cathode,
the standard electrode was placed in the water close to the outlet pipe of each reactor
and directly connected to the multimeter using an external cable. The other port of the
multimeter was then alternatively connected to the cathode (red) and anode (blue) cables
around the resistor.
3.3.3
Nutrient analysis
Samples were filtered through 0.2 µm nylon filters and stored in a -21°C freezer in plastic
vials until analysis.
Concentrations of PO3−
4 , NOx, NH+
4 , and NO−
2 were measured using a San++ segmented
flow analyzer (Skalar, Netherlands) until March 19th (day 48). After March 19th, analyses
of PO3−
4 , NOx, NH+
4 , NO−
2 , and SO2−
4
were performed using a Gallery Plus analyzer (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, USA).
NO−
3 was calculated by subtracting NO−
2 from NOx species.
Page 17 of 47
==PAGE:22==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
Test kits (Hach Lange, GmbH, Dusseldorf, Germany) were occasionally also used to
measure nutrient concentration, and to compare the results against skalar analysis. Filtra-
tion through 0,2 µm mesh size nylon filters was also done prior to all measurements, except
for the total phosphorous (TP) test kit that account foe particulate phosphorous. Ammo-
nium was measured using an LCK 304 low range (0,015-2 mg-N/L ) test kit , immediately
after sampling to avoid losses through evaporation in ammonia. Sulfide was analyzed with
a LCK 653 (0,1 - 2 mg/L), on site directly after sampling. Nitrate was quantified using a
LCK 339 (0,23 - 13,50 mg-N/L) test kit, on site. Phosphate and total P were analyzed with
a LCK 349 (0,05 - 1,50 mg-P/L ) test kit. Since total P requires two hours of digestion
at 148 °C , this part of the analysis was performed in DTU chemistry laboratory using a
thermostat, while Phosphate was measured directly on site.
The concentration of all the above chemicals was read on a portable Hach Lange spec-
trophotometer DR 1900 on site. At least two readings per sample were recorded to compute
an average value.
Sulfide and Ammonium were analyzed once per month from February to April.
The following standard solutions were used to compare the test kits results against
skalar:
• standard solution of 1,2 (mg/L) for nitrate
• standard solution of 1 (mg/L) for phosphate and ammonium
3.3.4
Total organic carbon
Measurements of total organic carbon (TOC), inorganic carbon (IC), total carbon (TC),
and total bound nitrogen (TNb) were performed using a Multi N/C 3100 analyzer (Analytik
Jena, Germany).
To avoid organic carbon adsorption onto plastic, liquid samples were store in glass vials
with teflon lids in a -21°C freezer. The dissolved organic carbon (DOC) was determined by
filtering the samples with 0.2 µm filters prior to the measurements. TOC samples were not
filtered.
Solids samples were dried at 105°C and grinned before analysis, that was done using the
same machine as for the liquid samples.
3.3.5
Biological oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand
BOD and COD analysis were conducted on the same water samples, collected from all
the reactors as well as for the creek, lake, total inlet and total outlet water.
After a first attempt to measure BOD with the Oxitop automated method that resulted
in non-exploitable results, an alternative method was applied:
The samples were placed in 250 mL blue-cap bottles wrapped in aluminum foil to exclude
light. Bottles were completely filled with water samples to avoid air pockets, and initial pH
and dissolved oxygen (DO) concentrations were recorded as described in subsubsection 3.3.1.
Page 18 of 47
==PAGE:23==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
The samples were incubated in the dark at 20°C for 5 days, after which final DO concentra-
tions were measured again. The difference between initial and final DO values yielded the
5-day BOD (BOD5). Since no nitrification inhibitor was added, the measured BOD included
in this case oxygen consumption due to nitrifying bacteria.
COD was measured using the LCI400 kit (Hach Lange, Germany), with an operational
range of 0–1000 mg/L O2. Water samples were analyzed without filtration to determine
total COD. The kits were digested at 148°C for 2 hours using a HT 200 S high temperature
thermostat (Hach Lange, Germany), following the manufacturer’s protocol.
3.3.6
Total Suspended Solids and Volatile Suspended Solids
Glass fiber filters (0.3 µm) were pre-conditioned by filtering approximately 100 mL of
DI water using vaccum filtering attached to a centrifugal pump, followed by heating in a
muffle furnace (model LE 14/11/R7, Nabertherm, Germany) at 550°C for 15 minutes. The
filters were then cooled in a desiccator with silica beads and weighed to record their initial
weight, using a four decimal scale (Model A120S, Sartorius, Germany).
Total suspended solids (TSS) were calculated using Equation 1:
TSS = (Dry Weight −Filter Weight)
Volume filtered
(1)
Volatile suspended solids (VSS) were calculated using Equation 2:
VSS = (Dry Weight −Ash Weight)
Volume filtered
(2)
3.3.7
Elemental analysis
The following elements were analyzed in the liquid samples: aluminum (Al), phosphorus
(P), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), beryllium (Be), chromium (Cr), cobalt (Co), copper (Cu),
zinc (Zn), arsenic (As), strontium (Sr), cadmium (Cd), antimony (Sb), mercury (Hg), lead
(Pb), and sulfur (S).
The solid samples were dried at 105°C and stored at ambient temperature, while liquid
samples were frozen at -21.
Both liquid and solid samples were subjected to acid digestion with hydrochloric acid
(HCl) and nitric acid (HNO3) prior to analysis. The digestion followed standard protocols
to ensure full dissolution of metals and compatibility with the instruments.
Samples were analyzed using an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer 7850
ICP-MS (Agilent, USA) and an optical emission spectrometer ICP-OES Avio 200 (PerkinElmer,
USA).
Page 19 of 47
==PAGE:24==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
3.3.8
Data processing
All data processing and statistical tests were done on R.
For skalar analysis, all measurements were done in duplicates per treatment. The analysis of
the results was done on the average of the duplicates, except for under-quantification limit
values (<QL), which were disregarded and treated as Nan values. The average of the three
reactors per treatment was computed for all available results, including treatments for which
only one or two values were available. Because of the small sample size of the treatment
(n=3 for triplicates reactors), standard deviation of the meant per treatment was very high
across all the time series. The goal was therefore to assess the triplicates separately when
doing statistical analysis, and to show overall timeseries evolution of the mean treatments,
knowing that these means don’t represent accurately the true values per treatment.
Additionally, precipitation data were extracted from the freely available Visual crossing
data base (Visual Crossing, 2025), using R.
3.3.9
Statistical analysis
To compare treatments against controls for all the timeseries, a Kruskal-Wallis ranking
test (H test) was performed, using the kruskal.wallis() function in R.
This test assigns a rank to all the data, sorts the ranks per group, computes the sum of
ranks per group and computes the H statistic on this sum according to the following equation:
H =
12
N(N + 1)
k
X
i=1
R2
i
Ni

−3(N + 1)
(3)
With N the total number of ranks, k the number of groups and R the sum of ranks per
group.
The H value follows a chi square distribution when computed over large enough sample size,
with k-1 degrees of freedom. The null hypothesis states that all the samples are similar.
The H test computes then a p value, that measures the body of evidence against the null
hypothesis, and compares it to the confidence level α. If the p-value is lower or equals α,
then the null hypothesis is rejected with high confidence. The alternative hypothesis, being
that there is at least one group that differs significantly from the others, is then valid.
This test was chosen because it doesn’t assume a normal distribution and is therefore more
robust when analyzing data that present a skewed distribution or outliers.
To further investigate which group is responsible for the significant difference in ranks
distribution, a Mann-Whitney U test was performed, using the wilcox.text() function in R.
This test runs pairwise comparisons for all the groups, and computes the p values for each
comparison.
Statistical analysis of NOx species was disregarded, as NOx is by definition (in the
context of this project) the sum of nitrates and nitrates, that were both analyzed.
Page 20 of 47
==PAGE:25==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
3.3.10
Hydrolic retention time (HRT) test
A Hydrolic retention time test using the pulse method was performed on reactor 1.1
(SMFC charcoal) on May 2 2025. This reactor was chosen because it was not working, the
risk of altering microbial activity that actually contribute to the building up of electrical
potential was thus lower.
The pulse method according to (Levenspiel, 1999) consists of releasing instantaneously
a known amount of tracer (M) in a vessel of known working volume (WV), while applying a
constant known flow (ν) and to measure the tracer concentration (C) over time. This method
works well for non-ideal flows, which is certainly the case for the present experiment. The
condition stating that each flow particle can only enter and exit once the vessel stands as
well. The area under the C curve and the mean residence time are given by the following
equations:
A =
Z ∞
0
C dt ≈
X
i
Ci∆ti = M
v
kg · s
m3

(4)
¯t =
R ∞
0 tC dt
R ∞
0 C dt ≈
P
i tiCi∆ti
P
i Ci∆ti
= V
v
[s]
(5)
with :
C = tracer concentration ( kg
m3)
M = mass of tracer released (kg)
ν = flow(m3
s )
Additionally, the residence time distribution of the fluid in the vessel is given by the E
curve, the Exit age distribution, that has per time units (Levenspiel, 1999). This variable
shows the global age distribution of fluid in a vessel, given that some fluid particles will take
paths of different lengths resulting in different residence time. It is built so that the area
under the E curve equals unity, by applying the following equation to the C curve:
E = Cpulse
ν
M
(6)
The pulse experiment ideally requires a constant flow, an instantaneous innoculation of
the tracer in the vessel, and recordings of its concentration at the outlet of the vessel, to
measure tracer content in the exit fluid.
In this experiment, classic kitchen salt (Sodium Chloride) was used as a tracer to conduct
the test. It is assumed to possess the same molar mass as the theoretical molar mass of
NaCl, M = 58,44(g/mol).
The mass of salt to add was computed to target a response of the system of 10 times the
initial conductivity in reactor 1.1., ie, a signal of 10 times the initial salt concentration. To
that end, an average value of σ = 1237[ µ s/cm]was used as initial back-groud conductivity.
Page 21 of 47
==PAGE:26==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
The Working Volume (WV) used for these calculation was determined as follows:
WV = Vreactor −Vcassette −Vdry −Vsediment = 272 (L)
(7)
With :
Vreactor = 350(L),
Vcassette = area ∗hight = 30, 8(L),
Vdry = the first cm of the reactor that is not filled with water, approx. 27 (L) and
Vsediment = the estimated volume occupied by the sediment, approx. 20,3 (L).
To compute the salt concentration from conductivity values, the following calibration
curve was used:
Fig.
6.
Calibration curve of measured conductivity for different known NaCl concentrations, at 25 ◦C.
Curve made by Vasileia Stoumpou, DTU sustain.
The R2 is solid (very close to unity). From this curve we get the following equations:
y = 1, 3228x + 1, 9238
(8)
Isolating x gives:
x = y −1, 9238
1, 3228
(9)
With x being NaCl concentration in (g/L), and y being σ in (µs/cm). Conversion to the
correct units from this calibration curve was applied. The equivalent NaCl concentration of
the initial conductivity was then computed to be 0,9 (g/L), and the target signal was then
determined as 9 (g/L). Knowing the WV and the target massic NaCl concentration, the
mass to add to the reactor was calculated as follows:
mto add = mfinal −minitial = 2, 337(kg)
(10)
with: mfinal = 9 WV = 2, 6(kg) minitial = 0, 9 WV = 0, 263(kg)
The flow was recorded manually over approximately 5 hours, and the average value of ν
= 26 (L/min) was used to calculate the E curve. A correction factor of 0.25 was applide to
this flow, since flow measurment are done at the flowmeter, that measure the common flow
Page 22 of 47
==PAGE:27==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
3
Material and Methods
supplying all reactors. Two pipe intersections before reactor 1.1 devide the initial flow by 4.
The conductivity was then recorded over approximately 24 hours, as a proxy for salt
concentration, using the same WTW as described in 3.3.1, that was fixed close to the outlet
pipe of reactor 1.1.
Page 23 of 47
==PAGE:28==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
4
Results
All the parameters were monitored from January 30 to May 28, 2025, on a weekly or
monthly basis. Since it can be informative to read the following results in parallel with the
weather conditions, Table 1 below shows the precipitation data associated with the moni-
tored window.
Time (days)
Date
Precipitation (mm)
6
05-02-2025
0.058
13
12-02-2025
0.000
20
19-02-2025
0.056
27
26-02-2025
1.748
35
06-03-2025
0.000
41
12-03-2025
0.666
48
19-03-2025
0.016
55
26-03-2025
0.356
56
02-04-2025
0.000
63
03-04-2025
0.000
69
09-04-2025
0.000
83
23-04-2025
0.113
90
30-04-2025
0.000
97
07-05-2025
0.000
103
13-05-2025
0.000
110
20-05-2025
0.000
118
28-05-2025
3.875
Table 1
Precipitation (mm) data selected for the monitored days in all the time series produced over the monitored
period.
As shown, the weather was globally really dry on the monitored days, with some light
rain events on February 26, March 12 and march 26. Moderate rainfalls occurred once on
May 28. The data shown the average precipitation per day in Vanlose, Copenhaguen.
4.1
Harrestrup creek and Damhuss lake monitoring
Damhus lake and Harrestrup creek were monitored for temperature, pH, conductivity
and dissolved oxygen concentration, as displayed in Figure 7 below:
Page 24 of 47
==PAGE:29==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
Fig. 7. From left to right: Monitoring of temperature (C°), dissolved oxygen (mg/L),pH and conductivity
(µs/cm) of Harrestrup creek and Damhuss lake water. Day 0 is January 30, 2025.
Temperatures rise almost linearly for both the creek and the lake, going from winter
temperatures around 0.1 (C°) in January until approximately 15°C in April and May. It can
be seen that the lake warms more rapidly than the creek, as the slope is steeper. Dissolved
oxygen is depicted as slightly decreasing for both the creek and the lake, with the lake being
more oxygenated in January and in May, while the dissolved oxygen in the creek dominates
during February and March. On the other hand, pH stays overall constant over the moni-
tored period, with the lake showing slightly higher pH than the creek.
Conductivity is notably higher in the creek, with values around 1250 µs/cm, while the lake
displays values is around 500 µs/cm. Both conductivities seem to decrease slightly over time.
Nutrients levels across the monitored period are shown in Figure 8 below:
Page 25 of 47
==PAGE:30==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
Fig. 8. Monitoring of nutrient concentrations (PO3−
4 , NH+
4 , NO−
3 , and NO−
2 ) in Harrestrup Creek and
Damhuss Lake. Day 0 is January 30, 2025.
All nutrient levels are consistently higher in the creek, while lake values repeatedly go
under detection limit. Phosphate in the creek presents large variability, with a tendency
to increase after day 80 (late April) as opposed to the lake values, that stay pretty much
constant. Ammonium levels are again largely changing for the creek and no trend can be de-
tected at first sight. As for the lake, slight increasing ammonium values from approximately
20 to 50 µg-N/L are hidden by the scaling of the graph.
The amounts of total Phosphorus (TP) and total Nitrogen (TN) in both the creek and
the lake are shown in Figure 9 below:
Page 26 of 47
==PAGE:31==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
Fig. 9. On the left: total Phosphorous (TP)in Damhus lake and Harrestrup creek water samples,analyzed
once per month, with the detection limit indicated. On the right, total Nitrogen (TN) in creek and lake
water samples, analyzed on a weekly basis.
TP in the lake remains constantly close to the detection limit of 50µ g/L during the first
months, before going undetected. Creek TP levels are higher than the lake concentrations,
with a peak value of 99 µg/L on the second of April. Both the creek and the lake present a
decreasing trend over time, with values ranging from approximately 2500 to 1600 µg/L for
the creek, with a peak value of 3260 µg/L recorded on the second of April as well. Lake
levels are once again lower and span from approximately 1700 to 1200 µg/L. The second of
April was a dry day, with low cloud cover.
Fig. 10. On the left: Total organic carbon (TOC) in the water of Damhus lake and Harrestrup creek. On
the right: Total carbon (TC) and total inorganic carbon (TIC) in the creek and in the lake. Monitoring was
conducted on a weekly basis, with day 0 being January 30, 2025.
Page 27 of 47
==PAGE:32==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
TOC exhibits an increasing trend over time for both the creek and the lake, as weather
conditions transition from winter to spring.
Until day 62 (April 2nd), the lake displays
slightly higher organic content than the creek, after which both ecosystems show similar
TOC values around 10 mg/L.
The creek shows TC and IC concentrations around twice the values observed for the lake
over the complete monitored period. The fraction of inorganic carbon with respect to total
carbon content is higher in the lake than in the creek.
The biological oxygen demand (BOD5) and its ratio with the chemical oxygen demand
(COD) are displayed in Figure 11 below:
Fig. 11. On the left: BOD5 of Damhus lake and Harrestrup creek. On the right: BOD5 and COD ratio
are displayed, in percentage. COD itself is not shown. Day 0 is January 30, 2025.
Biological oxygen demand is notably higher in the creek with an increasing trend ranging
from 5.49 to 7.14 (mg O2/L ), whereas the lake displays values around 3.5 (mg O2/L ), with
no distinguishable trend. In contrast, both creek and lake BOD5 /COD ratio clearly increase,
showing higher organic matter fraction within both water bodies.
Suspended solids are displayed further down in Section (ref).
Page 28 of 47
==PAGE:33==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
Fig. 12. On the left: phosphate concentration. On the right, Nox species and nitrites concentrations. All
concentrations were measured in Harrestrup creek on May 2d, 2025, over a time window of 24 hours.
This figure highlights diurnal variability in Harrestrup creek. A clear pattern can be
observed with the NOx species oscillation over the monitored 24 hours, with a crest of
approximately 390 µg-N/L at 20:13 pm, followed by a trough close to 70 µg- N/L at 04:13
am, before increasing again. Both phosphate and ammonium levels show the same dynamic
over the monitored time window, presenting oscillations of higher frequency, with two crests
and two troughs distinguishable.
Page 29 of 47
==PAGE:34==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
4.2
Study of SMFCs in a flow-through system
To investigate the efficiency of the sediment microbial fuel cells in this pilot project,
several physical and chemical parameters were monitored in all the reactors, as well as in
the total inlet and total outlet water. Physicochemical parameters include temperature, pH,
dissolved oxygen and conductivity, that are displayed in Figure 13 below:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 13. Average per treatment for temperature (a), dissolved oxygen (b), pH (c), and conductivity (d).
Day 0 is January 30,2025.
Seasonality effects are clearly visible, as mean temperature rise (after a first drop until
day 20) from 5 C° to 15 C°, with a peak temperature of 19.7 °C for charcoal SMFC, recorded
Page 30 of 47
==PAGE:35==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
on May 20. In contrast, pH values remain constant over the monitored period. Dissolved
oxygen present high variability, transitioning between increasing and decreasing trends. Con-
ductivity starts with a sharp increase until day 20 (February 19), with values ranging from
1150 to 2000 µs/cm, before diminishing until reaching the lowest value of around 700 µs/cm
on day 118 (May 28). This last conductivity measurement corresponds to a moderate rainfall
event ( as previously indicated in Table 1), that clearly diluted the concentrations of charged
compounds in the reactors.
Nutrients concentrations (phosphates, nitrates, nitrites, ammonium) were also moni-
tored and are displayed in Figure 14 below:
Page 31 of 47
==PAGE:36==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 14. Monitoring of nutrient concentrations: (a) PO3−
4 , (b) NH+
4 , (c) NO−
3 , and (d) NO−
2 ) in Harrestrup
Creek and Damhuss Lake. The mean concentration per treatment are shown, as well as the corresponding
detection limit. Standard deviations of the averages are not shown for clarity purpose. Day 0 is January 30,
2025.
Phosphate concentrations decrease abruptly in the first weeks, before going under de-
tection limit from day 40 to day 80, after which the concentrations increase again across all
treatments and controls. They follow a similar dynamic as phosphate levels in the creek and
in the lake, as previously shown in Figure 8. A similar comparison cam be made for nitrates,
that presents a steep linear decrease. The visible gap for both nitrates and nitrites values
between day 70 and day 118 is due to laboratory technical issues. Ammonium levels display
high variability across the whole time period.
Page 32 of 47
==PAGE:37==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
Total inlet and outlet water follow similar trends as the treatments shown in Figure
14. Interestingly, ammonium levels in the total inlet tend to dominate over total outlet
concentrations, as shown in Figure 15 below:
Fig. 15. Ammonium concentration for total inlet and total outlet water, with quantification limit indicated.
Day 0 is January 30, 2025.
In order to compare all the previous physicochemical parameters between treatments
(charcoal and steel SMFC) and controls (charcoal, steel OCP and controls),ranks were as-
signed to all the groups across all investigated parameters, as previously detailed in Section
3.3.9. The box plots below display the rank distribution for nutrients concentrations, regard-
less of time variation, as rank values are assigned to a specific group, and not to a specific
time :
Page 33 of 47
==PAGE:38==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
(a) PO3−
4
ranks
(b) NH+
4 ranks
(c) NO−
3 ranks
(d) NO−
2 ranks
Fig. 16. Rank distributions of nutrient concentrations (PO3−
4 , NH+
4 , NO−
3 , NO−
2 ) for the average values
per treatment (groups 1 to 5), as well as for Harrestrup Creek, Damhuss Lake, total inlet and total outlet
water, displayed with a classic R boxplot. The horizontal black line is the median rank value, the colored
box represents the Interval Inter Quantile values and the vertical line shows the Normal Variation for each
reactor.
These box plot show the overall spreading of the ranks around the median value for all
the investigated treatments. All groups don’t possess the same number of ranks, as nutrient
levels fell under quantification limit non homogeneously across the different treatments and
different nutrients analyzed. The size of the boxes is therefore not indicative of the sample
size, but of the spreading of values within the sample.
Page 34 of 47
==PAGE:39==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
Phosphates: Median ranks values are close to 25 across all treatments (groups 1 to 5),
while the lake clearly exhibits a lower value (median rank aroud 10). However, the Kruskal
Wallis test run over all the groups, with 8 degrees of freedom, showed no significant result,
with a p-value of 0,1921. After running the Mann Whitney (or Wilxcon test), the pairewise
comparison showed all non-significant results as well, except for the Creek and the Lake, for
which paire the p-value was 0,043.
Ammonium: The global rank distribution for ammonium is more centered around the
median values, pointing towards data that are more precisely represented by the median
rank value. The clearly visible difference between the lake median rank compared to all
other groups is therefore more representative of the actual rank distribution (assuming that
the sample size per group doesn’t differ so much, whis is the case, even though the sample
size are not displayed in the graph for visual clarity). This is corroborated by the result of
Kruskal Wallis test that gave a p value of 0.000489, allowing to assert a significant difference
in teh ranks distribution at least for one of the groups.
Subsequent pairwise Wilcoxon test showed the following adjusted p values:
Table 2
Significant Pairwise Wilcoxon Comparisons for NH+
4 (the non-significant results were ignored).
Group 1
Group 2
Adjusted p-value (BH)
1
Lake
0.00039
2
Lake
0.00273
3
Lake
0.00039
4
Lake
0.00039
5
Lake
0.00039
Nitrates: Median ranks are once again close to each other across all the groups, with
large values dispersion. No significant difference in the rank distribution was established
for nitrates, as the p-value computed with the Kruskal Wallis test was too high (0.8876).
Subsequent Wilcoxon test revealed no significant paire-wise comparison.
Nitrites: The lake displays once again a clearly lower median rank value than all other
groups, while the overall distributions are tightly centered around median rank values across
all groups. At least one significant difference in rank distribution was established, as the
Kurskal test provided a p value of 0.009. Subsequent Wilcoxcon test gave the following
significant paire-wise comparison results:
Page 35 of 47
==PAGE:40==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
Table 3
Significant Pairwise Wilcoxon Comparisons for NO−
2 , the non-significant results were ignored.
Group 1
Group 2
Adjusted p-value (BH)
1
Lake
0.0052
2
Lake
0.0012
3
Lake
0.0012
4
Lake
0.0012
5
Lake
0.0012
Creek
Lake
0.0012
Tot in
Lake
0.0052
Tot out
Lake
0.0040
4.2.1
Working potentials and open circuit potentials
The potentials recorded over the complete monitoring time period are displayed in
Figure 17 down below. An overall increase with time for all the reactors can be observed,
ranging from slightly negative potentials to a maximum of 965 (mV) in reactor 2.1 All reactors
display a slow increase in the first 20 to 30 days after day zero, followed by a sharp increase
around day 40, corresponding with the sediment inoculation at day 33. Both charcoal and
steel OCPs depict overall higher potentials than the working potentials of the corresponding
charcoal and steel SMFCs.
Page 36 of 47
==PAGE:41==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
(a) SMFC charcoal
(b) OCP charcoal
(c) SMFC steel
(d) OCP steel
Fig. 17. Working Potential measured in mV for: (a) SMFC charcoal, (b) OCP charcoal, and Open circuit
potential recorded for: (c) SMFC steel, (d) OCP steel. Day 0 is January 30, 2025.
Reactor 1.1 showed constant zero values, indicating the presence of a broken connection,
until day 113, where it abruptly increases to 145 (mV), that corresponds to the day when
the electrodes were changed. Reactors 1.2 and 1.3 present a singular decrease in potential
after day 80 until approximately day 110, before increasing sharply again.
Reactor 3.1
shows the sharpest increase before stabilizing at approximately a working potential of 700
(mV). Additionally, it can be seen that both OCPs tend to present larger spreading within
triplicates reactors than for the SMFCs.
Averages of the triplicates per treatment was not used as variable, as the standard deviation
was high.
To get a visual representation of the reactors performance, ranks were assigned to each
potential value (with respect to the total number of values using the rank() function in R).
Page 37 of 47
==PAGE:42==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
These ranks were then grouped per reactor, and displayed in the classic boy plot down below:
Fig. 18. Rank distribution per reactor for the potential values, computed over the complete monitoring
period. Colours indicate the 5 different treatments (charcoal SMFC in red, charcoal OCP in orange, steel
SMFC in green and steel OCP in dark green.
According to this first visual representation, the highest ranking values are seen in the
OCP steel (Reactors 4.1 to 4.3). The spreading and the tailing of the ranks around the
median value is quite diverse among the reactors. Reactor 1.1 shows the lowest ranks.
The Kruskal Wallis (run over all the groups) giving a p value very close to 0, at least one
significant difference among the rank distribution per group is established with very high
confidence.
Table 4
Kruskal-Wallis test result on potential rank distribution
Test
Degrees of Freedom
H Statistic
P-value
Kruskal-Wallis
11
124
2.64 × 10−21
To investigate which reactors do differ significantly, pairwise comparisons were done
using the Wilcoxcon test, which results are displayed in table ?? below, with adjusted p-
values:
Page 38 of 47
==PAGE:43==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
Fig. 19
Reactor 1.1 is indeed the one presenting the largest number of significant pairwise com-
parisons, (against all the other reactors).This was expected given Figure 18. SMFC charcoal
Reactors 1.2 and 1.3 differ significantly from the OCP steel reactors (4.1, and 4.3) which is
interesting, as we would generally expect such differences between treatments and controls.
However, no such difference is shown between 1.2 and 1.3 as SMFC charcoal treamtent and
their associated OCP charcoal controls (2.1 to 2.3). On that regard, reactors 3.2 and 3.3 are
showing significant difference with their associated controls (4.1 to 4.3).
gard, reactors 3.2 and 3.3 are showing significant difference with their associated controls
(4.1 to 4.3).
Page 39 of 47
==PAGE:44==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
4.2.2
Biological oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand
Fig. 20. On the left: Biological oxygen demand (BOD) in mg O2/L for Damhus Lake, Harrestrup Creek,
total inlet, total outlet, and average BOD per treatment. On the right : BOD/COD ratio. Day 0 is January
30, 2025.
An overall increase in biological oxygen demand is visible, with the exception of Damhus
lake total out water that decrease over the monitored period. This increase is also present
for the BOD/COD ratio, indicating larger fraction of biodegradable material in the water
as environmental conditions transition from winter to spring.
The Kurskal Wallis test revealed no significant difference among all the tested groups
(Harrestrup creek, Damhus lake, charcoal SMFC, charcoal OCP, steel SMFC, steel OCP,
total inlet, total outlet and controls), with a p value of 0.07522. Similar non-significant
results were found for chemical oxygen demand, with a p value of 0.6338.
Page 40 of 47
==PAGE:45==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
4.2.3
Total suspended solids and total volatile suspended solids
Fig. 21. On the left: total suspended solids (TSS)in all the monitored groups. On the right: volatile solids
(VSS) over TSS concentrations. Day 0 is January 30,2025.
Total suspended solids remain quite constant during the recorded time window. Values
are highly spread on day 20 between the different groups analyzed, with peak values of
33 g/L recorded for charcoal control mean values. VSS/TSS ratios depicts different trends
depending on the variables: lake ratios decrease over time, Steel SMFC and controls increase
while the remaining variables stay overall constant.
No significant differences among the rank distribution for both TSS and VSS could be
established, as the Kruskal Wallis test gave p values of 0.7925 and 0.981 respectively.
Page 41 of 47
==PAGE:46==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
4.3
Hydrolic Retention Time test
The conductivity measurements in reactor 1.1 of the SMFC charcoal treatment is dis-
played in Figure 22 down below.
It depicts a clear sharp increase corresponding to the
moment where the salt solution was added, at time t = 42 min, followed by a classic expo-
nential decrease, until the values stabilize at the initial equilibrium.
Fig. 22. Conductivity measurements in reactor 1.1 (SMFC charcoal) on May 2 nd 2025, in the context of
a pulse method HRT test.
A slight increase is visible around time of approximately 300 minutes, probably due to
dilution in the reactor following some light precipitation that occurred at that moment.
As detailed in 3.3.10, the corresponding curve of NaCl concentration was computed,
as well as the corresponding exit time distribution curve (E curve). The initial back-groud
conductivity (with the equivalent salinity) was removed in the two following graphs:
Page 42 of 47
==PAGE:47==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
4
Results
(a) NaCl concentration curve
(b) Residence time distribution curve
The y axis scales were not matched on purpose, as the E curve was completely flattened
when plotted until the maximum value of NaCl curve. The mean residence time is by defi-
nition given by:
˜t= WV
ν =10,46 (min)
The average residence time computed according to equation 5, knowing the area under
the NaCl curve given by equation 4 was given by:
˜t= 667 (min) ≈11(h)
Page 43 of 47
==PAGE:48==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
5
Discussion
5
Discussion
5.1
Harrestrup creek and Damhus lake monitoring
As previously shown in Figure 7, the creek and the lake are subject to seasonal variations
: while temperature increase for both the ecosystems, dissolved oxygen in mg/L diminishes,
which is expected, as gas solubility is negatively correlated with increasing temperatures. On
the other hand, oxygen saturation increases while transitioning from winter to spring tem-
peratures. Over-saturation occurred frequently in both the creek and the lake with values
up to 150 % , indicating active photosynthesis. Indeed, at equilibrium, the oxygen dissolu-
tion in the water will reach its solubility set by the local pressure and temperature, ie,100
% saturation. Over-saturation is typically the sign of enhanced biological activity, or wind
mixing .
Besides, photosynthesis is tightly coupled with pH in aquatic ecosystems: high photosynthe-
sis reduces CO2 concentration in the water, resulting in a decrease of carbonic acid amount,
thereby increasing the pH. Daily pH cycles following the light availability are typical , as
well as seasonal increase in pH following the photosynthesis boost in spring. These trends
are slightly visible for the lake, that shows a soft increase in pH values starting around day
90 (April 30,2025).
Conductivity being the amount of charged ions or particles, usually coming from wastew-
ater discharges, urban run-offs, or road salt, high conductivity is typically associated with
high pollutant loads in freshwater ecosystems (Ahmed and Hala, 2019). The creek shows
consistently high values, with a maximum of 2560 µs/cm in February, suggesting an impor-
tant chemical stress. The lake present lower and more stable values around 500 µs/cm over
the monitored period. This points towards a higher buffering capacity, probably due to the
dilution of charged ions in the larger volume.
Both the creek and the lake are nutrient rich ecosystems, especially regarding the TP
and TN levels. Harrestrup creek peak value of 98 µg/L combined with its consistently high
TP levels tend to hypertrophic conditions as established by the EEA. The threshold of 60
µg/L TP for good ecological status has been constantly exceeded over the monitored time
period. Damhus lake has been presenting lower TP values around 55 µg/L , thereby falling
under mesotrophic environmental conditions category.
Regarding total nitrogen, both the creek and the lake are excessively loaded, as their TN
values consistently exceeded the thresholds established by Denmark River Basin Management
Plans. Indeed, TN thresholds for lakes are set at 1 mg/L, while streams limits are established
at 1.5 mgN/L. Damhus lake exhibited maximum TN values of 1.7 mg/L and minum values of
1 mg, while Harrestrup creek TN peaked at 2.7 mg/L, overshooting the required thresholds.
Organic matter content has been among other parameters, represented by the biological
oxygen demand, that is the equivalent oxygen concentration needed for biological degradation
of organic matter. On the other hand, chemical oxygen demand indicate the total amount
of oxygen needed to chemically oxydize the organic matter. BOD/COD ratio provide there-
fore insights of the portion of organic matter that is biodegradable. Damhus lake presented
Page 44 of 47
==PAGE:49==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
5
Discussion
relatively low BOD values, of around 3 mg/L, pointing towards slightly polluted waters. On
the other hand, Harrestrup creek presented steadily rising BOD values, ranging from 5.5 to
7.2 mg/L, indicating a moderate pollution level. The ratio of BOD/COD were ranging from
approximately 10 to 20 % for both the creek and the lake, indicating that the fraction of
biodegradable organic matter was quite low with respect to the total organic matter content.
Regarding the nutrient levels, seasonality impacts are visible with nitrates curves for
both the creek and the lake: a sharp decrease in nitrate concentration matches with spring
boost of photosynthesis. This is also valid for phosphate, even though during the second
half of the monitored period, phosphates increase again, suggesting that the levels are in
excess of what is needed for primary production. This hypothesis is aligned with the TP
trend in Hrrestrup creek, that also increase over time after the spring photosynthesis boost.
Additionally, nitrate exhibited a decreasing tendency over the monitored period, suggesting
continuous consumption by primary producers. TN also displayed a diminishing trend over
time. These combined findings could suggest that Harrestrup creek and Damhus lake are
Nitrogen limited ecosystems.
The autosampler experiment allowed to recorded NOx species diurnal cycle, with con-
centrations decreasing over night, and increasing during the day. This enforces the hypothesis
that NOx levels are probably most of all driven by uptake from the primary producers.
Suspended solid values for the creek indicate towards a moderate pollution , with a peak
TSS value of 41.7 mg/L. High ratios of VSS/TSS of around 40 % confirms that a large amount
of suspended solid is inorganic, pointing towards urban runoff pollution events. Damhus lake
showed lower TSS levels of around 7 g/L, indicating lower pollution level, probably due to
the strong dilution effect of the lake volume that is obviously significantly larger than the
creek.
Additionally, high organic carbon concentrations have been recorded over the complete mon-
itored window, for both the creek and the lake, with TOC values ranging from 7 to 12 mg/L.
With respect to that criteria, both Damhus lake and Harrestrup creek fall within moderate
to highly polluted ecosystems.
5.2
Study of SMFCs in a flowthrough system
Differences in both WP and OCP have been successfully implemented in the sediment
microbial fuel cell pilot project experiment, with a clear tendency of increased potentials for
reactors inoculated with creek sediment as opposed to lake sediment. Additionally, natural
sediment build up was not found to be sufficient to provide substrate for microbial activity
in anoxic conditions. Both OCPs displayed higher values than the corresponding SMFCs,
that is expected, as electrical current in the connected treatment result in electrical potential
decrease. The most efficient treatment, ie, the one presenting the highest pair of WP and
OCP was found to be the steel electrodes, as they increased the most rapidly and stabilized
at a highest WP of around 750 (mV) for steel SMFC, and 900 (mV) for steel OCP.
Additionally, steel electrodes were the ones presenting significant difference between treat-
Page 45 of 47
==PAGE:50==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
5
Discussion
ment reactors and control reactors, suggesting with high confidence that the observed dif-
ference in potential is not due to random variation only.
On the other hand, no similar significant results could be found for all the analyzed pollutants
when comparing treatments against controls, the only significant results were consistently
related to the lake.
Moreover, pollutants concentrations in the reactors should be interpreted with caution with
respect to the hypothesis of SMFC impact, as sampling was done at the surface of all reactors
and not directly over the cathode. This choice was made for both practical and theoretical
reasons, to avoid disturbing the reactor’s bottom when sampling, and because complete mix-
ing of the reactors was assumed during the whole duration of the experiment. Stratification
was checked twice, by measuring nutrients directly at the cathode and at the usual sampling
location, and no difference could be observed, suggesting that the assumption holds.
5.3
Hydrolic retention time test
The discrepancy between the area under an ideal E curve (being unity) and the com-
puted area in Section 3.3.10 of 1,55 might be due to the slight increase visible on all the
curves, that deviates from a classic exponential decrease. Additionally, highly variable flows
could have biased the results. The calculated mean HRT is therefore not exploitable.
Page 46 of 47
==PAGE:51==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
6
Conclusion
6
Conclusion
A pilot scale experiment was conducted form January 30 to May 28, 2025, to investi-
gate SMFCs potential in preventing sediment pollutants leaching in a flow through system.
An array of physical, biological and chemical parameters were analyzed to assess and com-
pare the water quality of SMFCs against controls and to evaluate the current status of
Harrestrup creek and Damehus lake ecosystems. The findings of the present study pointed
towards ecological stress for both ecosystems, with some nuances: the creek showed higher
concentrations than the lake for all the investigated pollutants, with TP levels constantly
exceeding the 60 µg/L threshold,thereby falling under poor to moderate ecological status.
While exhibiting systematic lower pollutant levels, Damhus lake is still chemically stressed,
as TP and TN levels are consistently high as well as organic matter content.
The SMFCs were successfully implemented, with significant difference between steel SMFC
and steel OCP potentials, warranting to further monitoring.
However, no significant differences in the monitored pollutants could be established between
the treatments and controls.
The main limitation of this project is the lack of control on the flow, that prevents
accurate HRT calculation, that is crucial in order to assess and optimize the design of this
pilot project.
Page 47 of 47
==PAGE:52==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
References
References
(2023). Vandområdeplanerne 2021-2027.
Ahm, M., Thorndahl, S., Nielsen, J. E., and Rasmussen, M. R. (2016).
Estimation of
combined sewer overflow discharge: A software sensor approach based on local water level
measurements. Water Science and Technology, 74(11):2683–2696.
Ahmed, E. and Hala, A. (2019). Chemical indicators for pollution detection in terrestrial
and aquatic ecosystems. Bulletin of the National Research Centre, 43(1):18.
Algar, C. K., Howard, A., Ward, C., and Wanger, G. (2020). Sediment microbial fuel cells
as a barrier to sulfide accumulation and their potential for sediment remediation beneath
aquaculture pens. Scientific Reports, 10(1).
Bartram, J. and Chorus, I. (2014). Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water : a Guide to their Public
Health Consequences, Monitoring and Management. CRC Press.
Berner, R. A. (1981). A new geochemical classification of sedimentary environments. Journal
of Sedimentary Petrology, 51(2):359–365.
Brock, A. L., Kostadinova, K., Mørk-Pedersen, E., Hensel, F., Zhang, Y., Valverde-Pérez,
B., Stedmon, C. A., and Trapp, S. (2023). Remediation of marine dead zones by enhancing
microbial sulfide oxidation using electrodes. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 193.
Chrysochoidis, V., Gruber, G., Hofer, T., Mikkelsen, P. S., and Vezzaro, L. (2025). Rethink-
ing modelling of particulate pollutants in combined sewer overflows (CSOs): A focus on
model structure. Journal of Hydrology, 659.
Conley, D. J., Carstensen, J., Ærtebjerg, G., Christensen, P. B., Dalsgaard, T., Hansen,
J. L., and Josefson, A. B. (2007). Long-term changes and impacts of hypoxia in Danish
coastal waters. In Ecological Applications, volume 17. Ecological Society of America.
Ebrahimi, E. and Ojani, M. R. (2024). Phosphorus Dynamics in Soil-Water-Sediment Envi-
ronment. Technical report.
Essington, T. E. and Carpenter, S. R. (2000). Nutrient cycling in lakes and streams: Insights
from a comparative analysis.
European Commission (2025). European commission takes action to protect and restore
europe’s waters. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_25_
342. Press release.
European Environment Agency (2021). Ecological status of surface waters in europe.
urlhttps://www.eea.europa.eu/en/analysis/indicators/ecological-status-of-surface-waters.
Consulté le June 27, 2025.
Page I of ??
==PAGE:53==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
References
European Parliament and Council (2000). Directive 2000/60/ec of the european parliament
and of the council of 23 october 2000 establishing a framework for community action in
the field of water policy. Official Journal of the European Communities, L 327, 22.12.2000,
p. 1–73.
European Parliament and Council (2013). Directive 2013/39/eu of the european parliament
and of the council of 12 august 2013 amending directives 2000/60/ec and 2008/105/ec as
regards priority substances in the field of water policy. Official Journal of the European
Union, L 226, 24.8.2013, p. 1–17.
Haxthausen, K. A. v., Lu, X., Zhang, Y., Gosewinkel, U., Petersen, D. G., Marzocchi, U.,
Brock, A. L., and Trapp, S. (2021). Novel method to immobilize phosphate in lakes using
sediment microbial fuel cells. Water Research, 198.
Hupfer, M. and Lewandowski, J. (2008). Oxygen controls the phosphorus release from lake
sediments - A long-lasting paradigm in limnology.
Jørnsgård, L. M. S. (2025). Sediment microbial fuel cells to enhance removal of nutrients and
pollutants from creek water in a flow-through system. Msc thesis, Technical University of
Denmark (DTU), DTU Sustain, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. Supervisors: Stefan Trapp,
Borja Valverde-Pérez; External supervisor: Andreas Libonati Brock.
Københavns Kommune (2019). Vandområdeplan 2015–2021: Kortlægning og vurdering af
københavns kommunes ferske vande. Technical report, Københavns Kommune, Teknik-
og Miljøforvaltningen, København, Danmark. In Danish. Identifies Damhussøen as having
moderate ecological status under the WFD.
Levenspiel, O. (1999). Chemical reaction engineering. Wiley.
Logan, B. E., Hamelers, B., Rozendal, R., Schröder, U., Keller, J., Freguia, S., Aelterman, P.,
Verstraete, W., and Rabaey, K. (2006). Microbial fuel cells: Methodology and technology.
Pereira, A. C. and Mulligan, C. N. (2023). Practices for Eutrophic Shallow Lake Water
Remediation and Restoration: A Critical Literature Review.
Perry, W. B., Ahmadian, R., Munday, M., Jones, O., Ormerod, S. J., and Durance, I. (2024).
Addressing the challenges of combined sewer overflows.
Peter Blomqvist, A. G. and Elmgren, R. (2004). Why the limiting nutrient differs between
temperate coastal seas and freshwater lakes. Limnology and Oceanography, 49(6):2236–
2241.
Rubæk, G. H., Kristensen, K., Olesen, S. E., Østergaard, H. S., and Heckrath, G. (2013).
Phosphorus accumulation and spatial distribution in agricultural soils in Denmark. Geo-
derma, 209-210:241–250.
Søndergaard, M. (2009). Redox Potential Definitions and General Aspects. Technical report.
Page II of ??
==PAGE:54==
Testing SMFCs in a flow-through system
References
Visual Crossing (2025). Visual crossing weather data. Accessed: 2025-06-26.
Wang, H., García Molinos, J., Heino, J., Zhang, H., Zhang, P., and Xu, J. (2021). Eutroph-
ication causes invertebrate biodiversity loss and decreases cross-taxon congruence across
anthropogenically-disturbed lakes. Environment International, 153.
Xie, C., Li, X., Tang, Z., Chu, W., and Li, H. (2024). Enhanced combined sewer overflow
treatment by rapid magnetic flocculation–magnetic sedimentation: efficiency and mecha-
nism. Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology, 10:1586–1594.
Yindong, T., Xiwen, X., Miao, Q., Jingjing, S., Yiyan, Z., Wei, Z., Mengzhu, W., Xuejun,
W., and Yang, Z. (2021). Lake warming intensifies the seasonal pattern of internal nutrient
cycling in the eutrophic lake and potential impacts on algal blooms. Water Research, 188.
Page III of ??
