==PAGE:1==
Modelling of Building Operational Faults
for improved IEQ And Energy Efficiency
Author
Sara Rhiger - s193927
Supervisors
Rune Korsholm Andersen
Jørn Toftum
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
June 6, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Abstract
Improving energy efficiency in buildings is critical to reducing global carbon emissions and
ensuring sustainable performance and operation. The literature suggests that early detection
and diagnosis of faults through advanced fault detection and diagnosis (FDD) technologies
can affect energy savings of up to 30%, while also improving occupant comfort and indoor
environmental quality. Despite increasing research interest in data-driven FDD methods,
most practical implementations still rely on rule-based and trend analysis approaches. These
methods typically only capture major faults, often missing minor but impactful issues due to
limited automation and a heavy dependence on expert interpretation. One of the main chal-
lenges in developing robust data-driven FDD models is gathering sufficient training data and
ensuring the generalizability of these models to transfer them from laboratory data to differ-
ent real-world buildings, which is often overlooked in the literature. This thesis presents a
proof-of-concept study focused on detecting three occupant-centric and one sensor faults us-
ing simple, well-established classification algorithms, Random Forest and XGBoost, trained
on supervised simulated building performance data for an entire year. The models are first
validated on a different simulated zone and then tested on measured data from a real-world
meeting room to assess their generalizability and applicability. The results show that both
the binary and multiclass models perform well on the simulated data, achieving high preci-
sion and recall scores, indicating reliability and robustness. When applied to measured data,
the binary XGBoost models outperform the multiclass models and effectively detect the im-
plemented faults. This suggests that, for specific fault types, with this particular type of
data and under controlled conditions, models trained on simulation data can be successfully
transferred to real-world applications.
All data, simulations, scripts and descriptions of the files can be found in the GitHub repos-
itory at: https://github.com/SaraRhiger/FDD-model-for-occupant-centric-faults.
git
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my gratitude to Wihlborgs A/S for their valuable support through-
out this project. Their assistance in providing measurement devices, access to real-world
data, participating in the human experiment quiz, and genuine interest in the project has
been key to the execution and vision of the project.
I would also like to thank Jørn Toftum and Rune Korsholm Andersen, my supervisors,
for their continuous support, insightful guidance, and constructive feedback throughout the
course of this work. Their expertise and encouragement have been greatly appreciated.
A special thanks goes to Mikkel Odgaard, from the Pioneer Centre for Artificial Intel-
ligence, for his guidance in the AI field and for encouraging me to explore this area. Our
conversations, bridging expertise in artificial intelligence and architectural engineering, not
only strengthened the technical direction of this project but also sparked valuable discussions
and raised important questions at both practical and conceptual levels. This interdisciplinary
dialogue has been both inspiring and foundational for the work presented here.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Machine learning and FFD in buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Method
9
3.1
Data generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Description of implemented faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Simulation of synthetic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.3
Measured data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Development of models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Human performance experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results
17
4.1
FDD models with simulated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.1
Binary models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.2
Multiclass model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.3
Evaluation of model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Testing the FDD models with measured data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Discussion
26
5.1
Key findings and challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Conclusion
31
References
32
Appendix
I
I
Fault Simulation Timestamps
I
II Human performance result
IV
III Human performance experiment
VII
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
Today, buildings account for 32% of the total global energy consumption [1], making en-
ergy efficiency in buildings a critical concern. A key question, therefore, is how to optimize
building performance and reduce energy waste. Building Management Systems (BMS) are
widely implemented in modern buildings, enabling the monitoring and analysis of system
settings, energy consumption, and indoor climate based on detailed sensor data. Buildings
often fail to perform accordingly to design expectations due to improper equipment instal-
lation, system failures, occupant behavior, or incorrect system control [2]. BMS plays a
crucial role in building commissioning, aiming that systems operate as intended and are op-
timized for efficiency. Studies demonstrate that effective monitoring and commissioning can
lead to significant energy savings [2]. Currently, energy efficiency improvements and fault
detection in buildings are often based on benchmarking and rule-based approaches, which
require significant time and expert knowledge to analyze each incident. As a result, these
methods typically only identify major faults that cause a complete stop of a building system
[3]. However, minor faults, whether occupant-centric or system-related, also shift the system
away from its optimal operating point, potentially leading to increased energy consumption
or reduced occupant comfort. Unfortunately, such faults often remain undetected for ex-
tended periods or never solved [3]. However, as the volume of collected building data grows,
a key challenge emerges: How can data-driven approaches be leveraged to maximize
the potential of monitored building data?
For years, researchers have investigated this question, dedicating significant effort to devel-
oping various approaches and models for fault detection and diagnosis (FDD) for building
systems. While FDD and anomaly detection are well established in sectors such as aerospace,
energy, and automotive, their application in the building sector remains in its early stages
globally [4]. Despite this, the potential is substantial. Automated fault detection and di-
agnosis (AFDD) in buildings offers the advantage of automatic monitoring and detection of
faults in real-time, which can be reported directly to the building technology manager and
provided throughout the entire lifespan of the building. The early detection and diagnosis
of faults through advanced FDD technologies could lead to energy savings of up to 30% [5].
When designing and developing the FDD models, several decisions must be made. First,
should the model focus solely on fault detection, or should it also perform fault diagnosis?
Additionally, which part of the building and its systems should the model be designed for?
Second, which algorithm or combination of algorithms should be used? Each of these choices
presents its own set of challenges and advantages, which in turn influence the model’s accu-
racy, robustness, and practical applicability.
While substantial effort has been invested in developing increasingly powerful artificial intel-
ligence algorithms for FDD, comparatively less attention has been given to evaluating their
real-world effectiveness, robustness, and practical applicability [6]. Literature reviews and
market studies have found that few of the research models have been tested on real-world
data and never been seen in any application outside the science domain [3]. The limited fo-
Page 1 of 33
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
cus has been placed on refining methodologies through a detailed understanding of the FDD
process for building energy systems, highlighting the need for more validation, benchmark-
ing, and testing to ensure these methodologies and algorithms are truly beneficial beyond
theoretical or experimental settings [7].
The aim of this project is therefore to develop an FDD model based on a simple setup, uti-
lizing simple classification-based machine learning techniques trained on simulated building
performance data, and to investigate whether it is possible to transfer the model to real-
world measured data. The objective is to employ a simple and well-established algorithm
known for its effectiveness in outlier detection. To ensure a manageable and transferable
framework, the study focuses on three occupant-centric and one sensor faults, which are
relatively easy to implement in both simulated and real-world environments. Furthermore,
these types of faults remain underexplored in the existing literature [8]. Their distinct pat-
terns also make them more identifiable within datasets, making them well-suited for initial
investigation and validation. The project specifically investigates two key challenges: (1)
The ability of an FDD model trained on one simulated zone to generalize effectively when
validated on a different simulated zone, and (2) the feasibility of using simulation generated
data to train models that can accurately detect and diagnose faults, when applied to real
measured sensor data. The robustness and generalization of both the model and training
data are a central focus.
Page 2 of 33
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
2
Background
Faults can occur in various areas of a building and its systems. Fault detection and diagnosis
(FDD) can be applied at various levels within the building, including individual systems,
zone levels, and/or the entire building. Andersen et al. propose the Energy System Ter-
minology (EST) as a framework for distinguishing between different building systems [9].
The EST tool categorizes systems into three groups: Energy distribution (e.g., air handling
units), energy use (e.g., whole buildings or zones), and energy conversion (e.g., centralized
heating systems). The majority of the literature on FDD in buildings focuses on energy
distribution and conversion systems, with particular attention given to air handling units
and centralized cooling systems [4].
Various types of faults can occur within each EST category, but there is no universally
accepted terminology or hierarchical classification for individual faults. Literature typically
suggests classifying faults into three general categories: Condition-based, behavior-based,
and outcome-based faults [6]. This project focuses on energy use at the zone level, examin-
ing occupant-centric behavior and faults within the outcome-based category. Outcome-based
faults are defined as "a state in which a quantifiable outcome or performance metric for a sys-
tem or piece of equipment deviates from a correct or reference outcome, termed the expected
outcome" [6].
Figure 1: Classification of the fault detection and diagnosis methods
Page 3 of 33
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
Two main approaches can be distinguished when detecting and diagnosing faults in build-
ings: Knowledge-based and data-driven approaches.
The classification of FDD methods
varies across the literature, and there is no universally accepted classification of the ap-
proaches. The classification was initiated by Katipamula et al. and has been developed
ever since [10]. In this project, the classification shown in Figure 1 is adopted, based on a
synthesis of existing research.
The knowledge-based approach relies heavily on domain expertise and typically features
a clear physical interpretation of the building. This approach can be broadly categorized
into model-based and rule-based methods. Model-based methods detect faults by compar-
ing measured values to expected values derived from physical or mathematical models, such
as simulations. In contrast, rule-based methods employ predefined rules or threshold con-
ditions grounded in expert knowledge and theoretical principles. Wang et al. emphasize
the importance of continuous commissioning throughout the lifecycle of a building using a
knowledge-based approach. Their study employs trend analysis as a method for monitoring
and fault detection and realized and actual energy saving of 10% based on the commission-
ing case study. At the same time, the authors underscore the need for more advanced and
automated FDD strategies to improve detection efficiency [2]. The model- and rule-based ap-
proaches can also be integrated, as demonstrated by Song et al., who developed an FDD tool
combining both methods. In their framework, model-based techniques were used for fault
detection, while rule-based logic was applied to localize the fault within an air-conditioning
system [11]. A common characteristic of knowledge-based models is their reliance on expert
input during development and operation, as these models cannot be generated automatically.
These models are typically labor-intensive and require continuous monitoring, tuning, and
analysis by domain experts. However, a key advantage lies in their simplicity, transparency,
and interoperability, which make them attractive for practical deployment [12]. Further-
more, these models can incorporate a variety of data sources beyond sensor measurements,
such as maintenance logs and equipment status, to enrich the diagnostic process.
The data-driven approach focuses on identifying patterns within data. These patterns
are extracted using algorithms and do not necessarily have a direct physical meaning. In the
data-driven approach, statistical models or artificial intelligence (AI) models can be utilized.
AI models can be further categorized into neural networks and machine learning techniques.
This project focuses on the machine learning aspect of the data-driven approach, specifically
on supervised classification models, and will therefore remain the main focus of the following
section.
The knowledge-based approach was the dominant method in the literature for FDD in build-
ing systems from the 1980s until approximately 1998. In the late 1990s, data-driven methods
for AFDD began to emerge and have become the dominant approach in academic literature.
Since 1998, approximately 79% of published studies have concentrated on data-driven tech-
niques [7]. Despite this academic trend, most commercially available FDD systems still rely
on knowledge-based methods, typically employing simple rules or threshold values to trig-
ger alarm messages when specific parameters exceed predefined limits. This approach often
Page 4 of 33
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
2.1
Machine learning and FFD in buildings
makes it challenging and time-consuming to diagnose the underlying causes of abnormal
performance, and faults frequently remain unresolved. There are three main reasons for the
continued preference for knowledge-based approaches:
• Although many AI-based AFDD models demonstrate promising results on specific
systems and datasets, their real-world applicability remains limited.
The diversity
of building systems, configurations, and boundary conditions makes it challenging to
generalize these models [13].
• Rule-based approaches are conceptually simple and straightforward to implement in
software [14].
• In many buildings, sensor data is insufficient in quality or quantity to support the
deployment of advanced AFDD models [3].
2.1
Machine learning and FFD in buildings
Machine learning (ML) is a branch of artificial intelligence (AI) that enables computers to
learn patterns from data and make predictions or decisions. ML can generally be categorized
into two types: supervised and unsupervised learning. In the literature on data-driven meth-
ods for FDD, 26% of studies applied regression-based methods (supervised learning), 30%
used classification methods (supervised learning), and 44% utilized unsupervised learning
techniques [7]. This project will employ supervised learning, which will be the primary focus
of the following section.
In general, the FDD process consists of two main parts: fault detection and fault diagnosis.
Fault detection determines whether a fault has occurred, while fault diagnosis identifies the
type or cause of the fault. Fault detection and fault diagnosis methods can be discussed
separately or as an integrated approach within a single model, depending on the system’s
application and complexity. The steps involved in the process are illustrated in Figure 2.
This project will focus on developing a one-step FDD model.
Figure 2: Steps in a FDD model
Page 5 of 33
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
2.1
Machine learning and FFD in buildings
The performance of a trained machine learning model is evaluated and refined based on a
validation dataset, and then tested on a separate test dataset to assess its accuracy and
generalization ability before deployment in real-world applications.
Unsupervised learning models identify patterns in data without predefined labels, allow-
ing them to detect structures and relationships. Unsupervised learning is commonly used for
three main tasks: Clustering, association rule learning (ARL), and dimensionality reduction.
Principal Components Analysis (PCA) is the most widely used technique for unsupervised
fault detection [7]. Cotrufo et al. propose an effective PCA model for fault detection during
the commissioning of a chiller system. The model utilizes seven input variables to detect
outliers, and once a fault is identified, it highlights the variable most likely responsible [15].
While the unsupervised approach is useful for fault and variable identification, it does not
enable direct diagnosis of the root cause of the fault. Therefore, it typically needs to be
combined with another algorithm or a knowledge-based method to form a two-step FDD
process. Fully automated one-step fault detection and diagnosis using unlabeled datasets
remains an unresolved challenge in the field [16].
Supervised learning is trained using labeled data, where the correct outputs are pro-
vided to the model during training. By learning the relationships between input variables
and their corresponding labels, the model can generalize patterns and make predictions on
new, unseen data. Supervised learning methods are broadly categorized into regression and
classification models. In the literature, 30% of studies have applied classification methods,
with support vector machines (SVM) being the most commonly used algorithm [4]. Classi-
fication models offer the possibility of developing a one-step FDD model for fault detection
and diagnosis in a one step model. However, they are also frequently used in two-step models
in the literature. This project will focus on one-step classification models, with the classifi-
cation methods serving as the primary focus in the section below.
Classification models are used to assign input data to predefined categories, known as
classes. Classification tasks are categorized based on the number and exclusivity of class
labels, as follows:
• Binary classification groups data into two categories, typically distinguishing be-
tween normal and abnormal instances.
This method is commonly used for outlier
detection, such as identifying whether a system is operating under normal or faulty
conditions.
• Multiclass classification groups data into more than two exclusive categories, mean-
ing each instance belongs to only one class. This approach is useful for identifying
different fault types, such as airflow issues, sensor failures, or control malfunctions.
• Multilabel classification allows a single data instance to belong to multiple cate-
gories simultaneously, meaning the classes are not mutually exclusive. For example,
an operational issue may be caused by both an airflow problem and a temperature
regulation failure simultaneously.
Page 6 of 33
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
2.1
Machine learning and FFD in buildings
Different classification algorithms are capable of handling these classification types, each
with its own advantages and challenges depending on the application. Various studies have
applied different algorithm approaches in FDD. Most algorithms can be adapted to one-class,
multiclass, and multilabel classification tasks. The following section will introduce some of
the most commonly used classification algorithms.
Support vector machines (SVMs) are among the most widely used classification algo-
rithms for FDD. Its primary objective is to find the optimal hyperplane that best separates
data points into distinct categories. Although SVMs are most effective with low-dimensional
data and are commonly used for one-class classification tasks, they are also applied in mul-
ticlass classification. For example, Liang and Du developed a multi-layer SVM-based FDD
method for chillers [17]. SVMs are often combined with other models to enhance accuracy.
For instance, Tun et al. integrated SVM as an additional classifier, leveraging feature impor-
tance to improve performance [18]. SVMs are well known for their strong overall performance
in FDD. However, a key limitation of the algorithm is its low interpretability, making it less
transparent compared to other machine learning models.
Figure 3: Visualization of a random forest decision tree. Taken from https://www.ibm.
com/think/topics/random-forest
Random forest (RF) is an ensemble learning method that combines multiple decision trees
to improve predictive accuracy and robustness. Instead of relying on a single tree, RF con-
structs multiple trees, each trained on a randomly selected subset of the dataset’s features.
The final classification is determined through majority voting, where the class predicted most
frequently across all trees is chosen as the final output. A visualization of the RF concept is
shown in Figure 3, illustrating how multiple trees contribute to a combined decision. By av-
eraging multiple decision trees, RF reduces variance, thereby lowering the risk of overfitting
and improving its ability to handle complex and imbalanced datasets. Bode et al. tested
various ML algorithms, including RF, for FDD in heat pump systems. Their model was
trained on laboratory data and validated on a real-world system, emphasizing the challenges
associated with transferring models to real-world operational environments [3]. Parzinger
Page 7 of 33
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
2.1
Machine learning and FFD in buildings
et al. developed a model using RF regression to predict energy consumption in HVAC sys-
tems, detecting faults by comparing with the measured energy consumption. Faults were
diagnosed through residual analysis, highlighting the potential of combining data-driven and
knowledge-based methods [19]. The appeal of decision trees also lies in their interpretability,
which allows for understanding and validation through expert insights.
Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) is an ensemble learning algorithm based on
decision trees. Unlike traditional decision trees or random forests, XGBoost builds trees
sequentially, with each new tree learning from the errors of the previous ones to improve
predictive performance. This boosting approach allows the model to progressively refine its
predictions, making it a powerful and accurate machine learning algorithm for classification
and regression tasks. Although XGBoost has not been widely adopted in FDD approaches,
possibly due to its relatively recent development, it offers significant advantages and is dom-
inant and preferred in other industries. The algorithm is highly efficient with large datasets,
handles class imbalances effectively, and often outperforms other algorithms in terms of ac-
curacy [16]. For example, Zhang et al. combined XGBoost with clustering for a two-step
FDD strategy to detect and diagnose three faults in a chiller. The model demonstrated high
performance and generalization ability, outperforming the SVM model when compared [20].
Given its strong predictive capabilities and ability to handle complex datasets, XGBoost
presents a promising approach for FDD applications.
Page 8 of 33
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
3
Method
The primary objective of this project is to develop binary and multiclass one-step machine
learning models capable of detecting and diagnosing three occupant-related and one sensor
fault on the building zone level. The models are classification models using decision trees.
The models were initially trained on synthetic data generated from simulations of a single
zone. They were then validated on data from a different simulated zone to evaluate their gen-
eralization capability and robustness. As a final step, the models were applied to real-world
sensor data to assess whether a model trained on simulated building data can be effectively
transferred to measured data from an actual building. To support the discussion around
the relevance and potential of data-driven FDD, the performance of the machine learning
models is benchmarked against human performance in detecting and diagnosing faults.
The model’s input features include zone-level or whole-building heating consumption, mean
air temperature, relative humidity, CO2 concentration, global horizontal irradiance, and out-
door air temperature. The overall methodology and the key steps are summarized in Figure
4, and described in detail in the following sections.
Figure 4: The approach for the project
3.1
Data generation
3.1.1
Description of implemented faults
Three occupant-centric faults and one sensor fault were investigated in this project. An
occupant-centric fault refers to a fault caused by the behavior of the building’s occupants.
The selected faults were evaluated based on their impact on zone performance, considering
both indoor climate conditions and energy consumption. Unlike other studies that focus on
system-level faults, this analysis was conducted at the zone level, meaning that technical
system data was not included in the datasets. The following faults, as shown in Table 1,
were investigated and implemented in the models.
Page 9 of 33
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
3.1
Data generation
Table 1: Overview of implemented fault codes in the model as well as description of the
faults
Fault class
Fault name
Fault description
1
Open window
Opened window during heating season
without turning off the heat.
2
Heating shut down
Thermostat set to 0 °C for a longer period
of time during heating season.
3
Uncalibrated CO2 sensor
CO2 sensor measuring values below
400 PPM due to failure in calibration.
4
High setpoint
Thermostat turned to above 25 °C
for a longer period of time
during the heating season.
The fault class refers to the class that the models need to detect in order to detect and
diagnose the correct fault.
3.1.2
Simulation of synthetic data
The goal of the simulations was to generate datasets representing the general performance
of commercial buildings, both with and without the above faults. These datasets were used
as training and validation data for the classification-based FDD models.
The simulations were conducted in IDA ICE, a building simulation tool for indoor climate
and energy modeling. Building 373D at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) served
as the simulated case study for this project. The building, known as Skylab, functions as
an innovation and entrepreneurial hub for students and staff at DTU. The aim was to simu-
late realistic operating conditions while avoiding excessive detail or overly building-specific
parameters, ensuring that the generated data remained generalized and applicable to other
typical commercial buildings. Occupancy schedules were generated using an occupancy sim-
ulator tool [21], representing the occupancy patterns of a standard office building. Additional
building information was sourced from construction file archives. If specific data were un-
available, standard values from industry guidelines were applied.
Indoor climate and energy data from Zone 1 in Building 373D were used to train the model,
while Zone 8 served as the test zone. Figure 5 highlights the two selected zones on the ground
floor of Building 373D. The two zones were intentionally chosen due to their differences in
geometric shape, façade orientation, and size, to test the robustness and generalizability of
the developed models. As illustrated in Figure 6, Zone 8 features extensive south-facing glaz-
ing, whereas Zone 1 has glazing only on its north façade. The variations lead to differences
in occupancy levels and internal heat gains. The building was simulated with a constant
air volume (CAV) ventilation system supplying 2 l/(s·m2) to each zone. The U-values for
the building components are provided in Table 2, while other key input parameters for the
simulations are summarized in Table 3.
Page 10 of 33
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
3.1
Data generation
Figure 5: Floor plan of the simulated building with simulated zones as cross-hatched
(a) South facade in Zone 8
(b) West facade in Zone 8
(c) North facade Zone 1
Figure 6: Facades in simulated zones. East facade zone 1 is not included due to no glass
area.
Page 11 of 33
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
3.1
Data generation
Table 2: U-values of the building parts
U-value [W/(m2K)]
External walls
0,3
Roof
0,23
Slab
0,21
Window
0,74
Table 3: Key inputs for IDA ICE simulation for Zone 1 and 8
Zone 1
Zone 8
Area
33 m2
155 m2
Heating setpoint
21 °C
21 °C
Equipment and light
765 W
2800 W
Heating capacity
2000 W
6000 W
The open window, low and high setpoint were simulated, whereas the fault of a uncalibrated
CO2 sensor was created by directly manipulating the data, specifically, by replacing the CO2
concentration values in the dataset with 200 PPM over a defined period.
Each fault was implemented in a separate simulation, and a combined simulation includ-
ing all four faults was subsequently conducted, resulting in a total of five datasets that
enabled both binary and multi-class classification.
All datasets span a full year, allowing the analysis to account for seasonal variations and
their impact on building performance. The timestamps for the simulated faults in Zones
1 and 8 are provided in Appendix I. The complete datasets are available in the GitHub
repository.
3.1.3
Measured data
During March, an indoor climate sensor was installed in a meeting room in an office building.
The meeting room area is 35 m2 and the entire building covers 9300 m2. The floor plan of
the room and location of the sensor are seen in Figure 7a. The placement of the sensor on
the wall is shown in Figure 7b. The room is designed for 12 people and the default heating
setpoint is 22 °C. The meeting room faces east and features a facade CAV HVAC system.
The room is ventilated 4 hours a day from 11:00 to 15:00.
Page 12 of 33
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
3.1
Data generation
(a) Dimension of meeting room
(b) Sensor location
Figure 7: Setup for measured data in meeting room
The measurements were carried out over a 10-day period from March 11th to March 21st.
Two types of the investigated occupant-related faults were intentionally introduced during
this time. The first fault involved increasing the temperature setpoint to 27°C for three
hours on a single day. The second fault involved opening a window for 1.5 hours in the
morning, and a similar fault was later repeated in the afternoon and continued overnight.
Table 4 provides an overview of the implemented faults in the meeting room throughout the
measurement period. The room remained unoccupied during all fault scenarios.
Table 4: Overview of implemented faults in the physical experiment
Date and time
for implemention
Fault name
Description
12/3 12.15 - 15.15
High setpoint
Setpoint set to 27 °C
19/3 9.30 - 11.00
Open window
Window opened with heating on
20/3 13.00 - 7.30
Open window
Window opened with heating on
The heating consumption was only available for the entire building and the models were
therefore trained with simulated building heating consumption and then tested with the
measured data. This differs from the training and testing phase with the simulated dataset
from zone 1 and 8, where the models were provided with simulated zone-level heating con-
sumption.
Page 13 of 33
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
3.2
Development of models
3.2
Development of models
One binary model have been developed for each fault and one multiclass classification model
have been developed and tested using the simulated dataset as well as the measured data
from the meeting room. The development approach is illustrated in Figure 8. The models
assume that faults occur independently and that multiple faults do not arise simultaneously.
Figure 8: The approach for the development, validation, and testing of the classification
models
Training data is labeled with the category of fault according to Table 1 and at the corre-
sponding timestamp, as listed in Appendix I.
The first step in model development was to train and validate the model on the same zone
by training on one month of the dataset and validating on a different month from the same
simulation. This helps in understanding the dataset and assessing the algorithm’s character-
istics. The next step was to train the model on Zone 1 and validate it on Zone 8. This step
evaluates whether the model is robust, generalizable, and capable of transferring its learned
patterns to another zone with different performance characteristics. Ultimately, the models
were tested and evaluated using the measured data, but with heating consumption on the
building level instead of the zone level.
Both the Random Forest and XGBoost algorithms were utilized and evaluated for all the
models. The development process was iterative, involving multiple steps and simulations to
refine the model’s performance.
Page 14 of 33
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
3.2
Development of models
3.2.1
Performance evaluation
The developed FDD models yield four possible classification outcomes:
• True Positives (TP): Faults correctly identified by the model.
• False Positives (FP): Instances where the model incorrectly identifies a fault that
does not exist.
• True Negatives (TN): Instances where the model correctly identifies that no fault
is present.
• False Negatives (FN): Faults that the model fails to detect.
Model performance was evaluated and analyzed using three complementary methods: Visual
graph analysis, feature importance, which highlights the influence of each input variable
during training, and three widely used evaluation metrics, defined as follows:
• Accuracy measures the overall correctness of the model:
A =
TP + TN
TP + FP + FN + TN
(1)
• Precision indicates how many of the predicted faults are correct:
P =
TP
TP + FP
(2)
• Recall reflects how many of the actual faults were correctly identified by the model:
RC =
TP
TP + FN
(3)
• f1-score reflects the reliability of a model due to finding the harmonic mean of the
precision and recall of a classification model. The two metrics contribute equally to
the score:
f1 = 2 ∗P ∗RC
P + RC
(4)
Each performance metric is averaged over 10 runs to account for the randomness in decision
tree-based models.
Page 15 of 33
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
3.3
Human performance experiment
3.3
Human performance experiment
To benchmark the performance of the machine learning models, a comparison was made
against human performance in fault detection and diagnosis. A group of 11 participants,
who can be considered experts to some extent in the field of building energy, were presented
with visualizations of indoor climate and energy consumption data. These visualizations rep-
resented room operation under faulty conditions, utilizing both simulated data from Zone 8
and measured data from the meeting room. The participants were given access to the same
data that the FDD machine learning models were trained and evaluated on.
Participants were asked to detect and diagnose faults occurring within a defined time period
across three different cases:
• Case 1: A binary classification scenario based on simulated data, where participants
were asked to identify the potential occurrences of an increased radiator thermostat
during active heating. The occupants were presented with zone air temperature and
heating consumption.
• Case 2: A multiclass classification task using simulated data with five implemented
faults occurring in January.
Participants were presented with three possible fault
types and informed that these could happen once, multiple times, or not at all. They
were asked to identify and diagnose the faults accordingly to the presented zone air
temperature and heating consumption.
• Case 3: A multiclass classification task using the measured data from the meeting
room in March. Similar to Case 2, participants were asked to detect and diagnose
faults based on the same fault type options and likelihood of occurrence. In this case,
the participants were only presented with zone air temperature measurements due to
the lack of heating consumption on the zone level.
To make the experiment feasible, the data presented to the participants was simplified com-
pared to the input used by the machine learning models. Although models can process large
volumes of data and extract patterns across multiple features, human participants were only
shown two key variables: air temperature and energy consumption. These features were
selected due to their high feature importance in the trained models. Furthermore, the time
span of the data shown to participants was significantly shorter than the full-year datasets
used during model training. The results of the quiz were compared to those of models trained
using the Random Forest algorithm. The complete quiz presented to the participants can be
found in the Appendix III. Additionally, a list of the participants’ professions can be found
in Appendix II.
Page 16 of 33
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
4
Results
The models performance presented below have been compared with human performance,
and all results from this experiment can be found in Appendix II.
4.1
FDD models with simulated data
This section presents the performance of the models trained and tested on simulated data.
First, the results of the individual binary classifiers, each targeting a specific fault, are pre-
sented. Subsequently, the performance of the multiclass model, which addresses all simulated
faults collectively, is presented.
Note that the following models utilize weather data, simulated indoor climate data, and
simulated heating consumption at the zone level as input.
4.1.1
Binary models
Figure 9 presents the precision, recall, and F1 scores for each FDD binary model across their
respective fault detection tasks. The presented models are trained using Random Forest. All
models achieve high precision scores, indicating a low number or no false positives. However,
the recall scores for detecting open windows, low setpoints, and high setpoints are 43%, 55%,
and 73%, respectively. These values suggest that a significant number of faults remained
undetected throughout the year. The model for detecting high setpoints yields the highest
F1 score among the three occupant-centric faults, but also exhibits the highest uncertainty.
This indicates greater variability in the model’s performance across different runs, which
may reduce its reliability despite the strong average performance.
Figure 9: Model performance for each Random Forest binary class model tested on zone 8.
Page 17 of 33
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
4.1
FDD models with simulated data
In contrast, the model developed for detecting the sensor fault achieved a perfect performance
score of 100% as seen in Figure 9, demonstrating its robustness in identifying this specific
fault type. This high performance can be attributed to the way the fault was implemented in
both the training and test datasets. The CO2 concentration was synthetically manipulated
by introducing values of 200 ppm in both datasets. As a result, the decision tree model could
reliably detect the fault based on this clear, easily identifiable threshold.
(a) Temperature and fault predictions for the entire year
(b) Zoomed-in view of the first detected fault occurring in January, showing both zone tem-
perature and heating consumption.
Figure 10: Performance in Zone 8 with four instances of simulated lowered setpoints through-
out the year, including prediction markers from the binary FDD model using Random Forest.
Figure 10a shows the temperature in Zone 8 over a one year period, during which a lowered
setpoint was simulated four times. The plot illustrates that no faults are detected when
no fault events are present (FP), leading to a high precision score, as shown in Figure 9.
However, the initial hours of each simulated lowered setpoint are not detected, leading to
a reduced recall score. All four simulated faults were eventually detected within the time
period where the setpoint was set below 21
°C. The false negatives observed at the be-
ginning of each fault period are due to the transition phase shown in Figure 10b, where
the temperature gradually decreases. Once the temperature drops below 21 °C, the fault is
detected. In the simulation, the heating is turned off from 15:00 until 09:00 the following
day. However, the temperature is observed to increase despite the heating being off, likely
due to solar gains, which are intensified by the high floor-to-glass ratio in Zone 8. This raises
the question of whether the consequences of such occupancy behavior in this specific case
should truly be classified as a fault.
Page 18 of 33
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
4.1
FDD models with simulated data
In contrast to the gradual temperature change, the heating consumption exhibits an im-
mediate drop from 68 % to 0 % as seen in Figure 10b, reflecting an instant system response
in the simulation. However, this drop alone is insufficient for the model to detect a fault,
likely because the lowered setpoint does not directly cause the drop. Similar consumption
patterns occur after occupancy hours or due to solar gains, making heating consumption a
less distinctive feature for fault detection in this context. This observation is further sup-
ported by Table 5, which presents the feature importance for each binary model. For the low
setpoint task, temperature emerges as the most influential feature, and the heating consump-
tion exhibits the least impact on model training. For the high setpoint and open window
tasks, both heating consumption and temperature have a significant impact on the training.
This likely stems from the low setpoint model’s inability to recognize a consistent pattern
in the drops of heating consumption. Understanding feature importance not only provides
insight into the model’s decision-making process but also serves as a valuable reference for
later comparisons with the multiclass model and during testing with measured data.
Table 5: Feature importance for each binary fault detection model using Random Forest.
Importance (%)
Irradiance
Outdoor °C
Zone °C
Humidity
CO2
Heating
Open window
5
2
46
3
5
39
Low setpoint
8
10
58
10
10
4
CO2 sensor
0.5
1
0.5
2
95
1
High setpoint
2
3
30
4
2
60
Figure 11 shows the heating consumption in Zone 8 from January to March, during which
a raised setpoint was simulated three times. This graph was also presented to participants
in the human performance quiz. As shown, 100% of the participants correctly identified
the fault instances. The graph further illustrates the model’s predictions, which successfully
detect all three fault occurrences. However, the model also produces some false positives. 2
out of the 11 participants identified false positives in the presented graph as well.
Figure 11: Heating consumption in zone 8 with raised setpoint and model predictions using
Random Forest.
Page 19 of 33
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
4.1
FDD models with simulated data
4.1.2
Multiclass model
The performance scores of the multiclass model for each fault class are presented in Figure
12. The multiclass model achieves comparable performance to each corresponding binary
FDD model across all individual faults as seen in Figure 9. This indicates that the multi-
class approach is equally effective in identifying each fault type, offering similar diagnostic
accuracy to that of separately trained binary classifiers. Although the performance scores
are similar, a notable observation is the increased recall score and reduced uncertainties for
the high setpoint task in the multiclass model compared to the binary high setpoint model.
Specifically, the multiclass model shows a significantly lower variability, with a standard
deviation of only 2% compared to the binary model with 27% for the recall score.
Figure 12: Model performance for the multiclass model tested on zone 8 using Random
Forest
This improvement may be attributed to the feature importance distribution in the mul-
ticlass model, as shown in Table 6.
In contrast to the binary high setpoint model, the
CO2-concentration has the most influential feature in the multiclass model. This shift in
feature importance suggests that the multiclass model is more robust and that heating and
temperature may cause some noise in the binary high setpoint model.
Table 6: Feature importance for multiclass model using the random forest algorithm
%
Irradiance
Outdoor °C
Zone °C
Humidity
CO2
Heating
RF
3
3
3
8
77
6
As shown in Table 7, training the same models with XGBoost yields lower scores in general,
particularly in terms of lower precision scores, indicating a higher number of false positives.
It is noted that there is no standard deviation for all models and metrics, suggesting that
XGBoost may be a more reliable model. Unlike models trained with the Random Forest
algorithm, XGBoost obtains different performance scores when comparing the binary models
and the multiclass model.
Page 20 of 33
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
4.1
FDD models with simulated data
Table 7: Performance score for each binary model and multiclass model using XGboost
tested on simulated data
Precision
Recall
f1 score
Binary models
Open window
0.75 ±0
0.23 ±0
0.35 ±0
Low setpoint
0.78 ±0
0.55 ±0
0.64 ±0
Uncalibrated CO2 sensor
1 ±0
1 ±0
1 ±0
High setpoint
0.88 ±0
0.22 ±0
0.35 ±0
Multiclass model
Open window
0.83 ±0
0.38 ±0
0.53 ±0
Low setpoint
0.83 ±0
0.55 ±0
0.66 ±0
Uncalibrated CO2 sensor
1 ±0
1 ±0
1 ±0
High setpoint
0.59 ±0
0.97 ±0
0.73 ±0
Figure 13 presents the simulated mean air temperature for Zone 8, where Faults 1, 2, and 4
were introduced during January. The graph also indicates the percentage of the 12 partici-
pants in the human performance experiment who correctly identified each fault. Additionally,
it is marked whether the multiclass model successfully detected the faults.
All three faults were detected by at least some participants. However, the open window,
introduced on January 15th, was not detected by the model. During this fault, heating con-
sumption rapidly increased from 0% to 80% of the system’s maximum capacity as seen in
the quiz in Appendix III. This was likely the primary cue used by participants to identify
the fault. The model’s failure to detect this fault may be attributed to its short duration;
it persisted for only 2 hours. Despite the fault having a significant impact on energy con-
sumption, the model may struggle to identify faults with brief or transient effects.
In general, human participants achieved lower performance scores than the model, largely
due to a lower detection rate and a higher number of false positives. On average, participants
spent about five minutes analyzing each case.
Figure 13: Implemented faults in January with detection by RF multiclass model and human
participant in quiz
Page 21 of 33
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
4.1
FDD models with simulated data
4.1.3
Evaluation of model development
During the development of the FDD models based on simulation data, additional or improved
input features were incorporated to improve model performance. The impact of these is
illustrated in Figure 14, which demonstrates that including weather data and normalizing
energy consumption significantly improves model performance. An attempt was also made to
normalize the mean air temperature; however, this adjustment did not affect performance and
was therefore excluded from the final model. Overall, the results suggest that incorporating
more relevant data and features can enhance the models performance.
Figure 14: F1 score as a function of the added features during model development using
Random Forest.
Figure 15 illustrates the effect of data balance in training data on model performance, specif-
ically by varying the number of fault occurrences in the dataset. The experiment focuses
on Fault 1 (window opening) in Zone 1, where the number of simulated fault events is in-
creased during training. The plot displays the model’s performance as a function of fault
frequency. The results demonstrate that the model’s performance improves substantially as
it is exposed to more instances of the fault. This trend follows a logistic growth pattern,
with a steep initial improvement that gradually levels off, indicating that additional fault
instances contribute progressively less to performance improvement.
Figure 15: F1 score as a function of the number of simulations of an open window (Fault 1)
in Zone 1, evaluated on test data from Zone 8 using Random Forest.
Page 22 of 33
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
4.2
Testing the FDD models with measured data
4.2
Testing the FDD models with measured data
The following models have weather data, simulated indoor climate data and simulated heat-
ing consumption for the entire building as input for the trained models.
(a) RF
(b) XGBoost
Figure 16: Performance scores for both the binary and multiclass models using Random
Forest (a) and XGBoost (b) algorithms for training and testing with measured data
Figure 16 presents the performance scores of both binary and multiclass models when tested
with measured data from the meeting room, using both Random Forest and XGBoost for
training. Overall, training the models with XGBoost, results in improved performance across
evaluation metrics for the binary models. The high-setpoint binary model, in particular,
achieves strong results with perfect precision and minimal uncertainty. As seen in Figure
16b, the multiclass model trained with XGBoost shows a decline in performance when com-
pared to the binary models, and the model fails to detect the high setpoint fault.
When the multiclass model using RF is tested on the same measured dataset, the per-
formance score for the open window fault remains unchanged, however, the model still fails
to detect the high setpoint fault, as seen in Figure 16a. This could be due to the multiclass
model relying more heavily on CO2 concentration as a dominant feature, as opposed to the
mean air temperature, which is more influential in the binary model as seen in Table 8.
Interestingly, this behavior contrasts with the results from the simulated data, where the
binary models showed less robustness than the multiclass model. This discrepancy could be
explained by the fact that, in the measured dataset, only aggregate heating consumption
data is available for the entire building, rather than for individual zones, which may impact
model performance.
Table 8: Feature importance for each binary fault detection model and multiclass model
using Random Forest
Importance (%)
Irradiance
Outdoor °C
Zone °C
Humidity
CO2
Heating
Open window
7
4
74
3
7
4
High set point
4
4
78
7
3
4
Multiclass
3
3
10
3
77
3
Page 23 of 33
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
4.2
Testing the FDD models with measured data
From Figure 16 it can be observed that the recall score for the open window binary and
multiclass model using Random Forest is lowest, indicating that the faults are detected at
only a few time steps. This limited detection capability is also evident in Figure 17a, where
the open window fault on March 19th is not detected at all by the model, and the fault
on March 21st is detected late in its occurrence. In contrast, the binary model trained with
XGBoost demonstrates a higher detection rate for the same fault, as illustrated in Figure 17,
which is reflected in its improved recall score. However, this improvement comes at the cost
of reduced precision, indicating that the model also produces more false positives. Neither
models succeed in detecting the fault on March 19th. Due to the absence of zone-level heat-
ing consumption data, it is challenging to assess the localized energy impact of individual
faults. Furthermore, as shown in Table 8, temperature is the most influential feature in the
models. Since the open window fault may not cause significant temperature deviation during
the shoulder season, this makes the fault more challenging to detect.
All the above observations suggests that, for this specific task, the binary classification
approach benefits more from the XGBoost framework than the multiclass setup, which is
opposite from the observation with the simulated data.
(a) RF
(b) XGBoost
Figure 17: Comparison of detection rates for the binary open window model trained using
the Random Forest (a) and XGBoost (b) algorithms.
Page 24 of 33
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
4.2
Testing the FDD models with measured data
Figure 18 shows the measured indoor temperature in the meeting room during March, where
one setpoint increase and two window openings were implemented. As observed, all faults
were detected either by participants or by the model, except for the opened window on March
19th. The window was open for approximately 2.5 hours, and as previously mentioned, the
model may have failed to detect the fault due to the short duration of the event and the
lack of zone-level heating consumption data. Without access to this detailed consumption
information, the model may not be able to leverage heating data as a critical input. From
the figure, it is also seen that only one out of the eleven participants detected this fault.
Based solely on the temperature data, this event may not clearly indicate a fault, and its
classification is uncertain without corresponding heating consumption values.
From the
results found in the Appendix, it is seen that participants exhibited a precision score of
approximately 50%, while the models achieved nearly 100% . This suggests that humans
may be more prone to false positives compared to machine learning models.
Figure 18: Measured temperature in the meeting room with implemented faults in March.
Detection by RF models and human participants in the quiz
Page 25 of 33
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
5
Discussion
5.1
Key findings and challenges
In this project, human participants generally demonstrated lower precision than the machine
learning models and were more prone to false positives. Nevertheless, they were also able to
identify specific faults that the models failed to detect. Trend analysis, rule-based methods
and knowledge-based methods, in general, are still the most commonly used in practice,
but often struggle to handle complex, large-scale, or noisy real-world data in fault detection
applications, resulting in the detection of only major or obvious faults. This observation
aligns with findings in the literature, where data-driven methods are often shown to out-
perform knowledge-based approaches in terms of fault detection and diagnosis accuracy [7].
Consequently, there is a strong motivation to develop more advanced FDD methods, but
it is widely acknowledged that data-driven AFDD methods in buildings are still underde-
veloped in three critical areas: generalizability, ease of use, and interoperability, especially
when compared to knowledge-based approaches [22]. The challenges are further discussed in
the sections below based on the project.
Model performance and fault definition
The developed models consistently demonstrated a low rate of false positives, particularly
those trained with Random Forest, both when tested on simulated data and measured data,
which is a crucial factor for reliability in real-world deployment. This further suggests that
the model is capable of accounting for seasonal variations, which is a concern in the litera-
ture, given that many studies focus on a shorter period of the year [12].
One of the main comparisons made in the results is between the algorithms and binary
and multiclass FDD models. The result could not reveal a one-size-fits-all solution. On
simulated data, both approaches demonstrated comparable performance, but with the RF
multiclass model showed the best performance, with lower uncertainty and greater reliability.
These findings suggest that multiclass models can be advantageous, particularly when the
classification task emphasizes different feature sets, potentially reducing overfitting within
fault categories that primarily depend on similar signals, such as heating and temperature.
In general, lower precision scores were observed using XGBoost when testing with simulated
data, indicating the models detect more false positives. However, when testing on measured
data, the binary models using XGBoost outperformed the RF binary models and multiclass
models, indicating that binary classification may offer greater robustness under real-world
conditions. This may be due to the measured data being noisier than the simulated, and
the increased complexity of the multiclass model may cause it to struggle to generalize in
the presence of noise, incomplete data, or limited feature resolution. Nevertheless, a direct
comparison between testing with simulated and measured data is limited by the absence of
zone-level heating consumption data, which could significantly influence model performance.
The performance was highly case-specific, emphasizing the importance of evaluating multi-
ple model architectures for each use case rather than assuming a universally superior method.
Page 26 of 33
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
5.1
Key findings and challenges
Another observation is the timing of fault detection. The results show that the models, in
most cases, fail to detect faults during the transition period; however, ideally, faults should
be detected as early as possible during their occurrence, allowing for prompt investigation
and mitigation. To better reflect this aspect, future studies could introduce a new metric
that incorporates the timeliness of detection, thereby evaluating not only whether a fault is
detected but also how soon it is detected.
When analyzing the building performance, both from simulated and measured data, it is
a challenge to define the threshold at which a condition constitutes a fault. For example,
when opening a window, a brief rise in energy consumption without a significant drop in
temperature and an improvement in air quality may not immediately indicate a fault. Nev-
ertheless, such inefficiencies may accumulate over time, particularly if the system must later
overcompensate to maintain desired conditions. These borderline scenarios raise important
questions: What defines a fault? Should they be labeled as faults in the training data, and
if so, when in the occurrence of the event? This complexity also highlights the multifaceted
nature of building performance, where each event must be evaluated individually. In this
case, both energy efficiency and occupant comfort must be evaluated concurrently. This
also highlights the need for a standardized ontology and a consistent framework for fault
definitions, as frequently suggested in the literature as well. Fault definitions are based on
individual expert judgment, which limits their scalability and consistency. Ontology-driven
approaches provide a structured method for defining and classifying faults, enabling bet-
ter generalization across systems without requiring human interpretation [23]. While many
existing ontologies are tailored to specific individual subsystems, Chen et al. take a step
toward a unified ontology for HVAC system faults. The taxonomy includes fault catego-
rization, physical hierarchy, fault library, relation model, and a tagging scheme [24]. Their
classification system could serve as a foundation for broader ontological frameworks, includ-
ing entire building systems and occupant-centric faults. Without clear boundaries created
by ontologies, models risk either over- or under-diagnosing faults.
Data collection and generalizability
Obtaining sufficient and representative data remains a significant bottleneck in both super-
vised and unsupervised FDD, and is one of the reasons a sufficient FDD product for buildings
is not available on the market. The key advantage of the unsupervised FDD method is that
they do not require labeled data, making the datasets more accessible and further enabling
these models to potentially uncover novel or unexpected faults within the dataset. However,
unsupervised methods lack the ability to directly diagnose faults. Instead, they typically
rely on clustering techniques, where the resulting clusters must be manually interpreted
by experts to determine the nature of any anomalies. Regardless of the chosen approach,
whether supervised or unsupervised, datasets must include representative fault scenarios, ei-
ther from real-world measured data or synthetic simulations, to effectively train and evaluate
the models. An insight from this project is the importance of thoughtful data preprocessing,
including feature selection, normalization, and, crucially, class balancing. For instance, the
balanced dataset created for Zone 1, which featured evenly distributed occurrences of faults
and baseline data, led to noticeably improved model performance. This finding supports
Page 27 of 33
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
5.1
Key findings and challenges
the conclusions drawn by Bode et al. [3], who emphasize that balanced datasets containing
equal numbers of faulty and non-faulty data points are essential for training robust machine
learning models. However, constructing such datasets, especially from real buildings, can
be time- and cost-intensive, and they will never be able to cover all possible fault scenarios.
This is why most projects tend to focus on one specific system or aspect. It can also be
challenging to introduce controlled faults into measured data, as seen in the experiments
conducted in the meeting room, due to variable and uncontrollable influences. For exam-
ple, ASHRAE Project 1312-RP required an entire year to introduce and collect data from
19 different fault types in air handling units within a controlled laboratory environment [7].
Consequently, many studies turn to simulation-based approaches, which provide a faster and
more scalable way to generate diverse datasets that include multiple faults across different
seasons, systems, and zones.
Still, simulation-based data generation introduces its own set of challenges. The assumptions
made during simulation, which are highly building-specific, such as thermostat setpoints, oc-
cupancy schedules, and HVAC system behavior, can significantly affect model outcomes and
their generalizability. The parameters and simulation results often differ from real-world
conditions, making it challenging to directly translate simulation-trained models to practi-
cal applications. This limitation is not always fully acknowledged in the literature [7]. It
is therefore unrealistic to expect identical performance when applying models trained on
simulated data to real-world buildings. One of the significant barriers to deploying FDD
models at scale is, therefore, the issue of generalizability, both in terms of transferring mod-
els trained on simulated data to real environments and reusing models trained and tested on
one building for deployment in another. Even buildings with similar layouts or typologies
can behave differently due to unique system configurations, operational schedules, and user
behavior patterns. In literature, only a few examples are found where models trained with
simulation data were successfully integrated into real-world applications [3]. This project
addressed this challenge by testing models trained on simulated data against measured data
from a different real-world building. The results showed that while the models performed
well in some scenarios, their effectiveness could not be consistently guaranteed across various
models.
Opportunities for scalable FDD
The above discussion raises the broader question of which method and approach is best suited
for operational deployment, considering factors such as performance, cost, interpretability,
and response time. Ultimately, there is a clear need for more effective and automated FDD
practices in the building industry. One of the most promising paths forward may lie in
hybrid systems that combine the strengths of data-driven approaches with knowledge-based
methods. Such systems could offer a balanced solution, enhancing robustness and detection
accuracy while maintaining the transparency and interpretability required for real-world
adoption.
Page 28 of 33
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
5.2
Limitations
Data is the foundation of this approach, offering both opportunities and challenges. In this
project, only four faults are investigated, and the model is trained using energy and indoor
climate data. However, other types of building faults may produce similar patterns in the
data, raising the question of whether the model can accurately distinguish such faults or
whether additional system-related data would be necessary. It is therefore important to
investigate the model’s ability to differentiate between faults with overlapping consequences.
Successful models for system-related faults have been demonstrated in the literature, and
by combining different models, it may be possible to develop a comprehensive framework
capable of detecting and diagnosing faults across multiple systems and zones at the building
level. A key consideration remains whether it is more advantageous to design specialized
models tailored to individual systems and fault types, or to develop integrated models that
address a wider range of fault conditions throughout the building.
The broader challenges of building implementation and development may be supported by
advances in digitalization, building information modeling, and semantic web technologies,
which enable consistent data storage and efficient information management throughout the
building’s lifecycle. They also facilitate seamless data exchange between different stakehold-
ers and software tools needed for the FDD models [13]. These technologies may also suggest
developing and training specific FDD models tailored to individual buildings during the
design phase. This would help address the difficulties associated with transferring models
between buildings and mitigate the critical loss of information that often occurs between the
design and commissioning stages.
5.2
Limitations
A major limitation in the project was the lack of heating consumption data for the meeting
room in the measured dataset. The entire building’s heating consumption replaced the zone
heating consumption, and due to the large area of the building, the faults were diluted in
the total energy consumption. This reduced the models’ ability to replicate the fault de-
tection patterns when training and testing on simulated data, where heating consumption
was a highly informative feature. Future applications may benefit from advancements and
requirements for more sub-metering in commercial buildings, enabling zone-level or smaller
area monitoring, which will provide sufficient data for FDD, and potentially improve the
quality of FDD models.
Furthermore, the faults in the measured dataset were introduced during the shoulder season,
which reduced their impact and visibility. For example, setting the temperature setpoint to
12 °C in the meeting room had minimal thermal consequences due to milder outdoor temper-
atures. As a result, the dataset includes only a limited number and variety of faults, which
contributes to high uncertainty in the testing results and makes it difficult to generalize the
findings. Additionally, the sensor fault was not included in the measured validation dataset,
as attempts to manipulate a faulty or uncalibrated CO2 sensor were unsuccessful. Conse-
quently, the testing and generalizability of the sensor fault detection model, as well as the
low setpoint fault detection model, cannot be fully assessed.
Page 29 of 33
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
5.2
Limitations
An additional challenge not fully addressed in this study is the occurrence of multiple simul-
taneous faults. Handling such scenarios would require a multi-label classification approach,
which involves a different training strategy and a significantly larger and more diverse dataset
to represent the possible combinations of fault conditions. In this work, it is assumed that
faults occur independently and at separate times. However, in real-world buildings, multiple
faults may indeed occur concurrently. In such cases, the model is likely to still detect the
faults, but with a delayed response, only identifying subsequent faults after the initial one
has been resolved. These scenarios require further investigation to better understand how
overlapping faults affect detection accuracy and model behavior.
Page 30 of 33
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
6
Conclusion
This project demonstrated both the potential and necessity for more effective and auto-
mated fault detection and diagnosis practices in buildings. By using data-driven machine
learning models, FDD systems can contribute to substantial energy savings and improved
indoor comfort by enabling continuous, real-time monitoring of building operations and per-
formance. To fully realize the potential of FDD in buildings, it is essential to integrate the
tools into the building lifecycle from the early design phase. A central challenge identified
throughout the project was generating training data, as well as the difficulty of transferring
models trained on one building or system to different real-world environments. These bar-
riers are crucial to overcome to achieve scalable, robust FDD systems that can be applied
across various building types, usage patterns, and technical infrastructures.
The project particularly addressed occupant-centric faults, which are often overlooked but
can significantly impact building performance when left undetected. The developed FDD
models, based on the classification algorithms Random Forest and XGBoost, showed promis-
ing results. When trained and tested with simulated data, both the binary and multiclass
models accurately detected occupant-centric faults, such as open windows and changed tem-
perature setpoints, with high precision and recall scores, indicating a high number of accurate
detections and a low number of instances where the model incorrectly detects faults that
are not present. The RF multiclass performed best on the simulated data. When tested
with measured data from a real-world meeting room, the binary classification models, par-
ticularly those trained using XGBoost, performed best, successfully detecting both types of
faults. In contrast, the multiclass model struggled, particularly in detecting the high setpoint
fault, likely due to differences in feature weighting and the limited diversity in the measured
dataset. The limited number and variety of faults in the measured dataset introduce un-
certainty into the validation process, limiting the extent to which the generalizability of the
results can be confirmed. Nonetheless, the findings suggest that for certain fault types and
under appropriate conditions, it is feasible to transfer models trained on simulated data to
real-world scenarios. In the future, the validation should be expanded to diverse real-world
datasets with broader fault representation.
The results and comparisons between the machine learning algorithms, Random Forest and
XGBoost, as well as between binary and multiclass models, did not reveal a one-size-fits-all
solution. Model performance was highly dependent on the specific case, highlighting the im-
portance of evaluating multiple model architectures for each application rather than relying
on a universally optimal approach.
In conclusion, this project provides a proof of concept that occupant-centric faults can be
detected using simple machine learning models trained on simulated data and, under certain
conditions, applied successfully to real-world buildings. Further development and investiga-
tion of the potential of hybrid approaches for improved interpretability and robustness have
the potential to make FDD a vital component of future building management practices.
Page 31 of 33
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
References
References
[1] U. N. E. Programme, “Global status report for buildings and construction 2024-2025:
Key messages,” 2025-03.
[2] L. Wang, S. Greenberg, J. Fiegel, A. Rubalcava, S. Earni, X. Pang, R. Yin, S. Wood-
worth, and J. Hernandez-Maldonado, “Monitoring-based hvac commissioning of an ex-
isting office building for energy efficiency,” Applied energy, vol. 102, pp. 1382–1390,
2013.
[3] G. Bode, S. Thul, M. Baranski, and D. Müller, “Real-world application of machine-
learning-based fault detection trained with experimental data,” Energy, vol. 198,
p. 117323, 2020.
[4] S. P. Melgaard, K. H. Andersen, A. Marszal-Pomianowska, R. L. Jensen, and P. K.
Heiselberg, “Fault detection and diagnosis encyclopedia for building systems: a system-
atic review,” Energies, vol. 15, no. 12, p. 4366, 2022.
[5] M. M. Ardehali, T. F. Smith, J. M. House, and C. J. Klaassen, “Building energy use
and control problems: an assessment of case studies,” ASHRAE Transactions, vol. 109,
p. 111, 2003.
[6] S. Frank, G. Lin, X. Jin, R. Singla, A. Farthing, and J. Granderson, “A performance
evaluation framework for building fault detection and diagnosis algorithms,” Energy and
Buildings, vol. 192, pp. 84–92, 2019.
[7] Y. Zhao, T. Li, X. Zhang, and C. Zhang, “Artificial intelligence-based fault detection
and diagnosis methods for building energy systems: Advantages, challenges and the
future,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 109, pp. 85–101, 2019.
[8] K. H. Andersen, “Rethinking building performance during the operational phase: To-
wards increased implementation and adoption of system and occupant-centric assess-
ments,” 2024.
[9] K. H. Andersen, S. P. Melgaard, A. Marszal-Pomianowska, R. L. Jensen, T. Fehr, and
P. Heiselberg, “Development and description of the sato kpi tool,” 2022.
[10] S. Katipamula and M. R. Brambley, “Methods for fault detection, diagnostics, and
prognostics for building systems—a review, part i,” Hvac&R Research, vol. 11, no. 1,
pp. 3–25, 2005.
[11] Y.-h. Song, Y. Akashi, and J.-J. Yee, “A development of easy-to-use tool for fault
detection and diagnosis in building air-conditioning systems,” Energy and Buildings,
vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 71–82, 2008.
[12] M. S. Piscitelli, D. M. Mazzarelli, and A. Capozzoli, “Enhancing operational perfor-
mance of ahus through an advanced fault detection and diagnosis process based on
Page 32 of 33
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
References
temporal association and decision rules,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 226, p. 110369,
2020.
[13] G. A. Benndorf, D. Wystrcil, and N. Réhault, “Energy performance optimization in
buildings: A review on semantic interoperability, fault detection, and predictive con-
trol,” Applied Physics Reviews, vol. 5, no. 4, 2018.
[14] S. Frank, M. Heaney, X. Jin, J. Robertson, H. Cheung, R. Elmore, and G. Henze,
“Hybrid model-based and data-driven fault detection and diagnostics for commercial
buildings,” tech. rep., National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United
States), 2016.
[15] N. Cotrufo and R. Zmeureanu, “Pca-based method of soft fault detection and iden-
tification for the ongoing commissioning of chillers,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 130,
pp. 443–452, 2016.
[16] I. Matetić, I. Štajduhar, I. Wolf, and S. Ljubic, “A review of data-driven approaches and
techniques for fault detection and diagnosis in hvac systems,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 1,
p. 1, 2022.
[17] J. Liang and R. Du, “Model-based fault detection and diagnosis of hvac systems using
support vector machine method,” International Journal of refrigeration, vol. 30, no. 6,
pp. 1104–1114, 2007.
[18] W. Tun, J. K.-W. Wong, and S.-H. Ling, “Hybrid random forest and support vector
machine modeling for hvac fault detection and diagnosis,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 24,
p. 8163, 2021.
[19] M. Parzinger, L. Hanfstaengl, F. Sigg, U. Spindler, U. Wellisch, and M. Wirnsberger,
“Residual analysis of predictive modelling data for automated fault detection in build-
ing’s heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems,” Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 17,
p. 6758, 2020.
[20] S. Zhang, X. Zhu, B. Anduv, X. Jin, and Z. Du, “Fault detection and diagnosis for the
screw chillers using multi-region xgboost model,” Science and Technology for the Built
Environment, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 608–623, 2021.
[21] L. B. N. Laboratory, “Occupancy simulator.” Accessed: 2025-04-28.
[22] W. Nelson and C. Culp, “Fdd in building systems based on generalized machine learning
approaches,” Energies, vol. 16, no. 4, p. 1637, 2023.
[23] X. Lei, Y. Chen, M. Bergés, and B. Akinci, “Formalized control logic fault definition
with ontological reasoning for air handling units,” Automation in Construction, vol. 129,
p. 103781, 2021.
[24] Y. Chen, G. Lin, E. Crowe, and J. Granderson, “Development of a unified taxonomy
for hvac system faults,” Energies, vol. 14, no. 17, p. 5581, 2021.
Page 33 of 33
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
I
Fault Simulation Timestamps
Table 9: Implemented faults in simulation zone 1
Zone
Fault type
Code
Date
Time
Zone 1
Open window
1
08.jan
10-14
Zone 1
Open window
1
14.jan
12-15
Zone 1
Open window
1
20.jan
13-16
Zone 1
Open window
1
26.jan
9-13
Zone 1
Open window
1
07.feb
10-14
Zone 1
Open window
1
12.feb
12-15
Zone 1
Open window
1
24.feb
9-11
Zone 1
Open window
1
24.feb
14-16
Zone 1
Open window
1
05.nov
9-12
Zone 1
Open window
1
12.nov
11-14
Zone 1
Open window
1
21.nov
12-15
Zone 1
Open window
1
07.dec
10-14
Zone 1
Open window
1
15.dec
8-11
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
05.jan
15-24
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
06.jan
0-8
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
21.jan
17-24
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
22.jan
0-8
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
03.feb
15-24
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
04.feb
0-9
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
19.feb
17-24
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
20.feb
0-10
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
16.nov
15-24
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
17.nov
0-7
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
10.dec
17-24
Zone 1
Heating shut down
2
11.dec
0-7
Zone 1
Defect co2 sensor
3
13/2-16/2
14-08
Zone 1
Defect co2 sensor
3
15/12 - 16/12
17-09
Zone 1
Defect co2 sensor
3
16/4 - 20/4
22-16
Zone 1
Defect co2 sensor
3
23/10 - 27/10
21-09
Zone 1
Defect co2 sensor
3
3/6 - 7/6
13-11
Zone 1
Defect co2 sensor
3
9/1 - 11/1
9-14
Zone 1
Defect co2 sensor
3
9/8 - 11/8
15-15
Page I of IX
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
Zone
Fault type
Code
Date
Time
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
08.jan
15-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
09.jan
0-8
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
12.jan
15-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
13.jan
0-11
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
27.jan
17-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
28.jan
0-8
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
05.feb
15-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
06.feb
0-9
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
24.feb
17-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
25.feb
0-10
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
26.feb
17-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
27.feb
0-10
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
08.nov
14-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
09.nov
0-8
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
18.nov
15-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
19.nov
0-7
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
23.nov
18-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
24.nov
0-9
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
01.dec
15-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
02.dec
0-9
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
13.dec
17-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
14.dec
0-8
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
20.dec
17-24
Zone 1
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
21.dec
0-7
Zone 1
Open window
1
04.jan
10-15
Zone 1
Open window
1
06.jan
10-12
Page II of IX
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
Table 10: Implemented faults in test set in simulated zone 8
Zone
Fault type
Code
Date
Time
Zone 8
Open window
1
15.jan
9-10
Zone 8
Open window
1
15.jan
14-15
Zone 8
Open window
1
18.feb
12-15
Zone 8
Open window
1
08.nov
9-12
Zone 8
Open window
1
21.dec
11-14
Zone 8
Heating shut down
2
07.jan
15-24
Zone 8
Heating shut down
2
08.jan
0-9
Zone 8
Heating shut down
2
27.jan
17-24
Zone 8
Heating shut down
2
28.jan
0-8
Zone 8
Heating shut down
2
16.feb
17-24
Zone 8
Heating shut down
2
17.feb
0-9
Zone 8
Heating shut down
2
09.dec
13-24
Zone 8
Heating shut down
2
10.dec
0-7
Zone 8
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
12.jan
15-24
Zone 8
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
13.jan
0-9
Zone 8
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
20.jan
17-24
Zone 8
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
21.jan
0-8
Zone 8
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
22.feb
17-24
Zone 8
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
23.feb
0-9
Zone 8
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
16.dec
13-24
Zone 8
Setpoint 25 degrees
4
17.dec
0-7
Page III of IX
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
II
Human performance result
Table 11: Overview of participants and the time used in minutes for each case presented in
the quiz
Particpant
Profession
Time used
Case 1
Time used
Case 2
Time used
Case 3
Total
1
Head of ESG
4
8
5
17
2
BMS consultant
2
5
2
9
3
Energy consultant
2
3
4
9
4
HVAC engineer
5
10
5
20
6
Building inspector
5
5
5
15
7
Building inspector
5
5
5
15
8
Building inspector
5
5
5
15
9
HVAC engineering student
4
5
2
11
10
Dataanalysist
1
2
1
4
11
PHd - Indoor climate
1
5
2
8
12
PHd - Indoor climate
1
5
6
12
Mean
3 min
5 min
4 min
12,3 min
Table 12: Ground truth in the presented graphs in the experiment
Ground truth
Positives
Negatives (Days)
Total days
Case 1
3
87
90
Case 2
5
26
31
Case 3
3
20
23
Page IV of IX
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
Table 13: Correct prediction by participants for each case
Case 1
Correct
Percentage
Fault 4.1
11
100%
Fault 4.2
11
100%
Fault 4.3
11
100%
Case 2
Correct
Percentage
Fault 2.1
8
73%
Fault 4.1
9
82%
Fault 1.1
7
64%
Fault 4.2
9
82%
Fault 2.2
7
64%
Case 3
Correct
Percentage
Fault 4
9
82%
Fault 1.1
1
9%
Fault 1.2
10
91%
Table 14: Average performance for the participants for each case.
Case
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
f1
1
0,90
0,90
1,00
0,93
2
0,85
0,75
0,73
0,67
3
0,78
0,49
0,52
0,46
Page V of IX
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
Table 15: Complete overview for each participant performance results in each case
Case
Participant
TP
FP
FN
TN
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
f1
1
Model
3
1
0
83
1,0
0,8
1,0
0,9
2
Model
4
0
1
21
1,0
1,0
0,8
0,9
3
Model
2
0
1
17
1,0
1,0
0,7
0,8
1
1
3
3
0
81
1,0
0,5
1,0
0,7
2
1
4
3
1
18
0,8
0,6
0,8
0,7
3
1
1
11
2
6
0,4
0,1
0,3
0,1
1
2
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
2
5
0
0
21
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
3
2
1
0
2
17
0,9
1,0
0,3
0,5
1
3
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
3
5
0
0
21
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
3
3
1
1
2
16
0,9
0,5
0,3
0,4
1
4
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
4
2
0
3
21
0,9
1,0
0,4
0,6
3
4
2
0
1
17
1,0
1,0
0,7
0,8
1
6
3
5
0
79
0,9
0,4
1,0
0,5
2
6
0
4
5
17
0,7
0,0
0,0
0,0
3
6
2
2
1
15
0,9
0,5
0,7
0,6
1
7
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
7
5
0
0
21
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
3
7
2
1
1
16
0,9
0,7
0,7
0,7
1
8
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
8
5
0
0
21
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
3
8
2
6
1
11
0,7
0,3
0,7
0,4
1
9
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
9
4
0
1
21
1,0
1,0
0,8
0,9
3
9
2
1
1
16
0,9
0,7
0,7
0,7
1
10
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
10
5
13
0
8
0,5
0,3
1,0
0,4
3
10
1
11
2
6
0,4
0,1
0,3
0,1
1
11
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
11
0
6
5
15
0,6
0,0
0,0
0,0
3
11
1
2
2
15
0,8
0,3
0,3
0,3
1
12
3
0
0
84
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
2
12
5
2
0
19
0,9
0,7
1,0
0,8
3
12
2
4
1
13
0,8
0,3
0,7
0,4
Page VI of IX
==PAGE:44==
Fejlfinding og diagnosticering af brugeradfærd i bygninger – Human performance 
 
Case 1 
Nedenstående grafer viser varmeforbruget og temperaturen i et lokale i fyringssæsonen. 
I den viste tidsperiode i 2023 er der muligvis 1 eller flere gange blevet skruet op for radiatortermostaten af en bruger i en længere 
periode. Marker på grafen hvor du tror dette er sket.  
 
 
 
 
Hvor lang tid brugte du på at analysere casen?:  ______________________ 
III
Human performance experiment
VII
==PAGE:45==
Case 2 
Nedenstående grafer viser varmeforbruget og temperaturen i et lokale i januar. I den viste tidsperiode er der muligvis opstået en eller 
flere af følgende fejl:  
 
1) Et vindue er åbent samtidig med, at varmen er tændt.  
2) Radiatoren er blevet slukket.  
3) Radiatorens termostat er blevet skruet op af en bruger i en længere periode.  
 
Den samme fejl kan være opstået flere gange i perioden. Marker på en af graferne, hvornår og hvilken fejl du tror, at der er opstået.  
 
 
Hvor lang tid brugte du på at analysere casen?:  ______________________ 
VIII
==PAGE:46==
 
Case 3 
 
Nedenstående graf viser temperaturen i et lokale. I den viste tidsperiode er der muligvis opstået en eller flere af følgende fejl:  
 
1) Et vindue er åbent samtidig med, at varmen er tændt.  
2) Radiatoren er blevet slukket.  
3) Radiatorens termostat er blevet skruet op af en bruger i en længere periode.  
 
Den samme fejl kan være opstået flere gange i perioden. Marker på en af graferne, hvornår og hvilken fejl du tror der er opstået.  
 
 
 
 
 
Hvor lang tid brugte du på at analysere casen?:  ______________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IX
