==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
EdgeFlow - Neural Architecture Generation
Designing Neural Architectures with Generative AI
for Resource-Constrained Hardware
William Diedrichsen Marstrand (s183921)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface/Approval
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, June 27, 2025
William Diedrichsen Marstrand (s183921)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has enabled automated design of deep neural net-
works, but often at the cost of excessive compute and complex sampling procedures.
A new paradigm of Neural Architecture Generation has emerged as a promising al-
ternative, however it still relies on heavy simulation-based training and sampling
methods using diffusion models, which can be prohibitively expensive and slow. This
thesis instead applies Discrete Flow Matching (DFM) to neural architecture gener-
ation, a generative framework with simulation-free training and which has shown
results of flexible and robust generation/sampling.
First, this work demonstrates
that a basic DFM model is able to yield valid, unique, and novel architecture samples
on NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 with scores competitive with state-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods, while reducing training times from GPU-hours to seconds or min-
utes.
Second, we implement lightweight surrogate guidance mechanisms to steer
DFM generation toward target metric limitations on FLOPs, accuracy, latency, peak
memory, and parameters. Third, we propose a guidance extension (hard guidance)
that incorporates hard constraints into the DFM guided sampling of architectures.
By controlling the DFM sampling trajectory through masking of the velocity field
to disallow invalid jumps and by applying an iterative update of the DFM source
distribution, the method improves the amount of architectures that satisfy metric
limitations, with minimal overhead. Together, these contributions produce a proof
of concept for applying DFM to neural architecture generation, and demonstrate its
future potential in this domain.
The code for this thesis is available at: https://github.com/wdmdev/EdgeFlow.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors for their guidance, insightful feedback, and
support throughout this project.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface/Approval
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Main Hypothesis and Research Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Related Work
10
2.1
Neural Architecture Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Neural Architecture Generation Variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Flow Matching and Its Extensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methodology
13
3.1
From NAS to Generative Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Search Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Neural Architecture Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Neural Architecture Flow Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Experiments and Results
36
4.1
Experimental Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
RQ1 - Validity, Uniqueness, and Novelty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
RQ2 - Guided Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
. . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.5
Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5
Discussion
76
5.1
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.2
Research Question 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.3
Research Question 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6
Conclusion
86
Appendices
87
A MobileNetV3
88
A.1 MBConv Block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.2 Initialization of the Search Space -
Using Once-For-All(OFA) Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B Metrics Measurements in MobileNetV3
90
B.1
CPU Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
B.2
FLOPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B.3
Peak Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
B.4 Total Number of Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C Experiment Hardware
95
C.1 NVIDIA GPU: Tesla A100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
C.2 NVIDIA GPU: V100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
C.3 NVIDIA GPU: Quadro RTX 6000
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
D DMF Implementation Details
97
D.1 Velocity Field MLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
E Guidance - Surrogate Model Implementation Details
100
E.1
Surrogate Guide - Base Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
E.2
Upper Limit Surrogate Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
E.3
Lower Limit Surrogate Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
E.4
Multi-Objective Surrogate Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
F Surrogate Predictor Model Implementation Details
111
G Experiment Plots for RQ2 Guidance Distributions
114
G.1 Distribution Plots for RQ2 - NAS-Bench-201
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
G.2 Distribution Plots for RQ2 - MobileNetV3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
H Acronyms
117
Bibliography
118
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
Deep Learning (DL) technologies have seen massive growth across many industries
in recent years. However, these powerful technologies often need substantial com-
putational resources, memory, storage, and energy, creating significant barriers to
their implementation [34]. Beyond the environmental concerns of resource-intensive
models, many practical limitations emerge that restrict where DL can be deployed.
The resource demands of advanced DL models often force cloud-based deployment,
introducing communication latency that makes them unsuitable for critical real-time
applications [34]. This dependency on cloud infrastructure creates multiple challenges.
For instance, it limits the ability for privacy-preserving AI to perform sensitive com-
putations locally without sending information to the cloud.
It also introduces a
vulnerability to network disruptions, which poses serious risks in situations requir-
ing guaranteed operations—like medical interventions, autonomous vehicles, remote
fieldwork, or space exploration—where internet connectivity isn’t guaranteed. Fur-
thermore, the growing field of Internet of Things (IoT) and edge computing, with
battery-powered devices performing continuous computations near sensors, requires
extremely resource-eﬀicient models. As such, by tackling the fundamental challenge
of resource constraints, we can vastly reduce the cost of using DL technologies, we
can make the models more accessible and enable them to be deployed in a wider
range of applications that will make it possible to expand the use of AI to a multi-
tude of new domains with the potential to produce new technological breakthroughs,
revolutionize industries, and improve the quality of life for many people [26].
Current research addressing the challenges of creating DL architectures for re-
source constrained hardware mainly falls within Efficient ML, TinyML, and EdgeAI.
In these domains Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has emerged as a particularly
promising approach that consistently achieves state-of-the-art(SOTA) results in de-
signing eﬀicient deep learning models for resource-constrained hardware [26]. Neural
Architecture Search, often put in the category of automated machine learning (Au-
toML), automates the design of deep neural network architectures for specific tasks,
addressing the time-consuming and error-prone nature of manual architecture design
[14]. Broadly, NAS can be defined as a process that systematically explores a defined
search space of potential network architectures through a specific search strategy,
identifying optimal architectures according to an evaluation strategy, as illustrated in
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Background and Motivation
2
Figure 1.1.
Search Space
A
Search Strategy
Performance
Evaluation
Strategy
Architecture
A ∈A
Performance
evaluation of A
Figure 1.1: Neural Architecture Search (NAS) components based on [14]
Besides driving the design of eﬀicient DL architectures, NAS has consistently yielded
neural network architectures with state-of-the-art performance across various tasks,
demonstrating its substantial potential [49, 13, 30, 11]. Despite its effectiveness, tradi-
tional NAS is inherently resource-intensive due to its reliance on an exhaustive search-
and-filtering process. These methods explore a vast search space of candidate archi-
tectures, often employing reinforcement learning(RL), evolutionary algorithms(EA),
or gradient-based optimization to identify promising models. This process is com-
putationally expensive, as it requires training or evaluating numerous architectures—
many of which are suboptimal—before converging on a competitive solution. Existing
approaches seek to reduce computational costs by leveraging supernets [6] and weight-
sharing [15, 30, 5] to avoid repeated training of candidate architectures or surrogate
models to predict the performance of candidate architectures instead of training them
which has shown promising results[29].
The challenges only intensify when considering hardware-aware or platform-aware
NAS (HW-NAS). In HW-NAS, the search must jointly optimize not only model per-
formance, e.g. accuracy, but also device-related metrics such as latency, energy con-
sumption, or memory footprint, turning NAS into a multi-objective, constrained opti-
mization problem. To evaluate these additional objectives, many HW-NAS methods
perform hardware-in-the-loop profiling or rely on detailed latency/energy predictors,
dramatically increasing per-candidate evaluation cost [3]. Many different approaches
are taken in the effort to tackle these challenges in the HW-NAS space. Some meth-
ods take a meta-learning approach to try to learn a cross-device metric prediction
model that can be adapted to different hardware for fast evaluation of candidate ar-
chitectures [22]. While others use reference models, with known good performance
for the target hardware, to guide the search process towards similar architectures [43].
However, these methods still fit within computationally heavy RL or EA based search
strategies, which still require training or evaluating many candidate architectures.
Different methods have been proposed to address these issues, but the challenge
remains of balancing eﬀiciency in the search process while maintaining the quality of
the generated architectures and ensuring an effective exploration of the architecture
search space. As a result, while NAS has demonstrated its effectiveness in automating
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Background and Motivation
3
architecture design, the remaining challenges have motivated the exploration of more
direct generative approaches [2, 23].
Generative modeling, also known as Generative AI (GenAI), is a promising field
which has seen a great interest in the last few years, due to its strong results in
multiple domains [40]. Recently researchers have proposed a new formulation of the
NAS problem by posing it as a generative modeling problem using diffusion models [2].
This new formulation named Neural Architecture Generation (NAG) aims to further
improve on some of the challenges that NAS faces such as the high computational cost
of the search process and effective exploration of search spaces. Building on this work
is the POMONAG framework [32] which has further extended the NAG formulation
to a multi-objective optimization problem by introducing a predictor guided strategy
for generating architectures according to multiple criteria such as accuracy, latency,
and the number of model parameters.
The introduction of multiple objectives is
crucial for the application of NAG to hardware-aware NAS problems, like generating
architectures for resource-constrained devices as is the focus of this thesis. While
the current state-of-the-art has demonstrated the promise of generative methods for
neural architecture search problems using diffusion models, this work explores an
alternative generative approach by applying Discrete Flow Matching (DFM) models
[18] to NAG.
Flow matching is a very recent framework for generative modeling introduced in
2022 by Yaron Lipman et al.[27]. The overall idea is to learn a vector field, the velocity
field, using a neural network. This field defines a flow and can be used to transform
samples from a simple source distribution, e.g. a uniform distribution, into samples
from an often complex target distribution such as a NAS search space. This breaks
down to two main components: Choose a probability path pt that interpolates between
the source distribution p and the target distribution q. Then train a neural network
to learn a velocity field that defines a flow which moves samples along this path [28].
The flow matching approach differs from diffusion models because it inherently relies
on a deterministic transformation driven by the learned velocity field rather than
stochastically reversing a prescribed noising process. Hence, while diffusion models
require carefully designed forward and reverse steps to iteratively denoise a sample,
flow matching offers a more direct trajectory from source to target distribution (Figure
1.2).
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Background and Motivation
4
Source Distribution
(Noise)
Target Distribution
(Search Space)
Architecture Sample
((a)) Diffusion model, continues state space.
Architecture Sample
Source Distribution
(Noise)
Target Distribution
(Search Space)
((b)) Flow matching model, continues state space.
Figure 1.2: Diffusion models vs Flow Matching (FM) models.
(light = low probability, dark red = high probability)
Yaron Lipman et al. showed that flow matching actually subsumes diffusion models
as specific instances. This means that flow matching models can perform the tasks
that diffusion models can do, but they also allow moving outside the diffusion model
framework as they enable flexibility in designing the probability paths that define the
transition from the source distribution to the target distribution. Additionally, the
deterministic nature of flow matching models supports reproducibility and compara-
bility of results out of the box, which is also an attractive feature in a search context
where consistency can often be valuable. The researchers’ results indicate that the
flow matching framework can create more eﬀicient and robust generative models with
faster training and sampling while at the same time consistently outperforming diffu-
sion models in terms of sample quality [27].
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Background and Motivation
5
Furthermore, state-of-the-art research have made flow matching applicable to dis-
crete state spaces (Figure 1.3). This approach is named Discrete Flow Matching and
works by applying the flow matching framework to time-continuous Markov processes
on discrete state spaces, known as Continuous Time Markov Chains (CTMC). Their
work shows that DFM can be used to generate high-quality discrete samples with
improved sampling eﬀiciency over existing methods [7, 18, 41].
Architecture Sample
Figure 1.3: Discrete Flow Matching (DFM), discrete state space.
(light = low probability, dark red = high probability)
The results of these models are promising and perfectly align with the discrete
nature of neural network architecture search spaces. Though discrete flow matching
models have not been applied to neural architecture generation before, there exists
research in the field of graph generation which has shown discrete flow matching
models can consistently outperform state-of-the-art diffusion based models in terms
of training, sample quality, and eﬀiciency [38].
Finally, researchers have recently
unlocked guidance for the discrete flow matching model framework by showing how
updates to the velocity field can help steer the generation towards desired subspaces
of the distribution[35]. This is another fundamental component for applying DFM
to NAS problems and with that in place all the necessary components are available
to explore these models and open up new avenues for eﬀicient, robust, and high-
quality neural architecture generation. This sets the stage for the work in this thesis,
which aims to investigate how the new generative modeling framework of discrete
flow matching can be utilized for neural architecture generation in order to create
architectures suited for resource-constrained devices.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Background and Motivation
6
As a final summary, figure 1.4 gives a quick overview of the presented fields and
methods to build a rough understanding of how they are organized and how this
work places DFM into the landscape.
AutoML
Flow Matching
Guided
DFM
NAS
DFM
RL, EA, BO, 
Differentiable
NAG
DiffusionNAG
POMONAG
This work
Figure 1.4: Visual overview of how this work places DFM into neural architecture
generation and the AutoML landscape.
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Main Hypothesis and Research Questions
7
1.2
Main Hypothesis and Research Questions
This thesis builds on existing work in neural architecture generation [2, 32] and ex-
tends it by integrating recent advances in discrete flow matching into a novel approach
for multi-objective guided architecture generation specifically focused on resource con-
strained devices. Finally, this new approach is evaluated based on its computational
eﬀiciency and how effectively it can produce network architectures that operate un-
der the constraints of resource-limited hardware while achieving competitive accuracy
performance on SOTA benchmarks. The main hypothesis is stated as follows:
Main Hypothesis
Integrating Discrete Flow Matching into hardware-aware, multi-objective ar-
chitecture generation will reduce computational cost while yielding models
that meet or exceed state-of-the-art eﬀiciency and accuracy for resource-
constrained devices.
A collection of research questions are posed under the main hypothesis:
Research Question 1
To what extent can discrete flow matching be used for generating unique, valid,
and novel neural architectures?
Research Question 2
How can guidance mechanisms for discrete flow matching be utilized to make
the generated architectures suitable for resource constrained hardware?
Research Question 3
How can guided discrete flow matching be extended to incorporate hard con-
straints in the generation of neural architectures?
1.2.1
RQ1 Research goals
To start addressing the main hypothesis the first research question investigates how
well discrete flow matching can function in a neural architecture generation context,
how it can be used to effectively explore the neural architecture search spaces, and
what the computational costs of the generation process are. This first entails imple-
menting a discrete flow matching model on neural architectural search spaces and
evaluating the performance of the model in terms the amount of valid, unique, and
novel architectures in the generation. Furthermore, this question will investigate the
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Main Hypothesis and Research Questions
8
computational cost of the generation process through the model training times. The
benchmarks for the evaluation will be the search spaces NAS-Bench-201 and Mo-
bileNetV3 as they are used by the majority of the current state-of-the-art research.
1.2.2
RQ2 Research goals
The second research question aims to investigate how guidance mechanisms for dis-
crete flow matching can be utilized to make the generated architectures suitable for
resource-constrained hardware. This first involves implementing a guidance mecha-
nism for the discrete flow matching model. Next the guidance will be evaluated on the
NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 search spaces according to metrics used by state-of-
the-art methods: accuracy, Floating Point Operations (FLOPs), cpu latency, model
parameter count, and model peak memory usage. Finally, the computational cost
of the generation process will be evaluated by measuring the guided model sampling
times and comparing them to the current state-of-the-art methods.
1.2.3
RQ3 Research goals
The third research question will investigate how hard constraints can be added into
the guided discrete flow matching generation process. This will involve the definition
of one or multiple techniques for constraining the state changes of the discrete flow
matching model sampling process to disallow certain transitions in the search space
based on user defined metrics e.g.
latency, memory usage or storage constraints.
Furthermore, the work of this research question will be to implement the proposed
method, as a proof of concept, for applying hard constraints to the discrete flow
matching generation process and to evaluate the performance of the implementation
against current state-of-the-art results.
==PAGE:16==
1.3 Thesis Outline
9
1.3
Thesis Outline
The thesis is structured as follows:
• Related Work: This chapter reviews the foundational studies and recent de-
velopments that form the basis of this thesis.
• Methodology: This chapter describes the theoretical framework used to ad-
dress the research questions in this work.
• Experiments and Results: This chapter presents the details of how the
methodology is implemented in this thesis, how the experimental setup is done,
what the results of the performed experiments are, and what answer was found
to the tested main hypothesis.
• Discussion: This chapter discusses the results, their implications and limita-
tions, and other relevant aspects of this work and future directions.
• Conclusion: This chapter summarizes and concludes the findings of this thesis.
An explanation of acronyms can be found in Appendix H.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
2.1
Neural Architecture Search
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a widely studied approach for automating the
design of deep neural networks, aiming to optimize both model performance and eﬀi-
ciency [48]. Traditional NAS methods explore a predefined search space using various
strategies, including reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithms, Bayesian opti-
mization(BO), and gradient-based techniques [30]. While NAS has been instrumental
in discovering high-performing architectures, it is often computationally expensive es-
pecially for methods working in discrete state spaces [51, 42, 47] or diﬀicult to control
in approaches like DARTS, where a continuous relaxation of the search space is used
which can introduce instability and make final architectures sensitive to hyperparam-
eters, leading to unpredictable or suboptimal outcomes [30, 46].
One-shot and Zero-shot NAS
A prominent strategy to reduce the computational
overhead in NAS is through one-shot methods, in which a single supernet encompasses
all possible sub-architectures, allowing them to share weights [37, 6]. By training
this supernet only once and then selecting the best sub-architecture according to
a validation metric, one-shot approaches dramatically shorten the search process,
compared to re-training each candidate independently. Nevertheless, the accuracy
estimates from weight sharing may not perfectly reflect the true performance of each
sub-architecture, potentially leading to suboptimal or unstable search outcomes.
More recently, zero-shot NAS methods eliminate the need for training altogether
by leveraging lightweight proxies of model quality, such as gradient-based or activation-
based measures of expressivity and trainability [23]. Here, each architecture is scored
at initialization (i.e. zero training steps), drastically reducing search cost. While
zero-shot NAS shows promise for ultra-fast architecture discovery and aligns with
theoretical insights on network capacity, further studies are actively examining how
best to design reliable proxies that preserve ranking fidelity across diverse tasks and
hardware settings as this is an ongoing challenge.
Surrogate Models
Rather than relying on weight sharing or training-free prox-
ies at initialization, a widely explored alternative is to learn a surrogate model that
predicts target metrics (e.g., accuracy, parameter count, or latency) of candidate
architectures based on pre-existing data [31]. By collecting a pool of (architecture,
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Neural Architecture Generation Variants
11
performance) pairs—often from partial training, previous related experiments, or syn-
thetic data—one can fit a predictor (e.g., a neural network) that rapidly infers how
new architectures might perform. This learned surrogate then guides the NAS process,
toward promising regions of the search space. In contrast to zero-shot scoring, which
draws on intrinsic properties of untrained networks, surrogate models typically ben-
efit from more flexible representations and can capture complex performance trends
across diverse hardware platforms or dataset domains [21]. However, they do depend
on curated training data for the predictor itself and thus may require more up-front
cost or risk misgeneralization if the training dataset does not suﬀiciently cover the
architecture search space of interest.
Multi-objective and Hardware-aware NAS
In practical deployment scenarios,
architectures must meet several criteria beyond raw predictive performance, such
as latency, energy consumption, parameter budget, or memory footprint [39]. Hence,
multi-objective and hardware-aware NAS aims to jointly optimize multiple metrics [42,
4, 44]. By tailoring architectures to specific device constraints (e.g., microcontroller,
mobile, CPU, or GPUs) or distinct application requirements, hardware-aware NAS
has delivered more resource-eﬀicient models.
2.2
Neural Architecture Generation Variants
Recent works treats NAS as a problem of generating architectures, rather than search-
ing for them, by leveraging generative models. Two notable frameworks exemplifying
this paradigm are DiffusionNAG [2] and POMONAG [32]. However, the field is still
in its early stages, with limited research and available implementations.
Diffusion-based Generation (DiffusionNAG)
DiffusionNAG uses a score net-
work which is trained to iteratively denoise Gaussian noise into valid neural architec-
tures aligning with a target performance metric (e.g., accuracy or latency). Specifi-
cally, DiffusionNAG leverages a predictor-guided diffusion mechanism, where a pre-
trained performance (or property) predictor modifies the reverse-diffusion gradient.
Such conditional guidance steers the sampling trajectory toward architectures that
better satisfy user-specified constraints or goals. This design allows NAS objectives,
property prediction, and generative modeling to be unified within one diffusion-based
framework, reducing reliance on conventional iterative sampling-and-ranking heuris-
tics.
Pareto-Optimal Many-Objective Generation (POMONAG)
While Diffu-
sionNAG primarily focuses on accuracy-conditioned generation, POMONAG extends
the same diffusion process to many-objective optimization. Thus, it simultaneously
optimizes accuracy, model size, MACs, and inference latency and thereby introduces
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Flow Matching and Its Extensions
12
a hardware-aware generation process that can produce architectures that are Pareto-
optimal across multiple objectives.
2.3
Flow Matching and Its Extensions
Flow Matching
Flow Matching (FM) [27] is a generative modeling framework that
formulates data generation as a deterministic transport problem. Unlike diffusion
models, which reverse a predefined stochastic noising process, FM learns a velocity
field that smoothly transforms a simple source distribution into a complex target dis-
tribution by solving an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE). This approach enables
eﬀicient sampling and deterministic interpolation between distributions.
Discrete Flow Matching
While FM has demonstrated strong generative perfor-
mance in continuous state spaces, recent work has extended it to discrete domains
through Discrete Flow Matching (DFM) [18, 41]. DFM applies the FM framework to
Continuous-Time Markov Chains (CTMCs), where probability mass transitions occur
between discrete states instead of following a continuous trajectory. Given its ability
to model discrete structures, DFM has naturally been adapted to graph generation
[38].
Guidance in Discrete Flow Matching
A recent advancement in DFM is the
introduction of guidance mechanisms [35], which allow for conditional generation by
incorporating auxiliary constraints in the rate matrix, produced by the learned DFM
velocity field model, to steer the generation process toward desirable properties.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter presents the theoretical framework used for the work in this thesis. It
includes explanations of the used theory and the reasoning behind the choices of
methods and techniques.
3.1
From NAS to Generative Modeling
When performing traditional Neural Architecture Search (NAS) the process involves
repeated sampling, training, and evaluation of potential architectures which can
quickly become computationally expensive [31]. Some ways to reduce the compu-
tational cost of NAS are to avoid the training of the architectures and avoid having
to initialize and run them to evaluate them.
This is generally done in two ways;
either through proxy methods that use formulas to calculate specific metrics based
on architecture information such as layer types or a second approach by utilizing
surrogate models, e.g. neural networks, that predict a metric for a given architecture
input. The use of surrogate models have become increasingly popular as they can be
used with datasets of architectures and their corresponding performance metrics to
learn a mapping from architecture to metric instead of manually having to create it
[29]. Besides the evaluation, the search strategy also has a significant impact on the
overall performance of the NAS process. The search strategy is the method used to
explore the search space of architectures often implemented through reinforcement
learning, evolutionary algorithms, Bayesian optimization, or gradient-based methods.
RL and EA based methods can often be extremely computationally expensive because
they have to perform multiple steps where many candidate architectures are sampled
and evaluated before converging to a good solution. For gradient based methods the
search can be very fast and the challenge typically instead becomes to keep memory
usage at a reasonable level during the search. BO based methods seek to create an
eﬀicient solution by using a probabilistic surrogate model, which should be cheap to
evaluate, and an acquisition function that decides the trade-off between exploration
(sampling from high uncertainty areas) and exploitation (sampling from low uncer-
tainty areas). This creates a setup where NAS is treated as a black-box optimization
problem and the surrogate model is used to guide the optimization [37]. In many
ways the BO approach is similar to the idea of guidance of the DFM model used in
this work. However, we do not necessitate the use of a probabilistic surrogate model
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Search Spaces
14
and further BO based methods are generally constrained to a set of possible solution
architectures and does not suggest candidates outside this predefined set.
By defining the NAS process as a generative modeling problem, as shown in Figure
3.1, we can combine the two stages of search strategy and performance evaluation into
a single very eﬀicient guided generation process which is even able to produce novel
unseen architectures from outside the training data [2].
Search Space
Search Strategy
Performance
Estimation
Strategy
Replaced by Guided Generative Model
Figure 3.1: Mapping the NAS process to a generative modeling version. The search
strategy and performance evaluation are combined into a single generative modeling
process.
By leveraging the generative model’s ability to learn complex distributions and par-
ticularly DFM’s ability to work on discrete data, we can generate architectures that
are valid in a very eﬀicient way. Furthermore, we also take advantage of the eﬀiciency
that surrogate models can provide by using them to guide the sampling from the gen-
erative model post-training. This allows us to train a single generative model on a
specific search space and then repurpose the model on various tasks by only changing
the surrogate models used for guidance. This does require training new surrogate
models is only possible when data is available. However, once data is available the
surrogate models can potentially be made very simple and fast to train while still
being very effective [2, 29].
3.2
Search Spaces
Search spaces are the set of possible neural architectures that a given search algorithm
can explore. Sometimes, they are also referred to as design spaces. Though this work
is focused on neural architecture generation, the term search space will be used to
stay consistent with the NAS literature and to emphasize that the generative models
are trained on samples from existing search spaces. Specifically, this work adopts
the terminology of Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter [14] for
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Search Spaces
15
defining the search space of neural architectures, as their highly cited paper provides
a widely accepted reference framework within the field of NAS research.
3.2.1
Search Space Types
The type of search space determines the structure of the neural architectures that
can be generated and the complexity of the space that should be explored. Therefore,
deciding on the type of search space is crucial for producing architectures that perform
well on a given task. This work makes use of the two search spaces NAS-Bench-201
[12] and MobileNetV3 [19] as these are used by the current state-of-the-art works in
neural architecture generation [2, 32]. Both search spaces are described in detail in
the experimental details Section 4.1.1. The terminology used in this work divides the
overall classes of search spaces into the following three types.
Chain-Structured Search Spaces
In chain-structured search spaces, Figure 3.2(a),
a neural architecture A is simply represented as a sequence of N layers or blocks where
the i’th layer Li receives input from layer (i −1) and the output of layer i is fed to
layer (i + 1) such that A = LN ◦LN−1 ◦· · · ◦L1 ◦L0. This search space is defined by
the parameters: maximum number of layers N, the possible layer operations F, and
the hyperparameters of each layer operation e.g. kernel size and stride for a convolu-
tion [14, p. 2–3]. The MobileNetV3 search space is an example of a chain-structured
search space.
Multi-branch Search Spaces
This search space type have chain-structured search
spaces as a subset. However, multi-branch search spaces, Figure 3.2(b), include addi-
tional connections between layers such as skip connections or parallel branches. This
allows for much more complex architectures and creates a search space with signifi-
cantly more degrees of freedom[14, p. 3].
Cell-based Search Spaces
These search spaces, Figure 3.2(c), are based on the
concept of cells or blocks that can be repeated and combined to form the neural
architecture (macro-architecture). This structure often decreases the size of the search
space because it works on the cells, that usually have fewer layers, instead of the whole
architecture. The final architecture is then built by stacking the cells together and
connecting them in a predefined way. However, since the cells, in principle, can be
combined arbitrarily this also adds a new complexity to the search space on how to
choose the macro-architecture, e.g. using a chain-structure or multi-branch approach.
[14, p. 3–5]. The NAS-Bench-201 search space falls into this category, where the cell
is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with a fixed number of nodes and operations that
fits into a predefined macro-architecture.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Search Spaces
16
Input
Output
((a)) Chain-structured Search Space.
Input
Output
((b)) Multi-branch Search Space.
Input
Output
Input
Output
Input
Output
((c)) Cell-based Search Space.
Cells (left) are combined to build the final macro architecture (right).
Figure 3.2: Search Space Types. The nodes represent layers or blocks in the neu-
ral architecture, with the color representing different operations e.g. convolution or
pooling, and the edges represent the connections between the layers.
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Neural Architecture Representations
17
3.3
Neural Architecture Representations
The choice of representation for neural architectures is an important consideration,
as it is a defining factor for multiple aspects of the generation process. Very impor-
tantly, the representation will influence which generative models that can be used and
how the architectures can be generated. For instance autoregressive methods such
as RNNs [50, 24] and sequential decision-making methods like RL based methods
[51] typically represent neural architectures as an ordered collection of operations or
layers that is built incrementally. The other common approach is to represent neural
architectures as a complete directed acyclic graph (DAG) where the whole structure
is generated at once. This method is not as flexible as the sequential approach as
you have to predefine the maximum number of possible nodes and edges in the graph.
However, this representation is chosen in this work, since it is suitable for the Discrete
Flow Matching method which is non-autoregressive.
3.3.1
Graph Representations
When representing a neural architecture as a DAG this work uses a common approach
of having two matrices to represent the graph structure. First is a vertex matrix
often referred to as the operator type matrix.
This matrix describes the type of
operation for each vertex/node in the graph where each vertex corresponds to a
layer or block in the architecture. The second matrix is the adjacency matrix which
describes the connections between the vertices in the graph. The adjacency matrix can
be represented as a binary upper triangular matrix where each element aij indicates
whether there is a connection from vertex i to vertex j or not. Specifically, the neural
architecture A with a maximum of N layers generated from a search space A with F
possible operations can be represented as the pair of an operator matrix:
V ∈{0, 1}N×F ,
such that
F
X
j=1
Vij = 1
∀i ∈{1, . . . , N}
(3.1)
and an upper triangular adjacency matrix E ∈{0, 1}N×N.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Neural Architecture Representations
18
3.3.2
Metrics for Evaluating Neural Architecture Generation
This work uses the metrics Validity, Uniqueness, and Novelty to evaluate the gener-
ated neural architectures. These metrics are chosen to be comparable to the current
state-of-the-art works in neural architecture generation [2, 32]. These metrics are not
used in the generation of architectures only in the analysis of the quality of architec-
ture samples.
Validity
A generated architecture A = (V, E) is considered valid if it satisfies the
inherent constraints of neural architectures, such as acyclicity and adherence to the
pre-specified rules of the selected search space. Let C = {c1, c2, . . . , ck} be the set of
design constraints imposed by the search space, where each ci is a predicate on A.
For example, for the search spaces used in this work the following design constraints
are defined; In NAS-Bench-201 the first operator type in A must be a start node, the
last node must be an end node, and no intermediate nodes are allowed to be start or
end nodes; In MobileNetV3, which can have varying layers in each stage (see 4.1.1),
either the first or second layer in the architecture A must be used, and if the third
layer is used in a stage then the last layer, the fourth, must also be used. For each
such constraints ci, we can define the indicator function:
ci(A) =
(
1,
if A satisfies constraint ci,
0,
otherwise.
Formally, the validity function can then be defined as:
Validity(A) =
(
1,
if A is acyclic and ci(A) = 1
∀i ∈{1, . . . , k},
0,
otherwise.
(3.2)
This metric ensures that only those architectures which can be implemented and
trained are considered, thereby filtering out any architectures that might violate fun-
damental properties of neural networks or architecture that do not follow the design
constraints of the selected search space.
Uniqueness
The uniqueness metric quantifies the diversity among the set of gen-
erated valid architectures. Let S denote the set of valid architectures generated by
the model. Then the uniqueness metric is given by:
Unique(S) = |{A ∈S | A is distinct}|
|S|
.
(3.3)
This metric reflects the model’s ability to explore a varied design space rather than
producing multiple copies of the same architecture.
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Neural Architecture Representations
19
Novelty
Novelty assesses the degree to which generated architectures differ from
those in an existing dataset. Let D represent the set of architectures in the training
dataset. The novelty metric is defined as:
Novelty(S) = |{A ∈S | A /∈D}|
|S|
.
(3.4)
This fraction indicates the proportion of generated architectures that are not present
in the known training dataset, thereby measuring the capability of the generative
model to explore designs outside the scope of the training data.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
20
3.4
Neural Architecture Flow Matching
Current SOTA methods within neural architecture generation successfully use the well
known Diffusion Models [2, 32]. Such generative models can be very powerful and
have shown to be able to generate high quality samples from complex distributions
[8]. However, they usually require many iterations to perform sampling - often in the
order of hundreds or thousands of steps [2] - resulting in high inference latency and
substantial computational cost. Furthermore, training of diffusion models is based
on simulating forward and reverse stochastic processes, which is also time-consuming
and computationally intensive. This work attempts to address these issues by using
Flow Matching - Discrete Flow Matching in particular - which offers a simulation-free
training approach, i.e. no step-by-step noising and denoising, with deterministic flows
where studies have shown the method can perform sampling in far fewer steps than
diffusion models with greater flexibility and higher robustness while maintaining high
sample quality with lower computational cost [41]. Additionally, the Discrete Flow
Matching framework has shown great promise for generation of discrete sequential
data, matching performance of SOTA autoregressive models [18].
In the case of
neural architecture generation, this is particularly relevant as the architectures can
naturally be represented as discrete sequences of tokens i.e. layers or operations. The
subject of the following sections will be to look at key concepts to understand the
essential building blocks of discrete flow matching.
3.4.1
Discrete Flow Matching
In Discrete Flow Matching the overall problem we try to solve given a source and
target distribution p and q is this:
Find uθ
t (x) generating pt(x), with p0(x) = p and p1(x) = q
(3.5)
where uθ
t(x) is a learnable velocity field parameterized by θ, typically a neural network,
pt(x) is a time dependent probability mass function (PMF), called a probability path,
p is a simple source distribution, and q is the complex target distribution we want
to generate samples from.
In the case of discrete flow matching uθ
t (x) produces
rate matrices for the instantaneous flow from a state at time t to other states. The
aggregation of these unit time rate matrices then produces a flow which governs a
Continuous Time Markov Chain over discrete states i.e.
a flow that models how
probability mass moves between states from the source distribution p to the target
distribution q [28, p. 16].
The overall approach which the Flow Matching framework, and thus Discrete Flow
Matching, takes is (1) Identify a known source distribution p e.g. a simple uniform
distribution, and an unknown target distribution q e.g. a distribution of neural archi-
tectures in a search space represented by a dataset. (2) design a probability path pt
that models the marginal probabilities from the source distribution p to the target
==PAGE:28==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
21
distribution q for each time step t ∈[0, 1). (3) learn a velocity field uθ
t(x), e.g. via a
neural network, that generates the probability path pt. (4) produce samples follow-
ing the target distribution q by solving an Ordinary Differential Equation with the
learned velocity field uθ
t(x).
Before diving into the details of the DFM framework, it is important to create an
overview and establish some terminology and key concepts that will be used through-
out the following sections. Table 3.1 provides summarizes of some essential concepts
and sets up the terminology, with important distinctions between some of the key
components.
Table 3.1: Terminology mapping between CTMC theory and DFM Framework
Term
CTMC Theory
Role in DFM Framework
CTMC
A stochastic process {Xt}t∈[0,1) on
a finite discrete state space where
transitions occur randomly in con-
tinuous time.
The stochastic process that DFM simu-
lates to transport probability mass from
the source distribution p0 to the target dis-
tribution p1.
CTMC Model
The full setup defining a CTMC:
state space S, generator ut,
initial distribution p0, etc. where
|S| < ∞,
ut ∈RS×S, P
x ut(x, z) = 0,
ut (x′; x) ≥0 (x′ ̸= x)
The DFM model instantiates a CTMC
model where the generator is learned from
data.
CTMC Generator
A rate matrix ut(x, z) specifying the
instantaneous transition rate from
state z to x. Must satisfy rate con-
ditions.
The theoretical object that DFM’s velocity
field approximates. Defines the infinitesi-
mal flow of probability.
Velocity Field
A term from the flow matching
framework referring to the
time-dependent rate field that
governs probability flow
In DFM, this is parameterized as a neu-
ral network uθ
t(x, z) that learns to approx-
imate the CTMC generator.
Probability Path
Flow matching term referring to a
time-indexed family of marginal dis-
tributions governed by the CTMC
dynamics.
Designed in DFM to interpolate between
source p0 and target p1.
Used to define
target velocities for training the neural ap-
proximation uθ
t(x, z).
Kolmogorov
Forward Equation
dpt(x)
dt
= P
z ut(x, z)pt(z).
Describes the evolution of
marginal probabilities.
The differential equation that governs the
evolution of marginal probabilities under a
CTMC. In DFM, it is implicitly solved via
learning the velocity field and simulating
its dynamics to map p0 →p1..
Transition Kernel
P(Xt+h = x | Xt = z)
≈δ(x, z) + hut(x, z)
Used to approximate transitions during
sampling; e.g. implemented via Euler-style
steps using the learned generator uθ
t (x, z).
Sampling Trajectory
A realization {Xt} following the
CTMC.
Generated in DFM by simulating the
learned velocity field from t = 0 to t =
1 −ε.
To understand how the DFM framework functions it is advantageous to first look
at the Continuous Time Markov Chain which form the foundational mathematical
framework underlying discrete flow matching.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
22
3.4.1.1
Continuous Time Markov Chain
Let T define a finite set of tokens, e.g. the set of possible layer operations in a neural
architecture search space, and let S = T d be the set of all d-length sequences e.g.
the set of neural architectures with d layers. A sample from S is then defined as
x = (x1, ..., xd) where xi ∈T is the i’th token in the sequence. The CTMC model is
then defined as an S valued time-dependent collection of random variables (Xt)0≤t≤1
forming a Markov chain, that describes moves on the states in S with the probability
transition kernel:
pt+h|t(y | x) := P (Xt+h = y | Xt = x)
(3.6)
= δ(y, x) + hut(y, x) + o(h)
(3.7)
and initial condition P (X0 = x) = p0(x). Where y is the new state which we can
transition to from the old state x, h is the time step size and o(h) is an error term
with o(h)/h →0 for t →0. The delta function is defined as:
δ(y, x) =
(
1
y = x
0
else
(3.8)
It captures the fact that if no transition occurs (i.e. as h →0), the process remains
in the same state, and in this way it provides the base from which the transitions are
applied. The generator ut(y, x) describes the rates as a time dependent function that
determines the speed at which probabilities are moved to state y from state x at time
t and it must satisfy the rate conditions:
ut(y, x) ≥0 for all y ̸= x, and
X
y
ut(y, x) = 0.
(3.9)
Implicitly leading to the outflow condition:
ut(x, x) = −
X
y̸=x
ut(y, x)
(3.10)
Here a subtle but important observation is, that ut(x, x) represents the rate of remain-
ing in state x at time t. To satisfy the rate conditions (3.9), it must be negative, and
thus encodes the total outgoing flow — that is, how fast probability mass leaves state
x. We have that ut generates pt if ut satisfies the rate conditions in Equation 3.9,
and ut and pt satisfy the flow, i.e. the net rate of change, defined by the Kolmogorov
==PAGE:30==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
23
Equation:
d
dtpt(y) =
X
x
ut(y, x)pt(x)
=
incoming flux
z
}|
{
X
x̸=y
ut(y, x)pt(x) −
outgoing flux
z
}|
{
X
x̸=y
ut(x, y)pt(y)
= −
X
x̸=y
[ut(x, y)pt(y) −ut(y, x)pt(x)] , t ∈[0, 1)
(3.11)
where incoming flux describes the probability of moving to state y from state x and
outgoing flux describes the probability of moving to x from y. Finally, if ut(y, x) is
continuous w.r.t. time t, then, by the theory of linear ODEs, there exists a unique
solution pt(x) to Equation 3.11 for t ∈[0, 1) satisfying the initial condition p0(x) =
p(x). This is essential, because it guarantees that a unique marginal path {pt}0≤t<1
exists which is governed by the CTMC generator ut we want to learn. As a result,
learning the generator ensures that the probability flow modeled by the velocity field
uθ
t is well-defined [28, pp. 40-41].
To summarize, the CTMC model builds on a transition kernel which is defined such
that the probability of leaving state x over an infinitesimally small time interval h is
close to zero. While transitions between states happen instantaneously, the likelihood
of such jumps is proportional to h, meaning they are distributed randomly over time
in a way that makes the CTMC evolve continuously in time. This continuous time
property is what enables the construction of a well-defined probability path {pt}t∈[0,1),
and allows us to formulate the Kolmogorov equation (3.11). Furthermore, it crucially
ensures the existence of a unique solution for the marginal probabilities pt(x), which in
turn makes it possible to define a velocity field uθ
t(x, z) that models a flow transporting
probability mass from a source distribution to a target distribution - all of which are
key enablers for DFM generative modeling.
This is the basis on which Discrete Flow Matching builds to leverage CTMC
dynamics to model flows between discrete distributions in generative settings. In the
following section we will look at key concepts of Discrete Flow Matching that makes it
possible to actually apply and scale the framework to generative problems in practice.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
24
3.4.1.2
Key Concepts
Data Coupling [28, p.
42]
The nature of the generative problem will determine
the type of coupling for the data from the source distribution X0 ∼p to the target
distribution X1 ∼q:
(X0, X1) ∼π0,1(X0, X1)
(3.12)
In some cases a coupling is known e.g.
if the generative problem is defined as a
mapping of a source distribution of low resolution images to a target distribution of
high resolution images or in the case of neural architecture generation where the source
distribution could be a set of large neural architectures and the target distribution
a set of smaller knowledge distilled architectures. In these cases we will be able to
create a joint distribution from datasets of the source and target distributions. In
other cases no coupling is known, like the case with generation of neural architectures
done in this work where the source distribution is a simple noisy distribution, e.g. a
uniform distribution, and the target distribution consists of samples from a search
space of neural architectures. In these cases the source and target samples follow the
independent coupling π0,1(X0, X1) = p(X0)q(X1).
Probability Paths and Velocities [28, pp.
16-17, 42–43]
A probability path
in DFM is simply a time-dependent sequence of discrete probability mass functions
over the finite state space S (presented in 3.4.1.1), i.e. a sequence of distributions
{pt}0≤t<1, that describes how the source distribution p0 is gradually transformed into
the target distribution p1 over time. Where each distribution pt(x) is defined on a
finite state space S consisting of all possible sequences of d discrete tokens and
pt(x) : S →[0, 1],
X
x∈S
pt(x) = 1
(3.13)
Learning a velocity field that directly transports samples from the source distribution
at t = 0 to the target distribution at t = 1−ε is challenging as there are infinitely many
CTMC generators that can produce this transportation. However, the probability
path describes a concrete sequence of distributions between the source and target
which provides the desired marginal probabilities that can be used to guide the learning
of a velocity field uθ
t(x).
In order to make the probability path, the discrete flow matching framework uses
a conditional strategy which simplifies the problem. This is done by constructing the
marginal probability path pt(x) as an aggregation of conditional probability paths
pt|Z(x | z):
pt(x) =
X
z∈Z
pt|Z(x | z)pZ(z)
(3.14)
where Z ⊆S is the set of targets e.g. the dataset of neural architectures, z ∈Z is
a specific target e.g. a specific neural architecture drawn from a dataset, Z ∼pZ is
a random variable that samples the target states z according to pZ(z), and pZ(z) is
==PAGE:32==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
25
the distribution of the target states. If the conditional probability paths satisfy:
p0|1 (x | x1) = π0|1 (x | x1) , and p1|1 (x | x1) = δx1(x),
(3.15)
i.e. at the initial time t = 0, our conditional distribution coincides with the coupling
π of the simple prior and at the final time t = 1 it is a point-mass at the observed
target x1, then the marginal probability path pt(x) will satisfy the boundary condi-
tions on the source and target distribution p0(x) = p(x) and p1(x) = q(x).
For the independent coupling, which is used in this work, the initial condition simpli-
fies to:
p0|1 (x | x1) = π(x0, x1)
q(x1)
= p(x0)q(x1)
q(x1)
= p(x0)
(3.16)
Now, if the conditional probability paths pt|Z are continuous in time and satisfy the
boundary conditions in 3.15 then if the conditional velocity field ut(·, · | z) generates
pt(· | z) then the marginal velocity field, i.e. the aggregated velocity field:
ut(y, x) =
X
z∈Z
ut(y, x | z)pZ|t(z | x) = E [ut (y, Xt | Z) | Xt = x]
(3.17)
also generates the marginal probability path pt(x). This is an important property,
because it means that if we can train a conditional velocity field uθ
t(y, x | z) to
approximate the conditional probability paths pt|Z(x | z), then by aggregation we can
obtain a marginal velocity field uθ
t(y, x) that generates the marginal probability path
pt(x). This ensures that the learned velocity field can be used to smoothly interpolate
samples from the source distribution p0(x) = p(x) to the target distribution p1(x) =
q(x) and thereby produce valid generative samples.
DFM Loss [28, pp. 19, 43–44]
To be able to learn the velocity field uθ
t (·, x),
the entire vector of rates at time t leaving state x, we need a tractable loss function.
However, using the target CTMC generator ut(·, x) directly is not feasible, as it re-
quires marginalization over the entire training dataset in Z. To address this, the Flow
Matching framework employs a family of loss functions called Bregman divergences,
which measure the dissimilarity between two vectors v1, v2 ∈RS:
D(v1, v2) := Φ(v1) −[Φ(v2) + ⟨v1 −v2, ∇Φ(v2)⟩]
(3.18)
where, for DFM, we use a convex function Φx : Ωx →R over a convex set:
Ωx =


v ∈RS | v(y) ≥0∀y ̸= x, and v(x) = −
X
y̸=x
v(y)


⊂RS
(3.19)
which means ut(·, x) ∈Ωx. These divergences are non-negative and only 0 for v1 = v2,
furthermore they enable the computation of unbiased gradients that can be used to
train the learnable velocity field uθ
t (·, x) in terms of the conditional velocity field
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
26
ut(·, x | z).
The key value of Bregman divergences in this context is that their
gradient with respect to the second argument is aﬀine invariant, such that:
∇vD(E[Y ], v) = E [∇vD(Y, v)]
for any random variable Y ∈RS.
(3.20)
This property allows us to exchange the order of expectation and gradient and replace
an intractable unconditional loss function:
LDFM(θ) = Et,Xt∼ptDXt
 ut (·, Xt) , uθ
t (·, Xt)

(3.21)
with a tractable conditional loss function:
LCDFM(θ) = Et,Z,Xt∼pt|ZDXt
 ut (·, Xt | Z) , uθ
t (·, Xt)

.
(3.22)
where t ∼U[0, 1]. Flow Matching then exploits the fact that the gradients of the two
loss functions coincide, i.e.:
∇θLDFM(θ) = ∇θLCDFM(θ),
(3.23)
and that the minimizer of the conditional loss LCDFM(θ) is the marginal velocity
uθ
t(·, x) = E [ut (·, Xt | Z) | Xt = x] .
(3.24)
In other words, by minimizing the conditional loss, we learn the marginal velocity
field uθ
t(y, x) that generates the marginal probability path pt(x).
Sampling
With the learned velocity field uθ
t(y, x) we can then perform sampling
e.g. by using the simple Euler-method as an ODE solver like so:
P (Xt+h = y | Xt) = δ (y, Xt) + huθ
t (y, Xt)
(3.25)
Which clearly matches the definition of the transition kernel in the CTMC model (3.7)
but with an approximated generator uθ
t(y, x) and not including the error term o(h).
Which means the step size h must be small enough to ensure that the approximation
produces a valid PMF.
Discrete Flow Matching Framework Overview
This concludes the key con-
cepts of the Discrete Flow Matching framework. The following sections will look at
how these concepts are applied in practice in a scalable and eﬀicient manner and
how guidance can be applied to the DFM framework to make it relevant for solving
the neural architecture search problem in a generative framework. As a final note
figure 3.3 attempts to illustrate the DFM framework and its key components as pre-
sented here in Section 3.4.1 to provide a high level visual overview for connecting the
concepts.
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
27
CTMC Theory
Sampling
Training
Kolmogorov
Equation
CTMC Generator
Rate conditions
Source distribution
Target distribution
t = 0
Sample
Minimize
Controlling
 condition
Probability path
ODE Solver e.g.
Generative samples
DFM Framework
Figure 3.3:
Discrete Flow Matching framework.
The figure gives a high level
overview of the key components and their interactions in the DFM framework as
presented in Section 3.4.1.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
28
3.4.1.3
Discrete Flow Matching in Practice
A challenge with the DFM framework, as presented so far, is that it requires the
velocity field uθ
t(y, x) to produce rates for all possible states y ∈S which is infeasible
in practice. To address this, the DFM framework uses a factorized approach which
significantly reduces the output space of uθ
t (y, x) and makes the problem feasible.
Factorized Probability Paths and Velocity Fields [28, pp.
44-46]
The
idea behind the factorized approach is to go from velocities over the full space of
possible states to only consider states that differ from the current state in at most
one token. In high-dimensional discrete spaces S = T d, a full rate matrix ut(y, x) has
|T |d possible outputs (self transitions included) which is impossible to learn directly.
By only allowing single-token jumps, we reduce the output dimension to d × |T |. In
the case of neural architecture generation, this means that we go from an output size
of the number of unique operator types O raised to the power of the number of layers
l, i.e. Ol , to an output size of l × O. The factorized velocity becomes:
ut(y, x) =
X
i
δ

y
¯i, x
¯i
ui
t
 yi, x

(3.26)
with per dimension i ∈[d] rate conditions:
ui
t
 yi, x

≥0 for all yi ̸= xi, and
X
yi∈T
ui
t
 yi, x

= 0
for all x ∈S.
(3.27)
where ¯i = (1, . . . , i−1, i+1, . . . , d), i.e. all indices excluding i, and ui
t(yi, x) is only the
rate for changing the i’th token. The Kronecker delta δ

y¯i, x¯i
forces all coordinates
̸= i to stay the same, so only coordinate i flips. It is important to notice, that even
though the velocity field is factorized to only consider changes in one token at a time,
the full sequence x is still considered in the velocity field ui
t(yi, x) to make the i’th
token jump depend on all the other tokens.
Now, as in 3.4.1.2, to make the problem tractable, we need to work with the
conditional probability paths which can be designed in a factorized manner as:
pt(x) =
X
z
pt|Z(x | z)pZ(z), with pt|Z(x | z) =
Y
i
pi
t|Z
 xi | z

,
(3.28)
If we assume ui
t
 yi, xi | z

is continuous w.r.t. time t, that it generates pi
t|Z
 xi | z

so it is also continuous w.r.t. time, and that pt(x) > 0 for all x ∈S and t ∈[0, 1).
Then we get the factorized marginal velocity, as in 3.26:
ut(y, x) =
X
i
δ

y
¯i, x
¯i
ui
t
 yi, x

(3.29)
with
ui
t
 yi, x

=
X
z
ui
t
 yi, xi | z

pZ|t(z | x) = E

ui
t
 yi, Xi
t | Z

| Xt = x

(3.30)
==PAGE:36==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
29
where ui
t
 yi, x

generates pt(x). So now we know that by constructing our probability
path in a factorized manner, we can make the problem of learning the velocity field
uθ
t (y, x) scalable. Specifically, this work uses a factorized path build as a Mixture
Path [28, p. 46]:
pi
t|0,1
 xi | x0, x1

= κtδ
 xi, xi
1

+ (1 −κt) δ
 xi, xi
0

where κ : [0, 1] →[0, 1] is a time continuous scheduler. Here the RV Xi
t ∼pi
t|0,1 (· | x0, x1)
follows
Xi
t =
(
xi
1
with prob κt
xi
0
with prob (1 −κt)
which is to say that the i’th token in the sequence x at time t is either the source
token xi
0 or the target token xi
1 with a probability κt and 1 −κt, respectively. The
marginal pt(x) then satisfies the boundary constraints for κ0 = 0 and κ1 = 1. To
apply it in practice though, we still need to define how to train the velocity field, i.e.
constructing the loss in the factorized case, and how to sample from the velocity field.
Training [28, p.
46]
When we factorize the velocity field into per-token updates,
then the conditional DFM loss decomposes into a sum of simpler independenttoken-
wise Bregman divergences:
LCDFM(θ) = Et,Z,Xt∼pt|Z
X
i
Di
Xt

ui
t (·, Xt | Z) , uθ,i
t
(·, Xt)

,
(3.31)
Which means that at each time t, for each sample Xt, and for each token i, we compare
the true conditional per-token rates ui
t (·, Xt | Z) against our learned per-token rates
uθ,i
t
(·, Xt). Each rate vector ui
t(·, x | z), uθ,i
t (·, x) must be in the smaller convex set,
where for each token type α ∈T :
Ωα =


v ∈RT | v(β) ≥0 ∀β ∈T \{α}, and v(α) = −
X
β̸=α
v(β)


⊂RT
(3.32)
Which means that any per-token rate vector
v ∈Ωxi
must satisfy
v(xj) ≥0
 xj ̸= xi
and
v
 xi
= −
X
xj̸=xi
v(xj)
i.e. it must be non-negative and sum to zero, which are the CTMC rate conditions
for token i. This also ensures that the rate conditions for the CTMC in Equation 3.9
are satisfied. Minimizing this loss we can then learn the per-token rates uθ,i
t (·, x) and
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
30
that can be used to perform sampling. As this work uses a mixture path with the
factorized loss we end up with the following loss function:
LCDFM(θ) = D

ui
t
 ·, xi | x0, x1

, uθ,i
t (·, x)

=
˙κt
1 −κt
h δ
 xi
1, xi
−1

log pθ,i
1|t
 xi
1 | x

+ δ
 xi
1, xi
−pθ,i
1|t
 xi | x
i
as a case of 3.31 where ˙κt is the time derivative of the scheduler κt. Here we don’t
actually learn the velocity field uθ,i
t (·, x) directly, but instead parameterize it by pθ,i
1|t
i.e. we make the learned model output a conditional probability distribution pθ,i
1|t(j | x)
for j ∈{1, . . . , |T |}, for each token i at time t given the current state x.
Sampling [28, p.
44]
Once we have learned the factorized rates uθ,i
t
 yi, x

, we
can approximate the continuous-time CTMC by a small-step Euler scheme, applied
independently to each coordinate i (following the structure from the CTMC transition
kernel (3.7)):
P
 Xi
t+h = yi | Xt = x

= δ
 yi, xi
+ hui  yi, x

+ o(h)
(3.33)
As usual with the error o(h) where h needs to be chosen suﬀiciently small.
For
mixture paths with the parameterization with the posterior pθ,i
1|t we get coordinate-
wise sampling following the transition kernel:
P
 Xi
t+h = yi | Xt = x

= δ
 yi, xi
+ hui  yi, x

+ o(h)
=
X
xi
1

δ
 yi, xi
+ h
˙κt
1 −κt

δ
 yi, xi
1

−δ
 yi, xi
+ o(h)

pi
1|t
 xi
1 | x

.
(3.34)
Which in practice can be performed by the steps: (1) draw Xi
1 ∼pi
1|t
 Xi
1 | x

; and
(2) update Xi
t+h with the velocity
˙κt
1−κt

δ
 yi, Xi
1

−δ
 yi, xi
according to the Euler
step
P (Xt+h = y | Xt) =
(
exp [hut (Xt, Xt)]
y = Xt
ut(y,Xt)
|ut(Xt,Xt)| (1 −exp [hut (Xt, Xt)])
y ̸= Xt
(3.35)
This Euler step is used in practice because it maintains the error o(h) such that any
choice of h > 0 yields a valid PMF [28, pp. 41, 49].
==PAGE:38==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
31
3.4.1.4
Surrogate-Guidance for Discrete Flow Matching
To make the DFM framework relevant for solving a neural architecture search problem,
we must steer (guide) the sampling process. A well known strategy for creating such
guidance is to use surrogate models (also called guides or predictor models), which
are models such as neural networks that can be trained to predict a performance
metric for a neural architecture, e.g. accuracy or latency. This work utilizes such
surrogate models by creating datasets with couplings between architectures and proxy
performance metrics. Here proxy performance metrics are defined as metrics that we
calculated or measured cheaply such that they might be, but not necessarily are, equal
to the true performance metric. But, at least they need to be correlated with the true
metric to the degree that they can be used to guide the sampling process. As an
example, the measurement of FLOPs of a neural network has been found to be a
good proxy for accuracy [25]. Or the measurement of accuracy after a few training
cycles, or latency/peak memory usage on a random input of a fixed size can be a
good proxy for the true performance of a neural architecture once deployed.
Formally this work uses a surrogate model with one or multiple predictor mod-
els f ϕ(x) parameterized by ϕ that can quickly estimate the quality of a candidate
architecture x ∈S. The predictor models are each trained on a dataset of pairs of ar-
chitectures and a corresponding proxy performance metric to predict e.g. accuracy or
latency. The distinction here is that the predictor models produce ”raw” predictions
for a given architecture representation while the surrogate model adds additional logic.
Specifically, the method used in this work makes three types of surrogate models:
Lower-limit Surrogate Model
The lower-limit surrogate model glower takes the
output from a single predictor model f ϕ, measures the difference from a predefined
metric lower limit llower and scales the difference to the range [0,1] by using a Sigmoid
function:
glower(x) = Sigmoid(α · (f ϕ(x) −llower))
(3.36)
where x is an architecture representation and where the ordering of the prediction-
limit differences are maintained. The purpose of the scaling factor α is to ensure the
prediction-limit differences are in a fitting range for the Sigmoid function to produce
a meaningful output where it does not saturate i.e. only produces 0 or 1.
Upper-limit Surrogate Model
The upper-limit surrogate model is similar:
gupper = Sigmoid(−α · (f θ(x) −lupper))
(3.37)
only with a negation of the Sigmoid input to make sure that the produced signal
favors smaller metric predictions according to the upper limit lupper.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
32
Multi-objective Surrogate Model
For the multi-objective surrogate models this
work simply uses a weighted average of the set of selected surrogate models i.e.
gmulti (G) =

X
g∈G
wg · g(x)

1
|G|
(3.38)
where G defines the set of chosen single-objective surrogate models e.g. lower-limit ac-
curacy, lower-limit flops, and upper-limit latency, x is an architecture representation,
and wg is the weight of the surrogate model signal g with wg ≥0 and 1 ≥g(x) ≥0.
This allows a generation guided by preferences defined by the weighting of the surro-
gate model outputs e.g. one could weight latency over accuracy if real-time inference
is more important than maximal accuracy.
==PAGE:40==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
33
Guiding the Velocity Field
Since we only need to consider single token transi-
tions, because of factorization (3.4.1.3), we go from guidance on a | T |d state space to
guidance on a d × | T | state space, which gives the possibility of using the guidance
procedure illustrated in figure 3.4.
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
X
Velocity Field
Transition Scores
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
Guided Velocity Field
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
: Batch Dimension (Sampling size)
: Sequence Dimension (e.g. layers)
: Token Dimension (e.g. operator types)
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
Value 8
Value 9
Low
High
Surrogate Model
+ Predictor Model(s)
v
Guidance signal 
vector
Guided Discrete Flow Matching
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
Batch of current states
single transition
token-wise expansion
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
Figure 3.4: Velocity field guidance: Produces transition scores for each state xt in
a batch and adjusts the velocity field rates through element-wise multiplication with
the surrogate model guidance signal.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
34
This work computes the guidance signal by generating all permutations of single-
token changes to the state xt at time t i.e. all possible single-token transitions. Then
for each possible transition a score is computed by the surrogate model to produce
the guidance signal vector in figure 3.4. This vector is scaled by a temperature τ
and the exponential function to secure a non-negative output. The guided velocity
field is then used in step (1) from the sampling description in Section 3.4.1.3 to get
a probability mass function from which to draw an x1 used to perform the update
Xi
t+h.
Hard Constraints and Guidance
Guidance is one necessary component for work-
ing with the architecture search problem. However, in resource constraint settings
another typical, and often crucial, requirement is to also be able to apply hard con-
straints to the architectures such as a hard limit on the model size, peak memory or
accuracy. As long as these constraints are within reasonable limits, a method should
be able to satisfy them in order to be considered successful. Such hard constraints
are diﬀicult to satisfy in a generative framework, because the generative model is not
explicitly trained to satisfy them, but rather to generate samples that can vary within
a distribution. Therefore, this sets the stage for an interesting challenge, that can be
tackled from many different angles. This work takes the approach of dividing the sur-
rogate models into two groups, soft constraints and hard constraints surrogate guides.
Then two different methods are investigated to see how well they can satisfy hard
constraints. The first approach is extremely simple and just does surrogate guided
sampling followed by a top-k filtering of the generated architectures based on the hard
constraints surrogate guides. The method is chosen because it is simple to implement
and is a good way to provide a baseline. The biggest challenge of this approach is
that it is completely dependent on the surrogate model’s ability to predict the hard
constraints and on the guided sampling to generate high quality architectures plus
the DFM generative model must produce, at least some, architectures that fall within
the hard constraints. For the second method the following sampling strategy is used,
illustrated by Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 DFM Hard Constraint Guided Sampling
Require: DFM model M
▷Discrete Flow Matching model
Require: Guide G
▷Surrogate model for guidance
Require: Number of samples n
▷number of samples to generate
1: S1 ←M.guidedSampling( n)
▷Do initial surrogate guided sampling
2: Skept ←{ s ∈S1 | G.isWithinHardConstraint(s) } ▷Keep predicted valid samples
3: M.setSourceDistribution (Skept) ▷Set kept samples as DFM source distribution
4: Sﬁnal ←M.guidedSampling(n)
▷Do final surrogate guided sampling
5: return Sﬁnal
The sampling strategy works by first doing a surrogate guided sampling to generate a
high quality set of candidate architectures S1. Then the set of candidate architectures
==PAGE:42==
3.4 Neural Architecture Flow Matching
35
is filtered to only keep those that satisfy the hard constraints. Then this set of valid
architectures is used as the source distribution for the DFM model. By doing this we
ensure that the DFM model always starts from one of these high quality architectures.
Finally, the DFM model is used to do a final surrogate guided sampling to generate
the final set of candidate architectures Sﬁnal. This setup also allows for saving the
new source distribution Skept for future use, so that the DFM model can be used
again directly i.e. without doing step 1-3 again. Furthermore, a final key change is
also introduced to the hard constraint guided sampling process as compared to the
standard (soft constraint) guided sampling process. The key change is a check in the
guidance to not only score state transitions by their performance prediction but to
completely clamp them to zero if any of the hard constraints are violated. We name
this a hard transition constraint, and it is implemented through two components. (1)
The surrogate model is extended to produce a mask that indicates if the architecture
of a transition is predicted to be within the hard constraints or not. (2) The guided
velocity field is adjusted such that the rate is set to zero for all transitions where the
current architecture xt is predicted to satisfy the hard constraints, but the transition
to the next architecture xt+h is predicted to violate the hard constraints. In this way
the approach seeks to allow the evolution of architectures, even through non-valid
states, until a valid architecture is reached. From that point the architecture should
only evolve if the surrogate model predicts an increase in the performance for the
transition to the next architecture. This second approach, like the top-k filtering
approach, is also dependent on the surrogate model’s prediction ability, but it also
adjusts the DFM model in important ways to try and reduce the risk of generating
architectures outside the hard constraints. We choose to name this approach hard
guidance as it is a hardening of the guidance according to the limits and the surrogate
model’s predictions, but still it does not formally guarantee the hard constraints are
satisfied e.g. if the surrogate model predictions are off or if the DFM sampling is not
able to reach a distribution fit adhering to the metric limit constraints.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments and
Results
4.1
Experimental Details
This section describes essential components of the overall experimental setup used in
this work. The setup includes details that are relevant across all experiments for all
three research questions (RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3). The complete configurations of all
experiments are available in the project code at: https://github.com/wdmdev/Ed
geFlow/blob/main/conf.
4.1.1
Search Spaces Used in This Work
This work uses the computer vision focused search spaces NAS-Bench-201 [12] and
MobileNetV3 [19] as done by the current state-of-the-art work in neural architecture
generation [2, 32]. The search space datasets are acquired from the work on Diffu-
sionNAG by Sohyun An et al. [2] to ensure a fair comparison. The statistics of used
datasets for the search spaces are shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Statistics of NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 Search Spaces.
Search Space
Number of Architectures
Number of nodes
Number of operation types
NAS-Bench-201
15,625
8
7
MobileNetV3
500,000
20
9
It is important to note that the search space of MobileNetV3, as described below, is
much larger than the 500,000 sampled architectures used to train the DFM model in
this work.
NAS-Bench-201
is a cell-based search space meant to be used as a unified bench-
mark for comparing NAS algorithms without having to think about different hyper-
parameter tuning of the architectures. It uses a predefined macro architecture with a
stack of a searchable cell as shown in Figure 4.1. This work uses a stack size of N = 5
as described in [2]. In this way the NAS-Bench-201 search space is only designed for
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Experimental Details
37
the problem of finding a single good cell architecture which will be used in the fixed
macro architecture as a stack of N identical cells for each of the three blocks. The cell
search consists of finding the best combination of operators connecting 4 nodes in a
densely connected directed acyclic graph (DAG) where each connection corresponds
to one operation from the set of 5 possibilities: zeroize, skip-connect, conv1x1,
conv3x3, and 3x3 avg pool. In this work an input and output node is added to the
cell representation, like in [2], which adds a total of 2 more edges to the cell structure
and 2 more operator types (input and output) for which the cell representation be-
comes a 8x7 operator matrix. Since the cell topology is fixed, this work implements
the search space using only an operator matrix, i.e. no adjacency matrix, for the
representation of the cell. In this operator matrix each row corresponds to a specific
fixed position in the cell and each column corresponds to an operator type.
Image
conv
            X N
cell
residual
block
(stride=2)
            X N
cell
residual
block
(stride=2)
            X N
cell
global
avg. pool
Macro architecture
cell
cell
cell
cell
Set of Possible Operators
zeroize
skip-connect
1x1 conv
3x3 conv
3x3 avg pool
Figure 4.1: NAS-Bench-201 Search Space Illustration. Based on the work of Xuanyi
Dong and Yi Yang [12]. Upper part shows the macro architecture of each sample from
the search space with cell being the searchable part of the architecture based on the
possible operator types shown in the lower part.
The total size of the search space is relatively small, 15,625 architectures, and thus the
benchmark provides lookup tables with measurements for all possible architectures
such as latency and test accuracy on the CIFAR10[20], CIFAR100[20]. This makes it a
good starting point for testing the generative capabilities of the DFM model. However,
the static macro architecture and its lack of explicit consideration for computational
cost makes it less suited for searching with regard to resource constrained hardware.
For this reason, the MobileNetV3 is used as a second search space.
MobileNetV3
provides a search space for CNN-based neural architectures meant
to run eﬀicient inference on mobile devices[19]. As such it still produces relatively
large models when considering the requirements of extremely resource constrained
devices such as microcontrollers, but it does provide a useful setting for testing the
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Experimental Details
38
capabilities of the DFM model in the context of guided generation of architectures
for resource constrained hardware.
This work instantiates the MobileNetV3 search space in the same manner as [2].
The search space uses a chain-structured architecture consisting of s = 5 stages where
each stage has B ∈{2, 3, 4} blocks. Each block is a MBConv block with kernel size
K ∈{3, 5, 7} and expansion ratio E ∈{3, 4, 6}. The size of the input is set to be
static as 224x224, meaning the complete search space gets a size of approximately:
|A|MBV 3 =
s
Y
i=1
X
b∈B
(|K| · |E|)b
=


X
b∈{2,3,4}
9b


5
= (92 + 93 + 94)5
≈2 · 1019
(4.1)
Which is a very large search space that provides a good testbed for evaluating the
performance of the DFM model in a realistic setting. See appendix A for a descrip-
tion of the MBConv block and details on how the search space is initialized. Again
this work chooses to represent the architectures in the search space using only an
operator matrix. We leverage the fact that the search space macro architecture is
chain-structured (see Section 3.2.1) such that the adjacency matrix is fixed. However,
in this case an additional operator type is required, a none operator, to represent the
absence of a block in a stage. This makes the operator matrix a 10x20 matrix, where
each row corresponds to a specific position in the chain-structured architecture and
each column corresponds to an operator type.
Due to the large search space size there are no lookup tables available with pre-
computed architecture metrics like in NAS-Bench-201. This work therefore creates a
dataset through random sampling of 131,161 architectures from the 500,000 architec-
tures in the DiffusionNAG dataset. The number of architectures simply was decided
based on the amount of samples that could be measured within the time frame of a few
hours. For each of the sampled architectures we measure cpu latency, peak memory,
FLOPs, and total number of parameters. Latency is calculated as an average over
10 time measurements on a random input of shape (3,224,224) where the network
gets 5 warmup rounds before the 10 time measurements are done. Peak memory is
computed using a PyTorch fake tensor [17] which is an object behaving like a real
PyTorch tensor but without any data. Using this fake tensor and TorchDispatch-
Mode[45], which allows us to carry a memory tracking state through our network,
we estimate the peak memory of a network without actually running heavy computa-
tions on real data. Additionally, peak memory is computed based on an assumption
of an int8 quantization of the network. FLOPs are measured in a fairly similar way
where we register a buffer for our network where the total number of operations are
updated when running the model on a dummy input of shape (1,3,224,224). Fi-
nally, the total number of parameters is calculated using the parameters() function
in PyTorch where we take the count of weight and bias parameters. The code for all
metric measurements can be found in Appendix B.
==PAGE:46==
4.2 RQ1 - Validity, Uniqueness, and Novelty
39
4.1.2
Baseline Models
This work compares the DFM model against the current state-of-the-art in neural
architecture generation, specifically DiffusionNAG [2] and POMONAG [32]. For
DiffusionNAG the code is available at https://github.com/CownowAn/DiffusionN
AG. Doing a deep dive into the code and reproducing the results of DiffusionNAG is
deemed out of scope for this work mainly due to the complexity of the codebase and
the computation time required to train the model. Instead, the code was tested once
using the default settings to ensure that the generated results align with the reported
results in the paper.
After confirmation using this, shallow testing, the reported
results are used directly from the paper. The work of POMONAG is still in review
and thus no code is available. Therefore, the results of POMONAG are also taken
directly from the paper.
Besides these two baselines, this work uses random sampling baselines with re-
placement and an incremental approach where the unguided DFM model produced
in RQ1 becomes a baseline for the guided DFM model in RQ2 and then both of these
models become baselines for the hard guided DFM model in RQ3. This is done to
investigate how the choices made are affecting model performance and to see if the
incremental extensions that each research question performs have the desired effects.
4.1.3
Hardware Used in This Work
All model trainings have been done on a single Tesla A100-PCIE NVIDIA GPU with
the specifications shown in Table C.1. (One deviation from this is the computation
time comparison with DiffusionNAG described in Section 4.2.2).
Table 4.2: NVIDIA GPU: Tesla A100 Specifications.
Year
Architecture
CUDA cap.
CUDA cores
Clock (MHz)
Mem (GiB)
SP peak (GFlops)
DP peak (GFlops)
Peak (GB/s)
2020
GA100 (Ampere)
8.0
6912
1410
40
19500
9700
1555
For a detailed description of each column in Table C.1, please refer to Appendix C.1.
DiffusionNAG uses an NVIDIA Tesla V100-SXM2 GPU, described in Appendix C.2,
for their reported experiments. The POMONAG work uses an NVIDIA Quadro RTX
6000 GPU, described in Appendix C.3.
4.2
RQ1 - Validity, Uniqueness, and Novelty
To evaluate the potential of the DFM model to perform neural architecture generation,
we first look at the model’s ability to generate architectures from a given search
space without any guidance, we name the model unguided DFM. This entails training
on a set of architectures from a chosen search space to have the model learn the
distribution of the architectures and then test its ability to generate valid, unique, and
novel samples. Here we implement the definitions of validity, uniqueness, and novelty
==PAGE:47==
4.2 RQ1 - Validity, Uniqueness, and Novelty
40
described in Section 3.3.2. Validity and uniqueness are essential metrics for the DFM
to be effective. However, novelty is of particular interest as it is a good measure of
the model’s potential to explore a search space beyond the known architectures and
thereby discover new and possibly high performing candidates.
4.2.1
Setup
This experiment trains a DFM to generate samples from the NAS-Bench-201 search
space and the MobileNetV3 search space and uses the reported results in Diffusion-
NAG [2] and POMONAG [32] as baselines for comparison. For both search spaces
a DFM is constructed with a simple MLP model for velocity field prediction using
4 linear layers with Swish activation and hidden dimensions of size 128 each. The
implementation code can be found in the appendix D. The following DFM settings
are used:
Table 4.3: RQ1 DFM settings.
Setting
Type
Source distribution
Uniform
Time sampler
Uniform
Probability path
Mixture Discrete
Probability path scheduler
Polynomial Convex of degree 2
This model could easily be made more complex, however that is out of the scope
for this thesis, since we are primarily interested in producing a proof of concept for
investigating guidance and hard constraints of the DFM model. Furthermore, the
implementation in this work builds on the code in the flow_matching repository [16]
where these settings were available without having to extend the framework, which
would have been outside the scope of this thesis.
The training is done with a train, validation, and test batch size of 256 using a
mixture path generalization KL loss as this fits with the choice of a discrete mixture
path. The training is done for 30 epochs on the NAS-Bench-201 search space and for
100 epochs on the MobileNetV3 search space for the models to converge. To adhere to
the settings of the DiffusionNAG paper and leave a portion of data for the model to be
unseen, the training set for NAS-Bench-201 is composed of 50% of the architectures
randomly sampled from the search space. Besides this, 10% of the architectures are
used for validation where the model with the highest score on the validation set is
chosen. This is done for the complete search space of 15,625 architectures. For the
MobileNetV3 search space a dataset created by the DiffusionNAG research team of
500,000 randomly sampled architectures is used. Here the dataset is divided into 80%
training architectures, 10% validation architectures, and 10% test architectures as the
total size of the search space is vast enough. The training in both cases is guided by
==PAGE:48==
4.2 RQ1 - Validity, Uniqueness, and Novelty
41
the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 and a ReduceLROnPlateau1 scheduler
is used with mode min, factor 0.1, and patience of 10 epochs to reduce the rate if
learning stagnates. Sampling from the model on each search space is done using a
mixture discrete Euler solver as this fits with the choice of probability path and was
readily available in the flow_matching library. POMONAG is not included, as no
unguided generation results are reported in the paper.
4.2.2
Experiment Results
The results of the DFM model versus DiffusionNAG on the NAS-Bench-201 and Mo-
bileNetV3 search spaces are shown in Table 4.4 with the best results highlighted
in bold. Importantly, for this experiment no architectures are trained all validity,
uniqueness, and novelty scores are based on the matrix representations of the archi-
tectures as done in DiffusionNAG. When referring to training times it is the time it
takes to fit the generative models to the search space distributions.
Table 4.4: Comparison of validity, uniqueness, and novelty metrics for unguided
generation on NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 search spaces with 95% confidence
intervals.
Method
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
Validity (%) ↑
Uniq. (%) ↑
Novelty (%) ↑
Validity (%) ↑
Uniq. (%) ↑
Novelty (%) ↑
DiffusionNAG (w/o Pos. Emb.)
100.00±0.00
98.96±0.49
49.08±2.05
42.17±1.80
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00
DiffusionNAG (w/ Pos. Emb.)
100.00±0.00
98.70±0.66
49.20±1.96
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00
DFM
100.00±0.00
95.05±0.37
48.74±0.73
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00
Both experiments show a validity, uniqueness, and novelty of 100% for the Mo-
bileNetV3 search space.
The DFM model shows a slightly lower uniqueness and
novelty for the NAS-Bench-201 search space, but still achieves 100% validity. Overall
we see results from the DFM model that are comparable to those of DiffusionNAG.
The comparison is based on 1000 generated architectures across 3 different seeds
for DiffusionNAG, while the DFM model is based on 1000 generated architectures
generated for each of 30 different seeds to increase the robustness of the results.
Table 4.5 shows the average training times for DFM, DiffusionNAG, and POMONAG
on the search spaces NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3. For this specific comparison
the same GPU hardware, a Tesla V100-SXM2 (See Appendix C.2 for specifications),
is used like in DiffusionNAG to make the comparison as fair as possible (Otherwise
the default GPU used in this work is an NVIDIA Tesla A100 described in 4.1.3).
However, as mentioned earlier in Section 4.1.3, the POMONAG work uses a different
GPU, a Quadro RTX 6000, which this project does not have access to. The DFM
training times are computed as an average across 30 different seeds.
1https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.optim.lr_scheduler.ReduceLROn
Plateau.html
==PAGE:49==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
42
Table 4.5: Comparison of Training Times.
Method
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
Fastest Config
Slowest Config
Fastest Config
Slowest Config
DiffusionNAG
3.43 GPU Hours
-
21.33 GPU Hours
-
POMONAG
2.55±0.90 GPU Hours
3.53±1.32 GPU Hours
2.13±0.52 GPU Hours
2.43±0.65 GPU Hours
DFM
11.18 GPU Seconds
-
12.72 GPU Minutes
-
This comparison uses a Tesla V100-SXM2 like in DiffusionNAG. However, the POMONAG work
uses a different GPU, a Quadro RTX 6000, which this project does not have access to.
DFM
measurements are across 30 seeds; DiffusionNAG and POMONAG do not provide this information.
It’s clear that the training times of the DFM models are significantly faster than
both DiffusionNAG and POMONAG. Even with the optimized pipeline implemented
in POMONAG, the training times are still significantly higher than for DFM plus
the variation in training times for POMONAG shows the training is less stable than
with DFM.
This concludes the results of RQ1 to investigate if the DFM framework could
fit to NAS search spaces and be used for sampling.
The comparison of sampling
times is left for RQ2 where guidance is introduced, as the sampling times are not
directly comparable to the SOTA methods without this component. Furthermore,
the comparison of the sampled architectures and their top-k metrics is left for RQ3
where the complete method of this thesis is implemented and benchmarked.
To summarize, the results of the experiments for RQ1 show that DFM is capable
of generating valid, unique, and novel architectures to a degree comparable to the
state-of-the-art methods DiffusionNAG and POMONAG. Adding to that are the sig-
nificantly lower training times of the DFM model which all together takes a first solid
step towards creating support for the main hypothesis of this work that DFM can be
used to enhance neural architecture generation for resource-constrained devices.
4.3
RQ2 - Guided Generation
To work with a neural architecture search problem under resource constraints, we
must steer the generative process toward architectures satisfying properties such as
accuracy, latency, and parameter count. Therefore, in this section we apply guidance
to the Discrete Flow Matching model to prioritize these constraints, though not yet in
a hard sense which is left for RQ3. We implement the guidance method described in
Section 3.4.1.4 and for the predictor models we use the ones listed in Table 4.6. The
implementation supports both upper‐limit, lower‐limit, and multi-objective guidance.
For example, a lower‐limit surrogate might enforce a minimum accuracy of 90 %
while an upper-limit surrogate could enforce a maximum latency of 17 ms and the
multi-objective surrogate could combine the two.
==PAGE:50==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
43
4.3.1
Setup
This experiment uses random sampling and the unguided DFM model from RQ1
(without retraining) as baselines for investigating the influence of guidance on the
generative capabilities of the DFM model. The random samples are taken without
replacement from the dataset provided by the NAS-Bench-201 benchmark and the
MobileNetV3 search space dataset from DiffusionNAG [2]. For the surrogates mod-
els the single-objective lower and upper limit models are implemented according to
equation 3.36 and 3.37 respectively and for the multi-objective surrogate equation
3.38 is used (see Section 3.4.1.4). During initial experiments the scaling factor α was
found to be important for the performance of the guidance to avoid saturation of the
Sigmoid function in the surrogate models. To find a suitable scaling factor, this work
uses a simple heuristic approach based on limited empirical testing results:
alpha = torch.pow(prediction.abs().mean() + self.eps, -1)
Where eps is a small value added for numerical stability. Code for each surrogate type
(upper, lower, multi) is available in Appendix E. The guidance in this project uses an
exact approach (as described in 3.4.1.4) where all possible one-jump transitions are
computed and scored to produce the guided velocity rate matrix. The main parts of
the logic in the implementation is shown in Listing 4.1.
1 def get_guided_rates_exact(guide, xt, R_t, guide_temp):
2
"""
3
Obtain the exact guide-adjusted rates for predictor guidance (PG)
4
5
Variables: B for batch size, D for number of dimensions , S for state-
space size
6
7
Assumes we are given a trained `guide` that takes as input xt
8
of shape (B, D, S) . Assumes `guide` implements a function `predict(xt)`
9
which outputs a score > 0 of shape (B,).
10
Also assumes we are given a function `get_all_jump_transitions(xt)` that
11
takes as input xt of shape (B, D) and outputs xt_jumps
12
of shape (B*D*S, D, S) with all states after an identity transition,
13
plus all possible states after 1 jump from xt in a one hot encoded
format.
14
15
Args:
16
guide (Guide): The trained guide model that predicts quality scores.
17
xt (torch.tensor): Noised input, shape (B, D).
18
R_t (torch.tensor): The learned unconditional rates used for
generative sampling, shape (B, D, S).
19
guide_temp (float): Guidance temperature.
20
t (torch.tensor): (Optional) Time, shape (B,).
21
22
Returns:
23
(torch.tensor): The guide-adjusted rates used for sampling with
guidance, shape (B, D, S)
24
"""
25
B, D = xt.shape
26
S = R_t.shape[-1]
==PAGE:51==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
44
27
xt_onehot = F.one_hot(xt.long(), num_classes=S).to(torch.float32)
28
xt_jumps = get_all_jump_transitions(xt, S)
# shape (B*D*S, D, S)
29
score_xt = guide.predict(xt_onehot)
# shape (B,)
30
score_xt_jumps = guide.predict(xt_jumps).view(
31
B, D, S
32
)
33
34
# Compute score_diff
35
score_diff = score_xt_jumps - score_xt.view(B, 1, 1)
36
37
# Temperature adjustment
38
score_diff /= guide_temp
39
# Clamp for numerical stability
40
score_diff = torch.clamp(score_diff, min=-50, max=50)
41
42
# Adjust the unconditional rates
43
score_diff = torch.exp(score_diff)
44
return R_t * score_diff
Listing 4.1: Guidance implementation
Surrogate Models
This work uses surrogate models for guidance on the NAS-
Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 search spaces. The models use the predictors listed in
Table 4.6 with the target metric and corresponding search space.
Table 4.6: Surrogate Predictor Models Used for Guidance on NAS-Bench-201 and
MobileNetV3 Search Spaces.
Target Metric
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
Accuracy
✓
FLOPs
✓
✓
Latency
✓
✓
Peak Memory
✓
Parameters
✓
✓
This combination of metrics was chosen mainly due to time constraints. For accuracy,
measurements were readily available in NAS-Bench-201 where in MobileNetV3 they
had to be computed which would require immense computational resources and time
which was not feasible within the scope of this work. For (peak) memory, code was
already available for MobileNetV3 which required only minor adjustments to work
within this project. Furthermore, it was decided that this combination of metrics and
search spaces would be suﬀicient to investigate the performance of the guided DFM
model in a meaningful way in regard to the research questions.
The predictor models are trained using a simple MLP model with 3 linear layers
with ReLU activations and hidden dimensions of 400 each.
The models also have
a simple positional embedding layer that adds a parameter in the shape (Number
of Layers x Number of Operators) such that they can learn a positional bias for
==PAGE:52==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
45
each operator in the architectures of a search space e.g. that the first node in an
architecture should be an input node type. This is an extremely simple approach
that could easily be made more sophisticate, but it was found to be suﬀicient for
improving the validity of the architectures generated by the proof of concept in this
work. The implementation code can be found in Appendix F.
The surrogate model training, on the single Tesla A100 GPU, amounts to 1-2
GPU minutes per model for NAS-Bench-201 and 5-6 GPU minutes per model for
MobileNetV3. All models are trained for 150 epochs with a train batch size of 128
and validation batch size of 256. All training uses gradient clipping of 5.0 for better
convergence, and a ReduceLROnPlateau scheduler with factor 0.1 and patience
10. The Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 is used for all models except
one. The exception is the latency surrogate model for MobileNetV3, which uses the
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−5 to secure convergence on the validation
dataset. The total dataset used train and evaluate the MobileNetV3 surrogate models
includes 131161 architectures that were randomly selected from the 500,000 unlabeled
architectures in the dataset by DiffusionNAG[2]. The metrics: FLOPs, latency, peak
memory, and number of parameters is measured for the sampled architectures to
create the surrogate target values (see Section 4.1.1). For the NAS-Bench-201 search
space, the dataset is composed of all 15,625 possible architectures where the target
metrics are used directly from the lookup tables provided by the benchmark [12]. For
all surrogate models and search spaces a training, validation, and test split of 80%,
10%, and 10% is used, and the target metrics are standardized to have a mean of 0
and standard deviation of 1. The model with the lowest loss on the validation set is
chosen; training and validation losses of the surrogate models are shown in figure 4.2.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
46
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Step
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
Loss
NAS-Bench-201 - Predictor Training Loss
CIFAR10-ACC (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:14)
CIFAR100-ACC (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:12)
CPU-LATENCY (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:12)
FLOPS (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:13)
PARAMS (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:12)
((a))
NAS-Bench-201
Predictor
Training
Losses.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Step
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
Loss
NAS-Bench-201 - Predictor Validation Loss
CIFAR10-ACC (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:14)
CIFAR100-ACC (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:12)
CPU-LATENCY (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:12)
FLOPS (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:13)
PARAMS (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:01:12)
((b)) NAS-Bench-201 Predictor Validation
Losses.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Step
10
8
10
7
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
Loss
MobileNetV3 - Predictor Training Loss
CPU-LATENCY (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:05:43)
FLOPS (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:05:42)
PARAMS (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:05:37)
PEAK-MEM (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:05:44)
((c))
MobileNetV3
Predictor
Training
Losses.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Step
10
6
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
Loss
MobileNetV3 - Predictor Validation Loss
CPU-LATENCY (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:05:43)
FLOPS (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:05:42)
PARAMS (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:05:37)
PEAK-MEM (seed 1886) (Total running time: 0:05:44)
((d))
MobileNetV3
Predictor
Validation
Losses.
Figure 4.2: Predictor Model Training and Validation Losses for Metrics on NAS-
Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 Search Spaces.
An interesting trend for both search spaces is that latency produces a higher loss
(train and validation) than the other metrics.
Also, accuracy shows a bit higher
loss than the remaining metrics for NAS-Bench-201. While FLOPs and parameters,
which are also much connected to the intrinsic properties of the architectures, seem
to be easier to predict from the one-hot architecture representations in both search
spaces. Finally, peak memory also shows signs of being easier to predict than e.g.
latency, but even though it gets the lowest train loss on MobileNetV3, it does not
generalize as well as parameters on the validation set for MobileNetV3. All predictor
models were also evaluated on a final test set showing similar trends in loss as on the
validation data.
For the guidance a temperature is applied to scale the surrogate model output.
The value of this temperature empirically shows to be important for the performance
==PAGE:54==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
47
of the guidance as it can make the guidance become too strong or too weak leading
to all or no architectures being deemed high quality. This work uses a temperature of
0.1 for both search spaces NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3. This value is not based
on exhaustive search, but rather on a few experiments to find a suitable setting.
Another important hyperparameter is the upper and lower limit for the surrogate
models. Based on a quick test this work uses the limits shown in Table 4.7 for the
surrogate models and search spaces:
Table 4.7: Surrogate Model Limits Used for Guidance on NAS-Bench-201 and Mo-
bileNetV3 Search Spaces.
Surrogate Target Metric
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
Lower Limit
Upper Limit
Lower Limit
Upper Limit
CIFAR10 Accuracy
90
-
-
-
CIFAR100 Accuracy
70
-
-
-
FLOPs [M]
150
-
350
-
Latency [ms]
-
0.01
-
17
Peak Memory [MB]
-
-
-
4
Parameters [MB/M]
-
0.2
-
4
These limits are chosen based on the distribution of the metrics in each search space.
All limits are placed around the boundaries of the metric distributions to test the
guidance under extreme conditions. This work did not find time to standardize the
used search spaces and therefore the limits show large differences in values between
the search spaces. This is mainly due to different units of the metrics and the different
sizes and operators in the architectures of each search space. Particularly, it should be
mentioned that parameters on NAS-Bench-201 is in Megabytes(MB) based on 32-bit
representations while for MobileNetV3 it is in counts of Millions(M).
The number of ODE solver steps, i.e. the number of function evaluations (NFE),
also determines the number of guidance updates during the generation. Therefore,
the guidance is tested both with a low number of steps in the solver (64) and a high
number of steps (1024).
4.3.2
Experiment Results
The following section describes the results of guided sampling using the unconditional
DFM model from RQ1. It is important to note that the unconditional DFM model
is not trained again. Only a single, simple MLP, surrogate model is trained once
for each combination of search space and metric, and each dataset (CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100) specifically for accuracy.
Again it should be stressed, that none of the sampled architectures are trained in
this experiment. Instead, we use the lookup table in NAS-Bench-201 to get accuracy
==PAGE:55==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
48
measurements for the sampled architectures like done in DiffusionNAG, and we focus
on architecture FLOPs in MobileNetV3 and save accuracy measurements for the
benchmarking in RQ3 (Section 4.5) due to the significant computational costs.
4.3.2.1
Single-Objective Guidance
Table 4.8 shows the results of the single-objective guided sampling for the NAS-Bench-
201 and MobileNetV3 search spaces. The Metric column defines the single-objective
target of the guided generation. The baselines Random and Unguided are included to
have a point of reference to show the impact of the guidance on the generation. The
best mean results are highlighted in bold for each metric type with a 95% confidence
interval created using 1000 samples for each of 30 different seeds for NAS-Bench-201
and 100 samples for each of 30 seeds on the MobileNetV3 search space. The choice of
100 samples for MobileNetV3 is due to the significantly higher computational cost of
performing the analysis on the larger search space where metrics are not precomputed
for the architectures as in NAS-Bench-201. The NFE header refers to the number of
function evaluations used in the Euler ODE solver for the guided sampling, either 64
or 1024.
Table 4.8:
Comparison of metrics for Random Samples, Unguided, and Guided
DFM on NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 Search Spaces.
Metric
Stats.
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
Random
Unguided
Guided
(NFE 64)
Guided
(NFE 1024)
Random
Unguided
Guided
(NFE 64)
Guided
(NFE 1024)
CIFAR10 Accuracy ↑
Max
94.36
94.37
94.37
94.37
-
-
-
-
Mean
87.17±0.14
87.11±0.14
91.70±0.02
91.82±0.02
-
-
-
-
Min
10.00
10.00
10.00
54.55
-
-
-
-
CIFAR100 Accuracy ↑
Max
73.51
73.51
73.51
73.51
-
-
-
-
Mean
61.62±0.13
61.41±0.14
68.63±0.02
68.79±0.02
-
-
-
-
Min
1.00
1.00
37.87
56.64
-
-
-
-
FLOPs [M] ↑
Max
220.12
220.12
220.12
220.12
435.71
412.71
475.34
472.76
Mean
54.92±0.38
54.89±0.39
211.13±0.19
214.41±0.16
274.10±1.45
262.08±1.38
356.97±1.40
358.35±1.40
Min
7.78
7.78
82.49
113.95
155.55
160.39
213.26
221.53
Latency [ms] ↓
Max
0.026
0.026
0.017
0.013
31.136
31.731
28.463
25.326
Mean
0.016±0.000
0.016±0.000
0.009±0.00
0.009±0.00
23.643±0.099
22.801±0.094
18.714±0.071
16.451±0.071
Min
0.008
0.007
0.007
0.007
15.248
15.567
14.142
11.622
Peak Memory [MB] ↓
Max
-
-
-
-
7.23
7.12
5.55
5.32
Mean
-
-
-
-
4.86±0.03
4.70±0.02
3.62±0.01
3.59±0.01
Min
-
-
-
-
3.18
3.17
3.17
3.17
Params [MB/M] ↓
Max
1.53
1.53
1.07
0.13
7.12
6.96
6.18
5.99
Mean
0.40±0.00
0.40±0.00
0.08±0.00
0.07±0.00
4.87±0.02
4.84±0.02
4.10±0.02
4.10±0.01
Min
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
3.60
3.46
3.46
3.44
The results clearly show the potential of guiding the DFM model. A particularly
interesting observation is the improvement in the min/max values when guidance
is applied which indicates that the guidance steers the generation process well to
disregard low performing architectures. This trend is seen across all surrogate models,
but it depends on the number of function evaluations used in the Euler ODE solver
and the search space. This is particularly evident in the CIFAR10 accuracy on NAS-
Bench-201 where the guidance with 1024 NFE is able to raise the minimum accuracy
of the sampled architectures from 10% to 54.55%. However, there is no silver bullet, as
==PAGE:56==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
49
increasing the NFE does not necessarily lead to better results. For instance, on latency
for NAS-Bench-201 and parameters on the MobileNetV3 search space, the results
are similar for NFE 64 and 1024. Furthermore, the effect of using 1024 number of
function evaluations only creates a marginal improvement in all cases, perhaps except
for latency on the MobileNetV3 search space where the mean latency is reduced from
18.714 ms to 16.451 ms which is a fairly significant improvement. Finally, we see that
most of the guided sampling results have a mean score within the specified metric
limit. While not all sampling results achieve a mean within the limit we note that all
the results do have at least some (sometimes all) of the sampled architectures which
are within the specified single-objective limit. This provides a good foundation for
working with the use of hard constraints in research question 3. Figure 4.3 shows some
of the metric distributions for the surrogate guided architecture sampling compared
to unguided and random architecture sampling. We can clearly see how the guidance
”pushes” the distribution in the desired direction according to the chosen limit for each
metric. The complete collection of distribution plots for the comparison in Table 4.8
can be found in Appendix G.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
50
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
PARAMS
1e6
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Frequency
MobileNetV3 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
PARAMS Limit (4e+06)
((a)) Parameters (M), MobileNetV3.
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
PEAK_MEM
1e6
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Frequency
MobileNetV3 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
PEAK_MEM Limit (4e+06)
((b)) Peak memory (MB), MobileNetV3.
20
40
60
80
ACC
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Frequency
NAS-Bench-201 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
ACC Limit (90)
((c)) CIFAR10 accuracy (%), NAS-Bench-
201.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
PARAMS
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Frequency
NAS-Bench-201 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
PARAMS Limit (0.2)
((d)) Parameters (MB), NAS-Bench-201.
Figure 4.3: Illustration showing the difference in distribution characteristics for the
two search spaces NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3. (Be aware of the overlap in
color due to opacity.)
From the plots it becomes clear that the distributions differ quite a bit in shape
and spread.
For the MobileNetV3 search space, the distributions are all close to
Gaussian distributions, while the NAS-Bench-201 search space shows much more
skewed distributions. Either with long tails like in the case of accuracy on CIFAR10
or with spiking distributions with multiple modes like in the case of parameters.
4.3.2.2
Multi-Objective Guidance
Tables 4.9 and 4.10 show the results of multi-objective guided sampling on the NAS-
Bench-201 search space. The multi-objective guidance is implemented by including
all surrogate models Accuracy, FLOPs, Latency, and Params for each of the two
datasets CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 and each of the two NFEs 64 and 1024. For the
models named Equal all surrogate models are equally weighted with a weight of 1.
==PAGE:58==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
51
For the other models, the name indicates that the guidance of the specified metric is
weighted by a factor 10, while the guidances on all other metrics are kept at a factor
1. For instance in the model Accuracy the guidance signal for accuracy is multiplied
by 10, while the other metric guidance signals are weighted by 1. This is done to
investigate the interrelationship between the different metrics and how they influence
the generation process in a multi-objective setting. Again, the best mean results are
highlighted in bold for each metric type with a 95% confidence interval created using
1000 samples for each of 30 different seeds.
Table 4.9: Multi-Objective Guided Sampling Results on NAS-Bench-201 - Part 1.
Acc. Dataset
Model
NFE
Stats.
Accuracy ↑
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Params [MB] ↓
CIFAR10
Equal
64
Max
94.37
220.12
0.026
1.53
Mean
82.39±0.10
26.59±0.60
0.012±0.000
0.20±0.00
Min
10.00
7.78
0.007
0.07
1024
Max
94.36
220.12
0.026
1.53
Mean
82.34±0.10
26.69±0.62
0.012±0.000
0.20±0.00
Min
10.00
7.78
0.007
0.07
Accuracy
64
Max
94.37
220.12
0.026
1.53
Mean
90.91±0.03
55.78±0.60
0.016±0.000
0.40±0.00
Min
10.00
7.78
0.008
0.07
1024
Max
94.37
220.12
0.026
1.53
Mean
90.96±0.02
55.90±0.63
0.015±0.000
0.40±0.00
Min
10.00
7.78
0.008
0.07
FLOPs
64
Max
94.36
220.12
0.026
1.53
Mean
93.76±0.00
220.04±0.02
0.024±0.000
1.53±0.00
Min
93.00
184.73
0.019
1.29
1024
Max
93.82
220.12
0.026
1.53
Mean
93.76±0.00
220.11±0.01
0.024±0.000
1.53±0.00
Min
93.05
184.73
0.020
1.29
Latency
64
Max
94.08
149.34
0.019
1.05
Mean
67.33±0.13
7.79±0.01
0.009±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
10.00
7.78
0.007
0.07
1024
Max
93.78
184.73
0.021
1.29
Mean
67.35±0.13
7.81±0.02
0.009±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
46.25
7.78
0.007
0.07
Params
64
Max
93.76
220.12
0.024
1.53
Mean
74.48±0.12
7.86±0.03
0.010±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
10.00
7.78
0.007
0.07
1024
Max
93.76
220.12
0.024
1.53
Mean
75.80±0.11
7.82±0.03
0.010±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
10.00
7.78
0.007
0.07
==PAGE:59==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
52
Table 4.10: Multi-Objective Guided Sampling Results on NAS-Bench-201 - Part 2.
Acc. Dataset
Model
NFE
Stats.
Accuracy ↑
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Params [MB] ↓
CIFAR100
Equal
64
Max
73.51
220.13
0.026
1.54
Mean
57.55±0.10
29.37±0.62
0.012±0.000
0.23±0.00
Min
1.00
7.79
0.007
0.08
1024
Max
73.51
220.13
0.026
1.54
Mean
57.45±0.10
29.41±0.65
0.012±0.000
0.23±0.00
Min
1.00
7.79
0.007
0.08
Accuracy
64
Max
73.51
220.13
0.026
1.54
Mean
69.35±0.02
88.23±0.50
0.017±0.000
0.63±0.00
Min
35.59
7.79
0.008
0.08
1024
Max
73.51
220.13
0.026
1.54
Mean
69.58±0.02
90.46±0.51
0.017±0.000
0.65±0.00
Min
50.79
11.72
0.009
0.11
FLOPs
64
Max
73.51
220.13
0.026
1.54
Mean
71.11±0.00
220.05±0.02
0.023±0.000
1.54±0.00
Min
68.78
184.74
0.019
1.29
1024
Max
71.11
220.13
0.024
1.54
Mean
71.11±0.00
220.12±0.01
0.023±0.000
1.54±0.00
Min
69.86
184.74
0.019
1.29
Latency
64
Max
72.01
184.74
0.022
1.29
Mean
41.91±0.17
7.80±0.02
0.008±0.000
0.08±0.00
Min
1.00
7.79
0.007
0.08
1024
Max
71.85
184.74
0.023
1.29
Mean
43.82±0.16
7.81±0.02
0.008±0.000
0.08±0.00
Min
10.15
7.79
0.007
0.08
Params
64
Max
71.11
220.13
0.023
1.54
Mean
48.35±0.11
7.86±0.03
0.009±0.000
0.08±0.00
Min
1.00
7.79
0.007
0.08
1024
Max
71.11
220.13
0.024
1.54
Mean
49.77±0.09
7.84±0.03
0.009±0.000
0.08±0.00
Min
1.00
7.79
0.007
0.08
When comparing the results between the different models, we can see that increasing
the weight for a specific metric in the multi-objective guidance does indeed lead
to better results for that metric than just doing an equal weighting of all surrogate
models, which is also expected. The results show similar trends between the CIFAR10
and CIFAR100 datasets on all metrics which makes sense as the architectural search
space is the same and the datasets are very similar. The accuracy results show, as
expected, a higher mean accuracy for CIFAR10 than for CIFAR100. An interesting
observation is that the highest mean accuracy is achieved with the FLOPs model,
and not the Accuracy model for both datasets. This indicates that FLOPs can be
a good proxy for accuracy, something which has already been found by Ji Lin et al.
[25]. Furthermore, low latency, and low number of parameters show similar trends in
the measured metrics, both for CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. This makes good sense, as
smaller models with fewer parameters and lower FLOPs are generally faster in their
computations. Finally, quite interestingly the multi-objective guidance with a single
high weighted metric actually produces results that are comparable to, or even better
==PAGE:60==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
53
than, those of the single objective guidance on NAS-Bench-201 (Table 4.8).
Table 4.11 shows the results of multi-objective guided sampling on the MobileNetV3
search space. The same procedure as for NAS-Bench-201 is used with an equal weight-
ing of 1 for all surrogates in the Equal model, and a weighting of 10 for the surrogate
model specified in the Model column. Now (peak) Memory is included as a surrogate
model while Accuracy is not since it was not feasible to produce a predictor model
for this metric within the scope of this project as described in Section 4.3.1. The
best mean results are highlighted in bold for each metric type with a 95% confidence
interval created using 100 samples for each of 30 different seeds.
Table 4.11: Multi-Objective Guided Sampling Results on MobileNetV3.
Model
NFE
Stats.
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Peak Memory [MB] ↓
Params [M] ↓
Equal
64
Max
382.94
37.449
6.62
6.62
Mean
240.06±1.32
18.696±0.132
4.29±0.02
4.56±0.02
Min
146.58
11.265
3.16
3.50
1024
Max
377.37
28.773
6.76
6.95
Mean
237.92±1.33
20.216±0.087
4.26±0.02
4.54±0.02
Min
145.34
13.500
3.16
3.46
FLOPs
64
Max
566.17
50.179
7.39
7.66
Mean
557.62±0.19
39.674±0.117
7.38±0.00
7.57±0.00
Min
522.91
32.640
7.09
6.72
1024
Max
566.17
38.725
7.39
7.66
Mean
557.16±0.19
33.165±0.065
7.38±0.00
7.57±0.00
Min
529.07
29.425
7.08
6.79
Latency
64
Max
186.91
17.629
3.47
4.46
Mean
155.31±0.34
14.975±0.020
3.23±0.00
3.96±0.01
Min
129.77
12.940
3.16
3.49
1024
Max
183.93
11.670
3.46
4.47
Mean
155.21±0.34
9.980±0.015
3.23±0.00
3.96±0.01
Min
131.13
8.780
3.16
3.49
Peak Memory
64
Max
306.52
30.562
3.95
6.67
Mean
204.63±0.98
20.846±0.089
3.37±0.01
4.55±0.02
Min
134.30
14.297
3.16
3.45
1024
Max
306.11
22.326
3.95
6.70
Mean
205.48±1.00
15.033±0.070
3.37±0.01
4.58±0.02
Min
135.45
10.611
3.16
3.46
Params
64
Max
252.75
25.430
5.57
5.13
Mean
170.67±0.64
17.612±0.071
3.64±0.01
3.96±0.01
Min
131.38
13.401
3.16
3.44
1024
Max
256.64
21.498
5.66
5.15
Mean
169.49±0.64
16.269±0.041
3.61±0.01
3.95±0.01
Min
124.27
13.712
3.16
3.44
The results again show that the multi-objective guidance is able to steer the gener-
ation process towards high performing architectures and even beat single-objective
guidance, as with NAS-Bench-201. Again we see that putting particular emphasis
on specific objectives by increasing their weights does, as one would expect, lead to
==PAGE:61==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
54
better results for the specific metric than just using equal weights.
Summing up the results of the guided sampling, it is clear that with surrogate
model guidance we are able to produce architectures that are significantly more rel-
evant in regard to specific desired metrics than the random and unguided baselines.
Quite naturally, we also see some relationships between metrics where some metrics
like latency and parameters drastically degrade other metrics (accuracy and FLOPs)
once they are weighted higher in the guidance. We further see the results indicat-
ing that, at least for the search spaces considered here, multi-objective outperforms
single-objective generation. We also see that for the multi-objective guidance all mean
scores, except the accuracy on CIFAR100 which is very close, are adhering to the de-
fined limits. The results also indicate that it might not be necessary to include all
metrics in multi-objective guidance due to signs of strong correlation between them
where a single metric can be a good guide for multiple others such as FLOPs also
guiding accuracy well. Specifically, it seems that FLOPs and latency, in many cases,
could be suﬀicient to guide the generation process to well performing architectures
both for NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3.
The results from testing NFE in the ODE solver indicate that the NFE hyperpa-
rameter does influence the guided sampling quality. For instance, we see that a higher
NFE can significantly improve the minimum accuracy of sampled architectures for
single objective guidance on the CIFAR10 accuracy metric for NAS-Bench-201 and
also makes an improvement in the latency for latency multi-objective guided sampling
on MobileNetV3. However, in the setup of this experiment the results for NFE=64
are in general on par with the results for NFE=1024 which indicates that 64 function
evaluations in the ODE Euler solver is enough for this work.
4.3.2.3
Computational Cost - Sampling
Table 4.12 shows the comparison of sampling times measured for DFM and the sam-
pling times reported by SOTA methods on the search spaces NAS-Bench-201 and Mo-
bileNetV3. For DiffusionNAG the sampling batch size is 256 while for POMONAG it
is not specified. For DFM the sampling batch size is 1000 and the NFE in the Euler
solver is tested with 64 and 1024, for both search spaces.
Table 4.12: Comparison of Sampling Times.
Method
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
Single-Objective
Multi-Objective
Single-Objective
Multi-Objective
DiffusionNAG
2.02 GPU Minutes
-
2.02 GPU Minutes
-
POMONAG
-
5.75±0.53 GPU Minutes
-
18.25±1.2 GPU Minutes
DFM NFE-64
1.34±0.33 GPU Seconds
3.68±0.03 GPU Seconds
1.48±0.15 GPU Seconds
4.90±0.21 GPU Seconds
DFM NFE-1024
7.00±0.01 GPU Seconds
52.54±9.21 GPU Seconds
15.2±0.21 GPU Seconds
72.80±0.25 GPU Seconds
The results clearly indicate that, also in sampling, the DFM model is significantly
faster than both DiffusionNAG and POMONAG. However, NFE is crucial for the
sampling time of DFM and, as the results in the previous sections show, NFE is a
==PAGE:62==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
55
hyperparameter that most likely needs to be tuned for the specific search space and
target metric and where a larger NFE does not necessarily lead to better results.
4.3.2.4
Multi-Objective Guidance for Resource Constrained Scenarios
In this section, we present the results from investigating the performance of the multi-
objective guidance in different resource-constrained scenarios. Before only a single
metric was weighted higher than the others, but now we will look at the following
scenarios, shown in Table 4.13, that could be relevant in real resource-constrained
settings where the goal is to produce architectures that are not only high performing
on a single metric but also fit within certain hardware-relevant limitations:
Table 4.13: Multi-Objective Guidance - Resource Constrained Scenarios.
ID
Scenario
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
1
High Acc., Low Params
✓
-
2
High Acc., Low Latency
✓
-
3
High Acc., Low Params, Low Latency
✓
-
4
High FLOPs, Low Latency
✓
✓
5
High FLOPs, Low Params
✓
✓
6
High FLOPs, Low Latency, Low Params
✓
✓
7
High FLOPs, Low Memory
-
✓
8
High FLOPs, Low Params, Low Memory
-
✓
9
High FLOPs, Low Latency, Low Memory
-
✓
10
High FLOPs, Low Params, Low Latency, Low Memory
-
✓
For each case we set the weight of accuracy/FLOPs to 1 and the weight of the other
metrics to 2. E.g. in scenario 1 we use Acc. weight 1, Params weight 2. This is done
to produce guidance signals where the strongest influence is on producing architec-
tures within the hardware-relevant limitations while still guiding for performance on
accuracy/FLOPs. For scenario 1-3 the experiments are run with accuracy on both
CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. The results are shown in Table 4.14 for NAS-Bench-201
and in Table 4.15 for MobileNetV3.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 RQ2 - Guided Generation
56
Table 4.14: Multi-Objective Guided Sampling Results on NAS-Bench-201 - Resource
Constrained Scenarios.
Scenario ID
Stats.
Accuracy ↑
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Params [MB] ↓
1 (CIFAR10)
Max
93.10
-
-
1.07
Mean
81.09±0.08
-
-
0.08±0.00
Min
10.00
-
-
0.07
2 (CIFAR10)
Max
92.39
-
0.017
-
Mean
79.11±0.10
-
0.010±0.000
-
Min
10.00
-
0.007
-
3 (CIFAR10)
Max
89.83
-
0.014
0.10
Mean
76.22±0.11
-
0.009±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
10.00
-
0.007
0.07
1 (CIFAR100)
Max
70.39
-
-
1.08
Mean
55.69±0.08
-
-
0.09±0.00
Min
1.00
-
-
0.08
2 (CIFAR100)
Max
71.13
-
0.017
-
Mean
53.86±0.08
-
0.009±0.000
-
Min
1.00
-
0.007
-
3 (CIFAR100)
Max
65.08
-
0.014
0.14
Mean
50.20±0.09
-
0.009±0.000
0.08±0.00
Min
1.00
-
0.007
0.08
4
Max
-
220.12
0.026
-
Mean
-
99.80±0.93
0.016±0.000
-
Min
-
7.78
0.007
-
5
Max
-
220.12
-
1.53
Mean
-
12.93±0.35
-
0.11±0.00
Min
-
7.78
-
0.07
6
Max
-
220.12
0.26
1.53
Mean
-
9.47±0.20
0.009±0.000
0.08±0.00
Min
-
7.78
0.007
0.07
From the results in Table 4.14 we can observe that both latency and parameters are
extremely constraining on the accuracy and FLOPs of the sampled architectures, as
also observed earlier in the results of Section 4.3.2.2. For all scenarios, the mean
accuracy/FLOPs is very far from the desired limit while latency and parameters
are doing well and dominating the guidance through their higher weights. Another
interesting observation is that by combining more objectives and thereby increasing
the complexity of the guidance, as in scenario 3 and 6, we also see an increased
degradation of the accuracies/FLOPs performance metrics. In this case, it makes
sense to think that adding more surrogate models with higher weights (like adding
both latency and parameters with weight 2) to the guidance will lead to the generation
process moving towards these metrics possibly at the cost of the lower weighted
metrics (accuracy and FLOPs with weight 1).
==PAGE:64==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
57
Table 4.15: Multi-Objective Guided Sampling Results on MobileNetV3 - Resource
Constrained Scenarios.
Scenario ID
Stats.
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Peak Memory [MB] ↓
Params [M] ↓
4
Max
387.49
29.652
-
-
Mean
243.86±1.39
20.541±0.090
-
-
Min
146.61
14.036
-
-
5
Max
416.09
-
-
6.38
Mean
266.86±1.46
-
-
4.18±0.02
Min
142.45
-
-
3.47
6
Max
356.02
28.731
-
6.18
Mean
222.22±1.25
19.890±0.081
-
4.15±0.02
Min
135.56
14.100
-
3.45
7
Max
385.63
-
5.75
-
Mean
256.70±1.19
-
3.80±0.01
-
Min
153.90
-
3.17
-
8
Max
359.37
-
6.38
6.55
Mean
221.00±1.19
-
3.97±0.02
4.37±0.02
Min
133.89
-
3.17
3.47
9
Max
338.95
27.397
5.62
-
Mean
219.38±1.11
19.476±0.078
3.69±0.01
-
Min
139.01
14.000
3.16
-
10
Max
332.62
28.729
5.80
6.39
Mean
205.30±1.05
18.430±0.074
3.82±0.02
4.26±0.02
Min
140.35
13.793
3.16
3.45
The results in Table 4.15 show a similar pattern for FLOPs as in NAS-Bench-201,
where the higher weighted latency, peak memory, and parameter metrics dominate
the guidance which leads to low FLOPs far away from the specified limit. The results
further indicate that increasing the complexity of the guidance by increasing the
number of constraining metrics (latency, peak memory, parameters) leads to even
more degraded results in the FLOPs metric.
For the latency, peak memory, and
parameters metrics, we only see peak memory appear with mean scores within the
limits. Though latency and parameters are very close and each produce some samples
within the limits, as can be seen in the min values, none of the models are able to
achieve results where all constraints are fulfilled. A final important note is that the
variance in the quality of the produced architectures in regard to the specified limits,
as can be seen in the min/max values, is a sign that the basic guidance implementation
in this work is not in itself suﬀicient to produce architectures that adhere to the desired
limitations in the scenarios.
4.4
RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
For the third research question, we investigate how hard constraints can be integrated
into the DFM model guidance and how this affects the sampling results. This work
investigates two approaches: (1) The first is a simple top-k approach, top-1 and top-
==PAGE:65==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
58
5 specifically, where 1000 architecture candidates are generated with guidance and
then the highest scoring k architectures are selected based on the surrogate model
scores. Here the assumption is that a good enough guidance will lead to the top-
k architectures being within the hard constraints. (2) The second approach (hard
guidance) adds a hard constraint component to the guidance signal by implementing
algorithm 1 and the hard transition constraint on bad jumps described in Section
3.4.1.4. Listing 4.2 shows the implementation of the hard guidance logic to disallow
bad jumps. We evaluate this hard guidance alone, and then combine it with top-
k filtering, also based on 1000 samples, to see if a final ranking step adds further
benefit.
Both strategies are first benchmarked on single-objective tasks, then on
the same multi-objective resource-constrained scenarios as in RQ2 (listed in Section
4.3.2.4 Table 4.13).
Finally, we perform a last benchmarking of top-1 hard guided sampling against
the SOTA methods DiffusionNAG and POMONAG. This is done in a realistic set-
ting by sampling architectures from the MobileNetV3 search space based on two
different setups. For each architecture we measure its metrics and then trains the
sampled architecture on the FGVC-Aircraft dataset [33] containing 10,000 images of
100 aircraft classes and on the Oxford-IIIT PET dataset with 7,349 images across 37
different breeds of cats and dogs [36]. These datasets are chosen because they are
used by the current state-of-the-art NAG methods[2, 32] and thus provide a good
comparison point for the results.
1 def get_guided_rates_exact(guide, xt, R_t, guide_temp):
2
"""
3
Obtain the exact guide-adjusted rates for predictor guidance (PG) (Hard
Guidance Version)
4
5
Variables: B for batch size, D for number of dimensions , S for state-
space size
6
7
Assumes we are given a trained `guide` that takes as input xt
8
of shape (B, D, S) . Assumes `guide` implements a function `predict(xt)`
9
which outputs a score > 0 of shape (B,).
10
Also assumes we are given a function `get_all_jump_transitions(xt)` that
11
takes as input xt of shape (B, D) and outputs xt_jumps
12
of shape (B*D*S, D, S) with all states after an identity transition,
13
plus all possible states after 1 jump from xt in a one hot encoded
format.
14
15
Args:
16
guide (Guide): The trained guide model that predicts quality scores.
17
xt (torch.tensor): Noised input, shape (B, D).
18
R_t (torch.tensor): The learned unconditional rates used for
generative sampling, shape (B, D, S).
19
guide_temp (float): Guidance temperature.
20
t (torch.tensor): (Optional) Time, shape (B,).
21
22
Returns:
23
(torch.tensor): The guide-adjusted rates used for sampling with
guidance, shape (B, D, S)
==PAGE:66==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
59
24
"""
25
B, D = xt.shape
26
S = R_t.shape[-1]
27
xt_onehot = F.one_hot(xt.long(), num_classes=S).to(torch.float32)
28
xt_jumps = get_all_jump_transitions(xt, S)
# shape (B*D*S, D, S)
29
score_xt, xt_valid_mask = guide.predict(xt_onehot)
# shape (B,)
30
score_xt_jumps , jumps_valid_mask = guide.predict(xt_jumps) # shape (B*D*
S,)
31
score_xt_jumps = score_xt_jumps.view(B, D, S)
32
33
# Compute score diff
34
score_diff = score_xt_jumps - score_xt.view(B, 1, 1)
35
36
# Temperature adjustment
37
score_diff /= guide_temp
38
# Clamp for numerical stability
39
score_diff = torch.clamp(score_diff, min=-50, max=50)
40
41
# Adjust the unconditional rates
42
score_diff = torch.exp(score_diff)
43
guided_R_t = R_t * score_diff
44
45
if xt_valid_mask is not None:
46
# If xt_invalid_mask is provided, we use it to mask out bad jumps
47
jumps_invalid_mask = ~jumps_valid_mask
48
no_change_mask = jumps_invalid_mask.view(B, D, S) & xt_valid_mask.
view(B, 1, 1) # shape (B, D, S)
49
50
# If current state xt is valid in regard to guide limit and the jump
is invalid,
51
# then we set the score ratio low, meaning no change in the rate
thereby no change in the specific token.
52
guided_R_t = torch.where(
53
no_change_mask ,
54
torch.tensor(0, device=xt.device),
55
guided_R_t
56
)
57
58
return guided_R_t
Listing 4.2: Guidance implementation
4.4.1
Setup
This experiment builds on the results of RQ1 and RQ2. It uses the same surrogate
models (no retraining), the same search space datasets, and the same DFM model
(no retraining).
We use random sampling (without replacement), unguided, and
guided sampling with top-1 and top-5 filtering as baselines.
These baselines are
chosen to be able to test that the hard guidance mechanism does indeed bring further
improvements to the generation process.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
60
The same surrogate limits are used as in RQ2, which are listed in Table 4.7. The
hard guidance implementation for the resource-constrained scenarios uses an equal
weighting of 1 for all guides. For all cases the accuracy/FLOPs metric limit is chosen
as a soft guide and the remaining metric limits are chosen as hard guides. For instance
for scenario 1 accuracy is a soft guide with a weight of 1 and parameters is a hard
constraining guide with a weight of 1. The reason for equal weighting is the idea that
these metrics can then steer the generation to high performance subspaces, while
the hard guide will make sure that the subspace still becomes valid in regard to the
hard constraints. By putting equal weight on the guides, we try to avoid one guide
dominating the other. If FLOPs/accuracy dominate too much then there might not
be any architectures that meet the hard constraints. If the hard guides dominate
then the accuracy/FLOPs results might degrade too much.
Since the results of RQ2 indicated that a low NFE (64) is suﬀicient to produce good
results, the NFE is set to 64 for all experiments in this section. For all top-k versions
of the models: random, unguided, guided, and hard guided, 1000 architectures are
sampled before applying the top-k filtering. This is done across 30 different seeds for
each DFM model and a 95% confidence interval is provided for the mean scores with
the highest ones highlighted in bold.
The final benchmarking in Section 4.5 is done by sampling architectures from the
MobileNetV3 search space, adjusting the classifier head to the number of classes in the
respective dataset, and then training each sampled architecture from scratch on the
FGVC-Aircraft and Oxford-IIIT PET datasets. Each dataset is split 80 %/10 %/10 %
into train/validation/test. Training uses a Cross-Entropy Loss running for 20 epochs
with a gradient clipping at 1.0, and an SGD optimizer with learning rate 0.1, momen-
tum 0.9, and weight decay 5 · 10−4 together with a cosine annealing scheduler. All
images are resized to 224 × 224 and for training the following dataset augmentations
are applied: random horizontal flip, cutout with a length of 16 [10], and AutoAug-
ment [9]. These settings are not investigated thoroughly but are simply chosen to
match the training pipeline used in DiffusionNAG[2] as close as possible. The batch
size is set to 128 for training and 256 for validation and testing. To be able to perform
the benchmarking within the time frame of this thesis it was necessary to choose one
search space. Therefore, the comparison is done only on the MobileNetV3 search
space, because it was deemed more relevant in the context of evaluating the DFM
hard guidance in a resource constrained setting and a harder challenge as the space is
much larger and with more diverse hardware-related metrics (latency, peak memory,
parameters) than NAS-Bench-201.
4.4.2
Experiment Results
The following sections present the results of the experiments conducted to answer
RQ3 in regard to the applicability of hard constraints in the DFM model guidance.
==PAGE:68==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
61
4.4.2.1
Hard Constraints for Single Objective Guidance
We first evaluate the hard guidance and top-k filtered sampling on single-objective
tasks for NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3. As a start we compare a standard hard
guidance approach with the random, unguided, and guided sampling from RQ2 (i.e.
no top-k filtering). Then we compare random, unguided, and guided top-k filtered
sampling against hard guided top-k filtered sampling.
Hard Guidance
Table 4.16 shows the results of the hard guided sampling on NAS-
Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 compared to the results achieved with the baselines from
the guidance in RQ2 (random, unguided, and guided with NFE=64).
Table 4.16: Comparison of metrics for Random Samples, Unguided, Guided, and
Hard Guided DFM on NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 Search Spaces. All DFM
model uses NFE set to 64.
Metric
Stats.
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
Random
Unguided
Guided
Hard Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
Hard Guided
CIFAR10 Accuracy ↑
Max
94.37
94.37
94.37
94.37
-
-
-
-
Mean
87.14±0.14
87.11±0.14
91.70±0.02
92.30±0.01
-
-
-
-
Min
10.00
10.00
10.00
80.19
-
-
-
-
CIFAR100 Accuracy ↑
Max
73.51
73.51
73.51
73.51
-
-
-
-
Mean
61.62±0.13
61.41±0.14
68.63±0.02
70.68±0.01
-
-
-
-
Min
1.00
1.00
37.87
58.54
-
-
-
-
FLOPs [M] ↑
Max
220.12
220.12
220.12
220.12
435.71
412.71
475.34
496.70
Mean
54.94±0.38
54.89±0.39
211.13±0.19
216.36±0.12
274.10±1.45
262.08±1.38
356.97±1.40
378.01±0.98
Min
7.78
7.78
82.49
153.27
155.55
160.39
213.26
251.68
Latency [ms] ↓
Max
0.026
0.026
0.017
0.011
31.136
31.731
28.463
14.510
Mean
0.016±0.000
0.016±0.000
0.009±0.000
0.009±0.000
23.643±0.099
22.801±0.094
18.714±0.071
11.122±0.028
Min
0.008
0.007
0.007
0.007
15.248
15.567
14.142
9.174
Peak Memory [MB] ↓
Max
-
-
-
-
7.23
7.12
5.55
4.10
Mean
-
-
-
-
4.86±0.03
4.70±0.02
3.62±0.01
3.46±0.01
Min
-
-
-
-
3.18
3.17
3.17
3.17
Params [MB/M] ↓
Max
1.53
1.53
1.07
0.10
7.12
6.96
6.18
5.08
Mean
0.40±0.00
0.40±0.00
0.08±0.00
0.07±0.00
4.87±0.02
4.84±0.02
4.10±0.02
3.91±0.01
Min
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
3.60
3.46
3.46
3.44
The results show that the hard guidance consistently produces better results than the
baseline models. The effectiveness of the hard guidance is dependent on the metric
and search space, but for all metrics the hard guidance is able to steer the sampling
towards architectures that on average are within the set limits (see Table 4.7). Also,
for all metrics the hard guidance significantly reduces the difference between the
metric min/max values and improves them compared to the baselines, which is a
good starting point for further enhancing the performance through top-k filtering.
Top-k Filtering
Table 4.17 shows the results of the top-5 and top-1 filtered sam-
pling with single-objective guidance on NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3. The re-
sults provide a comparison between the random (without replacement), unguided,
guided, and hard guided sampling methods. The highest mean scores within each
metric are highlighted in bold for each search space.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
62
Table 4.17: Comparison of Metrics for Top-k Filtered Random Samples, Unguided,
and Guided DFM on NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 Search Spaces. All DFM
models use NFE set to 64.
Metric
Top-k
Stats.
NAS-Bench-201
MobileNetV3
Random
Unguided
Guided
Hard Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
Hard Guided
CIFAR10 Accuracy ↑
Top-5
Max
94.37
94.37
94.36
94.37
-
-
-
-
Mean
93.97±0.03
93.95±0.03
94.12±0.03
94.12±0.03
-
-
-
-
Min
93.52
93.42
93.74
93.24
-
-
-
-
Top-1
Max
94.37
94.37
94.36
94.37
-
-
-
-
Mean
94.15±0.06
94.09±0.07
94.21±0.05
94.18±0.10
-
-
-
-
Min
93.74
93.70
93.74
93.24
-
-
-
-
CIFAR100 Accuracy ↑
Top-5
Max
73.51
73.51
73.51
73.51
-
-
-
-
Mean
72.14±0.10
72.05±0.10
72.99±0.06
73.17±0.04
-
-
-
-
Min
69.35
69.35
72.24
72.30
-
-
-
-
Top-1
Max
73.51
73.51
73.51
73.51
-
-
-
-
Mean
72.71±0.17
72.55±0.20
73.23±0.09
73.15±0.10
-
-
-
-
Min
71.48
71.23
72.67
72.30
-
-
-
-
FLOPs [M] ↑
Top-5
Max
220.12
220.12
220.12
220.12
436.98
440.29
475.57
492.93
Mean
163.63±2.41
166.83±2.58
220.12±0.00
220.12±0.00
392.03±2.38
375.88±2.65
449.04±1.90
451.40±2.23
Min
149.34
149.34
220.12
220.12
360.52
327.31
402.63
408.14
Top-1
Max
220.12
220.12
220.12
220.12
436.98
431.27
475.57
492.93
Mean
180.67±5.40
182.37±5.14
220.12±0.00
220.12±0.00
409.24±5.26
394.22±5.37
459.00±3.74
460.46±5.05
Min
153.27
153.27
220.12
220.12
381.19
370.86
434.95
437.79
Latency [ms] ↓
Top-5
Max
0.010
0.010
0.007
0.007
16.834
16.800
14.750
12.470
Mean
0.009±0.000
0.009±0.000
0.007±0.000
0.007±0.000
14.945±0.124
14.916±0.115
13.809±0.054
11.298±0.046
Min
0.008
0.007
0.007
0.007
13.414
13.539
13.172
10.474
Top-1
Max
0.010
0.009
0.007
0.007
15.645
16.165
14.369
14.860
Mean
0.009±0.000
0.008±0.000
0.007±0.000
0.007±0.000
14.227±0.209
14.216±0.232
13.571±0.125
11.070±0.437
Min
0.008
0.007
0.007
0.007
13.172
13.346
13.093
10.205
Peak Memory [MB] ↓
Top-5
Max
-
-
-
-
3.81
3.80
3.66
3.66
Mean
-
-
-
-
3.41±0.03
3.40±0.02
3.43±0.02
3.42±0.02
Min
-
-
-
-
3.17
3.18
3.17
3.17
Top-1
Max
-
-
-
-
3.65
3.66
3.66
3.66
Mean
-
-
-
-
3.38±0.05
3.42±0.05
3.41±0.06
3.45±0.05
Min
-
-
-
-
3.18
3.18
3.18
3.18
Params [MB/M] ↓
Top-5
Max
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
4.50
4.72
4.74
4.69
Mean
0.07±0.00
0.07±0.00
0.07±0.00
0.07±0.00
4.36±0.01
4.35±0.01
4.31±0.01
4.29±0.01
Min
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
4.27
4.27
4.26
4.25
Top-1
Max
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
4.78
4.97
4.72
4.69
Mean
0.07±0.00
0.07±0.00
0.07±0.00
0.07±0.00
4.45±0.06
4.45±0.07
4.41±0.06
4.40±0.06
Min
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
4.26
4.25
4.25
4.25
The results show that guided and hard guided top-k filtering consistently outperforms
the unguided and random baselines in the mean scores except for peak memory on Mo-
bileNetV3 where the random sampling achieves the best average score, however here
it is important to note that the confidence intervals of all models overlap. Further-
more, the guided and hard guided top-k filtering produce very similar mean results
in all cases except for latency where the hard guided top-k filtering is able to achieve
better results. For the remaining metrics where guidance and hard guidance match
in performance, we see no clear winner in the mean scores because the confidence
intervals overlap in all cases. However, another observation is that the top-k filtering
does in general, as expected, lead to better results in the min/max boundaries.
When comparing to the RQ2 scores in Table 4.8 the mean results in this experi-
ment improve on all metrics except for one, parameters on MobileNetV3, though in
this case the top-k filtering significantly improves the boundary min-value. In gen-
eral the top-k filtering does lead to comparable or better results than the non-filtered
sampling and the guided and hard guided filtered sampling in particular performs
well and is able to produce architectures within the set metric limits for all metrics
and datasets except for parameters on MobileNetV3. For parameters the limit is
==PAGE:70==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
63
4.0 · 106, but the best model (hard guidance) is only able to produce architectures
down to 4.29±0.01 million parameters sometimes even producing architectures with
4.69 million parameters indicating a limit that cannot be satisfied or possibly incorrect
rankings by the surrogate.
4.4.2.2
Hard Constraints for Resource Constrained Scenarios
This section compares three sampling strategies for hard constraints: multi-objective
top-k filtered sampling, hard guidance, and hard guidance with top-k filtering. The
strategies are evaluated and compared on the resource-constrained scenarios from
RQ2 and the model with the best mean scores across all metrics within each sampling
strategy is highlighted in bold for each scenario. The mean scores again is based on
running the model across 30 different seeds. The hard constraints have first priority
i.e. if one model is better on FLOPs or accuracy but does not meet the limit on
the hard constraints and the other model does, then the other model is chosen. The
cases where the best model also adheres to the hard constraints are marked with a
†. If top-5 and top-1 have equal results, only the top-1 results are chosen. First the
multi-objective top-k filtered sampling results are presented as a baseline, followed by
the results for hard guidance, and finally the top-k filtered hard guidance. Figure 4.4
and 4.5 at the end of this section show a visual comparison of the best performing
model on each of the scenarios for each of the three sampling strategies.
Multi-Objective Top-k Filtered Sampling
The results of the multi-objective
top-k filtered sampling baseline are shown in Table 4.18 and Table 4.19.
==PAGE:71==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
64
Table 4.18:
Top-K Filtered Multi-Objective Guided Sampling Results on NAS-
Bench-201 - Resource Constrained Scenarios. Cases where the best model adheres to
the hard constraints are marked with a †. All models use NFE set to 64.
Scenario ID
Top-k
Stats.
Accuracy ↑
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Params [MB] ↓
1 (CIFAR10)
Top-5
Max
86.63
-
-
0.07
Mean
86.61±0.00
-
-
0.07±0.00
Min
86.59
-
-
0.07
Top-1 †
Max
86.63
-
-
0.07
Mean
86.63±0.00
-
-
0.07±0.00
Min
86.59
-
-
0.07
2 (CIFAR10)
Top-5
Max
84.17
-
0.009
-
Mean
84.17±0.00
-
0.009±0.000
-
Min
84.17
-
0.009
-
Top-1 †
Max
84.17
-
0.009
-
Mean
84.17±0.00
-
0.009±0.00
-
Min
84.17
-
0.009
-
3 (CIFAR10)
Top-5
Max
84.19
-
0.009
0.07
Mean
84.17±0.00
-
0.009±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
84.17
-
0.008
0.07
Top-1 †
Max
84.17
-
0.009
0.07
Mean
84.17±0.00
-
0.009±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
84.17
-
0.009
0.07
1 (CIFAR100)
Top-5 †
Max
58.45
-
-
0.08
Mean
58.22±0.03
-
-
0.08±0.00
Min
58.11
-
-
0.08
Top-1
Max
58.11
-
-
0.08
Mean
58.11±0.00
-
-
0.08±0.00
Min
58.11
-
-
0.08
2 (CIFAR100)
Top-5
Max
55.00
-
0.008
-
Mean
54.86±0.00
-
0.008±0.00
-
Min
54.86
-
0.008
-
Top-1 †
Max
54.86
-
0.008
-
Mean
54.86±0.00
-
0.008±0.00
-
Min
54.86
-
0.008
-
3 (CIFAR100)
Top-5 †
Max
55.00
-
0.008
0.08
Mean
54.87±0.01
-
0.008±0.00
0.08±0.00
Min
54.86
-
0.008
0.08
Top-1
Max
54.86
-
0.008
0.08
Mean
54.86±0.00
-
0.008±0.00
0.08±0.00
Min
54.86
-
0.008
0.08
4
Top-5
Max
-
220.12
0.024
-
Mean
-
220.12±0.00
0.024±0.000
-
Min
-
220.12
0.024
-
Top-1
Max
-
220.12
0.024
-
Mean
-
220.12±0.00
0.024±0.000
-
Min
-
220.12
0.024
-
5
Top-5
Max
-
7.78
-
0.07
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
-
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
-
0.07
Top-1 †
Max
-
7.78
-
0.07
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
-
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
-
0.07
6
Top-5
Max
-
7.78
0.008
0.07
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
0.007±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
0.007
0.07
Top-1 †
Max
-
7.78
0.007
0.07
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
0.007±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
0.007
0.07
==PAGE:72==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
65
The results show that by applying the top-k filtering to the multi-objective guided
sampling, we are able to maintain the accuracy performance of the model while
adhering to the metric limits set for the scenarios (CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 1-3).
This is a substantial improvement over the non-filtered results in RQ2 (Table 4.14).
However, for FLOPs this is not possible.
We come close in scenario 4, but the
latency is not able to meet the limit of 0.01 ms. In scenario 5 and 6 the latency
and parameter metrics are within the desired limits, but the (soft constraint) FLOPs
metric is completely off, and everything suggests that with latency and parameters
completely controlling the results there is simply no way to achieve the FLOPs limit
of 150 M.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
66
Table 4.19:
Top-K Filtered Multi-Objective Guided Sampling Results on Mo-
bileNetV3 - Resource Constrained Scenarios. Cases marked with † are the best models
that also meet the hard constraints on the average metric score. All models use NFE
set to 64.
Scenario ID
Top-k
Stats.
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Peak Memory [MB] ↓
Params [M] ↓
4
Top-5 †
Max
264.96
19.508
-
-
Mean
224.07±2.83
13.022±0.236
-
-
Min
189.37
11.360
-
-
Top-1
Max
254.95
17.880
-
-
Mean
223.22±5.58
14.696±0.840
-
-
Min
192.45
11.253
-
-
5
Top-5 †
Max
413.73
-
-
4.73
Mean
331.50±3.84
-
-
3.98±0.04
Min
283.56
-
-
3.54
Top-1
Max
413.73
-
-
4.76
Mean
346.93±8.85
-
-
4.38±0.06
Min
306.00
-
-
4.17
6
Top-5
Max
280.37
17.328
-
4.76
Mean
211.65±3.44
12.752±0.244
-
4.65±0.01
Min
174.33
10.296
-
4.53
Top-1
Max
232.96
18.879
-
4.73
Mean
210.50±5.59
13.256±0.996
-
4.70±0.00
Min
184.51
10.767
-
4.69
7
Top-5
Max
373.1
-
3.92
-
Mean
319.31±2.63
-
3.53±0.03
-
Min
279.96
-
3.19
-
Top-1 †
Max
373.11
-
3.92
-
Mean
327.57±6.34
-
3.53±0.07
-
Min
302.62
-
3.19
-
8
Top-5
Max
281.37
-
3.80
5.33
Mean
205.79±4.57
-
3.45±0.02
4.61±0.04
Min
162.77
-
3.17
4.28
Top-1
Max
281.37
-
3.80
5.33
Mean
209.05±12.05
-
3.50±0.06
4.59±0.11
Min
173.32
-
3.17
4.28
9
Top-5 †
Max
258.36
19.822
3.63
-
Mean
213.34±2.62
12.349±0.268
3.32±0.02
-
Min
184.12
10.639
3.16
-
Top-1
Max
241.15
17.047
3.63
-
Mean
212.06±5.46
13.215±0.709
3.29±0.05
-
Min
189.21
11.209
3.16
-
10
Top-5
Max
232.45
19.136
3.78
5.13
Mean
200.48±1.56
12.286±0.241
3.33±0.02
4.73±0.01
Min
181.11
11.147
3.16
4.68
Top-1
Max
209.55
18.055
3.50
4.74
Mean
195.23±2.52
12.997±1.123
3.31±0.05
4.70±0.01
Min
182.90
10.690
3.16
4.68
The results in Table 4.19 show a clear improvement in the number of models that meet
==PAGE:74==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
67
the hard constraints, going from none in the RQ2 setup to 4 when top-k filtering is
applied. Furthermore, we observe that the min/max boundary samples are improved,
while the FLOPs metric values are maintained at a level close to the none-filtered
results. Again we also see the trend as in the non-filtered results, where increasing
the complexity of the guidance, by increasing the number of hard constraints, leads
to a decrease in the FLOPs performance of the models.
Hard Guidance Sampling
Table 4.20 and Table 4.21 show the results of the
hard guided sampling on NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 respectively, again for
the resource constrained scenarios presented in RQ2 Table 4.13.
Table 4.20: Multi-Objective Hard Guided Sampling Results on NAS-Bench-201 -
Resource Constrained Scenarios. All models use NFE set to 64.
Scenario ID
Stats.
Accuracy ↑
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Params [MB] ↓
1 (CIFAR10)
Max
91.05
-
-
0.16
Mean
84.55±0.06
-
-
0.09±0.00
Min
10.00
-
-
0.07
2 (CIFAR10)
Max
87.00
-
0.011
-
Mean
81.58±0.06
-
0.009±0.000
-
Min
10.00
-
0.007
-
3 (CIFAR10)
Max
90.80
-
0.018
0.16
Mean
79.68±0.09
-
0.010±0.00
0.08±0.00
Min
10.00
-
0.007
0.07
1 (CIFAR100)
Max
68.22
-
-
0.19
Mean
60.44±0.05
-
-
0.10±0.00
Min
1.00
-
-
0.08
2 (CIFAR100)
Max
58.87
-
0.012
-
Mean
54.87±0.05
-
0.009±0.000
-
Min
1.00
-
0.007
-
3 (CIFAR100)
Max
66.91
-
0.017
0.16
Mean
54.45±0.08
-
0.010±0.000
0.09±0.00
Min
1.00
-
0.007
0.08
4
Max
-
7.78
0.011
-
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
0.009±0.000
-
Min
-
7.78
0.007
-
5
Max
-
23.51
-
0.19
Mean
-
9.48±0.03
-
0.09±0.00
Min
-
7.78
-
0.07
6
Max
-
19.58
0.018
0.16
Mean
-
7.95±0.01
0.010±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
0.007
0.07
For the hard guidance on NAS-Bench-201 we see that the hard constraints are satisfied
in all scenarios. Once more we observe that the desired limit of 150 M FLOPs is
not achievable within the hard constraints. We further see that the min/max value
==PAGE:75==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
68
samples of the FLOPs metrics are very low as well, which indicates the even with a
top-k filtering it is not possible to achieve the desired FLOPs limit with the current
constraints.
Table 4.21: Multi-Objective Hard Guided Sampling Results on MobileNetV3 - Re-
source Constrained Scenarios. All models use NFE set to 64.
Scenario ID
Stats.
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Peak Memory [MB] ↓
Params [M] ↓
4
Max
320.16
17.063
-
-
Mean
208.96±0.83
12.797±0.037
-
-
Min
145.82
9.832
-
-
5
Max
364.48
-
-
4.93
Mean
243.03±1.27
-
-
3.98±0.01
Min
149.58
-
-
3.45
6
Max
349.73
19.028
-
6.06
Mean
205.75±0.97
12.687±0.045
-
4.04±0.01
Min
131.04
9.226
-
3.44
7
Max
348.49
-
4.73
-
Mean
244.76±1.18
-
3.68±0.01
-
Min
146.85
-
3.17
-
8
Max
336.52
-
6.37
6.43
Mean
209.80±1.03
-
3.80±0.01
4.31±0.02
Min
133.66
-
3.17
3.44
9
Max
339.32
20.112
5.46
-
Mean
212.60±1.00
12.866±0.048
3.65±0.01
-
Min
143.26
9.772
3.16
-
10
Max
299.91
20.452
5.76
6.07
Mean
197.34±0.88
12.060±0.043
3.76±0.01
4.18±0.02
Min
132.29
9.306
3.16
3.45
For the results on MobileNetV3 we see that most hard constraints are satisfied for the
scenarios. However, parameters are close but not quite within the limits for scenarios
6, 8, and 10. However, min/max values for all hard constraints show potential for a
top-k filtering to improve the results further to bring them within the limitations.
Hard Guidance Sampling with Top-K Filtering
Table 4.22 and Table 4.23
show the results of the hard guided sampling with top-k filtering on NAS-Bench-201
and MobileNetV3 respectively.
==PAGE:76==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
69
Table 4.22: Top-K Filtered Multi-Objective Hard Guidance Sampling Results on
NAS-Bench-201 - Resource Constrained Scenarios. Cases marked with † are the best
models that also meet the hard constraints. All models use NFE set to 64.
Scenario ID
Top-k
Stats.
Accuracy ↑
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Params [MB] ↓
1 (CIFAR10)
Top-5
Max
86.68
-
-
0.07
Mean
86.62±0.00
-
-
0.07±0.00
Min
86.46
-
-
0.07
Top-1 †
Max
86.63
-
-
0.07
Mean
86.62±0.00
-
-
0.07±0.00
Min
86.59
-
-
0.07
2 (CIFAR10)
Top-5
Max
84.19
-
0.009
-
Mean
84.17±0.00
-
0.009±0.000
-
Min
84.17
-
0.008
-
Top-1 †
Max
84.17
-
0.009
-
Mean
84.17±0.00
-
0.009±0.000
-
Min
84.17
-
0.009
-
3 (CIFAR10)
Top-5 †
Max
86.53
-
0.009
0.07
Mean
84.35±0.10
-
0.008±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
84.17
-
0.008
0.07
Top-1
Max
86.53
-
0.009
0.07
Mean
84.32±0.22
-
0.009±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
84.17
-
0.008
0.07
1 (CIFAR100)
Top-5 †
Max
58.79
-
-
0.08
Mean
58.36±0.04
-
-
0.08±0.00
Min
58.11
-
-
0.08
Top-1
Max
58.45
-
-
0.08
Mean
58.18±0.05
-
-
0.08±0.00
Min
58.11
-
-
0.08
2 (CIFAR100)
Top-5
Max
58.32
-
0.009
-
Mean
57.92±0.18
-
0.009±0.000
-
Min
54.86
-
0.008
-
Top-1 †
Max
58.32
-
0.009
-
Mean
58.20±0.24
-
0.009±0.000
-
Min
54.86
-
0.008
-
3 (CIFAR100)
Top-5
Max
58.38
-
0.009
0.08
Mean
58.16±0.07
-
0.009±0.000
0.08±0.00
Min
54.86
-
0.008
0.08
Top-1 †
Max
58.32
-
0.009
0.08
Mean
58.31±0.02
-
0.009±0.000
0.08±0.00
Min
58.02
-
0.009
0.08
4
Top-5
Max
-
7.78
0.009
-
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
0.008±0.000
-
Min
-
7.78
0.007
-
Top-1 †
Max
-
7.78
0.008
-
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
0.007±0.000
-
Min
-
7.78
0.007
-
5
Top-5
Max
-
7.78
-
0.07
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
-
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
-
0.07
Top-1 †
Max
-
7.78
-
0.07
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
-
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
-
0.07
6
Top-5
Max
-
7.78
0.009
0.07
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
0.008±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
0.007
0.07
Top-1 †
Max
-
7.78
0.009
0.07
Mean
-
7.78±0.00
0.007±0.000
0.07±0.00
Min
-
7.78
0.007
0.07
==PAGE:77==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
70
Table 4.23: Top-K Filtered Multi-Objective Hard Guidance Sampling Results on
MobileNetV3 - Resource Constrained Scenarios. Cases marked with † are the best
models that also meet the hard constraints. All models use NFE set to 64.
Scenario ID
Top-k
Stats.
FLOPs [M] ↑
Latency [ms] ↓
Peak Memory [MB] ↓
Params [M] ↓
4
Top-5
Max
311.53
24.704
-
-
Mean
274.46±2.18
15.071±0.365
-
-
Min
237.28
13.031
-
-
Top-1 †
Max
311.53
19.942
-
-
Mean
279.37±4.24
15.475±0.883
-
-
Min
256.35
12.896
-
-
5
Top-5
Max
382.50
-
-
4.77
Mean
340.66±2.33
-
-
4.35±0.02
Min
306.70
-
-
4.13
Top-1
Max
382.50
-
-
4.66
Mean
353.68±5.02
-
-
4.37±0.04
Min
337.89
-
-
4.21
6
Top-5
Max
362.63
23.401
-
4.76
Mean
283.11±3.73
15.176±0.265
-
4.43±0.01
Min
234.26
12.478
-
4.30
Top-1
Max
362.63
22.117
-
4.72
Mean
295.61±9.87
16.262±0.840
-
4.47±0.04
Min
252.52
12.931
-
4.33
7
Top-5
Max
366.79
-
4.23
-
Mean
328.14±2.82
-
3.66±0.03
-
Min
262.44
-
3.19
-
Top-1 †
Max
360.62
-
4.01
-
Mean
335.68±4.82
-
3.62±0.07
-
Min
305.88
-
3.19
-
8
Top-5
Max
319.17
-
4.35
5.90
Mean
245.15±3.69
-
3.68±0.04
4.64±0.05
Min
196.60
-
3.18
4.16
Top-1
Max
313.81
-
4.18
5.90
Mean
252.09±9.77
-
3.70±0.09
4.72±0.14
Min
213.33
-
3.18
4.31
9
Top-5 †
Max
331.69
25.080
4.08
-
Mean
273.19±3.87
15.495±0.353
3.50±0.03
-
Min
216.04
12.259
3.16
-
Top-1
Max
329.58
26.089
3.78
-
Mean
290.74±7.88
17.199±1.437
3.54±0.05
-
Min
250.80
13.696
3.34
-
10
Top-5
Max
265.36
17.833
3.78
5.21
Mean
209.83±2.30
12.287±0.231
3.40±0.02
4.75±0.02
Min
185.44
10.935
3.16
4.68
Top-1
Max
225.67
17.122
3.63
4.80
Mean
208.35±3.83
13.144±0.750
3.35±0.05
4.74±0.01
Min
188.78
11.309
3.16
4.69
==PAGE:78==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
71
When we look at the hard guidance top-k filtered results for both NAS-Bench-201 and
MobileNetV3 we see that they match the hard guided results. However, one inter-
esting observation is that on MobileNetV3 scenario 5, the non-filtered hard guidance
produces results with a valid average score on parameters according to the limit, but
the top-k filtering is not within the limit. This indicates an issue in the surrogate
ranking, where the top-k filtering does not choose the truly best models.
For all
experiments we measure that the hard guidance and top-k filtering has a negligible
impact on the sampling time, which is still in on the order of seconds for 1000 samples
similar to the RQ2 results (Table 4.12).
As a final summary of the hard constraints scenario experiments figure 4.4 and 4.5
below show a visualization of the best models found for each of the hard constraint
sampling strategies on NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 for each scenario. Latency
is illustrated by a color scale for models including this metric. For scenarios where
parameters are included the size of the marker illustrates the parameter size of the
model, scenarios without the parameter metric are marked with a * in the scenario
x-axis label. For NAS-Bench-201 the legend shows if the model performance metric
is accuracy or FLOPs. For the MobileNetV3 the marker edge/line width illustrates
the peak memory of the model for scenarios including this metric.
==PAGE:79==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
72
1 (CIFAR10)
1 (CIFAR100)
2 (CIFAR10)*
2 (CIFAR100)*
3 (CIFAR10)
3 (CIFAR100)
4*
5
6
Scenario
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Accuracy (%)
Model Performance for Seach Space: NAS-Bench-201
0
50
100
150
200
FLOPS (M)
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.020
0.022
0.024
Latency (ms)
Models
Guided-Top1 (ACC)
Guided-Top1 (FLOPS)
Hard-Guided (ACC)
Hard-Guided (FLOPS)
Hard-Guided-Top1 (ACC)
Hard-Guided-Top1 (FLOPS)
Guided-Top5 (ACC)
Guided-Top5 (FLOPS)
Hard-Guided-Top5 (ACC)
Hard-Guided-Top5 (FLOPS)
Figure 4.4: Best models found for each scenario on NAS-Bench-201.
==PAGE:80==
4.4 RQ3 - Hard Constraints in DFM Model Guidance
73
4*
5
6
7*
8
9*
10
Scenario
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
FLOPS (M)
Model Performance for Seach Space: MobileNetV3
12.5
13.0
13.5
14.0
14.5
15.0
15.5
16.0
Latency (ms)
Models
Guided-Top5
Hard-Guided
Hard-Guided-Top5
Hard-Guided-Top1
Guided-Top1
Figure 4.5: Best models found for each scenario on MobileNetV3.
In the visual comparison the results point to the hard guided models being as good
as the guided models or superior. For one case in scenario 4 on NAS-Bench-201 we
do have guided top-1 sampling with higher FLOPs, however this model violates the
latency limit of 0.2 ms. We also quite clearly see that for parameters on both search
spaces and for peak memory on MobileNetV3 all the models seem to converge to
very similar results. Latency seems to be the biggest differentiator for the models on
MobileNetV3, where the hard guided models are able to increase the latency to make
a trade-off for higher FLOPs while still being within the limits.
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Benchmarking
74
4.5
Benchmarking
This section presents the results of the benchmarking conducted by performing hard
guidance sampling with top-1 filtering on MobileNetV3 and then training the sam-
pled architecture, according to the setup described in Section 4.4.1, on the FGVC-
Aircraft and Oxford-IIIT PET datasets.
We perform two sets of experiments: one for maximum test accuracy by using
FLOPs as a proxy, and another experiment where FLOPs is set a soft guide and
latency, peak memory and parameters are set to be hard guides, and all guides get a
weight of 1. For the maximum test accuracy the results are shown in Table 4.24 and
compared to the results reported for the DiffusionNAG method by Sohyun An et al.
To produce a 95% confidence interval for the top-1 filtered hard guidance results
the sampling and training of a top-1 architecture is repeated 10 times with different
seeds. Again, we use the reported results from DiffusionNAG, because it was not
possible to apply the DiffusionNAG method within the time frame of this thesis. We
do not compare POMONAG on the first case, because the method used to produce the
results was deemed to be too different to make a meaningful comparison. Specifically,
POMONAG includes an advanced hyperparameter tuning step using the Optuna
framework [1] and performs 50 epochs of training instead of 20.
Table 4.24: Maximum Accuracy Benchmarking results for MobileNetV3 on FGVC-
Aircraft and Oxford-IIIT PET datasets.
Method
FGVC-Aircraft Acc. ↑
Oxford-IIIT PET Acc. ↑
Trained Architectures ↓
FLOPs [M] ↑
DiffusionNAG [2]
81.47±0.05
94.75±0.10
30
-
Top-1 Hard Guidance Sampling
69.64±0.76
84.25±0.67
1
468.37±4.92
The results in Table 4.24 show that the top-1 hard guidance sampling method achieves
a lower accuracy than the reported DiffusionNAG results on both datasets. However,
it is important to note that the DiffusionNAG method is based on a top-30 sampling
procedure, which also trains all 30 architectures for each dataset to find the best
candidate. This amount of training is not feasible in the scope of this thesis, and
therefore we resort to comparing with the top-1 hard guidance sampling method.
For the second comparison it is not possible to match the results against Diffusion-
NAG as the method does not do multi-objective guidance. However, for POMONAG
this is done in Table 4.25 but with a caveat. As the POMONAG method reports the
results for mean metric values across 15 different datasets it is not feasible to make a
similar set of results in this thesis. Also, since no code is available, as of now, it is not
possible to look at the technical details behind their experiment either. Therefore,
to try and get close to a meaningful comparison we take the mean metric scores for
top-1 hard guided sampling on the FGVC-Aircraft and Oxford-IIIT PET datasets.
==PAGE:82==
4.5 Benchmarking
75
Table 4.25: Benchmarking average results for MobileNetV3 on FGVC-Aircraft and
Oxford-IIIT PET datasets against POMONAG average results for 15 datasets.
Method
Acc.
FLOPs [M]
Latency [ms]
Peak Memory [MB]
Params [M]
POMONAGEff [32]
88.66±5.28
-
17.96±0.76
-
3.47±0.01
Top-1 Hard Guidance
71.73±1.18
211.87±5.51
18.32±0.61
3.42±0.09
4.74±0.02
For these results we see that the eﬀiciency optimized POMONAGEff is superior to
the top-1 hard guidance method both in terms of accuracy, latency, and parameters.
However, the top-1 hard guidance sampling method does manage to come within the
range of the confidence interval for the latency metric.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
This chapter first highlights the key findings of this thesis in the context of the main
hypothesis and research questions posed in Section 1.2. It interprets the results of
each research question in depth to highlight their significance and limitations, and
finally considers some primary directions for future work.
5.1
Key Findings
Research Question 1
”To what extent can discrete flow matching be used for gen-
erating unique, valid, and novel neural architectures?”
Even a basic DFM model can generate unique, valid, and novel architectures on
NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3, while training in minutes (or seconds) rather than
hours as current SOTA. These results showcase DFM as a fast, flexible framework
for applying generative models to architecture search problems.
Research Question 2
”How can guidance mechanisms for discrete flow matching
be utilized to make the generated architectures suitable for resource constrained hard-
ware?”
Guided discrete flow matching, using even simple surrogate performance predictor
models, can effectively be used to generate architectures, in a multi-objective hardware-
aware context, according to resource constraints such as latency, parameter count,
and peak memory usage. The guidance mechanism is well suited for adjusting the
generated architectures overall, but to incorporate hard constraints the method needs
additional modifications.
Research Question 3
”How can guided discrete flow matching be extended to in-
corporate hard constraints in the generation of neural architectures?”
Introducing hard constraints into the guidance mechanism of discrete flow matching
through a combination of constraints on the DFM jump velocities, iterative tuning
of the DFM source distribution based on the constraints, and top-k filtering of the
generated architectures, allows for the generation of architectures that in most cases
==PAGE:84==
5.2 Research Question 1
77
meet the hard constraints. However, the success of the method is highly dependent on
the specific constraints, the architecture search space, and the surrogate performance
predictor model and constraint limits used.
Main Hypothesis
”Integrating Discrete Flow Matching into hardware-aware, multi-
objective architecture generation will reduce computational cost and produce models
that meet or exceed state-of-the-art eﬀiciency and accuracy for resource-constrained
devices.”
The first part of the main hypothesis is strongly supported by the RQ1 and RQ2
results of this thesis, showing that DFM can be used to generate unique, valid, and
novel architectures while significantly reducing the computational costs of training
and sampling. However, second part of the hypothesis regarding accuracy and eﬀi-
ciency of the generated architectures is only partially supported by the RQ3 results.
The results show that the hard guidance sampling method introduced in this thesis
can in most cases generate architectures that meet specific hard constraints based
on predefined limits. However, the results also show that the hard guidance method
does not guarantee adherence to hard constraints, and that the success of the method
is dependent on the specific constraints, architecture search space, and surrogate per-
formance predictor model used.
Finally, when comparing the results of the hard
guidance sampling method to the state-of-the-art methods the results show that the
method to some degree is able to produce competitive results, but for the most part
is surpassed by the state-of-the-art methods. Especially when compared on accuracy
on the MobileNetV3 search space it becomes evident that the FLOPs proxy imple-
mentation used in the proof of concept in this work is not able to match the results of
the more advanced SOTA methods. Thus, the main hypothesis is formally rejected
despite multiple promising results.
5.2
Research Question 1
Validity, Uniqueness, and Novelty
The results for this research question show
that even a basic Discrete Flow Matching implementation can generate unique, valid,
and novel neural architectures. While the basic DFM implementation is not able
to surpass the quality of the existing state-of-the-art neural architecture generation
methods, it is still able to generate architectures that achieve comparable unique-
ness, validity, and novelty scores for both of the benchmarks NAS-Bench-201 and
MobileNetV3. In part, the validity, uniqueness, and novelty results reflect the search
spaces used in this work. On MobileNetV3 the search space size likely plays a key
role for the high scores. As explained in Section 4.1.1, the total count of possible
architectures is on the order of 2 · 1019, yet we use only ∼500 K sampled architec-
tures (≈2.5 · 10−14% of the space), of which ≈80% are seen during training. When
generating architectures from the vast search space it therefore becomes highly likely
==PAGE:85==
5.2 Research Question 1
78
not to produce samples in this tiny fraction of the space, possibly explaining why
DFM and SOTA methods achieve essentially 100% novelty.
By comparison, the NAS-Bench-201 search space is much smaller, only 15,625
architectures, so novelty is harder to achieve. In this case the achievable novelty is
highly dependent on the amount of training examples used because increasing the
training set size means a smaller set of novel architectures remains. This is probably
why the SOTA methods use a training set size of only 50% for the NAS-Bench-201
search space, because going beyond that would lead to a significant drop in novelty.
In this way the novelty score becomes hard to generalize across search spaces, and
most likely novelty in this work should be used as a sanity check for each search
space individually, rather than as a general measure of the DFM model’s performance.
However, from the scores on validity and uniqueness the DFM model seems to learn
the topological constraints of each search space, while still being able to fit the search
space distribution in a manner that can generate a diverse set of architectures.
Training Times
Critically, DFM trains orders of magnitude faster—reducing train-
ing time from GPU hours to minutes on MobileNetV3 and even seconds on NAS-
Bench-201. We expect the reason for this to be the simulation-free training of the
DFM model. In diffusion, we only know the endpoint laws (clean vs. fully noised) and
then we simulate a chain of small transitions to go between them. This means that
diffusion-based generators recover samples by first noising them through a stochastic
differential equation, then inverting that process via a reverse denoising process that
uses a learned noise-predictor model, such that each training sample incurs multiple
steps. In practice, this often entails on the order of hundreds or even thousands of in-
ternal evaluations merely to evaluate one loss because each training sample requires
stepping through the diffusion process at all T time steps—at each step you must
(1) simulate the SDE or sample a noisy state xt, (2) evaluate the learned denoising
(noise-predictor) network on that state, and (3) compute the noisy time step sam-
ple’s per-step contribution to the overall loss—thereby incurring one sampling/ODE
solve and one network pass for every time step. In contrast, Discrete Flow Matching
defines the probability distribution over the intermediate state xt based on the end
points x0 and x1 through a closed-form marginal probability path which can be eval-
uated directly. Since this setup also makes it possible to get an analytical expression
for the true velocity field, training reduces to a straightforward regression: a time
t is sampled uniformly, the corresponding intermediate architecture xt is drawn di-
rectly from the known probability distribution pt(·|x0, x1), and the velocity predictor
is optimized to match the true velocity in a single pass. All in all this eliminates
solver loops, score estimation, and step-wise integration in the training process, and
we therefore expect this simulation‐free paradigm to be the main cause of the DFM
model’s fast training.
==PAGE:86==
5.2 Research Question 1
79
Implications
The findings of RQ1 underscore DFM’s promise as a fast, flexible
framework for neural architecture generation. In particular the framework is flexible
in that it provides numerous opportunities for further improvements e.g. through
design of improved probability paths for training the DFM model, or using other
networks to learn the velocity field, or by exploring other solvers in the sampling
process.
For instance the use of domain/task specific probability paths could be
explored to improve the quality of the generated architectures for specific problems
e.g. by building the probability path in a way that favors certain types of architectures
the DFM model could potentially learn to produce a distribution over the search
space that leaves out the most irrelevant architectures thereby improving the chances
of finding good candidates. In regard to solvers it would be possible to explore the
use of more advanced solvers than the simple Euler solver used in this work e.g.
Runge-Kutta methods to reduce the error in the sampling steps.
As such DFM provides a new and promising foundation for introducing a new
family of generative models into neural architecture generation. Furthermore, the
great improvement in training times compared to diffusion-based methods used in
SOTA NAG methods today [2, 32] makes the DFM generation framework a good
candidate for supporting or even replacing diffusion-based methods in the future.
Limitations
This work only explores the use of DFM on two search spaces that
work on similar types of architectures, namely convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
for image classification. This hinders a real generalization of the results and means
that cross domain applicability is not guaranteed.
Furthermore, the investigated
search spaces are relatively simple in the sense that they can be represented as se-
quences i.e. with no need for an adjacency matrix. For more complex search spaces,
e.g. for multi-branch architectures, it will be necessary for the DFM model to pro-
duce both the operator matrix and the adjacency matrix which will be a far more
demanding task than the cases explored in this work.
Also, this work focuses on search spaces in moderate size, i.e. at most a 20x10
matrix representation is used. For larger architectures, the computational cost of
training the DFM model will increase and for increasingly larger search spaces, the
ability of other methods, e.g. differentiable methods, to produce latent representa-
tions of the architectures might prove to be more eﬀicient.
Furthermore, as described in Section 3.4.1.3, for practical applications DFM is
implemented in a factorized manner where velocities are only applied to consider
single token changes between states. However, it is unclear how well this factorization
will work for architectures where multiple tokens in an architecture need to be changed
together to produce a valid architecture. For instance, one could imagine a search
space where changing a single token in the architecture could potentially invalidate
all the following tokens. In such cases, a standard implementation of the DFM model
might not converge to a good fit on the search space or may require extremely long
time to train and sample before arriving at good architectures if the single token flip
scheme is ineﬀicient for traversing valid architectures. If this is the case, it would
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Research Question 2
80
be necessary to alleviate this issue e.g. by clever design of probability paths, solvers
and/or the architecture search spaces.
5.3
Research Question 2
The second research question investigates the effectiveness of guidance mechanisms
for DFM in generating architectures that meet specific resource constraints. The ex-
periment results demonstrate that DFM guidance mechanisms can effectively steer ar-
chitecture sampling toward predefined resource constraints, directly addressing RQ2.
By applying surrogate-model feedback during sampling in a multi-objective setting,
we achieve architectures whose FLOPs and Accuracy performance are prioritized
together with target hardware relevant budgets defined by resource constraints on
latency, parameters, and peak memory.
Surrogate Model Performance
A part of the reason for the strong performance
of the simple surrogate models used in this work is believed to be the discrete nature
of DFM and the search space representations. In the setup of this work the matrix
representation of architectures is made such that most architectures are valid or very
close to being valid. For instance, in the NAS-Bench-201 search space, any represen-
tation is valid as long as the input and output operators are placed correctly. For
MobileNetV3, the architecture is valid as long as the blocks in a stage are combined
correctly i.e. there should be a first or second block in each stage and if the third block
is present then the fourth one should also be present. We suspect that this creates
a case where even a uniform distribution over the search spaces, as is used for the
source distribution of the DFM, is highly likely to be valid or near-valid in its samples.
The surrogate then sees mostly legal architectures during the sampling trajectory and
can therefore accurately predict their performance. In contrast, in continuous search
spaces the architecture representations could be much more complex or noisy which
would make it harder for the surrogate models to predict the performance of the ar-
chitectures. However, for other search spaces the simple surrogate models used in this
work may not be suﬀicient therefore it would be interesting to also investigate setups
with more complex surrogate models, e.g. using more complex positional encodings,
other types of networks such as GNNs or Transformers, or dataset-aware predictors
like done in SOTA [2, 32]. Both to see their impact on the predictive capabilities of
the surrogate models and to understand the consequences of more complex surrogate
models on the computation cost and sampling time.
NFE as a Hyperparameter
We also observe that the number of function eval-
uations can influence the quality of the guidance in some cases like for accuracy on
CIFAR10 where it increases the minimum accuracy of the sampled architectures. We
believe that this is a natural consequence of more guidance steps in the sampling
when increasing the NFE which thereby creates more opportunities for the surrogate
==PAGE:88==
5.3 Research Question 2
81
model to ”push” the sampling toward the target. However, we also observe that an
increase in NFE does not necessary lead to better results and sometimes the results
even degraded a bit. One reason for this could be that the surrogate model sets a
barrier for the quality of the architectures that can be sampled even with more guid-
ance steps. And if the surrogate model is off in its predictions, then more guidance
steps will only lead to worse results as the surrogate model will ”push” the sampling
toward the wrong part of the search space.
FLOPs as an Accuracy Proxy
The superior accuracy performance on FLOPs-
guided generation for NAS-Bench-201 on both CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 likely reflects
two factors: first, that the FLOPs surrogate is able to produce a better model fit and
therefore consistently outperforms the accuracy surrogate in ranking architectures.
This is supported by the surrogate model training loss, as shown in figure 4.2, where
the train and validation loss for FLOPs is significantly lower than the accuracy surro-
gate model loss. A reason for this could be that FLOPs are more strongly connected
to the intrinsic properties of model architectures, and therefore they become easier
to predict from the one-hot encoded architecture representation input; second, prior
work has already noted a strong empirical correlation between FLOPs and accuracy
[25] which makes it natural to think that this correlation also holds for the search
spaces used in this work.
Multi-Objective Guidance
For multi-objective guidance on the resource con-
strained scenarios we see promising results for supporting a hardware-aware genera-
tive process that can produce architectures that meet the resource constraints while
still being able to optimize for a target metric. Interestingly, multi-objective guidance
with one metric heavily weighted outperforms single-objective guidance. We hypoth-
esize that the combined effect of surrogate weights and the guidance temperature
amplifies the steering signal more effectively than the tested single-objective setups.
However, a deeper analysis of weight-temperature interactions and alternative weight-
ing schemes is needed to clarify this behavior.
Implications
The fact that surrogate models can be used to guide a pretrained
DFM model to sample architectures in a resource aware manner, is a promising
result for the use of DFM in real-world applications both in hardware-aware scenarios
but also in general when working on neural architecture search problems. Some of
the biggest potentials come from the clear separation between the pretrained DFM
generative model and the surrogate guided sampling. This gives the opportunity for
a modular workflow in which a single, high-quality DFM can be trained once on
unlabeled architectures for a search space. These types of unlabeled data are often
much more abundant than labeled architectures. This pretrained model can then be
reused across multiple tasks/scenarios simply by swapping in, potentially lightweight,
surrogates for different objectives. It would even be possible to perform an online
update of the surrogate models during the sampling process, to dynamically adapt
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Research Question 2
82
the guidance. Because labeling costs (e.g. full accuracy measurements) are often
costly to produce, this decoupling allows practitioners to label only a small subset of
architectures for surrogate training, dramatically reducing the work required to adapt
DFM to new tasks. Moreover, sharing pretrained surrogates among different actors
would amortize costs and enable collaborative, hardware-aware NAG with minimal
redundant GPU usage.
Limitations
It was found that the computational cost of the guidance increases
with NFE since it means more steps in the ODE solver and more surrogate model
evaluations.
For large NFE (1024) the computational cost becomes significant as
sampling 1000 architectures can take minutes instead of seconds as for low NFE (64).
This is an important observation as it means that if a large NFE is required to achieve
good results, e.g. on other search spaces not investigated in this work, then the com-
putational cost of the guidance may become large and the improvement in sampling
time for DFM over current SOTA diffusion methods may not be as significant as
found by this work. In practice, the best results will likely be achieved by tuning
NFE for each individual search space and target metric, balancing computational
overhead and sampling quality. However, this work did not do a thorough investiga-
tion into the NFE hyperparameter, due to limited time, and therefore more research
is needed to understand the exact impact of NFE on the guidance performance.
This work chose to use FLOPs as a proxy for accuracy on the MobileNetV3 search
space. However, FLOPs is only a proxy and a caveat is that prioritizing FLOPs alone
may bias the search toward ”wider” or ”deeper” networks that maximize operation
count but do not necessarily maximize accuracy. In the end, the fact that this work did
not find time to train an actual accuracy predictor for MobileNetV3 or implemented a
pretrained predictor (unlike some SOTA methods [2]), means that our MobileNetV3
results are not directly comparable on accuracy in this case and further studies should
be done.
While the single-objective guidance mechanisms in RQ2 was able to produce archi-
tectures that on average meet the resource constraints defined by the specified metric
limits, this was not the case for the multi-objective guidance. The multi-objective
guidance proved to be more challenging, and it is clear that, at least for the imple-
mentation used in this work, it is not possible to reliably satisfy constraints solely
through the use of surrogate model guidance.
Another limitation is in the surrogate implementations, which are dependent on
manual hyperparameter tuning of the guidance temperature, the scaling factor of
the sigmoid function, and the weights of the surrogate models in the case of multi-
objective guidance. This means that translating the surrogate models to other search
spaces or target metrics will likely require careful consideration of these hyperparam-
eters and the tuning could potentially be time-consuming. This is a limitation of the
current implementation which could be improved in future work e.g. by automating
the hyperparameter tuning process, reducing the number of hyperparameters in the
setup, or investigate meta learning approaches to make it easier to quickly adapt the
==PAGE:90==
5.3 Research Question 2
83
surrogate models to new search spaces or target metrics.
Finally, exact guidance is used in this work where all possible single step transi-
tions are evaluated to create the guidance signal for the DFM sampling. This may
become infeasible in vastly larger search spaces, motivating an investigation of other
more scalable approximate guidance techniques.
5.3.1
Research Question 3
The third research question investigates how hard constraints can be integrated into
the DFM model guidance and how this affects the sampling results.
Hard Guidance Sampling Method
The hard guidance sampling method pre-
sented in this work is a simple extension to the DFM model guidance method, which
should be seen as a proof of concept for how hard constraints can be integrated into
the DFM guided sampling process. Specifically, we see that for single objective guided
sampling the method has a significant impact on the sampling results, compared to
just doing guided sampling without hard constraints. In this case the hard guidance
sampling method is able to move the sampling within the limits of the hard con-
straints. However, we see that when top-k filtering is introduced on top of the hard
guidance some metric results become worse. This is an indication that the surrogate
model used for guidance is not able to accurately predict the performance of the ar-
chitectures and therefore produces a faulty top-k set. Also, we see that going from
single objective guided sampling to multi-objective guided sampling is a non-trivial
change, which has a significant impact on the sampling results. These could mean
that the simple weighted average implementation of the multi-objective surrogate
model is insuﬀicient for effectively guiding the sampling process in a hard constraint
setting. However, these challenges regard components of the hard guidance sampling
method that can be explored and exchanged in a plug-and-play manner, e.g. by sim-
ply training a new surrogate and load it into the sampling method or by implementing
another surrogate multi-objective model class to replace the weighted average model
used in this work. Therefore, this work does not conclude that the hard guidance
sampling method is not a viable method for hard constraint sampling, but rather that
the method needs to be extended and improved further.
Benchmarking Against SOTA Methods
It is diﬀicult to compare the results of
the hard guidance sampling method directly against the state-of-the-art methods, as
the different methods, DiffusionNAG and POMONAG, have quite different settings.
Additionally, the time and computational resources required to reproduce the results
of the SOTA methods are significant and thereby creates another barrier to a direct
comparison. Nonetheless, this work makes an attempt of comparing the results in a
simplified manner to at least get an idea of how the hard guidance sampling method
matches up against the SOTA methods. From this comparison we see that the SOTA
methods substantially outperform the hard guidance sampling method on accuracy.
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Research Question 2
84
However, this is not surprising as the SOTA methods uses much more advanced and
accuracy specific surrogate models for guidance, whereas the hard guidance sampling
method uses a very basic surrogate model implementation with FLOPs as a proxy
for accuracy. In this way, the comparison is not capable of determining whether the
hard guidance sampling method is a viable alternative to the SOTA methods, but
more a way to realize that the very simple implementation of hard guidance sampling
used in this work will have to be extended to be able to compete with the SOTA
methods. One potential extension could be to use more advanced surrogate models
and to specifically use a data-aware accuracy predictor implementation, which is able
to predict the accuracy of the architectures based on the dataset used for training and
evaluation. Another could be to improve on the filtering method used in this work,
which as of now is the simplest possible i.e. top-k filtering. Furthermore, the reported
results from DiffusionNAG trained 30 architectures whereas this work only trains
a single architecture to achieve the reported performance.
Also, the POMONAG
method performs enhancements to both the surrogate models and the datasets used,
together with hyperparameter tuning to achieve the reported performance.
Such
enhancements could be applied to the hard guidance sampling method as well to try
and improve the performance and make it more competitive with the SOTA methods.
Implications
The proof of concept in this work shows that it is possible to inte-
grate hard constraints directly within the DFM sampling loop, transforming it into a
constraint-aware generator rather than only relying on post-hoc filtering. Though the
method implemented in this work is a proof of concept, it has significance as it opens
the door for multiple future research directions. For instance, the method could be
extended in many ways e.g. by investigating other types of surrogate models, or fil-
tering methods as described above. Furthermore, the lightweight nature of the DFM
framework supporting the hard guidance sampling method makes it very accessible
for researchers, and practitioners to implement and experiment on, without the need
for extensive computational resources and many GPU hours or days.
Limitations
One of the biggest limitations of the hard guidance sampling method
is the use of surrogate models to enforce the hard constraints. On the one hand,
the surrogate models provide eﬀicient evaluation of candidate architectures, which
is a key component. On the other hand, the evaluation becomes non-deterministic
and will vary depending on the performance of each surrogate model. This makes
it diﬀicult to produce consistent results that always match the hard constraints. It
might not be possible to completely eliminate this issue, but it most likely can be
reduced. One strategy could be to use surrogate models with an uncertainty measure,
and then adapt the sampling method based on this e.g.
by increasing the top-k
filtering threshold when the uncertainty is high or to still allow jumps to states that
have a bad predicted performance if the model uncertainty is high.
==PAGE:92==
5.4 Future Work
85
5.4
Future Work
This section gathers the directions for future work which are deemed most essential
and promising based on the findings in the research questions in this thesis.
Testing on Actual Hardware
As of now the results of this work are only based on
proxy metrics which introduces a gap between the results and the actual performance
of the architectures on real hardware. Future work should therefore focus on testing
the generated architectures on actual resource-constrained devices to investigate if
the results presented here hold in practice.
Expand on Search Spaces
The results presented in this work are based on the
NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 search spaces. Two search spaces that both focus
on vision tasks. Furthermore, the two search spaces have relatively simple macro
structures which can be represented by a single operator matrix and a static ad-
jacency matrix. Future work should therefore focus on testing the DFM guidance
on more complex search spaces with dynamic adjacency matrices and multi-branch
architectures, and across different non-vision domains.
Explore Other Surrogate Models
As mentioned multiple times during the dis-
cussion of the research questions, the surrogate models used in this work are very
simple and basic. It is expected that much performance can be gained by using more
advanced surrogate models, such as those implemented in the current state-of-the-
art methods, DiffusionNAG and POMONAG. Future work should therefore focus on
exploring such models and how they affect the results of the DFM hard guidance
framework.
Explore Other Probability Paths
Finally, one of the opportunities that DFM
provides is the ability to design probability paths. Such design was outside the scope
of this thesis, but it is a promising direction for future work where many possibilities
exist for ways to improve the sampling results of the DFM hard guidance.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this thesis, we have introduced Discrete Flow Matching as a generative framework
for multi-objective hardware-aware neural architecture generation under resource con-
straints. By introducing discrete flow matching into the neural architecture generation
framework, we achieve orders-of-magnitude reductions in training times and signifi-
cantly improve sampling costs compared to SOTA diffusion-based methods.
Our investigation of RQ1 demonstrated that even a basic DFM model yields valid-
ity, uniqueness, and novelty scores competitive with SOTA on both NAS-Bench-201
and MobileNetV3. Crucially, training times drop from hours to seconds or minutes.
In RQ2, we showed that lightweight surrogate-models can be utilized for guidance to
steer a pretrained DFM model to generate architectures that prioritize limits set on
metrics such as FLOPs, accuracy, latency, and parameter. For RQ3, we integrated
hard constraints directly into the DFM sampling loop via velocity masking and iter-
ative source-distribution refinement to produce a ”hard guidance” mechanism. Com-
bined with top-k filtering, this approach shows promising results when implemented
as a basic proof of concept on single- and multi-objective tasks.
Despite these successes, we were not able to validate the main hypothesis of this
work as the proof of concept for hard guidance did not quite meet the performance
requirements when benchmarked against current state-of-the-art methods, and key
limitations still remain. The used search spaces were chain-structured and focused
on CNNs; extending this work to richer search spaces on other domains and/or multi-
branch spaces warrants further study. Also, the results were limited by the use of
FLOPs as a proxy for accuracy when benchmarking the hard guidance method on
MobileNetV3; future work should incorporate true accuracy predictors. Finally, the
multi-objective guidance did not consistently manage to produce architectures within
the set constraints; more research is needed to refine the hard guidance mechanism
and the multi-objective sampling process.
Looking ahead, though challenges remain this work does present multiple promis-
ing avenues for future research and though the hard guidance proof of concept did not
meet the performance requirements of the main hypothesis, the results indicate that
DFM has the potential to be a powerful tool that can become a strong competitor
to the current state-of-the-art methods for neural architecture generation and that
many possibilities remain to be explored.
==PAGE:94==
Appendices
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
MobileNetV3
This appendix provides a description of the MBConv blocks used in the MobileNetV3
architecture search space and how the search space is initialized to perform sampling
and evaluation of the architectures.
A.1
MBConv Block
The MBConv block shown in Figure A.1 is the basic building block of the MobileNetV3
architecture. Batch normalization and activation functions (ReLU6, hardSwish) are
omitted in the figure for clarity.
Input
1x1 expand conv
(expansion ratio)
depthwise conv
(kernel size)
squeeze-excitation
1x1 projection conv
Residual add
output
Figure A.1: The MBConv block used in the MobileNetV3 architecture.
The block consists of a pointwise expansion (first from left, marked with gray and
dotted lines), i.e. a 1x1 convolution, that expands the input channels by a factor
according to the specified expansion ratio. Then follows a depthwise spatial filtering
(second from left, marked with gray and dotted lines) using a depthwise convolution
using the specified kernel size that lets the network learn different patterns in the input
without mixing channel information. This is followed by a squeeze-and-excitation (SE)
operation which uses a combination of global pooling and a two fully connected layer
bottlenecks with ratio 1/4 which is used to allow reweighting of the feature channels
based on their global importance. Finally comes a pointwise convolution to project
the features back to a desired number of output channels. The residual connection
is only added if the input and output channels have a matching number of channels
and the stride is 1.
==PAGE:96==
A.2 Initialization of the Search Space -
Using Once-For-All(OFA) Network
89
A.2
Initialization of the Search Space -
Using Once-For-All(OFA) Network
To initialize the search space, this work uses the Once-For-All (OFA) network [6].
The OFA network provides a pre-trained supernet that includes all possible archi-
tectures in the search space. By specifying depths for each stage, i.e. number of
blocks in each stage, together with the kernel sizes and expansion ratios, the su-
pernet can be used to sample a subnetwork with those specific configurations. It
is also possible to choose other configurations such as batch normalization configu-
rations, or base stage width for the base number of channels for each stage in the
network. This work only changes the parameters ks_list, expand_ratio_list, and
depth_list to be [3,5,7], [3,4,6], and [2,3,4] respectively. The ks_list and
expand_ratio_list are the kernel sizes and expansion ratios for each stage in the
network.
The depth_list is the number of blocks in each stage.
For all other
parameters, this work uses the default configurations of the OFAMobileNetV3 class
provided in the OFA repository which can be found at https://github.com/mit-
han-lab/once-for-all/blob/master/ofa/imagenet_classification/elastic_
nn/networks/ofa_mbv3.py.
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX B
Metrics Measurements
in MobileNetV3
This chapter contains the code used to calculate the architecture metrics cpu latency,
FLOPs, peak memory, and total number of parameters for the MobileNetV3 search
space. The PyTorch framework is used for all measurement implementations.
B.1
CPU Latency
The cpu latency measurements are run with the default input settings except for
l_type which is set to "cpu" and clean which is set to True.
1 def measure_net_latency(
2
net, l_type="gpu8", fast=True, input_shape=(3, 224, 224), clean=False
3 ):
4
if isinstance(net, nn.DataParallel):
5
net = net.module
6
7
# remove bn from graph
8
rm_bn_from_net(net)
9
10
# return `ms`
11
if "gpu" in l_type:
12
l_type, batch_size = l_type[:3], int(l_type[3:])
13
else:
14
batch_size = 1
15
16
data_shape = [batch_size] + list(input_shape)
17
if l_type == "cpu":
18
if fast:
19
n_warmup = 5
20
n_sample = 10
21
else:
22
n_warmup = 50
23
n_sample = 50
24
if get_net_device(net) != torch.device("cpu"):
25
if not clean:
26
print("move net to cpu for measuring cpu latency")
27
net = copy.deepcopy(net).cpu()
==PAGE:98==
B.2 FLOPs
91
28
elif l_type == "gpu":
29
if fast:
30
n_warmup = 5
31
n_sample = 10
32
else:
33
n_warmup = 50
34
n_sample = 50
35
else:
36
raise NotImplementedError
37
images = torch.zeros(data_shape, device=get_net_device(net))
38
39
measured_latency = {"warmup": [], "sample": []}
40
net.eval()
41
with torch.no_grad():
42
for i in range(n_warmup):
43
inner_start_time = time.time()
44
net(images)
45
used_time = (time.time() - inner_start_time) * 1e3
# ms
46
measured_latency["warmup"].append(used_time)
47
# if not clean:
48
# print("Warmup %d: %.3f" % (i, used_time))
49
outer_start_time = time.time()
50
for i in range(n_sample):
51
net(images)
52
total_time = (time.time() - outer_start_time) * 1e3
# ms
53
measured_latency["sample"].append((total_time, n_sample))
54
return total_time / n_sample, measured_latency
Listing B.1: CPU Latency measurement code.
B.2
FLOPs
The FLOPs measurements are run with the default input settings.
1 def profile(model, input_size, custom_ops=None):
2
handler_collection = []
3
custom_ops = {} if custom_ops is None else custom_ops
4
5
def add_hooks(m_):
6
if len(list(m_.children())) > 0:
7
return
8
9
m_.register_buffer("total_ops", torch.zeros(1))
10
m_.register_buffer("total_params", torch.zeros(1))
11
12
for p in m_.parameters():
13
m_.total_params += torch.zeros(1).fill_(p.numel())
14
15
m_type = type(m_)
16
fn = None
17
18
if m_type in custom_ops:
==PAGE:99==
B.3 Peak Memory
92
19
fn = custom_ops[m_type]
20
elif m_type in register_hooks:
21
fn = register_hooks[m_type]
22
23
if fn is not None:
24
_handler = m_.register_forward_hook(fn)
25
handler_collection.append(_handler)
26
27
original_device = model.parameters().__next__().device
28
training = model.training
29
30
model.eval()
31
model.apply(add_hooks)
32
33
x = torch.zeros(input_size).to(original_device)
34
with torch.no_grad():
35
model(x)
36
37
total_ops = 0
38
total_params = 0
39
for m in model.modules():
40
if len(list(m.children())) > 0:
# skip for non-leaf module
41
continue
42
total_ops += m.total_ops
43
total_params += m.total_params
44
45
total_ops = total_ops.item()
46
total_params = total_params.item()
47
48
model.train(training).to(original_device)
49
for handler in handler_collection:
50
handler.remove()
51
52
return total_ops, total_params
Listing B.2: FLOPs measurement code.
B.3
Peak Memory
The peak memory is run with quant_size set to 1 for (int8 quantization).
1 def estimate_torch_mem(architecture: nn.Module, input_shape:tuple[int,int,
int], quant_size:int):
2
class MemoryTrackingMode(TorchDispatchMode):
3
def __init__(self):
4
super().__init__()
5
self.current_memory = 0
6
self.peak_memory = 0
7
self.tensor_sizes = {}
8
9
def __torch_dispatch__(self, func, types, args=(), kwargs=None):
10
# Call the function to get outputs
==PAGE:100==
B.4 Total Number of Parameters
93
11
outputs = func(*args, **(kwargs or {}))
12
13
# Track memory allocations
14
tensors = []
15
if isinstance(outputs, torch.Tensor):
16
tensors = [outputs]
17
elif isinstance(outputs, (tuple, list)):
18
tensors = [out for out in outputs if isinstance(out,
torch.Tensor)]
19
20
for tensor in tensors:
21
mem = tensor.numel() * quant_size
22
self.current_memory += mem
23
self.peak_memory = max(self.peak_memory , self.
current_memory)
24
self.tensor_sizes[id(tensor)] = mem
25
26
# Track memory deallocations
27
for arg in args:
28
if isinstance(arg, torch.Tensor) and id(arg) in self.
tensor_sizes:
29
self.current_memory -= self.tensor_sizes.pop(id(arg)
)
30
31
return outputs
32
33
inputs = torch.randn(input_shape)
34
# Use FakeTensorMode and MemoryTrackingMode to estimate peak memory
usage
35
with FakeTensorMode(allow_non_fake_inputs=True) as fake_mode:
36
fake_inputs = fake_mode.from_tensor(inputs).to(next(architecture
.parameters()).device)
37
with MemoryTrackingMode() as mem_mode:
38
# Simulate the forward pass
39
fake_outputs = architecture(fake_inputs)
40
# Get the peak memory usage
41
peak_memory_usage = mem_mode.peak_memory
42
43
return peak_memory_usage
Listing B.3: Peak memory measurement code.
B.4
Total Number of Parameters
1 def count_parameters(net):
2
weight_params = sum(p.numel() for p in net.parameters() if p.
requires_grad and p.ndim > 1)
3
bias_params = sum(p.numel() for p in net.parameters() if p.requires_grad
and p.ndim == 1)
4
total_params = weight_params + bias_params
5
return total_params , weight_params , bias_params
==PAGE:101==
B.4 Total Number of Parameters
94
Listing B.4: Parameters measurement code.
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX C
Experiment Hardware
This appendix provides detailed specifications of the hardware used for training and
evaluating the generative models in this work. All GPU hardware in this work is pro-
vided by the DTU Computing Center (DCC) at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) 1.
C.1
NVIDIA GPU: Tesla A100
Table C.1 below shows the specifications of the hardware used for training the gen-
erative models in this work. All model trainings have been done on a single Tesla
A100-PCIE NVIDIA GPU.
Table C.1: NVIDIA GPU: Tesla A100 Specifications.
Year
Architecture
CUDA cap.
CUDA cores
Clock (MHz)
Mem (GiB)
SP peak (GFlops)
DP peak (GFlops)
Peak (GB/s)
2020
GA100 (Ampere)
8.0
6912
1410
40
19500
9700
1555
The Architecture column indicates the GPU’s underlying microarchitecture, which
determines the design, feature set, and performance optimizations of the device. The
CUDA cap. column specifies the CUDA Compute Capability version, reflecting
the hardware support for advanced parallel processing features. The CUDA cores
column enumerates the number of parallel processing units, directly influencing com-
putational throughput.
The Clock (MHz) column denotes the operational fre-
quency of the GPU cores, which affects the speed of executing tasks. The Mem
(GiB) column represents the onboard memory capacity, critical for handling large
datasets and memory-intensive applications. The SP peak (GFlops) and DP peak
(GFlops) columns indicate the maximum theoretical performance for single-precision
and double-precision floating-point operations respectively, addressing different pre-
cision requirements.
Finally, the Peak (GB/s) column measures the maximum
memory bandwidth, a key factor for data transfer rates between the memory and
processing units
1A datasheet for the DCC GPU nodes can be found at https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?page_id=2129
==PAGE:103==
C.2 NVIDIA GPU: V100
96
C.2
NVIDIA GPU: V100
Table C.2 below shows the specifications of the hardware used for evaluating training
and sampling times of the generative models in this work. All model evaluations have
been done on a single Tesla V100-PCIE-16GB NVIDIA GPU. See Section C.1 for a
description of the columns in the table below.
Table C.2: NVIDIA GPU: Tesla V100 Specifications.
Year
Architecture
CUDA cap.
CUDA cores
Clock (MHz)
Mem (GiB)
SP peak (GFlops)
DP peak (GFlops)
Peak (GB/s)
2017
GV100 (Volta)
7.0
5120
1380
15.75
14131
7065
898
C.3
NVIDIA GPU: Quadro RTX 6000
Table C.3 below shows the specifications of the hardware used for all experiments
reported in the POMONAG paper [32] 2. See Section C.1 for a description of the
columns in the table below.
Table C.3: NVIDIA GPU: Quadro RTX 6000 Specifications.
Year
Architecture
CUDA cap.
CUDA cores
Clock (MHz)
Mem (GiB)
SP peak (GFlops)
DP peak (GFlops)
Peak (GB/s)
2018
TU102 (Turing)
7.5
4608
1440
24
16300
509.8
672
2The data sheet of the Quadro RTX 6000 GPU can be found at https://www.nvidia.com/conte
nt/dam/en-zz/Solutions/design-visualization/quadro-product-literature/quadro-rtx-6000-
us-nvidia-704093-r4-web.pdf
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX D
DMF Implementation
Details
D.1
Velocity Field MLP
Below is the PyTorch implementation of the velocity field model used in this work.
1 import torch
2 from torch import nn, Tensor
3
4 from flow_matching.path.path_sample import PathSample
5
6 from edgeflow.discrete_flow_matching.models.velocity_fields.base import
VelocityField
7 from edgeflow.utils.device import torch_device
8
9 class SimpleMLPVelocityField(VelocityField):
10
"""
11
Class for a simple MLP velocity field.
12
"""
13
14
def __init__(self, input_dim: int, time_dim: int, hidden_dim: int,
sequence_length: int, device: torch.device|str):
15
# Activation class
16
class Swish(nn.Module):
17
def __init__(self):
18
super().__init__()
19
20
def forward(self, x: Tensor) -> Tensor:
21
return torch.sigmoid(x) * x
22
23
# Model class
24
class MLP(nn.Module):
25
def __init__(
26
self, input_dim: int = 128, time_dim: int = 1, hidden_dim
=128, length=2):
27
super().__init__()
28
self.input_dim = input_dim
29
self.time_dim = time_dim
30
self.hidden_dim = hidden_dim
31
32
self.time_embedding = nn.Linear(1, time_dim)
==PAGE:105==
D.1 Velocity Field MLP
98
33
self.token_embedding = torch.nn.Embedding(self.input_dim,
hidden_dim)
34
35
self.main = nn.Sequential(
36
Swish(),
37
nn.Linear(hidden_dim * length + time_dim, hidden_dim),
38
Swish(),
39
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim),
40
Swish(),
41
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim),
42
Swish(),
43
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, self.input_dim * length),
44
)
45
46
def forward(self, x: torch.Tensor, t: torch.Tensor) -> torch.
Tensor:
47
"""
48
Forward pass of the model.
49
50
Args:
51
x (torch.Tensor): The input tensor of shape (batch_size ,
sequence_length).
52
t (torch.Tensor): The time tensor of shape (batch_size ,
1).
53
54
Returns:
55
torch.Tensor: Per token velocity score of shape (
batch_size , sequence_length , input_dim).
56
"""
57
t = self.time_embedding(t.unsqueeze(-1))
58
x = self.token_embedding(x)
59
60
B, N, d = x.shape
61
x = x.reshape(B, N * d)
62
63
h = torch.cat([x, t], dim=1)
64
h = self.main(h)
65
66
h = h.reshape(B, N, self.input_dim)
67
68
return h
69
70
self.model = MLP(input_dim, time_dim, hidden_dim, sequence_length).
to(torch_device.get_device(device))
71
72
def predict(self, path_sample:PathSample) -> torch.Tensor:
73
"""
74
Predict the velocity field at the given path sample.
75
76
Args:
77
path_sample (PathSample): The path sample.
78
79
Returns:
80
torch.Tensor: The predicted velocity field with size (batch_size
, sequence_length)
==PAGE:106==
D.1 Velocity Field MLP
99
81
"""
82
return self.model(path_sample.x_t, path_sample.t)
Listing D.1: Simple MLP for velocity field prediction.
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX E
Guidance - Surrogate
Model
Implementation
Details
This appendix provides the implementation details for each of the guide types, upper
limit and lower limit, and their base class, used in this work.
E.1
Surrogate Guide - Base Class
The Guide class serves as the base class for the upper and lower limit guides.
1 import torch
2 from torch import nn
3 from edgeflow.utils.models.torch_load import load_state_dict_model
4 from torch.nn.functional import one_hot
5
6
7 class Guide:
8
"""
9
Base class for all guides.
10
A guide that produces a guiding signal based on a predicted metric
11
"""
12
13
def __init__(
14
self,
15
predictor: nn.Module,
16
vocab_size: int,
17
predictor_checkpoint: str | None = None,
18
device: str | torch.device | None = None,
19
):
20
"""
21
Args:
==PAGE:108==
E.1 Surrogate Guide - Base Class
101
22
predictor (nn.Module): A neural network model that predicts some
metric.
23
vocab_size (int): The size of the vocabulary for the predictor.
24
predictor_checkpoint (str, optional): Path to the checkpoint for
the predictor. Defaults to None.
25
If provided, the predictor
will be loaded from this
checkpoint.
26
device (str | torch.device | None, optional): The device to run
the model on. Defaults to None.
27
If predictor_checkpoint is
provided, the device
must be specified.
28
29
Raises:
30
ValueError: If predictor_checkpoint is provided without a device
.
31
"""
32
self.eps = 1e-12
# use instead of 0 to avoid numerical issues
33
self.vocab_size = vocab_size
34
self.predictor = predictor
35
36
if predictor_checkpoint is not None and device is None:
37
raise ValueError(
38
"If predictor_checkpoint is provided, device must also be
specified."
39
)
40
41
if isinstance(predictor_checkpoint , str):
42
self.predictor = load_state_dict_model(
43
predictor_checkpoint , predictor, device
44
)
45
46
def predict(
47
self, x: torch.Tensor, t: torch.Tensor = None, no_grad=True,
48
return_raw_prediction: bool = False # kept for compatibility , not
used in base class
49
) -> tuple[torch.Tensor, None]: # Return None for compatibility
50
"""
51
Predict the guiding signal based on the input architecture.
52
53
Args:
54
x (torch.Tensor): The input architecture. shape (B, D, S)
55
t (torch.Tensor, optional): The time step tensor. Defaults to
None. shape (B,)
56
The predictor must support this
argument as well.
57
no_grad (bool): Whether to disable gradient calculation.
58
59
Returns:
60
torch.Tensor: The guiding signal. shape (B,)
61
"""
62
# One-hot encode x if it is not already one-hot encoded
63
if x.ndim == 2:
64
x = one_hot(x, num_classes=self.vocab_size).to(torch.float32)
==PAGE:109==
E.2 Upper Limit Surrogate Guide
102
65
66
def predict_fn(x, t) -> torch.Tensor:
67
predictions = self.predictor(x) if t is None else self.predictor
(x, t)
68
return self.predictor.to_original_unit(predictions)
69
70
if no_grad:
71
with torch.no_grad():
72
prediction = predict_fn(x, t)
73
else:
74
prediction = predict_fn(x, t)
75
76
return prediction , None
77
78
def get_valid_mask(self, prediction: torch.Tensor) -> torch.Tensor:
79
"""
80
Get a mask indicating whether the prediction is invalid in regard to
the guide limit.
81
82
Args:
83
prediction (torch.Tensor): The prediction tensor. shape (B,)
84
85
Returns:
86
torch.Tensor: The limit mask. shape (B,)
87
"""
88
raise NotImplementedError(
89
"This method should be implemented in the subclass."
90
)
Listing E.1: No limit guide implementation.
E.2
Upper Limit Surrogate Guide
1 import torch
2 from torch import nn
3
4 from edgeflow.guidance.guides.base import Guide
5
6
7 class UpperLimitGuide(Guide):
8
"""
9
A guide that produces a guiding signal
10
based on some upper limit on a metric.
11
"""
12
13
def __init__(
14
self,
15
predictor: nn.Module,
16
vocab_size: int,
17
upper_limit: float,
18
is_hard_constraint: bool = False,
19
alpha: float = None,
==PAGE:110==
E.2 Upper Limit Surrogate Guide
103
20
predictor_checkpoint: str | None = None,
21
device: str | torch.device | None = None,
22
):
23
"""
24
Initialize the Guide with a predictor and an upper limit on some
desired metric.
25
26
Args:
27
predictor (nn.Module): The predictor module to use for
generating the guiding signal.
28
vocab_size (int): The size of the vocabulary for the predictor.
29
upper_limit (int): The lower limit on the metric.
30
alpha (float | None): The scaling factor for the sigmoid
function.
31
If None, it will be heuristically
determined.
32
predictor_checkpoint (str | None, optional): Path to the
predictor checkpoint. Defaults to None.
33
If provided, the
predictor will
be loaded from
this checkpoint.
34
device (str | torch.device | None, optional): The device to run
the model on. Defaults to None.
35
If predictor_checkpoint is
provided, the device
must be specified.
36
37
Raises:
38
ValueError: If the upper limit is less than or equal to 0.
39
"""
40
super().__init__(predictor, vocab_size, predictor_checkpoint , device
)
41
self.upper_limit = upper_limit
42
self.is_hard_constraint = is_hard_constraint
43
self.alpha = alpha
44
45
# Upper limit is expected to be greater than 0
46
if self.upper_limit < 0:
47
raise ValueError("Upper limit must be greater than 0")
48
49
def predict(
50
self, x: torch.tensor, t: torch.tensor = None, no_grad: bool = True,
51
return_raw_prediction: bool = False
52
) -> tuple[torch.Tensor, torch.Tensor] | tuple[torch.Tensor, None]:
53
"""
54
Predict the guiding signal based on the input architecture.
55
56
Args:
57
x (torch.Tensor): The input architecture. shape (B, D, S)
58
t (torch.Tensor, optional): The time step tensor. Defaults to
None. shape (B,)
59
The predictor must support this
argument as well.
60
no_grad (bool): Whether to disable gradient calculation.
==PAGE:111==
E.3 Lower Limit Surrogate Guide
104
61
62
Returns:
63
torch.Tensor: The upper limit guided signal. shape (B,)
64
(optional) torch.Tensor: The raw prediction from the predictor.
shape (B,)
65
"""
66
prediction , _ = super().predict(x, t, no_grad=no_grad)
67
68
# Heuristically determine alpha if not provided
69
alpha = torch.pow(prediction.abs().mean() + self.eps, -1) if self.
alpha is None else self.alpha
70
result = torch.sigmoid(-alpha * (prediction - self.upper_limit))
71
72
if return_raw_prediction:
73
return result, prediction
74
75
if self.is_hard_constraint:
76
valid_mask = self.get_valid_mask(prediction)
77
return result, valid_mask
78
else:
79
return result, None
80
81
def get_valid_mask(self, prediction: torch.Tensor) -> torch.Tensor:
82
"""
83
Get a mask indicating which predictions are valid in regard to the
upper limit.
84
85
Args:
86
prediction (torch.Tensor): The predictions from the predictor.
shape (B,)
87
88
Returns:
89
torch.Tensor: A mask indicating which predictions are <= upper
limit. shape (B,)
90
"""
91
return prediction <= self.upper_limit
Listing E.2: Upper limit guide implementation.
E.3
Lower Limit Surrogate Guide
1 import torch
2 from torch import nn
3
4 from edgeflow.guidance.guides.base import Guide
5
6
7 class LowerLimitGuide(Guide):
8
"""
9
A guide that produces a guiding signal
10
based on some lower limit on a metric.
11
"""
==PAGE:112==
E.3 Lower Limit Surrogate Guide
105
12
13
def __init__(
14
self,
15
predictor: nn.Module,
16
vocab_size: int,
17
lower_limit: float,
18
is_hard_constraint: bool = False,
19
alpha: float = None,
20
predictor_checkpoint: str | None = None,
21
device: str | torch.device | None = None,
22
):
23
"""
24
Initialize the Guide with a predictor and a lower limit on some
desired metric.
25
26
Args:
27
predictor (nn.Module): The predictor module to use for
generating the guiding signal.
28
vocab_size (int): The size of the vocabulary for the predictor.
29
lower_limit (int): The lower limit on the metric.
30
alpha (float, optional): A scaling factor for the guiding signal
. If None, it will be heuristically determined.
31
predictor_checkpoint (str | None, optional): Path to the
predictor checkpoint. Defaults to None.
32
If provided, the
predictor will
be loaded from
this checkpoint.
33
device (str | torch.device | None, optional): The device to run
the model on. Defaults to None.
34
If predictor_checkpoint is
provided, the device
must be specified.
35
36
Raises:
37
ValueError: If the lower limit is less than 0.
38
"""
39
super().__init__(predictor, vocab_size, predictor_checkpoint , device
)
40
self.lower_limit = lower_limit
41
self.alpha = alpha
42
self.is_hard_constraint = is_hard_constraint
43
44
# Lower limit is expected to be >= 0
45
if self.lower_limit < 0:
46
raise ValueError("Lower limit must be >= 0")
47
48
def predict(
49
self, x: torch.tensor, t: torch.tensor = None, no_grad: bool = True,
50
return_raw_prediction: bool = False
51
) -> tuple[torch.Tensor, torch.Tensor] | tuple[torch.Tensor, None]:
52
"""
53
Predict the guiding signal based on the input architecture.
54
55
Args:
==PAGE:113==
E.4 Multi-Objective Surrogate Guide
106
56
x (torch.Tensor): The input architecture. shape (B, D, S)
57
t (torch.Tensor, optional): The time step tensor. Defaults to
None. shape (B,)
58
The predictor must support this
argument as well.
59
no_grad (bool): Whether to disable gradient calculation.
60
61
Returns:
62
torch.Tensor: The upper limit guided signal. shape (B,)
63
(optional) torch.Tensor: The raw prediction from the predictor.
shape (B,)
64
"""
65
prediction , _ = super().predict(x, t, no_grad=no_grad)
66
67
# Heuristically determine alpha if not provided
68
alpha = torch.pow(prediction.abs().mean() + self.eps, -1) if self.
alpha is None else self.alpha
69
result = torch.sigmoid(alpha * (prediction - self.lower_limit))
70
71
if return_raw_prediction:
72
return result, prediction
73
74
if self.is_hard_constraint:
75
valid_mask = self.get_valid_mask(prediction)
76
return result, valid_mask
77
else:
78
return result, None
79
80
def get_valid_mask(self, prediction: torch.Tensor) -> torch.Tensor:
81
"""
82
Get a mask indicating which predictions are valid in regard to the
lower limit.
83
84
Args:
85
prediction (torch.Tensor): The predictions from the predictor.
shape (B,)
86
87
Returns:
88
torch.Tensor: A boolean mask where True indicates the prediction
is >= lower limit.
89
"""
90
return prediction >= self.lower_limit
Listing E.3: Lower limit guide implementation.
E.4
Multi-Objective Surrogate Guide
1 import torch
2 from edgeflow.guidance.guides.base import Guide
3
4
5 class MultiGuide(Guide):
==PAGE:114==
E.4 Multi-Objective Surrogate Guide
107
6
"""
7
A guide that produces a guiding signal based on
8
a weighted combination of multiple guides.
9
"""
10
11
def __init__(
12
self,
13
soft_guides: list[Guide] | None = None,
14
soft_weights: list[float] | None = None,
15
hard_guides: list[Guide] | None = None,
16
hard_weights: list[float] | None = None,
17
):
18
"""
19
Initialize the Guide with soft guides that should be
20
optimized according to soft constraints on their respective metrics,
21
and hard guides that should be optimized according to hard
constraints
22
on their respective metrics.
23
24
25
Args:
26
soft_guides (list[Guide], optional): The list of soft guides.
27
Defaults to None.
28
soft_weights (list[float], optional): The list of weights for
the soft guides with 0 < w <= 1.
29
Defaults to None. If provided, must have the same length as
soft_guides.
30
hard_guides (list[Guide], optional): The list of hard guides.
31
Defaults to None.
32
hard_weights (list[float], optional): The list of weights for
the hard guides with 0 < w <= 1.
33
Defaults to None. If provided, must have the same length as
hard_guides.
34
35
Raises:
36
ValueError: If the provided guides and weights do not meet the
required conditions.
37
I.e. soft guides and weights must be defined
together and have the same length,
38
and the same for hard guides and weights.
39
"""
40
if soft_guides is not None and soft_weights is None:
41
raise ValueError(
42
"soft_weights must be provided if soft_guides are provided"
43
)
44
if soft_guides is None and soft_weights is not None:
45
raise ValueError(
46
"soft_guides must be provided if soft_weights are provided"
47
)
48
if soft_guides is not None and len(soft_guides) != len(soft_weights)
:
49
raise ValueError("soft_guides and soft_weights must have the
same length")
50
if hard_guides is not None and hard_weights is None:
51
raise ValueError(
==PAGE:115==
E.4 Multi-Objective Surrogate Guide
108
52
"hard_weights must be provided if hard_guides are provided"
53
)
54
if hard_guides is None and hard_weights is not None:
55
raise ValueError(
56
"hard_guides must be provided if hard_weights are provided"
57
)
58
if hard_guides is not None and len(hard_guides) != len(hard_weights)
:
59
raise ValueError("hard_guides and hard_weights must have the
same length")
60
if soft_guides is None and hard_guides is None:
61
raise ValueError(
62
"At least one of soft_guides or hard_guides must be provided
"
63
)
64
if soft_weights is not None and any(0 > w > 1 for w in soft_weights)
:
65
raise ValueError("soft_weights must be between 0 and 1")
66
if hard_weights is not None and any(0 > w > 1 for w in hard_weights)
:
67
raise ValueError("hard_weights must be between 0 and 1")
68
69
self.soft_guides = soft_guides
70
self.soft_weights = soft_weights
71
72
self.hard_guides = hard_guides
73
self.hard_weights = hard_weights
74
75
if self.soft_guides is not None:
76
self.soft_guides_with_weights: list[tuple[Guide, float]] = list(
77
zip(self.soft_guides , self.soft_weights)
78
)
79
80
if self.hard_guides is not None:
81
self.hard_guides_with_weights: list[tuple[Guide, float]] = list(
82
zip(self.hard_guides , self.hard_weights)
83
)
84
85
def __get_soft_weighted_predictions(
86
self,
87
guides_with_weights: list[tuple[Guide, float]],
88
x: torch.tensor,
89
t: torch.tensor = None,
90
no_grad: bool = True,
91
) -> torch.tensor:
92
"""
93
Get the weighted predictions from a list pair of guides and weights.
94
95
Args:
96
guides_with_weights (list[tuple[Guide, float]]): A list of
tuples containing guides and their respective weights.
97
shape (N, 2)
98
x (torch.Tensor): The input architecture. shape (B, D, S)
99
t (torch.Tensor, optional): The time step tensor. Defaults to
None. shape (B,)
==PAGE:116==
E.4 Multi-Objective Surrogate Guide
109
100
The predictor must support this
argument as well.
101
no_grad (bool): Whether to disable gradient calculation.
102
103
Returns:
104
torch.Tensor: The weighted predictions. shape (N,B)
105
"""
106
weighted_predictions = []
107
for guide, weight in guides_with_weights:
108
prediction , _ = guide.predict(x, t, no_grad=no_grad)
109
weighted_predictions.append(prediction * weight)
110
111
return torch.stack(weighted_predictions , dim=0)
112
113
def __get_hard_weighted_predictions(
114
self,
115
guides_with_weights: list[tuple[Guide, float]],
116
x: torch.tensor,
117
t: torch.tensor = None,
118
no_grad: bool = True,
119
) -> tuple[torch.tensor, torch.tensor]:
120
"""
121
Get the weighted predictions from a list pair of hard constraint
guides and weights.
122
123
Args:
124
guides_with_weights (list[tuple[Guide, float]]): A list of
tuples containing guides and their respective weights.
125
shape (N, 2)
126
x (torch.Tensor): The input architecture. shape (B, D, S)
127
t (torch.Tensor, optional): The time step tensor. Defaults to
None. shape (B,)
128
The predictor must support this
argument as well.
129
no_grad (bool): Whether to disable gradient calculation.
130
131
Returns:
132
torch.Tensor: The weighted predictions. shape (N,B)
133
torch.Tensor: A mask representing predictions violating the hard
constraints. shape (B,)
134
"""
135
weighted_predictions = []
136
valid_mask = []
137
for guide, weight in guides_with_weights:
138
prediction , raw_prediction = guide.predict(x, t, no_grad=no_grad
, return_raw_prediction=True) # shape tuple[(B,) (B,)]
139
valid_mask.append(guide.get_valid_mask(raw_prediction))
140
weighted_predictions.append(prediction*weight)
141
142
weighted_predictions = torch.stack(weighted_predictions , dim=0)
#
shape (N,B)
143
valid_mask = torch.stack(valid_mask, dim=0) # shape (N,B)
144
valid_mask = torch.any(valid_mask, dim=0)
# shape (B,)
145
146
==PAGE:117==
E.4 Multi-Objective Surrogate Guide
110
147
return weighted_predictions , valid_mask
148
149
def predict(
150
self, x: torch.tensor, t: torch.tensor = None, no_grad: bool = True
151
) -> tuple[torch.tensor, torch.tensor] | tuple[torch.tensor, None]:
152
"""
153
Predict the guiding signal based on the input architecture.
154
155
Args:
156
x (torch.Tensor): The input architecture. shape (B, D, S)
157
t (torch.Tensor, optional): The time step tensor. Defaults to
None. shape (B,)
158
The predictor must support this
argument as well.
159
no_grad (bool): Whether to disable gradient calculation.
160
161
Returns:
162
torch.Tensor: The guiding signal. shape (B,)
163
torch.Tensor | None: A mask indicating which predictions violate
the hard constraints.
164
shape (B,) if hard guides are used, None
otherwise.
165
"""
166
if self.soft_guides is not None:
167
soft_predictions = self.__get_soft_weighted_predictions(
168
self.soft_guides_with_weights , x, t, no_grad
169
)
170
if self.hard_guides is not None:
171
hard_predictions , valid_mask = self.
__get_hard_weighted_predictions(
172
self.hard_guides_with_weights , x, t, no_grad
173
)
174
175
if self.soft_guides is None:
176
N = len(self.hard_guides)
177
prediction = torch.sum(hard_predictions , dim=0) / N
178
return prediction , valid_mask
179
elif self.hard_guides is None:
180
N = len(self.soft_guides)
181
return torch.sum(soft_predictions , dim=0) / N, None
182
else:
183
N = len(self.soft_guides) + len(self.hard_guides)
184
prediction = (torch.sum(soft_predictions , dim=0) + torch.sum(
hard_predictions , dim=0)) / N
185
return prediction, valid_mask
Listing E.4: Multi-objective guide implementation.
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX F
Surrogate Predictor
Model
Implementation
Details
This appendix provides implementation details for the predictor model architecture
used for all predictors in the surrogate models in this work. All predictor models were
instantiated with 3 layers and hidden dimensions of 400 for each layer and a simple
positional embedding. The predictor is a simple MLP that predicts a target metric
e.g. accuracy on a specific dataset or number of parameters in of an architecture.
The model is trained in a supervised manner on a dataset of architectures and their
corresponding target metrics. The model training is done on standardized data and
thus the data mean and standard deviation are saved as part of the model state dict
to be used for inverting the standardization during inference.
1 from torch import nn
2 import torch
3
4
5 class MetricPredictor(nn.Module):
6
"""
7
A predictor for a surrogate model that predicts a given metric of a
given neural network architecture represented as a tensor
8
of shape (batch_size , num_layers, num_operators). The metric could be
accuracy, latency, RAM usage, etc.
9
"""
10
11
def __init__(self, sequence_length:int, vocab_size:int, hidden_size:int,
n_layers:int) -> None:
12
"""
13
Initialize the surrogate model.
14
15
Args:
==PAGE:119==
F Surrogate Predictor Model Implementation Details
112
16
num_layers (int): The maximum number of layers in the generated
architectures.
17
num_operators (int): The number of unique operators in the
search space.
18
hidden_size (int): The size of the hidden layer.
19
n_layers (int): The number of layers in the surrogate model.
20
"""
21
super().__init__()
22
# learnable positional biases of shape (seq_len, vocab_size)
23
self.pos_bias = nn.Parameter(
24
torch.zeros(sequence_length , vocab_size),
25
requires_grad=True
26
)
27
28
# build layers
29
layers = []
30
for i in range(n_layers):
31
in_dim = (sequence_length * vocab_size) if (i == 0) else
hidden_size
32
layers.append(nn.Sequential(
33
nn.Linear(in_dim, hidden_size , dtype=torch.float32),
34
nn.ReLU(inplace=True),
35
))
36
37
layers.append(nn.Linear(hidden_size , 1, bias=False, dtype=torch.
float32))
38
self.layers = nn.Sequential(*layers)
39
40
# Register variables to persist with model checkpoint for later
inverse standardization
41
self.register_buffer("data_mean", torch.tensor(0, dtype=torch.
float32))
42
self.register_buffer("data_std", torch.tensor(0, dtype=torch.float32
))
43
44
def to_original_unit(self, predictions: torch.tensor) -> torch.tensor:
45
"""
46
Inverts the standardized predition values back to the original
47
non-standardized target value range.
48
49
Args:
50
prediction (torch.tensor): The standardized predictions.
51
52
Returns:
53
torch.tensor: The predictions in non-standardized form.
54
"""
55
return predictions * self.data_std + self.data_mean
56
57
def forward(self, x: torch.Tensor) -> torch.Tensor:
58
"""
59
Forward pass through the surrogate model.
60
61
Args:
62
x (torch.Tensor): The input tensor of shape (batch_size ,
num_layers , num_operators).
==PAGE:120==
F Surrogate Predictor Model Implementation Details
113
63
64
Returns:
65
torch.Tensor: The predicted accuracy of shape (batch_size ,).
66
"""
67
x = x + self.pos_bias.unsqueeze(0)
68
x = torch.flatten(
69
x, start_dim=1
70
)
# Flatten the input tensor to (batch_size , num_layers *
num_operators)
71
return self.layers(x).squeeze(-1) # Remove the last dimension to get
shape (batch_size ,)
Listing F.1: Simple MLP for predictor model in surrogate guidance.
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX G
Experiment Plots for
RQ2 Guidance
Distributions
This appendix contains the plots for the distributions of the architecture metrics for
the two search spaces NAS-Bench-201 and MobileNetV3 used in the single-objective
guidance experiment for RQ2. The plots visualize the differences in the distributions
for random, unguided, and guided sampling (NFE=64).
==PAGE:122==
G.1 Distribution Plots for RQ2 - NAS-Bench-201
115
G.1
Distribution Plots for RQ2 - NAS-Bench-201
20
40
60
80
ACC
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Frequency
NAS-Bench-201 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
ACC Limit (90)
((a)) CIFAR10 accuracy, NAS-Bench-201.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
ACC
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Frequency
NAS-Bench-201 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
ACC Limit (70)
((b)) CIFAR100 accuracy, NAS-Bench-201.
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
0.0225
0.0250
CPU_LATENCY
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frequency
NAS-Bench-201 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
CPU_LATENCY Limit (0.01)
((c)) Latency (ms), NAS-Bench-201.
0
50
100
150
200
FLOPS
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Frequency
NAS-Bench-201 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
FLOPS Limit (150)
((d)) FLOPs (M), NAS-Bench-201.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
PARAMS
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Frequency
NAS-Bench-201 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
PARAMS Limit (0.2)
((e)) Parameters (MB), NAS-Bench-201.
Figure G.1: Illustration showing the distributions for random, unguided, and guided
sampling from the NAS-Bench-201 search space.
==PAGE:123==
G.2 Distribution Plots for RQ2 - MobileNetV3
116
G.2
Distribution Plots for RQ2 - MobileNetV3
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
FLOPS
1e8
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Frequency
MobileNetV3 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
FLOPS Limit (4e+08)
((a)) FLOPs (M), MobileNetV3.
15
20
25
30
35
CPU_LATENCY
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Frequency
MobileNetV3 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
CPU_LATENCY Limit (2e+01)
((b)) Latency, MobileNetV3.
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
PARAMS
1e6
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Frequency
MobileNetV3 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
PARAMS Limit (4e+06)
((c)) Parameters (M), MobileNetV3.
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
PEAK_MEM
1e6
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Frequency
MobileNetV3 Random vs. Unguided vs. Guided
Random
Unguided
Guided
PEAK_MEM Limit (4e+06)
((d)) Peak memory (MB), MobileNetV3.
Figure G.2: Illustration showing the distributions for random, unguided, and guided
sampling from the MobileNetV3 search space.
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX H
Acronyms
AutoML Automated Machine Learning
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network (a type of neural network)
CTMC Continuous Time Markov Chain
DAG
Directed Acyclic Graph
DFM
Discrete Flow Matching
DL
Deep Learning
FM
Flow Matching
HW-NAS Hardware-aware Neural Architecture Search (considers hw. constraints)
IoT
Internet of Things
MAC
Multiply-Accumulate
MBV3 MobileNetV3 (the search space from [19])
ML
Machine Learning
MLP
Multi-Layer Perceptron (a type of neural network)
NAG
Neural Architecture Generation
NAS
Neural Architecture Search
OFA
Once-for-All (a type of network architecture used for NAS in [6])
RL
Reinforcement Learning
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network (a type of neural network)
TinyML Tiny Machine Learning (for highly resource constrained devices)
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[1]
Takuya Akiba et al. Optuna: A Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization
Framework. July 25, 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1907.10902. arXiv: 1907.1
0902 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.10902 (visited on June 25,
2025). Pre-published.
[2]
Sohyun An et al. DiffusionNAG: Predictor-guided Neural Architecture Genera-
tion with Diffusion Models. Version 4. March 24, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.23
05.16943. arXiv: 2305.16943 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16943
(visited on January 7, 2025). Pre-published.
[3]
Hadjer Benmeziane et al. A Comprehensive Survey on Hardware-Aware Neural
Architecture Search. January 22, 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2101.09336.
arXiv: 2101.09336 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.09336 (visited
on June 17, 2025). Pre-published.
[4]
Halima Bouzidi et al. SONATA: Self-adaptive Evolutionary Framework for
Hardware-aware Neural Architecture Search. February 20, 2024. doi: 10.48
550/arXiv.2402.13204. arXiv: 2402.13204 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/a
bs/2402.13204 (visited on February 5, 2025). Pre-published.
[5]
Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. ProxylessNAS: Direct Neural Architecture
Search on Target Task and Hardware. February 23, 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXi
v.1812.00332. arXiv: 1812.00332 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812
.00332 (visited on June 18, 2025). Pre-published.
[6]
Han Cai et al. Once-for-All: Train One Network and Specialize It for Eﬀicient
Deployment. April 29, 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1908.09791. arXiv: 1908
.09791 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.09791 (visited on March 1,
2025). Pre-published.
[7]
Andrew Campbell et al. Generative Flows on Discrete State-Spaces: Enabling
Multimodal Flows with Applications to Protein Co-Design. June 5, 2024. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2402.04997. arXiv: 2402.04997 [stat]. url: http://arxi
v.org/abs/2402.04997 (visited on February 5, 2025). Pre-published.
[8]
Hanqun Cao et al. “A Survey on Generative Diffusion Models.” In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 36.7 (July 2024), pages 2814–2830.
issn: 1558-2191. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3361474. url: https://ieeexplo
re.ieee.org/document/10419041 (visited on June 19, 2025).
==PAGE:126==
Bibliography
119
[9]
Ekin D. Cubuk et al. AutoAugment: Learning Augmentation Policies from Data.
April 11, 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1805.09501. arXiv: 1805.09501 [cs].
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09501 (visited on June 25, 2025). Pre-
published.
[10]
Terrance DeVries and Graham W. Taylor. Improved Regularization of Convolu-
tional Neural Networks with Cutout. November 29, 2017. doi: 10.48550/arXi
v.1708.04552. arXiv: 1708.04552 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708
.04552 (visited on June 25, 2025). Pre-published.
[11]
Mingyu Ding et al. HR-NAS: Searching Eﬀicient High-Resolution Neural Archi-
tectures with Lightweight Transformers. June 11, 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv
.2106.06560. arXiv: 2106.06560 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.0
6560 (visited on February 19, 2025). Pre-published.
[12]
Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. NAS-Bench-201: Extending the Scope of Repro-
ducible Neural Architecture Search. January 15, 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2
001.00326. arXiv: 2001.00326 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.003
26 (visited on February 26, 2025). Pre-published.
[13]
Sivan Doveh and Raja Giryes. DEGAS: Differentiable Eﬀicient Generator Search.
December 29, 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1912.00606. arXiv: 1912.00606
[cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.00606 (visited on February 19,
2025). Pre-published.
[14]
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural Architecture
Search: A Survey. April 26, 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1808.05377. arXiv:
1808.05377 [stat]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.05377 (visited on
February 13, 2025). Pre-published.
[15]
Thomas Elsken, Jan-Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Simple And Eﬀicient
Architecture Search for Convolutional Neural Networks. November 13, 2017. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1711.04528. arXiv: 1711.04528 [stat]. url: http://arxi
v.org/abs/1711.04528 (visited on June 18, 2025). Pre-published.
[16]
Facebookresearch/Flow_matching. Meta Research, February 18, 2025. url: h
ttps://github.com/facebookresearch/flow_matching (visited on Febru-
ary 18, 2025).
[17]
Fake Tensor — PyTorch 2.7 Documentation. url: https://docs.pytorch.o
rg/docs/stable/torch.compiler_fake_tensor.html (visited on June 27,
2025).
[18]
Itai Gat et al. Discrete Flow Matching. Version 2. November 5, 2024. doi: 10
.48550/arXiv.2407.15595. arXiv: 2407.15595 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.or
g/abs/2407.15595 (visited on February 5, 2025). Pre-published.
[19]
Andrew Howard et al. Searching for MobileNetV3. November 20, 2019. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1905.02244. arXiv: 1905.02244 [cs]. url: http://arxiv
.org/abs/1905.02244 (visited on January 8, 2025). Pre-published.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
120
[20]
A. Krizhevsky. “Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images.” In:
2009. url: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Learning-Multiple-
Layers-of-Features-from-Tiny-Krizhevsky/5d90f06bb70a0a3dced62413
346235c02b1aa086 (visited on May 18, 2025).
[21]
Hayeon Lee, Eunyoung Hyung, and Sung Ju Hwang. Rapid Neural Architecture
Search by Learning to Generate Graphs from Datasets. July 2, 2021. doi: 10.4
8550/arXiv.2107.00860. arXiv: 2107.00860 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org
/abs/2107.00860 (visited on February 28, 2025). Pre-published.
[22]
Hayeon Lee et al. HELP: Hardware-Adaptive Eﬀicient Latency Prediction for
NAS via Meta-Learning. December 2, 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2106.08630.
arXiv: 2106.08630 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.08630 (visited
on June 18, 2025). Pre-published.
[23]
Guihong Li et al. “Zero-Shot Neural Architecture Search: Challenges, Solutions,
and Opportunities.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 46.12 (December 2024), pages 7618–7635. issn: 1939-3539. doi: 10
.1109/TPAMI.2024.3395423. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstrac
t/document/10516268 (visited on February 6, 2025).
[24]
Mufei Li et al. LayerDAG: A Layerwise Autoregressive Diffusion Model for
Directed Acyclic Graph Generation. November 4, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv
.2411.02322. arXiv: 2411.02322 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2411.0
2322 (visited on March 1, 2025). Pre-published.
[25]
Ji Lin et al. MCUNet: Tiny Deep Learning on IoT Devices. November 19, 2020.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2007.10319. arXiv: 2007.10319 [cs]. url: http://ar
xiv.org/abs/2007.10319 (visited on January 7, 2025). Pre-published.
[26]
Ji Lin et al. “Tiny Machine Learning: Progress and Futures.” In: IEEE Circuits
and Systems Magazine 23.3 (Autumn 2023), pages 8–34. issn: 1531-636X, 1558-
0830. doi: 10.1109/MCAS.2023.3302182. arXiv: 2403.19076 [cs]. url: http
://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19076 (visited on January 7, 2025).
[27]
Yaron Lipman et al. “Flow Matching for Generative Modeling.” In: 11th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023 (October 2022).
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02747v2.
[28]
Yaron Lipman et al. Flow Matching Guide and Code. December 9, 2024. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2412.06264. arXiv: 2412.06264 [cs]. url: http://arxiv
.org/abs/2412.06264 (visited on January 7, 2025). Pre-published.
[29]
Chenxi Liu et al. Progressive Neural Architecture Search. July 26, 2018. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1712.00559. arXiv: 1712.00559 [cs]. url: http://arxiv
.org/abs/1712.00559 (visited on June 18, 2025). Pre-published.
[30]
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differentiable Ar-
chitecture Search. April 23, 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1806.09055. arXiv:
1806.09055 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.09055 (visited on
February 18, 2025). Pre-published.
==PAGE:128==
Bibliography
121
[31]
Shiqing Liu, Haoyu Zhang, and Yaochu Jin. A Survey on Computationally Eﬀi-
cient Neural Architecture Search. October 22, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.220
6.01520. arXiv: 2206.01520 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.01520
(visited on March 1, 2025). Pre-published.
[32]
Eugenio Lomurno et al. POMONAG: Pareto-Optimal Many-Objective Neural
Architecture Generator. Version 1. September 30, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv
.2409.20447. arXiv: 2409.20447 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2409.2
0447 (visited on January 7, 2025). Pre-published.
[33]
Subhransu Maji et al. Fine-Grained Visual Classification of Aircraft. June 21,
2013. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1306.5151. arXiv: 1306.5151 [cs]. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1306.5151 (visited on June 25, 2025). Pre-published.
[34]
Yuyi Mao et al. “Green Edge AI: A Contemporary Survey.” In: Proceedings of the
IEEE 112.7 (July 2024), pages 880–911. issn: 1558-2256. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2
024.3437365. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/1
0637271?casa_token=WlYFeXU0iYIAAAAA:JogZfJn8lqdqQwsgSWGTScdnceg3
zkyAmb1Yl7hXG74D5t4lkSkSszhT28h32RpXrKoWl79Wfg (visited on February 4,
2025).
[35]
Hunter Nisonoff et al. Unlocking Guidance for Discrete State-Space Diffusion
and Flow Models. Version 3. October 10, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.0
1572. arXiv: 2406.01572 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01572
(visited on January 29, 2025). Pre-published.
[36]
Omkar M Parkhi et al. “Cats and Dogs.” In: 2012 IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. June 2012, pages 3498–3505. doi: 10.1109
/CVPR.2012.6248092. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6248
092 (visited on June 25, 2025).
[37]
Hieu Pham et al. Eﬀicient Neural Architecture Search via Parameter Sharing.
February 12, 2018. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1802.03268. arXiv: 1802.03268
[cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03268 (visited on March 1, 2025).
Pre-published.
[38]
Yiming Qin et al. DeFoG: Discrete Flow Matching for Graph Generation. Oc-
tober 5, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2410.04263. arXiv: 2410.04263 [cs].
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2410.04263 (visited on January 7, 2025). Pre-
published.
[39]
Swapnil Sayan Saha, Sandeep Singh Sandha, and Mani Srivastava. “Machine
Learning for Microcontroller-Class Hardware: A Review.” In: IEEE Sensors
Journal 22.22 (November 2022), pages 21362–21390. issn: 1558-1748. doi: 10
.1109/JSEN.2022.3210773. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document
/9912325/?arnumber=9912325 (visited on February 6, 2025).
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
122
[40]
Sandeep Singh Sengar et al. Generative Artificial Intelligence: A Systematic
Review and Applications. May 17, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2405.11029.
arXiv: 2405.11029 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.11029 (visited
on February 19, 2025). Pre-published.
[41]
Neta Shaul et al. Flow Matching with General Discrete Paths: A Kinetic-
Optimal Perspective. December 4, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2412.03487.
arXiv: 2412.03487 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03487 (visited
on February 6, 2025). Pre-published.
[42]
Nilotpal Sinha et al. Hardware Aware Evolutionary Neural Architecture Search
Using Representation Similarity Metric. November 7, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ar
Xiv.2311.03923. arXiv: 2311.03923 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/231
1.03923 (visited on February 5, 2025). Pre-published.
[43]
Nilotpal Sinha et al. “Multi-Objective Hardware Aware Neural Architecture
Search Using Hardware Cost Diversity.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2024, pages 8032–8039.
url: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2024W/ECV24/html
/Sinha_Multi-Objective_Hardware_Aware_Neural_Architecture_Searc
h_using_Hardware_Cost_Diversity_CVPRW_2024_paper.html (visited on
February 5, 2025).
[44]
Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker et al. Multi-Objective Differentiable Neural Architec-
ture Search. June 19, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2402.18213. arXiv: 2402.1
8213 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18213 (visited on February 5,
2025). Pre-published.
[45]
TorchDispatchMode for Debugging, Testing, and More - Frontend API. PyTorch
Developer Mailing List. August 2, 2022. url: https://dev-discuss.pytor
ch.org/t/torchdispatchmode- for- debugging- testing- and- more/717
(visited on June 27, 2025).
[46]
Huiqun Wang et al. iDARTS: Improving DARTS by Node Normalization and
Decorrelation Discretization. August 25, 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2108.1
1014. arXiv: 2108.11014 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.11014
(visited on March 1, 2025). Pre-published.
[47]
Colin White, Willie Neiswanger, and Yash Savani. BANANAS: Bayesian Opti-
mization with Neural Architectures for Neural Architecture Search. November 2,
2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1910.11858. arXiv: 1910.11858 [cs]. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1910.11858 (visited on February 18, 2025). Pre-published.
[48]
Colin White et al. Neural Architecture Search: Insights from 1000 Papers. Jan-
uary 25, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2301.08727. arXiv: 2301.08727 [cs].
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.08727 (visited on February 13, 2025).
Pre-published.
==PAGE:130==
Bibliography
123
[49]
Kaixiong Zhou et al. Auto-GNN: Neural Architecture Search of Graph Neural
Networks. September 10, 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1909.03184. arXiv:
1909.03184 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.03184 (visited on
February 19, 2025). Pre-published.
[50]
Xinyi Zhou et al. SeaDAG: Semi-autoregressive Diffusion for Conditional Di-
rected Acyclic Graph Generation. October 21, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.241
0.16119. arXiv: 2410.16119 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2410.16119
(visited on March 1, 2025). Pre-published.
[51]
Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural Architecture Search with Reinforcement
Learning. February 15, 2017. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1611.01578. arXiv: 1611.0
1578 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.01578 (visited on February 18,
2025). Pre-published.
