==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Exploring effects of the atmospheric 
boundary layer capping-inversion on 
wind turbine loads: gravity waves, 
turbulence, and shear
Leonard Riemer
DTU Wind-M-9
July
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0
July 
E&T6 3
EduFation Master of 6FienFe
SXSerYLsRrs
0DUN&.Hlly
0LFKDHl.HQQHWK0F:LllLDP
'78 :ind 	 Energy 6ystems
0LURVlDY3HWURY
Energy .7+
5emarNs:
TKis reSort is suEmitted as Sartial 
fulfillment of tKe reTuirements for 
graduation in tKe aEoYe eduFation at 
tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN
7echnical 8niversity of 
'enmarN DeSartment of Wind and 
Energy 6ystems )rederiNsEorgYeM 
000 5osNilde
'enmarN
ZZZZLnddtXdN
$uthor:
/HRQDUG5LHPHU
7itle:
([SlRULQJHIIHFWVRIWKHDWPRVSKHULFERuQGDUy
lDyHUFDSSLQJLQYHUVLRQRQZLQGWuUELQHlRDGV
JUDYLWyZDYHVWuUEulHQFHDQGVKHDU
DTU Wind 	 Energy 6ystems is a deSartment of 
tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN ZitK a uniTue 
integration of researFK eduFation innoYation and 
SuEliFSriYate seFtor Fonsulting in tKe field of Zind 
energy 2ur aFtiYities deYeloS neZ oSSortunities 
and teFKnology for tKe gloEal and DanisK 
e[Sloitation of Zind energy 5esearFK foFuses on 
Ney teFKniFal-sFientifiF fields ZKiFK are Fentral for 
tKe deYeloSment innoYation and use of Zind 
energy and SroYides tKe Easis for adYanFed 
eduFation at tKe eduFation
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With the trend of ever-growing wind turbines harvesting more energy at higher altitudes, future
turbines will be exposed to new flow phenomena occurring within or even above the atmospheric
boundary layer (ABL). This trend is particularly pronounced in offshore wind energy. Cur-
rently, offshore wind turbines are designed and constructed according to the industry standard
IEC-61400, which prescribes methodologies to assess expected flow-induced stresses on turbine
structures. Widely recognized in the industry as critical parameters to characterize aerody-
namic loading are the tower base fore-aft bending moment and blade root flapwise bending
moment.
In this study, the ‘standard’ IEC methodology for synthesizing turbulence, employing the Mann
model for turbulence was used in combination with HAWC2 to acquire load references. These
loads were contrasted against synthesized flow phenomena that future turbines may encounter,
namely jets—widely researched in the context of onshore low-level jets—and gravity waves.
This work reviews theoretical background on jets and gravity waves. The Mann model for
turbulence, aero-elastic simulations using HAWC2, and statistical representations were utilized
to investigate whether the current IEC standard may over- or underestimate turbine loads by
not accounting for ABL depth, associated jets and gravity waves.
It was found that jets primarily altered the flow by introducing additional mean wind speed
and shear, both of which influence turbine loads and have been researched extensively. Grav-
ity waves modified the turbulence intensity in simulations, which also affected loads. Both
tower and blade loads were influenced in the respective studies, and fatigue load assessments
underlined the differences to the conventional IEC approach. The study concludes that while
suﬀicient measurements could technically capture these phenomena, it will be beneficial for fu-
ture turbine design to incorporate all relevant flow phenomena the turbine will experience. Jets,
in particular, are likely to be integral to such considerations, due to their likelihood. Whereas
gravity waves still require further research, especially regarding measurements and real-world
validation of numerical findings.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to Associate Professor Mark Kelly and
Senior Researcher Michael McWilliam for their invaluable guidance, support, and expertise
throughout the course of this thesis. Their insightful feedback and thoughtful questions were
instrumental in shaping the direction and depth of this work. Thank you for asking me the
right questions and encouraging me to find the answers on my own. For the crash course in
aeroelastic simulations, and for introducing me to so many useful tools along the way.
I am also deeply thankful to Grace for her unwavering support, encouragement, and patience
throughout this journey. Her belief in me provided strength during the most challenging mo-
ment.
A special thanks goes to my good friends Mark and Toni—for always being there, whether for
a quick coffee break or long conversations about turbulence boxes. Sharing this journey with
you has meant so much, and I look forward to many more chats to come. Your friendship truly
means a lot to me.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Atmospheric Parameters
θ(z) Potential temperature at height z [K]
T
Temperature [K]
Γd
Adiabatic lapse rate [K/m]
ρ
Density [kg/m3]
cp
Specific heat of dry air [J/kgK]
p0
Reference pressure [Pa]
R
Gas constant for dry air [J/kgK]
g
Gravity constant [m/s2]
z0
Roughness length [m]
N
Brunt–Väisälä frequency [s−1]
fc
Coriolis frequency [rad/s]
Bs
Surface heat flux [—]
he, H, zi, h′
ABL height indicators [m]
ch
ABL height correction factor [—]
ϵ
Capping inversion thickness parameter
[—]
α
Shear exponent [—]
Turbulence & Spectral Quantities
u∗
Friction velocity [m/s]
u, v, w
Turbulent velocity components [m/s]
TI, I
Turbulence intensity [—]
σ
Standard deviation [—]
Γ(k) Gamma distribution [—]
k
Shape parameter [—]
s
Scale parameter [—]
αMϵ2/3
Turbulence strength [m4/3s2]
LM
Characteristic length scale [m]
ΓM
Turbulence anisotropy [—]
kij
Wavenumber [m−1]
Λ1
Longitudinal scale parameter [m]
Jet & Wind Profile Parameters
U(z)
Mean wind shear [m/s]
Unominal, Vref
Nominal mean wind speed [m/s]
G
Geostrophic wind speed [m/s]
UG, VG
Components of G [m/s]
H
Jet height [m]
W
Jet width [m]
S
Jet strength [m/s]
CCN Correction factor [—]
A
Gravity wave amplitude [m/s]
Coordinates & Geometry
x, y, z
Spatial coordinates [m]
Nx, Ny, Nz
Meshgrid points [—]
dx, dy, dz
Meshgrid spacing [m]
zhub
Hub height [m]
R
Turbine radius [m]
ijk
Directional indices [—]
Time & Frequency Variables
t
Time [s]
ω
Radian frequency [rad/s]
τ
Wave period [s]
λ
Wavelength [m]
Statistical & Load Analysis
iii
==PAGE:6==
nref
Reference number of load cycles [—]
Ni
Number of load cycles [—]
Li
Load amplitude [Nm]
m
Wöhler exponent [—]
m
Reference mass [kg]
σ
Standard deviation [—]
k
Spring stiffness [N/m]
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Atmospheric Boundary Layer
5
2.1
Governing Concepts in the surface layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Stability Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Conventionally Neutral Boundary Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Boundary Layer Depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Super-geostrophic wind speeds and jets
11
3.1
Super-geostrophic winds in the Ekman solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
ABL flows in research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Additional factors of jet formation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Gravity waves
18
4.1
Theoretical Background and Generation Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Gravity waves in research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Methods
21
5.1
Workflow and Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine and environmental factors
. . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
IEC requirements and turbulence modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Turbulent wind field simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.5
α −study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.6
jet −study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.7
Parameter study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.8
wave −study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Results and Discussion
45
6.1
Results from the jet-study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Results from the wave-study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Conclusions
74
8
Annex A: Notes on shear distribution
81
9
Annex B: Initial wave −study results
82
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The transition to renewable energy is a critical step towards mitigating climate change and en-
suring a sustainable energy future. Among the available renewable energy sources, wind energy
has emerged as a key contributor due to its scalability, technological advancements, and de-
creasing costs. According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), the global
weighted average levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) for onshore wind projects commissioned
in 2021 fell to USD 0.033 per kilowatt-hour, reflecting a 15% decrease from the previous year.
This decline is attributed to technological improvements and economies of scale [33].
Over the past few decades, the size of wind turbines has increased significantly, especially in
offshore applications. The growth in rotor diameters and hub heights has allowed wind turbines
to capture more energy and improve economic viability. Modern offshore wind turbines now
reach heights exceeding 250 meters, with rotor diameters surpassing 200 meters such as the
Vestas V236 [67]. This trend is expected to continue for offshore wind energy, in particular. It
has gained significant attention due to its higher and more consistent wind speeds compared to
onshore locations. The International Energy Agency (IEA) reports that offshore wind technol-
ogy is focused on designing larger turbines, which allow reductions in the overall cost of power
generation [30]. This trend of increasing sizes is pushing turbines into atmospheric conditions
that were previously unaccounted for in standard load assessment methodologies.
The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) provides guidelines for assessing wind
turbine loads, primarily based on principles derived for the atmospheric surface layer (ASL),
which is defined as the bottom 10 % of the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL). However, these
standards do not account for the depth of the ABL and consequently ASL [31]. As turbine
size increases, the blades can extend beyond the ABL, exposing them to different turbulence
characteristics, shear effects, and transient phenomena that could significantly impact load cal-
culations.
The Atmospheric Boundary Layer is affected by atmospheric stability conditions. In a truly
neutral ABL the potential temperature gradient dθ/dz is zero. In stable conditions, there is
a positive potential temperature gradient, ”urging” displaced air parcels to return to a height,
consistent with their temperature. On the contrary in unstable conditions, the temperature
profile exacerbates vertical motion of air parcels, increasing turbulence. A conventionally neu-
tral boundary layer (CNBL), is characterized by atmospheric stratification. For a CNBL there
are neutral conditions near the surface and at the top there is a capping inversion, recognizable
by a strong, stable, θ(z) gradient [37]. These phenomena challenge the assumptions of wind
flow characteristics in the IEC 61400 standard and possibly necessitate a re-evaluation of the
methods used to estimate turbine loads.
The interaction between large wind turbines and the CNBL has direct implications for turbine
lifetime. Increased turbulence intensity and wind shear can result in higher fatigue loads on
turbine components, potentially reducing their operational lifespan. Understanding these ef-
fects is crucial for optimizing turbine design, improving load prediction models, and ensuring
the long-term viability of offshore wind energy projects. This thesis aims to investigate these
impacts by analyzing the load effects on large wind turbines in the case of extending above the
ABL, thereby contributing to the development of more accurate load assessment methodologies
for future wind energy systems.
The ABL plays a crucial role in defining wind conditions encountered by wind turbines. Con-
1
==PAGE:9==
ventional load assessments consider mostly neutral conditions in the ASL and often neglect
stability conditions or the depth of the ABL, which can have significant implications as turbine
sizes increase. The accurate estimation of wind turbine loads is crucial for ensuring structural
integrity, optimizing design, and consequently costs. Traditional load estimation methods rely
on deterministic approaches and empirical models for wind conditions (mean wind U and tur-
bulence intensity I), time series simulation from onsite measurements, followed by extremal
analysis (Rainflow counting) and damage-equivalent-load (DEL) calculation for each condition.
However, recent advancements have incorporated high-fidelity simulations, probabilistic assess-
ments and made the connection to atmospheric stability. Sathe et al. (2012) examined the
influence of atmospheric stability on turbine loads, revealing how different stability regimes
influence turbulence intensity and wind shear. They found that atmospheric stability can have
significant impact on tower loads, but have less impact on blade loads. And that stable con-
ditions impact shear-related loads (due to high shear in stable conditions) [59]. Furthermore
Kelly et al. (2014) tied atmospheric stability to wind turbine loads. They highlighted how sta-
bility affects mean wind speed, turbulence intensity, wind shear and turbulence length scale,
which in turn materialize in the resulting wind turbine loads. Based on data from multiple
measurement sites, they derived probabilistic relationships between atmospheric stability and
turbine loads. Additionally the derived joint distribution with loads was compared to load
simulations [38]. In a follow-up study, Dimitrov et al. confirmed those results and proposed a
database-driven approach for site-specific load estimation, which enhances precision by using
extensive datasets from high fidelity simulations and performing load mapping to the simulation
results to significantly reduce needed computational power for quick assessments [17]. Park et
al. (2014) employed large-eddy simulations (LES) to assess the impact of stable boundary layer
turbulence on turbine loads, highlighting the inadequacy of standard models in capturing these
effects. They assessed additional parameters such as geostrophic wind and surface conditions
(i.e., cooling rate), to explore the effects and establish a database for their simulations [55].
Larsen et al. (2017) emphasize the need for higher-order modeling approaches for wake-affected
flow fields and non-neutral ABL stability conditions. They validate the dynamic wake mean-
dering model [43]. Graf et al. (2016) explore the applicability of Monte Carlo integration in
estimating fatigue loads for floating offshore wind turbines, approaching load predication from
a stochastic perspective [24].
Turbulence intensity and wind shear significantly contribute to fatigue loads, which in turn
affect turbine lifetime. Lavely et al. (2011) analyze space-time variations in ABL turbulence
and their effects on turbine blade loading. Utilising LES simulations and the blade element
method (BEM), they find that turbulence enhances chaotic loading and load peaks [45]. Lee et
al. (2012) investigate atmospheric stability and wake turbulence impacts on fatigue loads. In a
LES simulation they demonstrated how fluctuations in wind conditions (from different surface
roughness, stability conditions or wakes) can enhance structural stresses. They found that at-
mospheric instability had less impact than wakes of an upwind turbine [46]. Tian, Ozbay, and
Hu (2014) examine the effects of incoming wind conditions on turbine wakes and dynamic wind
loads. They set up an experiment in a wind tunnel and found that the histogram of dynamic
loads fitted reasonably well with a Gaussian and confirmed the importance of turbulence inten-
sity for dynamic loads [66]. These studies highlight the growing need to incorporate dynamic
turbulence characteristics into load estimation frameworks.
With Increasing size, offshore wind turbines face unique aerodynamic challenges due to their
exposure to different boundary layer phenomena such as the CNBL and low-level jets. Kelly
(2014), already addressed the issue of turbines extending above the ASL, but when turbines
further increase in size and certain atmospheric conditions are met, the turbines or turbine
2
==PAGE:10==
blades can face lower level jets (LLJ) and ”peek” above the ABL. Sathe et al. (2012) discuss
the impact of atmospheric stability conditions on offshore wind turbine loads, underlining the
necessity of incorporating these effects into load assessment models (for certain load types).
Larsen et al. (2017) validate the performance of wind farm models under non-neutral ABL
conditions, showcasing the real-world implications of atmospheric stability on offshore turbine
operations. These findings underscore the importance of revisiting industry standards, such as
IEC guidelines, to check for accountability in wind conditions encountered by large offshore
wind turbines.
In the Lamar Low-Level Jet Project (LLLJP), Kelley et al. [34] analyzed one year of turbulence
and statistical data collected from NREL instrumentation on the GE Wind tower, an acoustic
wind profiler, and supplemental measurements from the NWTC/LIST program. Their find-
ings confirmed that low-level jets (LLJs) occur frequently at the site, particularly during the
warm-season months (April–September), aligning with earlier studies dating back over 30 years,
which could hint at inertial oscillations happening. They showed that LLJs can substantially
alter the vertical shear and turbulence environment within the atmospheric layer occupied by
wind turbine rotors. They concluded that, depending on atmospheric conditions, LLJs can
trigger intense, coherent turbulence through instabilities or merely enhance vertical shear up
to 200 m above ground level. Kelley et al. also observed that stably stratified layers beneath
nocturnal LLJs promote shear instabilities that lead to the formation of Kelvin-Helmholtz
waves—important sources of rotor-level turbulence. Their analysis of NWTC/LIST data iden-
tified that the largest flapwise blade root loads occur within a narrow range of vertical dynamic
stability, with key predictors including hub-height mean wind speed, vertical wind speed stan-
dard deviation, coherent turbulent kinetic energy peaks, and the vertical stability of the rotor
layer. Although mean turbulence levels between 52 and 113 m remained below IEC “A” and
“B” classifications, shear exponents between 50 and 200 m frequently exceeded the IEC Normal
Wind Profile (NWP) specification of 0.2 by up to a factor of six. The most extreme vertical
shear events were found to coincide with hub-height wind speeds between 8 and 14 m/s [34].
Similar wind shear values were also reported by Kelly et al. (2014), who confirmed that shear
exponents greater than 0.2 are commonly observed [38].
Gutierrez (2016) investigated the structure and impact of low-level jets (LLJs) within the
nocturnal stable atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) over the Great Plains, USA, where, lo-
cal topography and large-scale pressure gradients contribute to jet formation. Their analysis
revealed that LLJs exhibited a laterally coherent and horizontally extensive structure with lim-
ited vertical extent—meaning an influence on U (horizontally large extent) and small W in
the context of this thesis. Compared to unstable conditions, these jets were associated with
increased wind speeds, which can positively influence power production. However, the study
also raised concerns regarding turbine integrity and lifespan due to the additional aerodynamic
static and cyclic loads, as well as the occurrence of negative shear. LLJs were frequently ob-
served under low turbulence intensity conditions, likely due to the surrounding stable ABL
[25]. In a follow-up study, Gutierrez (2017) focused more specifically on nocturnal LLJs, de-
fined as relative wind speed maxima near the top of a stable boundary layer, and the effect of
consequential negative shear on wind turbine loading. Similar to earlier findings, LLJs were
linked to low turbulence intensities, again likely influenced by the stable ABL. Interestingly,
the study found that negative shear associated with LLJs had a mitigating effect on loads,
especially experienced by non-rotating turbine components, reducing structural vibrations and
oscillations. Moreover, the presence of LLJs contributed to more consistent power output by
lowering variability in power production [26].
3
==PAGE:11==
The reviewed literature highlights significant advancements in wind turbine load estimation,
particularly in the context of evolving atmospheric boundary layer dynamics. However, gaps
remain in understanding the full implications on large turbine sizes extending beyond the ABL.
Future research should focus on integrating CNBL effects, refining computational models to
better capture turbulence-induced loads, and updating industry standards to reflect the latest
scientific insights. Addressing these gaps will be essential for improving accuracy of design
lifetime, optimizing wind farm performance, and ensuring the long-term sustainability of wind
energy generation. Experimental and computational methodologies have been developed to
better understand wind turbine load dynamics under various atmospheric conditions, espe-
cially large eddy simulations are regularly employed as the literature review shows. Industry
standards employ hitherto simplified engineering models whereas the research, as shown un-
derlines the importance of high-resolution models such as LES etc. The Author recognizes the
need for validated engineering models, for quick estimation and with low computational effort,
such as i.e. Dimitrov et al. (2024) developed [19]. In the assessment the HiperSim tool for
generating turbulence and the HAWC2 model for calculating loads will be utilized, as they are
widely accepted and validated.
The questions that this work aims to explore are as follows: How — and to what extent —
can different ABL depths, strengths of the ABL-capping temperature inversion and associated
jets influence the loads on a wind turbine, for a given hub-height and rotor size? Following the
IEC 61400-1, are some loads under-estimated due to its omission of effects caused by the finite
depth of the ABL?
Section 2 introduces the reader to foundational concepts of micrometeorology, regarding the at-
mospheric boundary layer (ABL) that the rest of the work is based on. This includes the impact
of surface drag, the impacts of surface heat flux and a characterization of the conventionally
neutral boundary layer. Finally the height of the ABL and various concepts of approximating
it are reviewed. Section 3 shows concepts, relevant for the development of super-geostrophic
winds and jets within the ABL, including turbulent closure of the Ekman equations, reviews
relevant research on jets and explains the various factors of jet formation. Afterwards Section 4,
introduces theoretical background on gravity waves and depicts gravity waves from a research
perspective.
With the theoretical background out of the way, Section 5, describes the setup of the different
studies within this thesis, namely α −study, jet −study and wave −study. A focus lies on
the generation of the turbulent wind fields. The conventional approach as per IEC is reviewed
and then for each study, the employed methods are explained and critically assessed, towards
limitations.
Section 6 presents the results of the three studies and contrasts the jet and gravity wave cases
with the IEC reference cases. The wind fields are characterized first and then the results are
analyzed from a loads-perspective with regards to ultimate and fatigue loads. Finally Section
7 concludes this thesis and reiterates motivation and main outcomes. The Annexes contain
relevant derivations, learnings from the employed modeling methods and results from a ‘failed’
wave −study, where the methods were not employed correctly.
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Atmospheric Boundary Layer
Due to its importance in various applications, such as meteorology, aerospace engineering,
environmental/air pollution and other related research fields, the ABL has been extensively
studied in the past. In order to examine the effect on loads, firstly the ABL should be defined
and described. The ABL is the lowest part of the atmosphere and directly influenced by it’s
interaction with the surface. There are two main influences, firstly through mechanical forcing
and secondly thermal buoyancy effects, both of which shape the wind velocity and turbulence
characteristics within the ABL. Mechanical forcing is caused by surface roughness, which in-
duces frictional drag and leads to a deceleration of the wind speed as when approaching the
surface. This effect is described by the logarithmic velocity profile (log-law). Different types
of underlying terrain, i.e. land or ocean, influence the turbulence generation through mechan-
ical shear differently. In addition to mechanical effects, thermal buoyancy forces modify the
turbulence characteristics of the ABL. These effects are governed by surface heating or cooling
(atmosphere is heated from below), which alters the vertical temperature gradient and either
enhances or suppresses turbulent mixing. Thermal buoyancy-driven motions define the stability
of the ABL, which in turn affects the wind velocity profile, turbulence intensity, and boundary
layer height. This is without taking into account upstream structures and wakes that may
influence turbulence in the flow [8].
For wind energy applications, the stability (buoyancy conditions) of the ABL has direct influ-
ences on turbine performance and structural loads. Variations in stability change turbulence
levels, and shear profiles, which ultimate relate to blade and tower loads as well as power
generation. Understanding these dynamics is particularly important for recent wind turbines,
which operate at increasing hub heights and may extend the ABL top towards the transition
to free-atmosphere conditions. This chapter introduces fundamental concepts governing ABL
stability, focusing on how wind velocity and turbulence characteristics respond to different
stability regimes. Emphasis will be placed on CNBL conditions, leading to a characteristic ve-
locity profile and the formation of a super-geostrophic jet at the ABL top. These concepts form
the foundation for later sections of this thesis, where the implications on large wind turbine
operation and atmospheric interactions will be explored in more detail.
2.1
Governing Concepts in the surface layer
The earth’s surface is highly important to turbulence in the ABL in two ways: creating tur-
bulence through surface roughness and affecting buoyancy conditions through surface heat-
ing/cooling. Hence these two concepts and their influence, as well as physical depictions, will
be described in the following paragraphs. The atmospheric surface layer (ASL) is typically
defined as the lowest 10% of the ABL, by height. Within this region, the mechanical forcing,
which is induced by surface roughness, mainly influences the vertical wind profile. In compar-
ison the thermal effects are negligibly small. The surface exerts a frictional drag force on the
wind, leading to a reduction in wind speed near the ground. Here the wind speed approaches
zero at the surface due to the no-slip condition (in theory). The vertical wind velocity profile
in this region can be derived through dimensional analysis, yielding the well-known logarithmic
wind profile (log-law) and describes how wind speed U varies with height z above the surface.
The equation is given as:
U(z) = u∗
κ ln
! z
z0
"
(1)
5
==PAGE:13==
Here U(z) is the wind speed at height z, u∗is the friction velocity, which characterizes the
downward momentum flux, z0 is the roughness length, representing the surface roughness ef-
fects, and κ is the von Kármán constant (typically κ ≈0.4). The logarithmic wind profile is
derived under the assumptions of stationarity, homogeneous terrain, and neutral (or negligible)
stability conditions [8]. The slope of the vertical wind velocity profile is also often referenced
as wind-shear, meaning the change of wind velocity with height. Wind shear will be treated in
Section 5.7 in more detail.
2.2
Stability Considerations
Atmospheric stability is mostly described by the vertical gradient of potential temperature θ.
θ characterizes the temperature of an air parcel that moves vertically under adiabatic condi-
tions, meaning it undergoes no heat exchange with its surroundings, through the ABL. Under
these conditions, the temperature of the air parcel depends solely on pressure, following the
principle of thermodynamic expansion (or compression). As the hydrostatic balance describes,
atmospheric pressure decreases with height, so an air parcel that rises will expand and cool,
and a parcel that descends will be compressed and heat up. This effect is described by the
dry adiabatic lapse rate Γd, which shows the rate at which an air parcel changes temperature
(adiabatically):
Γd = −dT
dz
= g
cp
(2)
Where g is the acceleration due to gravity, typically 9.81 [m/s2], and cp is the specific heat
capacity of dry air at constant pressure, approximately 1005 [J/kg K]. The dry adiabatic lapse
rate has a characteristic value of approximately 9.8 [K/km] or roughly 1 [K] per 100 [m]. The
potential temperature θ adds a reference pressure level p0 and combines a temperature profile
with the change of temperature due to the effect described above:
θ(z) = T(z)
! p0
p(z)
" R
cp
(3)
Here T(z) is the temperature at height z, p(z) is the pressure at height z, p0 = 1000 [hPa] is the
reference pressure, and R = 287 [J/kg K] is the gas constant for dry air. The vertical gradient
of potential temperature determines the different atmospheric stability conditions, which affect
mechanically induced turbulence (unless neutral):
• Neutral conditions:
dθ
dz = 0 constant θ.
• Stable conditions:
dθ
dz > 0 increasing θ, suppresses vertical mixing.
• Unstable conditions:
dθ
dz < 0 decreasing θ, increases vertical mixing.
Figure 1 shows different stability conditions and the associated vertical velocity wind profiles,
qualitatively. The (truly) neutral case, shows a constant potential temperature over the full
height θ(z) = 300 [K]. Consequently, the vertical wind profile follows the log-law, Eq.1. Here no
buoyancy effects exacerbate or diminish the mechanically induced turbulence. Wind conditions
with high mean wind speed U, are also often considered to be neutral, as stability effects are
small enough to neglect them. The stable case dθ/dz > 0 means, if an air parcel is lifted
through mechanical turbulence, it finds itself in warmer environment and tends to return back
to its original height, defined by the hydrostatic balance:
dp
dz = −ρg
(4)
6
==PAGE:14==
295.0
297.5
300.0
302.5
305.0
307.5
310.0
Potential Temperature µ [K]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Height [m]
Neutral
Stable
Unstable
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Wind Speed [m/s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Neutral
Stable
Unstable
Figure 1: Stability and vertical wind velocity profiles
This way, mechanical turbulence is suppressed, and wind shear is enhanced, as seen on the
right side of Figure 1. Stable conditions can often be observed during nighttime or over a cold
surface (implying a negative heat flux at the surface). Finally in the unstable case the opposite
happens, where if an air parcel is lifted it, finds itself warmer than the environment and keeps
rising, adding to the mechanical turbulence. Unstable conditions increase vertical mixing and
thus decrease wind shear, see Figure 1. Unstable conditions appear usually during daytime,
when the surface is heated through (short-wave) radiation from the Sun [8].
2.3
Conventionally Neutral Boundary Layer
As the governing boundary layer condition in this work, the CNBL deserves a detailed descrip-
tion. The CNBL is characterized by neutral or near neutral conditions towards the surface and
a capping inversion layer (with stable conditions in the free atmosphere above) at the top of
the ABL. This is shown qualitatively in Figure 2.
CNBLs are frequently observed in offshore conditions [42], when air is advected over the sea.
Csanady (1974) explained the flow regime of air advection over a colder sea, where a strongly
stable inversion forms at the top of the internal boundary layer, that starts at the coastline. This
limits turbulent transport and thus, heat transfer through the inversion remains minimal, while
the air beneath it continues to cool until it reaches the sea temperature, eventually forming a
layer with near-neutral stratification [13]. Lange et al. (2004) confirmed this through measure-
ments of atmospheric stability near the Danish cost of the Baltic Sea [41]. Thus essentially,
a CNBL depicts a situation where stability in the ASL is negligible, leading to (near-)neutral
conditions and a stable regimes in the free atmosphere above is apparent. The inversion capping
can be characterized by ABL height (he) and strength of the temperature inversion (dθ/dz)
[1]. The formation of CNBLs is often accompanied by a jet with wind speeds higher than the
geostrophic winds above and exceeding turbulence intensity of the wind field below. These jets
7
==PAGE:15==
290.0
290.5
291.0
291.5
Potential Temperature µ [K]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Height [m]
CNBL
7
8
9
10
11
12
Wind Speed [m/s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
CNBL Wind Proﬁle
Figure 2: CNBL θ(z) and U(z)
form near the top of the ABL, and generate additional local wind shear, see Figure 2 [37], they
are topic of further discussion in later sections.
2.4
Boundary Layer Depth
As suggested in research, the ABL depth (denoted he) has an influence on the turbulent struc-
tures within the boundary layer and may also affect loads, as per research question [68]. Thus
follows a review of different methods to determine that depth. It was mentioned before that,
the ABL is defined as the atmospheric layer that is mainly influenced by interaction with the
surface. Different states of the ABL, are traditionally categorized by surface buoyancy flux Bs
[63]:
Bs = g
θ · w′θ′
(5)
Looking at the definition of Bs the above description based on the potential temperature gra-
dient (Section 2.2), is implicit in the classification by Bs. Zilitinkevich et al. expanded on these
definitions, introducing another parameter, namely the Brunt-Väisälä frequency N =
#
g
θ
dθ
dz.
It relates the vertical potential temperature gradient and yields a parameter of unit [Hz]. They
came up with four categories: Firstly the truly neutral boundary layer, that has neutral surface
buoyancy flux Bs = 0 and neutral stability N = 0. Based on these conditions, historically
many meteorological models were developed. Secondly the CNBL, which constitutes both pos-
itive Bs and N, which is the main focus of this thesis. Thirdly the nocturnal stable boundary
layer, which is characterized by negative surface buoyancy flux (stable conditions) Bs < 0 and
N = 0. Lastly the long lived stable boundary layer which has negative Bs < 0 and positive
N < 0 [72].
8
==PAGE:16==
Regarding the actual height of the ABL, there are several external parameters that influence
and/or limit the height of the ABL, according to Zilitinkevich et al. [72]:
1. Shear stresses at the surface represented by the friction velocity u∗which relates to the
mechanically induced turbulence in the ABL.
2. Surface buoyancy flux defined at the surface as Bs which describes the heat flux between
the surface and the air in the ABL.
3. The rotation of the earth expressed through the Coriolis parameter fc = 2Ωsinφ, limits
the height of the ABL, in the sense that with increasing height the winds approach
geostrophic conditions. There the Coriolis force is balanced with large scale pressure
gradients and the wind is less and less influenced by the surface. Once the conditions
fully align with the geostrophic balance, the ABL simply ends according to its definition
as the layer that is mainly influenced by interaction with the surface. The transition
from ASL conditions to geostrophic conditions happens in the Ekman layer, which is the
biggest part of the ABL [1].
4. Atmospheric stability which is expressed through the Brunt-Väisälä frequency N that
relates the vertical gradient of potential temperature with the gravitational acceleration.
Similar to the surface buoyancy heat flux, it incorporates gravity and the vertical gradient
of θ, but is defined over the whole height of the ABL and yields a frequency of oscillations
rather than a rate of heat exchange like Bs. In a stable atmosphere the frequency is
higher with smaller amplitudes, for a ideally neutral regime there are no oscillations and
per definition, there are no (real-valued) oscillations in unstable conditions [72].
As seen above the he is influenced by many different parameters, however there are some
characteristics that can be identified and were backed by statistical analysis, regarding the
ABL height. When treating he as a statistical variable, and looking at it under neutral, stable
and unstable conditions, its probability distribution was fitted by Liu & Liang (2010) to a
Gamma distribution, Eq. [6]:
f(x; k, s) = xk−1 ·
e−x
s
sk · Γ(k)
(6)
Where k and s are both positive, the shape and scale parameters of the distribution and Γ(k)
is the Gamma function, conditioned on the shape parameter. Liu & Liang (2010), analyzed
many different datasets, covering various locations, surface conditions, daytime and stability
regimes and found k values in the order of 1.7–4.2 and s values ranging from 1.0–7.2, while
fitting the distribution to the datasets [49].
Figure 3 shows the fitted Gamma distributions for ABL height he over oceans. While dis-
tributions over land and ice were also examined, offshore conditions are most relevant here.
In stable conditions he was concentrated at lower altitudes around 150–200 [m]. However for
neutral and unstable cases, the heights were spread more widely, with peaks around 250 [m]
and 700 [m] respectively. Notably, the trend of lower he for stable conditions and vice versa,
is coherent with the above-mentioned concepts of stability and suppression or enhancement of
vertical motion. It should be noted that these are fitted distribution to some measurement
points and were originally not continuous. For original plot see [49].
Additionally, the ABL height followed a well-defined diurnal cycle, consisting of a peak around
1200 local standard time (LST) over seas and 1500 LST over land. Before the peak there was a
”morning ramp-up”, where the ABL height developed from a low-value over night to the peak
9
==PAGE:17==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
ABL Height [m]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Probability Density [-]
Stable (k = 3.5, s = 1)
Neutral (k = 2.3, s = 3.9)
Unstable (k = 6.6, s = 2.6)
Figure 3: Gamma distribution of ABL Heights over Ocean, reproduced from [49]
at midday. And after the peak there was a more pronounced drop, towards the end of the
day. Over tropical oceans, he gradually increased before noon and then decreased at a similar
rate in the afternoon, more symmetrically. Compared to mid latitude land, he variability over
oceans remained consistently higher in the morning and at night but significantly lower in the
afternoon. The differences over land, sea and ice, can be warranted to the different surface
and stability conditions, while interactions over islands and mountains were found to be ex-
traordinarily complex [49]. Theoretical concepts and further literature regarding the ”morning
ramp-up” are reviewed in Wyngaard [70].
Another definition for the height of the ABL, which was historically dominant, independent of
stability and also used in the derivation of the Ekman equations, was the following approxima-
tion:
he = u∗
fc
(7)
Where u∗denotes the friction velocity and fc the Coriolis parameter. However, this relation
systematically overestimates the height of the ABL and an additional factor 0.1 < ch < 0.2 can
be introduced to account for that [72]. The overestimation, may be related to the assumptions
of the Ekman equations, which only apply to long-term averages and can not be used for
10-min averages, which are predominant in industry and measurements [8]. Another way of
estimating the height of the ABL was suggested by Sullivan et al. (1998), based on the potential
temperature: That he is where dθ
dz = 0 meaning where the maximum potential temperature
gradient is located [64]. Practically this assumed the existence of the capping inversion, to
estimate the height of the ABL, which would not be applicable for i.e. truly neutral boundary
layers or uniformly stratified regimes. Whereas for CNBL it is a common approach. ”The
presence of a potential temperature inversion sets the height of the ABL” [15][70].
Liu &
Liang (2010), divided the ABL into different Levels, based on local extremes in the potential
10
==PAGE:18==
temperature profile and define the stability conditions, based on the differences of θ at these
levels.
They determine he, as the height at which an adiabatically rising air parcel would
become neutrally buoyant, coherent with Stull [63]. For neutral or uniformly stable stratified
atmospheres, where the vertical θ profile, does not show the significant levels, they propose two
methods: 1. Using a threshold gradient ˙θ, with the condition, that there is no inversion above
and 2. Finding the ‘nose’ of the lower level jet (LLJ) and defining that height as he. Of these
two they choose whichever yields the lower height [49]. Finally, Zilitinkevich et al. proposed an
approach specific for each of the four types of boundary layers they identified. For the CNBL
they proposed:
he = CCN · u∗|fc · N|−1
2
(8)
Where CCN = 1.36 was derived experimentally from large eddy simulations (LES) [71]. Fur-
thermore they explain that baroclinic shear in the free atmosphere is an additional factor that
might deepen the ABL, due to additional turbulent mixing ”from above” and propose another
expression extended by that influence [72].
3
Super-geostrophic wind speeds and jets
The presence of super-geostrophic wind speeds and low-level jets (LLJ) in the ABL lead to
additional local shear, which has been recognized as a significant factor influencing turbine
loads. In this study ‘LLJ’ and ‘jets’ will be used interchangeably, whereas LLJ mainly referred
to observed nocturnal jets historically. Given the critical role of shear for material stresses,
incorporating the effects of jets into this study is essential. But what are (super-)geostrophic
wind speeds and jets ? This chapter reviews relevant theoretical concepts and present findings
in research on this topic. By describing the interplay of large-scale pressure gradients, surface
drag and the Coriolis force, causes for jets are examined. Then different definitions of jets are
explored and additional phenomena influencing jet development are briefly visited.
3.1
Super-geostrophic winds in the Ekman solution
The term ‘super-geostrophic’, refers to a wind speed that exceeds the geostrophic winds, appar-
ent in the free atmosphere above the ABL. Geostrophic winds are derived from a force balance
between large scale pressure gradients and the Coriolis force, along constant lines of pressure
and may be presented in the geostrophic balance [8]:
G = −∇p
ρfc
(9)
Where G is the wind along a constant line of pressure, consisting of two components UG, VG.
This wind can be interpreted as a result of large scale pressure gradients and the Coriolis force
(RHS). The two components can be written as follows:
UG = −1
fcρ
∂p
∂y
(10)
VG =
1
fcρ
∂p
∂x
(11)
Commonly UG denotes the main wind direction and VG denotes lateral winds. To summarize,
the geostrophic wind results from large scale pressure gradients and the Coriolis force and drives
winds globally. Hence, wind speeds in the ABL, exceeding G, are labeled ‘super-geostrophic’.
11
==PAGE:19==
Usually, when considering the geostrophic wind as the main driver for wind in the atmosphere,
one would not expect wind speeds exceeding G within the ABL, where surface drag typically
acts to slow the flow (see log-law). However, as will be shown below, this is not always the case.
First, the phenomenon of super-geostrophic wind speeds in the ABL is examined through the
lens of crosswind stresses inherent in the Ekman solution. Following this, a more qualitative and
intuitive perspective is introduced to illustrate the underlying mechanism. This introduction to
turbulent closure in the simple Ekman solution, reappears when looking at inertial oscillations
later.
We’re recalling the momentum balance for an air parcel, or Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes
(RANS) equations. Herein we include the Coriolis term, as an important influence, i.e. seen
from the geostrophic balance (Eq.
9).
On the other hand, the viscous term is neglected,
assuming high Reynolds number flows in the ABL. The Reynolds number (Re) is given by:
Re = UL
ν
(12)
Here U represents the characteristic velocity, which corresponds to the wind speed (e.g., 10
[m/s] for IEC class A [31]), while LM denotes the characteristic length scale, such as 119 [m]
for the DTU-10MW turbine hub height [5]. Additionally, ν refers to the kinematic viscosity of
air, approximately 1.5×10−5[ m2/s]. For the atmospheric boundary layer, using representative
values:
U = 10 m/s,
LM = 100 m,
ν = 1.5 × 10−5 m2/s
(13)
we obtain:
Re = 10 × 119
1.5 × 10−5 = 7.93 × 107.
(14)
Thus the flow can be considered highly turbulent and the viscous effectively vanishes, compared
to other terms. Then RANS can be written as:
∂Ui
∂t + ∂UiUj
∂xj
+ ∂⟨uiuj⟩
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂P
∂xi
−2εijkΩjUk
(15)
In Eq. [15] [8], the indices ijk denote the different horizontal, lateral and vertical direction. U
denotes mean wind, u denotes the fluctuating part as per Reynolds averaging, see Section 5.3, t
denotes time and x denotes space. P represents pressure and ρ density. Then reading from left
to rights, we have the local acceleration term, the advection term, representing an acceleration
if an air parcel changes location, the turbulent stresses, which are covariances between the
fluctuating parts in different direction and on the rhs the large-scale pressure gradient. The
last term on the RHS represents the Coriolis acceleration as the cross product of the vectors
Ωand U.
Now, using assumptions, this equation is simplified: When assuming horizontal
homogeneity, spatial variations in horizontal directions vanish (
∂
∂xij = 0). Furthermore, when
assuming stationarity, local accelerations vanish ( ∂
∂t = 0). This leaves a momentum balance
with Reynolds stresses on the LHS and the pressure gradient and Coriolis term on the RHS,
Equation 16[8]:
∂⟨uiuj⟩
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂P
∂xi
−2εijkΩjUk
(16)
The Coriolis term can be expressed in terms of fc and the geostrophic wind, when looking at
the specific components ij. Thus for the horizontal and lateral stress profile this yields:
12
==PAGE:20==
∂uw
∂z
= −1
ρ
∂P
∂x + fcV
(17)
∂vw
∂z = −1
ρ
∂P
∂y −fcU
(18)
Here Eq.[17], relates the vertical derivative of the uw stress to the large-scale pressure gradient,
Coriolis force and lateral component of the mean wind. Similarly, Eq.[18] links the vw stress
to the horizontal component of the mean wind.
Now taking into account the geostrophic
balance, the horizontal pressure gradients may be expressed using the geostrophic wind, as per
Eqs.[10] and [11]. Finally, one arrives at the mean momentum equations or Ekman equations
for horizontal and lateral directions:
∂uw
∂z
= f(V −Vg)
(19)
∂vw
∂z = f(Ug −U)
(20)
To summarize: these equations relate the vertical stress divergences to the Coriolis parame-
ter and the local difference between mean wind speeds V, U and geostrophic components, also
called geostrophic departure. Under the assumptions of stationarity, horizontal homogeneity
and high Re flow in the ABL [70]. When solving these equations, which is usually achieved
through parametrization of the turbulent stresses, a process known as ”turbulent closure,” two
key trends emerge: Firstly, the interaction of turbulent stresses can lead to super-geostrophic
wind speeds or the formation of jets within the ABL, depending on the vertical stress profiles,
which are influenced by surface conditions (drag and heat flux) and ABL height. Secondly, tran-
sition from surface force balance (surface drag & large scale pressure gradient) to geostrophic
force balance (Coriolis force & large scale pressure gradient) causes a turning of the wind from
the surface to the ABL top.
There are various approaches to solving the Ekman equations. By assuming constant viscosity
and applying the eddy viscosity hypothesis, Ekman derived the Ekman spiral, which predicts a
turning angle of the mean wind as it moves from the ABL top toward the surface. This turning
angle is clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and counterclockwise in the Southern Hemi-
sphere, with a maximum of 45◦at the surface [21]. On the other hand, numerical solutions of
Equations [19] and [20], such as those obtained through LES studies, have shown that approach-
ing the ABL top, U can exceed G, contributing to super-geostrophic wind speeds [8]. Also van
der Laan et al. (2020) have shown numerically that super geostrophic wind speeds occur when
using an approach of limited turbulent length scales to solve the Ekman equations [40]. Kelly &
van der Laan (2023) derived relations between shear and veer using RANS simulations. They
found that mean shear and veer depend on surface roughness and atmospheric boundary layer
depth, expressed through their respective Rossby numbers [39]. The important finding they had
in common: a jet always appeared in the mean wind profile when solving the Ekman equations.
While these theoretical concepts give an insight on how different ‘mean’ phenomena interact in
the atmosphere, it is noted that there are several assumptions limiting the applicability in cer-
tain situations. These assumptions include stationarity, with an inherent maximum timescale
of f −1
c , which corresponds to approximately 2 to 3 hours at mid-latitudes (∼45◦). However the
timescale might be limited due to faster-occuring changes in the surface heat flux. Addition-
ally, the eddy viscosity is assumed to be constant in the Ekman solution, whereas in practice,
it varies with height and atmospheric conditions. Finally, the derivation does not include a
13
==PAGE:21==
buoyancy term, implicitly assuming neutral atmospheric conditions — an assumption that is
rarely met in reality. The ABL depth is defined more often through the inversion layer capping
rather than Ekman dynamics [70]. Especially in the context of this work, buoyancy is impor-
tant as a CNBL is assumed to be present in the simulations. Furthermore, these explanations
only look at ‘mean phenomena’, faster, shorter-lived occurrences of jets can be caused by a
number of other mechanisms and alter the instantaneous wind profile.
Another, heavily simplified, but more visual approach of these concepts could be as follows:
Imagine two force balances at different heights. Firstly at the top, where the geostrophic bal-
ance holds. Here the pressure gradient force and Coriolis force balance each other and the result
is the geostrophic wind. Secondly, within the ABL closer to the surface, where the direction
of the mean wind is shifted, according to the Ekman spiral and the drag force exerted by the
surface becomes apparent. This way at heights, where the drag force ‘cancels out’ some of the
impact from the Coriolis force, but does not slow the wind down significantly, the mean wind
may exceed the Geostrophic wind. However, when moving closer to the surface, the drag force
increases, and the mean wind approaches 0 at the surface due to the no-slip condition. Refer
to [8], for a sketch of this analogy and van der Laan & Kelly for a derivation assuming generic
eddy diffusivity [40] [39].
3.2
ABL flows in research
As shown, the presence of jets in neutral boundary layers is a phenomenon inherent in the
Ekman solutions for mean wind phenomena. However, these equations are only analytically
solvable under specific assumptions mentioned above. In order to cover the complexity in-
troduced by real-world conditions and different stability regimes, numerical methods such as
Large-Eddy Simulations (LES) have been widely employed in research to investigate the emer-
gence and characteristics of jets in CNBLs.
Several studies have utilized LES to derive a
universal wind profile in CNBLs, highlighting the importance of jets.
Kelly et al. (2019) derived a universal wind profile for the lower region (70%) of inversion-
capped CNBLs. They introduced a correction factor for the log-law, based on Buckingham-Pi
analysis, to account for the influence of the potential temperature profile. This profile covers
most of the ABL, up until the ‘nose’ of the jet [37]. In a different approach, Liu et al. (2021)
reviewed earlier approaches to CNBL wind profiles and derived another universal wind profile
for CNBLs. They used ideas from Monin-Obhukov similarity, to describe the vertical wind
profile up to a certain height where their profile intersects with the geostrophic wind, capturing
the negative shear above the ‘nose’ of the jet [48].
Pedersen et al. (2014) investigated the structure and adjustment mechanisms of inversion-
capped CNBL flows by conducting a range of LES simulations. Their simulations covered neu-
tral and near-neutral, inversion-capped, horizontally homogeneous and barotropic atmospheric
boundary layers. They found that jet formation is influenced by Brunt-Väisälä frequency and
surface heat flux. Furthermore they confirmed the common appearance of super-geostrophic
jets and the correct scaling of models for ABL height, such as Equation [8] [56]. Allaerts &
Meyers (2015) extended this work by simulating large wind turbine arrays in a CNBL, illus-
trating the effect different boundary layer heights and inversion strengths can have on power
output in combination with wind farm blockage (increasing pressure decreases power output).
They also concluded that the main influence on the ABL height is the position of the capping
inversion, underscoring the importance of the vertical potential temperature profile for ABL
14
==PAGE:22==
flows.[2].
The role of mesh resolution in accurately capturing jets has also been a focal point in research.
Berg et al. (2020) conducted a sensitivity study on LES resolution, demonstrating that in-
suﬀicient resolution can lead to inaccuracies in turbulence representation and jet formation.
They found that a coarse mesh would be able accurately cover processes within the interval
of [0.1he, 0.9he], towards the surface and top, fine resolutions are needed to accurately predict
phenomena that depend strongly on buoyancy, such as jets [9].
Overall, the emergence of jets in CNBLs is a well-documented phenomenon, with various stud-
ies confirming their appearance through numerical modeling approaches, see figures on vertical
mean wind speed in any of the studies above. The boundary-layer height, inversion capping
and surface interactions are critical factors influencing jet formation, as demonstrated by the
extensive research utilizing LES.
Besides numerical simulations, jets are a well-documented atmospheric phenomenon that have
been measured and studied extensively over time, due to their relevance in aviation, pollutant
emissions and wind energy [4]. Another relevant aspect of jets is global moisture transport or
‘atmospheric rivers’ [57]. Historically, research has primarily focused on nocturnal jets, that
are mainly formed due to, frictional decoupling (see below). From these studies, several key
characteristics of jets have been identified. However, definitions of jets vary across the liter-
ature, with different scientists adopting distinct criteria. Stull (1998), defined a LLJ as local
maximum in the vertical wind speed profile of the lowest 1.5 km of the atmosphere. This
maximum, had to exceed speeds above and below by at least 2 m
s [63]. Other research applied
different absolute thresholds, i.e. 0.5 m
s or relative values, i.e. 20 % [7]. Bonner (1968) divided
LLJs into various classifications with different speeds, altitudes and latitudes [11]. Notably,
none include a relation to the geostrophic wind. The label ‘super-geostrophic jet’ in this work,
relates to jets associated with the capping inversion.
More recently, onshore LLJs were assessed through measurement campaigns, also with a per-
spective on wind turbine loads. These campaigns were mainly connected to frequent obser-
vations over the Great Plains in the US, which is quite a unique wind climate shaped by
topographic influences such as the Rocky Mountains and other localities.
In the Lamar Low-Level Jet Project (LLLJP), Kelley et al. analyzed one year of turbulence
and statistical data collected from NREL instrumentation on the GE Wind tower, an acoustic
wind profiler, and supplemental measurements from the NWTC/LIST program. Their findings
confirmed that LLJs occur frequently at the site, particularly during the warm-season months
(April–September), aligning with earlier studies dating back over 30 years. (This could hint
at inertial oscillations happening, as will be further explained in Section 3.3). They showed
that LLJs can substantially alter the vertical shear and turbulence environment within the at-
mospheric layer occupied by wind turbine rotors. Depending on atmospheric conditions, LLJs
can either trigger intense, coherent turbulence through instabilities or merely enhance verti-
cal shear up to 200 m above ground level. Kelley et al. also observed that stably stratified
layers beneath nocturnal LLJs promote shear instabilities that lead to the formation of Kelvin-
Helmholtz waves—important sources of rotor-level turbulence. Their analysis of NWTC/LIST
data identified that the largest flapwise blade root loads occur within a narrow range of verti-
cal dynamic stability, with key predictors including hub-height mean wind speed, vertical wind
speed standard deviation, coherent turbulent kinetic energy peaks, and the vertical stability
of the rotor layer. Although mean turbulence levels between 52 and 113 [m] remained below
15
==PAGE:23==
IEC “A” and “B” classifications, shear exponents between 50 and 200 [m] frequently exceeded
the IEC Normal Wind Profile (NWP) specification of 0.2 by up to a factor of six. The most
extreme vertical shear events were found to coincide with hub-height wind speeds between 8
and 14 [m/s] [34].
Gutierrez (2016) investigated the structure and impact of LLJs within the nocturnal stable at-
mospheric boundary layer over the Great Plains, USA, where, local topography and large-scale
pressure gradients contribute to jet formation. Their analysis revealed that LLJs exhibited a
laterally coherent and horizontally extensive structure with limited vertical extent—meaning
an influence on U (horizontally large extent) and small W in the context of this thesis. Com-
pared to unstable conditions, these jets were associated with increased wind speeds, which can
positively influence power production. However, the study also raised concerns regarding tur-
bine integrity and lifespan due to the additional aerodynamic static and cyclic loads, as well as
the occurrence of negative shear. LLJs were frequently observed under low turbulence inten-
sity conditions, likely due to the surrounding stable ABL [25]. In a follow-up study, Gutierrez
(2017) focused more specifically on nocturnal LLJs, defined as relative wind speed maxima
near the top of a stable boundary layer, and the effect of consequential negative shear on wind
turbine loading. Similar to earlier findings, LLJs were linked to low turbulence intensities,
again likely influenced by the stable ABL. Interestingly, the study found that negative shear
associated with LLJs had a mitigating effect on loads, especially experienced by non-rotating
turbine components, reducing structural vibrations and oscillations. Moreover, the presence of
LLJs contributed to more consistent power output by lowering variability in power production
[26].
3.3
Additional factors of jet formation
Aside from turbulent closure as described above, several additional factors can influence the
development of a (super-geostrophic) jet. According to Stull (1988) these factors include [63]:
• Synoptic-scale baroclinicity associated with weather patterns
• Baroclinicity related to sloping terrain
• Fronts
• Advective accelerations
• Splitting, ducting, and confluence around mountain barriers
• Land and sea breezes
• Mountain and valley winds
• Inertial oscillations
Since this study focuses on standard offshore conditions and a CNBL, most of these causes,
are not applicable: For example any terrain-related causes are irrelevant, and any interaction
of land and sea, since we are assuming to be far enough offshore, so that these influences may
be neglected. Baroclinity, as well as fronts will also be excluded from this study, due to their
complexity. A phenomenon, that has been historically regarded as an important cause for jets
are inertial oscillations.
16
==PAGE:24==
Based on Blackadar (1957), it has been historically assumed that jets form mainly from diurnal
variations of the eddy viscosity (As shown in Section 3.1, jets can be inherent in the turbu-
lent closure). It is assumed that during or after sunset, a stable layer forms at the surface,
which separates the mixed ‘day’ layer from the surface, a process labeled frictional decoupling.
This omission of drag force, disrupts the force balance inherent in the mixed layer and leads
to inertial oscillations around the geostrophic wind induced by the Coriolis force [10]. Then
the mean wind components U, V oscillate around their geostrophic values, with the inertial
period 2π
fc , and amplitude of their prior geostrophic departure U −UG or V −VG. This leads to
super-geostrophic wind speeds within the ABL and formation of jets overnight [63].
0
5
10
15
Time after sunset [h]
°5.0
°2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Windspeed [m/s]
Time Evolution of Wind Components
U-UG
V
UG
6
8
10
12
14
U [m/s]
°4
°2
0
2
4
V [m/s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
G
Figure 4: Inertial Oscillation of U and V
Figure 4 visualizes the effect of inertial oscillations on the mean wind speed components in
the frictionally decoupled layer, based on time after sunset. The left plot depicts the compo-
nents of the geostrophic wind [m/s] over time (after sunset) [h]. On the left, the oscillations
are visualized through labeled dots, which correspond to the time after sunset and UG, VG
are shown on the axes. This example is taken from an exercise in Stull (1988) and assumes
fc = 10−4[s−1]; UG = 10[ m
s ] and VG = 0[ m
s ]. It can be clearly observed that mean wind U
speeds up after sunset, based on the geostrophic departure, inherent when the decoupling hap-
pens. And the theoretical oscillations are clear. Afterwards these oscillations, will vanish once
there daytime convective conditions occur, and the decoupled layers are mixed again. Thus
depending on latitude, the oscillations might not complete a full inertial period, in this example
approximately 17 hours [63]. This model is based on the assumption of frictional decoupling,
which is reasonable, in the case of strong surface radiative cooling. However, if strong radiative
cooling persists, the longevity of these ‘nocturnal’ LLJs is then defined by the inertial period,
which depends on
1
fc, thus ultimately depends on latitude. Consequently, jets would be ex-
pected to persist over longer periods, with increasing latitude. An exemplary phenomenon was
observed by Andreas et al. (1993), when vertical wind profiles in arctic latitudes were examined
[69]. It was also found that frictional decoupling can occur in costal regions, which could affect
17
==PAGE:25==
offshore turbines, closely situated towards shores, i.e. in the coastal Baltic Sea regions [61].
In summary, jets have been widely observed in measurements and reproduced in numerical
studies. Historically, many different mechanisms were assumed to be the main drivers, such as
inertial oscillations. While not wrong, it has been more recently shown, that, depending on the
potential temperature profile, i.e. in a CNBL, the formation of a jet is inherent in the solution
to the Ekman equations. This means that a jet can be expected on average, as part of the
vertical mean wind profile, given the proper conditions.
This concludes the theoretical background on jets, basic concepts concerning the ABL (Section
2) and details regarding its depth have been reviewed. The emergence of super-geostrophic wind
speeds in general (Section 3.1) and jets specifically (Section 3.3) have been explained from a
theoretical and research perspective (Section 3.2). This review underlined the relevance of jets
and motivates the study to characterize jets and examine their impact on wind turbines further.
4
Gravity waves
This chapter is aimed at explaining why gravity waves are relevant in the context of wind en-
ergy, especially their connection to atmospheric stability and influence on the turbulent inflow
to wind turbines. Basic theoretical concepts are reviewed and the complex nature of gravity
waves is illustrated. Additionally, ongoing research regarding gravity waves in connnection with
wind turbines is presented.
Waves, in general, can be described as oscillating motions of particles, where neighboring par-
ticles move slightly out of phase with one another. In the context of wind energy, or more
broadly the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL), where air is the fluid of interest, several wave
types can be distinguished: surface waves, sound waves, and internal gravity waves. These
waves typically arise from disturbances in the fluid, counteracted by various restoring forces
in order to to re-establish an equilibrium. Surface waves appear at the interface between two
fluids—such as ripples on a pond—or in transition regions within a stratified fluid. For ex-
ample, Lanzilao et al. [42] described how wind farm blockage can induce surface waves on the
capping inversion, which marks the interface between a near-neutral atmospheric boundary
layer and a stably stratified free atmosphere, see Section 2.3. Sound waves, in contrast, are
governed by pressure variations, whereby particles oscillate back and forth along the direction
of wave propagation. Libianchi et al. studied how the characteristics of these pressure fields are
sensitive to atmospheric stability conditions [47]. Internal gravity waves occur within stably
stratified fluids and can significantly affect local fluid properties such as density. These waves
are generated when a fluid parcel in hydrostatic balance (see Eq. 4) is displaced. The resulting
buoyancy force acts as a restoring mechanism, pushing the parcel back towards its original
position and potentially setting up oscillations [54]. Surface waves are induced by the same
mechanism. However, due to their complex nature, and based on the findings of Lanzilao et
al., who observed that internal gravity waves were induced above the capping inversion (rather
than below), they were not the primary focus of this study. Instead, the emphasis lies on surface
waves at the capping inversion, which can induce vertical motions that propagate downward
through vertical momentum transfer. These vertical wave motions influence the vertical wind
component w, and are coupled into the streamwise direction via the cross-spectrum uw. Sim-
ply put: in a conventionally neutral boundary layer (CNBL), interfacial waves on the capping
inversion—triggered by upstream disturbances such as wind farms, mountains, or any obstacle
inducing vertical displacement—can propagate their effects downward into the ABL through
18
==PAGE:26==
vertical momentum transfer. As a result, a vertical wave signature becomes visible in the wind
field sampled by a turbine. This vertical motion translates into horizontal (streamwise) varia-
tions through the uw cross-spectrum, leading to periodic accelerations and decelerations in the
flow. Consequently, the local wind shear is modified, which can result in asymmetric loading
on turbine blades. Additionally, due to the inherent oscillatory nature of waves, they can also
introduce cyclic loading. Finally, wave breaking can occur, increasing turbulence intensity and
the likelihood of gusts. From this point forward, interfacial gravity waves are referred to simply
as gravity waves.
4.1
Theoretical Background and Generation Mechanisms
Generally speaking, a linear, one-dimensional, real-valued wave, i.e. in horizontal direction,
can be described by its amplitude, wavenumber and wave frequency. As an example a wave W
could be described like:
W(x, t) = Acos(kx −ωt)
(21)
Here the amplitude is A, the wavenumber k is defined as 2π
λx which describes the wavelength
lambda per radian and the wave frequency ω defined as 2π
τ which describes the wave period τ
per radian.
Gravity waves are characterized, in their name already, by the restoring force that creates them.
But that is only half of the picture. In the hydrostatic balance, Eq. [4], gravity is weighed
against buoyancy, which creates n equilibrium height in the fluid, where an air parcel of certain
density (i.e. temperature), will remain if undisturbed (seldom). Gravity waves occur in stably
stratified fluids, where there is a restoring force, when the parcel is displaced to a region of
higher or lower density (recalling that unstable conditions enhance vertical motions, because
there is no restoring force, see Section 2.2). Thus, the restoring force is really a combination of
gravity and buoyancy acting together on the parcel. So if an air parcel is displaced, its motion
can be captured as a simple monochromatic oscillation in the vertical direction as explained in
more detail by Nappo (2012) [54]:
δz(t) = AeiNt + Be−iNt
(22)
here A and B are constants and N is defined as:
N =
$
g
θ
dθ
dz
(23)
From the set of Eq.[22] and Eq.[23] it can be seen that for stable conditions, so dθ
dz > 0, where the
potential temperature increases with height, N is real and represents the oscillation frequency
of a displaced air parcel, called the Brunt-Väisälä frequency. For negative potential tempera-
ture gradients, N becomes imaginary-valued and corresponds to the unbounded growth of the
vertical motion, as per convective (unstable) motion. From this it can be concluded that gravity
waves, only occur in stably stratified conditions, but not all gravity waves necessarily have the
frequency N, rather the range of wave frequencies falls in the interval of [0, N], depending of
the angle of wave propagation relative to the horizontal β as shown in Nappo (2012)[54]. As
introduced in Section 2.2, the Brunt-Väisälä frequency, is also commonly used, to describe the
stability regime in atmospheric flows.
Based on the above, one could say that any vertical displacement of air parcels in a stably strat-
ified flow, could cause gravity waves, whereas the potential temperature gradient dθ
dz, that de-
scribes how ‘strongly’ the fluid is stably stratified, dictates the frequency of oscillation, through
19
==PAGE:27==
the Brunt-Väisälä frequency. A vertical displacement can occur, through different phenomena,
such as wind shear or impulses. These impulses may include but are not limited to, clouds,
which usually move slower than the atmospheric flow, and force the flow to over their top, or
similarly topographic variations, such as mountains, which force the atmospheric flow to flow
around or over themselves [63]. As shown by Allaerts & Meyers (2019) [3] or Lanzilao (2024)
[42], wind farms can also induce gravity waves (interfacial waves on the capping inversion layer
and internal gravity waves in the free atmosphere), through the wind farm blockage effect,
i.e. the combined thrust force the wind turbines exert on the atmospheric flow. While gravity
waves have been observed by soundings, LIDAR and satellite images, the research of wind farm
blockage effects and the induced gravity waves, is still fully based on numerical simulations.
Stull (1998) differentiates between short gravity waves, which can transfer turbulent momentum
to smaller scales, and internal gravity waves. He characterizes internal gravity waves by their
typical temporal and spatial scales, ranging from a few minutes to several hours and spanning
distances of 2 to 20 km [63]. Per the definitions given above, Nappo (2012) specifies values for
an isothermal atmosphere, where N ≈0.02 s−1. For higher altitudes, such as z ≈100 km, he
specifies a value of N ≈0.023 s−1 [54]. Holton (2004) specifies a value of N ≈0.012 s−1 for the
‘average’ troposphere [28].
4.2
Gravity waves in research
Gravity waves have been captured in research through measurements and modeling. Earlier
studies have analyzed wave structures, by de-composing the measured flow parameters, such
as wind speed and pressure, into three parts: ensemble average, turbulent fluctuations and
waves. Similar to the Reynolds decomposition (see Section 5.3), this technique was aimed at
separating the seemingly chaotic signal to analyze the different contributing parts in detail.
Eq.[24], shows the decomposition, where ˜u denotes the full signal (in this case for wind speed),
U is the ensemble average, uw represents wave fluctuations about U and ut stands for turbulent
fluctuations around U.
˜u = U + uw + ut
(24)
Using this technique Finnigan et al. (1984) studied how energy is transferred from gravity
waves to turbulence. He concluded that the energy transfer depended on the non-linearity of
the flow and found that the energy transfer also changes, depending on the relative phase of the
turbulent and wave components. When studying multiple measured wave-turbulence interac-
tions, he found that the energy transfer was negligible for a phase difference of π
2. Their study
was also extended to non-linear and unsteady waves which are not further discussed here, due
to increased complexity and less relevance to the applied model in this thesis [23] [22].
In more recent research and due to the increased commissioning of ever larger wind farms,
the focus of study has shifted towards gravity wave-wind farm-interactions. Allaerts & Meyers
(2019), have studied how wind farm blockage, leads to a vertical displacement of the incoming
flow and the excitation sensitivity of resulting gravity waves. They developed a LES model,
composed of three layers, the lower wind farm layer, an upper layer and the free atmosphere,
respectively. They highlight the importance of the Froude number, which is a dimensionless
flow parameter, that characterizes the force balance between inertia and gravity in the flow.
They found that at the critical Froude number (force balance), the excitation of gravity waves
was at its maximum. They also found that wind farm power loss, induced by excitation of
gravity waves, increases with wind farm size and turbine height [3]. With the current trends of
20
==PAGE:28==
ever larger wind farms and turbines, the impact of gravity waves and power loss may get get
increasingly important.
Expanding on the work done by Allaerts & Meyers (2019), Devesse et al.
(2022), further
developed the model to include effects of different stability regimes and wind speeds in the
free atmosphere layer. They found that certain stability regimes in the free atmosphere can
suppress gravity wave excitation in the ABL. By studying data of a Belgian-Dutch wind farm,
they validated their modeling efforts and concluded that free atmosphere stability should be
taken into account when assessing gravity wave excitations [16]. Lanzilao & Meyers (2024)
further extended the research efforts to specifically assess CNBLs. They investigated the im-
plications on wind farm eﬀiciency and blockage, from different atmospheric stability conditions
using LES. The interdependence of gravity wave excitation, capping inversion height, and free
atmosphere lapse rate, was examined in detail. It effectively modulated the stability profile
shown here in Section 2.3. They found that in all cases, the wind farm blockage, lead to an
upward displacement of the capping inversion, and found this effect to be more pronounced
in shallow boundary layers, with stronger stratification and less entrainment. They also found
that an increased potential temperature gradient (stronger capping inversion), decreased the
vertical displacement (effectively gravity wave excitation), but supported the development of
surface waves on the interfacial layer [42].
Finally, similarly to Finnigan, linking waves and turbulence in the light of kinetic energy trans-
fer, recent research has examined wave-turbulence interactions with regard to wave breaking
and related turbulence generation. Howland et al. (2021), examined the breaking of gravity
waves, induced by wind shear through direct numerical simulations and highlighted the im-
portance of shear-wave interactions, which [29]. This is further highlighted by the existence
of jets as explained in Section 3, although jet-wave interactions are a field of study, yet to
be established. Schumacher at al. (2023), further examined shear-induced breaking of gravity
waves and the consequent downburst. They completed a case study of an event northeast of
Colorado (US) in 2020 [60].
After carefully reviewing existing literature, be it educational books on Meteorology [63][28],
focused literature on gravity waves [54] or cutting-edge numerical research concerning gravity
waves and wind turbines [3][16][42], no references were found that described the interaction of
wind turbines exposed to a gravity wave flow, with regards to turbine loads. Recent research
has shown that wind farms can effectively induce gravity waves. This means that those in-
duced gravity waves can be ‘felt’ by other downwind located wind farms. A theoretical basis
was established with this chapter, in the practical part of the study, a simple engineering model
is developed to capture some of the effects, as described above and assess exactly that gap in
research, that was just identified.
5
Methods
The goal of this thesis was to examine whether the current IEC standard methodology over- or
underestimates wind turbine loads under certain, depths of the ABL and specific atmospheric
stability conditions. In order to assess this hypothesis, tools for turbulence simulations, load
assessment and statistical methods have been employed.
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5: Workflow for α −study, jet −study and wave −study.
5.1
Workflow and Tools
Figure 5 visualizes the workflow, that led to the results of this thesis. The ovals represent start
and end of a numerical study. As we will see, three studies have been conducted: α −study,
jet −study and wave −study. The violet boxes, show the specific tools, for the different steps
and blue boxes represent, different simulation steps and content focus. Firstly, the simulation
parameters were defined answering questions such as: Which turbine will be used? Where is
the turbine situated? What environmental conditions can be expected? How long will the
simulations be? How many seeds are needed to assure statistical significance? These questions
could be summarized as the simulation setup, as explained in the following section. Next, since
no data was readily available, for the stability and turbulence cases, covered in this thesis, the
turbulence needed simulation. This was achieved, using HiperSim.
HiperSim is an open-source, python-based tool developed for generating turbulence fields using
the Mann spectral model, which is recommended in the IEC standard for turbulence genera-
tion [31]. It has capabilities for applying constraints and simulating non-Gaussian turbulence.
Designed to enhance the realism and flexibility of turbulence simulations, HiperSim allowed to
tailor turbulence fields to the specific conditions, which were required by the IEC standard. The
tool outputs data compatible with the widely used aero elastic simulation software HAWC2,
facilitating seamless integration into this workflow. Its source code is publicly accessible, and
it can be installed as a Python library [19]. HiperSim (Version 0.1.7) was used to generate the
turbulent fluctuations and the desired mean vertical wind profile was added manually after-
wards, to account for jet parameters etc.
The output from HiperSim, labeled as ‘turbulence boxes’, were then fed into the load assess-
ment tool. HAWC2 was chosen as a widely established and validated tool, developed here at
DTU [58]. HAWC2 is an aeroelastic code to simulate wind turbine response and loads to a
turbulent wind field in the time domain. In essence, HAWC2 advects the given turbulence
box over a stationary virtual wind turbine (here DTU 10MW RWT), employing a given wind
turbine controller (here basic DTU 10MW controller) [44]. As results the tower-base fore-aft
bending moment and blade root flapwise bending moments in the main wind direction were
extracted, see Table 1.
Afterwards, the results from the load assessment were post-processed to achieve the wanted sta-
tistical representations, in order to assess systematic over- or underestimation of loads. Through
post-processing methods, the simulation results, namely time-series of blade-root flapwise bend-
ing moments and tower-base fore aft bending moments, were extracted from the HAWC2 result
files. Since simulations with different seeds were completed, statistical representations could
22
==PAGE:30==
ID
Channel
Unit
Full Description
Location
17
Mx coo: tower
kNm
MomentMx Mbdy:tower, nodenr: 1, coo: tower
Tower base
26
Mx coo: blade1
kNm
MomentMx Mbdy:blade1, nodenr: 3, coo: blade1
Blade 1 root
29
Mx coo: blade2
kNm
MomentMx Mbdy:blade2, nodenr: 3, coo: blade2
Blade 2 root
32
Mx coo: blade3
kNm
MomentMx Mbdy:blade3, nodenr: 3, coo: blade3
Blade 3 root
Table 1: Moment Mx Channels Used in Load Analysis
be established and then visualized, using pre-built C++ tools, provided by the supervisors and
python post-processing tools, built by the author. Finally, the results were evaluated, and
discussed with regards to the research question, simulations setup and limitations.
5.2
DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine and environmental factors
The DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine (RWT), is a virtual wind turbine that has not been
constructed. It is a model, aimed at providing a shared basis for wind energy research, with
public technical details. It is based on the NREL 5MW reference wind turbine and was con-
structed by upscaling the NREL turbine to 10 MW regarding overall dimensions. It has served
as a basis for wind energy research for over 10 years and has been studied extensively. The
DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine includes overall dimensions aerodynamic design, struc-
tural design, control and aero-servo-elastic design.
All design parameters and an accurate
virtual presentation were included in the HAWC2 simulations. This reference turbine was cho-
sen, for practical reasons: readily available data, readily available HAWC2 model and template
files and conformity of the results with prior and future research. Bak et al. (2013) provide
a detailed report on the DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine, as it was utilized in this study [5].
Table 2 gives an overview on the key characteristics of the DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine.
In the context of this thesis, three parameters can be highlighted: Firstly, the rating per IEC
as class 1A, which refers to design mean wind speed of U = 10 [m/s] and reference turbulence
intensity of TIref = 0.16 [-] [31]. Secondly, the cut-in, rated and cut-out wind speeds, which
partly defined the simulated parameter space. And thirdly, the rotor dimensions, which influ-
ence the dimensions of the synthesized turbulence boxes with HiperSim and dimensions of load
assessment in HAWC2.
23
==PAGE:31==
Parameter
DTU 10MW RWT
Wind Regime
IEC Class 1A
Rotor Orientation
Clockwise rotation – Upwind
Control
Variable Speed, Collective Pitch
Cut-in Wind Speed
4 m/s
Cut-out Wind Speed
25 m/s
Rated Wind Speed
11.4 m/s
Rated Power
10 MW
Number of Blades
3
Rotor Diameter
178.3 m
Hub Diameter
5.6 m
Hub Height
119.0 m
Drivetrain
Medium Speed, Multiple-Stage Gearbox
Minimum Rotor Speed
6.0 rpm
Maximum Rotor Speed
9.6 rpm
Maximum Generator Speed
480.0 rpm
Gearbox Ratio
50
Maximum Tip Speed
90.0 m/s
Hub Overhang
7.1 m
Shaft Tilt Angle
5.0°
Rotor Precone Angle
-2.5°
Blade Prebend
3.332 m
Rotor Mass
227,962 kg
Nacelle Mass
446,036 kg
Tower Mass
628,442 kg
Table 2: Main characteristics of the DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine
Besides the reference turbine, some environmental parameters have been fixed, to allow for com-
parable, reproducible and meaningful simulations. These parameters, are especially relevant
for the meteorological context of the study, as they characterize, the atmospheric conditions
(CNBL). These parameters were not directly relevant to the turbulence or load simulations,
but rather for context. Where relevant, they are pointed out again and an overview is given
here:
• Latitude: A representative mid-latitude location is used, at 55◦.
• Surface potential temperature: θ0 = 290[K], representing the potential temperature
at the surface level, up to the inversion (see Figure 2).
• Temperature gradient: dθ
dz = 0.003[K/m], indicating a stable stratification of the free
atmosphere (see Figure 2).
• Roughness length over water: z0 = 0.0001[m], a typical value for open sea surfaces.
5.3
IEC requirements and turbulence modeling
The IEC prescribes a specific set of methodologies and load cases for offshore wind turbine
design in their standard IEC-61400. The wind turbine classes can be derived, based on different
combinations of wind speed and turbulence intensity, as shown in Table 3. Vave stands for annual
24
==PAGE:32==
mean wind speed. This is more relevant for fatigue loads. Whereas Vref stands for reference
wind speed average over a 10 min period, relating to ultimate loads. In the case of the DTU
10MW RWT, this corresponds to a class 1A with Vave = 10 [m/s] and Iref = 0.16 [-] (TI).
Wind turbine class
Unit
I
II
III
Vave
(m/s)
10
8.5
7.5
Vref
(m/s)
50
42.5
37.5
A+
Iref (-)
0.18
A
Iref (-)
0.16
B
Iref (-)
0.14
C
Iref (-)
0.12
Table 3: IEC wind turbine classes
The expected design lifetime as per IEC amounts to 20 years. This influences especially the
number of load cycles a component of the turbine will experience and is reflected in the lifetime
equivalent cycles used for the calculation of damage equivalent loads (DELS). In this thesis
work, the focus lied on a statistical representation of the occurring loads during a 10 min
simulation. Thus, this could influence a) fatigue loads, in terms of lower or higher stress during
normal operation load cycles and b) ultimate loads, if the simulations reveal atypically high
loads, that might cause component failure (here blade root and tower base are assessed).
DEL =
%
1
nref
n
&
i=1
Ni · Lm
i
' 1
m
(25)
The DELs were assessed in accordance with the IEC standard. A reference number of cycles
nref = 107 was picked. Eq. [25], shows the process of calculating the DEL. Ni denotes the
number of cycles with respective load amplitude Li, determined through Rainflow counting for
a simulated 10 min time series. For the steel tower the Wöhler exponent was fixed to m = 3
and for the blades of composite materials the exponent was fixed to m = 10. This procedure
stands in accordance with industry and research standards [31][5].
Furthermore the standard prescribes certain environmental conditions, which can be divided
into ‘normal’ and ‘extreme categories’. Whereas ‘normal’ conditions reflect frequent operating
conditions and ‘extreme’ events are characterized by a return period of 1 or 50 years. The focus
in this study are not extreme events but rather abnormal operating conditions, that are not
covered by the standard IEC prescription for simulating design load cases (DLCs). Here the
focus was on a normal operating scenario, so DLC 1.1. In most methodologies, including the
IEC standard, a Reynolds decomposition is a applied to the wind, separating the wind speed
signal into a background or mean value (often averaged over 10min intervals, as also done in
this thesis) and a fluctuating, turbulent part. In the simulations, three velocity components
were considered: longitudinal u, lateral v, vertical w. Eq.[26] shows the components and de-
pendencies. It is common practice to define the coordinate system such that the longitudinal
component coincides with the mean wind flow. Furthermore the mean wind depends on height
z, for example as per power-law, log-law (Eq.[1]), Monin-Obhukhov similarity, etc. Addition-
ally, in the jet-study, the mean wind speed depended on jet parameters, as explained in the
next section (see Eq.[34]). The turbulent components were modeled with HiperSim and a
mean wind U(z) was added afterwards.
25
==PAGE:33==
˜u(x, y, z, t) = U(z) + u(x, y, z, t)
˜v(x, y, z, t) = v(x, y, z, t)
˜w(x, y, z, t) = w(x, y, z, t),
(26)
The main requirement regarding turbulence simulations, in the IEC standard, is that the simu-
lated turbulence has to satisfy or amount up to similar fluctuations, such as the Kaimal model
for turbulence. There are prescribed values for the turbulence standard deviation σ1 in the
longitudinal direction as well as for lateral and vertical fluctuations. The turbulence length
scale is based on the hub height on the turbine as per Eq.[27].
Λ1 =
(
0.7z
z ≤60 m
42 m
z ≥60 m
(27)
In Eq.[27], Λ1 stands for the longitudinal turbulence scale parameter. For the DTU 10 MW
RWT, with a hub-height of 119.0m (and most other contemporary turbines), Eq.[27] will always
yield Λ1 = 42 [m]. Since hub heights nowadays tend to be higher than 60 [m], especially in
offshore applications. Furthermore the power spectral densities are required to fulfill certain
analytic forms in the inertial sub range, consistent with Kolmogorov’s 5/3-law. Lastly a coher-
ence model is required to link the turbulence velocity components in space. However, while IEC
61400-1 chapter 6.3.1 mainly describes the Kaimal model, that has to be satisfied, in Annex C
it is explained that the ‘Mann model for uniform shear is recommended’, with given parameters
that were based on a least-squares fit to the Kaimal model.
The Mann model uses the von Kármán energy spectrum and distorts isotropic turbulence by a
uniform mean velocity shear, effectively ‘stretching’ the turbulent eddies in longitudinal direc-
tion. From this distortion an analytical form of the spectral tensor was derived by Mann. With
the spectral tensor Gaussian turbulence is produced at multiple spatial points by synthesizing
Fourier time series, to produce a turbulence box. The model is consistent with the required
model for coherence, and abides by the Kolmogorov 5/3-law in the inertial sub range. The
model is based on three parameters to describe the conditions for the generated turbulence.
Mann’s derivation was done under the assumptions of neutral stability conditions and a linear
mean shear. In reality it would be best to fit the three parameters to measured single point
spectra at a given site, to capture influences from surface heat flux or local inhomogeneities.
However for practicality, the IEC prescribes values that satisfy the requirements of IEC 61400-1
chapter 6.3.1 as described above.
The turbulence strength parameter αMϵ2/3 is not directly prescribed by the IEC standard.
Rather the IEC defines the isotropic turbulence, that is later distorted in the Mann model,
based on σ1 that is inherent in the relevant wind turbine class from a given turbulence intensity.
From there on the strength parameter can be constructed, with the given relation from Mann
[51][52]:
σ2
iso = 0.69(αMϵ2/3)L2/3
M = 0.44σ2
isoL−2/3
M
(28)
The turbulence characteristic length scale, is important for the isotropic turbulence spectra
that are distorted by a uniform mean shear. That length scale dictates the wavenumber where
the peak of the isotropic spectra is located and could be interpreted as the size of the most
influential eddies in the turbulent wind field. The IEC prescribes a turbulence length scale
LM = 0.8Λ1, which in turn is based on hub height. And as described above for many modern
wind turbines, especially offshore will most likely default to a value of 0.8 · 42[m] = 33.6[m].
Research has found that the turbulence length can also differ with various stability regimes,
26
==PAGE:34==
which indicates that a flat value like given by the IEC can not correctly characterize turbulence
across different sites, day times, seasons etc.
Different approaches have been developed to
estimate the turbulence length scale, based on site specific measurements, such as standard
10 min cup anemometer time series measurements. Kelly (2018) related the turbulence length
scale to the wind shear and standard deviation of stream wise fluctuations (σ1 in the IEC
context) and mean wind shear [35]. This relation will come in handy, for simulated turbulence
in the wave −study.
LM =
σ1
dU/dz
(29)
The turbulence anisotropy parameter ΓM, provides a scale to describe how much the isotropic
turbulence is distorted by the uniform mean shear that is applied. Mann formulated that the
eddy lifetime is proportional to the inverse of shear and ΓM. In isotropic turbulence, the com-
ponent spectra are equally big, by distorting the isotropic turbulence, the u, v and w spectra
are shifted, where usually σu is highest and shows higher wavelengths than v and w. This can
be observed i.e. in the Mann reference values in Figure 18a. The IEC prescribes a value of 3.9,
however, de Mare & Mann (2016) [53] and Kelly (2018) [35] found that ΓM is expected to be
closer to a value of 3. Measurements have shown that most commonly 2 ≤ΓM ≤4 [14], and in
that range it was found that σu ≈σiso(0.61 + 0.3ΓM) [35].
Table 4 summarizes the Mann turbulence parameters, their SI units and the respective preset,
dictated by the IEC standard.
Parameter
Unit
Description
IEC preset
Strength parameter αMϵ2/3
m4/3
s2
Based on the eddy dissipation rate
σiso = 0.55σ1
Characteristic length scale LM
m
Governs
the
peak
wavenumber
of
isotropic turbulence spectra
0.8Λ1
Anisotropy factor ΓM
–
Distortion factor of isotropic turbu-
lence
3.9
Table 4: IEC Mann turbulence parameters
5.4
Turbulent wind field simulation
After carefully reviewing the IEC-prescribed methods for turbulent wind field simulation, the
basis for the simulations within this thesis was established. Table 6, gives an extensive overview
of the numerical studies conducted during this thesis and the employed methods to simulate
turbulent wind fields. In the following sections, each study set up will be explained, choices
motivated and limitations examined. Three numerical studies have been conducted: The first
simulations were organized fully according to the IEC standard to serve as a basis for compar-
ison and impact assessment of jets and gravity waves (in the results section always referred to
as ‘IEC case’). In that set of simulations, hereafter referred to as the α −study, the focus was
on the specified shear exponent α = 0.2 [-], dictated by the IEC standard for load assessments
(for clarity: the α −study contains all the ‘IEC cases’, with a respective shear exponent of
α = 0.2). Here for the operating wind speed range of the DTU 10MW RWT, the load data was
gathered with a fixed turbulence intensity corresponding to IEC turbine class 1A (TI = 0.16
[-]). In the following sections, the example case studies, were also picked, with the IEC Class
27
==PAGE:35==
1A specifications in mind.
The second set of simulations, referred to as jet −study was conducted with superimposed
mean jets (mean in terms of 10 min simulations, which is a good enough simplification, taking
into account, the different mechanism contributing to jet formation and their respective time
scale: stationary vertical wind shear in Ekman Solution or the inertial period in mid latitudes,
as discussed in Section 3). The resulting loads are compared against the respective ‘IEC cases’
from the α−study, matching background parameters such as nominal mean wind speed U and
turbulence intensity TI.
Lastly, the wave −study consisted of simulations for coherent wave structures sampled by
a wind turbine at a given wave amplitude A and Brunt-Väisälä Frequencies N and are also
compared against the respective results from the α −study. The coherent wave structure was
placed at the top of the turbulent box according to the described scenario.
α-study
jet-study
wave-study
Windspeeds [m/s]
U ∈[4, 24] in steps of 2
U ∈{5.0, 8.0, 10.0, 11.0, 12.0, 14.0}
U = 10.0
Turbulence Intensity [-]
0.16
0.16
0.16
Shear Exponent α [-]
0.20
0.20
Mann model (implicit)
Seeds
10
10
10
Additional Parameters
N.A.
H ∈{150, 200, 250, 300, 400, 500} [m]
W(H) ∈{0.02H, 0.05H, 0.10H, 0.15H, 0.20H, 0.25H} [m]
S ∈{4.0, 6.0, 8.0, 10.0} [m/s]
N ∈{0.01, 0.03, 0.06, 0.1} [s−1]
A = 2.0 [m/s]
Table 5: Comparison of simulation parameters across α-, jet-, and wave −study setups.
Due to computational constraints, the jet −study, concluded a limited range of wind speeds,
the parameter space was already large, with examining different shapes of jets. Additionally,
it was found in earlier research during observation of jets on a mast at similar hub height to
the DTU 10MW RWT, that the highest vertical shears appeared for mean wind speeds at hub
height (in that case 120 [m]), between 8 [m/s] and 14 [m/s] [34]. While these measurements,
were performed onshore, they hinted at scenarios that were worth including in the parameter
space for this study. All simulations in the α−and jetstudy were performed with TI = 0.16
according to IEC class A. Further motivations regarding the chosen parameter space, especially
for the jet −study are found in Section 5.7.
5.5
α −study
The α −study was built as a reference study, to enable an assessment of over- or underesti-
mations within an IEC-prescribed load assessment. The simulations strictly adhered to the
contents of IEC-61400-1 [31] for normal operation conditions (DLC 1.1). The turbulent com-
ponents u, v, w of the wind field, were simulated in accordance with the methods explained in
Section 5.3. The mean wind U(z), that was added afterwards, was calculated using a classic
power law approximation, coherent with IEC methodology [31] [8]:
U(z) =
! z
zref
"α
(30)
Here the reference height was taken as the hub height zref = zhub = 119.0 [m] and the IEC-
prescribed shear exponent α = 0.2 [-] was employed. That resulted in a vertical mean wind
profile U(z), that matched Unominal at hub height and obeyed the shear requirement.
The
wind fields were simulated for a duration of 10 minutes, in agreement with industry standard
28
==PAGE:36==
and practice [31] [35]. The turbulence box mesh grid (Nx, Ny, Nz), was picked to match and
accurately depict the rotor swept area, as per HAWC2 requirements. The lateral and vertical
spacing was fixed to dy = dz = 1 [m], whereas the longitudinal spacing dx, was based on the
simulation parameters:
dx = U · TI
Nx
(31)
This model is simple, depends on only synthetic data and is likely less accurate compared to
extensive measurements. However, due to competitive tenders and the push for lower strike
prices, decisions are nowadays often based on limited data, such as shorter measurement cam-
paigns or interpolated mesoscale datasets. Research is also pushing for more simplistic models
to simulate offshore wind energy production and costs to facilitate the planning process devel-
opers and decision-makers undergo before construction a wind farm [62]. Hence, despite its
simplicity, this simulation remains relevant and provides a suﬀicient basis for comparison.
5.6
jet −study
The jet −study was aimed at assessing the impacts jet structures have on the turbulent wind
field and the consequences for a wind turbine. After reviewing various mechanisms that con-
tribute to jet development, see Section 3, this study focused on wind fields with apparent jet
structures, without taking generating mechanisms into account (i.e. Ekman solution or inertial
oscillations), but rather characterizing the jet and assessing its impact on the wind field and
ultimately turbine structure.
The turbulent wind field u, v, w, was simulated in the same manner as for the α −study.
Eq.[35], was only devised after carefully reviewing relevant literature on jets in the ABL. The
jet height H (defined as the vertical position of the nose of the jet) was assumed to coincide
with the height of the temperature inversion, in agreement with earlier theories on nocturnal
low-level jets (LLJs) [10, 4, 49]. This assumption was further supported by measurements in-
dicating that the jet’s position typically aligns with the inversion layer [69], as well as more
recent LES studies on the structure of the CNBL [37, 56, 48], which reveal similar trends. To
summarize, the jet height H was assumed to coincide with he. This way, the examination of
H in the results, is representative towards the research question: “How — and to what extent
— can different ABL depths and strengths of the ABL-capping temperature inversion influence
the loads on a wind turbine, for a given hub-height and rotor size?” As discussed in Section 3,
various methodologies exist for determining the height of the ABL. Likewise, the vertical posi-
tion at which a jet forms can vary. Therefore, throughout the numerical simulations, various
heights were tested.
Pedersen et al.
(2014) [56] defined the jet width W as the interval where U > |G|.
But
since no measurement data or simulations was readily available, an analytical description of
the jet was needed. Libianchi et al. [47] investigated the sensitivity of the predicted acoustic
pressure field to variations in wind and temperature profiles within a CNBL. And explored how
different atmospheric conditions, particularly wind speed and temperature gradients, influence
the propagation of sound waves in the boundary layer. They derived some useful relations
in the context of jet characterization. Recalling the definition of the atmospheric boundary
layer (ABL) height he as given by Zilitinkevich in Eq. (8) [72], Libianchi extended this concept
by incorporating findings from the momentum flux analysis conducted by Liu et al.
[48].
29
==PAGE:37==
Those findings were based on the assumption of medium to high latitudes, where the ratio
ϵ = ∆z/2h′ ≈0.12, See assumptions Section 5.2. From there on, Libianchi derived an expression
for the ABL height, h′, as follows:
h′ =
h
(1 −0.005)
2
3
(32)
Here, h is the height where the total momentum flux reaches 5% of the surface value, which
has been identified as a local maxima for wind speed, i.e. ‘nose of the jet’ [37] [56]. To further
develop the theory, Libianchi equated the two expressions for the ABL height. This allowed
for the derivation of the jet width W, here expressed as ∆z:
∆z =
2ϵ
(1 −0.005)
2
3 · CCN ·
u∗
√fcN
(33)
In Eq. [33], ϵ represents the ratio of the jet width to ABL height, CCN is a constant that
depends on the characteristics of the boundary layer as per [72], u∗is the friction velocity, and
√fcN is the square root of the product of the Coriolis parameter, fc, and the Brunt–Väisälä
frequency, N. This expression provides a method for calculating the jet width W, or ∆z, based
on the conditions of the boundary layer and the environmental parameters. Generally it shows
the dependence of jet width W on parameters that define jet Height H.
The jet strength S has historically been interpreted in different ways, such as the amplitude of
an inertial oscillation or through definitions based on local maxima thresholds. Otherwise, it
can be determined through the mean momentum balance (as per Ekman, see Section 3.1), or
dimensional analysis as done in research [37], [48]. These approaches rely either on theoretical
derivations, which employ methods and parameters outside the simulation scope of this thesis
or require measurements. Alternatively jet strength can be described as a velocity relative to
the geostrophic wind, following the relation established by Pedersen et al. [56]. This definition
is practical for integration within simulations that incorporate a ‘medium amount’ of atmo-
spheric parameters. In their LES simulations of CNBLs, Pedersen et al. consistently observed
a local wind speed maximum, or jet, around z/he = 1, with an amplitude of 1.07|G|, after the
layers reached a quasi-steady state, which was typically achieved around 23–24 hours.
Figure 6 compares differently simulated vertical wind profiles for a CNBL. The profile, shown
in blue, combines the log-law (Eq. 1) and an additional Gaussian jet, with the characteristics as
described above. This profile was developed to capture the effects described above and condense
the complex relations into the three simple parameters Height H, Width W and Strength S.
The simulation was based on a mean wind speed U = 10 [m/s] according to IEC Wind Class A
[31], and the environmental parameters as per Section 5.2: mid latitude of 55°, θ0 = 290[K],
dθ
dz = 0.003[K/m], and a roughness length over water z0 = 0.0001 [m]. The plot also includes the
universal profile derived by Kelly et al. [37] for validation, shown in green. The red area marks
the part of the wind field that would be sampled by the DTU 10MW RWT. It can already
be inferred that jets most likely impact the top-half of the rotor more than the bottom half,
which could cause asymmetric loading. Eq. [34] summarizes the vertical wind profile, depicted
as the red curve in Figure 6, where H, W, S were based on the above-mentioned relations,
with respect to the chosen environmental parameters. It can be observed that Eq.[34], basically
represents a classic log-law with a Gaussian-shaped jet, defined by the jet parameters.
U(z) = u∗
κ ln
! z
z0
"
+ S exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
(34)
30
==PAGE:38==
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Wind Speed U [m/s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Height z [m]
Log-Law
Universal CNBL Proﬁle, Kelly (2019)
Windspeed Proﬁle
Output to Mann Box
Figure 6: Simulated CNBL Profile
For the simluations, the vertical mean wind speed profile U(z), was further simplified, to
a power law approximation, equal to the one in the α −study. This way, less environmental
parameters were needed for the jet−study and a common basis for comparison was assured. To
summarize: U(z), was devised to represent an IEC prescribed power law with a superimposed,
Gaussian-shaped jet structure. The jet was characterized by three parameters height H, width
W and strength S. Eq.[35], shows the U(z)-relation that was used to describe the mean wind
field, vertically.
U(z) =
! z
zhub
"α
+ S exp
)
−
!z −H
W
"2*
(35)
It is noted, that U(z), could be described more accurately, using the ‘tools’, already found
by the wind and ABL research community, as they were described above and visualized in
Figure 6. However, in the scope of this thesis, the IEC 61400 standard was in the spotlight and
practical representation were needed. Thus compromises were made to ensure fair comparisons.
The time and spatial domains were simulated in the same manner as for the α −study. It can
be highlighted, that here it was even more important to properly depict the vertical mean wind
structure, which was achieved by picking Nz = 180 and dz = 1 [m].
A goal of this thesis was to identify atmospheric boundary layer flows that are not covered by
the IEC norm and examine their impact on turbine loads. Until here, a statistical representa-
tion of H, has been established (Section 2.4). Additionally, theoretical relations provided first
estimates for W and S. With the simplified representation of the jet structure in mind and no
readily available data to assess the common appearances or shape of jets, a parameter space
had to be defined for jet height H, jet width W and jet strength S. Hence, a smaller numerical
‘pre-study’ was conducted to find a suitable parameter space for the jet −study. The basis
of this pre-study was the resulting wind shear, that the turbine would ‘experience’ later in the
31
==PAGE:39==
HAWC2 simulation.
Wind shear has been extensively researched due to its influence on wind turbine loads. Both
wind shear and wind veer have been identified as key factors that impact the distribution of
aerodynamic loads across turbine components. Eggers et al. (2003) conducted numerical inves-
tigations to quantify shear and veer influence on fatigue loads of rotors and load control [20].
Furthermore, Sathe et al. (2012) employed aeroelastic simulations to explore how variations in
atmospheric stability affect wind turbine loads and found increased rotor loads resulting from
stability conditions that promoted high shear [59]. Further advancing the understanding of this
shear-loads relationship, Kelly (2014) developed statistical models of wind shear to predict load
responses on wind turbines, offering a probabilistic framework to anticipate turbine behavior
under varying wind profiles [38]. Collectively, these studies underline the crucial role of wind
shear (and veer) in influencing turbine loads. Besides wind shear, the main load driving com-
ponents were found to be wind speed U(z), turbulence intensity TI and characteristic length
scale L [35] [12].
Since the other parameters (TI, LM) were contained within other parts of the wind field
simulation, the parameter study primarily focused on wind shear (U(z) and α, somewhat go
hand in hand here). However, not the entire vertical wind profile described by Eq. [34] was
relevant in this context. Since the objective of this thesis is to analyze turbine loads, only the
height interval [(zhub −R), (zhub + R)] was considered—consistent with the approach used in
HAWC2 for load calculations. As a result, wind shear was evaluated only within the portion
of the turbulence box that the turbine actually ‘experiences’ and which directly influences the
loads (see Figure 6).
102
3 £ 101
4 £ 101
6 £ 101
2 £ 102
Wind speed U [m/s]
101
9 £ 100
9.2 £ 100
9.4 £ 100
9.6 £ 100
9.8 £ 100
1.02 £ 101
1.04 £ 101
Height z [m]
Sample wind proﬁle
Power-law ﬁt: Æ = 0.072
Figure 7: Fitting a sample wind profile in log-log space
Due to the importance here and in the following sections, the method for calculating shear
exponent α is reviewed shortly. The shear was determined by fitting a straight line in log-log
space to the vertical wind speed profile in the given rotor interval, as shown in Figure 7. This is
32
==PAGE:40==
consistent with Eq. [36], however one needs to be careful, as for low wind speeds log(U), may
become substantially large and skew results. Hence, this should be performed on the actual
U(z), which includes Unominal and not ‘just’ dU/dz representing the vertical shear. With this
method, the shear over the whole rotor was captured and condensed into one shear exponent.
This approach relaxed or underestimated local shear as it was averaged over the whole rotor.
For the case, depicted in Figure 7, that did not matter as much, since it was fitted for the
simulated CNBL profile (Figure 6), which still closely resembled a log-profile in the interval.
However, when examining varying jet parameters and ‘abnormal’ wind shears, this averaging
could become relevant. In reality the shear is the local derivative of the vertical wind speed
profile, Eq. [36], which can lead to more extreme values of shear. However for the parameter
study it was deemed a reasonable simplification, as the main goal was to test which jet pa-
rameters to consider for the following load studies, rather than conducting a whole study on
wind shear. In order to somehow account for the rotor-averaging, wind shear over only the top
half and top quarter of the rotor, will also be considered, when reviewing the results. A big
difference between the two wind shear exponents would hint at a higher rotor averaging effect.
Additionally an analytical relation will be reviewed, which depicts local shear.
α = d log U
d log z
(36)
5.7
Parameter study
Height H, width W and strength S within various combinations, were tested to assess the
resulting shear exponent α as an agent for loads. Naturally, not all combinations of jet pa-
rameters resulted in a unique wind shear at the turbine; some lead to similar shear profiles.
Therefore, in this parameter-study, the relationship between shear and the jet parameters was
derived numerically and quasi-analytically to identify a suitable set of jet parameters for the
HAWC2 simulations. In a numerical study a large range of jet heights, widths and strengths
was tested. Effectively each different combination of jet parameters was substituted into the
equation of U(z) as described earlier (Eq. [35]) and then the wind shear over the rotor interval
was calculated.
• Height H ∈[100, 400] [m], in steps of 10 [m]
• Width W ∈[20, 150] [m], in steps of 5 [m]
• Strength S ∈[0.0, 10.0] [m/s], in steps of 1.0 [m/s]
The 3D scatter plot in Figure 8, represents the results of the parameter study and shows the
various combinations with their respective rotor-averaged wind shear exponent α. Higher shear
cases were of interest due to the load driving nature of wind shear. Height H is depicted on
the abscissa, width W on the ordinate and strength S is color coded, as per the color bar on
the right. Each combination of jet parameters yielded a certain wind shear, represented by
one dot in the scatter plot. The corresponding wind shear α is shown on the applicate. As
could be expected, jets with higher strength, yielded higher wind shear, which can be observed
by the color gradient between the different dots in the graph. Upfront is an area of low shear
for heights above 250 [m] and widths below ca. 120 [m], which represent narrow jets above
the rotor that don’t impact rotor shear significantly. Behind that an elevated region can be
identified, with a curve and a peak around 180 [m] for widths of 40[m]. The higher the jets get
then the more the peak is shifted towards broader widths around 150 [m] for a height of 240
[m]. These jets represent impactful wind speed accelerations, especially over the top half of the
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 8: 3D scatter plot of parameter study results
rotor (reminder that zhub is at 119 [m]). Thus they highly influenced the shear and could lead
to extreme shear values exceeding 0.5. A dependence between H and W was be concluded,
that lead to high shear scenarios.
As observed in the scatter plot above, the top half of the rotor seems to be more influenced
than the bottom half of the rotor. Figure 9 compares histograms of numerically assessed shear
exponents over the whole, top-half and top-quarter of the rotor. Additionally, it shows an
example of a ‘marginal distribution’ for α, based on a relation, that is developed later in this
section. The frequency distributions are shown in log-space (y−axis). For now let’s focus on
the numerical results: One can observe high peaks in both frequency distributions around shear
values of 0.1. The full rotor averaged distribution, was skewed towards positive values. When
only looking at the wind shear for the top half (fitting a line in log-log space over only the inter-
val [zhub, (zhub +R)]), there was a broader distribution observed with bigger tails, also including
negative values. Negative shear for the top half can happen through certain jet parameter
combinations. Think about a fairly wide jet centered at hub-height, almost any strength could
cause negative shear, since mechanical shear from the power-law at that height is already fairly
small. After this numerical study, the question was, why is it that many parameter configura-
tions tend to yield a shear near 0.1?
In order to assess which parameter combinations had lead to the highly frequent observed shear
above, the data was categorized into 3 quantiles, each representing one third of the original
parameter range. The quantiles are labeled as ‘low’, ‘mid’, and ‘high’. By doing that, the data
could be represented in categories and combinations of these, i.e. low height with low width
and low strength, and so on. From analyzing these categorized histograms, it was clear that
the shear values were centered around the respective peak close to 0.2, due to non influential
jets, see Figure 10. As explained in the beginning it was expected that small widths and high
heights would naturally not influence the rotor-average wind shear a lot, either due to their
34
==PAGE:42==
°1.5
°0.5
0.5
1.5
103
104
Frequency [-]
Æ over top 25
°1.5
°0.5
0.5
1.5
102
103
104
Frequency [-]
Æ over top 50
°1.5
°0.5
0.5
1.5
Wind Shear Æ [-]
102
103
104
Frequency [-]
Æ over whole rotor
°1.5
°0.9
°0.3
0.3
0.9
1.5
Wind Shear Æ [-]
100
101
102
103
Frequency [-]
Analytical Æ distribution
Figure 9: Histograms of wind shear over different rotor sections & analytical distribution
Æ [-]
0
1000
2000
Frequency [-]
W: Low [m], S: Low [m/s]
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: Low [m], S: Mid [m/s]
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: Low [m], S: High [m/s]
Æ [-]
0
1000
2000
Frequency [-]
W: Mid [m], S: Low [m/s]
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: Mid [m], S: Mid [m/s]
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: Mid [m], S: High [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Æ [-]
0
1000
2000
Frequency [-]
W: High [m], S: Low [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: High [m], S: Mid [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: High [m], S: High [m/s]
Wind Shear Æ Distribution - Jet Height: High (310.0 [m] – 400.0 [m])
Figure 10: Histograms of α distribution for category: high heights H (highest 33%)
35
==PAGE:43==
limitation to being a local peak (small width) or due to the fact that they were situated above
the rotor and did not affect the rotor directly (high heights). It is noted that with respect to
the Γ distributions on ABL height as seen in Section 2.4, when referring to high height in the
context of this parameter study, in reality the ABL heights range up to 1500 [m]. From the
histograms in Figure 10 it was observed that especially high heights, combined with low widths
yielded the frequently observed shear, which basically corresponds to the power-law shear, in
this case 0.2. The same is applicable for the mid height range from 200 - 290 [m]. Thus the
overall frequency distributions were skewed towards values of low shear.
Æ [-]
0
500
1000
Frequency [-]
W: Low [m], S: Low [m/s]
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: Low [m], S: Mid [m/s]
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: Low [m], S: High [m/s]
Æ [-]
0
500
1000
Frequency [-]
W: Mid [m], S: Low [m/s]
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: Mid [m], S: Mid [m/s]
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: Mid [m], S: High [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Æ [-]
0
500
1000
Frequency [-]
W: High [m], S: Low [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: High [m], S: Mid [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Æ [-]
Frequency [-]
W: High [m], S: High [m/s]
Wind Shear Æ Distribution - Jet Height: Low (100.0 [m] – 200.0 [m])
Figure 11: Histograms of α distribution for category: low heights H
When visualizing a specific example from the assessed parameter space, the relevance of the
H-W-relationship for the shear exponent becomes more clear. Figure 12, showcases the relation
observed earlier in Figure 8. The combination of H and W is essential for defining the rotor-
averaged shear exponent. It can be observed, that the most ‘interesting cases’ lay somewhere
around a value of W/H ≈0.2 to 0.3.
After numerically assessing the jet parameters and associated shear exponents, a quasi analyt-
ical approach to find the shear distribution, dependent on the jet parameter distributions was
derived. Here the jet parameters were treated as statistical variables with simple distributions,
to find a marginal distribution for wind shear α. The vertical wind speed profile was modeled
using the log-law and adding a Gaussian shaped jet with parameters Height H, width W and
strength S, as described above (Eq.[34]). As mentioned above, the dimensionless wind shear
exponent is defined as the logarithmic derivative of the vertical wind speed profile, see Eq.
36. Therefore, an analytical expression for the shear exponent α could be derived using the
previously introduced relationships. Doing this yielded Eq. 37. Notes on the development and
derivative can be found in Annex A.
36
==PAGE:44==
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Jet Width W [m]
100
130
160
190
220
250
280
310
340
370
400
Jet Height H [m]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Æ [-]
Figure 12: Heatmap of shear exponent α over rotor, at U = 10m/s and S = 8m/s
α =
z
u∗
κ ln
+
z
z0
,
+ S exp
+
−
- z−H
W
.2, ·
)
1
z · u∗
κ −2S
W 2 exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
(z −H)
*
(37)
Here the complex dependence of shear on the jet parameters was revealed. Further analysis re-
garding dependence of shear on the jet parameters could have been first or second order Taylor
approximation, utilizing partial derivatives or other linearization techniques. While this is an
interesting topic of study, possibly for further research, due to the scope of this thesis, focusing
on loads over/underestimation through simulations was prioritized.
Eq. 37 summarizes the relation between wind shear and jet parameters, in the context of this
work. When assuming independence the law of transformation probabilities could have been
applied to find the analytical form for the distribution of wind shear. However, in this context
assuming independence of statistical variables (jet parameters H, W, S), seemed inappropri-
ate, since all of them describe one phenomenon and are assumed to be somehow correlated
(i.e. through physical description of the jet). In order to find a practical solution that still
provides meaningful insights, some simplifications were needed. When looking at the general
simulation parameters and taking into account the relations described above, by Liu, Liang
(2010), Pedersen et al. (2014) and Libianchi et al. (2023), the following set of parameters
could be constructed, for the simulated CNBL profile in Section 5.2:
• Height H = 452 [m] (Expected value of the gamma distribution)
• Width W = 98.4 [m] (following the relation of Libianchi et al. (2023), Eq. 33)
• Strength S = 2.12 [m/s] (following the relation by Pedersen et al. (2014))
37
==PAGE:45==
Based on these initial values as set of (simplified) of parameter distributions was chosen. Firstly,
Height H was assumed to be gamma-distributed, as laid out in Section 2.4. Secondly, Width
W, was assumed to be dependent on H, by a constant factor of 0.25 (Observed from above
98.43
451.79 ≈0.21 and from Figure 12). Thirdly, the strength S was assumed to be independently
Gaussian distributed with a µ = 2.12 and σ = 0.5. Here the µ represented the value of a
jet according to the Pedersen et al.
relation under for the simulated CNBL. Whereas the
distribution and σ was arbitrarily chosen by the author. A plot of the resulting distribution,
with 1000 samples, is shown in Figure 9. Generally, good agreement, can be concluded with
the numerical simulations. Again the distribution is centered around a low shear exponent,
due to high height-low width interactions. Again a tail towards, higher shear exponents can
be seen, and some negative shear cases emerged too. Summary for the plot and approximate
distribution in Figure 9:
Height H [m] :
f(h; k, s) = hk−1 · e−h/s
sk · Γ(k) ,
where h = H
50, k = 2.3, s = 3.9
(38)
Width W [m] :
W ∼N
-
0.25 · H, (0.05 · 0.25 · H)2.
(39)
Strength S [m/s] :
f(s; µ, σ) =
1
√
2πσ2 · exp
!
−(s −µ)2
2σ2
"
,
where µ = 2.12, σ = 0.5 (40)
Figure 13 shows the inputs and results in more detail, for a study with N = 104 samples where
the frequency is shown in log-space (y−axis). The Γ distribution for H and dependence of W
can be clearly observed, as well as the independent S distribution. In the bottom right corner,
the resulting wind shear distribution is shown and the resemblance, to the results from the
numerical study is clear. Also here, the shear is centered around a comparatively low value
(mean of 0.0965), slightly higher than the numerical approach, possibly due to the newly intro-
duced linear W-H-dependence, which prevents very high height and low width combinations.
However the similarity in results is clear and confirms the results of the numerical study.
Taking into account the previously identified trends and distributions, as shown in Eqs. [40],
and relating the local shear exponent defined in Eq. [37] to the given jet parameters, we ob-
tained a conditional distribution of the shear exponent α. This distribution is conditioned on
the jet parameters and visualized in Figure 14, which shows the probability of the 90th per-
centile (P90) of α as a function of jet height H (x-axis) and jet width W (y-axis), for a fixed
jet strength band of S = 1.07 · G −U ± 0.1m/s. This value was based on the observations by
Pedersen et al. (2014) [56]. The shear exponent α is represented using the color scale on the
right. It is important to note that this α does not correspond to a rotor-averaged or top-half
shear, as were discussed before. Rather, the analytical relation in Eq. [37] describes the local
derivative of wind shear in log-space (see Eq. [36]). For this figure, the characteristic height
was chosen as the hub height, zhub. The Grey region highlights the 3σ interval of H, which
corresponds to a 99.7% confidence, for H (Γ-distributed). The dependence between W and H
is observed, judging by the linear trend in the data points. From the color scale, it is evident
that in most cases the shear exponent lies within a typical range of 0 to 0.2. However, for small
values of H (and corresponding W), α tends to increase and, in extreme cases, even ‘flips’ to a
negative sign. This supports the findings of the earlier parameter study.
Two main factors then ultimately influenced the parameter space for the jet −study: Firstly,
the results from the parameter study especially motivated low heights and high widths. An
increased strength would also lead to more impact on the shear exponent. These were motivated
by the influence on shear exponent and consequently loads. Secondly, for completeness and
applicability within the climatology of ABL height. Higher values of H were still included, to
38
==PAGE:46==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Jet Height H [m]
101
102
103
Frequency [-]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Jet Width W [m]
101
102
103
Frequency [-]
0
1
2
3
4
Jet Strength S [m/s]
100
101
102
103
Frequency [-]
°1.0
°0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Wind Shear Æ [-]
101
103
Frequency [-]
Figure 13: Quasi-analytical study on shear distribution
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Jet Height H [m]
100
200
300
400
500
Jet Width W [m]
Conditional 90th Percentile of Wind Shear Æ given H, W: P90(Æ | H, W)
±3 æ interval of H
°0.6
°0.4
°0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
90th Percentile of Wind Shear Æ
Figure 14: Heatmap showing the conditional probability of P90(α | H, W)
39
==PAGE:47==
take prior research such as Liu et al. [49] into account, even though little to no influence on
the turbine loads was expected.
• Height H ∈{150, 200, 250, 300, 400, 500} m
• Width W ∈{0.02, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, 0.25} (conditioned on H)
• Strength S ∈{4, 6, 8, 10} m/s
5.8
wave −study
The wave −study was aimed at assessing the potential impacts of gravity waves on wind tur-
bines. Through consulting the existing literature, about gravity waves, their relevance in the
ABL and thus for wind turbines has been underlined in Section 4. From that it can also be
concluded that data availability on measurements is highly limited. Thus a numerical study,
based on ‘synthetic turbulence’ was conducted. Again the main focus lied on the impact of
gravity waves, rather than the actual generation mechanisms. Due to the limited time scope
of a master thesis, more simple, practical engineering approaches (compared to LES or CFD
simulations) were applied to simulate gravity waves in a turbulent wind field. The scenario,
could be imagined like this: A CNBL, with stable or near neutral conditions towards the surface
and a strong capping inversion. Somewhere upwind, a disturbance in the flow, i.e. another
wind farm, low-level clouds or an island, initiates vertical oscillations in the form of surface
waves on the capping inversion. This is not an unlikely scenario, recapping findings from the
earlier literature review [3] [16]. The impacts of these gravity waves, propagate throughout the
wind field via the auto- and cross-spectra of the turbulent components w and u. The vertical
oscillations are transmitted downward through vertical momentum transfer in ww. They are
broadcasted into the streamwise direction through uw.
Initially, the turbulent wind field u, v, w, was simulated in the same manner as for the α−study.
Then, using the constrain() method of HiperSim a wave-like signal was imposed on the tur-
bulent component u. A short description on that method is found in footnote C of Table6.
This wave-structure was situated at the top of the turbulence box, laterally coherent with con-
straints on every third point in the y-direction. Placing the constraints at the top, was coherent
with the scenario of waves on the above lying capping inversion. As we will see the waves, also
propagated downwards through the turbulence box, as per scenario above. It was not placed
at the uppermost height of the box, to avoid possible edge effects or continuity issues, as they
were observed in earlier testing simulations with wave constraints. The value of every third
point was chosen somewhat arbitrary. After a already ‘failed’ wave −study, see Annex B,
it was found that over constraining led to non-physical values, and the model needed space
in between constraints to properly adhere to constraints and Mann tensor based coherence. It
also helped with computational constraints (depending on the setup a covariance matrix within
.constrain(), can take up significant amounts of RAM).
The signal followed a sine-wave with a given amplitude A, and oscillated at the respective
Brunt-Väisälä frequency N of the simulation. The analytical constraint is describe in Eq [41].
The time-signal translates to a spatial signal over Taylor’s hypothesis of frozen turbulence so
that t = x
U [65]. This needs to be reviewed carefully when looking at higher TI, since it’s only
valid for σU ≪U. However, in this context it was deemed, applicable.
u(t, z) = A sin(2πNt)
at z = 174 [m]
(41)
40
==PAGE:48==
So, the gravity waves were characterized by 2 parameters in this engineering model: N and A.
As for the parameter space, parallel literature and projects were reviewed, to build interesting
cases. The Brunt-Väisälä frequency, does not vary starkly in general. With a parameter space
of N ∈(0.01, 0.03, 0.06, 0.1) s−1, we were able to cover most appearing frequencies. This was
picked with reference to other simulations, such as LES simulations by Pedersen at al. (2014)
[56] or Kelly et al. (2019) [37], who defined N based on the strength of the capping inversion in
their studies. Allaerts & Meyers (2019) [3], as well as Devesse et al. (2022)[16], focused the frac-
tion of N
fc, for application in their research. All those studies were within N ∈[0.006, 0.02] s−1.
Since measurements of gravity waves, are very limited available, this study chose the wave
amplitude more arbitrarily than anything. When reviewing literature, one finds some older
measurements of gravity waves, see Nappo [54] or Wyngaard [70]. However, these measure-
ments depict mostly pressure perturbations in the flow, which are related to velocity, but not
immediately applicable to the HiperSim method, for constraining u. Kelly (2025), performed
detailed analysis on flow acceleration statistics form long-term, high-frequency, offshore wind
measurements and the consequences with regards turbine loads [36]. Within that analysis, two
flow acceleration events, were identified, that resembled wave-like signals, which exerted wave
amplitudes (in terms of u), of up to 2 [m/s]. Thus A = 2 [m/s] was fixed in the parameter
space for the wave −study.
The resulting constraint was: an array depicting u(t) at a given position within Nx, Ny, Nz,
where t =
x
U ⇔x = t · U (recalling [65]). Now, this array was sampled, in the sense that
only every second or third or 4th (...) element was actually selected as a constraint and fed
into .constrain(). In essence, the original constraint data was sampled along the time (or
streamwise x) axis by only keeping every nconsample-th element, i.e.,
constraints_array = constraints_array[:: ncon_sample]
This allowed reducing the number of total constraint points without losing the coherent wave
structure. The sampling factor ncon_sample was not fixed but determined dynamically, based on
the requirement to resolve the wave suﬀiciently over space. Specifically, the spatial resolution
of the constraint signal, dxCon, had to meet the criterion:
dtCon = nconsample · dx
U
(42)
dxCon = dtCon · U
(43)
For 8 points per wavelength:
k · dx = 2π
8 = λ
8 ≈0.785
(44)
This ensured that the constraint resolves the wave signal with at least eight points per wave-
length. If the initial nconsample value violated this condition, it was reduced iteratively until
it satisfied the requirement or reached 1. This was both a practical and physically motivated
decision: fewer points meant a reduced the computational memory footprint of the covariance
matrix used in the constraint procedure, which may otherwise reach into the tens of terabytes,
especially when ‘over-constraining’ (as learned from experience). At the same time, retaining
some turbulence from the original Mann turbulence box ensured the constraint did not become
a perfectly smooth sine wave but instead exhibited some small-scale noise.
Arguably, this
aligns better with realistic flow observations, such as those reported by Kelly (2025) [36], where
the wave-like acceleration patterns in offshore winds still exhibited residual turbulent noise.
On the other hand, one could argue that in a very stable ABL-especially one with a strong
capping inversion-vertical mixing is suppressed, so a cleaner, more wave-like structure might
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 15: Wave constraints, ‘raw’ and constrained turbulence for initial wave −study simula-
tion N = 0.1Hz
have been more accurate. However, given the simplicity of the model and RAM constraints,
the uncertainty of not taking this into account was accepted.
Dimitrov & Natarajan (2017) [18] explained the approach to constraining turbulence in more
detail. Essentially, the base realization of turbulence is altered to locally match the constraints
by checking the local difference and adjusting dynamically with spatial coherence, based on the
spectral tensor Mann derived in the 90’s. Another description is given in footnote C of Table
6. This lead to some issues regarding the wave −study. The parameter space was defined to
include higher frequencies, such as N = 0.1Hz or N = 0.06Hz, since these would also fall within
the interval, examined by other research, as explained above. However, the interplay between,
aiming for a well-resolved wave signal, with regards to nconsample and ‘overconstraining’, lead to
unreasonable results, in the initial wave −study. Figure 15 depicts the turbulent components
u, v, w in a wave-constrained turbulence simulation, where the initial approach of constraining
every point laterally over a given height interval was used. The blue plots, show the time
series before and the orange plots after constraining, respectively. The black dots represent the
imposed constraints. Extreme oscillations were observed for components u and w, but why? A
well-resolved wave constraint, containing 8 points per wavelength, necessitated the ‘frequency’
of the constraint to be quite high. Thus the time series was mainly dictated by the points in
the constraint array. Furthermore, the constraints were applied to every point laterally in the
given wave-field. Thus there was no space left for approximation, based on the spectral tensor
and residual field. Hence a whole field was forced on to exact values, where the turbulence, is
supposed to be correlated, while the Fourier-based presentation, has a finite number of modes,
the model ran into the issue of adhering to constraints and Mann tensor based correlations
and continuity. Thus it introduced high-frequency noise to match the constraint values locally.
This was deemed unreasonable and couldn’t be fixed by adjusting the k · dx threshold, without
compromising the wave signal. Thus N = 0.06Hz and N = 0.1Hz, were excluded from the
initial wave −study. The results for that are available in Annex B. Afterwards the process of
constraining was adapted, to what is now described in this chapter with less dense constraints
laterally and only atop the turbulence box (vertically), which led to more reasonable results.
42
==PAGE:50==
The mean wind shear U(z), was in this case based on the implicit shear of the Mann model
turbulence. In the Mann turbulence model, the turbulent velocity components u, v, w are sim-
ulated under the assumption of a linear shear dU
dz , that distorts or stretches turbulent eddies.
This linear shear assumption enabled Mann to derive the sheared spectral tensor, which also
influences the eddy lifetime. Assuming a constant dU
dz leads to a linear differential equation
governing the time evolution of the spectral tensor and the deformation of individual eddies
[52]. So the implicit linear shear needed to be described and then translated into a shear expo-
nent, to be added from a power law approximation for the given heights. In order to find the
linear shear, a relation described by Kelly (2018) [35] was utilized. He reviewed that turbu-
lence effects on wind turbines, typically simulated using the Mann spectral-tensor model, rely
on key parameters such as the turbulence length scale L, dissipation rate ε, and eddy-lifetime
parameter Γ. Then he showed that L can be reliably estimated from commonly available site
measurements—specifically the mean wind shear dU
dz and streamwise velocity standard devia-
tion σu—without requiring sophisticated wind data. Eq. [45], summarizes the relation they
found from observed wind data at Hovsøre.
LM ≃
σu
dU/dz
(45)
Given L and σu based on the IEC standard and the simulated turbulent component u, the
linear shear was approximated using the relation by Kelly (Eq.[45]). Then a shear exponent
αimplicit was fitted, according to the described method in Section 5.6 and finally a power-law-
approximated shear U(z) was added to the turbulence box for the respective height. Arguably,
this could have been done more accurately, by ‘measuring’ σu from the synthesized turbulence,
which might differ from U · TI, due to uncertainty in the lower frequencies of the spectrum.
This effect would not have ‘smoothed’ out by using multiple seeds, since each seed resulted
in a different realization in the lower frequencies. However, for practicality and to ‘force’ an
alignment with the IEC standard, and ensure consistent shear across multiple turbulence boxes,
the above-mentioned approach was adopted.
With regards to the dimensions of the turbulence boxes in the wave−study, some compromises
had to be made to accommodate the simulations, within the given computational capacities.
Firstly, to avoid ramp-up or initial effects, the wave constraint only started after 60 [s] of the
simulation time T = 600s. Next to the constraint-sampling, as explained above, the lateral
and vertical granularity of the mesh grid, was decreased to combat the increasing size of the
constraint-covariance matrix. This resulted in Ny, Nz = 30 and dy, dz = 6 [m]. This was a com-
promise to speed up simulations, adhere by memory constraints and still preserve a meaningful
resolution, where dy, dz ≪DRotor.
43
==PAGE:51==
α-study
jet-study
wave-study
Turbulence u, v, w
Turbulence u, v, w
Turbulence u, v, w
Mann Model for Turbulence [52]
Mann Model for Turbulence [52]
Mann Model for Turbulence [52]
αϵ
2
3 = 1
Scaled afterwards to match nominal U and TI.A
αϵ
2
3 = 1
Scaled afterwards to match nominal U and TI.A
αϵ
2
3 = 1
Scaled afterwards to match nominal U and TI.A
LM = 33.6 m
According to IEC 61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3.
LM = 33.6 m
According to IEC 61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3.
LM = 33.6 m
According to IEC 61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3.
Γ = 3.9
According to IEC 61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3.
Γ = 3.9
According to IEC 61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3.
Γ = 3.9
According to IEC 61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3.
–
–
u ≈A sin (2πNt)
At given height 174 [m], u was constrained laterally
coherent (every third point) to follow a wave-like sig-
nal, representing gravity waves.C
Mean wind U
Mean wind U
Mean wind U
Power law
Power law + jet structure
Implicit shear
U(z) =
+
z
zhub
,α
Classic power law approximation according to IEC
61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3. Matching nominal U
at hub height zhub.
U(z) =
+
z
zhub
,α
+ S exp
/
−
- z−H
W
.20
Classic power law approximation according to IEC
61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3. Matching nominal U
at hub height zhub. Superimposed jet structure, see
Section 5.6.B
U(z) =
+
z
zhub
,αimplicit
Fitted power law approximation to the implicit
shear, from the Mann model turbulence. Matching
nominal U at hub height zhub.
α = 0.2
According to IEC 61400-1 [31], see Section 5.3.
α = 0.2
dU
dz = σu
L
Approximated linear shear using Eq.[29] and σu =
U · TI according to Kelly (2018) [35], then fitted
αimplicit in log-space, see Section 5.6.
–
H, W, S
Testing across parameter space, see Section 5.7.
–
Dimensions
Dimensions
Dimensions
T = 600 s
Classic 10 min simulations, in agreement with indus-
try practice [31] [35].
T = 600 s
Classic 10 min simulations, in agreement with indus-
try practice [31] [35].
T = 600 s
Classic 10 min simulations, in agreement with indus-
try practice [31] [35].
Nx, Ny, Nz = 1024, 180, 180
Streamwise HiperSim default. Lateral/Vertical cho-
sen to depict rotor (Drotor = 178.3 m [5]) accurately.
Nx, Ny, Nz = 1024, 180, 180
Streamwise HiperSim default. Lateral and especially
Vertical chosen to depict rotor (Drotor = 178.3 m [5])
and jet structure accurately.
Nx, Ny, Nz = 1024, 30, 30
Streamwise HiperSim default. Lateral and especially
Vertical chosen to depict rotor (Drotor = 178.3 m [5])
and wave structure accurately.
dx, dy, dz = U·T
Nx , 1 m, 1 m
dx dependent on U, TI and Nx. dy and dz chosen
to be accurate.
dx, dy, dz = U·T
Nx , 1 m, 1 m
dx dependent on U, TI and Nx. dy and dz chosen
to be accurate.
dx, dy, dz = UT
Nx , 6 m, 6 m
dx dependent on U, TI and Nx.
dy and dz cho-
sen to be suﬀiciently accurate (dy, dz ≪Drotor), but
extended due to memory constraints from the Hiper-
Sim .constrain() method.
Table 6: Comparison of simulation setups for α-study, jet −study, and wave −study.
44
==PAGE:52==
Footnotes on Table 6:
A The HiperSim method .scale_TI() calculates the TI of the theoretical Mann spectrum
for the current turbulence box (LM, Γ, Nx, dx) and then scales αϵ
2
3 to match [19]. This
might include slight seed-to-seed differences due to uncertainty in the lower frequencies.
B Here, we are not necessarily matching nominal U at hub height zhub, depending on the
local additional wind speed from the jet.
C The HiperSim method .constrain() modifies the wind field u, v, w to match velocity
constraints at given spatial locations by computing the Mann model-based correlation
tensors and applying a statistical correction. It first calculates spatial correlations (via
the Mann spectrum), assembles a constraint covariance matrix, solves for the residual
field and adds this residual, weighed with covariance, to the original field to enforce the
constraints [19]. Here the original v and w were given as constraints, so that effectively
only u was constrained, since the residual field, the consisted of only zeros for v, w.
6
Results and Discussion
In this section the results of the conducted studies are presented and discussed with regards to
relevance for the IEC standard. Table 5, summarizes the conducted studies and their respec-
tive parameter spaces. Not all results can be presented here, as can be seen, based on Table 5,
the number of simulations was 8640, for the jet −study only. If one were to conduct a more
granular study covering the operating range of the DTU 10MW-RWT and not conditioning the
width of the jet on its height, one would’ve gotten easily 200.000 or more simulations. Which
is a (computational) effort out of the scope of this thesis. These parameter ranges were deemed
appropriate to give insight into the mechanisms that drive loads on the wind turbine, while
staying within a reasonable limit of simulations. When doing these simulations, one has to
bear in mind the ‘usual suspects’ for driving loads on wind turbines which have been identified
over years of research namely: mean wind speed U (at hub height or conditioned on height z),
vertical wind shear, represented by the shear exponent α, and turbulence intensity TI [35] [12].
The topic of jet parameters and associated shear exponent α has been treated separately, when
studying possible parameters ranges for the jet −study, see Section 5.7. And from there, as
well as from the HiperSim and HAWC2 simulations, it has been found, that for jet heights of
H = 300 [m] and above, the loads are not affected significantly, as the jet does not affect the
wind field sampled by the rotor in terms of U or α, Figures 19 & 20 underline this statement,
as we will see.
In the following sections, firstly, the wind field inputs or turbulence boxes are discussed. They
serve as a basis to describe the atmospheric phenomena to the best extent possible under the
applied assumptions and simplifications. Then a perspective on loads is given, based on sta-
tistically significant results in form of box plots, how the loads revolve over a range of wind
speeds looking at mean±stdev (confidence interval of 68%), the P90-P99 interval and finally
examining closely the probability density functions (PDFS) for the loads, based on the chosen
relevant cases. Additionally plots of time series of chosen cases are shown to visualize some of
the conclusions.
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 16: Simulated wind field for α-study at U=10 [m/s]; TI=0.16 [-]; α=0.2 [-]; Seed=1
6.1
Results from the jet-study
Before comparing the load outputs from the simulations, the simulated wind fields are exam-
ined. The turbulent components u, v, w, were simulated, as described in Section 5.5. A wind
field with ‘random’ turbulence from the α−study can be seen in Figure 16. The left plot shows
u + U(z) in the x −z−plane at y = 90m, which corresponds to the middle of the turbulence
box. The nominal wind speed Unom was excluded, due to HAWC2 requirements, hence U(z),
here and in the following sections, refers to the mean wind shear. HAWC2 essentially, read
the turbulence field and ‘advected’ it past the virtual wind turbine, with the given nominal
wind speed Unominal. The wind fields are centered vertically around the hub of the DTU 10MW
RWT; Also a requirement for the load simulation. The color bar, describes the scale of the
turbulent fluctuations and around x = 3000 [m] a significant accelerated turbulent structure
can be observed. The mean wind shear U(z), is shown on the right side of Figure 16, as a
mean along x, including error bars for a confidence interval of 68% (1-σu), which correspond
to u. Still on the right hand plot, the added shear from the power law with corresponding
shear exponent α = 0.2, is clearly visible. Figure 16, shows only one seed for the turbulence,
for each parameter combination of U, (TI, α fixed), there were 10 simulations for seeds ∈[1, 10].
Figure 17 shows the turbulent wind field u and mean wind shear U(z), in the same way as Figure
16. On the left side, the streamwise Mann turbulence, can be observed, which was based on the
same parameters as in Figure 16. The color scale is wider in this case, due to the added mean
wind shear U(z), which is contained within the plot. Hence, the jet structure with parameters
H=150 [m]; W=30 [m]; S=8 [m/s], is clearly exhibited in both plots (keep in mind for this and
the following wind fields: H = 150 [m] in global coordinates, corresponds to z = 120 [m] in local
wind field coordinates, due to the centering around the hub). It can also be seen that the jet
has no effect on local TI, observing the constant width of the error bars. This was expected due
to the simplified modeling approach, but may be different in reality, as explained in Section 5.6.
In the following presentation of results, trends across simulation parameters are shown and
visualized with a chosen ‘case study’ that represents the described trends and has been chosen
due to its relevance, in terms of jet height H, width W and strength S but also for compari-
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 17: Simulated wind field for α −study at U=10 [m/s]; TI=0.16 [-]; H=150 [m]; W=30
[m]; S=8 [m/s]; Seed=1
son with the classic IEC class 1A wind field. Thus the chosen case consisted of the following
parameters: U=10 [m/s], TI=0.16 [-], H=150 [m], W=30 [m] (as 20% of H) and S=8 [m/s].
A jet strength of 8 [m/s] is a quite pronounced jet, especially for a mean wind speed of 10
[m/s], it was chosen to better visualize the effects of a jet, most jet-related ‘deviations’ from
the α −study generally scale in proportion to the jet strength S.
Furthermore, the synthesized turbulence u, v, w can be characterized by analyzing the respec-
tive auto-spectra, i.e. uu, and cross-spectrum uw. Figure 18a, computerizes the realization
from seed 1, to a lookup table of theoretical values from the Mann spectrum and the the-
oretical spectra, via integrating the spectral tensor, both included in HiperSim [19].
The
simulation parameters were: U = 10 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; α = 0.2 [-] and Seed = 1.
It
can be seen, that the realization follows, the theoretical curve.
However, at the lower fre-
quencies there is more uncertainty, due to the limited amount of samples from a 10 min
simulation.
Here: kmin =
2πfmin
U
where fmin =
1
T .
From this relation and the plot it can
be inferred that kmin ≈0.005[m−1]. The auto-spectra uu, vv, ww, show their peaks around
k = 0.005[m−1], k = 0.03[m−1], k = 0.06[m−1] respectively. Whereas the cross-spectrum uw
peaks around k = 0.015[m−1]. It is flipped and shows consistent, negative values, which in-
dicates downward momentum transfer, consistent with the assumption of linear shear in the
Mann model [52]. To underline the methods, described in the section above Figure 18b, shows
the spectra of a simulation within the jet −study. We see, that the spectra align with Figure
18a. Because, the jets were added as a 10 min mean phenomenon, after generating the tur-
bulence box, they did not influence the turbulence. The main study parameters, influencing
the turbulence u, v, w were U and TI, dictating the rescaling of αϵ
2
3 to match the given σu.
Regarding the spectra and ultimately the turbulence realization, the seeds were also relevant,
due to the mentioned uncertainty for low frequencies. This uncertainty was overcome, by sim-
ulating 10 seeds for each set of simulation scenarios. Parameters such as L and Γ, were fixed
throughout simulations, to IEC standard values. Firstly the tower fore aft bending moment is
analyzed in detail and then the blade loads were treated separately, since the components were
also affected differently, by the introduced jet as we will see.
47
==PAGE:55==
(a) Spectra α-study simulation.
(b) Spectra jet −study simulation.
Figure 18: Comparison of turbulence spectra for two representative simulations: (a) α-study
and (b) jet-study.
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: tower
Channel 17
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 17
Case Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 17
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
Mx coo: tower
Channel 17
IEC P90/99 - Channel 17
Case P90/99 - Channel 17
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — h: 300.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 19: Wind speed overview of tower loads for H=300 m; W=30 m; S=8 m/s
48
==PAGE:56==
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
°5000
0
5000
10000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: blade1
Channel 26
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 26
Case Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 26
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
Mx coo: blade1
Channel 26
IEC P90/99 - Channel 26
Case P90/99 - Channel 26
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — h: 300.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 20: Wind speed overview of blade loads for H=300 m; W=30 m; S=8 m/s
Figure 19, compares the resulting tower fore aft moment in [kNm] (y-axis), between the re-
spective ‘IEC case’ (power-law α=0.2 [-]) and the respective case study, revolving over multiple
nominal wind speeds (x-axis). It is important to mention here, that nominal wind speed refers
to the background wind speed at hub height. When adding the shear, it was matched so that
the hub height wind speed stays at the nominal wind speed. But when afterwards adding the
jet, the vertical wind speed profile was modified, such that, when looking at i.e. Figure 22 one
has to bear in mind that, the hub-height wind speeds are not equal for the ‘IEC case’ and case
study. The left side, represents mean values and a 1-σ interval. On the right side the interval
of the P90 to P99 values is shown. With increasing wind speeds the loads rise, up to the rated
wind speed (11.4 m/s), from where on the turbine pitches to maintain the target ω which leads
to reduced loads, from there on. Both mean and upper percentile plot reflect that expected
behavior. A similar development is evident in Figure 20, comparing the blade root flapwise
bending moment, for the respective study/case as explained above. Here, due to a coordinate
system convention in HAWC2, the loads are negative, but paint the same picture from an
absolute value perspective. In both figures the load curves, might be slightly shifted or exude
a higher standard deviation (thickness of the area in left plot), but it can be clearly concluded,
that the jet impacts neither the tower fore-aft moment, nor the blade root flapwise bending
moment significantly (Blade1 is representative here for all blades). In terms of jet height, the
results for H=150 m and H=200 m show the highest difference in comparison to the α −study
and are examined in further detail. For a height of H=250 m the effects are weakly visible but
not as pronounced, and as shown above from 300 m onward effects are negligible.
Now comparing the chosen case study, with the ‘IEC case’, Figure 21 achieves a direct com-
parison of the relevant load channel statistics through visualization in a box plot. The loads
are depicted on the y-axis in [kNm] (note tower plot has its own axis, whereas the blade plots
share the y-axis on the right). The whiskers of the box plots correspond to the 1% and 99%
quantile, whereas the body is marked by the 25% and 75% quantile. The median is depicted
49
==PAGE:57==
IEC
Case
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: tower
Channel 17
IEC
Case
Mx coo: blade1
Channel 26
IEC
Case
Mx coo: blade2
Channel 29
IEC
Case
Mx coo: blade3
Channel 32
°35000
°30000
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
°5000
Load [kNm]
Case Data – ws: 10.00 — ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
IEC
Case
Figure 21: Box plot of tower and blade load statistics for U=10 m/s; H=150 m; W=30 m;
S=8 m/s
as an orange line in the middle. For the tower fore aft bending moment, a large number of
loads was centered in a lower region compared to the ‘IEC case’, but the top whisker reaches
higher. This means that most of the loads appear to be lower, but a smaller number of loads,
reached higher values in comparison. Initially, this seems off, since ‘adding’ wind speed leads to
lower loads? Now a relevant turbine action, regarding nominal wind speed and real wind speed
at hub height, that will also dictate the rest of this section is pitching. The turbine measures
its rotational speed ω and adapts the pitch angle accordingly. The jet, alters the mean wind
speed profile U(z), effectively adding kinetic energy to the flow. Thus at the same nominal
wind speed U, there is more energy available, that is turned into rotation of the rotor, through
the lift force generated at the blades. As a consequence, the turbine spins up faster, when a jet
is apparent and the pitching starts at a lower nominal wind speed in the jet −study than in
the alpha −study. Through this the loads appear lower, when its just a ‘shift’ of (hub-height)
wind speed that makes the turbine controller initiate pitching.
Now diving deeper into cases, where the jet had a significant impact and how the loads revolved
over the simulated wind speeds: Figure 22, showcases, the effect described in the last paragraph
most effectively and visualizes the impact of the superimposed mean jet. Three things, can
be identified in the left plot, which also serve as a general trend for cases with H=150-200
[m]. Firstly, the mean load curve is shifted towards lower nominal wind speeds. As the jet
modifies, the wind speed profile, by adding mean wind speed and additional wind shear, the
available kinetic energy in the rotor swept area increases, consequently the aerodynamic rotor
power and loads increase too. At 11.4 [m/s] the turbine starts pitching in the ‘IEC case’, as
expected based on the DTU 10 MW RWT parameters, which validates the generation of the
wind fields in the alpha −study. Whereas for the case study it already starts pitching around
8 [m/s] nominal wind speed. As a consequence the aerodynamic power of the rotor, including
thrust, as a main driver for the fore aft bending moment in the tower, decreases. The thrust
50
==PAGE:58==
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: tower
Channel 17
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 17
Case Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 17
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
Mx coo: tower
Channel 17
IEC P90/99 - Channel 17
Case P90/99 - Channel 17
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 22: Wind speed overview of tower loads for H=150 m; W=30 m; S=8 m/s
force is generated from the blades, as the air flows around them and transferred through the
blade roots, bearings, rotor-nacelle-assembly and tower, towards the tower bottom, where its
transferred into the foundation. Gutierrez (2016), committed research on (nocturnal) onshore
lower level jets and found an increase in static mechanical loads and characteristic frequencies,
close to turbine characteristics, from which the first one is also evident here. A comparison is
only limited applicable, as they were looking at onshore jets, generated by large scale baroclin-
ity and topographic effects in the Great Plains (USA) and here we have synthetic data, where
the jet was added as a 10 min mean phenomenon. Interestingly Gutierrez, considered more
the loads perspective, diving deeper into the transmittance of loads throughout the turbine
structure [25]. The second effect, clearly visible in the left subplot, is a higher variance, i.e.
standard deviation of the loads, as the blue area (case study) appears thicker than the Grey
one (‘IEC case’). Thirdly, on the ‘IEC case’, there is a smoother transition from below-rated
over rated to above-rated wind speed, whereas for the case study, a sharp turn is evident at
8 [m/s]. On the right subplot, the upper quantile region (from 90% to 99%), exudes similar
developments, especially the shift towards lower nominal wind speeds and the sharp turn are
characteristic.
To summarize: The jet increased variance and introduced a sharper turn when pitching starts
with regards to the shape of the load curve, shown in Figure 22. A main phenomenon: the jet
shifted the load curve towards lower nominal wind speeds, by modifying load driving compo-
nents such as the height dependent mean wind speed U(z) and shear exponent α [35]. It also
led to ‘premature’ pitching in terms of nominal wind speed. Table 7, showcases, how the jet
alters the characteristics of the wind field, as ‘seen’ by the rotor. The hub height wind speed
is increased by almost 3 [m/s] and the global and local shear exponents deviate significantly.
Aside from a larger mean shear, the top half of the rotor and especially top quarter of the rotor
experience negative wind shear (based on the 10 min mean wind profile), which can introduce
additional moments, unaccounted for in the IEC. Gutierrez (2017) have performed analysis on
51
==PAGE:59==
a wide dataset of negative shear cases, associated with LLJs and have found that, this can
actually be beneficial from a loads perspective, reducing nacelle and tower motions in all di-
rections. However they also found that its less beneficial on the rotating parts such as blades
and shafts [26]. Generally, when looking across more simulations in the parameter space of
the jet −study, the effects on Uhub and α are more pronounced with greater jet widths and
strengths. H and W define how much the wind field is altered from its ‘original’ (here power
law with α = 0.2 [-], as defined by IEC) shape. Narrow jets, even with high strength, had a
low impact on tower fore aft bending moment, however their impact was expected to be more
localized and thus apparent in blade statistics, since the tower bottom only experiences the sum
of forces ‘coming from above’. From measurements it has been found that jets, can also affect
local σu and thus turbulence intensity [4], [25], [34], which has been excluded in this study (the
term affect has to be used with care, i.e. some effects such as lower turbulence intensity, may
also be attributed from external conditions, such as stable atmospheric conditions, but not the
jet itself).
Table 7: Compare shear exponents and hub height wind speeds for IEC and case study at
U = 10 [m/s] and TI = 0.16 [-]
IEC
Case study
H = 150 [m], W = 30 [m], S = 8 [m/s]
Uhub
10.00 [m/s]
12.96 [m/s]
α
0.20 [-]
0.4179 [-]
αTop50
0.1987 [-]
−0.6339 [-]
αTop25
0.1989 [-]
−1.78217 [-]
All simulations (i.e. parameter combinations as shown in Table 5), were performed over 10
seeds, to achieve statistically significant results. Thus we are able to look at the PDF for the
loads at given nominal wind speed. Figure 23, compares the tower fore aft bending moment
PDFs for the ‘IEC case’ and jet case study at wind speeds 10 [m/s] (23a) and 5 [m/s] (23b).
Now we can confirm the trends identified in the earlier paragraph, when looking at the nominal
wind speed overview. Starting with U=10 [m/s]: For the given nominal wind speed, the loads
are lower since the turbine is in two different operating conditions (i.e. below-rated for IEC
and above rated for case study). Furthermore the loads are more centered around an approx-
imate mean of 12.5 [MNm] for the case study, with a higher probability density and narrower
distribution than the ‘IEC case’. At lower wind speeds on the other hand, especially the trend
of increased variance in the load distribution (note this does not refer to a spatial distribu-
tion of loads, but the statistical distribution of loads and their value, that appeared in the
simulations), becomes apparent. Figure 23b, showcases a drastically increased variance, that
materializes in a flatter, wider PDF, which is skewed towards significantly higher tower fore
aft bending moments. But, it is also evident, that occasionally the load direction is reversed,
leading to negative loads. This could be due to negative shear, which essentially, creates a
moment that tilts the turbine forward into the mean wind speed direction. Note that for this
case of U = 5 [m/s], the jet strength is still fixed to S = 8 [m/s], thus the jet is effectively
more than doubling the wind speed in the wind field locally. This explains the strong upward
deviation of loads and the resulting negative loads too. If there is some turbulence counter-
acting the lower half of the jet (that ‘pushes against’ the turbine through additional shear in
mean wind direction), then the upper half of the jet (‘that pulls the turbine’ through negative
shear against mean wind direction), the jet‘s top half may dominate in a resulting moment and
reverse the sign of the tower fore aft bending moment. In the plot two ‘peaks’ are apparent
in the PDF, which most likely resulted from this type of interaction, whereas the right peak
52
==PAGE:60==
(representing higher loads) corresponds to a just a ‘shifted’ version of the ‘IEC case’, through
modified mean wind speed and the left tail/peak corresponds to negative shear interactions.
Another possibility could have been a situation, where the turbine switches a lot between below
and above-rated, pitching in and out of the wind a lot, however this case at nominal wind speed
5 [m/s] and the given jet parameters, the hub height wind speed is around 8 [m/s] and taking
into account the turbulence (σu), based on the nominal wind speed and TI of 0.16 [-], then
99.7% of wind speeds ˜u(x, y, z, t) should be within 8±2.4 [m/s], which is still below the rated
wind speed of the DTU 10MW RWT of 11.4 [m/s]. Again the mentioned effects were more
pronounced across simulations, with higher jet width W and jet strength S, due to increased
influence on the wind field sampled by the turbine.
Now, by matching the hub height wind speed between the ‘IEC case’ and the case study, it
should be more of an ‘apples with apples’ comparison. Figure 24 depicts that exact comparison
for the tower fore aft bending moment. It is in the same layout as for example Figure 22, but
now the x-axis, shows the matched hub height wind speeds. It is visible that the jet structure,
still alters the load distribution, by introducing additional variance across hub height wind
speeds, while the general trend curve is preserved in the plot for mean and standard deviation.
On the right side, we see that the P90-P99 curve, tends to exhibit higher loads, below rated
wind speed and generally lower loads above rated wind speed. This validates the findings of
above, in. a sense that, the impact on the mean wind speed merely shifts the curve and in-
troduce some additional variance for the tower fore aft bending moment. Now one could say
again, that the peak of the case study is more intense or even argue, that there is still a slight
mismatch between the peak of the curves, indicating that the pitching still does not happen
for the same wind speed. This is connected to the controller behavior: The DTU 10MW basic
controller, adapts the pitch angle, not based on a measured wind speed. Since the goal is a
consistent power output, the generator speed, is the defining parameter for the blade pitch
[27]. From Table 2 [5], it can be seen that the gearbox ratio is fixed to 50, thus the measured
rotor speed ω (corresponds to channel 10 in the HAWC2 output format), is a valid indicator
for generator speed, at least when conducting a comparison. Since the shift is so small for the
current case study, a different case is picked to illustrate: H = 200 [m]; W = 40 [m]; S = 8
[m/s]. Figure 25, shows the shift in rotor speed across several hub height wind speeds, which
ultimately determines the shift of pitching and peak of the load curves.
Again looking back at Figure 21: As for the blade loads (i.e. the blade root flapwise bend-
ing moments), firstly all three blades show similar statistics, which was expected, as they all
sample the same stationary (at least over the simulated 10 min periods) mean wind profile. If
a modification of TI, associated with the jets, were included, the blade-to-blade differences,
might have been higher, due to short-lived turbulence-jet interactions, that may have not been
sampled by all blades equally, Kelley et al. (2004) describe how they found that there is either
small turbulence associated with jets or excessively high turbulence, caused by excitation of
Kelvin-Helmholtz waves [34], which is what the wave −study examined in more detail.
Assessing the shape of an individual blade box plot in Figure 21 shows that there is much more
variance, seen as the ‘body size’ of the box plot is bigger, so the loads are scattered over a larger
amount of values. Also the extreme tails of the distribution shown as whiskers are higher or
lower respectively. On average the loads tend to be lower compared to the IEC case (note that
the y-axis is inverted here due to the coordinate system convention in HAWC2), which can
be seen from the median as well as the upper quartile, which are shifted towards lower loads.
However, with regards to an identifiable trend, the blades are affected in a similar way to the
tower: At the given nominal wind speed U=10 [m/s] the loads are lower (due to pitching),
53
==PAGE:61==
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
175000
200000
225000
Load [kNm]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Probability Density [-]
£10°5
PDFs for channel 17
IEC
Case
Case Data – ws: 10.00 — ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
(a) Wind speed U=10 m/s
°25000
0
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
175000
Load [kNm]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Probability Density [-]
£10°5
PDFs for channel 17
IEC
Case
Case Data – ws: 5.00 — ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
(b) Wind speed U=5 m/s
Figure 23: PDF of tower loads for different wind speeds at constant H=150 m; W=30 m; S=8
m/s.
54
==PAGE:62==
5
10
15
20
25
Hub-Height Windspeed [m/s]
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: tower – Channel 17
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev
Case Mean ±1 Stdev
5
10
15
20
25
Hub-Height Windspeed [m/s]
Mx coo: tower – Channel 17
IEC P90–P99
Case P90–P99
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 24: Matched hub height wind speed overview of tower loads for H=150 m; W=30 m;
S=8 m/s
5
10
15
20
25
Hub-Height Windspeed [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Load [kNm]
Omega – Channel 10
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev
Case Mean ±1 Stdev
5
10
15
20
25
Hub-Height Windspeed [m/s]
Omega – Channel 10
IEC P90–P99
Case P90–P99
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — h: 200.00 — w: 40.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 25: Match hub height wind speed overview of rotor speed ω for H=150 [m]; W=30 [m];
S=8 [m/s]
55
==PAGE:63==
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
°30000
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
°5000
0
5000
10000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: blade1
Channel 26
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 26
Case Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 26
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
Mx coo: blade1
Channel 26
IEC P90/99 - Channel 26
Case P90/99 - Channel 26
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 26: Windspeed overview of blade loads for H=150[m]; W=30[m]; S=8[m/s]
however the jet shear and negative shear interactions, introduce additional moments on the
blades which increase the variance of loads.
Now Figure 26 focuses on the blade root flapwise bending moment and how it revolves over the
simulated wind speeds in the case study compared to the ‘IEC case’. Again on the left side the
development of the mean with a confidence interval of 68% is shown and on the right side the
upper quantile area between P90 and P99 is depicted. Blade1 is examined as representative
for all blades, as statistics behave similar for all blades. Again the mean loads follow a similar
development as in the ‘IEC case’, however the curve is shifted towards lower nominal wind
speeds, as mentioned for the tower loads above. Additionally, the variance, i.e. standard devi-
ation in this plot, is far wider, and it is noted that this effect is more pronounced for the blades
than the tower. From the right subplot, depicting the P90-P99 interval, it could be concluded
that the loads in the case study seem lower, but a true comparison, would have to be made by
matching the hub height wind speeds.
Focusing more closely on the apparent loads in the case study, Figure 27, shows the PDFs for
all three blades in comparison to the respective ‘IEC case’ at nominal wind speed U=10 [m/s].
The grey dotted lines representing the ‘IEC case’ could be described as a stretched Gaussian
bell, that peaks around -20.0 [MNm], with minor differences in the PDF between blades, which
can be attributed to turbulence-blade position interactions.
However the case study PDFs
exude two peaks around -10.0 [MNm] and -22.5 [MNm] and the lower end reaches almost the
point of zero blade root flapwise bending moments. When analysing the blade load PDFs across
simulations in the jet −study, for jet heights of H=200 [m] and below, where the jet is within
the rotor swept area, the blade PDFs were following the same trend as here described for the
case study. Again narrow (small width W) jets, had less impact, as also the blade root only
experiences the cumulative bending moments allocated the the distributed aerodynamic forces
along the blade. Hence bigger jet structures affect more parts of the blade and yield a higher
56
==PAGE:64==
Load [kNm]
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
Probability Density [-]
PDFs for channel 26
IEC
Case
Load [kNm]
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
Probability Density [-]
PDFs for channel 29
°40000
°30000
°20000
°10000
0
Load [kNm]
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
Probability Density [-]
PDFs for channel 32
Case Data – ws: 10.00 — ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 27: PDF of blade loads for U=10 [m/s]; H=150 [m]; W=30 [m]; S=8 [m/s]
cumulative effect at the blade root. For lower nominal wind speeds, such as U=5 [m/s] the
effect of two peaks is also apparent, but here the distribution is more skewed towards higher
loads. From this it can be concluded that the effect of generating two peaks in the blade load
PDFs, is not attributed to the shift of mean wind speed and the associated ‘early’ pitching but
rather due to the impact of additional and negative shear in the vertical wind profile, which
affect the resulting blade root moment.
Imagining the jet as a stationary, laterally coherent structure, through which the blades ro-
tate in the y-z plane, helps to visualize the effect. Imagine a blade starting in the uppermost
position in the case study at hand: the jet is pointed on to the blade, affecting a rectangular
blade element of vertical width W=30 [m] and lateral width equal to the blade with at z=150
or in the interval 135-165 [m] (global z). As the rotor moves, the blade changes from sam-
pling a rectangle, to sampling a rhomboid, containing the increased wind speed of the jet (and
positive/negative shear), which then ‘moves’ along the blade, as the rotor evolves. This, in
combination with different lift-drag ratios along the length of the blade, creates many different
interactions of the vertical wind profile and the blade, materializing in an additional peak of
the load distribution. The effect on pitching, shifts the whole PDF either left or right of the
‘IEC case’ PDF, in the sense that: in the region below rated nominal wind speeds, the loads
are higher, due to the additional mean wind and from around 8 [m/s] onward (depending on
jet parameters), where the turbine starts pitching ‘early’, the second peak is lower due to the
pitching of the blades out of the wind.
This effect is further illustrated with an example time series plot of seed 1 from the jet −study
case. Figure 28 shows how the the blade moves in and out of the jet structure, creating oscil-
lating loads, next to the turbine‘s rotational speed. From the spacing of the load peaks: ≈16
peaks in 100 [s], which corresponds to a frequency of 16 [Hz]. That exactly matches the rotation
of the turbine frot =
ω
2π ≈
1
2π = 0.1591 [Hz]. This validates, the postulated relation from above
57
==PAGE:65==
and hopefully further illustrates the effect of the jet and what the turbine ’sampled‘ from it.
Figure 29, delves into the flapwise blade root bending loads, over matched hub height wind
speeds, for a more accurate comparison.
As explained above, for a true ’apples to apples‘
comparison, the matched rotor speed could be depicted on the x-axis, but due to limited time
this was not possible, however, based on the knowledge and insights gained so far, the curve
is only shifted, not significantly altered in that aspect. We see again, significantly increased
variance, for the 68% confidence interval, while the overall trend of ’loads increase up to rated
and decrease after rated‘ is conserved. Interestingly in the P90-P99 plot, we see the possibly
beneficial impact of a jet, as mentioned by Gutierrez et al. The whole upper 10 percentile
region is shifted towards lower loads, due to the additional moment, caused by negative shear.
This was validated by comparing to other cases, with the same jet in a higher positions, which
only resulted in additional positive shear across the rotor and did not have load-beneficial effects.
Finally, the damage equivalent loads can be assessed to frame the results in a perspective on
the turbines’ lifetime. Figure 30 compares DELs of the jet −study case with the ‘IEC case’.
The DELs are depicted on the y−axis with respective nref = 107 and m ∈3, 10. Only a few
wind speeds are depicted on the x-axis, due to the matching of hub height wind speeds. To
guarantee a fair comparison, only values where the hub height wind speed difference was < 0.20
[m/s] are shown. Luckily, this was the case for 8.0, 11.0 and 14.0 so that all ranges of below-,
at- and above-rated are covered. For both tower and blade loads the jet −study case shows
higher DELs. It seems the tower was especially affected in below-rated operation, where the
DELs is more than double. The blades (Blade1 here representative) show a consistent increase
of ≈50%. These are important findings, as they underline the impact of a jet in the rotor
swept area. Due to the additional kinetic energy in the flow in and around the jet, the loads
were significantly higher, in accordance with other findings above.
Across all analyses, the tower fore-aft bending moment proved more sensitive to the modified
vertical wind profiles introduced by the jets, particularly through increased mean wind speeds
at hub height and the resulting shift in operational regime (earlier pitching). Observable trends
were: increased load variance, distinct shifts in load curve onset, and in extreme cases even
reversal of load direction. The blades on the other hand were highly affected by the introduc-
tion of additional and negative shear, below and above the ‘nose’ of the jet respectively. The
load variance increased drastically, however an argument can be made that they also increased
towards the lower side, easing the stress on the blades. Where the ‘second peak’ in the load
PDFs emerged, depended again on the operational regime and the difference between nominal
and real wind speed. Overall, while strong, wide, and low-level jets introduce complex effects—
shifting the turbine into a different control regime and modulating structural loads—the impact
is highly dependent on jet height and width. These findings align with contemporary/earlier re-
search on jets, while the focus might have been different (nocturnal low-level jets) for Gutierrez
et al. (2016, 2017), we can validate that jets introduce additional loads and moments across the
turbine structure [25] and that negative shear, can have a beneficial impact by lowering loads
[26]. However, similarly to Gutierrez, the fatigue analysis raised concerns about the turbine‘s
integrity, if exposed to jets over the lifetime, due to increased DELs.
As shown, the load statistics in the jet −study deviated significantly, at lower jet heights,
where the jet was located within the swept rotor area. From measurements and literature, see
Liu et al. (2010), we see that those heights doe not dominate the ABL height distribution, but
are definitely significant [49]. A quick estimate can be done to see, how relevant these heights
are (note that this is still under the assumption, that jet height and ABL height coincide).The
58
==PAGE:66==
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
°35000
°30000
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
°5000
0
Mxcoo : blade1[kNm]
Æ ° study U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; Æ = 0.2 [-]
jet ° study U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; H=150 [m]; W=30 [m]; S=8 [m/s]; Seed=1
(a) Time series of load channel 26 (blade1) for the first seed in the jet −study case.
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
Omega[rad/s]
Æ ° study U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; Æ = 0.2 [-]
jet ° study U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; H=150 [m]; W=30 [m]; S=8 [m/s]; Seed=1
(b) Time series of ω channel 10 for the first seed in the jet −study case.
Figure 28: Blade1 load and ω in jet −study U = 10 [m/s]; H = 150 [m]; W = 30 [m]; S = 8
[m/s]; Seed=1.
59
==PAGE:67==
5
10
15
20
25
Hub-Height Windspeed [m/s]
°30000
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
°5000
0
5000
10000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: blade1 – Channel 26
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev
Case Mean ±1 Stdev
5
10
15
20
25
Hub-Height Windspeed [m/s]
Mx coo: blade1 – Channel 26
IEC P90–P99
Case P90–P99
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 29: Matched hub height wind speed overview of blade loads for H=150 [m]; W=30 [m];
S=8 [m/s]
8.0
11.0
14.0
Hub height wind speed [m/s]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
del 1e+07 3 [kNm]
Channel 17
Case
IEC
8.0
11.0
14.0
Hub height wind speed [m/s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
del 1e+07 10 [kNm]
Channel 26
Case
IEC
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — h: 150.00 — w: 30.00 — s: 8.00
Figure 30: Comparison of DELs in the jet −study for TI = 0.16 [-]; H = 150 [m]; W = 30
[m]; S = 8.0 [m/s].
60
==PAGE:68==
cumulative probability that the ABL height H (earlier denoted as he) is less than or equal to
200 [m] is given by:
P(H ≤200) = FH(200) =
1 200
0
1
Γ(kH) θkH
H
hkH−1e−h/θH dh
(46)
where:
• kH = 2.3 is the shape parameter [49],
• θH = sH · 50 = 3.9 · 50 = 195 is the effective scale parameter [49],
• Γ(kH) is the gamma function evaluated at kH.
From this we see can obtain that P(H ≤200m) = 0.1986, so almost 20% of the measurements,
from large scale data collections, that Liu et al.(2010) examined, have shown ABL heights of
200 [m] or lower. Note that the shape and scale parameters selected, refer to data over oceans
and neutral stability (as a conservative approach and to represent a CNBL atmosphere). When
looking at stable conditions, which nocturnal lower level jets are often associated with, this
percentage would be even higher [49]. Additionally, taking into account the trend of ever bigger
wind turbines, especially offshore, the relevance of jet-turbine interaction will only increase.
With up to 15 [MW] offshore wind turbines already deployed and concepts of up to 26 [MW],
with higher hubs and longer blades, wind turbines will reach new heights and encounter new
phenomena, such as jets, or significant acceleration events [36]. Furthermore, Gutierrez, found
jet structures in measurements, as low as 40 [m], which makes jets also relevant for conventional
onshore turbines [25].
6.2
Results from the wave-study
The wave −study differed from the jet −study in several ways. Generally there was less lit-
erature available on gravity waves, especially, the data from measurements was heavily limited
as opposed to jets, who at least have been studied onshore in terms of nocturnal LLJs. From a
modeling perspective, the wave−study also proved more sophisticated, since the .constrain()
method, altering the actual turbulence components u, v, w, introduced more complicated mod-
eling techniques, than adding a mean wind shear U(z) to the generated turbulence box. The
approach to constraining the turbulence boxes, was changed after issues emerged with ’over
constraining‘ the turbulence boxes. The results from the initial wave −study are summarized
in Annex B. According to review of background literature, the wave −study illustrates the fol-
lowing situation: A conventionally neutral boundary layer, with the IEC coherent turbulence
intensity. Upwind, a disturbance in the flow, i.e. another wind farm, causes the development
of gravity waves on the capping inversion. The waves were presented by the wave-constraint
on u atop the turbulence box and propagated downwards through vertical momentum transfer
(uw. In reality, gravity waves cause vertical motion, which then can translate into wave-like
acceleration in the streamwise component u, through uw, as discussed in earlier Sections.
With the scenario in mind, the results from the wave−study can be assessed. Starting with the
wind field. Again a case study was picked to represent the simulated scenario. It was found that
trends across simulation parameters were similar, thus one case study suﬀices and explanations
as to parameter influences will be given. Remembering the standard ’IEC case‘ the picked case
study exhibits the following parameters: U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06 [Hz] and
A = 2.0 [m/s]. The N was picked as an ’intermediate‘ value of the respective parameter space,
that characterized trends suﬀiciently. The wave amplitude A was picked, based on observed,
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure 31: Simulated wind field for wave −study at U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06
[Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]; Seed=1
wave-like structure in measurements [36].
Like the wind fields shown earlier, Figure 31, illustrates the input file for a HAWC2 simulation.
On the left side a laterally centered slice of the box over the x−z−plane is shown, both depicted
in [m]. Validating from the simulation inputs, for a 10 min window over U = 10 [m/s], the tur-
bulence box’s length was 6 [km]. u + U(z) varied between ≈±7.5 [m/s]. The wave-constraint
can be clearly observed: It was positioned at the second-highest possible height (not the edge
to avoid possibly emerging edge effects) and the waves propagated downwards throughout al-
most the whole wind field. The right side, shows the x-averaged values for that slice at each
height, characterizing the mean wind shear U(z), that was implicit in the synthesized turbu-
lence. Dimitrov % Natarajan explained, that imposing constraints of real measurements can
reduce uncertainty for load simulations or power curve validation [18]. While that is not the
case here exactly, since instead of using measurements, a simple monochromatic wave was in-
troduced, the loads afterwards can be assessed under assumption of apparent gravity waves.
Furthermore, the right plot shows the standard deviation of u, at the given height, and it may
be observed that u varied less in the region around the constraint, due to the forcing on the
constraint points. Vice-versa the points above and especially below, exuded more variance. The
increased variance, can be attributed to higher weighting of the residual field, in that region, to
align with the constraints. This means that the original turbulence field had to be ‘corrected’
increasingly, in the region around the constraint.
This is further motivated by Figure 32, which illustrates the residual field weighed with the
covariance matrix derived from the Mann spectral tensor. Essentially it shows the difference be-
tween original turbulence realization and constrained turbulence output (before implicit mean
wind shear U(z) was added). Here uraw −uconstrained varied around ≈±6.0 [m/s]. Any White
area in the plot indicates, that uraw and uconstrained aligned there, which can indicate the con-
straint positions (see upper end of the box). Consequently, most blue regions, especially those
following the wave pattern in the top half of the box, corresponded to ‘gravity wave troughs’.
Vice versa for the same region, red reflected ‘gravity wave crests’ in the simulation.
62
==PAGE:70==
Figure 32: Residual wind field for wave −study at U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06
[Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]; Seed=1
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure 33: Constraints for wind field in wave−study at U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06
[Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]; Seed=1
Surfing along the details of the constraint wave: Figure 33 compares the turbulent components
u, v, w before and after constraining, in the center of the box (y) at constraint height (z). On
each y-axis, the respective turbulent component is given in [m/s], while the shared x-axis, de-
picts the streamwise coordinates, within the turbulence box in [m]. The blue curve corresponds
to the ‘raw’ turbulence (initial realization). The orange curve represents the constrained turbu-
lence, whereas the black dots, were the given constraints. Multiple things can be noted for u:
Firstly, a well resolved waved is visible from the constraint points. Here nconsample, was adapted
to 3, meaning only every third streamwise point on the wave constraint was actually used as
a constraint. This was governed by the threshold of k · dx < 0.785. This specific simulation
yielded a k · dx = 0.663, which corresponded to roughly 9 points per wavelength, which is
also evident from the plot. Secondly, the orange plot does not follow the constraint points,
but why? Here, the implicit shear came into play, shifting the whole plot upwards slightly.
However, the wave-structure was preserved, as this was a 10 min ‘mean’ shift. Additionally,
the given wave frequency, is well apparent, and besides that a second frequency, seems to be
situated ‘on top’ of the gravity waves, almost like small wave packets, which corresponds to
the small scale turbulence emerging from the Mann spectrum, that the model imposed, while
adhering to the constraints. Additionally, as we will see from spectral analysis, there will be
a (lower-frequency) subharmonic apparent, which corresponds to the sub-sampling frequency
of the constraint. For v no change can be detected, the orange curve, including constraint
positions, fully align with the raw turbulence. This was expected, since the raw turbulence
was used as input, (however still sampled accordingly to nconsample). Anyways, the v compo-
nent is not included in the covariance matrix from HiperSim, thus no change was expected. In
w subtle changes occurred, due to vertical momentum transfer and changes in u leaking into
w over the cross spectrum uw, again with the relevant correlation from the man spectral tensor.
The wind field may be further analyzed in the wave number domain: Figures 34a and 34b
contrast the turbulence boxes, before and after constraining, in the wave number domain. The
y-axis depicts the pre-multiplied spectral density in [m2/s2] and the x-axis shows wave num-
bers. Again, the realizations are compared against a look up function of pre-computed Mann
turbulence and a theoretical integration of the spectral tensor. For Figure 34a, the realizations
64
==PAGE:72==
of uu, vv, ww, uw, closely resemble the reference values and show higher uncertainty towards
the lower frequencies, due to limited samples with T = 600 [s]. The peak wave numbers were
≈0.008, 0.03, 0.06, 0.015 [1/m] respectively. The negative values of uw, indicate downward
momentum transfer consistent with the assumption of linear shear [52].
Now Figure 34b illustrates the impact, the constraint had. All components except v were altered
by the constraint. Two additional peaks appeared in u at k = 0.008 [1/m] and k = 0.038 [1/m].
Keep in mind that k =
2π
U/f , whereas f corresponded to N in this case.
We can convert
back to the two characteristic frequencies that corresponded to those peaks: f1 =
k·U
2π
=
0.0127 [Hz] and f2 = 0.0604 [Hz].
These were approximate values, read from the graphs,
but represent the expected results quite well: f1 corresponded to response of constraint sub-
sampling. Adhering to the explanation in Section 5.8, the constraint array was sub-sampled by
nconsample. Consequently, a lower frequency of ≈
N
nconsample, impacted the turbulence. In reality,
this may be interpreted as sub-harmonics, known from Fourier analysis [50]. f2 corresponded
to the imposed gravity wave frequency (Brunt-Väisälä) N = 0.06 [Hz]. In ww another peak
emerged at k = 0.015 [1/m], which also translated into the cross spectrum uw. And both ww
and uw, shared the characteristic peak at the gravity wave-wave number. Notably, at that
wave number, uw shifted upward, indicating a reduced transfer of momentum in the downward
direction.
(a) Turbulent spectra before constraining
(b) Turbulent spectra after constraining
Figure 34: Comparison of turbulence spectra in wave −study before and after constraining at
U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06 [Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]; Seed=1
When assessing the characteristic frequencies of the wind, it is important to remind oneself,
about the natural frequency bands of the wind turbine component modes, especially of the
blades. Table 11, shows the relevant modes and respective frequencies. Keeping in mind the
observed frequencies above, in the same way, the possible frequency bands over the whole pa-
rameter space, can be taken into account where N ∈[0.01, 0.1] [Hz]. Comparing to the relevant
modes of the blades, there is no overlap and thus no natural mode was likely to be excited
within the turbine blades. Bak et al. also mention, the first tower modes of the DTU 10MW
RWT to be approximately at 0.25 [Hz], hence also outside the ‘reach’ of the gravity waves in
this this study. Finally, the 3P and 6P frequency bands, corresponding to the rotor‘s rotational
speeds are between 0.30 [Hz] - 0.48 [Hz] and 0.60 [Hz] - 0.96 [Hz], respectively [5].
Connected to the spectral analysis, is also the variance contained within the simulated tur-
bulence box. Table 9 showcases the variance of the turbulent components before and after
65
==PAGE:73==
Mode
Natural frequency [Hz]
1st flap mode
0.61
1st edge mode
0.93
2nd flap mode
1.74
2nd edge mode
2.76
3rd flap mode
3.57
1st torsion mode
5.69
4th flap mode
6.11
3rd edge mode
6.66
3P
0.30-0.48
6P
0.60-0.96
Table 8: Relevant frequencies of different blade modes and rotor harmonics DTU 10MW RWT
[6] [5]
constraining.
The variances of the initial realization in the case study, reflect the correct
scaling of the turbulence. Here αϵ
2
3 = 1[m
2
3s−1] was scaled to 0.128 [m
2
3s−1], to match the
prescribed TI = 0.16 [-]. Ultimately, the scaling was slightly inaccurate due to uncertainty
in lower seeds and yielded TI = 0.155 [-]. This can also be inferred from the given σ2
u, where
TI =
σu
U =
√
2.4314
10
= 0.1559 [-]. Due to constraining, the variances increased in u and w,
corresponding to the additional peaks observed in the spectra. From this a new ’real‘ TI can
be inferred: TI =
√
2.4314
10
= 0.2664 [-]. Thus, effectively constraining u to follow the wave-like
signal, introduced additional variance into the turbulence box, ultimately increasing the tur-
bulence intensity.
Before constraining
σ2
u
2.4314
σ2
v
1.3741
σ2
w
0.6443
After constraining
σ2
u
7.0970
σ2
v
1.3741
σ2
w
0.7285
Table 9: Variances of velocity components before and after constraining for wave case study
with N = 0.06 [Hz].
After carefully examining the wind field properties, the HAWC2 results can be assessed. As
the above section has shown, the gravity waves were properly implemented and appeared in
the turbulent wind fields as expected. They propagated throughout the wind field and thus
were ’sampled‘ by major parts of the rotor swept area. Since there was no overlap with any
of the natural frequencies in the DTU 10MW characteristic modes, no major oscillations were
expected. Again the loads are assessed by examining the tower fore aft bending moment first
and the blade root flapwise bending moments second, hereafter referred to as ’tower loads’ and
‘blade loads’.
Figure 35 contrasts the statistics for tower and blade loads of the case from the wave −study
with the respective ‘IEC case’. The load statistics are visualized with a box plot, where the
lower whisker refers to the P1 quantile, the box contains P25 (lower bound), Median (orange
66
==PAGE:74==
IEC
Case
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: tower
Channel 17
IEC
Case
Mx coo: blade1
Channel 26
IEC
Case
Mx coo: blade2
Channel 29
IEC
Case
Mx coo: blade3
Channel 32
°30000
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
Load [kNm]
Case Data – ws: 10.00 — ti: 0.16 — n: 0.06 — a: 2.00
IEC
Case
Figure 35: Box plot of tower and blade load statistics for in wave −study for U = 10.0 [m/s];
TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06 [Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]
line) and P75 (upper bound) and the top whisker shows P99. For the tower loads, the P1 loads
are significantly higher, compared to the ‘IEC case’. Additionally the median is slightly higher
at 140 [MNm], as opposed to the reference. Generally, the loads seemed to be more condensed
towards the median in the wave −study, showing by the smaller ‘body’ of the box. Overall,
the loads appeared to be at a comparable level.
Once again the evolvement of the tower loads within the wave −study are characterized, by
their evolvement of different nominal wind speeds. Here, the nominal wind speeds U, are well
comparable, since the added mean wind shear U(z), was added for both simulations as a power
law approximation, to fit nominal wind speed at hub height. However, the shear exponent
α might differ, due to the calculation of the implicit shear for the wave −study, see Table
6. Figure 36 shows the tower loads (y-axis) over the nominal wind speeds (x-axis), whereas
again the left side depicts the mean±1σ and the right side depicts the upper quantile region
P90-P99. On the left plot: The loads, follow closely, the reference case, but are slightly shifted
upwards. As the ‘IEC’ curve starts to turn, due to pitching, the gravity wave case, overshoots,
indicating higher loads and load variance around rated operation. A close resemblance of loads
(but shifted upwards), may be explained, by the natural frequency of the Basic DTU 10MW
controller. In partial load, the controller adapts with 0.05 [Hz], which in this case is not fast
enough to fully capture gravity wave dynamics of frequency N = 0.06 [Hz]. However, in full
load operation, the controller is tuned to react faster, with a frequency of 0.06 [Hz] [5]. How-
ever the enlarged peaks and increased variance persisted for all simulated frequencies, i.e. also
for N = 0.01 [Hz], which would remain well within the controller‘s effective operating range.
Thus, the increased variance and enhanced peaks around rated operation, likely stem from the
increased TI, as explained above.
As for the P90-P99 plot, the curves show high resemblance , with the wave −study case ac-
67
==PAGE:75==
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: tower
Channel 17
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 17
Case Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 17
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
Mx coo: tower
Channel 17
IEC P90/99 - Channel 17
Case P90/99 - Channel 17
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — n: 0.06 — a: 2.00
Figure 36: Wind speed overview of tower loads in wave −study for U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16
[-]; N = 0.06 [Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]
tually being lower on average, up to rated speed. Also here the curve overshoots, leading to
increased loads around rated, not necessarily increased variance (curve keeps same thickness).
On the far end, it looks like the curves are rejoining, possibly because the gravity waves with
same frequency at higher nominal wind speed become less relevant for loads. As wind speed
increases, they get stretched in the streamwise direction, which could have an effect on their
load impact. A broader parameter range could have helped complete that picture.
To further characterize the gravity waves’ impact on tower loads, selected PDFs are shown in
Figures 37a and 37b. The y-axis shows the non-dimensional probability density, and the x-axis
depicts the corresponding loads in [kNm]. Generally, the PDFs for N ∈{0.03, 0.06, 0.1} [Hz],
exuded similar features, as described here for N = 0.06 [Hz]. In Figure 37a, it can be observed,
that the loads were focused around the median of 140 [MNm]. The gravity wave case, yielded
a narrower distribution, with more probability centered closer around the median and smaller
tails. This validates the observations from the box plot. However for N = 0.01 [Hz], the load
distribution was shifted: In Figure 37b a peak can be observed around 125 [MNm] and in the
interval towards 160 [MNm], the probability is consistently lower for the gravity wave case.
Additionally, making up for the ‘lost’ probability around the median, the tails contained more
probability in this case. Looking at these PDFs, somewhat resembles looking at the U = 10.0
[m/s] slice of the wind speed overview plot (Figure 36), so these trends were expected. For
completeness Figure 37c illustrates the effects, described in the wind speed overview. Basically
the shape of the PDF was conserved, but the scale was shifted upwards from the original me-
dian of 150 [MNm] towards 165 [MNm], for that wind speed.
So far the impact on loads with regards to the tower, did not seem particularly harmful to the
structural integrity. The turbine experienced higher TI in the flow altered by gravity waves,
which led to higher loads, as one could suspect. Based on frequency analysis no excitement
68
==PAGE:76==
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
175000
200000
225000
Load [kNm]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Probability Density [-]
£10°5
PDFs for channel 17
IEC
Case
Case Data – ws: 10.00 — ti: 0.16 — n: 0.06 — a: 2.00
(a) U = 10.0 [m/s]; N = 0.06 [m/s]
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
175000
200000
225000
Load [kNm]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Probability Density [-]
£10°5
PDFs for channel 17
IEC
Case
Case Data – ws: 10.00 — ti: 0.16 — n: 0.01 — a: 2.00
(b) U = 10.0 [m/s]; N = 0.01 [m/s]
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
175000
200000
225000
Load [kNm]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Probability Density [-]
£10°5
PDFs for channel 17
IEC
Case
Case Data – ws: 11.00 — ti: 0.16 — n: 0.06 — a: 2.00
(c) U = 10.0 [m/s]; N = 0.06 [m/s]
Figure 37: PDFs of tower loads for different gravity wave cases at constant TI = 0.16 [-] and
A = 2.0 [m/s]
69
==PAGE:77==
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
°30000
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
°5000
0
5000
10000
Load [kNm]
Mx coo: blade1
Channel 26
IEC Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 26
Case Mean ±1 Stdev - Channel 26
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal Wind Speed [m/s]
Mx coo: blade1
Channel 26
IEC P90/99 - Channel 26
Case P90/99 - Channel 26
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — n: 0.06 — a: 2.00
Figure 38: Wind speed overview of blade1 loads in wave−study for U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16
[-]; N = 0.06 [Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]
of natural modes was neither expected nor observed. After carefully reviewing the impacts of
gravity waves on the tower loads, now its our turn to inspect blade loads. The blades were
expected to be more sensitive to gravity waves, as their interaction with the altered flow is
more direct, while the tower base only experiences the sum of loads from the operating turbine
[25].
Redirecting the focus back to Figure 35, the significant load statistics for all three blades may
be observed.
There are no abnormal deviations for the blades.
With increased TI an in-
creased variance was expected, and can be well observed. The medians of the gravity wave
case match the ‘IEC case’ quite well, situated at ≈−21 [MNm]. It seems all blades behaved
similar in the simulation; no singular blades experienced only crests or troughs of the gravity
wave accelerations/decelerations. This observation was made across simulated wind speeds and
Brunt-Väisälä frequencies. Which is backed by the implications from the frequency analysis,
that concluded no overlap between N parameter space and 3P/6P bands of the DTU 10MW
RWT.
Figure 38 gives an overview of the development of blade loads (y-axis) over multiple nominal
wind speeds (x-axis). Here blade1, stands representative for all three blades. The observations,
from last paragraph are validated across multiple wind speeds: similar mean and increased
variance of blade loads. With the variance especially increasing at or above rated operation. in
the P90-P99 plot, an upward shift can be observed, indicating enhanced peak loads. However,
once again a P1-P10 plot could have been interesting, due to the reversed sign of the blade loads.
For completeness, Figure 39 illustrates the PDFs of the loads of all three blades in the gravity
wave case. In comparison with the ‘IEC case’, the load distributions have a less accentuated
peak at the median and were more distributed towards the tails, which stands coherent with
70
==PAGE:78==
Load [kNm]
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
Probability Density [-]
PDFs for channel 26
IEC
Case
Load [kNm]
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
Probability Density [-]
PDFs for channel 29
°35000
°30000
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
°5000
Load [kNm]
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
Probability Density [-]
PDFs for channel 32
Case Data – ws: 10.00 — ti: 0.16 — n: 0.06 — a: 2.00
Figure 39: PDFs of blade loads in wave −study for U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06
[Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]
earlier observations.
As an example for the impact of gravity waves on the wind turbine: the time series of the
blade1 load and corresponding ω of the for a simulation of the case study is shown in Figure
40. Here again, the characteristic frequencies can be observed. The blade, Figure 40a, definitely
responded to the gravity waves: Firstly, oscillations with approximately 13 load peaks per 100
[s], thus a frequency of ≈0.13 [Hz], can be identified. Secondly, in Figure 40b, the rotation of
the turbine, characterized with ω, clearly responded to the gravity wave frequency, with around
6 peaks per 100 [s], which corresponds to 0.06 [Hz].
Finally, an analysis of the DELs, concludes the load assessment of the wave −study. Figure
41 compares tower and blade DELs against the respective ‘IEC case’. The y−axis depicts the
DEL (m = 3 for tower and m = 10 for blades) in [kNm]. The nominal wind speed is shown on
the x−axis. It can be observed, that for below- rated operation, the tower loads, are almost
equivalent to the IEC reference. However starting at 11 [m/s], the DELs rise significantly.
The highest difference was recorded for 12 [m/s] with a ≈50% increase. Blade1 was given
here as representative for all blades (Channel 26) and shows consistently higher DELs for the
wave −study case between ≈25 −60% increase, which was also more enhanced in above-rated
operation. These significant increases in DELs, raise concern about a turbines‘ integrity that
is exposed to gravity waves over its lifetime.
In summary: both tower and blade loads were affected by the introduction of gravity waves,
in the turbulent wind fields. A major concern, which was not fulfilled in the end, was the ex-
citement of natural modes of the DTU 10MW RWT. While Some frequency interactions were
observed, no natural modes were excited. From prior frequency analysis, based on turbulent
spectra and design of the turbine, no excitement of natural modes was expected and coherently
71
==PAGE:79==
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
°35000
°30000
°25000
°20000
°15000
°10000
Mxcoo : blade1[kNm]
Æ ° study U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; Æ = 0.2 [-]
wave ° study U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06 [Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]; Seed=1
(a) Time series of load channel 26 (blade1) for the first seed in the wave −study case.
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Omega[rad/s]
Æ ° study U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; Æ = 0.2 [-]
wave ° study U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06 [Hz] and A = 2.0 [m/s]; Seed=1
(b) Time series of ω channel 10 for the first seed in the wave −study case.
Figure 40: Blade1 load and ω in wave −study for U = 10.0 [m/s]; TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06 [Hz]
and A = 2.0 [m/s]; Seed=1.
72
==PAGE:80==
5.0
8.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
14.0
Nominal wind speed [m/s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
del 1e+07 3 [kNm]
Channel 17
Case
IEC
5.0
8.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
14.0
Nominal wind speed [m/s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
del 1e+07 10 [kNm]
Channel 26
Case
IEC
Case Data – ti: 0.16 — n: 0.06 — a: 2.00
Figure 41: Comparison of DELs in the wave −study for TI = 0.16 [-]; N = 0.06 [Hz]; A = 2.0
[m/s].
no oscillations were detected, from load analysis. The gravity waves mainly introduced addi-
tional TI, through u accelerations and decelerations, effectively altering σu. Consequently, the
loads showed more variance in every aspect, while the medians, stayed at comparable levels
across simulations. Most likely, the gravity wave case and ’IEC case‘ would have matched
closely, if the reference cases were run with the ’real‘ TI resulting from the gravity waves. The
analysis of DELs has shown significant increases in the wave −study compared to the IEC
reference, which can be linked to an increased TI. Unfortunately, no parallel or prior research,
examining gravity wave-associated loads on wind turbines was found during literature research.
Which leaves the question open: How often is a wind turbine subjected to gravity waves? Al-
laerts & Meyers, Devesse and Lanzilao et al. all focused their research on flow perturbations
caused by offshore wind farm and their respective effects power production and downstream
flow, as well as the interactions with the capping inversion [3][16][42]. Thus there is no way
to validate results against other research, as was done for the jet −study. Still, the results
indicate, that this phenomenon, which remains untreated in the IEC, influences TI and damage
equivalent loads in a non-negligible way. This could affect the turbine lifetime, depending on
the number of occurrences of gravity waves. Since the natural modes are heavily dependent on
turbine design, Brunt-Väisälä frequency bands, could be taken into account, to fully ensure no
overlap in future turbine builds. Take for example a simple spring-mass system, Eq. [47]:
fn = 1
2π
$
k
m
(47)
Here fn represents the natural frequency based on stiffness k and mass m [32]. It can be in-
ferred, that with the trend of ever increasing wind turbine size, proportional to turbine mass,
the natural frequency bands might reach lower and lower. Then, it is vital to restrict overlap
with characteristic frequencies of N. The extent, to which gravity waves will influence large
wind turbines, remains unclear. As of now there is are no major measurement campaigns with
73
==PAGE:81==
regards to gravity waves, due to their complexity. Such that no ’easy‘ estimate of their proba-
bility is possible, as illustrated with the Γ-distribution for the jet −study.
7
Conclusions
To conclude: There is currently limited research on the impacts of low-level jets and grav-
ity waves on wind turbine performance and loading. The current industry standard does not
cover any of the presented ABL phenomena and a question was whether the conventional
IEC approach over- or underestimates the loads. This study addressed that gap by reviewing
the relevant theoretical background and conducting an impact assessment in comparison to
industry-standard methods, such as those in the IEC guidelines, mainly IEC-61400-1 [31].
Local wind speed maxima, which have been treated in atmospheric science before, mainly
as nocturnal low-level jets (LLJs), and associated with both conventionally neutral boundary
layers (CNBL) and stable boundary layers (SBL). The focus lay on CNBLs and generation
mechanisms including inertial oscillations, baroclinity, and topography contributing to their
development. More recently, it has been found that they also emerge from solutions to the
RANS equations, which makes them an ‘average phenomenon’. A key focus was placed on
the shear exponent α, conditioned on jet parameters. As anticipated, high-elevation jets had
little impact on rotor-experienced conditions, whereas jets intersecting the rotor swept area
significantly altered the local shear — a finding supported both analytically and numerically.
An analytical expression was developed to quantify the influence of jet characteristics on local
shear, based on a log-law profile including a Gaussian-shaped jet. This emphasized the in-
creasing importance of local shear compared to the commonly used rotor-averaged shear. The
jets directly impacted load-driving parameters such as wind speed U and shear exponent α,
which in turn influenced turbine loads. With regards to the original question it could be said
that the IEC does both: Over- and underestimate. In a sense, the nominal wind speed U was
altered by the jets, which increased aerodynamic loads. Especially, the rotor top half experi-
enced additional loads, for jets around hub height or higher, which was most likely, inferring
from the given ABL depth (≈H) distributions. Furthermore, altered shear affected tower and
blade loads. On the flip side, negative shear within the rotor swept area was able to counteract
some of the usual loads, which could be seen as beneficial for the components. While LLJs at
heights as low as 40 [m] have been observed [25], the likelihood of those jets associated with
beneficial load impacts, is small (see distribution of H [49]). The fatigue analysis has revealed
significant increases in DEL, for both tower and blades. Either way, it would be recommended
to take jet cases into account, when designing a wind turbine, weighed by the probability of
occurrence, much like it is done with sea-states nowadays. Especially if the location is prone to
the development of jets, such as i.e. Cabauw, Netherlands [4]. However, in order to take these
facts into account, suﬀicient measurements at multiple heights would be needed.
The study assessed tower fore-aft and blade root flapwise loads, revealing that blades were
more sensitive to jet-induced changes than towers. Interestingly, some jet effects were found to
be beneficial, increasing power due to higher energy availability within the swept area, while
also raising loads. However, negative shear gradients occasionally reduced blade stress, aligning
with prior research on onshore low-level jets [25] [26] [34]. Generally, greater load variability
was observed under jet conditions compared to IEC reference cases. The interaction between
changing loads and turbine control systems, particularly blade pitch response, emerged as a
critical factor.
74
==PAGE:82==
The study also reviewed gravity wave mechanisms, which can be excited by various vertical
displacements within SBLs and CNBLs — including wind farms themselves, as recent research
has shown. This is especially relevant in offshore regions (like the North Sea), where spatially
dense wind farm development increases the likelihood of downstream farms experiencing block-
age or wave effects induced by upstream installations.
Simulating gravity wave effects proved challenging with conventional engineering tools.
A
simplified yet physically grounded approach was adapted that captured essential wave dy-
namics. However, simulations were computationally intensive due to the interaction between
wave-imposed constraints and constraint sampling. There was a trade-off between properly
resolving the waves and sampling the constraints to decrease memory issues. Additionally,
over-constraining, especially at insuﬀicient resolutions, led to nonphysical results. However, af-
ter adapting the method of constraining, the simulations, were closer to the IEC reference and
no overlaps regarding natural modes were identified. The introduction of gravity waves into
the turbulent wind fields, mainly altered the streamwise variance, through cyclic accelerations
and decelerations which ultimately increased turbulence intensity. Due to that increased TI,
the loads, varied accordingly more, whereas the medians, stayed at comparable levels. In an
assessment of fatigue loads, significant increases in DELs were found, raising concerns about
cyclic loading, turbine integrity, and design lifetime. Especially, if the probabilities of occur-
rence, for gravity waves were high. However, extensive research revealed the remaining gap in
the current understanding (in science and industry) and the question remands: How often will
wind turbines be subjected to gravity waves? Underlined by highly limited data availability,
such that no recommendation or final conclusion can be given. The results of the wave−study
remain somewhat inconclusive, as to the initial research question. The loads were proven to
be at similar levels, yet more variant, in gravity wave-affected wind fields and fatigue loads
proved to be higher. Thus, depending on how often gravity waves will occur over a lifetime,
they may have an effect on the turbines integrity. But, there is not enough data available, to
ultimately say how big that effect would be and thus, no way of saying that the IEC over- or
underestimates loads in that sense.
Based on these findings, several recommendations for future research and turbine load assess-
ment are proposed. Firstly, this study highlights the importance of acquiring spatially and
temporally well-resolved measurements of wind speeds at multiple heights, to assess expected
wind turbine loads at a given location. Measurements at multiple heights will be able to capture
jet-related phenomena and temporally well-resolved measurements will properly capture grav-
ity wave frequencies. Then, even when following fully the IEC standard, if the measurements
were done properly, the effects will be captured and can be taken into account for wind turbine
design. Further research could include include extending impact assessments across the full
wind speed range and different Design Load Cases (DLCs) for more comprehensive operational
insights and integrating generation mechanisms more explicitly into the models rather than
assuming pre-existing flow structures. A more detailed understanding of load variability driven
by atmospheric phenomena can ultimately support improved turbine design and site planning
decisions.
75
==PAGE:83==
References
[1]
Albornoz, C Pérez, Soberanis, MA Escalante, Rivera, V Ramírez, and Rivero, M. “Review
of atmospheric stability estimations for wind power applications”. In: Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 163 (2022), p. 112505.
[2]
Allaerts, Dries and Meyers, Johan. “Large eddy simulation of a large wind-turbine array
in a conventionally neutral atmospheric boundary layer”. In: Physics of Fluids 27.6 (2015).
[3]
Allaerts, Dries and Meyers, Johan. “Sensitivity and feedback of wind-farm-induced gravity
waves”. In: Journal of fluid mechanics 862 (2019), pp. 990–1028.
[4]
Baas, Peter, Bosveld, FC, Klein Baltink, H, and Holtslag, AAM. “A climatology of noc-
turnal low-level jets at Cabauw”. In: Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 48.8
(2009), pp. 1627–1642.
[5]
Bak, Christian, Zahle, Frederik, Bitsche, Robert, Kim, Taeseong, Yde, Anders, Henriksen,
Lars Christian, Natarajan, Anand, and Hansen, Morten. “Description of the DTU 10 MW
reference wind turbine”. In: DTU Wind Energy Report-I-0092 5 (2013), p. 905.
[6]
Bak, Christian et al. “Light Rotor: The 10-MW reference wind turbine”. In: EWEC 2012-
European Wind Energy Conference & Exhibition. European Wind Energy Association
(EWEA). 2012.
[7]
Banta, RM, Newsom, RK, Lundquist, JK, Pichugina, YL, Coulter, RL, and Mahrt, L.
“Nocturnal low-level jet characteristics over Kansas during CASES-99”. In: Boundary-
Layer Meteorology 105 (2002), pp. 221–252.
[8]
Berg, Jacob, Kelly, Mark, Mann, Jakob, and Nielsen, Morten. “DTU 46100: Introduction
to Micrometeorology for Wind Energy”. In: (2022).
[9]
Berg, Jacob, Patton, Edward G, and Sullivan, Peter P. “Large-eddy simulation of condi-
tionally neutral boundary layers: A mesh resolution sensitivity study”. In: Journal of the
Atmospheric Sciences 77.6 (2020), pp. 1969–1991.
[10]
Blackadar, Alfred K. “Boundary layer wind maxima and their significance for the growth
of nocturnal inversions”. In: Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 38.5 (1957),
pp. 283–290.
[11]
Bonner, William D. “Climatology of the low level jet”. In: Monthly Weather Review 96.12
(1968), pp. 833–850.
[12]
Burton, Tony, Jenkins, Nick, Sharpe, David, and Bossanyi, Ervin. Wind energy handbook.
John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[13]
Csanady, GT. “Equilibrium theory of the planetary boundary layer with an inversion lid”.
In: Boundary-Layer Meteorology 6.1 (1974), pp. 63–79.
[14]
De Maré, Martin and Mann, Jakob. “Validation of the Mann spectral tensor for offshore
wind conditions at different atmospheric stabilities”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series. Vol. 524. 1. IOP Publishing. 2014, p. 012106.
[15]
Deardorff, James W. “Three-dimensional numerical study of the height and mean struc-
ture of a heated planetary boundary layer”. In: Boundary-Layer Meteorology 7 (1974),
pp. 81–106.
[16]
Devesse, Koen, Lanzilao, Luca, Jamaer, Sebastiaan, Lipzig, Nicole van, and Meyers, Jo-
han. “Including realistic upper atmospheres in a wind-farm gravity-wave model”. In: Wind
Energy Science 7.4 (2022), pp. 1367–1382.
76
==PAGE:84==
[17]
Dimitrov, Nikolay, Kelly, Mark C, Vignaroli, Andrea, and Berg, Jacob. “From wind to
loads: wind turbine site-specific load estimation with surrogate models trained on high-
fidelity load databases”. In: Wind Energy Science 3.2 (2018), pp. 767–790.
[18]
Dimitrov, Nikolay and Natarajan, Anand. “Application of simulated lidar scanning pat-
terns to constrained Gaussian turbulence fields for load validation”. In: Wind Energy 20.1
(2017), pp. 79–95.
[19]
Dimitrov, Nikolay, Pedersen, Mads, and Hannesdóttir, Ásta. “An open-source Python-
based tool for Mann turbulence generation with constraints and non-Gaussian capabil-
ities”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 2767. 5. IOP Publishing. 2024,
p. 052058.
[20]
Eggers Jr, AJ, Digumarthi, Ramarao, and Chaney, Keith. “Wind shear and turbulence
effects on rotor fatigue and loads control”. In: J. Sol. Energy Eng. 125.4 (2003), pp. 402–
409.
[21]
Ekman, Vagn Walfrid. “On the influence of the earth’s rotation on ocean-currents.” In:
(1905).
[22]
Finnigan, JJ. “Kinetic energy transfer between internal gravity waves and turbulence”.
In: Journal of Atmospheric Sciences 45.3 (1988), pp. 486–505.
[23]
Finnigan, JJ, Einaudi, Fua, and Fua, Daniele. “The interaction between an internal grav-
ity wave and turbulence in the stably-stratified nocturnal boundary layer”. In: Journal of
Atmospheric Sciences 41.16 (1984), pp. 2409–2436.
[24]
Graf, Peter A, Stewart, Gordon, Lackner, Matthew, Dykes, Katherine, and Veers, Paul.
“High-throughput computation and the applicability of Monte Carlo integration in fatigue
load estimation of floating offshore wind turbines”. In: Wind Energy 19.5 (2016), pp. 861–
872.
[25]
Gutierrez, Walter, Araya, Guillermo, Kiliyanpilakkil, Praju, Ruiz-Columbie, Arquimedes,
Tutkun, Murat, and Castillo, Luciano. “Structural impact assessment of low level jets over
wind turbines”. In: Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy 8.2 (2016).
[26]
Gutierrez, Walter, Ruiz-Columbie, Arquimedes, Tutkun, Murat, and Castillo, Luciano.
“Impacts of the low-level jet’s negative wind shear on the wind turbine”. In: Wind energy
science 2.2 (2017), pp. 533–545.
[27]
Hansen, Morten Hartvig and Henriksen, Lars Christian. “Basic DTU wind energy con-
troller”. In: (2013).
[28]
Holton, James R. “An Introduction to Dynamic Meteorology. Fourth edition”. In: De-
partment of Atmo (2004).
[29]
Howland, Christopher J, Taylor, John R, and Caulfield, CP. “Shear-induced breaking of
internal gravity waves”. In: Journal of fluid mechanics 921 (2021), A24.
[30]
IEA, International Energy Agency. Wind Energy. Accessed: 2025-02-10. 2024. url: https:
//www.iea.org/energy-system/renewables/wind.
[31]
Wind energy generation systems - Part 1: Design requirements (IEC 61400-1:2019).
Standard. Belgium, BE: European Commitee for Electrotechnical Standardization, Apr.
2019.
[32]
Inman, Daniel J and Singh, Ramesh Chandra. Engineering vibration. Vol. 3. Prentice Hall
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1994.
[33]
IRENA, International Renewable Energy Agency. World Energy Transitions Outlook
2023. Accessed: 2025-02-10. 2023. url: https://www.irena.org/Digital-Report/
World-Energy-Transitions-Outlook-2023.
77
==PAGE:85==
[34]
Kelley, N, Shirazi, M, Jager, D, Wilde, S, Adams, J, Buhl, M, Sullivan, P, and Patton, E.
“Lamar low-level jet project interim report”. In: National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Technical Report (2004).
[35]
Kelly, Mark. “From standard wind measurements to spectral characterization: turbulence
length scale and distribution”. In: Wind Energy Science 3.2 (2018), pp. 533–543.
[36]
Kelly, Mark. “Flow acceleration statistics: a new paradigm for wind-driven loads, towards
probabilistic turbine design”. In: Wind Energy Science 10.3 (2025), pp. 535–558.
[37]
Kelly, Mark, Cersosimo, Roberto Alessio, and Berg, Jacob. “A universal wind profile for
the inversion-capped neutral atmospheric boundary layer”. In: Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Meteorological Society 145.720 (2019), pp. 982–992.
[38]
Kelly, Mark, Larsen, G, Dimitrov, Nikolay Krasimirov, and Natarajan, Anand. “Proba-
bilistic meteorological characterization for turbine loads”. In: Journal of Physics: Confer-
ence Series. Vol. 524. 1. IOP Publishing. 2014, p. 012076.
[39]
Kelly, Mark and Van Der Laan, Maarten Paul. “From shear to veer: theory, statistics,
and practical application”. In: Wind Energy Science Discussions 2023 (2023), pp. 1–37.
[40]
Laan, Maarten Paul van der, Kelly, Mark, Floors, Rogier, and Peña, Alfredo. “Rossby
number similarity of an atmospheric RANS model using limited-length-scale turbulence
closures extended to unstable stratification”. In: Wind Energy Science 5.1 (2020), pp. 355–
374.
[41]
Lange, Bernhard, Larsen, Søren, Højstrup, Jørgen, and Barthelmie, Rebecca. “The influ-
ence of thermal effects on the wind speed profile of the coastal marine boundary layer”.
In: Boundary-Layer Meteorology 112 (2004), pp. 587–617.
[42]
Lanzilao, Luca and Meyers, Johan. “A parametric large-eddy simulation study of wind-
farm blockage and gravity waves in conventionally neutral boundary layers”. In: Journal
of Fluid Mechanics 979 (2024), A54.
[43]
Larsen, Gunner Chr, Larsen, Torben J, Ott, Søren, and Hansen, Kurt Schaldemose.
“Loads in wind farms under non-neutral ABL stability conditions: A full-scale valida-
tion study of the DWM model.” In: 3rd International Conference on Future Technologies
for Wind Energy. 2017.
[44]
Larsen, Torben J and Hansen, Anders Melchior. How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual. Risø
National Laboratory, 2007.
[45]
Lavely, Adam, Vijayakumar, Ganesh, Kinzel, Michael, Brasseur, James, and Paterson,
Eric. “Space-time loadings on wind turbine blades driven by atmospheric boundary layer
turbulence”. In: 49th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including the New Horizons
Forum and Aerospace Exposition. 2011, p. 635.
[46]
Lee, Sang, Churchfield, Matthew, Moriarty, Patrick, Jonkman, Jason, and Michalakes,
John. “Atmospheric and wake turbulence impacts on wind turbine fatigue loadings”. In:
50th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace
Exposition. 2012, p. 540.
[47]
Libianchi, Pierangelo, Shabalina, Elena, Kelly, Mark, Brunskog, Jonas, and Agerkvist,
Finn. “Sensitivity of the predicted acoustic pressure field to the wind and temperature
profiles in a conventionally neutral boundary layer”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 154.2 (2023), pp. 763–771.
[48]
Liu, Luoqin, Gadde, Srinidhi N, and Stevens, Richard JAM. “Universal wind profile for
conventionally neutral atmospheric boundary layers”. In: Physical review letters 126.10
(2021), p. 104502.
78
==PAGE:86==
[49]
Liu, Shuyan and Liang, Xin-Zhong. “Observed diurnal cycle climatology of planetary
boundary layer height”. In: Journal of Climate 23.21 (2010), pp. 5790–5809.
[50]
Lyons, Richard G. Understanding digital signal processing, 3/E. Pearson Education India,
1997.
[51]
Mann, Jakob. “The spatial structure of neutral atmospheric surface-layer turbulence”. In:
Journal of fluid mechanics 273 (1994), pp. 141–168.
[52]
Mann, Jakob. “Wind field simulation”. In: Probabilistic engineering mechanics 13.4 (1998),
pp. 269–282.
[53]
Maré, Martin de and Mann, Jakob. “On the space-time structure of sheared turbulence”.
In: Boundary-layer meteorology 160.3 (2016), pp. 453–474.
[54]
Nappo, Carmen J. An introduction to atmospheric gravity waves. Vol. 102. Academic
press, 2012.
[55]
Park, Jinkyoo, Basu, S, and Manuel, L. “Large-eddy simulation of stable boundary layer
turbulence and estimation of associated wind turbine loads”. In: Wind Energy 17.3 (2014),
pp. 359–384.
[56]
Pedersen, Jesper G, Gryning, Sven-Erik, and Kelly, Mark. “On the structure and adjust-
ment of inversion-capped neutral atmospheric boundary-layer flows: Large-eddy simula-
tion study”. In: Boundary-layer meteorology 153.1 (2014), pp. 43–62.
[57]
Ramos, Alexandre M, Blamey, Ross C, Algarra, Iago, Nieto, Raquel, Gimeno, Luis, Tomé,
Ricardo, Reason, Chris JC, and Trigo, Ricardo M. “From Amazonia to southern Africa:
Atmospheric moisture transport through low-level jets and atmospheric rivers”. In: Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences 1436.1 (2019), pp. 217–230.
[58]
Rinker, Jennifer, Gaertner, Evan, Zahle, Frederik, Skrzypiński, Witold, Abbas, Nikhar,
Bredmose, Henrik, Barter, Garrett, and Dykes, Katherine. “Comparison of loads from
HAWC2 and OpenFAST for the IEA Wind 15 MW Reference Wind Turbine”. In: Journal
of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 1618. 5. IOP Publishing. 2020, p. 052052.
[59]
Sathe, Ameya, Mann, Jakob, Barlas, Thanasis K, Bierbooms, WAAM, and Van Bussel,
GJW. “Atmospheric stability and its influence on wind turbine loads”. In: The science of
Making Torque from Wind 2012: 4th scientific conference. 2012.
[60]
Schumacher, Russ S, Childs, Samuel J, and Adams-Selin, Rebecca D. “Intense surface
winds from gravity wave breaking in simulations of a destructive macroburst”. In: Monthly
Weather Review 151.3 (2023), pp. 775–793.
[61]
Smedman, Ann-Sofi, Bergström, Hans, and Högström, Ulf. “Spectra, variances and length
scales in a marine stable boundary layer dominated by a low level jet”. In: Boundary-Layer
Meteorology 76.3 (1995), pp. 211–232.
[62]
Sørensen, Jens Nørkær and Larsen, Gunner Christian. “A minimalistic prediction model
to determine energy production and costs of offshore wind farms”. In: Energies 14.2 (2021),
p. 448.
[63]
Stull, Roland B. An introduction to boundary layer meteorology. Vol. 13. Springer Science
& Business Media, 2012.
[64]
Sullivan, Peter P, Moeng, Chin-Hoh, Stevens, Bjorn, Lenschow, Donald H, and Mayor,
Shane D. “Structure of the entrainment zone capping the convective atmospheric bound-
ary layer”. In: Journal of the atmospheric sciences 55.19 (1998), pp. 3042–3064.
[65]
Taylor, GI. “The statistical theory of isotropic turbulence”. In: Journal of the Aeronautical
Sciences 4.8 (1937), pp. 311–315.
79
==PAGE:87==
[66]
Tian, Wei, Ozbay, Ahmet, and Hu, Hui. “An Experimental Investigation on Dynamic
Wind Loads Acting on a Wind Turbine Model in Atomspheric Boundary Layer Winds”.
In: 32nd ASME Wind Energy Symposium. 2014, p. 1221.
[67]
Vestas. V236-15.0 MW Offshore Wind Turbine. Accessed: 2025-02-10. 2025. url: https:
//www.vestas.com/en/energy-solutions/offshore-wind-turbines/V236-15MW.
[68]
Vijayakumar, Ganesh, Lavely, Adam, Kinzel, Michael, Paterson, Eric, and Brasseur,
James. “Influences of Atmospheric Boundary Layer Turbulence Structure on the Space-
time Variability in Wind Turbine Blade and Shaft Loadings”. In: 6th AIAA Theoretical
Fluid Mechanics Conference. 2011, p. 3300.
[69]
Weddell, Ice Station. “Low-level atmospheric jets and inversions on”. In: Antarctic Journal
of the United States 28.5 (1993), p. 274.
[70]
Wyngaard, John C. Turbulence in the Atmosphere. Cambridge university press, 2010.
[71]
Zilitinkevich, Sergej, Esau, Igor, and Baklanov, Alexander. “Further comments on the
equilibrium height of neutral and stable planetary boundary layers”. In: Quarterly Jour-
nal of the Royal Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied
meteorology and physical oceanography 133.622 (2007), pp. 265–271.
[72]
Zilitinkevich, SS, Tyuryakov, SA, Troitskaya, Yu I, and Mareev, EA. “Theoretical models
of the height of the atmospheric boundary layer and turbulent entrainment at its upper
boundary”. In: Izvestiya, Atmospheric and Oceanic Physics 48 (2012), pp. 133–142.
80
==PAGE:88==
8
Annex A: Notes on shear distribution
Related shear to the jet parameters with the vertical wind profile implemented as log law with
a Gaussian shaped jet.
• z: Vertical height [m]
• U(z): Wind speed dependent on height z [m/s]
• H: Gamma-distributed jet height (ABL height) [m]
• W: Jet width [m]; There is a relation by Libianchi et al. [47]
• S: Jet strength [m/s]; There is an approximation by Pedersen et al. [56]
• α: Dimensionless wind shear [-]; Defined as logarithmic derivative of vertical wind speed
profile
U(z) = u∗
κ ln
! z
z0
"
+ S exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
α = d(ln U)
d(ln z) =
z
U(z)
dU
dz
dU
dz = 1
z · u∗
κ + S exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
·
)!z −H
W
"2*′
⇒dU
dz = 1
z · u∗
κ + S exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
·
2
−1
W 2(z −H)2
3
‘
⇒dU
dz = 1
z · u∗
κ + S exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
·
2
−1
W 2
-
z2 −2zH + H2.3′
⇒dU
dz = 1
z · u∗
κ + S exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
· (−2
W 2(z −H))
⇒dU
dz = 1
z · u∗
κ −2S
W 2 exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
(z −H)
α =
z
u∗
κ ln
+
z
z0
,
+ S exp
+
−
- z−H
W
.2, ·
)
1
z · u∗
κ −2S
W 2 exp
%
−
!z −H
W
"2'
(z −H)
*
81
==PAGE:89==
9
Annex B: Initial wave −study results
As mentioned in Section 5.8, the initial simulations for gravity waves, went somewhat sideways
due to over constraining. The HiperSim model tried abiding by constraints, Mann spectral
tensor based correlation and continuity and ended up introducing additional high frequency,
high amplitude noise into the turbulence boxes. Nonetheless as a learning the results from that
initial wave −study are included for comparison, if other researchers run into similar issues
with constrained turbulence generation. Mostly the wind fields and constraints might be of
interest to avoid such issues, still the load results are also included.
Again, firstly the wind field inputs are examined and then the load results are assessed to see
the impact and compare wave −study results with corresponding ‘IEC’ cases. The study cases
for this simulation were picked as follows:
• U=11m/s; TI=0.16; N = 0.01Hz; A = 2.0m/s;H = 162.0m;W = 12.0m
• U=11m/s; TI=0.16; N = 0.03Hz; A = 2.0m/s;H = 162.0m;W = 12.0m
All parameters were fixed except for N. First, let‘s motivate the choice of wind speed. 8.0,
11.0 and 14.0, were within the simulated parameter space and U=11m/s was picked because
its closest to the rated wind speed of the DTU 10MW RWT and most likely to contain gravity-
wave-turbine-control interactions that might yield differences with respect to loads. Also it
is the wind speed that is closest to the respective IEC wind class (10 m/s as examined for
the jet −study). Anyways, the whole wind speed range will be assessed through wind speed
overview plots. When examining the load results in a dynamic view, it was found that A had
a negligible impact, thus it was fixed to A = 2.0m/s for the following paragraphs. However
the loads were highly variable scaling with the Brunt-Väisälä frequency N, thus both values
needed to be assessed within the study cases.
Figure 42 shows the turbulence box, serving as input for a simulation in the wave −study with
parameters: U=11m/s; TI=0.16; N = 0.01Hz; A = 2.0m/s;H = 162.0m;W = 12.0m; Seed=1.
The left side shows x −z-plane at y = 90m (where the hub of the DTU 10MW RWT lay).
Here the wave structure was inserted at a height H = 162.0m, which in the turbulence box
corresponds to Hbox = Hglobal −zhub + R = 132.0m. Here zhub was approximated to 120m to fit
on the mesh grid. This is due to the centering of the turbulence box around the hub, dictated
by HAWC2. The wave-constraint at 132.0±12m can b e clearly observed, whereas the checker-
like pattern emerges from the models objective to preserve continuity. This means that in the
air flow, air parcels can not ’disappear‘, thus they have to flow in a way that conserves mass.
Hence, when a constraint, dictates wave like accelerations and decelerations in one point on
the mesh-grid. Other neighboring air parcels have to oppositely decelerate/accelerate to ensure
continuity.
Outside the constraint-region, the development of waves, is evident, validating
the approach to ’constraining‘ for waves. The color scale shows the values for the turbulent
component u in the wind field, seeing values ranged from around -15m/s to 15m/s, while more
extreme values seemed to occur towards the end of the 10min interval. Similarly, for Figure 43,
the patterns and trends can be observed. Here the wave frequency is higher, leading to more
oscillations and more extreme values. It is noted that the waves propagated almost throughout
the whole vertical extent of the turbulence box over the cross spectrum uw, as shown in both
Figures.
On the right hand side of Figures 42 and 43, the x−averaged values of u are shown at each height
z, with a respective 1−σ interval. This plot characterizes the mean vertical wind profile, where
two things can be observed: Firstly, the implicit shear, added after synthesizing the turbulence,
can be ’read‘ off the mean values. Secondly, the constraint region exuded, less fluctuations, due
to the model forcing values onto the given constraints, which follows a monochromatic wave.
82
==PAGE:90==
Figure 42: Simulated wind field for wave −study at U=11m/s; TI=0.16; N = 0.01Hz; A =
2.0m/s;H = 162.0m;W = 12.0m; Seed=1
In this case it can be seen when examining the error bar plots, especially in Figure 42: In the
region around the constraints, the uncertainty (see error bars) was low, due to the constraints
being a monochromatic function. However, below and above, the uncertainty, was increased,
in order to preserve the overall variance of the turbulence box.
With the constraints in place, it can be validated if the process worked as intended by, check-
ing a one-point time series within the wave-structure region. Figure 44, shows the turbulent
component u, v, w time series for a wave with N = 0.01Hz at y = 90m, z = 132m, which corre-
sponds to the hub of the DTU 10 MW RWT in the simulation. The blue plots show the ’raw‘
turbulence (before constraining), whereas the orange plot visualizes the final HAWC2 input.
The black dots represent the constraint inputs, as points that are enforced to be met. However,
it can be observed, that the orange line does not coincide with the given points for component
u. This is due to the implicit shear, that was added after constraining, thus the orange plot is
slightly shifted ’upwards‘. The start-time of the constraint may be observed (0.1 · T) and the
wave signal, is apparent in u, which means the constraint worked as intended. Furthermore,
when looking at Figure 44 there was no obvious momentum transfer between u and w, so that w
followed a wave. It closely resembled the ’raw‘ turbulence, due to the selected constraints, being
essentially the raw time series (but sampled, accordingly to nconsample, as explained above). v
was not affected whatsoever, due to the setup of the .constrain()-method, which postulates
no connection to u, when populating the covariance matrix. On the other hand, Figure 45
depicts the same plots for a wave with N = 0.03Hz. The higher frequency and shorter wave-
length can be seen in the top plot (u). Additionally, the impact on w is far more evident here,
with wave-like progressions in w that include a second, higher-frequency wave on top. Like
smaller wavelets, traveling with their individual phase speeds ’on top‘ of the main wave with
the group velocity. Similar observations were made when measuring gravity waves during the
CASES-99 field campaign, but with much smaller wavelets than here, compare Nappo (2012)
[54]. This effect was even more pronounced for higher frequencies like N ∈0.06, 0.1Hz, and
also lead to extreme/unrealistic values, especially for N = 0.1Hz, during testing. In this case it
was most likely an interaction between the wave frequency N, the frequency of the constraint
and the overall variance of the turbulence box. Rather than wavelets, since the model was not
83
==PAGE:91==
Figure 43: Simulated wind field for wave −study at U=11m/s; TI=0.16; N = 0.03Hz; A =
2.0m/s; H = 162.0m; W = 12.0m; Seed=1
sophisticated enough to include those.
The turbulence boxes can also be characterized within the frequency domain. Figure 46, com-
pares the pre-multiplied auto spectra uu, vv, ww and the cross spectra uw, for simulations with
N = 0.01Hz and N = 0.03Hz. Other parameters were fixed here: U = 11.0m/s; TI = 0.16;
A = 2.0m/s; H = 162.0m and W = 12.0m. Both simulations were realized with Seed=1,
which is immediately evident when comparing Figures 46a and 46b. Both of these spectra and
consequently turbulence realization were identical before the wave constraint. It can be seen,
that the spectra follow the theoretical Mann spectra, as per lookup table and analytical inte-
gration closely, albeit higher uncertainty in lower frequencies. Again a negative uw indicates a
downward momentum transfer. The same observation can be made when looking at Table 10:
The variances were identical for all components, as intended.
N = 0.01
N = 0.03
Before constraining
σ2
u
2.9499
2.9499
σ2
v
1.6443
1.6443
σ2
w
0.7666
0.7666
After constraining
σ2
u
195.27
44.502
σ2
v
1.6443
1.6443
σ2
w
16.396
17.401
Table 10: Variances of velocity components before and after constraining for different N values.
Now focusing more closely on the spectra after constraining: In Figure 46c the monochromatic
wave frequency, dominates the uu, ww and uw spectra, at its characteristic wave number k =
2π
U/N ≈0.006m−1. The peak is slightly shifted (more towards k = 0.008m−1) due to the sampling
of the constraint array and a slight misalignment with the wave function. Opposed to the close
84
==PAGE:92==
Figure 44: Wave constraints and ’raw‘ turbulence for wave −study simulation N = 0.01Hz
Figure 45: Wave constraints and ’raw‘ turbulence for wave −study simulation N = 0.03Hz
85
==PAGE:93==
resemblance of the theoretical Mann spectra, from before constraining, afterwards the variance
was concentrated around the characteristic wave number, which led to a smaller but higher
peak for uu, ww and uw. The lateral component vv was unaffected, as expected. Furthermore
the variance increased more than tenfold, for turbulent components u, w, see Table 10. For
the simulation with N = 0.03Hz, another interesting phenomenon was observed. Figure 46d
depicts the same peak around the wave number of the imposed constraint, here k = 0.017m−1,
shifted due to sampling towards k = 0.03m−1. But there are two more spectral peaks than can
be observed: One additional peak around 0.03m−1 and one around 0.3m−1. The emergence of
these additional peaks, may be attributed to the constraining process in HiperSim. Again, the
variance in u, w increased, but not as much as for the simulation with N = 0.01Hz.
(a) Before constraining: N = 0.01Hz
(b) Before constraining: N = 0.03Hz
(c) After constraining: N = 0.01Hz
(d) After constraining: N = 0.03Hz
Figure 46: Comparison of turbulence spectra for two wave-study simulations with N = 0.01Hz
and N = 0.03Hz. Top: before applying constraints. Bottom: after applying constraints.
Table 11 shows the frequency bands of natural modes for the DTU 10MW RWT [6] [5]. Just
comparing with the imposed wave frequencies of N = 0.01Hz and N = 0.03Hz, no major res-
onance would be expected, thus no major increased in loads, especially looking at the flapwise
modes, since the blade root flapwise bending moment was examined. For the tower fore aft
modes, no reference values were found.
However, when analyzing the observed peak wavenumbers from Figures 46c and 46d, corre-
sponding to approximately k ∈0.008, 0.017, 0.03, 0.35, m−1, one can convert them back to the
86
==PAGE:94==
frequency domain using the relation k = 2πf
U
⇔f = k·U
2π . This yields frequencies of approxi-
mately f ∈0.014, 0.03, 0.052, 0.61, Hz. Notably, the highest of these frequencies coincides with
the first natural frequency in the first flapwise blade mode (see Table11). Moreover, the derived
frequencies of 0.03 Hz and 0.052 Hz fall within the range of the 3P rotor harmonic (0.30 Hz
to 0.48 Hz), while the 0.61 Hz component overlaps with the 6P harmonic range (0.60 Hz to
0.96 Hz) reported in [5]. This potential overlap may suggest a coupling between the gravity
wave-induced turbulence structures and rotor harmonics, which could contribute to resonance
and excite oscillations in the turbine structure.
Mode
Natural frequency [Hz]
1st flap mode
0.61
1st edge mode
0.93
2nd flap mode
1.74
2nd edge mode
2.76
3rd flap mode
3.57
1st torsion mode
5.69
4th flap mode
6.11
3rd edge mode
6.66
3P
0.30-0.48
6P
0.60-0.96
Table 11: Relevant frequencies of different blade modes and rotor harmonics DTU 10MW RWT
[6] [5]
Now after carefully examining the wind fields, that served as an input for the HAWC2 load
simulations, the actual loads can be assessed. In the wave −study the parameter space was
more limited than in the jet −study or α −study. Nonetheless, some trends were ascertained
and will be presented below. However, it is important to keep in mind, especially, when looking
at the plots for wind speed overview, that those plots contain only the wind speeds 8.0, 11.0
and 14.0m/s and the in between space was linearly filled due to plotting. On another note, as
opposed to the jet−study, here the nominal wind speeds are comparable, since no major shear
or mean wind was added, at least around hub height, compare Figures 16 and 42. However the
variance, as seen in the error bars changed significantly, which was expected to affect loads or
load cycles through σu.
Figure 47 summarizes the results from the wave study for the first study case (N = 0.01Hz) and
compares with the respective ‘IEC case‘ at U = 11m/s. Overall the tower fore aft bending mo-
ment and blade root flapwise bending moments seem to be in good agreement. Focusing on the
tower, the 1% quantile was around 90 MNm for both studies. The ‘body‘ of the wave −study
box-plot appears bigger, due to a lower first quartile. Also the median is slightly lower for the
wave −study. On the other hand the 99% quantile, is evidently higher, reaching around 210
MNm. So while the loads seem to be comparable, there is more variance and higher maxima,
when including gravity waves with N = 0.01Hz. Now Figure 48 paints an entirely different
picture, with extreme deviations between the wave −study-case (N = 0.03Hz) and the ‘IEC
case’. Focusing on the tower fore aft bending moment: Firstly, the median is comparable for
both around 150 MNm. Secondly, the 99% quantile behaves similar to the N = 0.01Hz case.
Thirdly and most importantly, the box-plot appears largely extended towards lower and even
reversed loads. This means, that there were situations where the tower base experienced a
reverse moment apart from the usual, static, thrust-based moment direction. The tower was
most likely moving back and forth, due to oscillations, caused by the gravity waves, which
87
==PAGE:95==
Figure 47: Box-plot from the wave−study for parameters U = 11m/s; TI = 0.16; N = 0.01Hz;
A = 2.0m/s; H = 162m; W = 12m
then led to reversed loads. However the reversed loads are well below the first quartile, which
indicates that it happened rather seldom, across simulations. The frequency of occurrences can
be further assessed, when looking at the probability density functions of the respective load,
below. The higher impact, was expected, after reviewing the wind fields, which have shown
greater deviations for the higher Brunt-Väisälä frequencies.
The influence of gravity waves is also evident in the wind speed overviews. Figure 49 displays
the tower fore-aft bending moment (y-axis) as a function of nominal wind speed Unom (x-axis).
(Note: For the ‘Case’ simulations, only wind speeds of 8.0, 11.0, and 14.0 m/s are included, as
described above). As in the jet −study, the figure presents the characteristic load curves for
the ‘IEC case’: the left subplot shows the mean values and a 68% confidence interval, while
the right subplot depicts the upper percentiles (P90–P99). Since the general trend has already
been discussed earlier, it is only briefly summarized here-loads increased up to rated wind speed
and decreased afterward due to blade pitching.
For the first gravity wave case with N = 0.01Hz, the load curves closely match the ‘IEC case’
across wind speeds, confirming earlier findings from the box plots. This resemblance also indi-
cates that hub height wind speeds are now comparable between the two cases, as opposed to the
jet −study. Additionally, the broader spread in both plots showcases increased load variance,
consistent with the box plot observations. The right-hand plot (P90–P99) shows elevated peak
load values, indicating that even low-frequency gravity waves (i.e., N = 0.01Hz) can amplify
peak loads.
Figure 50 illustrates the effects of a higher gravity wave frequency (N = 0.03Hz) on tower
loads. The upper bound of the mean ±1σ-interval remains similar to the ‘IEC case’. However,
the lower bound is significantly reduced, reaching a minimum around U = 11m/s. At this wind
88
==PAGE:96==
Figure 48: Box-plot from the wave−study for parameters U = 11m/s; TI = 0.16; N = 0.03Hz;
A = 2.0m/s; H = 162m; W = 12m
speed, load variability is approximately three times higher than in the ‘IEC case’. Most likely,
here the turbine was frequently transitioning between below-rated and above-rated operation
within a single simulation. This was driven by the gravity wave-induced wind speed fluctuations
as observed in the wind fields. This dynamic behavior is particularly concerning, as it may lead
to sustained oscillations while gravity waves persist. Here, the interaction between the pitch
controller and the gravity waves is critical: if the controller’s response time aligns with the
wave period, problematic feedback loops can emerge. For example, the ‘crest’ of a gravity wave
(in this context referring to an acceleration in u) increases wind speed and initiates pitching,
which in turn reduces thrust. By the time the pitch adjustment takes effect, the turbine may
be in the wave trough (deceleration u), where wind speed—and thus thrust—drops. This can
cause the controller to reduce pitch again, increasing thrust right before the next crest hits,
pushing the turbine backward once more, such that the oscillations get more and more enforced
by reduced/increased thrust in the ‘wrong’ moments.
While the upper quantile region shows slightly enhanced peak loads, as in the first case study,
the lower quantiles may be more problematic. As seen in the earlier box plots, the loads not
only vary more but can also reverse, raising further concerns about turbine stability and fatigue.
Taking a closer look at the statistical distribution of tower loads, Figure 51 compares the PDFS
of tower loads for the two study cases from the wave−study. The x-axis represents tower fore-
aft bending moments in kNm, while the y-axis shows the corresponding probability density.
For the ‘IEC case’, the distribution peaks around 150 MNm, which aligns with normal op-
erational loads resulting from relatively steady thrust at U = 11 m/s [5]. In the N = 0.01
Hz case, shown in Figure 49, the PDF closely resembles the ‘IEC case’, though the peak is
slightly shifted toward lower loads and the tails of the distribution are more pronounced. This
89
==PAGE:97==
Figure 49: Wind speed overview for tower fore aft bending moment from the wave −study for
parameters TI = 0.16; N = 0.01Hz; A = 2.0m/s; H = 162m; W = 12m
Figure 50: Wind speed overview for tower fore aft bending moment from the wave −study for
parameters TI = 0.16; N = 0.03Hz; A = 2.0m/s; H = 162m; W = 12m
90
==PAGE:98==
observation supports the trends seen earlier in the box plots.
In contrast, the N = 0.03Hz case displays a notably different distribution. Note that the x-axis
scale differs here due to the occurrence of reversed loads. While a major portion of the probabil-
ity remained centered around the same values as in the ‘IEC case’, a second peak appeared near
zero load, with a pronounced tail extending towards negative values. This secondary peak may
reflect an oscillatory response of the turbine, as described above: as the turbine moves back and
forth, the tower fore-aft bending moment momentarily approached zero when the turbine was
passing through the ‘upright position’. The further it deviated from that position, the greater
the loads became—consistent with the observed spread around 0 load and the asymmetry in
the overall distribution.
Delving deeper into the blade root flapwise bending moments, Figures 47 and 48 have already
shown, some of the relevant statistics for the wave −study. Generally, it seems that all three
blades showed similar statistics, based on the box-plots. Hence an interaction between gravity
wave frequency N and rotational speed ω in. a sense that one blade only samples accelerations
and another one only decelerations, most likely did not happen. For N = 0.01Hz the results
were somewhat comparable to the ‘IEC case’, the median of the loads was slightly shifted to-
wards lower loads (around 22MNm) and similar to the tower loads, the first quartile (based on
flipped y-axis), indicates a broader spread towards lower blade loads. Additionally, coherent
with results from the tower loads, the whiskers indicate enhanced peak loads in both directions.
The study case with N = 0.03 exhibited greatly increased variance, whereas the median stayed
somewhat stable, but the first quartile was shifted towards 5MNm. The maximum reversed
load is not depicted, since it would have caused quite distorted axes of the plot. Whereas the
minimum load (‘normal direction’) was still on similar levels as for the first study case. This
greatly increased variance can also be attributed to movements, where the blades were oscil-
lating flapwise, which was induced by the cyclic acceleration and deceleration from the gravity
waves.
Since all blades, showed similar statistics, again Blade 1, will be analyzed as ‘representative’
for all blades in some aspects. For completeness, the blade load PDFS, will compare all blades.
Figure 53 illustrates similar findings for that blades as to the tower: The gravity waves, in-
creased variance of loads, mainly towards the lower end (see the blue curve overlapping and
spilling over at the top), as well as downwards shifted P90-P99 loads (upwards in the plot due
to flipped y-axis). Furthermore, the second study case, visualizes how much the gravity waves,
altered the turbines behavior across the simulated wind speeds. Especially around rated opera-
tion (11.0m/s), the variance became extremely high, in the upper quantile region even reversing
the loads. These findings stand coherent with the box-plot findings and underline the impor-
tance of the earlier mentioned controller-gravity-wave interaction, in the context of blade loads.
The probability distributions obtained from simulating over 10 seeds are shown and compared
to the ‘IEC case’ in Figures 54 and 54. Generally, it can be confirmed that all blades showed
similar statistics, which is reflected in the PDFs as well. Firstly, for N = 0.01Hz, the PDFs,
are centered around the same median of ≈−22.5MNm. However the study case PDFs exude
a wider distribution, where the probability density is spread towards the tails. In comparison,
the second study case for N = 0.03Hz, shows a much broader distribution (also distorting the
scale, keep in mind the ‘IEC cases’ depict the same curve in both Figures). Here almost three
peaks can be observed, especially for Blade 1: One peak corresponding to the ‘normal loads’ as
per ‘IEC case’, one peak around -6.5MNm and lastly a peak in the reversed load region around
91
==PAGE:99==
(a) Gravity wave frequency N=0.01 [Hz]
(b) Gravity wave frequency N=0.03 [Hz]
Figure 51: PDF of tower loads from the wave-study for U=11 [m/s]; TI=0.16; A=2.0 [m/s];
H=162 [m]; W=12 [m], comparing different gravity wave frequencies.
92
==PAGE:100==
Figure 52: Wind speed overview for blade root flapwise bending moment from the wave−study
for parameters TI = 0.16; N = 0.01Hz; A = 2.0m/s; H = 162m; W = 12m
Figure 53: Wind speed overview for blade root flapwise bending moment from the wave−study
for parameters TI = 0.16; N = 0.03Hz; A = 2.0m/s; H = 162m; W = 12m
93
==PAGE:101==
Figure 54: PDFs for blade root flapwise bending moments from the wave−study for parameters
U = 11m/s; TI = 0.16; N = 0.01Hz; A = 2.0m/s; H = 162m; W = 12m
Figure 55: PDFs for blade root flapwise bending moments from the wave−study for parameters
U = 11m/s; TI = 0.16; N = 0.03Hz; A = 2.0m/s; H = 162m; W = 12m
94
==PAGE:102==
6.5MNm. The additional peaks, most likely stem from the gravity wave-induced oscillations
and correspond to the maximum deflection positions. Cyclic loadings and oscillations, due to
gravity waves, are a concern towards the blade‘s integrity and lifespan [12]
The results indicate that under cases with prominent gravity waves, structural load responses
showed increased variability and intermittency, especially for higher Brunt-Väisälä frequencies.
This behavior is visible in both the statistical metrics and probability density shapes, with
higher quantiles and broader PDFs compared to the ‘IEC case’ references.
These patterns
imply potential excitation of the turbine’s natural modes, in the tower fore aft and blade
flapwise directions. While direct oscillatory motions have not yet been conclusively observed
in time series, the statistical signatures strongly suggest their presence. Notably, gravity waves
were characterized by coherent, large-scale streamwise velocity fluctuations which may align
with structural natural frequencies and act as a driving mechanism for these modal responses.
Despite their relevance, there is currently no focused research addressing the specific effects of
gravity waves on turbine loading, to the best knowledge of the author nor are such conditions
represented in standard load case definitions [31]. Unfortunately there is no convenient paper
along the lines of ‘Climatology of gravity waves’ in a sense that there are now studies of large
scale measurement campaigns showing statistics of the probability of occurrence of gravity
waves in the ABL. Still the presented results reveal a gap in the current understanding and
modeling of atmospheric stability-driven load scenarios for large modern wind turbines.
95
