==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360°
Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
by
Rasmus Kurdahl-Martinsen
s194337@dtu.dk
Thesis Period:
January – June 2025
Supervisors:
Samel Arslanagic, Rasmus E. Jacobsen and Jo M. Eide
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
Rasmus Kurdahl-Martinsen - s194337
Signature
Date
ii
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
27.06.2025
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents the design, implementation, and testing of a wideband reconfigurable
antenna array for vehicular applications, operating in the 0.70–5.90 GHz range. The sys-
tem enables 360◦beam steering using a circular array of eight tapered slot antenna ele-
ments per polarization for both horizontal and vertical polarization to support 2×2 MIMO.
Azimuthal reconfigurability is achieved through PIN-diode-based switching, allowing one
or two elements to be active while the rest remain inactive. The two-active element config-
uration is used to increase low frequency gain rather than providing additional beams for
the same frequencies as the one-active configurations. The horizontal and vertical polar-
ized elements were individually optimized for gain, impedance matching, and beamwidth.
They were subsequently assembled together with the PIN diode feed networks into a pro-
totype. Simulated and measured results showed agreement for single elements, while
the assembled array demonstrated |S11| ≤−8 dB and a typical gain of 7 dBi for 0.70–
4.50 GHz. The prototype validates the feasibility of wideband, reconfigurable vehicular
antennas with beam steering and highlights areas for future improvement in feed network
bandwidth, minimize main lobe variation over frequency, and improve overall compact-
ness.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
i
==PAGE:4==
ii
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The thesis was carried out from 27.01.2025 to 27.06.2025 at the Department of Space
Research and Technology of Technical University of Denmark (Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark) in
cooperation with Comrod A/S (Tau, Norway).
I would like to express my appreciation to my supervisors and the teams at DTU Space
and Comrod A/S who have advised and aided in the outcome of this thesis. Special thanks
to Comrod for support in prototype production and for access to the far-field testing facility,
which allowed verification of the design with actual measurements.
Thank you to Assistant Professor Rasmus E. Jacobsen of DTU Space for your theoretical
guidance and academic support. Our weekly meetings clarified research goals, refined
the experimental design, and your suggestions for simulation verification techniques im-
proved the credibility of the design and expedited the development process.
Thank you to Jo M. Eide, CTO at Comrod A/S, for the opportunity to carry out this thesis in
cooperation with the company. Jo’s advice on design goals and antenna considerations
ensured alignment with real-world requirements.
Lastly, I want to acknowledge everyone who reviewed drafts, shared insights during in-
formal discussions, and offered moral support. Your contributions kept this project on
schedule and improved its overall quality.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Vehicular Wireless Communication and Antennas
3
2.1
Wireless Vehicle Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Array Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
The Tapered Slot Antenna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Theory and Methods
13
3.1
Relevant Design Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Circular Array Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
PIN Diode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Initial TSA Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Configuration of Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.6
Measurement Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Element Design
25
4.1
Template Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Horizontal Polarized Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Vertical Polarized Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Array Design and Assembly
37
5.1
Horizontal Polarized Array Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
Vertical Polarized Array Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
Reconfigurable Feed Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.4
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Measurements and Discussion
51
6.1
Standalone Elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Separate Array Configurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.3
MIMO Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6.4
Current State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
6.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
7
Conclusion
77
Bibliography
79
A Theory and Methods
83
A.1 Simulation Port Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
B Simulations
85
B.1 Template Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
B.2 Horizontal Polarized Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
B.3 Vertical Polarized Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
B.4 Array Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
B.5 Refined Simulation Model Including Feed Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
v
==PAGE:8==
C Feed Network
96
D Measurements
99
D.1 Horizontal Polarized Array . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
E
Testing Setup
102
E.1 Measurement Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
E.2 Measurement Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
vi
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Antennas are fundamental components of modern wireless communication systems. They
enable the transmission and reception of electromagnetic waves, serving as the physical
interface between electronic devices and the wireless domain. By propagating through
open-air environments, antennas facilitate flexible and scalable communication without
the need for physical connections.
The growing demand for high data-rate wireless communication has driven the develop-
ment of technologies such as 4G Long Term Evolution (LTE) and 5G New Radio (NR),
both of which currently operate largely within the 0.70–5.90 GHz frequency range [1]. A
study by the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (FFI) concludes that the pri-
mary limiting factor for the performance and range of 5G NR is the radiated power of
the user equipment (UE). The study recommends increasing radiated power using high-
power UE [2]. Directive antennas are not emphasized due to the challenges of maintaining
alignment while in motion and reorienting after base station handovers.
While the recommended omnidirectional antennas with increased transmitted power could
help address this limitation, this approach has significant drawbacks. Most of the the
radiated power will not propagate toward the its intended recipient, resulting in low ef-
ficiency, increased interference for nearby users, and greater exposure to signal inter-
ception. Comrod A/S seeks to overcome this challenge by developing a reconfigurable
vehicular antenna with 360◦beam steering. This design aims to combine the directional
gain benefits of a focused antenna with the flexibility of an omnidirectional one.
Most reconfigurable antennas with 360◦beam steering suitable for vehicular applications—
whether developed in academia or commercially available—are based on some form of
circular array. Designs presented in academic literature are typically multiband and in-
tended for Direction Finding (DF) and Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) communica-
tions, such as those in [3, 4]. In contrast, commercially available solutions, such as those
in [5, 6], often achieve excellent performance but are limited to single-band operation,
while also focusing on DF and MIMO applications.
There remains a gap between academic research and commercial products: namely,
the lack of a wideband, 360◦reconfigurable antenna operating across the 0.70–5.90 GHz
range that offers relatively high gain compared to omnidirectional antennas and is suited
for MIMO applications.
The purpose of this work is to design a 360◦reconfigurable antenna array tailored for ve-
hicular applications. The objective is to develop a circular, switch-based array using eight
tapered slot antenna (TSA) elements (per polarization) capable of operating from 0.70 to
5.90 GHz. The system must support dual linear polarization for 2×2 MIMO and config-
urable beamwidth through one- or two-active-element operation. The goal is to design
and assemble a prototype that demonstrates the viability of such an array ,that through
further development, could address the radiated power limitations of UE in commercial
use.
The thesis is organized as follows: Chapter 2 reviews current trends in vehicular wireless
communication and antenna technology. Chapter 3 defines the theoretical framework, de-
sign metrics, and simulation and measurement methods. Chapter 4 presents the design
and optimization of the individual antenna elements. Chapter 5 details the integration of
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
1
==PAGE:10==
the antenna elements into the full array and the design of a reconfigurable feed network.
Chapter 6 compares measured results with the simulations and considers the current
state of the work with similar academic work, and suggest future improvements.
Design Specifications
As the frequency range for cellular communication is set from 0.70 GHz to 5.90 GHz, three
tactical radio bands that fall within this interval are also intended to be included: Link 16
(960–1215 MHz), NATO Band III+ (1.35–2.70 GHz), and NATO Band IV+ (4.40–5.90 GHz)
[7]. To support these and cellular applications, a limited set of design requirements has
been defined:
• Frequency range of 0.70 GHz – 5.90 GHz.
• The S11 ≤8.0 dB for the frequency range.
• The gain per 45◦azimuth-sector should have Half Power Beamwidth (HPBW) of
45◦and the gain at 0◦should be in the interval of 5 – 8 dBi. Expecting the gain to
increase with frequency.
• Should have a horizontal and vertical polarization.
• The isolation between the horizontal and vertical polarized arrays should be greater
then 20.0 dB.
• The antenna system’s mechanical dimension is constrained to be able fit on a typical
four wheeled vehicle.
2
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:11==
2
Vehicular Wireless Communication and
Antennas
Antennas are essential for wireless communication, as they enable the transmission and
reception of electromagnetic waves to convey information. Wireless communication is
especially critical for mobile platforms, where tethered connections are impractical. As
integral components of modern communication systems, antennas support technologies
ranging from compact, millimeter-scale Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) chips to
large, satellite-based systems such as Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS).
This chapter outlines the major domains of vehicular wireless communication namely
Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X), telemetry, and infotainment. In addition, it compares om-
nidirectional and directive antennas, highlighting the growing relevance of reconfigurable
arrays in enhancing link robustness and mitigating interference. The issue of mutual cou-
pling is discussed in the context of densely packed single-band vehicular antennas, moti-
vating the use of wideband solutions that reduce physical footprint while supporting mul-
tiple services. Circular arrays are introduced as a promising architecture for directional
coverage, and the TSA is presented as the preferred element for the array design pro-
posed in this thesis.
2.1
Wireless Vehicle Communication
Modern vehicles operate across multiple frequency bands, each covered by antennas
specifically tailored to its respective range. An emerging domain of wireless communica-
tion, known as Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X), leverages the increased throughput capacity
enabled by the rollout of 5G NR and the expansion of the Internet of Things (IoT). This do-
main requires dedicated antennas operating within Frequency Range 1 (FR1), spanning
0.45–6.00 GHz,1 and Frequency Range 2 (FR2), covering 24.25–52.60 GHz [8]. Along
with telemetry and infotainment, V2X constitutes one of the primary domains of wireless
communication relevant to vehicular systems, as illustrated in Figure 2.1.
V2X
V2X is an umbrella term in which the “X” represents a multitude of subcategories. The
most central being Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I), Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), and Vehicle-
to-Network (V2N). The primary objective of V2X is to facilitate the exchange of information
between vehicles and their environment to enhance situational awareness and improve
safety. Currently, two main standards define V2X communication: cellular vehicular-to-
everything (C-V2X), developed by 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), and dedi-
cated short-range communications (DSRC), developed by Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers (IEEE) 802.11p. Both operate primarily in a 5.9 GHz band, although
V2N typically utilizes existing FR1 cellular frequencies [9]. V2X facilitates direct commu-
nication links between actors offering low latency, as the data does not need to be relayed
through a central network. This low-latency communication is essential for real-time up-
dates and is a critical for applications such as vehicle platooning and autonomous driving.
Telemetry
The telemetry domain is primarily concerned with communicating the state and location
of the vehicle. This includes both cellular communication and position tracking via GNSS.
1FR1 is expected to expand to 0.45–7.00 GHz in the near future.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Visualization of the primary areas of wireless vehicular communication. Taken
from ref. [9].
Global Positioning System (GPS) and Galileo systems operate in the frequency range
of 1.1–1.6 GHz, typically using circularly polarized antennas [10, 11]. Cellular commu-
nication supports the transmission of vehicle data for services such as fuel optimization,
predictive maintenance, and system monitoring [9]. Most modern passenger vehicles use
a shark fin antenna, named for its fin-like shape and roof placement, which is a low-profile
housing, large enough to contain multiple antenna elements. One example is shown in
Figure 2.2. The shark fin antenna AECS1806D07Z (not the one pictured) from Abracon
integrates an omnidirectional 2×2 MIMO system for selected 4G LTE bands between
0.7 GHz and 2.7 GHz, along with dedicated antennas for GNSS and AM/FM radio, all
within a height and width smaller than 70 mm [12].
Figure 2.2: Picture of a typically shark fin antenna, visually reminiscent of a shark fin
because of its shape and placement on the car roof. Taken from ref. [13].
Infotainment
The infotainment domain provides the vehicle’s occupants with both information, such
as traffic alerts, navigation, and voice calls, and entertainment, such as streaming music.
The entertainment functionality is largely centered around cellular frequencies within FR1,
4
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:13==
as well as the 2.4 GHz and 5.0 GHz bands, which provide Bluetooth and Wi-Fi connec-
tivity to smartphones. AM/FM and DAB radio services are all located < 0.70 GHz. The
information services include both public cellular networks, but also networks dedicated to
emergency and security forces. With the developments within emergency communica-
tion systems integrated into cellular networks, most critical information is now carried over
FR1 frequencies, placing greater emphasis on the performance of cellular antennas [14].
While both smartphones and vehicles can access infotainment services via cellular net-
works, vehicles can leverage their size to support larger antennas and share their stronger
connection through a local hotspotf￿ootnoteThe smartphone’s reception can be degraded
by the vehicle’s body, which acts as a Faraday cage. An overview of the relevant cellular
and tactical radio bands within FR1 is shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Visualization of the frequency distribution of relevant bands in Norway [1].
Omnidirectional and Directive Vehicular Antennas
Omnidirectional antennas, such as shark fin and monopole antennas, provide theoret-
ically uniform coverage around the vehicle. This is particularly useful in for vehicular
applications, where the direction of nearby transmitters and receivers changes frequently
as the vehicle moves. However, because omnidirectional antennas radiate energy in all
directions, including directions where communication is unnecessary, the transmissions
tend to be power-inefficient and more susceptible to interference and signal interception.
As a result, there is growing interest in beam-steering antennas for vehicular applica-
tions. Beam steering enables the antenna to reconfigure its radiation pattern toward the
intended transceiver, using array-based solutions such as electronically scanned phased
arrays or switched beam arrays. By focusing energy in a specific direction, these systems
can achieve significantly higher gain (typically 10–15 dBi), extended range, and improved
link robustness [6]. Examples of a monopole antenna and a circular array are shown in
Figure 2.4. A major advantage of beam-steering antennas is their ability to suppress radi-
ation in undesired directions. This directional control reduces interference and improves
communication security by limiting signal exposure to unintended receivers.
Implementing beam steering on moving platforms poses several technical challenges.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
5
==PAGE:14==
Accurate beam alignment requires either continuous real-time direction-of-arrival (DOA)
estimation or reliable knowledge of the platform’s own position (e.g., via GNSS) combined
with situational awareness of other users or base stations. In either case, the complexity
of maintaining precise alignment in a dynamic environment is significant. The specifics of
beam alignment are, thus, beyond the scope of this thesis.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: Pictures of vehicular antennas, showing a monopole (a) and circular array (b)
antennas.Taken from [15, 6], respectively.
Antenna Coupling and the Case for Wideband Solutions
As vehicles incorporate more wireless functions such as cellular, GNSS, and satellite
communication, the number of onboard antennas continues to grow. Placing multiple
antennas on constrained surfaces like the roof or hood leads to reduced spacing between
them. When antennas are positioned close to one another, they begin to interact, resulting
in mutual coupling. This coupling can distort radiation patterns potentially introducing nulls
in the azimuth plane, defined as the horizontal plane relative to the vehicle. It can also
cause impedance mismatches, and reducing the antennas efficiency. These effects are
illustrated in the radiation patterns shown in Figure 2.5, taken from Comrod marketing
material, which compares the performance of four individual antennas on a vehicle with
that of a single wideband antenna designed to cover all channels.
To mitigate these issues, multiple frequency bands can be incorporated into a one wide-
band or multiband antenna capable of operating across a broad frequency range, such as
0.7 GHz to 5.9 GHz. A wideband antenna reduces the need for multiple physical elements,
thereby minimizing coupling effects and simplifying both mechanical and electrical inte-
gration.2 While wideband antennas typically trade some gain and impedance matching
in exchange for broader bandwidth, they can still outperform tightly spaced narrowband
antennas due to reduced mutual coupling.
2.2
Array Configuration
An antenna array is necessary to achieve high gain with directional control, as a single
element’s directivity limits its ability to efficiently focus energy in multiple directions. By
2There is also a finite number of mounting points available on a vehicle.
6
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.5: Comparison of the actual radiation pattern for a one multi-band antenna and
4 single-band antennas. Courtesy of Comrod.
combining multiple antenna elements in an array, the amplitude and phase of each ele-
ment can be adjusted to electronically steer and shape the radiation pattern. This enables
beamforming, enhancing gain in the desired direction while suppressing interference from
others.
Constructing a planar wideband array presents challenges, particularly in maintaining
small element spacing to avoid grating lobes, while ensuring that the elements remain
large enough to perform well at the lowest operating frequency.3 Ideally, elements should
be sized for the lowest frequency, but this results in excessive spacing at higher frequen-
cies, leading to significant grating lobes. Consequently, there is a trade-off between ele-
ment performance at low frequencies and array performance at high frequencies.
Two array configurations were initially considered to achieve 360◦coverage. The first
involved using three planar phased array panels, each covering approximately ±60◦. Re-
cent advances in tightly coupled dipole arrays (TCDA) offer a 10:1 impedance bandwidth
and acceptable gain values with element sizes as small as 0.44λmin. However, TCDAs are
mechanically complex, requiring multilayer VIAs, frequency-selective surfaces as ground
planes, and metamaterial impedance matching layers. This complexity exceeds the prac-
tical scope of this thesis. Furthermore, wideband phase steering would likely require dig-
ital implementation with individual RF chains per element, which is beyond the scope of
this thesis.
The second configuration is a single-layer circular array. This design places antenna el-
ements uniformly along a full circular perimeter to achieve full 360◦coverage. Due to the
large element sizes needed for the lowest frequency fmin, large inter-element spacing
occurs at fmax, beamforming will be limited to the lower frequencies where grating lobes
3Grating lobes begin to develop at element spacings near λ/2, but can be mitigated as long as the spacing
remains below λ [16, p. 278]
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
7
==PAGE:16==
are less pronounced. In practice, this means using two active elements at lower frequen-
cies, and switching to a single active element at higher frequencies, where the individual
element gain is sufficient. These configurations can be realized using basic switching
schemes, without requiring complex amplitude or phase control.
Circular antenna arrays are a well-established configuration in direction-finding (DF) sys-
tems due to their ability to provide uniform 360◦coverage in the azimuth plane. Typically
combined with DOA beamformers, they enable accurate azimuthal signal localization.
Beyond DF, circular arrays are increasingly being explored for use in reconfigurable com-
munication systems, where directional beam steering can enhance signal strength and
mitigate interference. Their symmetrical geometry makes them especially suitable for
mobile platforms, where consistent angular resolution is required regardless of orienta-
tion.
Numerous research designs and commercial systems have been developed, each demon-
strating trade-offs in bandwidth, polarization, gain, and size. Selected examples from both
academic and commercial sources are summarized in Tables 2.1 and 2.2, respectively.
Ref
[3]
[17]
[4]
[18]
[19]
Polarizationa
Horizontal
Vertical
Vertical
X-pol
Horizontal
Number of elements
8
4
10
8
8 (4 ports)
Element type
TSA
Monopole
TSA
TSA
TSA
Element spacing
-
0.03 λ
< λ
< λ
< λ
Bandwidth
3.0:1
6.0:1
8.0:1
10.0:1
7.0:1
VSWR
2.3:1
1.9:1
2.6:1
2.6:1
2.3:1
Gain (typical) [dBi]
5 dBi
3-5.5 dBi
8 dBi
7 dBi
-
Type of beamformer
PIN diode
None
Digital
Digital
Digital
Intended utility
DF and MIMO
MIMO
DF
DF
DF
a ”X-pol” refers to 45◦tilted orthogonal linear polarization.
Table 2.1: Overview of existing 360 degree reconfigurable arrays.
Table 2.1 presents a comparative summary of several research-oriented circular array de-
signs. Most implementations use the Tapered Slot Antenna (TSA), which is both directive
and wideband, but challenging to implement with small element spacing. In contrast, ref.
[17] employs monopoles, which occupy less space and can therefore be spaced more
closely, helping to suppress grating lobes. However, monopole elements are inherently
omnidirectional, which limits the achievable gain in a four-element array.
Arrays intended strictly for direction-finding applications typically utilize digital beamform-
ers, as they allow for dynamic amplitude and phase control across the elements, en-
abling high-resolution signal processing. In contrast, the array antennas refs. [3, 17],
whose designs are focused on communication rather than DF, employ simpler beam-
forming schemes. These systems toggle between fixed radiation patterns, as opposed to
continuous scanning. For instance, ref. [3] achieves beam switching by using PIN diodes
in a star-junction configuration.
Several commercial solutions have also been developed to provide reconfigurable 360◦
coverage. Table 2.2 outlines the specifications of selected commercial reconfigurable an-
tennas. These systems are generally designed for DF and communications in stationary
and vehicular applications, often prioritizing high gain within single frequency bands.
Table 2.2 shows that full 360◦coverage with a gain < 13.0 dBi is typically achieved using
8
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:17==
Antenna System
[6]
[20]
[5]
[21]
[22]
Vendor
L3Harris
Cojot
Cojot
Cojot
SWA
Freq Band [GHz]
4.40 – 5.88
4.40 – 5.00
3.40 – 3.80
1.35 – 2.70
4.40 – 5.90
Polarizationa
+
+
X-pol
Vertical
Vertical
Gain [dBi]
14.0
14.0
14.0
13.0 – 16.0
15.0 (max)
VSWR
-
≤3.0:1
≤2.5:1
≤2.5:1
≤2.0:1
∅[mm]
345
320
370
420
> 308
Weight [kg]
5.5
5.3
4.5
6.5
3.4
a ”+” indicates orthogonal linear polarization; ”X-pol” refers to 45◦tilted orthogonal linear polarization.
Table 2.2: Overview of existing commercial circular array antennas.
up to 20 overlapping beams, each with a HPBW of 20◦–30◦[20, 21]. Due to their narrow
operational bandwidths (≤2:1), these arrays experience minimal variation in electrical
element spacing across the band, which simplifies the design of the beamforming network.
Additionally, arrays designed for higher frequency bands can be implemented in more
compact mechanical structures. This is because the physical aperture required to sup-
port high-frequency operation is smaller, and the design is not constrained by the longer
wavelengths associated with lower frequencies. Naturally, array weight also increases
at lower frequencies due to the larger physical size. As a result, high-frequency recon-
figurable arrays are often better suited for integration into platforms with strict size and
weight limitations.
Together, Tables 2.1 and 2.2 offer a broad perspective on the current state of the art in
circular array development, across both academic and commercial contexts. Notably,
commercial solutions tend to focus on high-performance, single-band arrays, whereas
academic designs aim to support multiband operation, accepting some trade-offs in gain
and complexity in exchange for broader functionality.
2.3
The Tapered Slot Antenna
The array elements used in the design presented in this thesis are determined by a com-
bination of electrical, radiation, and mechanical requirements, as outlined in Chapter 1.
Among these, the most challenging constraint is achieving the desired HPBW at 45◦while
conforming to the physical limitations of a 45◦wedge-shaped geometry, as all horizontally
polarized elements are placed side by side in the same plane. This mechanical con-
straint rules out many conventional broadband antennas, such as the log-periodic an-
tenna, which typically feature an arrow-shaped profile with their widest point at he back
of the antenna, making them incompatible with the available wedge shape.
Traveling-wave antennas, including horn antennas and TSA, expand in aperture width
along their length. This structural characteristic makes them particularly well-suited for
meeting the wedge geometry requirement. As illustrated in Examples 13.2 and 13.3 of
ref. [23], horn antennas require a substantial aperture width, typically greater than 2λ, to
achieve satisfactory radiation performance. At the lowest operating frequency of 0.7 GHz,
this corresponds the horn having a minimum opening width of a > 2λ0.7 GHz ≈857 mm.
When arranged in an octagonal array, this element width results in an overall array diam-
eter of
2r > 2
a
2 sin(π/8) ≈2239 mm,
(2.1)
as derived from standard circular geometry [24]. Such a large diameter is impractical for
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
9
==PAGE:18==
most vehicular or compact platform applications, effectively ruling out the horn antenna
as a feasible array element. This constraint leaves the TSA as the most viable alternative.
A typical TSA is shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: TSA in its standard form. Taken from figure 9.11 in ref. [23].
Originally introduced by P. J. Gibson as “The Vivaldi Aerial” in ref. [25], the TSA is a
planar slot-line antenna that operates by gradually flaring the slot width along its length.4
Radiation occurs as the wave propagates through regions where the slot opening ap-
proaches λ/2. Higher frequencies to radiate further inside to the tapered opening wehre
the rest of the opening guides the radiated wave, resulting in more directed endfire radi-
ation, while lower frequencies radiate further out along the widest tapering resulting with
broader patterns.5 As a result, the TSA generally exhibit increasing gain with frequency.
However, various design modifications can enhance low-frequency performance, or re-
duce the size of the TSA while maintaining performance. These modifications, as well as
the final element dimensions, are discussed further in Chapter 4.
Table 2.3 presents an overview of several existing TSA designs that are potentially suit-
able for integration into a circular MIMO array. These antennas were developed with
different design priorities: some emphasize compactness, while others are optimized for
enhanced performance in terms of bandwidth and gain. In both cases, the resulting de-
signs demonstrate relatively high performance with respect to their size.
Ref
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
Bandwidth
8.6:1
3.0:1
9.0:1
9.0:1
33.0:1
5.9:1
VSWR
2.3:1
2.1:1
1.9:1
2.0:1
2.0:1
2.0:1
Gain (typical) [dBi]
1.9–8.0
7.0–11.5
5.0–12.5
8.0–16.0
8.0–15.0
3.1–7.9
Min HPBWE−plane1
28◦
-
≈20◦
≈10◦
≈15◦
≈30◦
Min HPBWH−plane1
38◦
-
≈20◦
≈20◦
≈50◦
≈30◦
Intended utility
Compact
Sat-Com
Compact
Wideband
Better gain
Compact
1 Minimal HPBW within a impedance bandwidth of 10:1.
Table 2.3: Overview of TSA elements with relevant design configurations.
4The tapered slot antenna is also commonly referred to as the Vivaldi antenna.
5For the lowest frequencies the radiation pattern are often reminiscent of that of a dipole
10
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:19==
A common characteristic across all listed antennas in Table 2.3 is the narrowing of the
mainlobe at higher frequencies. While this improves directivity, it also introduces chal-
lenges when used in an eight-element circular configuration. Antennas with very narrow
beams can lead to significant angular coverage gaps (i.e., nulls between adjacent ele-
ments). This is particularly evident in designs with peak gains exceeding 8.0 dBi, where
the mainlobe becomes too narrow to provide effective azimuthal overlap.
For instance, antennas such as those proposed in refs. [29, 28] exhibit high gains (above
12 dBi) but correspondingly narrow beamwidths, around 20◦in both E- and H-planes,
rendering them unsuitable for an eight-element array. In contrast, designs with lower
maximum gains, such as those in refs. [26, 31], maintain wider beamwidths (≈30◦or
more), which are more appropriate for circular arrays with a limited number of elements.
Summary
This chapter has provided an overview of the primary wireless communication domains
relevant to modern vehicles, including V2X, telemetry, and infotainment systems. It dis-
cussed the diverse frequency ranges these systems operate in, noting that telemetry and
infotainment applications primarily fall within cellular bands. The trade-offs between om-
nidirectional and directive antenna designs were also examined as well as coupling chal-
lenges and the need for wideband solutions.
Circular array configurations and the TSA array element has been introduced and moti-
vated as the the preferred combination for achieving directional coverage across a broad
frequency range. Current commercial solutions were contrasted with academic proto-
types, motivating for a reconfigurable 360◦array for MIMO applications that is particularly
widebanded.
In the following chapter, the theoretical foundations and methodological approach used
to design and evaluate such antenna systems will be presented.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:21==
3
Theory and Methods
This chapter outlines the theoretical background, analytical expressions, and simulation
methodology used in the design and characterization of the wideband reconfigurable an-
tenna array. The chapter begins by defining the key design parameters which guided both
the antenna element and array design. Following this a theoretical expression for the the
circular array’s radiation pattern is derived and compared with simplified CST simulations.
The chapter also presents the modeling and function of PIN diodes used to reconfigure the
”active-state” of the array elements. Lastly, the simulation settings and solver selections
for both single-element and full-array models, as well as the setups used for S-parameter
and far-field measurements, are described.
3.1
Relevant Design Parameters
The three primary parameters defined in the design requirements—gain, half-power beamwidth
(HPBW), and scattering parameters (S-parameters), were central to the antenna design.
Each of these addresses a distinct aspect of antenna performance: field behavior and ra-
diation efficiency, spatial coverage, and impedance matching. This section outlines their
roles and how they were applied throughout the design.
Gain
Gain was chosen over realized gain as the primary field metric to decouple the effects
of return loss from the radiation characteristics. This separation allows the field behavior
of the antenna to be assessed independently of impedance matching. Realized gain
includes mismatch losses and would therefore complicate the analysis of the radiation
pattern. Notably, gain is considered from the port of each element and does not account
for attenuation or standing wave losses in the feed network. Realized gain is used when
comparing with measured gain for the prototype, as it accounts for mismatch losses
Half-Power Beamwidth (HPBW)
HPBW was closely monitored due to the 45◦-sector constraint imposed by the circular
array geometry. The HPBW is measured from the gain pattern.
S-Parameters
S-parameters (|S11| and |S21|) were used to assess the impedance matching, isolation
and insertion losses and of the antenna elements and array. Among these, |S11|, the re-
flection coefficient, was preferred over directly analyzing the complex input impedance.
This is especially relevant for the TSA, where the feed-point impedance is strongly influ-
enced by the microstrip feed balun rather than the slot itself. |S11| provides a measure
of how effectively the antenna is matched to the system impedance. This thesis includes
matching to both 50 Ωand 75 Ω, to avoid confusion the relevant matching is mention in
the caption of the |S11| plots.
|S21|, and more generally |Sij| for i ̸= j, was also considered to evaluate network isolation
between elements in array configurations and insertion loss through the feed network.
Lastly, |S21| was simulated between elements (excluding the feed network) to model inter-
element coupling, and also simulated for the standalone feed network to estimate inter-
element isolation.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
13
==PAGE:22==
3.2
Circular Array Configuration
To evaluate the beamforming behavior and frequency-dependent limitations of the cir-
cular array, it is useful to first develop a theoretical model that represents its radiation
pattern. Since a maximum of two elements are active at any given time, a simplified two-
element configuration can be considered independently of the inactive elements to better
understand the array pattern and the onset of grating lobes. To validate this model, a cor-
responding two-element configuration is simulated in CST. The comparison provides a
grounded framework for interpreting the behavior of the full circular array in later sections.
Array Expression
The two-element configuration is considered as a segment of a full circular array using
the geometry shown in Figure 3.1. The resulting array expression combines a directive
element pattern with the conformal positioning of the elements. The element pattern is
inspired by Eq. 5.5 in ref. [32], while the exponential term of the far-field pattern is adapted
from Eq. 3.14 in ref. [33]:
Figure 3.1: Circular array with N = 8 elements. Configured as described for the array
expression.
ejka sin(θ) cos(ϕ−ϕn)+jαn
This expression is converted to two-dimensional (cylindrical) coordinates by setting θ = π
2 .
Following the form of Eq. 5.5 in ref. [32], the full array factor becomes:
AF =
N
∑
n=1
fn(ϕ)wnejka cos(ϕ−ϕn)+jαn
fn(ϕ) represents the directive element pattern, wn is the amplitude weighting (wn = 1
1), and αn is the phase offset (αn = 0). The wave number is defined as k = 2πf
c . The
radius of the circular array is a = 250 mm, corresponding to an inter-element spacing of
approximately ∼225 mm. The two elements are placed
2π
8 elements = π
4
(rad/element)
14
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:23==
radians apart to match the angular spacing in a full eight-element circular array. The two
elements are symmetrically positioned at ϕ1 = −π
8 and ϕ2 = π
8 , i.e., halfway to either side
of ϕ = 0. The expression thus simplifies to:
AF =
2
∑
n=1
fn(ϕ)ej 2πf
c a cos(ϕ−ϕn)
(3.1)
The directive element pattern is based on the Kirchhoff approximation from the Huygens–
Fresnel principle, which offers a good representation of the TSA’s broad yet directive
pattern. This approximation, taken from ref. [34, p. 423], is given by:
K(ϕ) = 1 + cos(ϕ)
2
The pattern is individually shifted to align each element’s mainlobe with its respective an-
gular position. Specifically, f1(ϕ) and f2(ϕ) are offset by ∓π
8 , ensuring that their mainlobe
directions are separated by π
4 .
f1(ϕ) = 1 + cos
(
ϕ −π
8
)
2
(3.2a)
f2(ϕ) = 1 + cos
(
ϕ + π
8
)
2
(3.2b)
Combining these, the final composite expression for the two-element circular array be-
comes:
AF = f1(ϕ)ej 2πf
c a cos(ϕ−π
8 ) + f2(ϕ)ej 2πf
c a cos(ϕ+ π
8 )
(3.3)
This expression is plotted and compared to simulations in Figure 3.8 (last page in the
chapter).
Dipole Array Simulation
A two-element circular array of λ1 GHz/2 dipoles, each backed by a λ1 GHz/2 × λ1 GHz
reflector was modeled and simulated in CST. The reflectors are placed at a spacing of
λ1 GHz/4 behind their respective dipoles. These dipole-reflector combinations serve as
representation for the directive elements.
To replicate the conditions described in Eq. 3.3, the elements are rotated by ∓π
8 and are
spaced d = 225 mm apart. The configuration, illustrated in Figure 3.2, provides a simple
representation of the array behavior modeled in Eq. 3.3.
The grating lobes for the circular array in Figure 3.8 (last page in the chapter) become
increasingly numerous, and the mainlobe narrows with rising frequency. This behavior is
expected, as the relative element spacing at 1.5 GHz exceeds one wavelength. Appendix
Figure A.1 shows that grating lobes continue to develop up to 5.9 GHz. The circular
array pattern expression suggests that a two-active-element configuration is viable up to
approximately 1.5 GHz; beyond this point, the grating lobes become too prominent.
The simulations indicates that the array maintains its maximum gain at broadside, while
grating lobes become more significant at higher frequencies. These characteristics are
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Horizontal dipole element array.
(b) Vertical dipole element array.
Figure 3.2: Two element circular array consisting of two dipoles with reflectors modeled
in CST.
consistent with Eq. 3.3 and demonstrate the effectiveness of the two-element configura-
tion for enhancing gain at lower frequencies. The usable frequency range of the array is
limited by the emergence of grating lobes as well as by the inherent gain of the individual
elements.
3.3
PIN Diode
PIN diodes were used in the feed network to toggle array elements active and inactive.
They offer advantages over RF transistors, as their bias (control) current is routed through
the RF path rather than requiring a separate bias line, thereby saving space. The bias
circuitry can be integrated along the traces, where more physical area is available. The
compactness of the diodes is critical, as it determines the physical size of the star junction,
which must remain small (less than λ/4) to maintain proper matching at the junction [35].
The PIN diode is named after its structure, which consists of a p-type (P), intrinsic (I), and
n-type (N) semiconductor region arranged in sequence.
Forward Biased PIN Diode
In forward bias (when DC current flows through the diode), the PIN diode behaves like
a low-value resistor to AC signals. It is typically modeled as shown in Figure 3.3, with
inherent inductance Ls and resistance Rs contributing to insertion loss (IL). Under forward
bias, the positive holes and negative electrons are flows into the I-region, enabling both
DC and RF current to pass through [36]. The dominant parameter in forward bias is Rs,
which determines the insertion loss. It is given by:
Rs =
W 2
(µn + µp)Q [Ω],
(3.4)
where W is the width of the I-region, µn and µp are the electron and hole mobilities,
respectively, and Q is the product of the forward bias current If and carrier lifetime τ [36].
Reverse Biased PIN Diode
When the PIN diode is reverse biased, the I-region contains no stored charge, and the
diode behaves like a capacitor Ct in parallel with a large resistor Rp, both in series with the
intrinsic inductance Ls, as illustrated in Figure 3.4. When zero bias is applied (0 V), some
16
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Circuit equivalent of a forward-biased PIN diode.
finite charge is left in the I-region, however it is not moving, the diode therefore behaves
like somewhat lossy capacitor, similarly to the reverse-biased case [36].
Figure 3.4: Circuit equivalent of a reverse-biased PIN diode.
The diode’s behavior is primarily defined by Ct, which is given by:
Ct = ϵW
A [F],
(3.5)
where ϵ is the permittivity of the silicon and A is the diode junction area. A small capaci-
tance is essential to maintain high isolation at higher frequencies.
Switch Configurations
PIN diodes can be configured in multiple ways to function as RF switches. Common con-
figurations include the diode in series, as a shunt, or a combined series-shunt arrange-
ment, as shown in Figure 3.5. The series–shunt configuration offers the highest isolation,
as the diodes are effectively stacked, but it requires additional space and precise tuning
of the transmission line length and impedance between the diodes.
The application note ref. [37] provides expressions for isolation and insertion loss for the
series Single Pole Single Throw (SPST) configuration:
IsodB = 10 log10
[
1 +
( XC
2Z0
)2]
,
(3.6)
ILdB = 20 log10
[
1 + Rs
2Z0
]
.
(3.7)
Here, isolation depends on the ratio between the capacitive reactance XC =
1
ωC and the
characteristic impedance Z0 of the transmission line. The insertion loss is determined by
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.5: Circuit diagram of a series–shunt SPST switch with bias circuitry.
the ratio between Rs and Z0. In both cases, a low Ct and low Rs are desirable for optimal
performance.
The application note [37] also provides expressions for the series–shunt SPST configu-
ration:
IsodB = 10 log10
[(
1 + Z0
2Rs
)2
+
( XC
2Z0
)2 (
1 + Z0
Rs
)2]
,
(3.8)
ILdB = 10 log10
[(
1 + Rs
2Z0
)2
+
(Z0 + Rs
2XC
)2]
.
(3.9)
As in the series case, both isolation and insertion loss are optimized by minimizing Ct and
Rs. While the shunt diode improves isolation, it also contributes additional insertion loss.
3.4
Initial TSA Dimensions
This section calculates the initial dimensions of the TSA elements to be used in the cir-
cular arrays, based on the required bandwidth of 0.70–5.90 GHz and the available space
allocated to each element within the array.
The TSA is a traveling-wave antenna; consequently, the shape and size of the tapered
opening are particularly important to the resulting radiation pattern. An initial guide to the
taper dimensions is provided in ref. [23, Ch. 9.4]. The minimum width Wmin at the feed
point should be less than half the guided wavelength λmax at the maximum frequency
fmax, in order to keep the traveling waves bound near the feed:
Wmin < λmax
2
≈1
2 ·
3 · 108 m/s
5.9 GHz ·
√
4.3 ≈12.26 mm
(3.10)
The opening width at the front end of the antenna, Wmax, should lie within the interval
Wmax1 < Wmax < Wmax2, where:
Wmax1 ≈λ0 ≈
3 · 108m/s
3.3 GHz ·
√
4.3 ≈43.84 mm
(3.11)
18
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:27==
and
Wmax2 ≈λmin
2
≈1
2 ·
3 · 108m/s
0.7 GHz ·
√
4.3 ≈103.34 mm
(3.12)
The recommended length of the taper is:
Ltaper > λmin ≈206.68 mm
(3.13)
These recommended dimensions apply to a classical TSA designed to maximize gain,
which typically results in a narrow beamwidth [23]. This contrasts with the goal of the
present project: to maintain HPBW ≈45◦across the operating bandwidth. Nevertheless,
the values above serve as initial guidelines, from which parameter sweeps will be used
to optimize the dimensions of the horizontal and vertical elements.
The length and width of the element are further constrained by their contribution to the
overall array size and their influence on element spacing. Smaller elements allow closer
placement of the phase centers, reducing grating lobes. While no strict limit is imposed
on the total array size, a diameter greater than 500 mm would be impractical for vehicular
applications. There is therefore a mechanical 45◦wedge sector that the each element
have to be inside. The maximum allowable width and length of each 45◦wedge sector
can be calculated using the regular polygon equations from ref. [24].
r =
W
2 sin(π/8)
(3.14)
W = 2r sin(π/8) ≈210.48 mm
(3.15)
The maximum length of an element is given by the apothem:
L = 2r sin(π/8)
2 tan(π/8) ≈254.07 mm
(3.16)
However, this length spans from the edge of the array to its center. The central region
will house the feed network responsible for configuring the active beams. Both the feed
network radius and the element length must fit within this apothem. As a design constraint,
the maximum element length is limited to 200 mm, leaving approximately 50 mm in radius
for the feed network.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
19
==PAGE:28==
3.5
Configuration of Simulations
CST 2024 offers multiple solvers to choose from. For the simulation of the antenna ele-
ments, both time domain (TD) and frequency domain (FD) solvers were considered. The
TD is better suited for wide frequency ranges, as only one simulation is needed and the
frequency response can subsequently be obtained using a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT).
Since the frequency resolution does not complicate the simulation calculations, it is more
suitable for electrically large antennas [32]. However, resonating structures complicate
the transient response, as the signal will reverberate for a long time.
The FD solver, on the other hand, performs simulations at discrete frequency points with
interpolation in between. CST recommends using adaptive mesh refinement in FD, which
automatically adjusts the mesh across the frequency range [38]. As such, the FD solver
is typically preferred for narrowband and electrically small antennas [39].
Regarding simulation environment configuration, all simulations for elements and arrays
are conducted in with open boundaries and without any specific background, as the prox-
imity to other array elements are modeled by placing the elements into the simulation
model. However for future simulations of a near complete and satisfactory array a hori-
zontal conducting plane could be added under ((−y)-direction) the array to represent the
roof of a vehicle. Although the front side conducting layer that makes up the shape of the
TSA antenna is symmetric along its length, the feed balun is not. Therefore no symmetric
conditions are applied to the simulations.
An overview of the chosen simulation configurations is provided below to give context to
the results used throughout the design process.
Element Simulations
The antenna elements fall into a ambiguous state of being somewhat wideband and elec-
trically small at low frequencies, but becoming electrically large at high frequencies. This
makes it difficult to select a single optimal solver in advance. To address this, both solvers
were tested using an existing TSA design from the literature that has previously been both
simulated and measured. The design features a total width of 252.00 mm and a length of
278.20 mm, including oscillating edge structures (Appendix Figure A.2) [40]. It serves as
a reasonable proxy for the intended design, which is approximately 200 mm in width and
length and is likely to incorporate similar structural features.
Ref. [40] includes CST FD simulations and measurements of a fabricated prototype.
The design was recreated and simulated using both TD and FD solvers. Adaptive mesh
refinement was used in FD, while mesh refinement was manually applied in TD. The
resulting VSWR values are compared in Figure 3.6, along with the results reported in the
paper.
All data sets display the same general behavior: a steep drop in VSWR below 1 GHz,
followed by fluctuating values between 1:1 and 2:1 in the range of 1–6 GHz. Notable
differences include the paper’s near-perfect matching around 1 GHz, which is not repro-
duced in the recreated simulations, and discrepancies in ripple behavior. These ripples
are visible in both CST simulations but not in the measurement data. However, the mea-
surements appear to use a non-uniform and sparse frequency resolution, possibly as
coarse as 0.4 GHz, which could explain the absence of these features.
Both TD and FD simulations are reasonably consistent with the measured results in the
0.7–5.9 GHz range. The TD simulation exhibits ripples across the full bandwidth, likely
due to resonating edge structures that complicate the time response. These ripples are
significantly reduced in FD, making it a better approximation of the measured VSWR.
20
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.6: Comparison of VSWR between the results from ref.
[40] and the time- and
frequency-domain CST simulations. Curves were overlaid manually using PowerPoint.
Furthermore, the two solvers differ in simulation efficiency and accuracy. The solver times
were similar: 34,000 seconds for FD and 35,000 seconds for TD. However, the FD solver
achieved a maximum Delta S of 3.38·10−4 (4 mesh passes), while the TD solver converged
to a less accurate 2.78 · 10−2 (5 mesh passes). Based on these results, the FD solver is
preferred for single-element simulations.1 The mesh passes need to have convergence
varies from design to design as shown in Figure 3.7 where the ∆S between the mesh
refinement passes for TSA of ref. [40] and a template design TSA used later in this
thesis is shown. Both mesh refinements converge to a ∆S well below the set threshold
∆S ≤2 · 10−2 for two consecutive passes. It remains unclear why the template design
TSA continues with passes well beyond the two passes under the threshold. This caused
by refining for other parameters such as estimated interpolation error.
Single-element simulations use waveguide ports with dimensions calculated using CST’s
“Calculate Port Extension Coefficient” macro. The arrays has discrete ports as these does
not require to be aligned with the x-axis and reduces the simulation time by being more
simple. Pictures of the ports as well as the use of the macro us provided in Appendix
Section A.1.
Array Simulation
At all operating frequencies, the array is electrically large.2 The TD solver is therefore
preferred for array simulations due to the array’s size, default mesh settings result in more
than 500 · 106 mesh cells even before refinement, resulting in simulations that exceed the
available computer memory. Hence, a reduced resolution global mesh was therefore
used, as outlined in Table 3.1.
To further reduce simulation time, only two elements were simulated with ports, using dis-
crete ports rather than waveguide ports. This simplification assumes symmetry, allowing
1All element simulations using the FD solver include adaptive mesh refinement.
2The maximum array diameter is approximately 541 mm.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.7: ∆S for ref.
[40] TSA and a template design TSA used later in this thesis
plotted for iterative mesh passes to reach a threshold of ∆S ≤2 · 10−2 for two passes.
accurate modeling of both the one-active-element and two-active-element configurations
with minimal complexity.
Parameter
Near to model
Far from model
Cells per wavelength
10
3
Cells per max model box edge
10
1
Fraction of maximum cell near to model
10
Table 3.1: Global mesh properties used to reduce mesh cell resolution for array simula-
tions.
3.6
Measurement Setup
S-Parameter Measurements
All S-parameters were measured using an R&S ZVB 8 Vector Network Analyzer (VNA).
For S11 measurements, the VNA was fully calibrated to a 50 Ωload.3
For S21 isola-
tion measurements, a female-to-female connector was used for a basic normalization
(through) calibration.
Field Measurements
Field measurements were conducted at Comrod’s outdoor far-field test facility, which al-
lows for measurements in a single plane at a time. Pictures for the facility is provided in
Appendix Section E.1.
Measurement administration was handled using the company’s internal software (Comrod
Antenna Test System), which captures 11 equally spaced frequencies per measurement
iteration. To ensure adequate frequency resolution across the 0.70–5.90 GHz range, the
frequency band was divided into multiple intervals.
Fine resolution was required between 0.80–1.00 GHz, where simulations predicted a high-
Q resonance that needed to be mapped accurately.As a result, 1.35 GHz was selected
3Calibration includes open, short, and 50 Ωreference standards.
22
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:31==
as the first split point. This frequency also marks the end of an LTE band and the start of
NATO BAND III+, while yielding a frequency resolution of 65 MHz in the 0.70–1.35 GHz
range. The RF amplifier ZFL-2500VH+ and the measuring antenna JXTXLB-660 (see
Appendix Figure E.4) perform well below 2.70 GHz and define the second split point.
Additionally, the log-periodic gain reference antenna L430 is rated up to 4.00 GHz, ne-
cessitating a third split.
Table 3.2 provides an overview of the measurement setup across the frequency intervals.
The SHF1359P09 parabolic dish antenna (Appendix Figure E.4) was used in combination
with the MCL ZRON-8G+ amplifier for measurements above 2.70 GHz.
Frequency Interval [GHz]
0.70–1.35
1.35–2.70
2.70–4.00
4.00–5.90
Resolution [MHz]
65
135
130
190
Measuring Antenna
JXTXLB-660
JXTXLB-660
SHF1359P09
SHF1359P09
Gain Reference Antenna
L430
L430
L430
H4.8G
RF Amplifier
ZFL-2500VH+
ZFL-2500VH+
MCL ZRON-8G+
MCL ZRON-8G+
Table 3.2: Overview of the field measurement setup for each frequency interval.
Outdoor far-field measurements pose several challenges that can affect both accuracy
and repeatability. The primary environmental factors include precipitation, wind, and elec-
tromagnetic interference.
Moisture on the antennas, such as from rain, introduces additional losses, particularly at
microwave frequencies. While these losses can theoretically be accounted for if the ref-
erence and Antenna Under Test (AUT) are measured under identical conditions, ensuring
such consistency is difficult. Unequal dynamic water distribution can lead to mismatches
in performance.
Wind may cause physical movement or misalignment of the antennas. While the impact
on gain is typically minor, beamwidth measurements can be affected.
Electromagnetic interference is another concern, as the measurement band (0.70–5.90 GHz)
overlaps with active 4G LTE and 5G NR cellular bands. Nearby base stations can intro-
duce noise and unwanted signals. This issue is mitigated by avoiding known interference
bands and visually inspecting measured radiation patterns for anomalies. A strong pre-
sumed 5G NR signal at around 5.52 GHz is known to originate from a nearby base station;
this is further detailed in Appendix E.2.
Finally, to minimize environmental variation, the time between reference and AUT mea-
surements is kept as short as possible.
Summary
This chapter has presented the theoretical and practical framework. The three key per-
formance metrics—gain, HPBW, and S-parameters were selected and defined. An ex-
pression for a two elements circular array was derived and validated with simulations. It
showed good agreement with CST simulations up to 1.5 GHz before grating lobes became
significant.
The use of PIN diodes for reconfiguration was justified based on their compact integration.
Initial TSA element dimensions were derived, balancing compactness and performance.
Simulation setup were justified for both elements and the circular arrays. The measure-
ment methodology has been presented to provide context for the measurements, includ-
ing the conditions and constraints of the outdoor test facility.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.8: Calculated (solid) and simulated (dashed) patterns for the two element circular
array. The plots are individually normalized and logarithmically scaled (dB).
24
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:33==
4
Element Design
This chapter presents the design and optimization process of the individual horizontally
(H-pol) and vertically (V-pol) polarized array elements. Initial optimizations, based on the
parameters derived in Section 3.4 resulted in a template design, (Appendix Section B.1).
From this template, the two elements are separated into horizontal and vertical variants,
each tailored to its polarization role and placement within the array. The design process
is shown in the flowchart presented in Figure 4.1.
Start: Element Design
Initial Design Steps: Dimension + Balun feed
Split into Polarizations
H-pol Element: E-plane emphasized
45° Fit: Triangular Cut
Improve Gain: Corrugated Edges
Final H-pol Element: Transform to 75 Ω
V-pol Element: H-plane emphasized
Improve Gain: Corrugated Edges
Increase HPBWH−plane: Air-Filled Tapering
Final V-pol Element: Transform to 75 Ω
End: Elements Ready
Figure 4.1: Design process for each of the array elements.
The horizontally polarized element (H-pol) is designed to provide high gain and an E-plane
beamwidth exceeding 45◦, while fitting within a 45◦sector. This leads to a triangular lay-
out and the use of corrugated edges to enhance low-frequency performance and reduce
parasitic radiation.
The vertically polarized element (V-pol) is less geometrically constrained but is optimized
to achieve a wide H-plane beamwidth, essential for maintaining polarization coverage
across the array. Techniques such as air-filled tapered openings and corrugated edges
are explored to improve performance while maintaining impedance bandwidth.
4.1
Template Design
As detailed in Appendix Section B.1, the template geometry was established by optimizing
key parameters such as the length-to-width ratio, taper rate, and element size. A series of
parameter sweeps were conducted to investigate how the element’s length-to-width ratio,
size, and taper rate affect antenna performance.
For the feed structure, a dual circular stub balun was selected due to its wideband char-
acteristics and effective coupling between microstrip and slotline. This template serves
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
25
==PAGE:34==
as the basis for the final optimization of each individual element. This design serves as a
template for each of the element designs.
The simulation of the template design shown in Figure 4.2 reveals potential impedance
challenges at 0.70 GHz and the first ripple around 1.25 GHz. The gain in Figure 4.3
generally increases with frequency, as expected for a TSA. This is because the effective
electrical size of the antenna increases, and the tapered aperture functions as a direc-
tor, as discussed in Section 2.3. Two main challenges are identified regarding gain and
radiation pattern, improving low-frequency gain, and widening the mainlobe to ensure a
half-power beamwidth (HPBW) of ≥45◦.
Figure 4.2: |S11| for the template design. Red line marks the minimum impedance match-
ing requirement of −8 dB. Designed and simulated for 50 Ω.
4.2
Horizontal Polarized Element
The H-pol element is oriented horizontally to maximize horizontal polarization. Conse-
quently, the radiation pattern in the E-plane (its horizontal plane) should be designed to
have HPBWE−plane > 45◦while maximizing the gain. The H-plane beamwidth is largely
irrelevant to this element’s design, as the antenna system is intended for communication
with other ground-based antennas. The design is also mechanically constrained to fit
within a 45◦sector, with a maximum length of 200 mm and a maximum outer width of 210
mm. The H-pol element is shown in its prototype form in Figure 4.4, with the front side
marked with dimensions.
Triangular Dimensions
Building upon the template design, two modifications were simulated to give the element
the triangular shape required for the array configuration. The first modification adds a
second exponential curve that cuts the outer edges of the TSA, replacing the default flat
edge. This gives the TSA a fan-like shape, shown in Figure 4.5a. The outer taper rate
was adjusted through a parameter sweep.
The second modification restricts the dimensions of both the conducting and substrate
layers to a linear line with an angle of 45◦
2
= 22.5◦, as seen in Figure 4.5b. The linear
26
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.3: Gain and HPBW for the simulated template design. Redline marks the mini-
mum HPBW of 45◦.
cutting lines are defined as:
y = ± tan(22.5◦)x ± 20 [mm].
(4.1)
These modifications should have minimal impact on antenna performance, as currents
primarily flow along the waveguide and tapered opening. The cuts start 20 mm from the
centerline to preserve sufficient ground plane area for the microstrip feed balun.
|S11| for the two modifications shown in Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.6 is comparable to that
of the template element. However, the impedance matching is greatly improved below
1.0 GHz, as the strong resonance around 0.85 GHz has been eliminated.
Furthermore, the gain in Figure 4.7 is nearly identical up to 5.0 GHz. Figure 4.7 also shows
significant difference in HPBWE−plane from 4 GHz, where the fan cut narrows drastically to
only 20◦, while the triangular cut maintains HPBWE −plane > 40◦. These results, along
with the feasibility of implementing corrugated edges on the triangular cut, make it the
preferred design.1
1Corrugated edges were attempted on the fan-shaped element, but the edges came too close to the
tapered opening, creating high-impedance areas along most of the taper.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.4: H-pol array element with relevant dimensions highlighted.
Corrugated Edges
To improve gain and impedance matching for f < 2.0 GHz, Corrugated Edges (CEs)
were introduced to mitigate parasitic currents running along the outer TSA edges. At low
frequencies, surface currents travel along the tapered waveguide edges [28]. These par-
asitic currents can radiate out of phase or at undesired angles, causing pattern distortion.
The corrugated edges act as high-impedance λ
4 barriers, suppressing these currents [41,
28].
Resonances form when the slot length equals a quarter wavelength, creating an open-
circuit equivalent. These resonances increase gain at low frequencies. The magnitude of
the resonance increases with the number of CEs, and the bandwidth can be broadened
by varying their individual lengths of the edges.
A model with four edges per side is shown in Figure 4.8. The CE design was adapted from
ref. [40], which uses so-called oscillation circuits tuned for a similar frequency range. The
neck length and distance to the element’s front edge were optimized accordingly. While
ref. [40] used five edges per side, this was reduced to four to avoid proximity to the tapered
opening, which would have caused high-impedance areas. Both a three and a four edge
design were simulated and compared to the plain triangular element in Figure 4.5b.
The |S11| results in Figure 4.9a show good impedance matching for the four-edge design,
with a significant resonance at approximately 0.9 GHz. This resonance is also evident
in the gain response (Figure 4.9b), where a second resonance is observed at around
4.5 GHz. As expected, these resonances significantly improve low-frequency gain. The
number of corrugated edges appears to amplify the resonance effect.
28
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:37==
(a) Fan shaped TSA that fit within the 45◦
sector.
(b) Traditional TSA fitted to a triangular
shape with the constraint of Eq. 4.1.
Figure 4.6: Simulated |S11| for fan and triangular cuts in the horizontal element. Designed
and simulated for 50 Ω.
A reduced low-frequency HPBW in the corrugated-edge designs indicates lower current
density at the element edges being reduced, resulting in a narrower low frequency main-
lobe that increases directivity. However, gain and HPBW converge with the template
design at higher frequencies. The design with four CEs on each side is preferred due
to its improved |S11| performance. Current density comparisons are shown in Appendix
Figure B.5.
The CE lengths were fine-tuned to reduce the Q-factor of the resonance, as different
lengths create λ/4 stubs over a range of frequencies. Finally, the element was designed
to 75 Ωby adjusting the microstrip width in the feed balun. The final simulation results are
presented with the V-pol element at the end of the Chapter (Figure 4.14).
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.7: Simulated maximum gain in the E-plane for fan and triangular cuts in the
horizontal element.
Figure 4.8: TSA model with 4 corrugated edges per side.
30
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:39==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Simulations of Corrugated Edges implemented horizontal element, showing
|S11| (a), and maximum gain in the E-plan (b). Designed and simulated for 50 Ω.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
31
==PAGE:40==
4.3
Vertical Polarized Element
The V-pol element is placed vertically at the center of each 45◦sector and is therefore not
constrained to the same triangular shape as the horizontally polarized elements. Instead,
the vertical element follows the rectangular dimensions of the template design. The V-pol
element must be optimized for high gain and an H-plane beamwidth HPBWH−plane > 45◦.2
The elements front and back side is shown in its prototype form in Figure 4.10 and 4.11,
marked with dimensions.
Figure 4.10: Front of V-pol array element with relevant dimensions highlighted.
Corrugated Edges
Due to the significant impact of the CEs observed in the H-pol element, they were also
implemented in the V-pol element to increase gain at low frequencies. Five CEs were
added to each side of the element, nearly identical to the design in ref. [40]. This modified
design was simulated and compared to the template.
Figures 4.12 and 4.13 show that as with the horizontal element, the CEs improve impedance
matching and significantly increase low-frequency gain. However, the H-plane HPBW is
still too narrow from 5.0 GHz onward.
Air Filled Tapered Opening
While the implementation of corrugated edges greatly improved gain and |S11|, the H-
plane HPBWH−plane remained narrow. The Three parameters—width, taper length, and
taper rate—were adjusted using parameter sweeps. These changes had minimal effect
on HPBWH−plane and often degraded |S11|.
Alternative attempts were made to reduce the element size and thus making the element
2The H-plane is aligned with the 45◦sector when the element is placed vertically.
32
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.11: Back of V-pol array element showing the feed balun.
less directive. This was first attempted by implementing wave traps along the tapered
opening as seen in [26, 27], and by lowering the dielectric constant.3. The wave traps
failed to increase HPBW and introduced significant impedance mismatches.
Secondly, reducing the dielectric constant was simulated with changing the ϵr of the FR4
material in CST from 4.3 to 2.0. This widened the beamwidth while maintaining the gain.
However, this model not realistic, as FR4 does not come with ϵr = 2. Thus two approaches
were investigated. The first would be to change out the substrate to one with the ϵr ≈2.
Soft Teflon substrates can achieve ϵr around 2, an example of this is TLY-5 that has ϵr ≈
2.2 [42]. The Teflon substrate are physically very flexible, which can be a problematic
considering the intended application of the complete array. The second approach is to
air-fill areas of the FR4 substrate so that the ϵe is lowered equivalent to ϵe ≈2. This
was attempted by perforating the element, and by cutting out most of the exposed FR4
in the tapered opening as shown in Figure 4.10. The latter was effective in widening the
mainlobe. Simulations of the FR4 with ϵr = 2, air filled opening and perforating is available
in Appendix Figure B.6. It the air-filled opening seemed to widen the beam more than just
lowering the ϵr of the substrate, indicating that the substrate it self binds or directs the
waves in the H-plane.
The |S11| response in Figure 4.12 shows that the air-filled tapered opening largely worsens
the impedance matching. However, the effect is not severe enough to be considered
problematic. Furthermore, Figure 4.13 demonstrates that both the CEs and the air-filled
opening contribute to improved gain at lower frequencies and a broader mainlobe at higher
frequencies. Although the HPBW remains slightly below the 45◦specification (simulated
to be ∼40.7◦), it is deemed acceptable considering the element’s overall gain level within
the 45◦sector.
The V-pol element was then designed to 75 Ωby adjusting the impedance of the microstrip
feeding the balun. The final simulation is plotted alongside the H-pol element in Figure
4.14. The final dimensional parameters for the vertical element are listed in Table 4.1.
Figure 4.14a shows both polarized elements have been designed to have |S11| < −8 dB.
3The electrical length is defined as G = l
λ = lf√ϵe
c
Thus a lower ϵ reduces the electrical length.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.12: |S11| for the V-pol element showing the effects of corrugated edges (CE) and
the tapered air filled opening. Designed and simulated for 50 Ω.
However this matching will have to maintained when it is integrated into their respective
arrays. Figure 4.14b shows how the both elements gains have been increased at low
frequency so it is relatively leveled out across the frequency band while largely up holding
the requirement of HPBW ≥45◦.
Summary
This chapter presented the design and optimization of the H-pol and V-pol elements, which
will be integrated into the antenna arrays in the following chapter. Starting from the dimen-
sions defined in Section 3.4, parametric investigations of the length-to-width ratio, taper
rate, and physical size were carried out to establish a wideband and compact template.
The H-pol element was shaped to fit within a 45◦sector, with triangular cuts enabling com-
pact integration. Corrugated edges were added to suppress parasitic surface currents,
yielding improved low-frequency gain and impedance matching.
The V-pol element retained a rectangular shape but faced the challenge of achieving
a higher gain at low frequencies and a broad H-plane beamwidth at high frequencies.
To address this, corrugated edges were introduced along with an air-filled taper section,
which reduced the effective dielectric constant. This allowed for improved beamwidth
and stable gain and HPBW across the frequency range. Both designs were finalized by
transforming their feeds to match with a 75 Ωsystem.
In the next chapter, these elements will be integrated into their respective circular polarized
arrays.
34
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.13: Gain and HPBW for the V-pol element showing the effects of corrugated
edges (CE) and the tapered air filled opening.
Symbol
H-pol
V-pol
Unit
Dimension
Do
35
35
mm
Front of element to first corrugated edge
Hm
35
35
um
Height of the copper
Hs
0.78
0.78
mm
Height of the substrate
Lback
30
25
mm
Length of the back of the element
Lcut
-
40
mm
Length until cut-out starts
Lg
10
5
mm
Length of the constant width waveguide
Lo1
30
25
mm
Length of corrugated edge 1
Lo2
25
25
mm
Length of corrugated edge 2
Lo3
25
25
mm
Length of corrugated edge 3
Lo4
25
25
mm
Length of corrugated edge 4
Lo5
-
25
mm
Length of corrugated edge 5
Ltaper
180
180
mm
Length of tapered opening
Pg
27
27
mm
Shifted distance between the corrugated edges
r
0.0260
0.0261
Taper rate
rcavity
6
5.5
mm
Radius of waveguide cavity
rfeed
6
6
mm
Radius of feed stub
ro
11
11
mm
Radius of corrugated edge cavity
s
0.4
0.4
mm
Tapering factor
W
180
180
mm
Width of the element
Wms
0.8
0.7
mm
Width of microstrip feed balun
Wo
0.8
0.7
mm
Width of the corrugated edges
Yms
15
15
mm
Offset of the microstrip
Table 4.1: Overview of design dimensions for the final design of both element types.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
35
==PAGE:44==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14: Simulations of the array elements in their final state, showing |S11| (a), and
gain and HPBW (b). Designed and simulated for 75 Ω.
36
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:45==
5
Array Design and Assembly
This chapter outlines the complete design the H-Pol and V-Pol arrays, and physical real-
ization of the prototype. Building on the individual element designs introduced in Chap-
ter 4, focus is placed on the layout and configuration of the arrays, the development of a
reconfigurable feed network, and the assembly steps required to produce a prototype.
In the array simulations, S11 results are not a highlighted. This is because the mutual cou-
pling between elements, represented by S21, remains low above 1.35 GHz. As a result,
each element operates largely independently, and impedance matching is more critically
influenced by the design of the feed network rather than by inter-element interactions.
Therefore, S11 is primarily optimized through the feed network design where matching to
75 Ω(one-active) and 37.5 Ω(two-active) has more of an impact.
A key feature of the design is the reconfigurable beamforming achieved by selectively
activating one or two antenna elements. The operational mode, of either one-active or
two-active configuration, is frequency dependent, with 1.35 GHz chosen as the switching
frequency. This frequency is where the grating lobes starts to develop as well as it is
located at the start of NATO Band III+.
The chapter concludes with an overview of the array assembly process and practical
implementation details, forming the basis for the measurement in the following chapter.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Pictures of the assembled H-pol (a) and V-pol (b) arrays.
5.1
Horizontal Polarized Array Design
The elements are placed horizontally next to each other, as shown in Figure 5.1a, leaving
minimal spacing between their edges. The width at the back of the H-pol element Wback =
2 × 20 = 40 mm determines how close they can be placed to the array center. For an
octagonal layout, the minimum possible distance from the element back to the center is
r =
Wback
2 tan
( π
8
) ≈48.28 mm.
(5.1)
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
37
==PAGE:46==
However, the elements cannot have contact with each other along the element edges, as
this would disrupt the corrugated edge functionality. Therefore, a larger spacing is used,
resulting in a back-to-center distance of 55.0 mm and a modeled air gap of 5.14 mm be-
tween the elements. This narrow gap may lead to capacitive coupling to adjacent ele-
ments at lower frequencies. Isolation is simulated to be better than 10 dB (Figure 5.2),
mitigating this effect is challenging without introducing lossy materials between elements,
which would likely degrade the performance of the two-active-element configuration.
Figure 5.2: Simulated interelement S21 for H-pol and V-pol arrays.
Figure 5.3: Simulated gain and HPBW for the one- and two-active-element configurations.
The intended switching frequency at 1.35 GHz is marked with a vertical red line, and the
HPBW specification of 45◦is indicated with a horizontal red line.
The simulated one-active configuration in Figure 5.3 performs well above 1.35 GHz, main-
taining high gain. The HPBW drops below the target of 45◦at approximately 4.90 GHz, but
the gain within the 45◦sector remains relatively high. This is further explored in Appendix
Figure B.7. The simulated two-active configuration also shows high gain and acceptable
HPBW but exhibits a significant drop in gain at 1.10 GHz. This is likely due to the array
configuration rather than the CEs, which caused a separate resonance at 0.9 GHz. At
38
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:47==
1.10 GHz, the front-to-back ratio is only 3.2 dB, and a notable drop in radiation efficiency
is observed. Nevertheless, the resonance is currently accepted and will be monitored
during measurements. The resonance was observed to sensitive when adjusting the el-
ements distance to array center, indicating it being caused by the array configuration.
Therefor practical factors such as feed networks and cabling within the array center might
shift or remove it.
5.2
Vertical Polarized Array Design
The V-pol elements can be placed much closer together, as they occupy less space in
the ring configuration. the V-pol array so is shown in Figure 5.1b. The distance from
the back of the elements to the array center was kept similar to the H-pol array to make
space for coax cables and bias lines for when the two arrays are combined into a MIMO
configuration. A challenge unique to the V-pol array is that adjacent elements form a 90◦
angle, effectively acting as a corner reflector that narrows the active element’s mainlobe
at higher frequencies. This effect is evident in Figure 5.4, where the array without spacers
(solid line) exhibits a too narrow beamwidth above 3.5 GHz.
To address this, unclad FR4 plates were placed between the elements, eliminating direct
electromagnetic paths and reducing unwanted reflections. It was further hypothesized that
the FR4 plates constrained the radiated fields in the H-plane, acting as a lateral boundary,
similar to the effect observed in the air-filled configuration discussed in Section 4.3. With
the spacers added, the HPBW exceeds 45◦up to 5.50 GHz. Beyond this, both HPBW and
gain at 0◦decrease, this is because of the formation of a split mainlobe with a dip larger
than 3 dB at boresight. Effectively splitting the HPBW. Mistakenly max gain in the H-plane
was considered rather than the gain at 0◦. They are both plotted in Figure 5.4 to show
which simulation outputs were considered for deciding to assemble the prototype. As with
the H-pol array, gain at 0◦and ±22.5◦(sector edges) is shown in Appendix Figure B.8.
The two-active configuration in Figure 5.5 performs well up to its 1.35 GHz upper limit, with
good gain and HPBW. At this frequency, a resonance caused by the corrugated edges
sharply reduces the HPBW from > 150◦to < 60◦. Finally, the interelement S21 for the V-
pol array, shown in Figure 5.2, remains below −10 dB and decreases with frequency. This
trend is attributed to the increasing electrical separation between elements as frequency
rises.
Figure 5.4: Simulation of the V-pol array in the one-active configuration.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.5: Simulation of the V-pol array in the two-active configuration.
5.3
Reconfigurable Feed Network
The feed network connects the array elements to the input, and manages which of the
elements are active and inactive. By controlling which elements are active, the feed net-
work realizes the beamforming dictated by the bias. The feed network should have one
SMA input port and eight outputs to the array elements. Furthermore it should be tuned
the specification of |S11| ≤−8 dB from 0.70 to 5.90 GHZ. The resulting feed network
prototype is shown in Figure 5.6.
Network Configuration
Two Transmission Line (TL) circuits were proposed to manage the unique requirement
of having one or two elements active at any given time. The first configuration, shown
in Figure 5.7a, has a 75 Ωload connected to the 50 Ωinput, resulting in a mismatch for
both the one-active and two-active cases (the latter having a characteristic impedance
of 37.5 Ω). The second configuration, shown in Figure 5.7b, uses separately matched
paths of 50 Ωand 100 Ωfor the one- and two-active-element configurations, respectively.
However, this complicates proper matching at the junction on the element side of the cir-
cuit. The additional arms would drastically increase the size of the junction, complicating
high-frequency matching as the physical length could approach or exceed λ/4.
This complication can be mitigated by splitting the junction into two or more smaller junc-
tions, an example of doing this is provided in Appendix Figure C.1. However, this ap-
proach is not feasible in the this design, as it would prevent the formation of certain two-
active-element beams. The 75 Ωconfiguration was ultimately chosen, as it only requires
a 8 + 1-arm star junction, compared to the 16 + 1 arms needed for a configuration with
separate paths for each element. This simplifies star junction impedance matching.
Selection of PIN Diode
The MA4SPS402 PIN diode was selected for the feed network due to its low capaci-
tance (0.045 pF), acceptable series resistance (5 Ω), parasitic inductance (0.45 nH), com-
pact size (1.29 × 0.53 mm), 100 V breakdown voltage, and operational range of 0.05–
18 GHz [43].1 The resulting isolation and insertion losses for both series and series-shunt
SPST configurations, derived from Equations 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9, are summarized in
1The electrical values are given as typical at 1 GHz.
40
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.6: Picture of the feed network with its paths configured to match the contact point
of the horizontal elements.
Table 5.1.
Dimension
Isolation (dB)
Insertion loss (dB)
0.7 GHz
5.9 GHz
0.7 GHz
5.9 GHz
Series
34.07
15.67
0.02
0.02
Series-Shunt
54.90
36.39
0.21
0.22
Table 5.1: Overview of theoretical series and series-shunt isolation and insertion losses
for a Z0 = 50 ΩSPST switch configuration.
The isolation shown in Table 5.1 is significantly improved when the switch is configured
as a series-shunt circuit, with only a minor increase in insertion loss. However, due to the
limited space around the star junction, integrating a shunt diode is ver difficuilt. Addition-
ally, the bias circuitry becomes complex, as it must supply a reverse voltage to one diode
while delivering a specific forward bias current to the other. Therefore, the series config-
uration was selected for controlling each element, with the resulting isolation of > 15 dB
still deemed sufficient for this application.
PIN Diode Modeling
MACOM provides Touchstone files for the MA4SPS402 PIN diode under several forward
and reverse bias conditions. These Touchstone files were initially used to model the diode.
However, the resulting model deviated from the behavior described in the datasheet. The
datasheet only specifies values up to 1 GHz, despite the diode being rated for operation
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) 2-way network with 75 Ωtermination.
(b) 3-way configuration with 50 Ωnetwork.
Figure 5.7: 2-element display of the two proposed configuration of feed networks.
up to 18 GHz, introducing uncertainty for parameter values above 1 GHz. Due to this
uncertainty, a second model was developed based on a SPICE model provided in the
datasheet [43]. This model was manually imported into the closest equivalent PIN diode
component in ADS and subsequently tuned, with the resulting values shown in Appendix
Table C.1.
Verification tests were conducted to compare both models to the expected values of Rp,
Ct, and Rs, as shown in Figures 5.9 and 5.8. The simulation setup is provided in Appendix
Figure C.2. Both models fall within the expected value range given in the datasheet, with
the SPICE model showing the closest agreement. Additionally, the Touchstone-based
model in ADS proved difficult to match with the rest of the feed network, as it did not
respond effectively to impedance changes in the circuit. Therefore, the SPICE-based
model was selected for use in the feed network design.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: Forward biased Touchstone (a) and SPICE (b) models for PIN diode.
42
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:51==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.9: Reverse biased Touchstone (a) and SPICE (b) models for PIN diode.
Star Junction and Impedance Matching
As shown in Eq. 3.6, the ”off” state isolation of the PIN diode largely depends on a low ca-
pacitance. However, sufficient impedance matching before and after the diode is required
to make it appear as an open circuit from the SMA port. This is achieved by carefully de-
termining the radius of the star junction and the lengths of the transmission lines from the
junction to the SMA port and to the elements.
Importantly, the diameter of the star junction must be significantly smaller than a quarter
wavelength across the operating band, as a λ/4 impedance transformation would convert
an open circuit into a short circuit. At the highest operating frequency of 5.9 GHz, the
quarter wavelength in the dielectric is approximated to,
1
4λ5.9 GHz ≈1
4
c
f√ϵr
= 1
4
c
5.9 GHz
√
3.55 ≈6.75 mm.
After considering the diode footprints, a junction diameter of 1.90 mm was determined
to be the minimum size required to fit all eight diodes. While this is well below λ/4 at
5.9 GHz, the size of the junction it does slightly affect the impedance seen at the port,
deviating from a perfect open circuit.
Subsequently, the lengths and impedances of the microstrip lines from the SMA port to
the junction and from the junction to the diodes were manually tuned using ADS’s tuning
sliders. The goal was to achieve |S11| ≤−8 dB across 0.70–1.35 GHz for the two-active
configuration and 1.35–5.90 GHz for the one-active configuration. Initial tuning was done
using terminated 75 Ωloads to allow for Si1 and Sii simulations. The tuning results are
shown in Figure 5.10.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
43
==PAGE:52==
The S21 parameters for both configurations, shown in Figure 5.10a, are comparable when
accounting for the 3 dB loss due to signal splitting between ports 2 and 3. The Sii reflection
coefficients for a 75 Ωtermination in both configurations are presented in Figure 5.10b,
showing good matching across the entire frequency band.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: Simulations of the V-pol array, showing the one-active (a) and two-active (b)
configurations. Redline marks the required |S11| ≤−8dB. Simulated with Port 1 being
50 Ωand Port 2 being 75 Ω.
Finally, the S-parameters of the 75 Ω-matched array elements designed in Chapter 4 were
imported as Touchstone files to confirm that the matching remained valid in the final con-
figuration. The matching shown in Figure 5.11 is largely maintained for both configurations
within their respective frequency intervals, as indicated by the colored boxes. A mismatch
is observed for the H-pol element around 1.5 GHz. However, this is considered accept-
able due to the significant uncertainties in the diode modeling and the potential influence
of the bias circuit. Prioritizing the assembly of a prototype, despite minor mismatches,
was deemed more valuable for evaluating the effectiveness of the current diode model
44
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:53==
and the circular array configuration, rather than aiming for perfect matching across the full
0.70–5.90 GHz band.
Figure 5.11: Simulated gain and HPBW for one- (blue) and two-active (red) configuration.
Redline marks the required |S11| ≤−8dB. Simulated with Port 1 being 50 Ωand Port 2
having the impedance of the designed elements.
Bias Circuit
The diodes are controlled by a dedicated DC bias circuit. The bias current flows through
the microstrip and is blocked from entering the SMA port by an RF capacitor, which acts
as a DC block while allowing RF signals to pass. The bias is supplied to the microstrip
via inductors that act as RF chokes. On the DC side of the inductors, RF decoupling
capacitors are used to shunt any conducted or coupled AC noise to ground. A typical bias
circuit is shown schematically in Figure 3.5 and in the PCB layout in Figure 5.12a. The
circuit is designed and simulated for 10 V reverse bias and 50 mA forward bias operation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.12: Simulations of the V-pol array, showing the one-active (a) and two-active (b)
configurations.
The RF capacitor was initially set to 1 pF. This is unnecessarily low and, unfortunately,
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
45
==PAGE:54==
carried over into the prototype. It has no constraining impact on the design, as it just
allows for frequencies << 0.70 GHz to pass through. A recommended value is 0.7 nF,
which results in an impedance of
Z ≈XC =
1
ω · 0.07 GHz · 0.7 nF ≈0.32 Ω
(5.2)
at 0.70 GHz, which is significantly lower than Z0. A 47 pF capacitor is used for RF de-
coupling on the DC side of the RF choke, allowing any RF current to bypass the choke to
ground.2
Choosing an RF choke can be challenging, as one must balance inductance and self-
resonant frequency (SRF). The TCCH-80+ RF choke was initially selected for its oper-
ating range of 50 MHz–8.20 GHz. However, due to supply and coordination issues, this
component could not be sourced in time. As a result, a substitute 6.8 µH inductor with an
SRF of 40 MHz was chosen based on immediate availability.
All bias components are listed in Table 5.2. Finally, the 75 Ωtraces were extended to the
contact points of the array elements. These paths were configured to maintain equal elec-
trical lengths at the contact points with a precision of ±0.5◦. The layout for the horizontal
feed network is shown in Figure 5.12b.
Purpose
Component Name
Manufacturer
Key value
Unit
DC Block
100B102JW300XT
KYOCERA AVX
1.0
pF
RF decoupling
Generic
-
47.0
pF
RF Choke
B82422A1682K
EPCOS
6.8
µH
Table 5.2: Components used in the Bias circuitry
5.4
Assembly
This section outlines the practical steps taken to assemble the array antenna prototype,
including substrate ordering, component mounting, and bias integration. Emphasis is
placed on ensuring reliable electrical connectivity and replicating the simulated configu-
ration as closely as possible to enable accurate comparison between measured and sim-
ulated results. The procedures described here form the foundation for the subsequent
measurement results.
The assembly process for the H-pol and V-pol arrays is summarized in Figures 5.13
and 5.14, respectively. Divinycell PVC foam was used to enhance the mechanical rigidity
of the arrays while minimizing interference with electromagnetic wave propagation, owing
to its low dielectric constant and low loss characteristics.
When installing the PIN diodes, it was noted that the glass housing of the MA4SPS402
PIN diode was very fragile, and that the star junction was very cramped. Consequently
not all installed PIN diode function properly. Diode for element 8 in the H-Pol array and
didoes for element 4 and 5 were not functional (no DC current could run through in forward
bias).
For the MIMO configuration, the two arrays were assembled together with a spacing of
43 mm between the H-pol and V-pol elements. Both RF inputs were routed to the bottom
of the H-pol array using SUCOFORM 141 coaxial cables with N-type connectors.
247 pF is chosen to shunt RF signals down to at least 5 MHz.
46
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:55==
Summary
This chapter detailed the design and physical realization of the antenna arrays. Building
on the individually optimized horizontally and vertically polarized elements, the focus was
placed on their arrangement in circular configurations.
For the H-pol array, close-packed elements were integrated into a 45◦-sector wedge. The
V-pol array was designed to maintain a broad beamwidth, using FR4 spacers to mitigate
unwanted reflections caused by the corner-like shape of the adjacent elements.
A reconfigurable feed network was developed to enable beam steering by switching be-
tween one-active and two-active element modes. This included PIN diode modeling, star
junction impedance matching, and the design of a bias circuit. The complete system was
then assembled into a prototype.
In the next chapter, the performance of the prototype is evaluated through measurements
and compared to simulated results, providing insight into the viability of the array design.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
47
==PAGE:56==
1. Solder Diodes
2. Solder SMA and bias
3. Copper tape from
network to element
4. Ground soldered together
5. DIVINICELL added for rigidty
6. Testing
Figure 5.13: Assembly process visualized for the H-pol array.
48
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:57==
1. Solder Diodes
2. Cuts in elements
3. Solder microstrip
network to element
4. Soldered ground
5. Cut and assemble spacers
6. Testing
Figure 5.14: Assembly process visualized for V-pol arrays.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:59==
6
Measurements and Discussion
This chapter presents and discusses the measurement results of the standalone ele-
ments, array configurations, and MIMO implementation of the proposed array. The pur-
pose of these measurements is to control the reliability of the simulated results and evalu-
ate it agist the design specifications. The chapter begins with measurements of individual
elements to evaluate that they are consistent with the elements simulations, followed by
measurements of two the polarized arrays and the MIMO array in both the one- and two-
active configurations. The final sections summarizes the current state of the MIMO array
and compare the results with similar systems in the literature, potential applications for
the work of this thesis and future work. Figure 6.1 show the final state of the prototype as
it was measured in the MIMO configuration.
Figure 6.1: Pictures of the MIMO array with the horizontal polarized array on top of the
vertical polarized array. Note that the H-pol and V-pol elements are azimuthally aligned.
6.1
Standalone Elements
Each element type was measured before assembling the array to verify individual per-
formance. Due to the 75 Ωsystem design and the lack of a 75 Ω-reference load, it was
impractical to measure S-parameters and gain in a 75 Ωsystem. Instead, measurements
were made against a 50 Ωload and compared to simulations using the same reference
(no design changes, only simulation setup).1 Pictures of the measurement setup can be
found in Appendix Section 3.6. The horizontal and vertical elements were measured in the
E- and H-planes, respectively, corresponding to their intended 45◦sectors as discussed
in Chapter 4. In an effort to mitigate gain magnitude inaccuracy, the same coaxial cable
was used for both reference antennas and AUTs, with only SMA-to-N adapters added for
the reference antenna.
The |S11| measurements were performed in a non-anechoic indoor facility. To assess the
impact of reflections, the element was directed toward an 80 × 80 cm absorber, shown in
150 ΩSMA ports were soldered onto the elements to enable testing.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
51
==PAGE:60==
Appendix Figure E.1. Only minor changes in the deep ripples between 3.5–4.0 GHz were
observed. The poor matching between the 75 Ωelement and the 50 Ωsystem, is likely
the reason for any facility reflection’s minimal effect on the measured |S11|.
Radiation pattern can be found at the end of the section.
Horizontal Polarized Element
Figure 6.2 shows that the measured and simulated |S11| are comparable. The resonance
caused by the corrugated edges at ∼1 GHz aligns well. Differences begin at ∼2.5 GHz,
though both results remain near the −8 dB level, with the measured values slightly lower,
likely due to coaxial losses from standing waves at the SMA port.2
The gain comparison in Figure 6.3 is also largely consistent with the simulations, though
the measured gain exhibits peaks at 0.77 and 0.96 GHz, suggesting a stronger resonance
than simulated. The higher measured gain at 0.70 GHz (2.7 dBi vs. 1.8 dBi) and a local
|S11| peak at 0.88 GHz (∼5.0 dB) indicate that these peaks may belong to a single, wider
resonance distorted by the poor |S11| in between the peak. An unexpected peak also
appears near 3.8 GHz. At 5.9 GHz, measured gain is 1.3 dB lower than simulated, this
could be caused by phase misalignment, which can be mitigated using a dielectric lens
as shown in Refs. [40, 30].
A discontinuity at 2.7 GHz is also observed, coinciding with the change from the JXTXLB-
660 to SHF1359P09 measurement antenna. Since the same reference antenna was used
across this range, it is likely due to standing waves caused by matching conditions.3 This
issue is observed in other H-pol in other measurements, suggesting it stems from the
matching between the measuring antenna and the 75 ΩAUT.
Finally, Figure 6.3 shows consistent HPBW and mainlobe shape in both simulation and
measurement. This is reinforced in the normalized radiation patterns shown in Figure 6.6,
that show that the simulated and measured pattern are very consistent.
Figure 6.2: Measured and simulated |S11| of the standalone H-pol element which is de-
signed for 75 Ωand simulated and measured against a 50 Ωreference.
2Cable length is approximately 1 m.
3Switching between measurement antennas and amplifiers is done electronically.
52
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.3: Measured and simulated gain of the standalone H-pol element.
Vertical Polarized Element
Similar to the horizontal element, the simulated and measured |S11| responses in Fig-
ure 6.4 agree well in both magnitude and trend up to 2.5 GHz.4 Although the local maxima
and minima are not perfectly aligned for measured and simulated |S11|, the overall match-
ing level remains around −8 dB. Notably, both polarized elements exhibit ripples between
3.0 and 4.5 GHz, likely caused by the VNA or the coax cables, as they persist despite
recalibration. However in context of the matching specification the ripples are considered
negligible (|S11| remains better than −10 dB throughout this range).
The measured gain at 0◦, shown in Figure 6.5, matches the simulated realized gain pri-
marily in the 1.00–2.00 GHz and 5.00–5.90 GHz intervals. Below 1 GHz, deviations such
as +2.91 dB at 0.70 GHz and −1.72 dB at 0.90 GHz suggest that the resonance is not
fully captured in the simulation, consistent with observations from the horizontal element.
The latter dip also corresponds to a significantly increased HPBW. Between 2.00 and
5.00 GHz, the measured gain is generally more than 1 dB higher than the simulated gain,
with two sharp dips at 2.70 GHz and 4.00 GHz. These dips are not accompanied by
wider beamwidth or significant differences in the radiation pattern, unlike the deviation at
0.90 GHz. This indicates a that there are something that causes the antenna efficiency
to drop. The HPBW shown in Figure 6.5 is nearly identical, indicating that the mainlobe
shape is realistically modeled. This is consistent with the measured radiation pattern being
very consistent with the simulated one up til 4.9 GHz where the pattern’s shape remains
similar but the mainlobe direction is positively shifted (Figure 6.7). This is likely a result
of the high frequency interacting differently with the FR4 substrate creating a significant
asymmetry of on each side of the copper that where the waves are excited.
A 0.5 dB discontinuity is observed at 4.00 GHz, where the reference antenna switches
from the L430 to the H4.8G. This is likely due to discrepancies a systematic source of error
for vertical measurements, as the same discontinuity appears in both the V-pol element
and array tests.
4The excellent matching at 1.57 GHz is disregarded, as it is not relevant to the 75 Ωdesign.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.4: Measured and simulated |S11| of the standalone V-pol element which is de-
signed for 75 Ωand simulated and measured against a 50 Ωreference.
Figure 6.5: Measured and simulated gain and HPBW of the standalone V-pol element.
54
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:63==
Normalized H-Pol for 0.9 GHz to 5.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
3.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
4.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
5.9 GHz
Simulated
Measured
Figure 6.6: Normalized radiation patterns for the H-pol element in the co-polarized (E-
) plane. The measured and simulated frequency have a maximum discrepancy of ±60
MHz.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
55
==PAGE:64==
Normalized V-Pol Element from 0.9 to 5.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
3.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
4.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
5.9 GHz
Meas
Sim
Figure 6.7: Normalized radiation patterns for the V-pol element in the cross-polarized (H-
) plane. The measured and simulated frequency have a maximum discrepancy of ±60
MHz.
56
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:65==
6.2
Separate Array Configurations
All elements per array were measured for |S11|, with minor differences observed across
the elements (Appendix Figures D.1 and D.2). Elements 1 and 2 were selected for the
field measurements and are the elements shown in the |S11| results. Specifically, ele-
ment 1 was used for the one-active configuration, and elements 1 and 2 for the two-active
configuration.5 These adjacent elements were selected for gain measurements because
their PIN diodes were the first to be installed in the constrained star junction, providing
greater confidence in the quality of their electrical contact. For the field measurements,
no reverse bias was applied to simplify the biasing process. In this setup, closed diodes
were biased with approximately 50 mA, while open diodes were left floating. This makes
supplying the bias current to the AUT much simpler as well as the feed network behav-
ior (at low power) is effectively the same with or without a 10 V reverse bias (Appendix
Figure D.3).
The realized gain of the array is simulated directly at the element ports. However, due
to the need for beam steering, the gain is measured at the coaxial cable connected to
the feed network, which in turn feeds the antenna elements. This creates a discrepancy
between the measured and simulated array gain.
To enable a fair comparison, the measured insertion losses of the coaxial cables and the
simulated insertion loss of the feed network are subtracted from the measured array gain.
This provides an approximation of the gain directly at the element level:
Gainelement, approx = Gainarray, meas −S21 coax, meas −S21 feednetwork, sim
(6.1)
Note that the insertion loss of the feed network was difficult to measure accurately due to
the 50 Ωto 75 Ωmismatch at the element ports. The simulated value ,likely lower than
the actual insertion loss, was therefore used as a substitute.
Gain and radiation measurements can be found at the end of the section.
Horizontal Polarized Array
|S11| for the one-active and two-active configurations of the horizontal array is shown in
Figure 6.8. The two-active configuration achieves great matching up to for it intended fre-
quencies up to 1.35 GHz and the one-active configuration has good matching for 1.35–4.5
GHz. Both configurations has significant impedance mismatch from 4.5 GHz, contributing
to large losses. Above 4.5 GHz the |S11| is centered around −5 dB with peaks crossing
−3 dB. This correspond to mismatch losses of 1.65 dB for |S11| = −5 dB and 3.02 dB for
|S11| = −3 dB. As a reference, |S11| = −8 dB has a mismatch loss of 0.75 dB when not
considering any further losses by standing wave in the cable and feed network.
The measured gain in Figure 6.10 has been processed to represent the gain at the an-
tenna element(s) rather than at the actual measuring point (the coax cable). The mea-
sured and simulated array gain align well up to 2.5 GHz when accounting for a leftward
frequency shift of approximately 0.15 GHz, which aligns peaks and dips. Figure 6.11 also
shows consistent differences in HPBW from 2.5 GHz, suggesting higher measured gain
at ∼3.8 and ∼4.6 GHz. However, above 2.5 GHz, the measured gain is generally lower
than the simulated gain. This is primarily due to the radiation pattern fluctuating between
a maximum at 0◦and a split mainlobe around ±15◦. At 3.48 GHz, the mainlobe shifts,
resulting in a gain difference of 6.80 dBi−1.09 dBi = 5.71 dB between −14.6◦and 0◦. The
split main beam is clearly present at 3.9 GHz in Figure 6.14. As higher-order modes be-
come excited at higher frequencies, this fluctuation continues. The discrepancy between
5Element numbering is shown in Figure 5.6
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.8: Measured |S11| at the SMA port for one-active and two-active H-pol configu-
rations. Measured for a 50 Ωreference.
measured and simulated array gain, when compared with the measured element gain,
suggests that parasitic effects from inactive elements are not well accounted for in the
simulations. The mainlobe becomes very sharp > 4.5 GHz as shown in Figure 6.11 and
at 4.9 and 5.9 GHz for Figure 6.14. This is consistent with a higher mode being excited
for the array.
The 2.70 GHz discontinuity observed in Figure 6.3 also appears in the array measure-
ments (Figure 6.10), though it is positive here rather than negative, indicating a potential
source of measurement uncertainty. Additional testing using both the JXTXLB-660 and
SHF1359P09 antennas across this frequency is recommended to further investigate the
issue.
The same frequency shift of 15 MHz is observed in Figure 6.12. The HPBW for the two-
active configuration, shown in Figure 6.13, closely matches the simulated result, with the
design goal of HPBW ≥45◦up to 1.35 GHz being met. Outside of the drop in gain
at 0.96 GHz, the measured gain below 1.35 GHz (red line) indicates that the two-active
configuration offers a significant improvement over the one-active configuration in that
frequency range. The radiation patterns for the two active array shown in Figure 6.15
has a mainlobe that formed well to for the 45◦-sector, however they also have significant
backlobe at ∼−10 dB of the mainlobe. Lastly, the granting lobes are clearly developing
with increasing frequency as seen in the radiation pattern of 1.5 GHz.
Vertical Polarized Array
The measured |S11| for the vertical array (Figure 6.9) closely resembles that of the hor-
izontal array (Figure 6.8), with sufficient two-active matching up to 1.35 GHz and good
one-active matching up to 4.50 GHz. The deterioration above 4.5 GHz suggests the mis-
match originates from the feed network rather than the elements or the assembled array.
The measured vertical array gain in Figure 6.16 is largely consistent with the simulated
gain up to 4.00 GHz. A shift in the mainlobe direction is observed at approximately 3.09 GHz,
moving to the right and causing a notable difference between max gain and gain at 0◦.
58
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.9: Measured |S11| at the SMA port for one-active and two-active V-pol configu-
rations. Measured for a 50 Ωreference.
This shift is visible in both the measured and simulated radiation patterns in Figure 6.20,
and is likely due to element asymmetry, specifically, the copper cladding being present
only on one side of the FR-4 substrate. This creates a less restrictive path toward the
nearest right-hand element compared to the left. Such asymmetry is inherent in printed
TSA designs but could potentially be mitigated by using an antipodal configuration, where
parts of the copper cladding are present on both sides of the element. Alternatively, ad-
justing element spacing or terminating inactive elements could reduce pattern distortion,
although simulations have shown limited improvements with these methods. A similar
shift was also observed and discussed for the measurements H-pol element.
The discontinuity at 4.00 GHz observed in Figure 6.5 is also present in the array gain
measurement in Figure 6.16 with a similar magnitude (0.7 dB). This supports the expla-
nation that the discontinuity originates from differences in the reference antennas when
measured in the vertical configuration.
Figure 6.11 show that the HPBW for the one-active H-pol array stay mostly stable at 45◦,
however the HPBW has some dips at the mainlobe start to shit away from 0◦with local
dips in the mainlobe larger than 3 dB. A good example of this is shown in the radiation
pattern at 3.9 GHz in Figure 6.14.
The two-active configuration for the vertical array has proven to function well, with high
gain and sufficient HPBW as shown Figures 6.18 and 6.19. As for the two-active H-pol
array, the two-active V-pol’s radiation patterns up to 1.35 GHz has satisfactory mainlobe,
but has a backlobe as large as to −10 dB (1.3 GHz in Figure 6.21).
Due to the large discrepancy in the gain pattern, both array models were updated to in-
clude a feed network ground plane. The refined simulation results were consistent with
the previous simulations and consequently did not contribute to mitigating the discrep-
ancy measurement and simulated results. Corresponding simulations can be found in
Appendix Section B.5.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.10: Measured and simulated gain of the H-pol array in the one-active configura-
tion.
Figure 6.11: Measured and simulated HPBW of the H-pol array in the one-active config-
uration.
60
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.12: Measured and simulated gain of the H-pol array in the two-active configura-
tion.
Figure 6.13: Measured and simulated HPBW of the H-pol array in the two-active config-
uration.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
61
==PAGE:70==
Normalized H-Pol 1-active array (0.9 to 5.9 GHz)
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-30
-22.5
-15
-7.5
0
0.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-30
-22.5
-15
-7.5
0
1.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-30
-22.5
-15
-7.5
0
2.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-30
-22.5
-15
-7.5
0
3.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-30
-22.5
-15
-7.5
0
4.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-30
-22.5
-15
-7.5
0
5.9 GHz
Meas
Sim
Figure 6.14: Normalized radiation patterns for the H-pol 1-active array in the co-polarized
(E-) plane. The measured and simulated frequency have a discrepancy of ±60 MHz.
62
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:71==
Normalized H-Pol 2-active array (0.7 to 1.5 GHz)
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0.7 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.0 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.3 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.5 GHz
Meas
Sim
Figure 6.15: Normalized radiation patterns for the H-pol 2-active array in the co-polarized
(E-) plane. The measured and simulated frequency have a discrepancy of ±25 MHz.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.16: Measured and simulated gain of the V-pol array in the one-active configura-
tion.
Figure 6.17: Measured and simulated HPBW of the V-pol array in the one-active config-
uration.
64
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.18: Measured and simulated gain of the V-pol array in the two-active configura-
tion.
Figure 6.19: Measured and simulated HPBW of the H-pol array in the two-active config-
uration.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
65
==PAGE:74==
Normalized V-Pol 1-active array (0.9 to 5.9 GHz)
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
3.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
4.9 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
5.9 GHz
Meas
Sim
Figure 6.20: Normalized radiation patterns for the V-pol 1-active array in the cross-
polarized (H-) plane. The measured and simulated frequency have a discrepancy of ±60
MHz.
66
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:75==
Normalized V-Pol 2-active array (0.7 to 1.5 GHz)
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0.7 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.0 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.3 GHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1.5 GHz
Meas
Sim
Figure 6.21: Normalized radiation patterns for the V-pol 2-active array in the cross-
polarized (H-) plane. The measured and simulated frequency have a discrepancy of ±25
MHz.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
67
==PAGE:76==
6.3
MIMO Configuration
To assess the prototype’s viability for MIMO applications, measurements were performed
with both the horizontal and vertical sub-arrays assembled into a full dual-polarized con-
figuration. The measurements are presented with a focus on inter-array isolation, gain,
and beamwidth behavior in the MIMO configuration. Comparisons are made to the corre-
sponding standalone array results to evaluate how the full integration affects performance.
Due to the known poor |S11| above 4.5 GHz. The field measurements is constrained to
0.70–4.50 GHz. With the two-active configuration in the frequncy interval 0.70–1.35 GHz,
and the one-active configuration in the interval of 1.35-4.50 GHz.
Isolation
The isolation between the H-pol and V-pol arrays in the MIMO configuration, was mea-
sured to be greater than 30 dB. The measurement results can be found in Appendix Fig-
ure D.4. This high level of isolation indicates minimal coupling between the two polariza-
tions, suggesting that the performance of each array component in terms of impedance
matching is largely unaffected by the presence of the other (distance between the two is
43 mm).
Horizontal Polarized Array
The H-pol array as a part of the MIMO array was measured to be similar as the standalone
H-pol array in Figure 6.22a with a notable difference a smaller HPBW for the MIMO ar-
ray. Despite the high isolation between the two arrays mainlobe clearly effected by the
proximity of the V-pol array as shown in the HPBW discrepancy in Figure 6.22b. Minor
variations in the radiation patterns are observed particularly at 2025 MHz and 4000 MHz
in Figure 6.23. Consequently there are additional challenges to maintain the gain perfor-
mance when assembling the two arrays into a MIMO array.
Vertical Polarized Array
The V-pol component of the MIMO array was also measured to be similar with the stan-
dalone V-pol array in Figure 6.24. However it also had a deteriorating performance for
higher frequencies as the gain at 0◦there is ≈3 dB drop from 3.50 GHz. There is a sig-
nificant discontinuity in Figure 6.24a at 4.0 GHz of more than a 1 dB. During testing, the
connection between the MIMO V-pol array and the coaxial cable became loose. Although
it was re-tightened, accessing the coupling nut was difficult with the full MIMO array as-
sembled, leading to low confidence in the gain magnitude measurements above 4.0 GHz.
The radiation pattern for the V-pol MIMO array is largely unchanged as shown in Figure
6.25, indicating a discrepancy in the measured gain magnitude, rather than a distorted
radiation pattern.
68
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:77==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.22: Measured gain (a) and HPBW (b) for the H-pol array as a part of a MIMO
array and by itself.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
69
==PAGE:78==
Normalized H-Pol Measured MIMO Patterns (0.7 to 4.0 GHz)
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
700 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1285 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2025 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2700 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
3350 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
4000 MHz
MIMO(H)
H-pol array
Figure 6.23: Normalized radiation patterns for the H-pol MIMO array in the co-polarized
plane.
70
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:79==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.24: Measured gain (a) and HPBW (b) for the vertical array as a part of a MIMO
array and by it self.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
71
==PAGE:80==
Normalized V-Pol Measured MIMO Patterns (0.7 to 4.0 GHz)
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
700 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1285 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2025 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2700 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
3350 MHz
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315°
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
4000 MHz
MIMO(V)
V-pol array
Figure 6.25: Normalized radiation patterns for the V-pol MIMO array in the cross-polarized
plane.
72
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:81==
6.4
Current State
The current state of the array for its |S11| and radiation characteristics. The MIMO array
upholds its matching and isolation specifications and partially its gain requirement in the
interval of 0.70 – 5.90 GHz. The design specifications are not met because the poor feed
network matching above 4.5 GHz, the gain dips discussed in the measurements and the
array being to large for vehicular applications. In the other hand |S11| ≤−8 dB and a
typical gain at 7 dBi at 0◦in the azimuthal plane for both polarization was achieved in the
frequncy range of 0.70–4.50 GHz utilizing both one-active and two-active configurations.
Comparison with State of the Art
The work carried out in this thesis is put into perspective to the circular array antennas
proposed in academia form Figure 2.1. The comparison in done in Table 6.1.
Ref
[3]
[17]
[4]
[18]
[19]
This work
Polarizationa
Horizontal
Vertical
Vertical
X-pol
Horizontal
+
Elements per pol
8
4
10
8
8 (4 ports)
8
Element type
TSA
Monopole
TSA
TSA
TSA
TSA
Element spacing
-
0.03 λ
< λ
< λ
< λ
< λ b
Bandwidth
3.0:1
6.0:1
8.0:1
10.0:1
7.0:1
6.4:1
VSWR
2.3:1
1.9:1
2.6:1
2.6:1
2.3:1
2.3:1
Gain (typical) [dBi]
5 dBi
3-5.5 dBi
8 dBi
7 dBi
-
7 dBi
Type of beamformer
PIN diode
None
Digital
Digital
Digital
PIN diode
Intended utility
DF and MIMO
MIMO
DF
DF
DF
MIMO
a ”+” indicates orthogonal linear polarization; ”X-pol” refers to 45◦tilted orthogonal linear polarization.
b Only up to 1.35 GHz.
Table 6.1: Overview of existing 360 degree reconfigurable arrays compared to the work
of this thesis.
Unlike the other work listed polarization diversity is implemented through the use of both
horizontal and vertical polarization. This is beneficial, as it enables an additional com-
munication layer, although it is not required for direction-finding (DF) applications. An
element count of eight is a common design choice and results in a typical gain of ap-
proximately 7 dBi, balancing directivity while avoiding major azimuth-plane nulls. In the
two-active configuration, element spacing is kept below one wavelength at 1.35 GHz to
mitigate grating lobes. A bandwidth of 6.4:1 is achieved compared to the specified 8.4:1,
which remains competitive with other proposed systems when factoring in VSWR con-
straints.6 While other arrays may offer more uniform gain across the band, they often em-
ploy digital beamformers for enhanced angular resolution. In contrast, the MIMO-oriented
array in this work uses a simpler reconfigurable architecture based on PIN diodes.
Alternative Applications
The standalone element’s ability to maintain a relatively consistent and wide beamwidth
across its operating band makes it well-suited for applications such as transmitting to un-
manned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and fixed wireless access (FWA) applications. For UAVs,
consistent beamwidth ensures a sector with good signal coverage regardless of carrier
frequency. In FWA deployments, a too directive antenna can lead to unreliable connection
as environmental factors can shift the antenna’s narrow mainlobe off its intended target.
Furthermore, communication technologies like 4G LTE and 5G NR use multipath to in-
crease signal robustness and are especially effective in non-line-of-sight situations. This
6Systems with broader bandwidths typically use more more lenient impedance matching thresholds.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
73
==PAGE:82==
is difficult to leverage with a highly directive antenna like a typical TSA operating at high
frequencies.
The feed network in this design allows two antenna ports to be open simultaneously. It
facilitates a multitude of configurations not only restricted to elements that are side by
side.
Although the array exhibits broad mainlobes, which might limit angular resolution for clas-
sical direction-finding, it aligns well with the capabilities of modern radios that incorporate
passive scanning features. These radios can monitor the RF environment for unknown
or unauthorized transmissions while maintaining their primary communication role. When
multiple radios equipped with this array are networked and geographically distributed,
signals of interest can be triangulated.
The array’s high gain and dynamic reconfigurability make it suitable for jamming appli-
cations. However, for such high-power applications, the currently integrated PIN diodes
would need to be replaced with variants capable of handling higher RF power levels, typ-
ically on the order of 20 W or more.
6.5
Future Work
Building on the results and limitations identified in the measurements, several aspects
of the array design can be further explored and improved. The following items outline
specific recommendations aimed at enhancing both the performance and practicality of
the antenna system. The recommendations are outlined into bullet point lists considering
the feed network and the array and elements.
• Viability of the 50 Ωto 75 Ω-element Configuration: The viability of interfacing a
50 ΩRF input with either a 75 Ωantenna element or the parallel equivalent 37.5 Ω
configuration should be critically evaluated. While the current design demonstrates
significantly improved low-frequency gain, this enhancement comes at the expense
of optimal impedance matching. Experience gained from the feed network design
and full-array simulations confirms that improved low-frequency performance can
be achieved compared to a standalone element. As an alternative, a dedicated
one-active-element array, fully normalized to a 50 Ωsystem, should be considered.
However, the adoption of such a configuration may ultimately depend on the pref-
erences and requirements of potential end-users.
• Make the Feed Network Test-Friendly: The current feed network design is only
configured to allow for |S11|-measurements. For prototyping purposes, DC block
capacitors should be added, as well as proper matching at the intended antenna
ports, enabling multi-port measurements.
• Feed Network Bandwidth: The feed network performance above 4.5 GHz needs
to be improved. However, based on the current work and measurements, it is un-
clear what causes the poor performance above 4.5 GHz. Further efforts should be
directed at isolating and resolving the mismatch.
• Increase Power Capability: The existing PIN diodes could be replaced with alter-
natives capable of handling higher power levels, as relevant radios for this antenna
typically deliver up to 25 W.
There are many steps left before this work is close to a commercial product. Steps like
integrating a radome and beam-steering logic are essential future tasks. However, more
immediate steps for improving the array are prioritized.
74
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:83==
• Link 16 Band: Future studies should evaluate whether the current array configura-
tion is necessary for supporting the Link 16 frequency band, particularly with respect
to resonance behavior created by the corrugated edges. This may lead to design
simplifications or retuning of the array structure. Additionally, Link 16 only uses
vertical polarization, simplifying the horizontal element and array design.
• Accurate Resonance Modeling: Simulation accuracy should be improved so that
the measured resonances are reflected in the simulation. This would reduce future
inaccuracies in element design.
• Full Array Simulation Accuracy: The full array simulation should be updated to
better reflect the actual electromagnetic behavior of the assembled system. This is
essential for any simulated design improvements.
• Size Reduction: The size of the elements, and thereby the array, is large, with a
diameter greater than 500 mm. This is considered too big for vehicular applications.
The elements should be made more compact and centered closer to the array cen-
ter. For example, the Comrod TSA ”Pod5 FRQP” specified for 0.70–5.90 GHz, is
only approximately 62% of the area of the H-pol element, yet offering marginally
lower gain and a comparable HPBW.
Summary
This chapter presents the measured impedance matching and gain pattern of the proto-
type, covering standalone elements and separate and MIMO array configurations. The
standalone horizontal and vertical elements were measured to be consistent with simula-
tions in both gain and impedance. The array measurements in two-active and one-active
modes largely demonstrated satisfactory impedance matching and gain magnitude in the
frequncy interval of 0.70–1.35 GHz and 1.35 4.50 GHz, respectively. At higher frequen-
cies mainlobe distortion and low radiation efficiency were observed, likely due to feed
network limitations and excitation of higher-order modes and parasitic effects of the inac-
tive elements that were not properly modeled in the array simulations. There was also
significant impedance mismatch (|S11| > −8 dB) after 4.5 GHz that contributed to a dete-
riorated gain magnitude. It is likely caused by insufficient modeling of the simulated feed
network, that lead to improper impedance tuning.
Nonetheless, the array achieves competitive bandwidth and low frequency gain relative
to state-of-the-art designs, using a simpler analog reconfiguration approach based on PIN
diodes. Key limitations include performance above 4.5 GHz, inconsistent high frequency
mainlobe, physical size, and the need for improved array modeling and feed network
design, which are addressed in the proposed future work.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:85==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has presented the design and development of a wideband, reconfigurable an-
tenna array for vehicular applications, designed to support 360◦beam steering across
the 0.70–5.90 GHz range. The key design challenges being achieving wideband per-
formance, consistent gain pattern, and beam steering within the limited physical space
available on vehicles. These challenges were addressed by a design based on eight
TSA elements (per polarization) arranged in circular, switch-based arrays, offering both
horizontal (H-pol) and vertical linear polarizations (V-pol) to enable 2×2 MIMO operation.
Reconfigurable control is achieved through dynamic switching between one- and two-
active element configurations that collectively cover 360◦. A prototype was assembled
consisting of two eight-element circular arrays, one per polarization, along with integrated
networks for beam steering. While the standalone elements showed good agreement
with simulation results, the complete array failed to meet design specifications, particu-
larly due to degraded impedance matching and gain patterns at higher frequencies. Still,
array measurements showed |S11| ≤−8 dB and a typical gain of 7 dBi at 0◦in the az-
imuthal plane for the 0.70–4.50 GHz range.
In Chapter 2 the communication domains relevant to vehicular applications were reviewed.
These systems predominantly operate within or adjacent to FR1 cellular bands. Om-
nidirectional and directive antennas were discussed as well as coupling challenges for
single-band antennas in close proximity and the need for multiband antennas.
Chapter 3 defined the theoretical framework for the design of the antenna system as well
as methods for simulation and measurements.
In Chapter 4, the individual H-pol and V-pol array elements were developed and optimized
for. The H-pol element was fitted within a 45◦sector using triangular shaping and cor-
rugated edges to improve low-frequency gain. The V-pol element was kept rectangular,
and has an air-filled taper that increase the beamwidth at high frequencies. Both elements
achieved good impedance matching and radiation performance across the 0.70–5.90 GHz
band.
Chapter 5 described the integration of the antenna elements into their respective circular
arrays. A reconfigurable feed network using PIN diode switching was implemented to
toggle between one- and two-active element configurations.
In Chapter 6, measurements of the array elements, separate and MIMO arrays were
compared to simulations. The individual elements matched simulations closely, but in
the full array configuration, some high-frequency performance deviations appeared.
While the antenna array is primarily intended for cellular and tactical communications, the
individual elements are potentially suited for UAV data links and fixed wireless access
due to their consistent, directive yet wide mainlobe across the band. These character-
istics offer reliable coverage without excessive directivity. Meanwhile, the array’s broad
beamwidth, though limiting for classical direction finding, can be leveraged by modern
radios using passive scanning and triangulation. Its high gain and reconfigurability also
suggest potential for jamming applications.
Before further development, two key decisions must be made: whether to retain the 50 Ω
to 75 Ωinterface enabling both one- and two-active element modes, or simplify to a single-
active element 50 Ωsystem; and whether the Link 16 band should remain within scope,
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
77
==PAGE:86==
given its different application compared to the other bands, and its frequencies potentially
being occupied by the corrugated edge resonance. Depending on these decisions, focus
should turn to improving feed network matching above 4.5,GHz, enabling multi-port test-
ing, increasing power capability, and refining simulation accuracy. Finally, further work is
needed to reduce the array’s size, integrate beam alignment logic, and resolve integration
challenges related to housing and vehicle mounting—critical steps toward commercial vi-
ability.
78
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
Spectrum Monitoring. Mobile Frequencies Database – Norway. https://spectrummonitoring.
com/frequencies.php?market=NOR. Accessed: 2025-06-19. Spectrummonitoring.com,
2025.
[2]
Agnius Birutis. Coverage, range and capacity of a 5G radio system. FFI-RAPPORT
23/01500. Kjeller, Norway: FFI – Forsvarets forskningsinstitutt (NO), 2023.
[3]
Soumya Sheel and Jacob C. Coetzee. “Switchable-Feed Reconfigurable Ultra-Wide
Band Planar Antenna”. In: International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation
(2015), pp. 1–3.
[4]
Rainer Mueller et al. “A UHF Ultrabroadband Vivaldi-Type Direction Finding An-
tenna”. In: Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium (2010),
pp. 1–4.
[5]
Alaris Antennas. SBA3438B-DP: Dual Polarized Steerable Beam MIMO Antenna
for 5G. Accessed: 2025-05-13. 2024. URL: https://products.alaris.tech/product/
428/SBA3438B-DP/dual-polarized-steerable-beam-mimo-antenna-for-5g?aff=4.
[6]
L3Harris Technologies. RF-7800W-AT30X Electronically Beam-Steered Smart An-
tenna. Accessed: 2025-05-13. 2024. URL: https://www.l3harris.com/all-capabilities/
rf-7800w-at30x-electronically-beam-steered-smart-antenna.
[7]
NATO. NATO JOINT CIVIL/MILITARY FREQUENCY AGREEMENT (NJFA)(Extract
for Public Disclosure) 2014. Downloaded on 31-05-2023. URL: https : / / english .
nmhh.hu/document/211426/NATO_Joint_Civil_Military_Frequency_Agreement_
NJFA.pdf.
[8]
ShareTechnote. 5G FR (Frequency Range) / Operating Bandwidth. Table 5.1-1,
Accessed: 2025-05-15. 2025. URL: http://sharetechnote.com/html/5G/5G_FR_
Bandwidth.html.
[9]
Qorvo. V2X in the Connected Car of the Future. Accessed: 2025-05-15. Qorvo.
2022. URL: https://www.qorvo.com/design-hub/blog/v2x-in-the-connected-car-of-
the-future.
[10]
NovAtel. GNSS Frequencies and Signals. Accessed: 2025-05-15. 2025. URL: https:
//novatel.com/support/known-solutions/gnss-frequencies-and-signals.
[11]
Galileo GNSS. Galileo Signal Polarization. Accessed: 2025-05-15. 2013. URL: https:
//galileognss.eu/galileo-signal-polarization/.
[12]
Abracon LLC. AECS1806D07Z Automotive 2xLTE MIMO + GNSS + AM/FM Shark-
fin Antenna Datasheet. Accessed: 2025-05-15. 2020. URL: https://abracon.com/
datasheets/AECS1806D07Z.pdf.
[13]
AutoExe Inc. RX-8 Tuned Car by AutoExe. Accessed: 2025-06-20. 2025. URL:
https://www.autoexe.co.jp/en/?p=85346.
[14]
Direktoratet for samfunnssikkerhet og beredskap. Hva er det nye nødnettet? Ac-
cessed: 2025-05-15. 2024. URL: https://www.dsb.no/nodnett/nytt-nodnett/hva-er-
det-nye-nodnettet/.
[15]
ZCG Scalar. Heavy Duty 8.1dBi UHF Antenna (2.1m) BnS Ute Style. Accessed:
2025-06-20. 2025. URL: https://www.telcoantennas.com.au/zcg-heavy-duty-81dbi-
uhf-antenna-21m-bns-ute-style.
[16]
Warren L. Stutzman and Gary A. Thiele. Antenna theory and design. 3rd ed. John
Wiley % Sons, Inc., 2012.
[17]
Premalatha J. and Sheela D. “Compactfour-port vertically polarized UWB monopole
antenna for MIMO communications”. In: In Circuit World 47 (2020), pp. 129–137.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
79
==PAGE:88==
[18]
M. S. Jessup and S. Simpson. “Circular Dual-Polarised Wideband Arrays for Direc-
tion Finding”. In: Institution of Engineering and Technology Seminar on Wideband,
Multiband Antennas and Arrays for Defence or Civil Applications (2008), pp. 61–80.
[19]
J. Duplouy et al. “Wideband Vector Antenna for Dual-Polarized and Three-Dimensional
Direction-Finding Applications”. In: IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Let-
ters 18.8 (2019), pp. 1572–1575.
[20]
Alaris Antennas. SBA4450B-DP: Dual Polarized Steerable Beam Antenna for Band
IV. Accessed: 2025-05-13. 2024. URL: https://products.alaris.tech/product/430/
SBA4450B-DP/dual-polarized-steerable-beam-antenna-for-band-iv?aff=4.
[21]
Alaris Antennas. SBA1327B: Steerable Beam Antenna for UHF III. Accessed: 2025-
05-13. 2024. URL: https://products.alaris.tech/product/424/SBA1327B/steerable-
beam-antenna-for-uhf-iii?aff=4.
[22]
Southwest Antennas. Antenna Array, x6, 4.4–5.9 GHz, 15 dBi. Accessed: 2025-05-
13. 2024. URL: https://southwestantennas.com/products/array-antennas/antenna-
array-x6-44-59-ghz-15-dbi.
[23]
Constantine A. Balanis. Antenna Theory, Analysis and Design. 4th ed. John Wiley
% Sons, Inc., 2016.
[24]
Omni Calculator. Regular Polygon Calculator. Accessed: 5 March 2025. 2024. URL:
https://www.omnicalculator.com/math/regular-polygon.
[25]
P.J. Gibson. “The Vivaldi Aerial”. In: 9th European Microwave Conference Proceed-
ings (1979), pp. 101–105.
[26]
Torbjörn Ödman and Paul Hallbjörner. “Vivaldi antenna with low frequency reso-
nance for reduced dimensions”. In: 7th European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation (2013), pp. 2457–2459.
[27]
Wensong Wang and Yuanjin Zheng. “Wideband Gain Enhancement of a Dual-Polarized
MIMOVehicular Antenna”. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOL-
OGY 70.8 (2021), pp. 7897–7907.
[28]
A. Hossain and A. -V. Pham. “A Novel Gain-Enhanced Miniaturized and Lightweight
Vivaldi Antenna”. In: IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation 71.12 (2023),
pp. 9431–9439.
[29]
Xin Song and En Li. “A 2-18G Ultra-Wideband Double-Slot Structure for Antipodal
Vivaldi Antenna”. In: 2021 International Conference on Microwave and Millimeter
Wave Technology (ICMMT) (2021), pp. 1–3.
[30]
Weijun Huang et al. “Ultrawideband Tapered Slot Antenna With Phase-Correcting
Dielectric Lens Loaded”. In: IEEE ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS PROPAGATION
LETTERS 23.12 (2024), pp. 4218–4222.
[31]
Junho Yeo and Jong-Ig Lee. “Compact Wideband Tapered Slot Antenna Using Fan-
Shaped and Stepped Structures for Chipless Radio-Frequency-Identification Sen-
sor Tag Applications”. In: Sensors 24 (2024), pp. 1–22.
[32]
Randy L. Haupt. ANTENNA ARRAYS, A Computational Approach. John Wiley %
Sons, Inc., 2010.
[33]
M.T. Ma. THEORY AND APPLICATION OF ANTENNA ARRAYS, ANALYSIS AND
SYNTHESIS OF TWO DIMENSIONAL ARRAYS, Chapter 3. 1st ed. John Wiley %
Sons, Inc., 1974.
[34]
Max Born and Emil Wolf. Principles of Optics: Electromagnetic Theory of Propaga-
tion, Interference and Diffraction of Light. 7th. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
ISBN: 0-521-64222-1.
[35]
“SP8T, 50 to 1000 MHz, 20 W Switch Design”. In: Microwave Journal (Sept. 2013).
Accessed via uploaded PDF. URL: https://www.microwavejournal.com/articles/
print/20369-sp8t-50-to-1000-mhz-20-w-switch-design.
80
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:89==
[36]
Microsemi Corporation. The PIN Diode Circuit Designer’s Handbook. Application
Note. Microsemi Corporation. 2015. URL: https://www.microsemi.com/document-
portal/doc_view/130765-pin-diode-circuit-designer-s-handbook.
[37]
MACOM Technology Solutions. AG312: Application Note for the Design of PIN
Diode Switches. Tech. rep. Application Note, Version 3. MACOM Technology Solu-
tions. URL: https://cdn.macom.com/applicationnotes/AG312.pdf.
[38]
CST Studio Suite – High Frequency Simulation. Accessed: 2025-06. Dassault Sys-
tèmes. 2024.
[39]
Keyur K. Mistry et al. “Time and Frequency Domain Simulation, Measurement and
Optimization of Log￿Periodic Antennas”. In: Wireless Personal Communications
107.8 (2019), pp. 771–783.
[40]
Litovsky et al. “Synthesis of a Radiator in the Frequency Range of 0.9…5.8 GHz”. In:
Journal of the Russian Universities. Radioelectronics 22.4 (2019). Available under
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License, pp. 45–52. DOI: 10.32603/1993-8985-
2019-22-4-45-52.
[41]
Ya-Wei Wang et al. “Conformal corrugated edges for Vivaldi antenna to obtain im-
proved low-frequency characteristics”. In: Progress In Electromagnetics Research
C 60 (2015), pp. 75–81.
[42]
AGC Inc. TLY-5 Technical Datasheet. https://www.agc- multimaterial.com/agc-
downloads/AGC_TLY-5_TDS.pdf. Accessed 2025-06-11. 2024.
[43]
MACOM Technology Solutions. MA4SPS402: Silicon PIN Diode Data Sheet. https:
//cdn.macom.com/datasheets/MA4SPS402.pdf. Accessed: 2025-06-06.
[44]
Bernd Schuppert. “Micros trip / Slotline Transitions : Modeling and Experimental
Investigation”. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECH-
NIQUES 36.8 (1988), pp. 1272–1282.
[45]
Andre Vigano. “Simulation of an SP8T 18 GHz RF Switch Using SMT PIN Diodes”.
Master’s Thesis. MA thesis. California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo,
Dec. 2020.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
81
==PAGE:90==
82
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:91==
A
Theory and Methods
Figure A.1: The magnitude of the circular array pattern for two active directive elements
expressed in Eq 3.3.
Figure A.2: TSA design from Ref. [40].
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
83
==PAGE:92==
A.1
Simulation Port Setup
(a)
(b)
Figure A.3: Pictures of the Waveguide port (a) at the start of the microstrip feed balun for
a TSA and the Discrete port (b) of one of the TSA elements of the Horizontally polarized
circular array.
Figure A.4: Screen shot of the ”Calculate Port Extension Coefficient” macro
84
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:93==
B
Simulations
B.1
Template Design
Before developing the horizontally and vertically polarized antenna elements individually,
a series of preliminary simulations are conducted to understand how key geometric pa-
rameters affect performance. The goal is to identify a template configuration that ensures
wideband impedance matching and directional gain, which will later be tailored to each
polarization type. The parameter sweeps in this section investigate the influence of the
element’s length-to-width ratio, overall size, and taper rate. Additionally, the balun config-
uration is evaluated to provide efficient signal transition from the microstrip to the slotline
over a wide frequency range.
Initial Dimensions
Initial simulations are carried out to explore how fundamental geometric parameters influ-
ence the antenna behavior. These simulations evaluate how variations in the length-to-
width ratio, physical size, and taper rate affect impedance matching and radiation perfor-
mance across the target frequency band. The aim is to identify a compact yet efficient con-
figuration that balances bandwidth, gain, and beamwidth prior to further element-specific
modifications.
Length to Width Ratio
The first sweep is conducted to explore the effect of the ratio of overall element length
to the element width. It is conducted at W = 200 mm, adjusting Ltaper so that
L
W =
[1.2, 1.0, 0.8], and r is adjusted so that the tapering ends up in the outer corners of the
element.
The initial point of impedance matching shown in Figure B.1a moves with a shorter ele-
ment having its matching point at higher frequencies. This is likely due to the surface area
for low-frequency radiation becoming lower when the element becomes shorter. After the
initial matching, the S11 parameter ripples across at the same values for all sweeps. The
gain in Figure B.1b has larger variations, as expected. The longer elements have better
gain, as advised in [23]. The notable drop in high-frequency gain, rather than flat-lining
as seen from 3 GHz for the 0.8-element, is not due to the shorter directing area but rather
destructive phase interference that happens to be significant at this specific configuration.
This problem can be addressed by adding a dielectric lens that corrects the phase, which
is explored in Refs. [40] and [30]. However, the longer 1.2-configuration is preferred, as
it also significantly improves the gain at lower frequencies and has a stable high gain at
higher frequencies.
Size Scaling
The second parameter sweep is conducted in the 1.2-configuration where the width is
adjusted to W = [200, 180, 160] mm, and Ltaper and r are adjusted to maintain the ratio
and let the tapering end at the outer corners.
The S11 in Figure B.2a shows a general trend of better matching and a lower frequency ini-
tial matching point for larger element sizes. The gain in Figure B.2b is generally better for
the larger elements, as expected and discussed in Section 2.3 regarding larger elements
being better directors for the radiated wave. Based on this second parameter sweep,
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
85
==PAGE:94==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.1: Parameter sweep for different ratios of element length to width, showing |S11|
(a), and maximum gain in the E-plane (b).
W = 200 mm proves to be ideal, but W = 180 mm also results in good performance and,
combined with the smaller size, makes it the preferred configuration.
Taper Rate
Lastly, a parameter sweep was done to explore the effect of having a narrow or wide
opening. This is done by adjusting the taper rate r, with the upper and lower taper rates
based upon the Wmax interval discussed in Section 3.4.
Figure B.3a shows that the taper rate of r = 0.0265 provides an overall better S11 with
significantly lower ripples at higher frequencies. This indicates a sweet spot around this
value, which can be further tuned for each of the two types of elements. The gain in
Figure B.3b shows that a narrow opening results in low gain for certain frequency intervals,
which again is likely a result of destructive phase interference. Again, r = 0.0265 gives
good results with a stable gain high for 2 GHz and higher. There still remains the challenge
of improving the gain for the elements for f < 2 GHz; this will be addressed in the specific
designs per element type. The S11 will be further tuned when adjusting the feed balun.
86
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:95==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.2: Parameter sweep for different ratios of element sizes with the length-to-width
ratio of 1.2, showing |S11| (a), and maximum gain in the E-plane (b).
Feed Balun
The TSA element is fed by a balun that feeds the signal from a microstrip path on the
backside of the print to the waveguide in the frontal conducting layer. The signal is trans-
ferred through the substrate to the frontal conducting layer by means of coupling [44]. The
balun is typically either a quarter-wave stub or some form of a radial stub that provides
a greater wideband shorting. The quarter-wave stub reinforces the transfer of a signal
by redirecting the signal back to the point of transfer with a full wavelength, causing con-
structive interference.1 However, this stub is typically narrowband. Radial stubs are a
better alternative, as they provide a response with multiple reflective lengths that are bet-
ter suited for a wider frequency range. Extending this concept, a radial stub would then
provide an even wider bandwidth. The use of a circular balun together with a circular cav-
ity in the waveguide was calculated and measured in [44], a figure from which is shown
in Figure B.4.2
The dual circular shapes shown in Figure B.4b show a low reflection coefficient over a wide
frequency range. It was therefore selected for the balun configuration. A spatial trade-off
from the double radial shapes is that the microstrip line has to be extended slightly forward
to avoid the balun overlapping into the cavity, which could provide a secondary point of
transfer. However, this increase in balun length is largely irrelevant, as the waveguide
1From the perspective of the transfer point, the signal will propagate λ
4 , be reflected with a λ
2 , and propa-
gate back λ
4 —with a total change of phase by λ.
2The figure shown is Figure 18 in [44].
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
87
==PAGE:96==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.3: Parameter sweep for different taper rates, showing |S11| (a), and maximum
gain in the E-plane (b).
width is effectively constant at and around the point of transfer, allowing the balun length
to be extended without increasing the length of the TSA element.
The TSA element should be fed from the rear of the element, as this will be the shortest
path to the feed balun when the elements are oriented outward. The balun microstrip lines,
which are normal to the waveguide, will therefore have to turn 90◦to be accessed from
the rear. The corner is mitered to maintain the impedance. This results in the microstrip
line running to the back of the element, 35 mm from the center line of the element. The
feed balun and the microstrip are shown in Figure 4.11; it is a picture of the backside of
the H-pol element prototype.
88
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:97==
Figure B.4: Transmission coefficient for two microstrip/slotline transitions, connected by
a slotline of length Ls = 15 mm. The theoretical (—) and experimental (∆) results. (b)
Microstrip short with virtual circular dm = 5 mm, and open circular ds = 6 mm [44].
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
89
==PAGE:98==
B.2
Horizontal Polarized Element
(a)
(b)
Figure B.5: Current density for the triangular element without (a) and with (b) corrugated
edges.
90
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:99==
B.3
Vertical Polarized Element
(a)
(b)
Figure B.6: Simulations of several approaches for reducing ϵr for the V-pol element, show-
ing S11 (a) and key radiation parameters (b).
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
91
==PAGE:100==
B.4
Array Simulation
Figure B.7: Simulated gain at 0 and ±22.5◦for H-pol array.
Figure B.8: Simulated gain at 0 and ±22.5◦for V-pol array.
92
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:101==
B.5
Refined Simulation Model Including Feed Network
The array simulation model was refined to include an approximate representation of the
ground plane of the feed network at the center of the arrays, in order to address inconsis-
tencies between the simulated and measured gain patterns. The difference between the
simulations with and without the feed network’s ground plane for both polarizations (H-Pol
in Figure B.9 and V-Pol in Figure B.10) is small and does not contribute to reducing the
discrepancy between measurements and simulation.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
93
==PAGE:102==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.9: Measured and simulated gain (a) and HPBW (b) for the H-pol array with and
without the ground plane feed network added to the simulation model.
94
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:103==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.10: Measured and simulated gain (a) and HPBW (b) for the V-pol array with and
without the ground plane feed network added to the simulation model.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
95
==PAGE:104==
C
Feed Network
Figure C.1: SP8T network taken from Ref. [45]. Specifically showing the junction being
split up into two 4-way junctions.
96
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:105==
Parameter
Data Sheet
Tuned
Unit
Is
0.01
0.01
pF
Bv
100
100
V
Rs
0.1
0.1
Ω
Rp
0.02
500
MΩ
Repi
-
10
kΩ
W
-
39.8
µm
Wd
-
1.0
µm
Tau
0.2
0.2
s
Rho
-
10
Cj
0.06
0.06
pF
Vj
0.7
0.7
V
M
0.5
0.5
Fc
0.5
0.75
Ffe
1.0
1.0
Cpack
-
0.034
pF
Imax
1.0
1.0
MA
Table C.1: PIN diode model parameters used in simulation. Parameters are listed in the
same order as for the ADS component.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
97
==PAGE:106==
(a) Test circuit in reverse bias for the PIN diode.
(b) Test circuit in forward bias for the PIN diode.
Figure C.2: Screenshot from ADS showing the test circuits for testing and tuning the PIN
Diode model based upon the data sheet values provided Table C.1.
98
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:107==
D
Measurements
D.1
Horizontal Polarized Array
Figure D.1: Measured S11 at the SMA port in the feed array for all H-pol elements
Figure D.2: Measured S11 at the SMA port in the feed array for all V-pol elements
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
99
==PAGE:108==
Figure D.3: Measured S11 at the SMA port for 1 active and 2 active configurations with
-10 V and 0 V reverse bias.
100
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:109==
Figure D.4: Measured S21 from the coax cable extended from the feed networks of the
two arrays when in MIMO configuration.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
101
==PAGE:110==
E
Testing Setup
E.1
Measurement Setup
Figure E.1: H-elements pointing into absorber when measuring S11.
102
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:111==
(a)
(b)
Figure E.2: Pictures of the H-Pol (a) and V-pol (b) elements mounted for gain measure-
ment. Note that the mast is not in ”remeasuring” position.
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
103
==PAGE:112==
(a)
(b)
Figure E.3: Pictures of the H-Pol (a) and V-pol (b) arrays mounted for gain measurement.
Note that the mast is not in ”remeasuring” position.
104
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:113==
Figure E.4: Measuring antennas used for far-field measurements showing UHF1359P09
on the left and JXTXLB-660 on the right
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
105
==PAGE:114==
(a)
(b)
Figure E.5: Pictures of the test range showing the mast (a) where the AUT is mounted
(Port 2), and the point of view from the measuring antennas (Port 1).
106
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:115==
E.2
Measurement Interference
Figure E.6: Picture showing an interfering 5G NR base station
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
107
==PAGE:116==
Figure E.7: Picture showing an the measured interference from the base station in Figure
E.6.
108
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
==PAGE:117==
Wideband Reconfigurable Antenna with 360° Beam Steering for Vehicular Applications
109
==PAGE:118==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl, Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk/
