==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Disbonds in Curved Sandwich Panels for Aviation Subjected to
Pressure Loads
Authors:
Christian Casarotto (s223302)
Supervisors:
Prof. Carl Christian Berggreen
(cber@dtu.dk)
Dr. Edgar Arturo Gomez Meisel
(eagme@dtu.dk)
Ralf Hilgers
(ralf.hilgers@airbus.com)
June 1, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Abstract
1
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Sandwich Panels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Disbond Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.2
Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Fracture Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Problem Statement and Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Parametric Baseline Numerical Model
12
3
Fracture Parameter Evaluation Methods
23
3.1
VCCT Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
VCCT: Basic Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
VCCT: Abaqus Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1.3
VCCT: Mesh Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
CSDE Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.1
CSDE: Basic Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.2
CSDE: Implementation for Curved Crack Flanks . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.3
CSDE: Extrapolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3
J-integral Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.1
J-integral: Basic Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.2
J-integral: Abaqus Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.3
J-integral: Sensitivity and Path Independency . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Curvature Study
44
4.1
Curvature Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.1
Load Type Influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.2
Model Specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Mesh Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.1
Global Mesh Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.2
Crack Tip Mesh Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Curvature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Instability Study
56
5.1
Instability Introduction and Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Preliminary Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2.1
Instability and Curvature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2.2
Instability and Disbond Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
Airbus Radome Case Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
==PAGE:3==
Contents
6
Conclusions
77
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
References
IV
Appendix
VIII
A Mode Mixity Parameters
VIII
B Fracture Mechanics Testing
VIII
C Auxiliary CSDE Parameters
IX
D Crack Propagation with VCCT
IX
E VCCT Model, ERR Result Visualization
XI
F Instability Plots, Preliminary Study, section 5.2.1:
XII
G Instability Plots, Preliminary Study, section 5.2.2:
XVII
H Instability Plots, Radome Case Study, section 5.3:
XXII
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
Sandwich panels are widely used in aircraft structures due to their excellent strength-
to-weight ratio and versatility. However, face-sheet-to-core disbonds coupled with pressure
cycles and other operational loads pose a risk to structural integrity. While most existing
studies focus on flat panels with circular disbonds, many real aircraft components, such as
radomes, feature curved geometries, which are less explored in the literature.
The exploratory study presented in this thesis aims to investigate the influence of curva-
ture and disbond size on fracture parameters, specifically the energy release rate (ERR) and
mode mixity, in curved sandwich panels subjected to pressure loading. An additional focus
of this study is the occurrence of snap-through buckling instability, and its relation with
panel curvature and disbond size. A case study of a real radome structure is also presented.
A fully numerical approach was adopted, employing Finite Element Analysis via Abaqus
with a parametric Python scripting framework to enable flexible, automated modeling of
curved panels. A dedicated finite element tool was developed within the study to support
this process.
Three fracture mechanics methods were compared: Virtual Crack Closure
Technique, J-integral, and Crack Surface Displacement Extrapolation.
Key findings suggest that panel curvature has minimal effect on the overall ERR, which
remains nearly constant across tested curvature radii. However, curvature appears to in-
fluence mode mixity, potentially increasing the mode II contribution. The differences with
prior studies are believed to stem mainly from the loading conditions used, highlighting the
importance of isolating curvature effects through appropriate load cases.
Instability analyses reveal that highly curved panels require significantly higher pres-
sure to buckle, often coinciding with elevated ERRs that may promote crack propagation.
Conversely, flatter panels buckle at lower pressures with reduced ERR peaks, suggesting
instability may precede crack growth.
Furthermore, disbond size critically affects instability pressure and ERR trends: longer
cracks are more likely to propagate before buckling and may promote crack closure post-
buckling, potentially arresting growth, while shorter cracks tend to buckle earlier and exhibit
post-buckling geometries that encourage crack growth.
The developed finite element tool represents a substantial contribution, offering a flexible
and robust instrument for future study of curved sandwich structures and their instability.
Overall, the findings offer promising insights into the effects of curvature, disbond size,
and instability occurrence. Further experimental validation and extensions to include fatigue
loading and crack propagation would enhance the study’s impact.
Page 1 of 79
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Composite materials are widely used in aeronautics for numerous well established appli-
cations. The reason for their success in aviation and other weight critical forms of transporta-
tion is found in the excellent strength-to-mass ratio. In commercial aviation particularly,
weight has a major role in the operational cost of the aircraft due to its relation with fuel
consumption, and therefore material optimization is a fundamental aspect in aircraft design.
1.1
Sandwich Panels
Within weight optimization of structures, the interest is to maximize the stiffness-to-
weight ratio of the component. To achieve this goal, for a given material, the solutions often
consist of optimizing the material distribution, tailoring it to the scope of its application.
A great example is the classic H-Beam, constituted of a slender web and two thick flanges.
Considering for example a 100x100x6x10 beam, its moment of inertia I with respect to the
strong axes is 8.4 times higher than the equivalent I of the simple square beam, with equal
cross sectional area. This difference is due to the better distribution of the material, moved
far away from the bending axes to enhance the transfer theorem contribution to inertia.
In the field of composites, the same material distribution optimization principle is used
in sandwich materials to achieve the highest stiffness-to-weight ratio. A structural sandwich
is a type of laminated composite made by bonding together different materials in a way
that leverages the unique properties of each component, to enhance the overall structural
performance of the assembly. These sandwiches are widely used in the marine, structural
and aerospace applications, usually in the form of thick panels. These not only offer high
strength-to-weight ratio, but excellent thermal and acoustic insulation properties.
The first appearance of these materials in aeronautics is usually associated with the
British De Havilland Mosquito aircraft [1]. The peculiarity of this second World War aircraft
is the use of balsa wood core sandwiched between layers of plywood for the fuselage and
wings, as a replacement of aluminum. In modern aviation, sandwich materials are widely
used in control surfaces, radomes, and for small aircrafts also fuselage and wings. Figure 1
is an example of honeycomb sandwich material in a commercial aircraft flap.
The simplest and most efficient sandwich material is constituted by two high resistance
layers, referred to as face sheets, connected by a lighter and thicker layer, named core. The
Figure 1: Cross section of a 747 fore flap. Source: [2]
Page 2 of 79
==PAGE:6==
1.1
Sandwich Panels
Figure 2: Sandwich panel cross section nomenclature. Source: [3]
face sheets, often made of materials such as aluminum, fiberglass or carbon fiber, are meant
to provide the panel with its strength and resistance to bending. The core material, typically
foam or honeycomb, maintains the face sheets at a fixed distance, distributes loads, and deals
with the shear loads applied to the panel.
In figure 2 a sandwich cross section is represented, with subscript c referring to core and
f to face sheets. d represents the face sheets distance, t the thickness. E and G young and
shear modulus. Equation 1.1 describes the stiffness of the sandwich from figure 2. I is the
layer’s moment of inertia. The stiffness D is given by three elements: stiffness of the face
sheets (2Df), the associated transport theorem (Do) and stiffness of the core (Dc). Due to
the face sheet high density, their thickness tf must be small. The core on the other hand
must have low density, and therefore will have low young modulus Ec. This configuration
is referred to as "weak core and thin face sheets", and it correspond to the most optimized
sandwich configuration.
D =
X
EiIi = Eft3
f
6
+ Eftfd2
2
+ Ect3
c
12 = 2Df + D0 + Dc
(1.1)
One realistic example of configuration is with 2 mm-thick aluminum face sheets and 1 in.-
thick honeycomb aluminum core. Inputting the material properties, the obtained stiffness
in this case is 2Df = 1.9 · 105 Nmm2, Do = 5.5 · 107 Nmm2 and Dc = 5.5 · 105 Nmm2.
This highlights how dominant the transport term contribution Do is in the overall stiffness,
and therefore the core thickness as major contributor to d. With this concept in mind it is
easy to understand the importance of face sheets to core bonding, as it allows to transmit
stresses and construct the sandwich itself. Eventual loss of bonding, would imply the loss of
Do term, and therefore drastic loss of structural stiffness.
1.1.1
Disbond Failure
Sandwich components present a series of complications that do not affect traditional
materials. This is especially the case considering their failure modes, which are more complex
and difficult to characterize. These include:
• Face fracture: simple failure of the face sheets due to excessive loads
Page 3 of 79
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Sandwich Panels
• Core fracture: usually failure by shear, especially in foam cores where usually the crack
has a characteristic 45° slope
• Global buckling: buckling of the whole sandwich structure. Can only happen in pure
compression and quite unusual for sandwich structures
• Wrinkling: localized type of face sheet buckling due to compression stresses, it can
potentially bring to failure of the face sheet
• Face dimpling: localized face sheet buckling only relevant for honeycomb structures.
Here the core is strong and buckling only occurs in between the cells
• Shear crimping: borderline case of general buckling combined with core shear failure
• Local indentation: localized collapse due to sudden impact
• Disbond: loss of face-sheet-to-core bonding, with consequent reduction of mechanical
properties and likely collapse
As from subchapter 1.1 the loss of face-sheet-to-core bonding (Do) involves drastic strength
fall, hence making disbonds critical in aircrafts. An important example is the 2015 Airbus
A310 rudder failure, in figure 3, which brought to the in-flight component loss [4].
Figure 3: Airbus A310-300 rudder failure. Source: [4]
As described by L. Carlsson [5], fracture is not necessarily limited to the actual bonding
between face sheet and core: the crack often propagates in the core material, right below
the adhesive layer. This is due to the presence of a resin reinforced core layer, caused by
adhesive penetration during manufacturing [6]. This is especially the case in honeycombs.
In sandwich panels for aviation, core and face sheets are usually bonded with adhesive.
Weights, vacuum bag and autoclave can be employed to obtain a higher bonding quality. The
adhesive is usually epoxy or PUR [7]. These manufacturing process have evolved through
the years but they are not exempt from defects, especially when the panel geometries are
curved and therefore geometric mismatch are a potential threat.
Disbond defects may originate from manufacturing flaws or from minor impacts during
Page 4 of 79
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Sandwich Panels
maintenance, such as tools being dropped, or during operation, for example due to bird
strikes. These defects can vary in size and shape and may grow over time, mainly as a result
of fatigue loads caused by maneuvers and Ground Air Ground (GAG) pressure cycles. The
nature and effects of these loads are discussed in subchapter 1.1.2.
1.1.2
Loads
In operation, aircraft structures experience a range of loading conditions, with maneu-
vering and cabin pressurization loads being among the most significant for disbond growth.
If a critical sandwich disbond dimension is reached, loss of mechanical properties might bring
to local collapse. At the sandwich panel level, pressurization cycles are especially relevant
when honeycomb cores are employed. This is due to the air trapped in the honeycomb cells,
which will remain at ground pressure while the aircraft changes altitude. These pressure
cycles are referred to as Ground Air Ground cycles (GAG).
Considering a normal flight altitude of 40000 ft (12192 m), the outer pressure will
roughly be five times lower than the atmospheric ground pressure. Also temperature de-
creases to -56 °C. This pressure and temperature difference induces loads on the face-sheet-
to-core interface. As from figure 4, the air trapped inside the honeycomb cells will be at
atmospheric pressure. When the external pressure decreases during flight the honeycomb is
consequentially pressurized, and as from figure 4 this acts as distributed pressure load on
the inner side of the face sheets, fostering disbond growth.
Figure 4: GAG-Cycle effect
Other than pressurization, aircraft maneuvering loads result in multi-axial in-plane
stress state on the panels. At the disbond level, the most critical of these are the compression
stresses, which can result in buckling of the disbonded face sheet portion, undermining the
face-sheet-to-core bonding integrity.
In sandwich panels, honeycomb pressurization issues can be mitigated by equalizing
internal and external pressures, often by perforating the face sheets to allow air exchange
with the core. This method is commonly used in aerospace applications, where rapid alti-
tude changes amplify the Ground-Air pressure effect. However, it is unsuitable for aircraft
Page 5 of 79
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Fracture Mechanics
manufacturing due to the need for long-term durability. Moisture ingress and contamination
of the honeycomb core must be avoided, as humidity can freeze at high altitudes, expanding
in volume and potentially compromising panel integrity.
1.2
Fracture Mechanics
To analyze disbonds in sandwich structures, an understanding of fracture mechanics is
essential. In this thesis, the focus is on linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM), which is
appropriate for brittle materials such as fiber-reinforced polymers and adhesive interfaces
commonly used in aerospace sandwich panels. LEFM assumes that materials behave elasti-
cally up to failure, with no significant plastic deformation at the crack tip.
Energy Release Rate
The concept of the Energy Release Rate (ERR or G), is central to LEFM. It quantifies
the amount of energy available for crack growth per unit of newly created crack surface area.
For a crack to propagate, the available energy must exceed the material’s fracture toughness
Gc, which is a property of the material:
G ≥Gc
(1.2)
The ERR can be expressed as the change in potential energy Π with respect to crack area
A [8]. For example, in a specimen with width b and crack length a, the ERR is:
G = −1
b
dΠ
da
(1.3)
When G equals or exceeds Gc, the crack will advance.
This energetic approach enables
analysis of crack propagation under various loading and geometric conditions.
Mode Mixity
Fracture can occur in different modes depending on the loading and crack configuration:
• Mode I: Opening (tensile) mode
• Mode II: Sliding (in-plane shear) mode
• Mode III: Tearing (out-of-plane shear) mode
Each of these modes is associated with a respective ERR (GI, GII, GIII) and stress
intensity factor (KI, KII, KIII), [8].
In sandwich structures, especially at the interface between dissimilar materials (e.g., face
sheet and core), cracks often experience a combination of mode I and mode II loading,
known as mixed-mode loading.
The mode mixity, indicated by the angle ψ, measures the relative amount of mode II
loading compared to mode I at the crack tip. It can therefore be expressed as a ratio between
Page 6 of 79
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Fracture Mechanics
the two ERRs, equation 1.4. Here phase angle ψ = 0° corresponds to pure mode I loading
and ψ = ±90° corresponds to pure mode II.
ψ = tan−1
 r
GII
GI
!
(1.4)
Mode mixity is critical in fracture mechanics, as the effective toughness of an inter-
face depends on the mode of loading. This is especially important for dissimilar material
interfaces, where the crack path and propagation resistance vary significantly with ψ.
Interface Cracks and Bi-Material Effects
In homogeneous linear elastic materials, cracks tend to propagate under pure mode I
loading, kinking toward the direction perpendicular to the principal stress even if the far-
field loading differs [9]. However, for interface cracks between dissimilar materials, as in this
study, pure mode I is rarely achieved due to geometrical and material constraints.
In layered orthotropic or composite materials, calculating the stress intensity factors
KI and KII becomes complex [10, 11], particularly due to features like fiber tips or matrix
porosity. Even under pure mode I loading, material mismatches in stiffness, shear modulus,
and Poisson’s ratio result in mixed mode conditions. Avoiding direct use of KI and KII, the
full expression for ψ based on displacement fields is given by [12]:
ψ = tan−1
δ1
δ2

−γ ln
x
h

+ tan−1(2γ)
(1.5)
Here, x is the distance behind the crack tip used to evaluate displacements δ1 and δ2, and
h is a characteristic length (typically the face sheet thickness). The oscillatory parameter γ
and bi-material parameter β are defined in Appendix A, along with shear correction factors
ki and their dependence on Poisson’s ratio νi (Equations A.22-A.24).
As ψ diverges near the crack tip due to singularity issues [13], a simplified form is often used
by assuming β = 0 and γ = 0:
ψ = tan−1
δ1
δ2

(1.6)
This reduced form allows practical estimation of mode mixity from displacement fields alone.
Fracture Toughness
Fracture toughness (Gc or Γ) quantifies a material’s resistance to crack propagation. As
previously mentioned, it is a measurable property, and in layered materials, it depends on
both the constituent materials and their interface characteristics [10]. Importantly, Gc is a
function of the mode mixity ψ.
Several standardized tests exist to determine Gc at varying degrees of mode mixity; these
are detailed in Appendix B.
Experimental studies show that fracture toughness tends to increase with the phase angle ψ,
indicating that materials exhibit greater resistance under mode II dominated loading [12].
Page 7 of 79
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Problem Statement and Goals
1.3
Problem Statement and Goals
Following the introduction of sandwich materials, face-sheet-to-core disbonds and the
relevant fracture mechanics concepts in chapters 1.1 and 1.2, the objective of this study can
now be clearly stated.
The current certification requirements (FAA/EASA) towards the existence of disbonds
is a no-growth approach, which implies that every identified disbond in a sandwich panel
must be assessed before operation of the aircraft. This is stated for example in the EASA
advisory circular CM-S-010 [14]. This requirement can naturally lead to maintenance related
delays, resulting in aircraft downtime and increased operational costs.
In recent years, studies have been carried out to quantify the criticality of these disbonds,
and the influence of material properties and loading conditions on the energy release rate
and fracture mode-mixity. These studies mostly focus on flat sandwich panels with circular
disbonds, despite many aircraft structures being largely composed of curved panels. The
flat configuration is the standard case studied, and the majority of available work focuses
exclusively on this geometry. Chapter 1.4 gives an overview of the available literature on
disbonds in curved structures.
The aim of this thesis is to conduct an explorative study on the influence of curvature
and disbond size on energy release rate and mode mixity at the crack front in curved sandwich
panels. The considered load on the panels is the pressure resulting from ground-air pressure
cycles described in section 1.1.2.
Part of the explorative work focuses on instability phenomena such as snap-through
buckling, and the influence of curvature and disbond size on the critical pressure.
A Finite Element Analysis (FEA) tool is developed as part of this thesis. This could
serve as basis for refined damage assessment tools for curved disbonds, aiming at improving
aircrafts safety and reducing maintenance cost.
More in detail, the goals of this study are listed below:
• Study the influence of panel curvature on the energy release rate and mode-mixity at
the disbond front.
• Compare the energy release rate and mode-mixity results obtained from various frac-
ture mechanics methods from the literature.
• Study of instability phenomena in curved sandwich panels under pressure loads and
their connection with disbond size.
• Develop a flexible finite element tool able to analyze disbond damages in curved sand-
wich panels.
• Use the developed tool to analyze a case study involving a radome structure with
face/core disbonding. This applied case, provided by Airbus Operations, focuses on a
disbonded radome structure in a large commercial passenger aircraft.
Throughout the entire study, the panel curvature is assumed to be a simple circular form.
Recommendations for extending the research to more complex curvatures are provided.
Page 8 of 79
==PAGE:12==
1.4
Literature Review
1.4
Literature Review
This chapter introduces the current state of the art work available in the literature. An
overview of the current work on the subject is essential for identifying research gaps, which
this thesis aims to address.
As anticipated in section 1.3, limited resources have been published on curved sandwich
panels and disbond propagation in curved geometries. A comprehensive literature research
was carried out using keywords as: curved sandwich panels, curvature influence, disbond
propagation, fracture toughness in curved geometries, GAG pressure cycles, damage toler-
ance, buckling in curved sandwiches, post buckling behavior in curved sandwiches. Used
search engines include google scholar, ScienceDirect and SpringerLink.
As a general outcome many of the papers found focus on Finite Element (FE) solutions,
with limited studies being backed up by experimental work. Also, a large portion of the
research in the field of curved sandwich panels has been carried out by NASA, of which
several papers are cited below.
At DTU studies on the subject have been carried out by Moslemian, R. et al. [15]. In
this work, single curvature panels (non radome-like) with pre-made disbonds were analyzed
in compression, both using FEA methods and experimentally. Crack growth was monitored
with Digital Image Correlation (DIC) for the sandwiches, which were composed of Glass
Fiber Reinforced Polymer (GFRP) face sheets and foam core. The ERR is calculated at dif-
ferent points around the circular disbond front, and valuable insights are found on curvature
influence and needed additional research.
Valuable insights are found by William M. Ko. [16]. This FEA based work focuses on single
curved panels, with steel face sheets and honeycomb core, but the focus is on temperature
difference effects on material for hypersonic aircrafts. The aim here was to find the open
mode stress (mode-I) and its critical peak in the panel, without presence of disbond. Differ-
ent types of supports and curvature radii are considered.
One of the most relevant publications for this thesis is the paper from Zhi M. Chen et al.
[17]. A FEA model is created to analyze the disbond effects on both flat and single curved
sandwich panels, with composite face sheets and honeycomb core. GAG pressure cycles are
simulated, and the Virtual Crack Closure Technique (VCCT) is used in post processing to
evaluate the ERR.
It is found that ERR values along the disbond front in the single-curved panel were locally
and on average higher than the flat panel case, if subjected to the same load. It is stated
that further analysis with different radii of curvature should be performed to confirm the
outcome.
Reference [18] from Rinker M. et al. offers a similar work to [17] but using flat panels
and without fracture mechanics study involved.
The study by Roderick H. Martin et al. [19] investigates 90° curved composite laminate
joints featuring matrix/interface cracks, providing valuable insights into the effect of initial
crack length. Although the loading condition differs from that of interest in this thesis, being
a point load rather than a distributed pressure, the findings remain relevant.
2D and 3D FEA was employed, estimating ERR with the VCCT technique. The research
Page 9 of 79
==PAGE:13==
1.5
Methodology
primarily focuses on fatigue behavior, analyzing how varying pre-crack lengths influences
crack propagation. Results indicate that the ERR increases with crack length, promoting
unstable crack growth. However, the study provides limited information on curvature effects,
as all specimens shared a similar geometry. Additionally, singularities at the laminate edges
were found, suggesting non-uniform ERR distribution across the specimen width.
A similar work was presented in [20], reaching similar conclusions regarding the increase
of ERR with pre-crack length in curved laminates. It is important to note, however, that
also these results may be influenced by the use of a point load rather than a uniformly
distributed pressure on the crack flanks.
The study by S. K. Parida et al. [21] investigates the influence of curvature on the ERR
using a laminated joint configuration.
The key finding is that both Mode I and Mode II ERRs increase as the radius of curvature
decreases. Therefore, more highly curved geometries exhibit significantly higher ERR values.
The study also observes a corresponding increase in stress levels with increasing curvature,
suggesting a direct correlation between curvature, stress, and ERR.
However, the relevance to the current study may be limited due to the different loading
conditions. It is possible that the observed ERR trends are influenced more by the changing
load path than by curvature alone.
On the buckling and post-buckling front, Evan J. Pineda et al. [22] considers the case
study of a disbonded curved panel with CFRP face sheets and honeycomb core. This is a
FEM based study, with the aim of predicting the buckling load using non linear solvers.
As a final remark, other key references were important for the study. The work by Becker
[23] was consulted for the homogenization of in-plane material properties of honeycomb
cores, as described in chapter 2.
The methodology for the Crack Surface Displacement
Extrapolation (CSDE) technique, discussed in section 3.2, draws extensively from the study
by Berggreen et al. [24]. Furthermore, the loading approach used to isolate curvature effects
in the numerical simulations, outlined in section 4.1, was informed by the work of Bent F.
Sørensen et al. [25].
1.5
Methodology
This study adopts a fully numerical approach, relying on FEA to investigate the behavior
of disbonded curved sandwich structures. No experimental or analytical techniques were
used.
The decision to employ FEA was primarily driven by the exploratory nature of the work
and practical considerations such as time and resource constraints. Experimental validation,
although feasible within the DTU facilities, would have required extensive lab time, custom-
built test equipment, and availability of specially manufactured curved panel specimens.
These requirements were beyond the scope and timeline of a master’s thesis.
Instead, the use of FEA offers a flexible and efficient approach to achieving the objectives
outlined in section 1.3.
Page 10 of 79
==PAGE:14==
1.5
Methodology
The analysis was conducted using Abaqus, a widely used FE commercial software. Im-
portantly, the model was not developed using the Abaqus user interface but was instead
created through the Python scripting interface. This script based approach enables auto-
mated, fully parametric model generation. This is ideal for an iterative study, as it allows
efficient exploration of multiple geometries by modifying just a few lines of code.
Using the scripting-based methodology the model is not a simple static .cae file, but a dy-
namic and reusable codebase, facilitating future modifications and extensions of the study.
MATLAB was also employed, primarily for post processing tasks. Some of the post
processing tools used were pre-existing resources developed at DTU (see chapter 3.2). A
detailed description of the model is provided in chapter 2.
A key aspect of this study is the evaluation of fracture mechanics parameters, partic-
ularly the ERR and mode mixity. Three distinct methodologies were employed to estimate
these parameters: Virtual Crack Closure Technique (VCCT), J-integral, and Crack Surface
Displacement Extrapolation (CSDE) method.
VCCT and the J-integral are both available as standard tools within Abaqus. VCCT
enables the extraction of ERR components in mode I and mode II separately, while the
J-integral only provides the total ERR. The CSDE method, implemented in MATLAB as
an external post-processing tool, complements these methods as it offers the advantage to
compute the phase angle ψ directly.
Each of these methods is well established within computational fracture mechanics and
has been proven effective when coupled with FE. These methods are discussed in further
detail in chapter 3.
Some key assumption are made in this study, particularly concerning material behavior.
All materials are modeled as linear elastic, and no plastic deformation is considered. This
can be a limitation, as especially in regions near the crack tip plasticity may occur under.
Nevertheless, given the exploratory nature of this analysis and the predominantly elastic
behavior of the phenomena studied, the assumption is considered acceptable.
Post-processing of simulation data was carried out using a combination of Python scripts
and Microsoft Excel to generate the plots presented in this document. Additional information
on the specific tools and techniques used for data elaboration is provided in chapter 3.
As anticipated in section 1.4 limited literature is available on curved sandwich structures
with disbonds specifically. The validation of the FE model is therefore inherently limited.
The partial validation is nevertheless described when discussing the curvature simulations
results, in chapter 4.
The primary goal was to investigate general trends and effects related to curvature and
instability, rather than to produce fully validated, predictive models. This is in line with the
exploratory nature of this study.
Page 11 of 79
==PAGE:15==
2
Parametric Baseline Numerical Model
As introduced in section 1.5, this study was conducted using the commercial Finite
Element (FE) software Abaqus.
As stated in section 1.3, one of the main objectives of
this thesis is the development of a flexible FE tool for analyzing disbond damage in curved
sandwich panels. The content presented in this chapter therefore represents a core outcome
of the thesis work.
The FE tool developed for this study is presented hereafter. While it partially serves
as a user manual, its primary purpose is to support the understanding of the analyses and
results discussed in later chapters. The content here is closely integrated with the rest of the
thesis, as subsequent sections will frequently reference the methods and features described
in this chapter.
The model is generated entirely through Abaqus’ scripting interface by executing a
dedicated Python script. This approach bypasses the Abaqus interface, and enables full
parameterization of geometries, materials, loads, and boundary conditions of the model.
The structure of the Python script, which mirrors the organization of the FE model, is
outlined below. Each section is described in detail in this chapter.
1. Controls and Inputs
2. Functions
3. Preliminary Operations
4. Parts Creation
5. Material Definition
6. Step Creation
7. Assembly
8. Mesh Generation
9. Interactions and Constraints
10. Engineering Features
11. Boundary Conditions
12. Loads
13. Output Requests
14. VCCT
15. Job Submission
16. Post-processing
Controls and Inputs
The beginning of the script is used as control panel for the model generation. By default,
a model named BaseModel is generated, but in case a Virtual Crack Closing Technique
(VCCT) analysis is desired, a secondary VCCTmodel (chapter 3.1) is generated as well.
The dimensionality option, either axisymmetric or 2D planar, is selected in this phase.
This corresponds to single and double curvature panel (see Assembly section).
The type of solver, either Newton or Riks, is chosen depending on the type of analysis
desired (simple quasi-static loading or instability).
Page 12 of 79
==PAGE:16==
Flags are presented in this phase to activate job launch, VCCT model creation and post
processing. The type of load is chosen, between the 3 choices presented later in this section.
The model geometry is defined through user input, specified by the following parameters
(with example values provided):
1
# Model geometry
2
r
= 300.0
# [mm] Radius, corresponding to external panel side
3
hc = 25.4
# [mm] Core thickness
4
h1 = 1.0
# [mm] Upper (external) face sheet thickness
5
h2 = 1.0
# [mm] Lower (internal) face sheet thickness
6
a0 = 100.0
# [mm] Pre−crack length
The nomenclature hc, h1 and h2 to define the thickness, r to define external radius of
curvature and a0 to define pre-crack length is used in the whole document.
Pressure loads are generated from gas parameters and ground-flight pressure and tem-
perature, as from the code snippet below. Other specific loads are added in chapter 4.
1
# GA pressurization, fluid cavity or distrivuted pressure
2
Const_gas
= 8.314
# Universal gas constant, R in pV=nRT
3
Mol_weight = 28.9644
# Molecular weight of dry air, n in pV=nRT
4
T0
= 288.15
# Ground air temperature [K] (e.g. 0 ft)
5
T1
= 216.65
# Flight air temperature [K] (e.g. 40000 ft)
6
P0
= 0.1013
# Ground air pressure [MPa] (e.g. 0 ft)
7
P1
= 0.0187
# Flight air pressure [MPa] (e.g. 40000 ft)
8
P_gauge
= P0−P1
# Gauge pressure [MPa] (actual load pressure)
Finally, the mesh parameters are specified at this stage, including the global and crack-
tip element types, overall mesh density, and local refinement near the crack tip.
Miscellaneous inputs include the non linear geometry flag (NLGeoFlag) and contact flag
(ContactFlag). The first controls the inclusion of nonlinear effects of large displacement in
the load step, and the second allows for crack flank contact during deformation.
Lastly, the material properties are provided in this phase, defined with respect to the
material principal coordinate system (1: longitudinal, 2: transverse, 3: through-thickness).
Functions
Several internal functions are implemented within the Python script to automate specific
operations. These include routines for extracting crack flank coordinates, saving and printing
data arrays, and generating mesh bias. While each function is documented within the script,
the most critical among them is the CoordConvert function, which is detailed below:
1
## Function to convert from Cartesian coordinates to 2D cylindrical:
2
def CoordConvert(x_coord, y_coord):
3
RadialDis = r_intc+y_coord
4
angle = (a0+x_coord)/r_intc
5
Coordinates = ((RadialDis*sin(angle),RadialDis*cos(angle),0.0))
6
return Coordinates
Page 13 of 79
==PAGE:17==
This function allows to express point coordinates within the script as equivalent co-
ordinates in a flat panel, where the axes origin (0.0,0.0) is at the crack tip and x, y axes
correspond to longitudinal and through thickness direction. Coordinates are converted to
an equivalent 2D cylindrical coordinate system. rintc corresponds to the radius of curvature
at the core-LFS interface.
If future developments require the geometry to shift from cylindrical to more complex
curved profiles, modifications will likely be confined to this function. The rest of the model
adapts accordingly, maintaining flexibility and minimizing code changes.
Preliminary Operations
Preliminary operations include a series of validation checks to ensure that the input ge-
ometry and loading conditions are consistent and remain within reasonable physical bounds.
Following these checks, all input parameters are exported and stored in a .mat file. This
file serves as a bridge to the external post-processing routines.
Finally, a structured list of Cartesian coordinates is generated. These points represent
the key geometric references of the model, including endpoints of segments and midpoints
critical for defining the panel layout. Beyond geometry creation, these points are essential
throughout the script. For instance in selecting edges during mesh generation and executing
various geometry based operations.
Figure 5 represents the nomenclature used for the definition of each model edge.
5 vertical and 5 horizontal lines are created, indicated by the V and H footnote. These
mark the partitions, dividing the model in segments.
Each line corresponds to a numpy array of coordinates of the segments mid points.
Following this structure, for example, the 4V elements are highlighted in the figure, 4V {0 : 4},
and the 2V {1 : 6} are marked with x in the crack-tip enlarged representation. Index follow
the Python standard, with 0 being the first element. Using this logic, all the model edges
are encoded in numpy arrays, to be referred to in the whole script.
Figure 5 also highlights the final partition fp and pre-crack a0. Lintc is the 1/4 circle
arc length at the core-LFS interface. The crack tip zoom highlights the fine division at the
tip, which is presented later.
Parts Creation
Three parts are created for the model, Core, Upper Face Sheet (UFS) and Lower Face
Sheet (LFS). These are defined based on the coordinates generated in the previous step.
Specifically horizontal line 0 and 3 define the LFS, while 4 and 5 define the UFS in figure 5.
The parts will be assigned a material and connected in the assembly step of the code.
Material Definition
The material properties in the model are defined by their elastic constants, Young
modulus Eij, shear modulus Gij and Poisson ratio νij. No plasticity is included in the study
and therefore in the material properties.
An important note concerns the definition of the material axes. Material properties
Page 14 of 79
==PAGE:18==
h1
h2
hc
1V
0V
5V
4V
3V
2V
0H
1H
2H
3H
4H
5H
hK hK
a0
fP
Lintc - a0 - fP
1V
2V
3V
1H
2H
3H
hK
hNC
tP
(0)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Figure 5: Schematic of model partition nomenclature
are provided as input using the standard orthotropic convention: direction 11 denotes the
longitudinal axis, 22 the transverse (width-wise) axis, and 33 the through-thickness axis.
However, in the FE model, a cylindrical coordinate system is adopted. In this system,
direction 11 corresponds to the tangential (longitudinal) direction, while 22 aligns with
the radial (through-thickness) direction. Consequently, directions 22 and 33 are effectively
interchanged relative to the standard convention. This transformation is handled internally
within Abaqus through the material orientation definition.
Different properties were used for face sheets and core in the various stages of the anal-
ysis. These are collected in table 1.
The isotropic PMI foam core material in table 1, Rohacell HERO 71 [26], was selected
due to its widespread application in the aerospace sector. The term Al-HC refers to an alu-
minum honeycomb core. The asterisk (*) indicates that the otherwise orthotropic behavior
has been approximated as isotropic. The material properties for the aluminum were sourced
from internal DTU databases and correspond to alloy Al-5056-H191. This is a common
choice for aviation applications. The Kevlar honeycomb material in table 1 is the Coremas-
ter CN1 N636 [27], suggested by Airbus for the radome case study of section 5.3.
For the face sheets, isotropic aluminum (shown in column 6 of table 1) is used through-
out most of the study. In contrast, for the radome case study, a Glass Fiber Reinforced
Polymer (GFRP) is utilized. This GFRP material is produced by Isovolta [28].
Page 15 of 79
==PAGE:19==
Table 1: Material properties used in the study
Property
PMI Foam
Al-HC∗
Al-HC
Kevlar HC
Al iso.
GFRP
E11 [MPa]
123.00
400.00
198.31
111.97
7.31·104
1.74·104
E22 [MPa]
123.00
400.00
319.28
167.74
7.31·104
1.74·104
E33 [MPa]
123.00
400.00
399.90
298.00
7.31·104
1.74·104
G12 [MPa]
28.00
149.00
107.59
70.14
2.8·104
2.2·103
G13 [MPa]
28.00
149.00
149.00
59.60
2.8·104
2.2·103
G23 [MPa]
28.00
149.00
77.50
35.98
2.8·104
2.2·103
ν12 [-]
0.330
0.330
0.750
0.815
0.330
0.10
ν13 [-]
0.330
0.330
2.17e-4
2.17e-4
0.330
0.10
ν23 [-]
0.330
0.330
2.17e-4
2.17e-4
0.330
0.10
Due to the explorative nature of the study, material properties are taken as an approxi-
mation and could differ from real materials. Becker homogenization [23] was used to obtain
the in-plane properties of honeycomb materials in table 1.
Step Creation
Within the developed model, two types of steps are available: static-general (with quasi-
Newton solution technique) and static-Riks. An option to add damping is present in the
model, but it was never used within the study.
The static-general step in Abaqus is used to perform quasi-static analyses where inertia
effects are negligible. When using the quasi-Newton solution technique, the solver applies
an implicit integration scheme based on Newton-Raphson iterations, but with certain ap-
proximations that improve convergence behavior for non-linear problems involving contact,
large deformations, or material nonlinearities.
The Riks method on the other hand is a numerical strategy particularly suited for ana-
lyzing geometrically nonlinear collapse behavior in structures, such as snap through buckling.
For this reason it is employed in the instability part of this study, in chapter 5.
The Riks method is a common choice for problems involving non-monotonic load-displacement
responses. In such cases, traditional static analysis methods may fail to capture the complete
response, especially beyond the peak load.
To address this, the modified Riks method can be used to trace the full equilibrium path,
including through the unstable post-buckling regime.
The Riks method treats the load magnitude as an additional unknown, solving simulta-
neously for both displacements and load. To track the progress of the analysis, Abaqus intro-
duces the concept of an arc length, a scalar measure of distance along the load-displacement
path. This enables the solution to proceed through both stable and unstable phases, making
it ideal for capturing snap-through events.
In a Riks analysis, the load Ptot is incremented through a load proportionality factor
λ as from equation 2.7. P0 is an eventual "dead" load from previous steps, with constant
Page 16 of 79
==PAGE:20==
magnitude, and Pref is the reference load declared in the Riks step.
Ptot = P0 + λ(Pref −P0)
(2.7)
The solver incrementally follows the equilibrium path by adjusting both the displacement
field and the load factor λ, ensuring that the structure remains in static equilibrium even as
it passes through points of instability. When setting up the Riks step initial arc length and
expected total arc length are declared; the initial λ is found accordingly.
Assembly
In this section of the Python script the previously created parts are assembled in a
sandwich panel. The resulting 1/4 circle model, representing a circular radome or curved
panel with constant curvature, is in figure 6.
Figure 6: Model geometry, r = 100 mm, a0 = 50 mm, fp = 10 mm
The pre-crack a0 is highlighted in red in figure 6. This is a segment with duplicate nodes
and no bonding between Core and LFS. A final partition fp is introduced on the right side
for future boundary conditions (see 4.1.1).
The crack tip zone is divided in 3 partitions, corresponding to:
• tp, crack tip: innermost region, where nonlinearity and large deformations occur.
• hnc, plastic zone: plasticity dominates the deformation along the crack flanks.
Page 17 of 79
==PAGE:21==
• hk, k-dominated zone: outer region where stresses can be approximated using LEFM
via stress intensity factors K.
These areas correspond to specific refinements of the mesh, and constitute a fundamen-
tal part of the model as most of the stress and strain in the simulations is focused here.
As anticipated the Python script developed in this study supports the generation of two
types of FE models: axisymmetric and 2D-planar.
The axisymmetric model assumes rotational symmetry about the vertical (y) axis, typically
located on the left edge of the geometry, resulting in a dome-like structure. This configura-
tion is particularly suited for simulating aircraft radomes, where the top-left point of the 2D
profile represents the radome vertex.
In contrast, the 2D-planar model represents a flat, two-dimensional (x,y) section of a curved
panel, with symmetry or repetition defined through boundary conditions rather than geom-
etry. While a thickness in the z-direction can be specified, it is often left undefined in this
work, defaulting to a unitary value for simplicity in exploratory analyses.
Mesh Generation
The mesh is divided in global mesh zone and crack tip zone, as from figure 7.
The global mesh size is computed as a fraction of hc, for example hc/20, and is therefore
proportional to the geometry.
The global mesh size is assigned by default to the entire
model. Partitions define the minium element size in the crack tip zone.
Figure 7: Model mesh for r = 100 mm, with crack tip bias
Page 18 of 79
==PAGE:22==
If the refined mesh option is active, as usually is, the crack tip zone is parametrically
meshed based on the number of tp divisions, NumEltp. The divisions of hnc and hk are
in fact given proportionally to NumEltp, just like the number of elements in the diagonals
connecting tp, hnc and hk.
Eventually a bias option can be used at the crack-tip. This ensures a smoother transition
between the three zones, as in figure 7. A double bias is available also for the global mesh,
to reduce the number of elements in large models. The opportune bias is computed with a
custom made function.
The finite element type must be specified for the model. Additionally, a different element
type can be assigned specifically to the crack tip region to improve convergence, typically
by using linear elements in this critical zone. The available element types are listed below,
referring to the 2D planar model; in between brackets is the axisymmetric model equivalent.
1. linear CPE4 (CAX4) or quadratic CPE8 (CAX8).
2. linear CPE4H (CAX4H) or quadratic CPE8H (CAX8H).
3. linear CPE4R (CAX4R) or quadratic CPE8R (CAX8R)
These are continuum elements, for two-dimensional plane problems. For the 2D planar
model plane strain element (PS) are used, as they better describe the situation of a plate
whose thickness (z direction) is ideally infinitely large, causing zero strain. This is intrinsic
to the axisymmetric model.
The nomenclature 4 or 8 indicates the element number of
nodes, respectively first-order (linear) and second-order (quadratic). This refers to the shape
functions associated to the element to describe the displacement, with linear function only
requiring two nodes at each edge and quadratic functions requiring a midpoint node. These
two options differ in precision and computational cost.
The H letter indicates the use of hybrid formulation in the elements. In these special
kind, the weak form of the governing equations is modified to include additional constraints,
such as stress continuity across element. These are particularly useful in situations where
standard displacement-based elements encounter numerical difficulties, for example in high
stress gradients or presence of volumetric locking.
Finally, the letter R in the element name refers to the integration scheme. Full vs.
reduced integration affects accuracy and computational efficiency of the model.
Interactions and Constraints
In the BaseModel, a tie constraint is used to bond UFS and core. A similar tie is applied
between LFS and core, except in the a0 region.
A surface to surface contact is defined between the crack flanks, to avoid interpenetra-
tion. This is defined as frictionless with hard pressure over closure. The VCCT model will
have very different interactions and constrains, as described later.
Page 19 of 79
==PAGE:23==
Engineering Features
For the J-integral ERR extrapolation, a crack engineering feature needs to be defined.
This is done with crack normal defined radially from model origin to crack tip.
This is assigned to the contour integral associated to the J-integral.
Boundary Conditions
If the axisymmetric model is used, no boundary conditions (BC) are needed on the left
hand side due to symmetry. The right hand side of the model is generally pinned, unless
otherwise specified in this document.
For the 2D-planar model the right hand side BC is equivalent. The left side of the panel
is assigned X-symmetry. This involves that the quarter-circle left extremities can move along
y, but not along x. Also rotation around z is blocked. This imposed symmetry corresponds
to have another identical quarter-circle mirrored with respect to the y −z plane.
Loads
The loads described in subchapter 1.1.2 are here simplified and adapted to the model.
Maneuvering loads of the aircraft are neglected, focusing on the pressure loads acting on
the face sheets. The basic types of loads are "Fluid cavity" (FC) pressure and "Distributed
Pressure" (DP) load. Others are specified in the study, see for example section 4.1.1.
The gauge pressure is defined as shown earlier, using pressure and temperature differ-
ence (P0 ,P1, T0, T1), input to the script. If the fluid cavity load is used, also molecular
weight of the gas, gas constant and absolute 0 are needed, to complete the ideal gas law.
The pressure level applied in the study is generally the gauge pressure or its multiplier.
Both fluid cavity and distributed pressure are applied to the "crack surface" set, high-
lighted in figure 6 above. For the fluid cavity, a reference point is defined on the y axis.
The distributed pressure load is simply applied as a ramp. This reflects the internal
pressure of honeycomb core cells, acting on the face sheets, but ignores the coupling effects
between pressure and volume of the disbond. Indeed, with a static Newton analysis the
pressure is applied monotonically, independently of the disbond volume increase. Using a
Riks step, described earlier, the ramp pressure is coupled to the geometrical effects. In this
case, the distributed pressure does not necessarily increase monotonically in the simulation
(see section 5.1).
A more accurate representation of the real loads on the disbond is given by the fluid
cavity load. This offers coupling between pressure and volume of the bulge, through the
ideal gas law PV = nRT.
Differently from a load, the fluid cavity is applied in the model by defining a fluid cavity
interaction, and controlling initial pressure and temperature and final temperature using
predefined fields.
This process is the correct application of FC load, as described by the Abaqus manual [29],
but it only allows to declare initial disbond pressure, while the final pressure will be found
Page 20 of 79
==PAGE:24==
through PV = nRT. As a result, the ground-air pressure cycle is inverted to air-ground,
with initial cavity pressure being the imposed higher one, as the final pressure will be con-
trolled by the ideal gas law. This configuration corresponds to the application of a step
pressure load, where the crack will open entirely at step one, to then close by the ideal gas
law pressure and volume equilibrium in successive increments.
An alternative exists to impose the final cavity pressure as a boundary condition, ob-
taining a ramp pressure increment between imposed boundaries. This solution, as stated
in the manual [29], assumes fluid flow is allowed to or from the cavity: "Prescribing the
pressure at the cavity reference node is equivalent to applying a uniform pressure to the
cavity boundary using a distributed load. The fluid volume is adjusted automatically to fill
the cavity (that is, fluid is assumed to enter and leave the cavity as needed to maintain the
prescribed pressure)". In this case PV = nRT is therefore not respected, and the fluid cavity
becomes equivalent to the monotonically applied distributed pressure described earlier.
With the correct fluid cavity being applied as a step load, it is not possible to conduct
an instability study with fluid cavity. This is because the load at increment 0 would be
already over the instability point, making the simulation fail. As a further note, the fluid
cavity applied correctly by respecting the ideal gas law cannot be used with a Riks step
type. This is because the Riks method is designed for proportional loading scenarios, where
all external loads scale with a single scalar parameter. Using a fluid cavity there is no load
applied to the model, but predefined fields instead. As from chapter 5 using a Riks step is
fundamental for instability studies, therefore making the fluid cavity unsuited for it.
All the different options have been tested within this study, but finally the fluid cavity
could only be applied with a Newton step and below the instability point. As a result, this
option is present in the model, but not used within this study.
Output Requests
Output requests in the Abaqus model include position and displacement of the crack
flanks, position and displacement of the entire Core-LFS interface, pressure on the LFS mesh
elements and volume and pressure of the fluid cavity if this is used.
As described in chapter 3 also FM related variables are requested as output. These are
used directly or in post processing tools to evaluate FM property of the system.
VCCT
The code sections presented so far refer to the creation of the BaseModel, which serves
as the primary model for all simulations conducted in this study. While the BaseModel
supports the evaluation of fracture parameters such as ERR and mode mixity, it does so ex-
clusively through the J-integral method and CSDE method in the dedicated post-processing.
As previously discussed in section 1.5, the Virtual Crack Closure Technique (VCCT)
offers an alternative method for evaluating fracture parameters. However, VCCT requires
a fundamentally different model setup within Abaqus.
To accommodate this, the script
includes an optional VCCT mode, which can be enabled by the user. When activated, it
generates a dedicated secondary model specifically tailored for VCCT analysis.
Page 21 of 79
==PAGE:25==
The key differences between the BaseModel and the VCCT model lie primarily in the
meshing strategy and crack definition. The mesh near the crack tip must be coarser and
more structured (see chapter 3.1), typically using elements of uniform size to ensure accu-
rate energy release rate calculations. Consequently, fewer geometric partitions are required,
although the mesh configuration still reflects that of the BaseModel to maintain consistency
in element sizing and distribution.
Additionally, in the VCCT model, a different crack is defined during the engineering
features stage. This crack, named DebondVCCT, spans the entire core-to-face sheet inter-
face. A corresponding set is created to represent the initially bonded region of the crack
(after a0), which is essential for crack propagation simulations.
Further details regarding the VCCT model implementation can be found in section 3.1.2.
Job Submission
A job is created with the desired name and assigned the desired number of CPU cores.
Eventual homonymous .odb files are closed, and the .cae file is saved. After submitting the
job, the script waits for it to complete before moving to the post-processing.
Post-processing
As part of the post-processing phase, a dedicated Results folder is automatically gener-
ated to store all relevant output data, including plots, .txt, and .mat files. The parameters
extracted from the FE model include:
• Pressure measured on a selected mesh element of the lower face sheet (LFS)
• Energy Release Rate (ERR) computed via the J-integral method,
• Fluid cavity parameters: pressure, volume, and temperature. If a fluid cavity is present
• Relative crack face displacement, computed internally using a custom Python routine
All extracted quantities are compiled into a multidimensional array. A custom Python
function is used to generate and save corresponding plots, which are stored in the Results
folder. In addition, key plots are embedded directly within the Abaqus .odb file for conve-
nient access and visualization.
Finally, the position and displacement of the crack flanks are extracted at each simu-
lation increment. These coordinates are stored in a 3D .mat database, enabling the recon-
struction of the crack opening evolution. This database serves as the input for the Crack
Surface Displacement Extrapolation (CSDE) method, detailed in section 3.2.
In addition, the final coordinates of the entire Core-LFS interface are saved in a .txt file
and plotted in the Results folder. This plot provides a visual representation of the interface
deformation, which is displayed with a user-defined magnification factor to enhance clarity.
If a model using the Virtual Crack Closure Technique (VCCT) is generated, the corre-
sponding ERR in mode I and mode II are also automatically stored in the .odb file.
Page 22 of 79
==PAGE:26==
3
Fracture Parameter Evaluation Methods
This chapter describes the three fracture mechanics methods employed in the numerical
study, Virtual Crack Closure Technique (VCCT) (3.1), Crack Surface Displacement Extrap-
olation (CSDE) (3.2) and J-Integral (3.3). A brief description of the basic principle is given,
followed by details on the implementation in the FEA model and verification.
3.1
VCCT Method
This subchapter discusses the VCCT and its application to bi-material interfaces and
curved structures. The basis for this chapter is taken mainly from two references, namely
the first chapter of the book from P. P. Camanho and S. R. Hallett [30], and the paper on
VCCT from R. Krueger [31].
3.1.1
VCCT: Basic Principle
The VCCT is a well established fracture mechanics method to compute the Energy
Release Rate (ERR) and mode mixity of a cracked interface. It is a LEFM technique which
is well suited for brittle fracture between two rigid materials, under quasi-static loading.
Within this technique, the ERR and its mode is determined explicitly.
The basic principle is that the energy required to extend the crack by ∆a corresponds
to the work required to close the crack to its original configuration. Intuitively, the work
required to close the crack can be computed by multiplying the shear and opening forces at
node i in the closed state (8a) by the shear and opening displacement at node i in the opened
state (8b). Assuming a uniform crack growth, the same result is obtained multiplying shear
and opening forces in node i with shear and opening displacement in node l. This is assuming
that once the crack tip moves from node i to node k the shear and opening displacements
of node i will correspond to the ones of node l when the crack tip was at node i. This also
allows to compute work, and therefore ERR, without crack extension. As shown later this
can be of fundamental importance for the analysis.
Figure 8: Crack before (a) and after (b) crack extension in FE. Source: [30]
.
Page 23 of 79
==PAGE:27==
3.1
VCCT Method
The analysis presented in this document is for a curved panel, so the crack front has
a non-linear geometry. In this and similar cases ([30]) a local coordinate system must be
used to compute forces and displacements, and therefore obtain the ERR. This is presented
in figure 9, where the local (z’,w’) coordinate system is placed at the crack tip and used to
compute forces at node i (F ′
zi,F ′
xi) and displacements at node l (w′
l,u′
l), as from the previously
anticipated assumption.
Figure 9: Crack tip in the transformed coordinate system. Source: [30]
Using this coordinate system, the forces can in general be expressed as from equations 3.8
and 3.9. Here the (⋆) notation indicates displacements of the bottom crack flank.
GI = −1
2∆aF ′
zi(w′
l −w′
l⋆)
(3.8)
GII = −1
2∆aF ′
xi(u′
l −u′
l⋆)
(3.9)
The mode I and mode II energy release rates are determined separately, knowing the
opening and shear forces and displacements respectively.
Equations 3.8 and 3.9 assume
constant mesh size around the crack tip, i.e. every element will have length ∆a. Generally
∆a refers to a finite extension of the crack, but here it is also used as measure for the element
dimension, as the fracture is intended to extend of only one element per increment.
Chapter 1.3.2 of reference [30] shows that if the mesh size is not constant in proximity
of the crack tip, the equivalent forces corresponding to displacements in node l can be found
by integration along the element length. This requires the assumption of a singularity at
the crack tip. For example assuming a 1/√r singularity equations 3.8 and 3.9 become the
following:
Page 24 of 79
==PAGE:28==
3.1
VCCT Method
GI = −1
2∆aFzi(wl −wl⋆)
r
∆a1
∆a2
(3.10)
GII = −1
2∆aFxi(ul −ul⋆)
r
∆a1
∆a2
(3.11)
Here ∆a1 and ∆a2 are the element lengths before and after the crack tip.
The considerations presented so far referred to a two-dimensional quadrilateral element with
linear-shape functions. The Abaqus implemented model used in this study uses either ax-
isymmetric or 2D planar models, but eventually quadrilateral elements with quadratic shape
functions are tested, replacing the linear ones. The same principle described can be applied
to these elements.
Local Fracture Coordinate System
The simplified considerations above refer to a straight crack, eventually with rotated
crack front. The geometry considered in this study adds a further degree of complexity, as
it involves curved or non arbitrary crack fronts.
As seen the definition of fracture mode depends on the considered coordinate system;
with non arbitrary crack fronts the local coordinate system defined in figure 9 is not sufficient,
and a new set of coordinates needs to be defined locally. The most logical choice in this case
is to use a coordinate system based on tangents.
Chapter 1.4.2 of reference [30] gives an example of local coordinate system for arbitrary
curved crack front in a 3D mesh. Here for node i (i,G in figure 10) the secant connecting
node i-1 and i+1 (i,F and i,H in figure 10) defines the local y’ axis, its normal passing
through the node defines the local x’ axes, and the normal to the x’ - y’ plane passing
through the node defines the local z’ axes.
Axes x∗in figure 10 is defined as passing through nodes (l,G) and (k,G). In this study,
the crack front in undeformed shape will be a section of circle, therefore the perpendicular
Figure 10: Example of arbitrary local coordinate system. Source: [30]
Page 25 of 79
==PAGE:29==
3.1
VCCT Method
to the secant (x’) will be also normal to the curve tangent, which defines y’. With this
consideration, in figure 10 x’ would define mode I and y’ would define mode II. In presence
of mesh normality the x∗axes would coincide with x’, meaning that the mesh would follow
the normal to the curved crack front.
As this study considers a semi-circular geometry this is the case in the employed mesh,
as evident in figure 11b. Normality in the mesh is in this study guaranteed by parametrically
assigning a number of divisions to the edges instead of element size, obtaining a mesh that
develops radially, with local x∗axes all meeting at the model origin. If the geometry for the
curved panel was for example a section of ellipsis, normality would not be guaranteed this
easily. For very fine mesh the differences between reference systems are reduced.
Smith and Raju [32] studied the effect of lack of mesh normality in ERR predictions
using VCCT for a through the thickness crack in-plane strain, an embedded elliptic crack,
and a semi-elliptic surface crack.
In case of further developments of the model in more
complex geometries that do not guarantee normality reference [32] should be considered.
The local reference system presented above and in figure 10 is not necessarily the one
implemented in Abaqus. From the user manual it was not feasible to understand what is
the coordinate system used in case of arbitrary crack geometry, but it is important to know
how this is a variable when using VCCT for such cases.
Oscillatory Singularity in Bi-Material Interface
As this study focuses on sandwich materials, which are distinguished by the highly con-
trasting properties of their layers, some further detail on bi-material interfaces is needed. In
addition to the classical square root singularity, bi-material interfaces present an oscillatory
singularity at the crack tip [33]. This has to be considered when ERR is determined with
numerical methods, such as the VCCT.
A case of interface crack between dissimilar materials was studies by I. Raju et al. [34].
He obtained the equations below, to describe the tendency of total ERR (GT) for increas-
ingly fine meshes (∆a →0), in equation 3.14. The same tendency is described for mode
specific ERRs in equations 3.12 and 3.13.
GI = lim
∆a→0 Re

C + D · (∆a)iγ
(3.12)
GII = lim
∆a→0 Re

C −D · (∆a)iγ
(3.13)
GT = GI + GII = lim
∆a→0 Re[2C]
(3.14)
The parameters C and D are complex constants, i = √−1. The parameter γ (A.22) is
function of the Dundurs parameter β, equation A.23 in Appendix A. Note that equation A.22
applies to isotropic materials, while for the case of this study, with orthotropic materials
applied, equation A.22 results in a more complex formulation.
As from equations 3.12 and 3.13, GI and GII depend on element size ∆a, while the total
ERR in equation 3.14 is independent of ∆a and has a defined limit. This will be verified in
the mesh sensitivity analysis of section 3.1.3.
Page 26 of 79
==PAGE:30==
3.1
VCCT Method
3.1.2
VCCT: Abaqus Implementation
Most commercial FE software offer the possibility to conduct VCCT analysis, avoiding
complex post processing tools. In Abaqus a crack must be introduced as one-dimensional
discrete discontinuity. Along the crack front nodes will be duplicate and have equivalent
coordinates when undeformed, so that the crack flanks can deform independently.
To create a VCCT model suited for crack propagation, on the bonded side of the interface
two sets of nodes with identical coordinates must be used. The constrain between these nodes
must be defined accordingly declaring a realistic material’s fracture toughness GC.
If the model is employed only for ERR estimation, and no propagation is desired, the
bonded part of the interface can be defined with common nodes between the two layers.
Alternatively infinite GC at the interface can be assigned, leaving the possibility to study
crack propagation open for future studies. This alternative is used in the developed FE tool.
In Abaqus, the simplified process constitutes of four steps:
• Define contact pairs at the potential crack surface
• Define the portion of the interface to be initially bonded
• Activate the crack propagation capability
• Specify the VCCT criterion
Partitioning and mesh refinements of the model differ from the pre-existing base model,
therefore a partial copy of it was used as base for the VCCT model.
Starting from this copy, a new model with through the thickness partitions was created,
as from figure 11a. This way its possible to assign partition-wise different elements sizes,
reducing its complexity (figure 11b). As from section 3.1.1 constant element sizes around the
crack are preferable, and this element size can be parametrically declared at the beginning
of the script.
Other than the mesh, to perform a VCCT analysis the contact between Lower Face
Sheet and Core must be defined accordingly. A contact pair (interaction) is created between
LFS and core. In the surface assignment the most rigid surface of the couple should be
(a) Vertical model partitioning
(b) Element size at crack tip
Figure 11: VCCT Model, r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm, crack tip size 1 mm
Page 27 of 79
==PAGE:31==
3.1
VCCT Method
declared as main surface, LFS in this case. This will be the reference for force calculation.
Node to surface discretization method is used together with finite sliding.
Part of the contact pair must be declared to be initially bonded. For this purpose a set
of edges named "bond" is created on the secondary surface (core), starting from the crack
tip onward. When defining the contact interaction this will be assigned as bonding to limit
bonding to secondary nodes in the specific subset. The unbonded section of the secondary
surface will behave as a normal contact.
A contact property must be assigned to this interaction, this is defined as frictionless
tangential behavior. To this contact pair a VCCT fracture criterion is assigned, defining the
mixed mode behavior. This is only relevant if crack propagation is studied, and therefore it is
described in Appendix D. Finally, a crack engineering feature is created with type "disbond
using VCCT", assigning the created interaction as contact pair.
To obtain the energy release rates from the analysis, a field output request must be
created including the following variables:
• ’ENRRT’, including all components of strain energy release rate.
• ’ENRRT1i’ (i=1,2,3), 1i component of strain energy release rate
The variables ’ENRRT1i’ will directly give the specific mode I and mode II ERRs, GI
and GII. Mode mixity is not given directly as a variable, but can be easily found from the
GI over GII ratio with equation 1.4.
3.1.3
VCCT: Mesh Sensitivity
A mesh sensitivity study is needed to verify the influence of element type and size. This
is done to ensure accuracy and evaluate how using linear or quadratic elements can influence
the obtained ERR. The third and last goal of the mesh sensitivity study is to verify the
convergence of the parameters ’ENRRT11’ and ’ENRRT12’ previously introduced in 3.1.2.
All the element types presented in chapter 2 are tested here: linear and quadratic,
reduced, and hybrid elements.
Aluminum face sheets and isotropic aluminum honeycomb core (see chapter 2) were
used. These are found in table 1. The used load was the ’distributed pressure’, implemented
as described in 2, and assigned a value of one time the gauge pressure (0.0826 MPa). The
geometry was r = 300 mm external radius, hc = 25 mm core and h1 = h2 = 1 mm face
sheet. Pre-crack was assigned as a0 = 50 mm. All this was kept constant in the analysis.
Seven simulations were run for each element type (see mesh section of chapter 2), with
the sizes ranging 5 mm to 0.1 mm. These sizes were only assigned in the partitions around
the crack tip, as from figure 11b, with the global mesh size being 3 mm.
The results are presented in figure 12 for all element types in mode I and mode II,
examples of ERR results from the Abaqus interface are given in Appendix E.
The first outcome of the study is that linear elements consistently give higher ERR values
than the quadratic ones for mode I, while for mode II the opposite applies. On the other
hand, reduced integration elements give different results than normal and hybrid elements;
these are therefore deemed inadequate for the study.
Page 28 of 79
==PAGE:32==
3.1
VCCT Method
(a) GI over approximate element size
(b) GII over approximate element size
Figure 12: VCCT Mesh sensitivity analysis, element types
Hybrid and normal elements offer very similar results, especially for fine meshes. This
means that the more computationally heavy hybrid elements are in this case not necessary.
The conclusion of this first study is that normal CPE4 or CPE8 elements are probably the
best choice for the model.
Surprisingly, the difference between linear and quadratic element is large: almost 70%
for ENRRT11 and 10% for ENRRT12. To further enlighten the reason for this difference,
a different study was carried out by coupling the CPE4 and CPE8 curves with data from
"Mixed models", as from figure 13.
These two mixed models consist in CPE4 elements
globally and CPE8 elements in the partitions around the crack tip (CPE4-CPE8) and the
opposite in CPE8-CPE4, with quadratic elements globally and linear ones at the crack tip.
The mixed models results are very close to the ones obtained from equivalent full models,
especially for very fine meshes at the crack tip (0.1 mm - 0.5 mm). GII is much less influenced
by the element type, at least for this particular case analyzed.
The outcome of these simulations is that, for very fine meshes at the crack tip, using
quadratic or linear elements at the crack tip does not influence the results. In fact a model
with linear elements everywhere but in the crack tip obtains equal results to a full CPE4
model, and the other way around. Both mixed models converge to the ERR values of the
respective full models.
On the opposite, element choice far from the crack tip is fundamental.
This is an
unexpected result, as crack tip mesh refinement is usually considered the core factor in mesh
design. The reason can probably be found in the overall panel deformation influence on
crack flank deformation, and therefore ERR.
To further verify that the difference between CPE4 and CPE8 models is driven by overall
deformation of the panel, as suggested by the study of figure 13, the model deformation is
presented in figure 14.
Specifically, figure 14 presents the final coordinates of the interface between Core and LFS,
for both CPE4 and CPE8 models and for two mesh refinements. Deformation is magnified of
Page 29 of 79
==PAGE:33==
3.1
VCCT Method
(a) GI over approximate element size
(b) GII over approximate element size
Figure 13: VCCT Mesh sensitivity analysis, mixed elements
a factor 100. As predicted models with linear and quadratic elements deform very differently,
with the CPE8 appearing much more deformed. This is especially the case at the disbond
interface, but also in the intact part of the panel.
The study also shows that the quadratic model presents limited deformation differences
between refined mesh model (full line) and coarse mesh model (dashed line), with the two
red lines overlapping in figure 14. This suggests that the result variation seen above is not
influenced by deformation in the quadratic model. This is not necessarily the case in the
linear model, where fine and coarse models present much different deformations, suggesting
the error could be influenced by deformation approximations in the CPE4 model. This would
explain the higher variability of GI given by the linear model, seen in figure 12a.
Figure 14: Final deformation of the Core-LFS interface. Deformation scale 100
Page 30 of 79
==PAGE:34==
3.1
VCCT Method
(a) Mesh: element types, GT
(b) Mesh: element types, ψ
Figure 15: VCCT Mesh sensitivity analysis, GT and ψ
The major outcome of this mesh sensitivity study is that both ERRs do not converge
within the chosen element sizes. This coincides with the predictions made when discussing
oscillatory singularities in bi-material interfaces in section 3.1.1. Specifically, equations 3.12
and 3.13 predicted non convergence of GI and GII for decreasing element size (∆a →0).
This issue will emerge in the study, when comparing the three fracture mechanics meth-
ods in section 4.2.2.
As a final consideration, the total ERR GT and phase angle ψ variation with mesh refine-
ment and between models is presented in figures 15. Here GT is given by simple summation
as from equation 3.14 and ψ is obtained following equation 1.4.
As predicted by equation 3.14 the total ERR GT converges to a defined value. This is
especially the case for the quadratic model. The phase angle ψ, similarly to GI and GII, is
not converging and presents marked differences between linear and quadratic models.
The final outcome of the mesh sensitivity study indicates that overall mesh refinement
of the model has a significant influence on the results. In contrast, local mesh refinement at
the crack tip appears to have a relatively minor effect. A substantial difference was observed
between linear and quadratic elements, with the latter providing more accurate and stable
results. Overall, the VCCT exhibits inconsistent performance depending on the selected
mesh, and lack of convergency for fine meshes.
Further discussion on this topic will be presented in chapter 4 of this document, when
the curvature study is introduced.
Page 31 of 79
==PAGE:35==
3.2
CSDE Method
3.2
CSDE Method
The Crack Surface Displacement Extrapolation (CSDE) method, presented by Berggreen
[24], is an extension of the largely used CSD method. The aim of this method is to use the
nodal crack flank data of node pairs close to the crack tip to achieve a prediction of ERR
and mode mixity. The nodal crack flank data refers to the FE model mesh nodes, and cor-
responds to the final coordinates of the nodes after crack opening. The CSDE method in
this study is therefore based on node coordinates extraction from the Abaqus .odb files.
3.2.1
CSDE: Basic Principle
Starting from the displacement and the stress field close to the crack tip in a bi-material
interface, reference [24] describes in detail the process of obtaining equations 3.15 and 3.16 to
compute mode-mixity and Griffith-energy based on the crack flank displacements δx and δy.
These equations are equivalent to the ones presented in chapter 1.2, but based on measurable
displacements.
ψk = arctan
 r
H22
H11
δx
δy
!
−ε ln
|x|
h

+ arctan(2ε)
(3.15)
G = π(1 + 4ε2)
8H11|x|
H11
H22
δ2
y + δ2
x

(3.16)
The displacements δx and δy are defined according to a Cartesian reference system with
origin at the crack tip, as from figure 16. This is often referred to as fracture mechanics
reference system. In figure 16 the deltas are generically placed on the deformed crack flank,
but in the FEA model δx and δy are obtained directly from nodal displacement.
In equations 3.15 and 3.16 H11, H22 and ε are bi-material constants, dependent on
material properties and compliance. Equations 3.17 and 3.18 are used to compute H11 and
H22. ε is the equivalent of γ previously presented in equation A.22 in the appendix. x is
simply the coordinate as from figure 16.
H11 =
h
2nλ1/4p
S11S22
i
1 +
h
2nλ1/4p
S11S22
i
2
(3.17)
H22 =
h
2nλ−1/4p
S11S22
i
1 +
h
2nλ−1/4p
S11S22
i
2
(3.18)
The formulas for material parameters such as λ and n and compliances Smn are found in
Appendix C. Finally, h in equations 3.15 and 3.16 is a geometrical parameter referred to as
characteristic length. As from [24] h has no physical meaning. It has the effect of shifting the
mode-mixity phase and is generally chosen to have the ERR minimum at ψk. In sandwich
disbond problems this roughly corresponds to assigning h as the face sheet thickness, and
therefore h will always be equivalent to the tf in figure 2 of this document.
Just as seen in chapter 3.1.1 for the VCCT method, phase angle and ERR present os-
Page 32 of 79
==PAGE:36==
3.2
CSDE Method
Figure 16: CSDE coordinate system. Source:[24]
cillatory singularities at the crack tip. In the CSDE method equations 3.15 and 3.16 are
used to compute ψk and G for each node pair along the crack flank. This brings to the same
oscillatory singularity at the crack tip, characteristic of bi-material interfaces.
The CSD approach is schematically represented in figure 17a for the ERR estimation.
In the K-dominated zone close to the crack tip the obtained G should be constant, but by
applying equation 3.16 for each node pair the results are varying, as evident from the plot.
Using an infinitely fine mesh at the crack tip is impossible, therefore a numerical error
zone is present at the tip. On the other hand an outer zone can be defined relatively far from
the crack tip; here the G value changes due to the influence of global model deformations.
Reliable G estimates are considered the ones in between inner and outer borders, as
from figure 17a, and any nodal pair taken out of this zone would result in errors. As the
crack tip ERR is therefore not uniquely defined, the CSD approach involves computing it
with another method, usually J-integral. The phase angle is instead taken as the one ob-
tained from the node pair whose G matches the one externally computed with J-integral.
This approach can easily result in errors, as G is not directly obtained from the crack
flank displacements, and the node pair with corresponding G might result out of the evalu-
ation zone, therefore compromising also the result of ψk.
(a) CSD method schematic
(b) CSDE method schematic
Figure 17: Comparison between CSD and CSDE methods. Source: [24]
Page 33 of 79
==PAGE:37==
3.2
CSDE Method
To solve the CSD method issues, the CSDE method was introduced. Within the CSDE
solely the results from the relative crack flank displacements are used to determine G and ψk,
without externally determined Griffith-energy. This is done by using a routine to identify
inner and outer border of the linear zone, and therefore wisely choosing only the node
pairs within the evaluation zone to linearly interpolate G and ψk, as from figure 17b. The
considered nodes usually match between ERR and mode mixity, so they only need to be
identified once. This linear extrapolation method has proven to be accurate for sandwich
cases as the one considered in this study.
3.2.2
CSDE: Implementation for Curved Crack Flanks
In past years at DTU the CSDE method as described in chapter 3.2.1 was implemented
in MATLAB [24]. Within the study presented in this document, this pre-existing MATLAB
routine was used to conduct CSDE analysis.
The main input to the MATLAB routine is an array of nodal coordinates. These include
x and y coordinates of initial crack flank mesh nodes, and displacements U1 and U2 in the
two directions respectively. This applies to both LFS and Core, whose position is inverted
compared to figure 16 as the crack is in between core and LFS in this study.
Other inputs include material properties, used to compute the compliances (equa-
tions 3.17, 3.18), and characteristic length. In the current implementation these are saved
to a .mat file directly from the Python script; and this file is used by the MATLAB post
processing routine to run the CSDE analysis.
Within the post processing code the selection of node pairs occurs to ensure only points
in the evaluation zone are used. This is done by declaring the number of evaluation points
and the coordinates of start and end of the range. Also, a tolerance is assigned for the
linearity. Finally, a set of plots similar to the one in figure 17b is presented for ERR and
phase angle to verify the extrapolation quality and visualize the result.
In the case of a curved sandwich panel, as for the study presented in this document, the
crack front is also curved and therefore some adjustments are needed to apply the CSDE.
A first approach is to transform the curved crack front into an equivalent flat crack
front with a coordinate transformation, to consequentially apply the CSDE method to the
equivalent flat crack through the existent MATLAB code. In this process it is important
to correctly transform the nodal displacements δx and δy, as these are the ones that will be
used to compute ERR and phase angle, as from equations 3.16 and 3.15.
The CSDE code is based on a fracture mechanics reference system as the one in figure 16,
with origin at the crack tip and axes Cartesian x and y defining the displacement directions.
With the aim to transform the curved geometry to flat, two reference systems are
used: the Cartesian reference system used by Abaqus, with origin at the model origin (as
in plot 14), and a tangential reference system with normal axes n normal to the curve and
tangential axes t tangent to the curved crack flank. This tangential reference system will be
transformed to a fracture mechanics one.
Transforming a curved geometry to an equivalent flat one necessarily involves approxi-
mations. Different alternatives were tested to decide the most accurate to be used.
Page 34 of 79
==PAGE:38==
3.2
CSDE Method
Figure 18 represents a schematic of the initial crack front and final position of the flank,
for either LFS or core. In figure 18 the vn vectors represent the initial (undeformed) crack
flank, and vectors sn compose the final deformed position of the flank. The displacement vec-
tors un are formed by un,x and un,y, which are the FE model output displacements. Finally,
angles θn represent the angle of each vector vn with the global axes x.
V 1
V 2
V 3
U4
U3
U2
U1
S1
S2
S3
θ1
x
y
θ2
U1x
U1y
Figure 18: Schematic of the CSDE crack flank transformation, first version
The first alternative to transform the curved geometry to flat is rotating v1 of the angle
θ1, carrying the displacement vectors u1 and u2, and therefore defining s1. Subsequently
rotating v2 of θ2, carrying u3 and so defining s2, to then proceed similarly for every segment
onward, defining the transformed vector system.
The second option was to simply rotate each vector vn and un of the angle θn, adding
up the resulting coordinates to obtain an equivalent straight v segment and curved s.
Figure 19 on the other hand represents an alternative method to define the θn angles to
rotate the displacement vectors un. This alternative is similar to the one used in reference
[30] to define the local x′ axes normal to crack front, as presented earlier in figure 10. Here
the tangential axes tn is defined by linking node n −1 and n + 1, so the projection of un on
local t and n axes corresponds to rotating it of angle θn, defined by the tangential axes tn.
To define the first angle θ0, vector v0 is added, corresponding to the first element before the
crack tip. The crack tip is highlighted in green.
Each of this alternative coordinate transformation methods is based on the initial crack
position, as the rotation of each displacement vector u is based on the initial curvature of
each v vector defining the undeformed crack position. Alternatively, other solutions could
be found rotating the crack flanks of the average angle prescribed by the two crack flanks,
considering therefore an equivalent curved reference system in between the crack flanks.
After careful consideration of these alternatives, the final choice was to rotate every
u and v vector of the respective angle θ, as from figure 18. As the angles are extremely
Page 35 of 79
==PAGE:39==
3.2
CSDE Method
V 0
V 1
V 2
U3
U2
U1
U0
S0
S1
S2
θ1
x
y
θ2
t1
t2
n2
n1
Figure 19: Schematic of the CSDE crack flank transformation, second version
similar one to the other, practically equivalent results in terms of mode mixity and ERR
were obtained using one only average angle per each segment.
Using the coordinate transformation method described earlier, an example is shown in
Figure 20. Figure 20a displays the initial and final crack flanks near the crack tip in the
global Cartesian system, with axes origin corresponding to Abaqus model origin.
(a) Original curved crack, Cartesian
(b) Equivalent flat crack, tangential
Figure 20: CSDE crack front transformation example
Page 36 of 79
==PAGE:40==
3.2
CSDE Method
Although the crack is curved, the short segment shown appears nearly straight due to
the limited number of points selected. This highlights the minimal curvature over such a
small region. The plot is based on node coordinates extracted from Abaqus, with higher
point density near the crack tip due to mesh refinement. The crack tip displacement is also
clearly visible.
Figure 20b represents the transformed crack flank coordinates, of the same case from
figure 20a. The reference system is in this case the tangential (t, n), with origin at the initial
(undeformed) crack tip. The flat crack flank in figure 20b seems simply rotated if compared
to the one in figure 20a, but this is an optical effect due to the very short segment considered.
This further highlights the minimal difference between each θ angle described before.
As shown in figure 20a, the displacement vectors u exhibit significantly larger magni-
tudes than the corresponding v vectors, particularly near the crack tip. This leads to a
pronounced leverage effect, where even a small angular variation in v results in a substantial
shift in the endpoint of u. In some cases, the deformation of mesh elements around the crack
tip may appear irregular, resembling a saw-tooth pattern. This behavior is illustrated in
figure 21, where deformations are magnified by a factor of 10.
Such localized mesh distortions cause slight fluctuations in the computed rotation an-
gles, which, amplified by the leverage effect, may introduce noise in the transformed crack
flanks, as seen in figure 22. This loss of local precision does not affect the CSDE extrapolation
outcome, as the overall curvature of the crack flank remains accurately captured.
Figure 21: Segmented mesh, def. factor 10
Figure 22: Noise in the transformed crack
3.2.3
CSDE: Extrapolation
As from section 3.2.1, a fundamental part of the CSDE method is the extrapolation of
ERR and phase angle directly from the crack flank deformations. This is done by extrapo-
lating the values of ERR and ψ from the nodal pairs close to the crack tip.
Page 37 of 79
==PAGE:41==
3.2
CSDE Method
Figure 23: CSDE extrapolation, ERR
Figure 24: CSDE extrapolation, ψ
As anticipated in section 3.2.2, the nodal pairs need to be picked accurately, together
with the desired linearity tolerance. This is done parametrically through the CSDE MAT-
LAB routine. Once identified the evaluation zone of the plot against FM coordinate x, as
from figure 17a, a linear extraction determines the final outcome.
This procedure is consistently followed throughout the study whenever the CSDE method
is applied. The accuracy of the extrapolation is verified for each simulation. Due to the sim-
ilarity of the outcome plots, these will not be displayed in this document for each simulation
carried out in the study.
An example of CSDE extrapolation is presented in figure 23 and 24. This serves as
reference for the other simulations carried out in this study.
A fixed 2D-planar model of r=200mm and a0=50mm was used with a gauge distributed
pressure load (0.0826 MPa) and CPE8 elements to obtain these plots. The use of quadratic
elements instead of linear only adds points to the plot, making the line more dense. Excellent
extrapolation is obtained in this case, thanks to the fine mesh at the crack tip.
Mesh refinement at the crack tip is fundamental to improve the CSDE extraction. This
is not verified in the current subchapter, as the mesh will be tested directly in the curvature
study of chapter 4.
Page 38 of 79
==PAGE:42==
3.3
J-integral Method
3.3
J-integral Method
The J-integral is a well established non-linear method to compute ERR in fracture
mechanics. It was introduced by James Rice [35] by idealizing elasic-plastic deformation as
nonlinear elastic, extending the fracture mechanics method of the time beyond the limits of
LEFM.
This energy based method is applicable to non-linear elastic-plastic materials, assuming
small strains, and can therefore be well suited for the case of curved interface crack studied
in this document.
3.3.1
J-integral: Basic Principle
In the J-integral method the ERR estimate is given by a path integral around the crack.
This integral, whose basic form is in equation 3.19, relates the strain energy density of the
material w, stress σij and displacement field ui to a parameter named J. The unit of J is
[J/m2] and it represents the ERR associated with the integral path. In the case of linear
elastic materials J corresponds to the G given in equation 1.3, used so far in the study. In
equation 3.19 nj is the outward normal to the curved path.
J =
Z
Γ

w dy −σijnj
∂ui
∂x ds

(3.19)
The letter Γ indicates the path of the integral, followed in counter-clockwise direction.
ds is an infinitesimal portion of Γ, while x and y are coordinates centered at the crack tip,
with y being normal to the crack plane and x following the crack direction. The J-integral
is path independent, with Γ running around the crack tip from bottom to top crack flank.
The strain energy density w in equation 3.19 is given by the stress and strain tensor σij and
εij with the integral in equation 3.20.
w =
Z εij
0
σij dεij
(3.20)
In Abaqus the J-integral is defined in terms of the ERR associated with crack advance.
As described in [36], in the most general 3D case, for a virtual crack advance λ(s) in the
crack plane the J-integral in equation 3.19 transforms in 3.21. Here dA is a surface element
along an infinitesimally small tubular surface enclosing the crack tip line in 3D. q is a vector
that defines the local direction of the crack extension. n is the normal to dA. W is the
elastic strain energy, defined as summation of elastic energy and plastic dissipated energy.
¯J =
Z
A
λ(s) n ·

WI −σ · ∂u
∂x

· q dA
(3.21)
3.3.2
J-integral: Abaqus Implementation
In Abaqus the main operations required to compute the J-integral in a fracture mechan-
ics problem are to explicitly define the crack front and to specify the virtual crack extension
direction. A detailed mesh is preferred, as it reduces the large distorted to a limited number
Page 39 of 79
==PAGE:43==
3.3
J-integral Method
of cells around the crack tip, which will be easily included in the contour of the integral.
In a 2D finite element model such as the one used in this study, each J-integral evalua-
tion can be interpreted as the virtual motion of a material block surrounding the crack tip.
These blocks are defined by contours, where each contour consists of a ring of mesh elements
that entirely encircle the crack tip and the nodes along the crack line, extending from one
flank to the other. These element rings are recursively defined to encompass all preceding
contours. Abaqus/Standard automatically identifies the elements forming each ring based
on the regions designated as the crack tip or crack line.
When creating the crack engineering feature, contour integral has to be selected as the
crack option. After this it is possible to select the crack tip as region for calculation of the
integral, this will assign automatically the crack tip vertex as both crack region and crack
tip, therefore defining the contours as rings of elements around the crack tip, figure 25. Al-
ternatively it is possible to select the crack flank as region for the integral and the vertex as
crack tip. In this case the contours are going to run along the selected edge for the crack
flank already from the first contour, figure 26.
Figure 25: Contours, crack tip, CPE8
Figure 26: Contours, crack edge, CPE4
The next step is to define the virtual crack extension direction. This is done by declaring
this direction with the vector q, corresponding to the one in equation 3.21. This vector can
be declared by assigning initial and final point of the vector through coordinates or by snap
to datum points in the assembly.
Alternatively one can assign the n vector instead, corresponding to the normal to the
crack plane and therefore orthogonal to q. For automation purposes in the code this option
is preferred, as n can be defined parametrically by the (known) Cartesian center of the model
and easily obtained crack tip coordinate. Direction of the n vector will define the obtained
sign for the ERR. Using the normal vector n is generally preferable for curved crack flanks,
as it is easier to define for curved surfaces. In case the future geometry was to be changed
from fraction of a circle to a more general curvature type this definition of n would need to
be changed.
The last step is to define the crack tip singularity. The analysis carried out in this study
Page 40 of 79
==PAGE:44==
3.3
J-integral Method
considers the presence of geometrical non-linearity and generally employs a rather fine mesh
at the crack. In this case the addition of a singularity should have a limited effect in the
precision of the obtained ERR estimate.
With r being the distance from the crack tip and ε being the strain, the singularities
available in Abaqus are the following:
• Square root singularity: ε ∝r−1/2, for linear elasticity
• 1/r singularity: ε ∝r−1, for perfect plasticity
• Combined 1/√r and 1/r singularity: ε ∝r−
n
n+1, for power law hardening materials
Implementing these singularities generally requires a seam-type crack front with sweep mesh
option around the crack tip. In these cases the crack tip is modeled with a ring of collapsed
quadrilateral elements, with geometrically coincident nodes on the edge corresponding with
the crack tip, as represented in figure 27 for quadratic (8 nodes) elements.
Figure 27: Element collapse, crack tip singularity. Source: [36]
This option is not feasible when dealing with interface cracks. LFS and Core are modeled
as two different instances, therefore the sweep mesh is not applicable. As from figure 25 the
mesh at the crack tip in composed of quadrilateral elements. These cannot be replaced with
triangular elements around the crack tip.
It is not possible to collapse the elements side, but if the midside nodes on the element
side connected to the crack tip are moved to the 1/4 point the stain is square root singular
along the element edge but not in the element interior. This is of course only feasible for
quadratic elements due to the presence of the midside node. This is deemed to have very
little influence, therefore ignored.
The last step in the process is setting up the history output. This is done by simply
creating a history output request within step-1 and assigning as domain the created crack.
The frequency for ERR extraction was set to only the last increment, and the number of
contours were set equal to the number of elements in the crack edge near the tip zone. This
results in the last contour involving all the structured area represented in figure 25 and 26
around the tip.
As stated in section 3.3.1 J-integral is path independent, therefore the several contours
Page 41 of 79
==PAGE:45==
3.3
J-integral Method
should provide the same solution. This is not exactly the case due to the approximate nature
of FE analysis, as will be shown in section 3.3.3. Every contour includes the previous, and
it is fundamental to make sure that eventual high stress zones are fully included.
3.3.3
J-integral: Sensitivity and Path Independency
To ensure the J-integral implementation in Abaqus is giving accurate results a small
parametric study is needed. Firstly the mesh quality is evaluated by completing several
simulations varying the mesh element size at the crack tip. This is done for both linear
(CPE4) and quadratic (CPE8) elements.
As indicated in the Abaqus manual [36], pressure loads at the crack might influence
the accuracy of J-integral results. In fact, during the simulations a warning would state "A
crack analysis with pressure applied on the crack surfaces may give inaccurate values for
the evaluated contour integral when nlgeom=yes is used for a step". All the simulations
presented so far in this document were including Nonlinear geometry formulation (NLGeo).
The influence of this option is also studied here.
Figure 28 shows that even with the roughest mesh at the crack tip the obtained ERR
is accurate, suggesting the results would be reliable even with coarser mesh. On the other
hand the variation between ERR estimates from CPE4 and CPE8 elements is above 20%
both with and without the non-linear geometries option. The influence of the non-linear
geometries option is very relevant: 24% for linear elements and almost twice (100%) for
quadratic elements.
As described earlier path independence is a characteristic of the J-integral. Figure 29
shows that without the Nonlinear geometry formulation (NLGeo) option only the first path
is invalid, while activating non-linear geometries a slightly larger path around the crack tip is
needed. Nevertheless excellent path independence is found, as long as the path includes the
immediate surroundings of the tip, where the highest stresses and displacements are found.
The current version of the code picks the ERR value predicted from the largest contour and
in the last step, ensuring convergence.
Figure 28: Mesh sensitivity, J-integral
Figure 29: Path independency, J-integral
Page 42 of 79
==PAGE:46==
3.3
J-integral Method
The findings from this preliminary study on the J-integral suggest that this fracture
mechanics approach does not require an extremely refined mesh to yield accurate ERR
values.
This observation will be further examined in section 4.2.2, where a comparison
among the three fracture mechanics methods is presented.
Conversely, the element type proves to be highly influential, consistent with what was
observed for the VCCT method. For the type of analysis carried out in this study, quadratic
elements appear to be the most suitable choice, as they better capture the overall mesh
deformation. This is generally the preferred option in FE analysis, provided that sufficient
computational resources are available.
Additionally, the non-linear geometry setting significantly affects the J-integral results.
This option is kept active throughout the study to accurately capture large deformations,
particularly near the crack tip. Sufficient contour integrals are provided to ensure result
convergence despite the non-linearity.
Page 43 of 79
==PAGE:47==
4
Curvature Study
This chapter aims at exploring the influence of panel curvature in the resulting ERR
and mode mixity at the disbond front. The results obtained from the considered fracture
mechanics methods are compared, evaluating the accuracy of each method for the considered
case of a sandwich panel with different ratios of curvature.
Initially, the required expedients to isolate curvature as the only relevant factor in the
model are described in chapter 4.1. An overview of the parameters and options used in the
model is given in that chapter, to ensure reproducibility of the study. In the second chapter
(4.2) a mesh study is conducted. This is to ensure quality of the results, but also highlight
the limits of the employed FM methods. Insights into relevant factors in the creation of such
curved sandwich models are provided. Lastly, in chapter 4.3 the panel curvature influence
is presented for a range of geometries, providing a first glimpse of the geometrical effects
deriving from panel curvature.
4.1
Curvature Model
This subchapter describes the model used for the curvature study.
In section 4.1.1
details on the type of load used are given, while section 4.1.2 focuses on model technicalities.
For the sake of clarity and repeatability of the study, all the parameters chosen for the
model are presented. The code snipped below collects the model geometry. Curvature radii
range 40 mm to 500 mm. These are divided in the "small r" group, 40 mm to 75 mm, and
the "large r" group, 75 mm to 500 mm. In the code snippet, values between brackets refer
to the small r group. fp refers to the final partition dimension.
1
# Model geometry [mm]
2
r
= 40.0−500.0
# Radius, corresponding to external panel side
3
hc = 25.4
# Core thickness
4
h1 = 1.0
# Upper (external) face sheet thickness
5
h2 = 1.0
# Lower (internal) face sheet thickness
6
a0 = 50.0 (10.0)
# Pre−crack length
7
fp = 10.0 (5.0)
# Final partition length
Small r models have lower a0 and fp for purely geometrical reasons, as they are too
small to fit large pre-crack and partitions.
The dimensionality option for the whole curvature study presented in this chapter is the
2D-Planar, corresponding to a single-curved sandwich panel. The thickness w of the model
was left undeclared, therefore unitary. Static general step is used, with non-linear geometry
option (NLGeom) active. Contact between LFS and core is modeled as from chapter 2.
The loads used in this chapter will be presented in the next section, and they will be
kept equal for the whole curvature study.
The material used for the study is aluminum face sheets and PMI foam core, with
properties from table 1.
Page 44 of 79
==PAGE:48==
4.1
Curvature Model
4.1.1
Load Type Influence
This study focuses on Ground-Air (GA) pressure loads on sandwich panels, caused by
aircraft pressurization. The pressure is internal to the disbond, acting on the face sheets and
directed outwards.
The aim in this chapter is to isolate the curvature, marked by panel radius r, as the
only factor changing from one to the other simulation, allowing for a fair comparison of the
different geometries.
In chapter 2 and so far in the study the pressure was modeled as either fluid cavity
or distributed pressure load, with the disbond being at the panel center, on the left side of
the model. This proved to be an excellent method if the aim is to simulate the real loading
conditions on the panel, but it cannot be used as loading method to test the influence of
panel curvature.
With a distributed pressure at the disbond, the overall applied load can be kept constant
for different r by having the same pre-crack length a0, as the pressure will be distributed on
the same area. Still, this loading condition does not ensure the same force distribution in
the whole model.
A free body diagram of this loading condition is presented in figure 30a, where the
distributed pressure is simplified as concentrated force P acting on the disbond cavity. From
the schematic, it is visible that for different curvatures r the arm distance of P, named d,
will change. The reaction forces and moments (Rx, Ry and RM) are represented close to the
model BC. These will always be present in the three components represented to balance P
and the moments resulting from P · d.
The free body diagram in figure 30a is very simplified, but it helps understanding the
load-geometry connection with distributed pressure.
(a) Distributed pressure load
(b) Bending moments load
Figure 30: Approximate free body diagrams of the 2D planar model
Page 45 of 79
==PAGE:49==
4.1
Curvature Model
To avoid any load type effect while testing different curvatures, a new type of load based
on bending moments was introduced. This load was chosen to emulate a load and boundary
condition combination similar to the one of a DCB-UBM specimen. The double cantilever
beam with uneven bending moment (DCB-UBM) was introduced by Sørensen in [25], as a
type of specimen for mixed mode fracture testing. An introduction to this and other test
types for sandwich composites is given in Appendix B.
The new loading method, presented in figure 30b, relies on bending moments being
applied at the two crack flank extremities on core and LFS. By tuning the M1/M2 ratio
the fracture mode mixity can be changed. On the right hand side, the specimen is held by
rollers; these offer a balancing moment reaction RM, but the specimen is free to translate in
the tangential direction.
To reach convergence in the simulation the model needs to be fully constrained, therefore
the tangential sliding of the model cannot be fully unrestrained.
To avoid convergence
problems a spring was placed on the right hand side of the panel, as from figure 30b, blocking
excessive tangential movements. So in reality, a small Ry reaction force is present. This was
chosen with the smallest possible stiffness k for the simulation to converge, to emulate closely
a real DCB-UMB configuration.
The idea behind using this configuration of load and boundary conditions for this study
is that, if even opening bending moments are used (M1/M2 = −1), the residual forces after
the crack tip (RM) will be almost null. This is an ideal condition to isolate curvature as only
factor in the study, as by keeping the same pre-crack a0 the free body diagram of the model
will remain unchanged for increasing r.
Due to the curved geometry and stiffness mismatch between the half panel composed by
only LFS and the one of core and UFS, small reaction forces will be present on the rollers.
These are very limited compared to the ones found in the model where pressure is directly
applied on the crack front. The magnitude of the reaction forces was verified with Abaqus
for the simulations.
Finally, a load magnitude was selected for use in all simulations presented in this chapter.
The chosen load produces an energy release rate (ERR) close to a reference fracture toughness
value, GC ≈200 J/m2. This value was selected because it is considered realistic for a similar
material combination, and it was also found to promote convergence in the simulations.
This ERR level was achieved with loading moments of M1 = M2 = 50 Nmm, which are
therefore adopted consistently throughout this study. The stiffness of the balancing spring
was set to 0.01 N/mm.
4.1.2
Model Specifications
The initial FEA model described in chapter 2 was modified for the new load and BC.
The final partition (fp) on the right hand side of the model was used to apply the rollers. fp
is defined as arc length just like a0, so it can be kept constant through the curvature study.
A local curved reference system is created, with center at (0.0, 0.0) and tangential direction
running along the panel mid-plane. This is used to defined tangential and radial direction
in the model.
Page 46 of 79
==PAGE:50==
4.2
Mesh Sensitivity
For symmetry reasons in the application of moments, axisymmetric models are not fit
for use with this load. As anticipated the curvature study refers to 2D planar models, so
sandwich panels with one curvature. This results in a panel similar to a SCB or DCB-UBM
specimen.
For a fair comparison between VCCT, CSDE and J-integral, the same mesh must be
used. A first step in this direction is to use the same model for the three methods. Until
now, CSDE and J-integral were applied on the Abaqus model named BaseModel, and VCCT
on a modified model having different partitions and mesh. This separate VCCT model was
designed to allow studies of crack propagation, and despite being set aside in this part of the
study, it will remain available as an option in the FEA tool this thesis aims at producing.
Substantial modifications were required to adapt the BaseModel to a VCCT study.
These were in part described in chapter 2.
By using the same model, with identical partitions and mesh, it was possible to conduct
a fair comparison of the obtained ERR from the three methods. ERR is used in this chapter
as mesh sensitivity indicator, and to evaluate the result accuracy from the models.
4.2
Mesh Sensitivity
The last influential element to be excluded from the study in order to isolate the cur-
vature is the model mesh. To do so, a standard mesh should be identified, to be then used
for each considered curvature r in the study.
Within this subchapter the mesh employed in the curvature study is chosen, with sec-
tion 4.2.1 aiming at finding an appropriate global mesh size and section 4.2.2 focusing on
the crack tip mesh.
A fixed geometry was used to test the different mesh discretizations. External ratio of
curvature of the panel was chosen as r = 100 mm, and pre-crack length a0 = 50 mm. The
arc length of the last partitions to the right, corresponding to the rollers contact zone, was
set to fp = 10 mm. Load and all other characteristics of the model as from chapter 4.1.
4.2.1
Global Mesh Size
In this section the Global Mesh Size (GMS) influence on the obtained ERR is tested.
In the developed FE model, the GMS is parametrically defined as a fraction of the core
thickness hc. Here five different global sizes were tested, ranging hc/20 (1.27 mm, ≃6700
elements) to hc/50 (0.42 mm ≃19600 elements).
The global part of the mesh includes everything that is not part of the crack tip area, as
described in chapter 2 and specifically figure 7. It therefore excludes the hk zone, including
hnc and tp. In this section the crack tip mesh (hk, hnc and tp) is kept constant, to avoid
bias. A commonly used configuration with 6 divisions of tp (NumEltp) and proportionally
4 · NumEltp division in the hnc diagonal and 5 · NumEltp elements in the hk diagonal are
used. No bias was used at the crack tip, nor in the global mesh zone of the model.
Figure 31 represents the roughest (31a) and finest (31b) mesh in the tested models.
Figure 32 displays the ERR obtained by the three fracture mechanics methods (J-integral,
CSDE and VCCT), for the 5 tested mesh refinements. A second order polynomial is used
Page 47 of 79
==PAGE:51==
4.2
Mesh Sensitivity
as trend-line.
(a) Rough: GMS=hc/20 - 1.27 mm element size
(b) Fine: GMS=hc/50 - 0.42 mm element size
Figure 31: Global mesh detail for r = 100 mm, a0 = 50 mm, fp = 10 mm model
In figure 32a linear elements (CPE4) were used. Fair agreement is found between J-
integral and CSDE method, with the first constantly giving results 20% higher than the
latter.
VCCT on the other hand gives very different results, independently of the mesh density.
ERR predictions with VCCT are ≃50% lower than the CSDE method.
The reason of this discrepancy might lay in the crack tip mesh refinement, as this is a
constant factor within the simulations of figure 32a. This will be proved in section 4.2.2.
Figure 32a suggests that for J-integral and CSDE, if using linear elements, a quite
fine global mesh is needed to ensure ERR convergence. The ERR discrepancy between the
roughest and finest mesh is roughly 40%, with results converging at GMS 0.42 mm.
Figure 32b presents the same study for quadratic elements (CPE8). These elements
appear to give much more reliable results for this analysis, with constant ERR output at
each mesh density. The difference between CSDE and J-integral is once again constant, but
(a) CPE4 elements: GT vs. GMS
(b) CPE8 elements: GT vs. GMS
Figure 32: Global mesh sensitivity study results
Page 48 of 79
==PAGE:52==
4.2
Mesh Sensitivity
stable at only 6%.
Just as was the case for linear elements, the VCCT method provides very inaccurate
results compared to the other two methods. Similarly to what seen in figure 32a VCCT
predicts a much lower ERR despite the same mesh density.
The missing data point in
figure 32b represents a convergence problem.
The J-integral method converges to approximately the same result of 175 J/m2 when
using either linear or quadratic elements.
In contrast, the CSDE method predicts ERR
values that are about 15% higher with CPE8 elements compared to CPE4. The ERR results
obtained from the VCCT method appear consistent across both element types.
Although simulations using quadratic elements require longer computation times, they
appear to offer more reliable results. As shown in figure 32b, quadratic elements improve the
agreement between the J-integral and CSDE results, and they permit the use of a coarser
mesh away from the crack tip. Based on these considerations, CPE8 elements were selected
for the curvature sensitivity study, with a global mesh size (GMS) of 1.27 mm (i.e., hc/20).
4.2.2
Crack Tip Mesh Size
In this section the crack tip mesh density influence on ERR is considered. The tp area
of the crack has 0.01 mm half-side length, and it will be divided into a number of elements
(NumEltp) ranging from 1 (0.01 mm element) to 8 (0.0013 mm elements). These two fine
and rough cases are represented in figure 33. No bias is used at the crack tip for this analysis,
and the number of elements in the hnc and hk diagonals are 4 · NumEltp and 5 · NumEltp
respectively, just as in section 4.2.1.
Results are in figures 34 and 35. The J-integral output appears independent of crack
tip mesh size, at least in the considered range.
On the other hand, the CSDE method is highly dependent on mesh size at the crack
tip, with ERR values raising of 70% from rough to very fine mesh at the tip. An element
size of at least 0.0017 mm at tp should be used for convergence of the CSDE method.
In figure 34 the VCCT method has an opposite trend compared to CSDE, with ERR
values inversely proportional to mesh refinement at the crack tip. This tendency explains
the misleading results obtained by the VCCT method in section 4.2.1, confirming the crack
(a) Rough: NumEltp = 1 (0.01 mm size)
(b) Rough: NumEltp = 8 (0.0013 mm size)
Figure 33: Tip mesh detail for r = 100 mm, a0 = 50 mm, fp = 10 mm model
Page 49 of 79
==PAGE:53==
4.2
Mesh Sensitivity
Figure 34: Tip mesh Sensitivity, CPE8
Figure 35: Tip mesh Sensitivity, VCCT
tip mesh refinement as cause of the discrepancies.
To further demonstrate the tip element size dependency of the VCCT method, another
study was conducted with even rougher mesh. The obtained ERR are plotted in figure 35.
The inverse trend started in figure 34 continues in figure 35, with ERR values seemingly
reaching an asymptotic value only for element size 0.5 mm.
This value of roughly ≃175 J/m2 corresponds to the one obtained by J-integral and
CSDE for fine mesh in figure 34, and it matches the results obtained in the global mesh size
study conducted earlier.
The convergence of the VCCT method to the same result as CSDE and J-integral for
rough meshes probably confirms its inverse dependency with mesh refinement.
Similar non convergent ERR results for refined mesh size were found by T. Tay [37],
who studied the effect of mesh refinement for post buckled delamination of composite lami-
nates. A similar behavior was observed in the first VCCT sensitivity study of chapter 3.1.3,
especially in figure 13a.
Following these findings on the VCCT model, and considering the importance of obtain-
ing according results with identical meshes, the VCCT was disregarded for the remaining
part of this study. Only J-integral and CSDE methods are used hereafter.
Finally, the chosen mesh configuration for the curvature study is summarized in table 2.
No bias is used globally, but the bias option at the crack tip was activated to ensure better
distribution of the nodes extraction in the CSDE method.
Page 50 of 79
==PAGE:54==
4.3
Curvature
Table 2: Final mesh configuration for the curvature study
Variable
Description
Value
tp
Innermost tip partition [mm]
0.01
ElSizetp
Element size at tp [mm]
0.0017
GMS
Global Mesh Size [mm]
1.27
Divtp
Number of tp divisions
6
ElType
Type of element
CPE8
nElhnc
Number of hnc diagonal divisions
4xDivtp
nElhk
Number of hk diagonal divisions
5xDivtp
4.3
Curvature
With the mesh study of section 4.2, the model presented in 4.1 is finally complete and
ready for the curvature influence study. The model parameters used were described at the
beginning of the chapter and table 2 details the mesh used. Material properties are once
again found in table 1 for the PMI core and aluminum face sheets employed.
A range of panel curvatures from r = 45 mm to r = 500 mm was tested in this phase.
These are represented in figure 36. As anticipated the simulations were divided in "large"
r, spacing from r = 75 mm to r = 500 mm and "small" r, from r = 45 mm to r = 75 mm.
The first used pre-crack length a0 = 50 mm and final partition of fp = 10 mm, the second
a0 = 10 mm and fp = 5 mm. This was necessarily, as for example for r = 45 mm the
quarter circumference at the LFS-Core interface is only 29.2 mm, as from figure 36.
Figure 36: Visual representation of all the tested curvatures
Page 51 of 79
==PAGE:55==
4.3
Curvature
(a) Small r and flat panel
(b) Large r and flat panel
Figure 37: Curvature study results, ERR vs. curvature r
Figure 37 presents the obtained ERR values for all the simulations. Through the entire
study, J-integral path independency was checked as from section 3.3.3 and CSDE extrapo-
lation quality was ensured as from section 3.2.3. The plots of both path independency and
CSDE extrapolation are omitted for conciseness.
The first outcome from the plots is the excellent agreement between CSDE and J-integral
in the ERR estimation, with discrepancies below 2% in all curvatures. This is likely due to
the improved accuracy of CSDE due to using bias at the crack tip, compared to the studies
in the previous subchapter (4.2) where bias was omitted.
The ratio of curvature seems to have no influence in the resulting ERR, with constant
values of ≃177 J/m2. The only exceptions are found at the bottom end of the tested r
range, where a0 becomes very large compared to the overall 1/4 of circumference model. In
this configuration, both for r40 and r75 models, the BC are likely to have an influence in the
ERR as they are very close to the crack tip. For these "extreme" configurations ≃177 J/m2
is also obtained when refining the mesh further, proving the discrepancy to be a mesh-model
influence and not a curvature effect.
As the pre-crack length a0 passes from 50 mm in large r to 10 mm for low r, it is also
observed that a0 has no effect in the obtained ERR for the chosen configuration.
As no curvature influence was found on the ERR, a DCB-UBM simulation was performed
to verify if the results match with the flat panel case.
The pre-existing FEA model for flat sandwich panels was modified to match the curved
FEA partitions, loads and mesh, including the addition of a spring to the translation BC.
The same materials as for the curved case were used. With the equivalent dimension of a
curved panel of ratio 100 mm, the simulation was performed and ERR and ψ were extracted
with the CSDE method, without crack flank transformation.
With an extracted ERR of ≃185 J/m2 the difference from the curved case is below 5%,
confirming the lack of influence of curvature in the total ERR. This is added to the plots in
figure 37 for comparison.
Page 52 of 79
==PAGE:56==
4.3
Curvature
(a) Small r and flat panel
(b) Large r and flat panel
Figure 38: Curvature study results, phase angle ψ vs. curvature r
Similarly to the ERR, also the mode mixity is found to be constant with curvature,
with stable values at ψ ≃30° for all the simulated r. This is plotted in figure 38.
A phase angle of ψ = 30° indicates a mixed mode fracture. As from the DCB-UBM
publication [25], applying even opening moments M1 and M2 should yield to mode I dom-
inated fracture in flat specimens with equal beam thickness and even material properties.
As this is not the case, part of the discrepancy is certainly to be attributed to the different
material stiffness between core and LFS, but part of it might be due to curvature effects.
As from figure 38, the DCB-UBM simulation yields a phase angle of ψ ≃0.32°, comply-
ing with the expected pure mode I loading, and eventually excluding the material influence.
This outcome suggests that the influence of curvature is to increase the fracture mode
mixity, but maintaining an equivalent total ERR.
The model deformation for r = 75 mm and r = 500 mm are represented in figures 39
and 40. The different curvature of the panel yields to different deformations of the LFS.
For the same two models, the deformed crack tip is displayed in figures 41 and 42. Even
if the LFS appears to assume a very different deformed shape for the two curvatures, the
cracks in figures 41 and 42 appear simply rotated one with respect to the other.
Figure 39: Model deformation, r = 75 mm
Figure 40: Model deformation, r = 500 mm
Page 53 of 79
==PAGE:57==
4.3
Curvature
Figure 41: Crack deformation, r = 75 mm
Figure 42: Crack deformation, r = 500 mm
This is probably due to the fact that the considered crack segment is extremely small,
so differences in curvature are almost imperceptible.
A comparison between crack flank openings of the two extreme cases is given. As from
section 3.2.2, a transformation of the crack flanks from the curved FEA model is needed to
use the pre-existent CSDE MATLAB routine. In figures 43 and 44 the crack flanks for r40
and r500 models are plotted in the original and transformed form respectively.
In figure 43 the different inclination of the entire flank plot for the two models is ap-
parent. This is due to the different relative position of the crack tip along the 1/4 circle in
the two models. Beside the inclination, the curvature of the lines is different between the
r40 and r500. This curvature difference, effect of the different geometries of the models, is
almost imperceptible, just as it was from figures 41 and 42.
This observation explains why in figure 44 the crack flanks in fracture mechanics refer-
ence system appear identical. This was observed also in section 3.2.2, as each of the segments
composing the crack flank was being rotated of almost identical angles during the curved
to flat transformation; therefore the transformation in figures 43 to 44 appears as just an
overall rotation.
Figure 43: Original crack flanks
Figure 44: Transformed crack flanks
Page 54 of 79
==PAGE:58==
4.3
Curvature
In conclusion, the results of this exploratory study indicate that panel curvature does
not influence the ERR at the disbond front, in sandwich composite materials. While no
variation in ψ was observed across different curvature radii, a difference in phase angle was
noted between curved and flat panels. This suggests that curvature may affect the fracture
mode mixity, although it does not impact the total ERR. These observations will be further
discussed in the final conclusions of this thesis.
Page 55 of 79
==PAGE:59==
5
Instability Study
When exposed to increasing internal pressure, a disbond between core and face sheet of
a sandwich material can grow visibly, deforming the face sheet into a bulge. If this occurs in a
curved panel, geometrical instability can occur, with the face sheet undergoing snap-through
buckling and changing the bulge geometry. A definition of the phenomena is given by M.
Farshad [38]: "Snap-through buckling is a mode of instability in which an elastic system,
under certain loading, may pass from an equilibrium state to a non-adjacent equilibrium
configuration".
A sudden movement of the face sheet with respect to the core, for example due to snap-
through buckling, can cause stress concentrations at the crack tip and consequentially an
ERR spike. This could bring to a sudden crack growth, not foreseen within the study of
chapter 4, with potentially severe consequences.
The aim of this chapter is to study the instability phenomena in curved sandwich panels.
The main study objectives are the following:
• Identify the relation between panel curvature and instability occurrence
• Identify the relation between disbond size and instability occurrence
• Quantify the pressure and ERR associated with instability depending on the geometry
• Estimate the buckling shape of the disbond, depending on panel geometry (r)
Subchapter 5.1 gives an introduction on instability for curved sandwich structures, with
details on required load type and mesh. In 5.2 a preliminary study is presented, with sec-
tion 5.2.1 focusing on the influence of curvature on instability and section 5.2.2 linking the
occurrence of instability to disbond size, for a fixed curvature radius. Finally, in subchap-
ter 5.3 a case study representing an approximation of a A380 radome is presented, thanks
to the collaboration of Airbus.
The geometry is again the same as described in chapter 2, with disbonds located between
core and LFS. Contrary to chapter 4, all the instability study refers to dome geometries, i.e.
panels with double curvature, as the final aim is to analyze a real aircraft radome.
One important note on the nature of this study concerns the dynamic effects of snap-
through buckling. As with the rest of the work in this document, also instability is investi-
gated under quasi-static loading. Due to time constraints, dynamic effects are not included.
Their analysis would require a different type of study, including for example inertia effects
of the structure.
Quasi-static loading is expected to capture the pre-buckling and post-buckling behavior
accurately, with dynamic effects likely relevant only at the exact moment of buckling. Nev-
ertheless, the buckling shape observed for each geometry will offer insight into the potential
significance of dynamic contributions.
Page 56 of 79
==PAGE:60==
5.1
Instability Introduction and Model
5.1
Instability Introduction and Model
As the study moves towards a realistic aircraft radome case (subchapter 5.3), the load
employed in all the instability study of chapter 5 will resemble the pressure difference between
core and outer atmosphere.
This involves discarding the bending-moment-based load of
chapter 4 to focus on distributed pressure (DP) load. Details on the instability study FE
model are given hereafter.
Model Details
PMI cores such as the ones used in chapter 4 do not present air pockets, and GAG
pressure cycles are only a concern for honeycomb cores. The isotropic approximation of alu-
minum honeycomb is employed in this introduction section, while more realistic honeycombs
are employed in 5.2 and 5.3. All materials are found in table 1.
Throughout the chapter different radius of curvature r and pre-crack a0 are considered,
but for this introduction the model will present r = 300 mm, a0 = 100 mm. In the prelim-
inary study 1 in. core thickness and 1 mm face sheet thickness are used. This will change
for the radome case study. The non-linear geometry and contact flags are always active.
All other characteristics of the model, as boundary conditions and constrains, are kept
unchanged from the base model described in chapter 2.
The fluid cavity is the most adapt load type to describe a GAG pressure cycle, therefore
it would be the preferred load for the case study of section 5.3. Unfortunately, as anticipated
in chapter 2 the fluid cavity load type is not suited for Riks analysis. This limits the load
type to only distributed pressure for the instability study, as the Riks method is strictly
required for this part of the study.
The load magnitude in this study will be high enough to reach the instability point (see
chapter 2), but the simulations will stop at a declared number of iterations.
Mesh
Due to the high energies involved, high deformations are expected at the crack tip, es-
pecially right at the bifurcation point. The first part of the study consisted in experimenting
with the crack tip mesh size to ensure convergence and accuracy. This initial part of the
study is here omitted for conciseness.
Generally, rougher meshes were seen to work better for instability, due to the lower de-
formation of the elements. A brief mesh sensitivity analysis suggested that ERR predictions
were accurate enough also with only one element at the tp region (0.01 mm element at the
tip). This was a necessary choice for some of the simulations in this study, including the
models with r = 150 mm to r = 250 mm, while all the other models generally employed 4
crack tip division Divtp.
The high deformations involved required linear elements at the tip region, while the
rest of the model was equipped with quadratic elements to catch the overall deformation
accurately. This combination of CPE4 and CPE8 revealed effective to prevent non converge,
without involving any dumping.
Page 57 of 79
==PAGE:61==
5.1
Instability Introduction and Model
Extracting Model Parameters
Within the simulations seen so far pressure and deformation vary linearly.
In this
regard, instability can be identified as the loss of this linearity: with the load increasing
monotonically, at the instability point a small change of load will cause severe change of
deformation. Instability is therefore identified by a peak in the load-deformation plot.
Load and deformation need to be associated with Abaqus variables to be identified.
The load is taken as pressure measured on a mesh element surface. No matter the type
of pressure applied this will be constant on the whole crack surface, so any arbitrary mesh
element at the LFS crack flank is suited.
An example of crack flank deformation for a dome geometry is given in figure 45. As it is
difficult to quantify deformation, the relative displacement between core and LFS dome apex
can be used as indicator. The two points whose relative distance is measured are highlighted
in figure 46. Magnifying factor 10 was used in both figures.
Figure 45: Crack flank opening example
Figure 46: Dome apex relative displacement
Arc length replaces time in a Riks analysis, but this variable has no real physical mean-
ing. To bypass it, the pressure–arc length and relative displacement–arc length plots are
merged in the desired pressure–relative displacement one, used to identify instability in this
study.
The ERR was estimated with J-integral as this offers the possibility to be measured at
each simulation increment, similarly as relative displacement and pressure.
Unlike the behavior observed in section 3.3.2, path independence for the J-integral was
harder to achieve. As shown in figure 47, a higher number of contours near the crack tip was
required for ERR convergence, likely due to the shift from linear to quadratic elements. A
fixed number of 10 contours was adopted in this chapter for consistency, as from figure 48.
Also CSDE was used to estimate ERR and phase angle, with a Python routine able
to extract crack flank displacements at each increment, building a 3D dataset with x and y
displacement in the first two dimensions and increment number in the third. This allowed
to use the CSDE method at every desired increment of the analysis.
Page 58 of 79
==PAGE:62==
5.1
Instability Introduction and Model
Figure 47: J-int ERR vs Contour Number
Figure 48: Contours at crack tip
First Instability Example
Hereafter a first glimpse on instability for curved sandwich panels is presented. These
results originated from an explorative study carried out as special course by the author of
this thesis. This report is an internal DTU document [39].
When using a static Newton step, the simulation will fail right before occurrence of
instability. Nevertheless, non linearity in the load-displacement relation can be identified,
and the simulation failure load can be used as first rough guess of instability pressure.
Figures 49a and 49b present the displacement-time and pressure-displacement relations
for a model with r = 300 mm and a0 = 100 mm. The pressure–time relation is not presented
as simply linear.
The dashed line represents perfect linearity. As highlighted in figure 49b non linearity
(a) Rel. Displacement - Time
(b) Pressure - Rel. Displacement
Figure 49: Pre-existing study, instability with Newton
Page 59 of 79
==PAGE:63==
5.2
Preliminary Study
starts as roughly 0.6 MPa and the simulation failed at 0.9 MPa of pressure.
This last
point can be used as estimate of the instability load, but to really analyze the snap-through
buckling phenomena the Riks method as described in section 5.1 must be used.
Using Riks the last part of the pre-existing study was able to capture the bifurcation
point of the pressure-relative displacement relation. Figure 50 is substantially a continuation
of figure 49b, where also the post buckling zone of the plot is uncovered.
The non-linearity load was confirmed to be around 0.6 MPa and the instability load to
be 0.9 MPa, for this particular radome geometry.
Figure 50: Pre-existing study, instability with Riks and deformations associated
Figure 50 also shows the pre-buckled (1) and post-buckled (2) positions of the LFS, and
their respective location in the instability plot. Magnifying factor 5 was used for the display.
In (1) the LFS is clearly in a geometrically unstable shape, which rapidly shifted to (2) when
going over the pressure peak.
The plots presented above highlight how the pressure declared as Pref is only marginally
important when using Riks, as it will not be reached in the simulation unless this is run for
seemingly infinite iterations. In that case the pressure would start rising again with a very
deformed LFS. This is the case in all the simulation of this study.
5.2
Preliminary Study
As anticipated, the preliminary study includes the relation between panel curvature
(5.2.1) and pre-crack length (5.2.2) with instability.
The material considered in this preliminary study is the orthotropic aluminum hon-
eycomb core Al-5056-H-191, combined with isotropic aluminum face sheets. Properties for
both materials are in table 1. The geometry employed for the preliminary study is with a
1 in. core and 1 mm face sheets thickness. Distributed pressure was applied as type of load,
with various magnitudes depending on the case. As anticipated in section 5.1 the magnitude
is irrelevant when using Riks solver.
Page 60 of 79
==PAGE:64==
5.2
Preliminary Study
5.2.1
Instability and Curvature
In this explorative study the pre-crack length a0 is kept constant to 100 mm length.
Five radius of curvature are tested, ranging 150 mm to 500 mm. Curvature is referred to as
simply r. As from chapter 2, r corresponds to the external panel radius.
Figure 51 summarizes the found relation between pressure and ERR with relative dis-
placement. This is presented for all the 5 tested curvatures. In figure 51a also a reference
pressure is presented for comparison. This corresponds to the gauge pressure resulting from
a 40000 ft flight altitude, computed as from section 1.1.2.
(a) Pressure vs. Rel. Displacement
(b) ERR vs. Rel. Displacement
Figure 51: Instability occurrence for various curvatures r
The first outcome is that the bell-shaped instability peak introduced earlier does not
necessarily apply to every curved geometry. In figure 51 simulations r500, r250 and r200
clearly present different instability behaviors. This is believed to be associated with a dif-
ferent mode shape being triggered for those geometries, as will be later analyzed.
Despite the different peak shapes, each geometry presents a clear instability point, re-
flected both by pressure and J-integral computed ERR. For each model, peaks of pressure
and ERR occur simultaneously, suggesting that the crack probably tends to close right after
the snap-through buckling. This will be graphically confirmed later in the chapter.
Each peak occurs at similar face sheet deformation, with very curved geometries requir-
ing slightly higher deformations (1.4 mm relative displacement for r150) compared to flatter
panels (1 mm for r500).
A new plot was created in figure 52 to highlight the curvature effect on instability
occurrence. Peak pressure and ERR was plotted against panel curvature r.
Both peak ERR and pressure follow the same trend, as anticipated in figure 51. All
the found peak pressures are well above the dashed green line corresponding to the 40000 ft
reference pressure.
Page 61 of 79
==PAGE:65==
5.2
Preliminary Study
Figure 52: Peak Pressure and ERR evolution with curvature, a0 constant
A much higher pressure is needed to stem instability for severely curved panels, with
peak pressures over 5 MPa for a 150 mm curvature. This corresponds to over 60 times the
reference pressure. The tendency is for the buckling pressure to decrease with curvature,
with r = 500 mm corresponding to a 0.37 MPa instability pressure, 4.5 times the reference.
This is to be attributed with the higher energy needed to move from one equilibrium
position of the LFS to another, if the geometry is very curved. Semi-flat geometries may
present low energy differences between first and second buckling shape, explaining the rela-
tively low pressure for the r500 model.
From figure 51 the peaks of Pressure and ERR appear to get sharper for decreasing r.
This might suggest a more sudden equilibrium shift, which can intuitively be associated with
the higher energy involved in low r, depicted in figure 52.
Results from the ERR are encouraging, with the lowest snap-through buckling pressure
(r500) being associated to the lowest peak ERR. This suggests that even though instability
of the LFS might occur for large curvatures, the peak ERR associated would very unlikely
cause sudden crack propagation, therefore rendering the snap-through buckling less relevant.
The same cannot be said for highly curved domes, with ERR peaking at almost 900 J/m2
for r = 150 mm. This suggests that crack propagation is more likely to occur before instabil-
ity for severely curved geometries. This would bring to a different configuration with longer
pre-crack length a0. Influence of a0 is studied in section 5.2.2.
Figure 53 represents the r150 model deformation before snap-through buckling and in
the final buckled configuration. The one depicted is a clear elastic transition, with the LFS
suddenly passing from one curvature to two curvatures ("S-shaped"). This is believed to be
the first and most likely buckling mode of the structure, associated with the sharper peaks
of figure 51, for r150 and r300 especially.
Page 62 of 79
==PAGE:66==
5.2
Preliminary Study
(a) Pre-Buckled shape
(b) Final Buckled shape
Figure 53: Snap-through buckling: r = 150 mm, a0 = 100 mm. Deformation scale 2
The same cannot be said for the instability of figure 54. As was already clear from the
pressure - rel. displacement plot of figure 51, the r200 model presents very different buckling
shape compared to r150. Despite the pre-buckled shape being similar (53a, 54a), the final
buckled shape of figure 54b is likely to represent a different buckling mode. In fact, the LFS
presents more curvatures in this case, and seems to be in an intermediate state before a final
state characterized by 3 curvatures.
(a) Pre-Buckled shape
(b) Final Buckled shape
Figure 54: Snap-through buckling: r = 200 mm, a0 = 100 mm. Deformation scale 2
This is further displayed in figure 55b, where symmetry is used to represent the whole
radome section of r200. If the simulation was run further, the radome apex would likely bend
downwards, finalizing a "double-S" buckled shape. This is very different from the "single-S"
shaped assumed when using r = 150 mm, in figure 55a
(a) r = 150 mm, a0 = 100 mm
(b) r = 200 mm, a0 = 100 mm
Figure 55: Final buckled shape. Deformation scale 2
Page 63 of 79
==PAGE:67==
5.2
Preliminary Study
The models with curvature r = 150 mm and r = 200 mm were chosen as example of
how different geometry can bring to dissimilar buckled shape of the sandwich.
Similar but less marked differences are observed with r250 and r500, as intuitive from fig-
ure 51.
Appendix F provides supplementary simulation frames illustrating the buckling
behavior for each model with curvature ranging from r = 150 mm to r = 500 mm. These
images, excluded from the main text for brevity, offer a clear visual representation of the
different buckling phases.
From figure 55 it also emerges that the post-buckling shape does not necessarily tend
to open the crack. In r150, just like for most of the other curvatures tested, the tendency is
in fact for the crack flanks to close with LFS-core contact, due to geometrical reasons. This
is not the case considering r200.
This observation is reflected in the plots of figure 56, where the ERR and pressure is
seen decreasing after the peak for r = 150 mm (56a), while the tendency is to increase for
r = 200 mm (56b) after instability. This is a consequence of the different buckling shapes.
(a) r = 150 mm, a0 = 100 mm.
(b) r = 200 mm, a0 = 100 mm.
Figure 56: Pressure & ERR over Relative Displacement
To strengthen the results reliability, CSDE-computed ERR is also displayed in figure 56,
with gray dots. The match between J-integral and CSDE is adequate, especially for relatively
low deformations. Similar trends are observed for other curvatures; all plots are once again
collected in Appendix F.
The crack-closing tendency is observed also in the fracture mode mixity, figure 57. Phase
angle (ψ) values tend to decrease in r200, following the crack opening, while they are roughly
constant for r = 150 mm.
Mode mixity values are nevertheless extremely high in all the geometries tested, indi-
cating a highly mode II dominated fracture. This result was not anticipated, but it is likely
due to the non-isotropic core.
Page 64 of 79
==PAGE:68==
5.2
Preliminary Study
(a) r = 150 mm, a0 = 100 mm.
(b) r = 200 mm, a0 = 100 mm.
Figure 57: Phase angle & ERR over Relative Displacement
Mode II fracture is confirmed by the mesh element deformation at the crack tip, which
is highly shear dominated for each tested geometry. Figure 58 presents the tip deformation
for r300 and r500, as examples.
For the r500 model the crack flanks are seen to close completely due to a post-buckled
shape similar to the one of r150, while a slight opening is seen in r300. Nevertheless, mesh
elements are mostly distorted in the tangential direction, confirming the mode II.
(a) r = 300 mm, a0 = 100 mm.
(b) r = 500 mm, a0 = 100 mm.
Figure 58: Element deformation at the crack tip, peak ERR instance
A set of simulations was conducted to explain the very high phase angle encountered.
The most influential material properties that cause high mode II are intuitively found to be
in-plane Poisson ratio ν12 and shear module G12, but also G13.
Single Cantilever Beam (SCB) FEA simulations were carried out on a flat sandwich
panel with the same honeycomb aluminum used for the radome, obtaining a 16.4° phase
angle. This mode I dominated test type should give very low ψ values, suggesting that most
of the obtained mode mixity originates from the material instead of the loading configuration.
Another SCB test, with identical dimensions and face sheets material but PMI core, gave
mode mixity ψ = 4°.
Page 65 of 79
==PAGE:69==
5.2
Preliminary Study
As a final note on the panel curvature influence on instability pressure and ERR, it is
observed that less curved models tend to have a less sudden buckling transition. This was
suggested earlier by observing the peak shape of figure 51.
Taking as example r500, the pre-buckling and post-buckling shapes are presented in
figure 59. The two states present a relatively minor deformation difference compared to the
r150 case presented earlier.
Figure 59b also shows that crack flank closing is not a guarantee for increasing r, as the
disbond bulge can present several curvatures within the LFS.
(a) Pre-buckling shape
(b) Final Buckled shape
Figure 59: r = 500 mm, a0 = 100 mm. Deformation scale 2
5.2.2
Instability and Disbond Size
In this explorative study the panel curvature r is kept constant to 300 mm radius. This
was chosen as roughly middle value from the ones tested in section 5.2.1. Five pre-crack
lengths a0 are tested, ranging 50 mm to 250 mm.
Figure 60 summarizes the new relation between pressure and ERR with relative dis-
placement, for the tested pre-cracks.
(a) Pressure vs. Rel. Displacement
(b) ERR vs. Rel. Displacement
Figure 60: Instability occurrence for various pre-crack a0
Page 66 of 79
==PAGE:70==
5.2
Preliminary Study
In figure 60a the same reference pressure as in chapter 5.2.1, corresponding to 40000 ft
of altitude, is presented. Once again the instability point of each simulation are well above
this threshold.
The instability point corresponds to a peak of both ERR and pressure, similarly to what
was observed when testing curvature. Each peak is smooth, so the mode shapes associated
are expected to be similar to the r150 model of section 5.2.1, with one change of curvature
direction to a final S-shaped cross section. For each of the configurations the crack flanks
are expected to be in contact in the final iteration, as the ERR decreases.
Peak pressure and ERR are collected in figure 61, where they are plotted against a0.
This plot suggests that short pre-crack will have snap through buckling at lower pressure
compared to long a0. On the other hand, short a0 are also associated with lower peak ERR.
Figure 61: Peak Pressure and ERR evolution with pre-crack
This observation involves that if crack propagation does occur before instability, it is
unlikely that the new extended pre-crack will bring to instability, as the pressure required
to buckle increases with a0.
Snap-through buckling is less likely to occur for long a0, but in case it happens it is more
likely to cause crack propagation, due to the higher peak.
For short cracks, if instability occurs the material is likely to keep deforming in the buckled
shape, without crack propagation due to the low peak ERR, this will be demonstrated in
the subsequent sections.
For the chosen geometry, instability pressures are 5 to 10 times higher than the reference
pressure, and the associated ERR seem very low. This is not necessarily the case with other
geometries of material combinations, as will be demonstrated in chapter 5.3.
Figure 62 collects pressure and ERR relation with relative displacement, for a0 = 50 mm
and a0 = 150 mm. As from section 5.2.1 the match between J-integral and CSDE computed
ERR is excellent. The supplementary plots are collected in Appendix G for this section.
Page 67 of 79
==PAGE:71==
5.2
Preliminary Study
(a) r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm.
(b) r = 300 mm, a0 = 150 mm.
Figure 62: Pressure & ERR over Relative Displacement
The only difference between the two pre-crack configurations is found in the post-
buckling behavior for a0 = 50 mm (figure 62a); here the ERR seems to increase soon after
the first LFS snap-through. All other plots for the tested pre-cracks a0 present the same
pattern as for a0 = 150 mm (figure 62b).
The tendency for ERR to increase when a0 = 50 mm is clear when looking at the
buckled shape, presented in figure 63. If a0 = 50 mm the contact between crack flanks is
very limited (63a), and the LFS tends to open when the pressure increases (63b). This is
clear from the final buckled shape of the a0 = 50 mm model, presented later in figure 65a.
(a) Pre-Buckled shape
(b) Post-Buckled shape
Figure 63: Snap-through buckling: r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm. Deformation scale 2
On the contrary, if a0 = 150 mm the buckled shape tends to have a large portion of the
LFS in contact with the core, and the crack will only open in a portion of the interface close
to the radome apex. This is presented in figure 64.
Page 68 of 79
==PAGE:72==
5.2
Preliminary Study
(a) Pre-Buckled shape
(b) Post-Buckled shape
Figure 64: Snap-through buckling: r = 300 mm, a0 = 150 mm. Deformation scale 2
The increasing ERR for a0 = 50 mm seen in figure 62a is reflected on the final buckled
shape of figure 65a. With short pre-crack the tendency is for the crack tip to open again in
the buckled shape, while for a0 = 150 mm (65b) the tendency is for the crack flanks to close.
For increasing a0 length the post-buckling shape all look like the one for a0 = 150 mm,
suggesting that longer pre-cracks are likely to cause crack tip closing after instability. Sup-
plementary pictures are available for each model in Appendix G.
(a) r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm
(b) r = 300 mm, a0 = 150 mm
Figure 65: Final buckled shape. Deformation scale 2
The a0 length influence on post-buckling crack opening tendency is very relevant for
this study, as it appears that longer pre-cracks tend to have a less critical buckled shape, as
from figure 65b. This could also imply that for long a0 dynamic effects are less relevant, as
the tendency is for the crack to close, but this would need further studies in that direction
to be confirmed.
For shorter pre-crack it could be interesting to study the crack propagation, to under-
stand is the tendency for a short crack like the one of figure 65a is to have flank contact
when growing, and finally stopping as in figure 65b.
If the deformation scale factor is increased, for elevated a0 the LSF tends to assume a
wavy shape before buckling. This is depicted in figure 66, and might have an influence in
the real post-buckled shape assumed by the system.
Page 69 of 79
==PAGE:73==
5.2
Preliminary Study
Figure 66: Pre-buckling shape, r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm. Deformation scale factor 5
As a final note, the mode mixity for a0 = 50 mm and a0 = 150 mm is plotted in
figure 67. Similarly to what seen in section 5.2.1 the fracture is highly mode II dominated,
with very high ψ values for all the pre-crack lengths tested. The only slightly different plot
is found for a0 = 50 mm, where ψ decreases due to the shape assumed by the LFS being
more mode I oriented.
By looking at the mesh element distortion, the high shear load is apparent as shown
earlier in the curvature influence study. Those plotted are omitted in this case, as equivalent
to the ones of figure 58.
(a) r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm.
(b) r = 300 mm, a0 = 150 mm.
Figure 67: Phase angle & ERR over Relative Displacement
Page 70 of 79
==PAGE:74==
5.3
Airbus Radome Case Study
5.3
Airbus Radome Case Study
This subchapter collects the instability-related results from the Airbus radome case
study. The findings from the preliminary instability study are compared to a real aircraft
radome, whose approximate geometry and material properties are provided by Airbus.
The base FE model employed is the same as from the preliminary study of chapter 5.2,
including the distributed pressure load simulating Ground-Air pressurization of the honey-
comb core (see section 2).
The mesh structure is the same used in all the document and described in section 2,
using a tip number of elements Divtp = 2 (0.005 mm element size). 10 contours were used
for J-integral; Riks solver was used and non-linear geometry option was active.
The approximate dimensions provided by airbus described the radome to have a roughly
circular shape at the tip, converging to a flatter shape on the extremities.
Due to the
limitations of the analysis code implemented and to simplify the study, a ratio of r = 930 mm
was chosen to better described the radome shape.
Figure 68: Airbus A380 radome. Credit: [40]
The materials provided include GFRP for the face sheets and Kevlar honeycomb for
the core. The properties associated to these materials are collected in table 1.
Other characteristics of the FE model, including core and face sheet thickness (hc, h1,
h2) are collected in the following code snippet. The initial disbond was requested to be
400 mm in diameter so a0 is set to 200 mm, as this is located at the radome apex symmetry
plane, therefore mirrored.
Page 71 of 79
==PAGE:75==
5.3
Airbus Radome Case Study
1
# Model geometry
2
r
= 930.0
# Radius, corresponding to external panel side
3
hc = 8.0
# Core thickness
4
h1 = 0.6
# Upper (external) face sheet thickness
5
h2 = 0.6
# Lower (internal) face sheet thickness
6
a0 = 200.0
# Pre−crack length
The pressure, ERR and phase angle over relative displacement plot for the radome
model are presented in figure 69.
The bell shaped instability peak is found to be similar to the ones seen in 5.2, but the
loads depicted are much lower. For a pre-crack of 200 mm the instability load is found to be
around 0.008 MPa, roughly 1/10 of the reference pressure corresponding to 40000 ft altitude.
This suggests that the structure would likely be affected by snap-through buckling.
On the other hand, the obtained ERR values are very low, peaking just above 1 J/m2
to then decrease below 0.2 J/m2, suggesting a crack closing tendency. Values of phase angle
ψ are stable at around 25° during the crack opening, as from figure 69b.
(a) Pressure & ERR vs Relative Displacement
(b) ψ & ERR vs Relative Displacement
Figure 69: Radome: r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm
The agreement between the CSDE method and the J-integral appears less precise than
in other sections of the study; however, the results remain accurate and the trend in ERR
is consistent.
The curvature study presented in section 5.2.1, particularly figure 52, indicated that
increasing the curvature radius r is associated with a decrease in instability pressure. While
this effect is relevant, considering the radome’s large radius of r = 930 mm, it is unlikely
to be the primary cause of the significantly lower ERR, peak pressure and phase angle ψ
observed.
Instead, material properties and sandwich thickness are likely to play a more dominant
Page 72 of 79
==PAGE:76==
5.3
Airbus Radome Case Study
(a) Pre-Buckled shape
(b) Post-Buckled shape
Figure 70: Snap-through buckling: r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm. Deformation scale 2
role in influencing both instability pressure and fracture parameters. In the radome case,
the face sheets and core are considerably thinner than those analyzed in chapter 5.2. The
combination of reduced stiffness in both face sheets and core material, along with the limited
overall sandwich thickness, is believed to promote mode I dominated fracture and contribute
to the notably low instability threshold.
While structural instability may arise with the prescribed a0 before reaching flight al-
titude, the ERR appears to pose no significant concern for the LFS-core bonding. A peak
value of 1 J/m2 is unlikely to initiate crack propagation. However, the potential influence
of fatigue should be addressed in future investigations.
The preliminary study of section 5.2 suggested that long pre-cracks a0 were likely to
cause a crack-closing shaped buckling, therefore limiting the ERR at the tip in the final load
step. A similar behavior is observed for the radome model.
Figure 70 briefly presents the snap-through buckling for a0 = 200 mm.
The shape
assumed by the LFS is very similar to the ones seen in 5.2, with clear tendency of the bulge
to be localized at the radome apex, while closing the crack tip. This reflects the decreasing
ERR curve presented earlier in figure 69.
When increasing the deformation scale from 2 to 15 it is possible to see how right before
buckling the LFS assume an instable wavy shape (figure 71), which then collapses to a single-
Figure 71: Pre-buckling shape, r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm. Deformation scale factor 15
Page 73 of 79
==PAGE:77==
5.3
Airbus Radome Case Study
Figure 72: Final-buckling shape, r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm. Deformation scale factor 15
bulge stable form (figure 72). With the increased deformation scale factor it is clear how
LFS and core are not in perfect contact, but present a slight opening.
Supplementary figures of the snap-through buckling for the radome are collected in
Appendix H, illustrating every phase of the instability.
The results from the radome model are positive, as despite the likelihood of instability
to occur for the tested geometry, the associated ERR and buckled shape are very unlikely
to cause crack propagation.
The influence of pre-crack a0 is very important, especially on the final buckled shape.
For this reason, a shorter pre-crack was chosen to be tested for the same radome to see
how this would influence the ERR and buckled shape. The same plots seen above are now
presented for a0 = 50 mm in figure 73.
(a) Pressure & ERR vs Relative Displacement
(b) ψ & ERR vs Relative Displacement
Figure 73: Radome: r = 930 mm, a0 = 50 mm
Page 74 of 79
==PAGE:78==
5.3
Airbus Radome Case Study
Section 5.2.2 suggested that lower a0 is associated to lower instability pressure and
ERR peak. This is confirmed for the radome case, as from figure 73a the peak pressure is
about half of the one seen for a0 = 200 mm. Similarly applies to the ERR, which seems to
have a very good agreement between CSDE and J-integral methods. Phase angle is roughly
constant at around ψ = 9°, as from figure 73b.
Contrary to what seen above, the pressure peak is almost undetectable and the ERR
seems to simply climb with the pressure increase. This is due to the very short and flexible
LFS, which opposes little resistance to the pressure increase.
When looking at the radome cross section during buckling, in figure 74, it is clear how
the system smoothly transitions from one equilibrium position to the other, to then keep
opening the disbond in the second equilibrium state.
This behavior reflects the smoothened peak of figure 73a, with constantly increasing
ERR associated to monotonically opening crack.
(a) Pre-Buckled shape
(b) Post-Buckled shape
Figure 74: Snap-through buckling: r = 930 mm, a0 = 50 mm. Deformation scale 2
The final buckling shape is presented in figure 75 for the radome cross section. This
figure highlights how the snap-through buckling for short pre-crack is more likely to bring
to an increasing ERR instead of a crack closing tendency.
The final outcome of the instability analysis for the selected aircraft radome indicates
that buckling is likely to occur when the panels are subjected to pressure levels corresponding
Figure 75: Final-buckling shape, r = 930 mm, a0 = 50 mm. Deformation scale factor 2
Page 75 of 79
==PAGE:79==
5.3
Airbus Radome Case Study
to ground air pressurization at flight altitude. However, this instability does not appear to
pose a significant threat in terms of crack propagation, as the associated peak ERR remains
very low compared to the fracture toughness of similar material combinations.
The mode mixity obtained for the radome case is also lower that the one obtained in
other parts of the study, suggesting a mode I dominated fracture. This is believed to be
influenced by weaker material properties and sandwich element thickness.
Importantly, the post-buckled shape assumed by the disbond appears to cause a crack-
closing tendency. This suggests that even if snap-through buckling occurs, the tendency for
an increasing disbond pressure is not to open the crack for a0 = 200 mm. As this is not the
case with shorter smaller disbonds, further studies on fatigue effects are suggested.
An extensive discussion of all the results from the instability study is given in the
conclusions of this study, presented in chapter 6.
Page 76 of 79
==PAGE:80==
6
Conclusions
This thesis presents an exploratory investigation into the effects of panel curvature
and disbond size on fracture parameters at the crack front in curved sandwich structures
subjected to pressure loading. Three fracture mechanics methods are employed and com-
pared: the J-integral, VCCT, and CSDE. A significant part of the study also addresses
the snap-through buckling instability phenomena, and examines how curvature and disbond
size influence the critical instability pressure. The entire analysis is based on a FEA tool
developed as part of this work.
The comprehensive mesh sensitivity study in chapter 4.2 demonstrated that the selected
fracture mechanics methods showed excellent agreement on ERR results, provided an ap-
propriate mesh was applied. The J-integral method performed reliably with both coarse and
refined meshes at the crack tip, while the CSDE method required a refined mesh in this
region to yield accurate results.
Conversely, the VCCT method only aligned with the other two when a coarse crack tip
mesh was used. Due to this inconsistency, VCCT was excluded from the remainder of the
study, which instead focused on the J-integral and CSDE methods. Similar mesh-related
observations on VCCT were reported by Krueger R. [31], and more in detail Daricik, F. [41].
Notably, the global mesh size was found to significantly affect the calculated fracture
parameters across all methods. This sensitivity is attributed to the role of global structural
deformation in capturing the crack flank displacements accurately.
Within the curvature study of chapter 4.3, the ERR appears to remain effectively con-
stant across all tested panel curvature radii r. Visually, the actual curvature of the crack
front itself is almost imperceptible. This is likely because the region near the crack tip con-
sidered for analysis is so small that curvature has minimal geometric impact on the extracted
crack flank coordinates used as CSDE input.
The mode mixity remains nearly constant across all tested curvatures, reflecting the sim-
ilar crack flank openings extracted from each model. A reference simulation of an equivalent
flat panel confirms the same total ERR, reinforcing the conclusion on the ERR–curvature
relation. However, the flat case exhibits a different phase angle compared to the curved
cases, suggesting that curvature may influence mode mixity, even if it does not alter the
overall ERR.
The ERR tendency found in this study appear to contrast with the findings of S.K.
Parida et al. [21], who observed an increase in ERR with decreasing curvature radius. It is
important to note, however, that their study focused on laminate joints rather than sandwich
structures, and employed a fundamentally different loading scenario involving in-plane loads
applied to the laminate edges.
Similarly, the NASA study by Zhi M. Chen et al. [17] reported a general increase in
ERR for curved sandwich panels relative to flat ones. However, their analysis was based on
a GAG pressurization cycle, whereas the present study employs a controlled moment-based
loading designed specifically to isolate the influence of curvature.
Page 77 of 79
==PAGE:81==
In summary, the different trends in ERR behavior between this work and previous stud-
ies are believed to arise primarily from the type of loading applied. It is suggested that the
loading conditions used in [21] and [17] may not fully isolate the effect of curvature, and
may introduce additional variables that influence the crack tip behavior. The moment-based
loading approach used in this study allows for a more controlled investigation of curvature
effects alone.
The instability analysis in chapter 5 confirmed the robustness of both the J-integral
and CSDE methods in predicting ERR, even beyond buckling onset.
Results showed a
clear relationship between curvature and instability pressure: flatter panels buckled at lower
pressures and exhibited lower ERR peaks, while more curved panels resisted buckling longer,
often reaching higher ERRs before instability.
This behavior suggests that flatter panels are more prone to instability before significant
crack propagation, whereas curved panels may propagate the crack prior to buckling. The
difference likely stems from the smaller energy gap between equilibrium states in flatter
configurations, increasing their susceptibility to snap-through.
Post-buckling shapes varied with curvature, influencing ERR evolution. Some geome-
tries caused the crack to close (due to LFS-core contact), limiting ERR growth, while others
promoted opening and further crack driving forces. These shapes are believed to depend on
the dominant buckling mode, which varies with curvature.
Pre-crack length also played a key role: longer disbonds increased instability pressure
and ERR, favoring crack propagation before buckling. Shorter disbonds buckled more easily
and showed post-buckled shapes that amplified ERR.
This leads to an important hypothesis: short cracks may grow incrementally under
cyclic loading until a post-buckled shape induces crack closure, potentially arresting further
propagation. This self-limiting mechanism is promising but requires further simulation and
experimental validation.
The CSDE method consistently showed high phase angles, indicating strong mode II
dominance.
While orthotropy in the honeycomb core contributed, a comparison with a
Single Cantilever Beam test suggests that curvature also plays a key role in increasing mode
mixity-pointing to a complex interaction worth deeper investigation.
In the Airbus radome case (chapter 5.3), lower stiffness and thinner structure led to
very low instability pressures and ERRs, well below in-flight pressure levels. For a 400 mm
disbond, post-buckling promoted crack closure, limiting ERR. Shorter disbonds, however,
showed shapes that could increase ERR after buckling, possibly enabling propagation.
Several limitations of the present study suggest directions for future research. The panel
geometry was limited to circular arcs, which may not fully capture the complexity of real
aircraft structures. The material behavior was assumed linear elastic. This is appropriate
for an exploratory study, yet neglecting crack tip plasticity effects may affect the predictions
accuracy of ERR and mode mixity. Including plasticity would require adapting the fracture
mechanics methods employed.
Additionally, only CSDE method was used to evaluate the phase angle; incorporating
Page 78 of 79
==PAGE:82==
an independent method would strengthen result validation.
Lastly, the current instability analysis neglects dynamic effects, which could be sig-
nificant given the sudden nature of snap-through buckling. Addressing this would require
changing the type of FE simulation.
Future work should focus on experimental validation of the numerical results, greatly
strengthening the study’s credibility and relevance. Experimental campaigns could be con-
ducted at DTU, provided that suitable curved sandwich specimens and dedicated fixtures
are available. These may include pressurization tests or simplified loading scenarios such as
point-loaded (SCB-like) or moment-loaded (DCB/UBM-like) configurations.
Furthermore, if analytical models for curved sandwich panels become available, com-
parison with such formulations would provide an additional benchmark.
The observed influence of curvature on the phase angle warrants dedicated investigation
to confirm and quantify this effect.
A linear buckling analysis in Abaqus could help verify whether the deformation modes
observed in the instability study are related to specific mode shapes of the structure.
Lastly, the developed finite element tool could be extended to handle more general ge-
ometries and to simulate crack propagation and fatigue under cyclic loading, particularly
through refinement of the current VCCT implementation. These extensions would be es-
pecially valuable in light of the observed crack-closure tendencies presented in this study,
which highlight the relevance of fatigue effects in curved sandwich panels.
Page 79 of 79
==PAGE:83==
List of Figures
1
Cross section of a 747 fore flap. Source: [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Sandwich panel cross section nomenclature. Source: [3] . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Airbus A310-300 rudder failure. Source: [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4
GAG-Cycle effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5
Schematic of model partition nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6
Model geometry, r = 100 mm, a0 = 50 mm, fp = 10 mm
. . . . . . . . . . .
17
7
Model mesh for r = 100 mm, with crack tip bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
8
Crack before (a) and after (b) crack extension in FE. Source: [30] . . . . . .
23
9
Crack tip in the transformed coordinate system. Source: [30] . . . . . . . . .
24
10
Example of arbitrary local coordinate system. Source: [30] . . . . . . . . . .
25
11
VCCT Model, r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm, crack tip size 1 mm . . . . . . . . .
27
12
VCCT Mesh sensitivity analysis, element types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
13
VCCT Mesh sensitivity analysis, mixed elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
14
Final deformation of the Core-LFS interface. Deformation scale 100 . . . . .
30
15
VCCT Mesh sensitivity analysis, GT and ψ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
16
CSDE coordinate system. Source:[24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
17
Comparison between CSD and CSDE methods. Source: [24]
. . . . . . . . .
33
18
Schematic of the CSDE crack flank transformation, first version
. . . . . . .
35
19
Schematic of the CSDE crack flank transformation, second version . . . . . .
36
20
CSDE crack front transformation example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
21
Segmented mesh, def. factor 10
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
22
Noise in the transformed crack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
23
CSDE extrapolation, ERR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
24
CSDE extrapolation, ψ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
25
Contours, crack tip, CPE8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
26
Contours, crack edge, CPE4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
27
Element collapse, crack tip singularity. Source: [36] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
28
Mesh sensitivity, J-integral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
29
Path independency, J-integral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
30
Approximate free body diagrams of the 2D planar model . . . . . . . . . . .
45
31
Global mesh detail for r = 100 mm, a0 = 50 mm, fp = 10 mm model
. . . .
48
32
Global mesh sensitivity study results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
33
Tip mesh detail for r = 100 mm, a0 = 50 mm, fp = 10 mm model . . . . . .
49
34
Tip mesh Sensitivity, CPE8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
35
Tip mesh Sensitivity, VCCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
36
Visual representation of all the tested curvatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
37
Curvature study results, ERR vs. curvature r
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
38
Curvature study results, phase angle ψ vs. curvature r
. . . . . . . . . . . .
53
39
Model deformation, r = 75 mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
40
Model deformation, r = 500 mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
41
Crack deformation, r = 75 mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
42
Crack deformation, r = 500 mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
I
==PAGE:84==
List of Figures
43
Original crack flanks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
44
Transformed crack flanks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
45
Crack flank opening example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
46
Dome apex relative displacement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
47
J-int ERR vs Contour Number
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
48
Contours at crack tip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
49
Pre-existing study, instability with Newton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
50
Pre-existing study, instability with Riks and deformations associated
. . . .
60
51
Instability occurrence for various curvatures r
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
52
Peak Pressure and ERR evolution with curvature, a0 constant . . . . . . . .
62
53
Snap-through buckling: r = 150 mm, a0 = 100 mm. Deformation scale 2
. .
63
54
Snap-through buckling: r = 200 mm, a0 = 100 mm. Deformation scale 2
. .
63
55
Final buckled shape. Deformation scale 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
56
Pressure & ERR over Relative Displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
57
Phase angle & ERR over Relative Displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
58
Element deformation at the crack tip, peak ERR instance . . . . . . . . . . .
65
59
r = 500 mm, a0 = 100 mm. Deformation scale 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
60
Instability occurrence for various pre-crack a0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
61
Peak Pressure and ERR evolution with pre-crack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
62
Pressure & ERR over Relative Displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
63
Snap-through buckling: r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm. Deformation scale 2 . . .
68
64
Snap-through buckling: r = 300 mm, a0 = 150 mm. Deformation scale 2
. .
69
65
Final buckled shape. Deformation scale 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
66
Pre-buckling shape, r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm. Deformation scale factor 5 . .
70
67
Phase angle & ERR over Relative Displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
68
Airbus A380 radome. Credit: [40] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
69
Radome: r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
70
Snap-through buckling: r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm. Deformation scale 2
. .
73
71
Pre-buckling shape, r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm. Deformation scale factor 15
73
72
Final-buckling shape, r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm. Deformation scale factor 15
74
73
Radome: r = 930 mm, a0 = 50 mm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
74
Snap-through buckling: r = 930 mm, a0 = 50 mm. Deformation scale 2 . . .
75
75
Final-buckling shape, r = 930 mm, a0 = 50 mm. Deformation scale factor 2 .
75
76
Disbond fracture tests for sandwich composites. Source: [42] . . . . . . . . .
IX
77
VCCT Model, r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm, crack tip size 1 mm, CPE4
. . . .
XI
78
VCCT Model, r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm, crack tip size 1 mm, CPE8
. . . .
XI
79
Supplementary instability plots. r = 150 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XII
80
Supplementary instability plots. r = 200 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIII
II
==PAGE:85==
List of Tables
81
Supplementary instability plots. r = 250 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIV
82
Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XV
83
Supplementary instability plots. r = 500 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVI
84
Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XVII
85
Note: same as figure 82.
r = 300 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XVIII
86
Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 150 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIX
87
Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 200 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XX
88
Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 250 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale
factor 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXI
89
Supplementary instability plots, radome case study.
r = 930 mm, a0 =
200 mm, hc = 8.0 mm, hf1 = hf2 = 0.6 mm.
Deformation scale factor
2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XXII
90
Supplementary instability plots, radome case study, full radome section. r =
930 mm, a0 = 200 mm, hc = 8.0 mm, hf1 = hf2 = 0.6 mm. Deformation scale
factor 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XXIII
91
Supplementary instability plots, radome case study.
r = 930 mm, a0 =
50 mm, hc = 8.0 mm, hf1 = hf2 = 0.6 mm. Deformation scale factor 2 . . . .XXIV
List of Tables
1
Material properties used in the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Final mesh configuration for the curvature study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
III
==PAGE:86==
References
References
[1] M. J. Hardy, The de Havilland Mosquito. New York : Arco Pub. Co., 1977.
[2] P. Kumar, K. K. Sadasivuni, B. AlMangour, and M. S. A. bin Majid, eds., High-
Performance Composite Structures: Additive Manufacturing and Processing. Compos-
ites Science and Technology, Springer, 2022.
[3] Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU, “Figure from course 41517:
Stiffened plates and sandwich constructions.” Lecture notes or presentation slides, not
publicly available, 2025. Course material, Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
[4] Transportation Safety Board of Canada, “Aviation investigation report a05f0047: Loss
of rudder in flight, air transat airbus a310,” 2007. Report released November 22, 2007.
[5] L. A. Carlsson and G. A. Kardomateas, Structural and Failure Mechanics of Sandwich
Composites, vol. 121 of Solid Mechanics and Its Applications. Springer, 2011.
[6] V. Saseendran and C. Berggreen, “Honeycomb sandwich face/core fracture toughness
measurements using the dcb-ubm test method: Doss project,” ResearchGate, 2017.
[7] K. F. Karlsson and B. T. Åström, “Manufacturing and applications of structural sand-
wich components,” Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 1996.
[8] T. L. Anderson, Fracture Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications. Boca Raton:
CRC Press, 4th ed., 2017.
[9] M. Manca, Fracture Characterization of Sandwich Face/Core Interfaces. Ph.d. thesis,
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2024.
[10] J. Hutchinson and Z. Suo, “Mixed mode cracking in layered materials,” Advances in
Applied Mechanics, vol. 29, pp. 63–191, 1991.
[11] M.-Y. He and J. W. Hutchinson, “Kinking of a crack out of an interface,” Journal of
Applied Mechanics, vol. 56, pp. 270–278, jun 1989.
[12] A. Quispitupa, C. Berggreen, and L. A. Carlsson, “Design analysis of the mixed mode
bending sandwich specimen,” Journal of Sandwich Structures and Materials, vol. 12,
no. 2, 2009.
[13] C. Berggreen, B. C. Simonsen, and K. K. Borum, “Experimental and numerical study
of interface crack propagation in foam-cored sandwich beams,” Journal of Composite
Materials, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 493–520, 2006.
[14] European Union Aviation Safety Agency, “Certification memorandum cm-s-010: Com-
posite materials - the safe design and use of monocoque sandwich structures in principal
structural element applications,” 2018. Accessed: 2025-05-27.
IV
==PAGE:87==
References
[15] R. Moslemian, C. Berggreen, and K. Branner, “On the effect of curvature in debonded
sandwich panels subjected to compressive loading,” in Sandwich Construction 8: ICSS
8: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Sandwich Structures, (Dordrecht),
Springer, 2008.
[16] W. L. Ko, “Open-mode debonding analysis of curved sandwich panels subjected to
heating and cryogenic cooling on opposite faces,” technical publication, NASA Dryden
Flight Research Center, Edwards, CA, United States, June 1999.
[17] Z. M. Chen, R. Krueger, and M. Rinker, “Face sheet/core disbond growth in honeycomb
sandwich panels subjected to ground-air-ground pressurization and in-plane loading,”
conference paper, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, U.S., June 2015.
[18] M. Rinker, R. Krueger, and J. Ratcliffe, “Analysis of an aircraft honeycomb sandwich
panel with circular face sheet/core disbond subjected to ground-air pressurization,”
contractor report, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, U.S., March 2013.
[19] R. H. Martin and W. C. Jackson, “Damage prediction in cross-ply curved composite
laminates,” Tech. Rep. NASA TM-104089 / AVSCOM TR 91-B-009, NASA Langley
Research Center and U.S. Army Aviation Systems Command, 1991. Accessed: 2025-05-
28.
[20] R. H. Martin, “Delamination failure in a unidirectional curved composite laminate,”
Tech. Rep. NASA CR-182018, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA),
Hampton, VA, USA, 1990. Accessed: 2025-05-28.
[21] S. Parida and A. Pradhan, “Influence of curvature geometry of laminated frp composite
panels on delamination damage in adhesively bonded lap shear joints,” International
Journal of Adhesion and Adhesives, vol. 54, pp. 57–66, 2014.
[22] E. J. Pineda, B. A. Bednarcyk, and T. K. Krivanek, “Post-buckling analysis of curved
honeycomb sandwich panels containing interfacial disbonds,” conference paper, NASA
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, United States, January 2016.
[23] W. Becker, “The in-plane stiffnesses of a honeycomb core including the thickness effect,”
Archive of Applied Mechanics, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 334–341, 1998.
[24] C. Berggreen and B. C. Simonsen, “Non-uniform compressive strength of debonded
sandwich panels - ii. fracture mechanics investigation,” Journal of Sandwich Structures
& Materials, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 483–517, 2005.
[25] B. F. Sørensen, K. Jørgensen, T. K. Jacobsen, and R. C. østergaard, “Dcb-specimen
loaded with uneven bending moments,” International Journal of Fracture, vol. 141,
pp. 163–176, 2006.
[26] E.
I.
AG,
“Rohacell
71
hero
-
structural
foam
core
material.”
https:
//performance-foams.evonik.com/en/products-and-solutions/rohacell/
rohacell-hero-170036.html, 2022. Accessed: 2025-05-26.
V
==PAGE:88==
References
[27] S. GmbH, “Cormaster cn1 - kevlar n636 honeycomb core material.” https://www.
schuetz-composites.net/en/honeycombs/cormaster-cn1/, 2025.
Accessed: 2025-
05-26.
[28] I. AG, “Composite materials - prepregs, laminates, and technical composites.” https:
//www.isovolta.com/composites_en.php, 2025. Accessed: 2025-05-26.
[29] D. SystĂ¨mes, Surface-Based Fluid Cavities: Overview. Dassault SystĂ¨mes Simulia
Corp., Providence, RI, USA, 2022. Abaqus 2022 Documentation.
[30] P. P. Camanho and S. R. Hallett, eds., Numerical Modelling of Failure in Advanced
Composite Materials. Woodhead Publishing Series in Composites Science and Engi-
neering, Cambridge, United Kingdom: Woodhead Publishing, 1st ed., 2015.
[31] R. Krueger, “Virtual crack closure technique: History, approach, and applications,”
Engineering Fracture Mechanics, vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 252–271, 2004.
[32] S. Smith and I. Raju, Evaluation of Stress-Intensity Factors Using General Finite-
Element Models. ASTM STP, ASTM International, 1998.
[33] M. L. Williams, “The stresses around a fault or crack in dissimilar media,” Bulletin of
the Seismological Society of America, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 199–204, 1959.
[34] I. Raju, J. C. Jr., and M. Aminpour, “Convergence of strain energy release rate com-
ponents for edge-delaminated composite laminates,” Engineering Fracture Mechanics,
vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 383–396, 1988.
[35] J. R. Rice, “A path independent integral and the approximate analysis of strain concen-
tration by notches and cracks,” Journal of Applied Mechanics, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 379–386,
1968.
[36] D. Systemes, Abaqus 2022 Documentation: Contour Integral Analysis, 2022. Accessed:
2025-02-10.
[37] T. Tay, F. Shen, K. Lee, A. Scaglione, and M. D. Sciuva, “Mesh design in finite element
analysis of post-buckled delamination in composite laminates,” Composite Structures,
vol. 47, no. 1-4, pp. 603–611, 1999.
[38] M. Farshad, “Buckling of plastic pipes,” in Plastic Pipe Systems: Failure Investigation
and Diagnosis, pp. 101–133, Elsevier, 2006.
[39] C. Casarotto, “Development of a fracture mechanical analysis model for disbond dam-
ages in curved sandwich components.” Internal report, Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), Aug. 2024.
[40] V. Mangudi, “Image via wikimedia commons.” https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Nose_Lufthansa_D-AIML_A380-841_(29324827394).jpg, n.d.
Licensed
under CC BY 2.0. Accessed May 28, 2025.
VI
==PAGE:89==
References
[41] F. Daricik, “Mesh size sensitivity analysis for interlaminar fracture of the fiber-reinforced
laminated composites,” Journal of Engineered Fibers and Fabrics, vol. 14, pp. 1–6, 2019.
[42] A. Quispitupa, C. Berggreen, and L. A. Carlsson, “On the analysis of a mixed mode
bending sandwich specimen for debond fracture characterization,” Engineering Fracture
Mechanics, vol. 76, no. 7, pp. 997–1010, 2009.
VII
==PAGE:90==
Appendix
A
Mode Mixity Parameters
Equation 1.5 from section 1.2 makes use of the oscillatory index γ, given by equa-
tion A.22, where β is the bi-material interface parameter, given in equation A.23.
γ = 1
2π ln 1 −β
1 + β
(A.22)
β = G1(k2 −1) −G2(k1 −1)
G1(k2 + 1) + G2(k1 + 1)
(A.23)
Gi is the shear modulus and ki the shear correction factor. Here the index i = 1, 2 refers
to face sheet (i = 1) and core (i = 2). ki is given in equation A.24, where the Poisson ratio
νi is once again for face sheet and core.
ki =
(
3−νi
1+νi
Plane stress
3 −4νi
Plane strain
(A.24)
B
Fracture Mechanics Testing
Just as yield strength is a critical parameter for metals, fracture toughness must be
tested and characterized for individual materials and material interfaces. This allows for
comparison with the energy release rate determining if crack propagation will occur.
Over the years, various fracture toughness tests have been developed for simple lam-
inates.
Several of these methods are now being adapted and standardized for use with
sandwich composites. The most widely used tests include:
• Single cantilever beam (SCB): mode-I dominant interface fracture toughness
• Double cantilever beam (DCB): mode-I dominant interface fracture toughness
• Mixed-mode bending (MMB): mixed mode-I/mode-II interface fracture toughness
• Double cantilever beam subject to uneven bending moments (DCB-UBM): mixed
mode-I/mode-II interface fracture toughness
These tests aim at characterizing Gc at different values of ψ, but they are currently
limited to flat sandwich panels. Figure 76 (reference [42]) illustrates a variety of sandwich
tests: (a) DCB, (b) Cracked Sandwich Beam (CSB), (c) Tilted Sandwich Beam (TSD), (d)
MMB, (e) SCB and (f) DCB-UBM.
VIII
==PAGE:91==
Figure 76: Disbond fracture tests for sandwich composites. Source: [42]
C
Auxiliary CSDE Parameters
The equations presented below define the auxiliary parameters used in the Crack Surface
Displacement Extrapolation (CSDE) method, as discussed in section 3.2.1.
The terms n and m are transformation coefficients used to rotate the displacement field
into local crack tip coordinates. The parameter ρ accounts for material anisotropy, while
λ is a stiffness ratio used to scale displacements. These depend on the reduced stiffness
(compliance) matrix components Sij, which are defined for an orthotropic material in terms
of the engineering constants: Young’s moduli E1 and E2, shear modulus G12, and Poisson’s
ratios ν12 and ν21.
n =
r
1
2(1 + ρ)
m =
s
1
2(1 −ρ)

λ = S11
S22
ρ = 1
2 · 2S12 + S66
√S11S22
S11 = 1
E1
S22 = 1
E2
S12 = S21 = −ν12
E1
= −ν21
E2
S66 =
1
G12
D
Crack Propagation with VCCT
As anticipated in section 3.1.2, a contact property must be assigned to the VCCT
interaction. This is generally defined as frictionless tangential behavior.
To this contact pair a VCCT fracture criterion is assigned, defining the mixed mode
behavior. The one currently implemented in the code is the BK (Benzeggagh-Kenane) law,
equation D.25.
IX
==PAGE:92==
GequivC = GIC + (GIIC −GIC)

GII + GIII
GI + GII + GIII
η
(D.25)
Critical values of fracture toughness for the material, GIC, GIIC and GIIIC, need to
be assumed and declared in the code. The exponent η is determined by a curve fit to the
fracture toughness data, Gc, plotted as a function of the mixed-mode ratio, GII/GT. The
criterion applied to determine crack propagation is for the equivalent ERR Gequiv not to
overcome the critical one GequivC:
Gequiv > GequivC · (1 + tolerance)
The tolerance is also declared when defining the contact property. The value used in the
study was 0.2, corresponding to a 20% increase over the critical fracture toughness. Viscosity
is assigned as null. Alternatively to the BK law of equation D.25, the power law can be used
to determine the equivalent critical fracture toughness GequivC.
In case a crack propagation study is carried out, it is important to choose an appropriate
time increment, as only one node bonding can be broken per each time increment.
The variable ’EFENRRTR’, effective energy release rate ratio Gequiv/GequivC, can be
added to the output request if crack propagation is studied.
X
==PAGE:93==
E
VCCT Model, ERR Result Visualization
Below an example of visualization of the ERRs results in a VCCT simulation, from
section 3.1.3. The outcome is represented in the .odb file by highlighting the mesh cells
corresponding to the crack tip. Two examples are given, for linear and quadratic elements,
both with 1 mm mesh element size at the crack tip.
(a) Overall model in the .odb file
(b) Crack tip detail
Figure 77: VCCT Model, r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm, crack tip size 1 mm, CPE4
(a) Overall model in the .odb file
(b) Crack tip detail
Figure 78: VCCT Model, r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm, crack tip size 1 mm, CPE8
XI
==PAGE:94==
F
Instability Plots, Preliminary Study, section 5.2.1:
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Post-buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape 2
(f) Post-buckled shape 3
Figure 79: Supplementary instability plots. r = 150 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XII
==PAGE:95==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape
(f) Post-buckled shape 1
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 80: Supplementary instability plots. r = 200 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XIII
==PAGE:96==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape
(f) Post-buckled shape 1
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 81: Supplementary instability plots. r = 250 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XIV
==PAGE:97==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Post-buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape 2
(f) Post-buckled shape 3
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 82: Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XV
==PAGE:98==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Pre-buckled shape 2
(e) Post-buckled shape
(f) Post-buckled shape 1
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 83: Supplementary instability plots. r = 500 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XVI
==PAGE:99==
G
Instability Plots, Preliminary Study, section 5.2.2:
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Post-buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape 1
(f) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 84: Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 50 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XVII
==PAGE:100==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Post-buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape 1
(f) Post-buckled shape 2
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 85: Note: same as figure 82. r = 300 mm, a0 = 100 mm, hc = 25.4 mm, hf1 = hf2 =
1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XVIII
==PAGE:101==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Post-buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape 1
(f) Post-buckled shape 2
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 86: Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 150 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XIX
==PAGE:102==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Post-buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape 2
(f) Post-buckled shape 3
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 87: Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 200 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XX
==PAGE:103==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Pre-buckled shape 2
(e) Post-buckled shape
(f) Post-buckled shape 1
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 88: Supplementary instability plots. r = 300 mm, a0 = 250 mm, hc = 25.4 mm,
hf1 = hf2 = 1 mm. Al face sheets and Al honeycomb core. Deformation scale factor 2
XXI
==PAGE:104==
H
Instability Plots, Radome Case Study, section 5.3:
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Post-buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape 2
(f) Post-buckled shape 3
Figure 89: Supplementary instability plots, radome case study. r = 930 mm, a0 = 200 mm,
hc = 8.0 mm, hf1 = hf2 = 0.6 mm. Deformation scale factor 2
XXII
==PAGE:105==
(a) Pre-buckled shape
(b) Post-buckled shape
(c) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 90: Supplementary instability plots, radome case study, full radome section. r =
930 mm, a0 = 200 mm, hc = 8.0 mm, hf1 = hf2 = 0.6 mm. Deformation scale factor 15
XXIII
==PAGE:106==
(a) Pressure & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(b) Phase Angle & ERR over Rel. Displacement
(c) Pre-buckled shape
(d) Post-buckled shape
(e) Post-buckled shape 2
(f) Post-buckled shape 3
(g) Post-buckled final shape
Figure 91: Supplementary instability plots, radome case study. r = 930 mm, a0 = 50 mm,
hc = 8.0 mm, hf1 = hf2 = 0.6 mm. Deformation scale factor 2
XXIV
