==PAGE:1==
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo
through growth­coupled selection schemes
in bacteria
Master Thesis
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center For Biosustainability
Systems Environmental Microbiology (SEM)
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection
schemes in bacteria
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Mathias Herløv Wagner
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Systems Environmental Microbiology (SEM), Building 220, Henrik
Dams Allé, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://sem-cfb.com/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for
Biosustainability, Systems Environmental Microbiology group, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Biotechnology
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Mathias Herløv Wagner ­ s201352
Signature
Date
ii
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The development of sustainable biotechnological production platforms is vital for address­
ing global climate challenges. This study focuses on engineering the promiscuous oxy­
genation activity of Rhodospirillum rubrum RuBisCO as a novel pathway for glycolate
biosynthesis, leveraging its ability to catalyze a promiscuous oxygenation reaction. A
synthetic auxotrophic Escherichia coli strain (GLY­AUX∆) was used as a growth­coupled
sensor, enabling direct selection for improved RuBisCO variants based on restored growth
via glycolate production. The RuBisCO gene was subjected to three parallel mutagenesis
and evolutionary strategies: adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) using continuous turbido­
stat cultivation, error­prone PCR (epPCR) for random mutagenesis, and cluster­based
directed mutagenesis informed by deep mutational scanning data. The ALE platform
was successfully implemented using PioreactorTMand yielded evolved clones exhibiting
improved growth, indicative of putative enhancement in RuBisCO­mediated glycolate pro­
duction. The mutations discovered could not be fully validated in this study and further
effort is required to confirm the effect. Although epPCR did not yield beneficial variants
within the experimental time frame, it highlighted the limitations of random mutagenesis
related to the landscape of mutations obtained. Furthermore, it enabled the discussion
of the mutational landscape theoretically related to random mutagenesis approaches. Di­
rected mutagenesis, guided by co­evolutionary and structural clustering of beneficial mu­
tations, enabled the construction of targeted variant libraries for future screening. This
work demonstrates the feasibility of in vivo growth­coupled evolution and selection for
engineering enzyme promiscuity and lays the foundation for harnessing RuBisCO’s oxy­
genase activity in sustainable glycolate production.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Mathias Herløv Wagner, Honours MSc Biotechnology civil engineering, DTU
Enrico Orsi, Postdoc, Supervisor
I would like to express so much gratitude to Enrico for being not only a supervisor focused
on this project but for being an overall amazing mentor in all aspects of science I have
learnt at the SEM group.
Pablo Ivan Nikel, Full professor / Head of section, Supervisor and tutor
I am very grateful to Pablo for giving me the opportunity to be part of the amazing SEM
research group. It has been an amazing experience being part of this group and I have
learnt incredibly much from you and everyone else. I would also like to thank Pablo for
having accepted to be my personal tutor in connection to the DTU honours student pro­
gram.
SEM group
I would like to express my gratitude to the entirity of the SEM group. I feel very privileged
to have had the chance to work with everyone in the group. I also thank everyone for the
day­to­day help and guidance that was freely and happily given at any point during my
stay with the group.
Rebecca Schmieder, Partner
I am incredibly grateful to Rebecca for spending significant amounts of time reading my
thesis. Getting another set of eyes on the thesis is invaluable and your help certainly
improved the product!
iv
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Global need and relevance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The past, the present, and the future of RuBisCO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Growth­coupled selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Random mutagenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Cluster based directed mutagenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7
Research outline and evolutionary divergence vs convergence . . . . . . . 10
2
Materials and Methods
13
2.1
Strains and media composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
General molecular biology techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
DNA analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Growth experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.5
Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.6
Error prone PCR (epPCR) mutagenesis of R. rubrum RuBisCO . . . . . . . 20
2.7
Directed mutagenesis by orthogonality clustering based on deep mutational
scan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3
Results
25
3.1
Establishing a sensor strain with tight demand under high CO2 conditions . 25
3.2
Constructing a reliable and versatile CBB expression plasmid . . . . . . . . 26
3.3
Assembling, calibration and testing of Pioreactors as a continuous fermen­
tation vessel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.4
Long­term ALE turbidostat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.5
epPCR library of R. rubrum cbbM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.6
Directed mutagenesis of R. rubrum cbbM on clusters based on a DMS of
RuBisCO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4
Discussion
45
4.1
Expression system for evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.2
Pioreactor setup and assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.3
Selection of auxotrophic strain for evolution and testing
. . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.4
Choice of chemostat vs turbidostat and ALE parameter setup . . . . . . . . 47
4.5
Structural analysis of RuBisCO mutation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.6
Reproducing mutations from ALE experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.7
Random mutagenesis approach and the pitfalls of it
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.8
Directed mutagenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.9
Comparison of the three methods of mutagenesis/laboratory evolution used
in this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5
Future recommendations
55
5.1
ALE experiment with higher selective pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.2
Finishing the directed evolution libraries and combining beneficial clusters . 55
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
v
==PAGE:8==
6
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
58
A Oligonucleotides and plasmids
63
A.1 Primers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.2 Plasmids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
B Gel pictures
67
C Time between dilution plots from MW_pio_003 and MW_pio_004
69
vi
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Global need and relevance
The world is currently facing a tremendous risk in the global climate change crisis. One
of the main contributors to the climate crisis is the emission of greenhouse gases (GHG),
specifically fossil CO2 which represents the largest fraction of emitted GHGs. As reported
in the annual report of the UN Environment Program’s ”Emissions Gap Report” from 2024,
global GHG emissions reached a record high of 57.1 Gt in 2023, with fossil CO2 account­
ing for approximately 68% of this at around 39 Gt emitted [1]. Although global awareness
has increased throughout the last decade, the emissions continue to increase every sin­
gle year (few exceptions, like 2020). The world’s population is steadily growing and will be
nearing 10 billion people by 2060 according to global population projections. The burden
of sustaining this continued population increase will only further increase emissions from
almost all sectors [2]. Human involvement in accelerating the climate crisis is evident,
and large scale actions such as global deforestation, waste management, fertilization,
changes in land use and the growth of fossil­based transportation release substantial
amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere [3].
Among all sectors, the power sector contributes the most significant emissions. However,
the individual sectors of fuel production, transport, industrial processes and agriculture
make up approximately 45% of the total emissions [1]. These sectors have the poten­
tial for significant improvements through a green effort in the field of biotechnology and
synthetic biology. For thousands of years humans have harnessed microorganisms for
purposes such as beer brewing and wine making. But since the key discovery of DNA in
1953 by Watson & Crick, biotechnology as a whole has seen rapid increase in complexity
and range of technologies and methodologies [4]. Synthetic biology as a field formed in
the early 21st century, building on the discovery by Watson and Crick [5] [6] [7]. The field
has been growing rapidly since. The advances in synthetic biology include designing a
whole range of tools to genetically modify and tweak the very foundation of life: DNA. From
novel synthetic parts, devices, oscillators and biological gates for deleting and inserting
specific genes into the genome of microorganisms, synthetic biology has already shown
its great potential. With the combined efforts from the fields of systems biology, bioinfor­
matics, artificial intelligence, bioengineering technologies and more, synthetic biology is
breaking through barriers that have limited the technology so far [5].
The engineering tools and methods developed for microorganisms have been used to cre­
ate, enhance and in other ways improve growth, production, tolerance to toxic compounds
and many other interesting features of microorganisms. As a result of these technologies
and methods, present day fermentation can be much more than just beer brewing and
wine making. Today, fermentation is utilized in the production of a plethora of different
compounds in medicine, agriculture, biofuel industry, etc. [8].
Production of biofuels, chemicals, and industrially relevant polymers in addition to biomass
treatment strive towards a carbon neutral state through advances in biotechnology. By
utilizing the metabolic machinery of different microorganisms that have been developed
and fine­tuned for millennia, we can attempt to lower the emissions of certain production
and treatment processes.
On the path to sustainable production of the aforementioned compounds, one­carbon (C1)
metabolism has been a growing topic of research. Whilst the world needs to move away
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
1
==PAGE:10==
from the use of fossil fuels for energy generation, it is vital that production also follows
the trend of moving towards greater sustainability [9]. Predominantly, the C1­molecules
CO2 (carbon dioxide), CH4 (methane), CO (carbon monoxide), CH3OH (methanol) and
HCOO­ (formate) are of interest in bio­based manufacturing as renewable, cheap and
readily available feeds­stock. Currently, bio­based production mainly relies on sugar­
based carbon sources for production, but these substrates are rather expensive and not
sustainable. Genetically engineering bacteria has emerged as a way to alter gene regula­
tion, metabolism and many other internal factors ´to make cell factories. The utilization of
these techniques in combination with more complete mapping of the metabolic landscape
of bacteria are key factors on the path to synthetic C1­chemoautotrophic strains [10] [11].
The development of strains able to grow on C1­feedstocks is just the first step, as the
final aim of this line of research is production of value­added compounds from abundant
C1­feedstocks. With this in mind one important difference between C1­feedstocks and
sugar­based feedstocks is the lack of carbon­carbon bonds. This difference means that
cell­factories employed for production will need to generate these de novo by assimila­
tory pathways. Multiple examples of assimilatory pathways employed in the production of
valuable compounds from C1­feedstocks have been discovered. As summarized by Lv
et al., there already exist a whole range of products that can be made from C1­feedstocks
by different prokaryotes, eukaryotes, and fungi [12].
Some compounds are already produced by natural autotrophs such as Cupriavidus neca­
tor, which has been rapidly gaining interest as a microbial workhorse that can produce a
wide variety of compounds and, maybe even more importantly, is capable of growing
solely on CO2 [11]. One such compound, which can be produced by engineering, is gly­
colate (C2H3O3­), the salt/ester of glycolic acid. Glycolate itself has uses in the medical,
chemical, and textile industries, in addition to being the precursor of biopolymers of great
value. Production of glycolate with microorganisms at titers up to 1.4 g/l in E. coli [13]
and 15 g/l in saccharomyces cerevisiae [14] has been achieved. However, the glycolate
/ glycolic acid currently supplying the market is produced by dissolving formaldehyde, or
a polymer thereof, in water containing a catalyst, preferably having acidic characteris­
tics, and exposing it to high­pressure and high­temperature and an atmosphere of carbon
monoxide [15]. Another method is by enzymatic conversion of glycolonitrile to glycolic
acid by a microbial nitrilase produced by Alcaligenes sp. ECU0401 [16]. Both of these
processes are unsustainable. Because of this, the requirement to swap productions like
the one of glycolate to more sustainable alternatives is evident, as one way to combat the
global climate crisis is converting current production to sustainable options, whilst aiming
to maintain titers, economic viability and upholding a global responsibility. An additional
unexplored way of synthesizing glycolate is harnessing the oxygenation of ribulose­1,5­
bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase(RuBisCO). RuBisCO is one of the most well stud­
ied enzymes in history. One of the reasons for this is its sheer abundance as it seems
to be one of, if not, the most abundant single enzyme in the world [17]. RuBisCO cat­
alyzes, as the name suggests, the carboxylation or oxygenation reaction of ribulose­1,5­
bisphosphate(RuBP). This enzyme is of vast interest in the topics of CO2­assimilation and
usage for C1­metabolism as the carboxylation reaction captures the carbon of one CO2.
However, this study will focus on the promiscuous oxygenation reaction of RuBisCO that,
instead of using CO2 as a co­substrate, uses O2. Specifically, the goal will be the evolu­
tion of RuBisCO in the direction of a more favored and faster oxygenation reaction, which
is opposed to the natural evolution of RuBisCO over the last millions of years. This study
slots into a larger project, which is the development of a sustainable glycolate produc­
tion using the promiscuous oxygenation reaction of RuBisCO to produce glycolate in the
model organism C. necator.
2
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:11==
1.2
The past, the present, and the future of RuBisCO
The promiscuous oxygenation reaction of the RuBisCO naturally produces a glycolate
precursor. The products are 3­phosphoglycerate(3PG), which is further metabolized in
the Calvin­Benson­Bassham cycle(CBBc), and 2­phosphoglycolate(2PG). In nature, this
compound is reassimilated through the process of photorespiration, which allows it to re­
enter the CBBc. The process of photorespiration is energetically costly and loses one
carbon in the form of CO2 per two molecules of 2PG reassimilated [11] [18]. The CBBc is
depicted in figure fig. 1.1
Figure 1.1: Simple overview of the Calvin­Benson­Bassham cycle made by Vedantu[19].
The RuBisCO enzyme has been around for several billion years and was even present
before the first Great Oxygenation Event (GOE). This means that RuBisCO’s function as a
carbon fixing enzyme through its carboxylation reaction originally did not have to face the
substrate competition of free O2 vs. CO2 [20]. Furthermore, the abundance of free CO2 at
around more than 20% before the first GOE meant that it was readily available. Thus, the
original carbon fixating enzyme that both modern day RuBisCOs and old RuBisCO­like
proteins derive from, did not need to evolve in a way to discern effectively between CO2
and O2. However, after the first GOE, the free oxygen in the atmosphere increased to
around more than 1% whilst the free CO2 was continuously decreasing. The decrease
in atmospheric CO2 continued till and past the second GOE, where the free O2 rose to
present day levels at almost 21%. The decrease in free CO2 resulted in modern day
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
3
==PAGE:12==
levels of around 0.04% free CO2 in the atmosphere [20]. As reported by Erb et al. [20],
there are several different hypotheses for how and why RuBisCO evolved like it did. It is
clear that several different sources of evolutionary pressure have shaped the kinetic and
substrate space of RuBisCO.
The unknown evolutionary origins lead us to what we know of modern day RuBisCOs.
There are a wealth of different RuBisCOs which are present in all three domains of life:
archaea, prokaryotes and eukaryotes. One commonality among the RuBisCOs of all three
domains is their main function of carbon­fixation. As mentioned above, the carboxylation
reaction of RuBisCO is a way to fix one carbon from CO2 to create two three carbon
molecules from a 5 carbon molecule substrate. More than 90% of inorganic carbon con­
verted to biomass goes through the carboxylation reactions of RuBisCOs. Despite the
fact that RuBisCO has such a large role in feeding life on Earth, it is rather inefficient and
has, for some forms of RuBisCO more than others, low specificity between its substrates
CO2 and O2. In the context of using inorganic carbon as a substrate for biomass, the
oxygenation reaction of RuBisCO is a mistake. Therefore, some RuBisCOs have evolved
to have a lower ”error­rate” or evolved to have a higher specificity for CO2 than others.
In particular, form I plant RuBisCOs have developed a higher CO2 specificity as recently
highlighted by Prywes et al. [21].
RuBisCO has been a hot­topic enzyme for decades with the aim of harnessing the CO2
fixing abilities of the enzyme. The future of RuBisCO is interesting as advancements in the
tools and approaches of synthetic biology enable the potential to rewire the biochemical
prowess of RuBisCO. The majority of research related to RuBisCO is focused on enhanc­
ing and utilizing the carboxylation reaction or increasing the specificity to CO2. Various
approaches to meet this end are being explored. The efforts to revive ancient RuBisCOs
and evolve them under O2 rich conditions or re­engineering the protein scaffold of RuBis­
COs to allow for better distinction between CO2 and O2 are two examples. However, the
promiscuous oxygenation reaction of RuBisCO is a largely untapped resource. In­depth
characterization of the oxygenation reaction of RuBisCO and its performance in vivo is
lacking in current literature and will be a focus of this study. Furthermore, the product
2PG, as mentioned before, is a precursor for the bulk chemical glycolate/glycolic acid. To
produce glycolate anywhere near sufficient yields using the oxygenation reaction of Ru­
BisCO, there is a significant need to enhance the reaction rate or to lower the specificity
for CO2 vs O2 making the RuBisCO more ”sloppy”. The ”sloppiness” is measured by the
SC/O and the lower the value the more ”sloppy” the RuBisCO is in terms of its main car­
boxylation reaction. However, when trying to utilize the promiscuous oxygenation reaction
this ”sloppiness” is desired. There are only few papers published that focus on enhancing
the oxygenation reaction of RuBisCO such as Yang et al. [22]. While it is possible to
create enzyme variants with divergent substrate specificities and enzyme kinetics, selec­
tion for those remains challenging. Alternative approaches for direct selection of variants
with desired phenotypes is needed. Creating synthetic auxotrophies, that select for these
properties, is one way to perform direct selection.
1.3
Growth­coupled selection
A powerful tool in biotechnology research is creating auxotrophic metabolic sensors (AMS).
An auxotrophy is defined as the inability of an organism to synthesize a compound re­
quired for its growth. One example of an AMS strain is the E. coli DL39 strain which had
been genetically engineered to have auxotrophies for aspartic acid, isoleucine, leucine,
phenylananine, tyrosine, and valine residues [23]. Thus, this strain only grows in me­
dia that has all of these compounds supplied. A simple schematic and overview of the
4
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:13==
behavior of an AMS can be seen in fig. 1.2a­b.
Figure 1.2: Simple schematic overview of how auxotrophic metabolic sensors work. a)
Simple overview of a genomic knockout cutting off the metabolic pathways to an essential
metabolite for growth. b) Example of growth behavior of a simple auxotrophic metabolic
sensor strain in selective medium.
AMS strains of different bacterial or fungal species are constructed using genetic engi­
neering. This means rewiring the genome of microbes in a tailor­made fashion to cut
off certain metabolites or pathways at predetermined locations. By knocking out certain
genes encoding pathways leading to certain metabolites, it is possible to completely re­
move the ability to synthesize the given metabolite. A time­consuming and low­throughput
part of creating AMS strains lies in obtaining the knowledge of exactly which genes to
knock out or silence to obtain the desired phenotype. Recent development in in silico
metabolic models and the analysis hereof has showcased the potential for a more high­
throughput and versatile pipeline for constructing AMS [24].
Using metabolic models
that can predict novel and non­trivial auxotrophies streamlines the first part of creating
AMSs.
However, the design and genetic engineering of the strains can still be chal­
lenging. Through different genetic recombineering tools like the λ­red system [25] or
Cas9­mediated base editing tools [26] it is possible to either knock out genes entirely or
introduce premature stop­codons in the coding sequence(CDS) of the genes of interest
(GOI).
When creating AMS strains, the design has to be made with the target molecule as the
focus. It is possible to create AMS strains that sense and then express a fluorescent
protein like green­fluorescent protein (GFP) to turn the AMS strain into a biosensor for
the target molecule. The readout of the fluorescence can be normalized to biomass and
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
5
==PAGE:14==
this strain could be used for quantification of the target metabolite in a given medium. This
method could be used to monitor the production and excretion of the target molecule by
another organism in a co­culture setup. Another use of AMS strains is to test metabolic
pathways. Expressing certain metabolic pathways towards the target molecule of the
AMS would allow for evaluation by relating the specific growth rate µmax and max OD600
to the efficiency and viability of the pathway.
1.4
Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE)
Adaptive laboratory evolution is a commonly used method in various biological studies,
ranging from studying the basic mechanics of molecular evolution to adaptive evolution of
a population that accumulates because of a beneficial phenotype. Generally, in biotech­
nology, the use of ALE experiments is related to specific growth conditions that direct
a selective pressure in some predetermined way. ALE as a method has been used for
more than 30 years[27]. High quality and fast next generation sequencing (NGS) has
become available readily for researchers in most of the world for more than a decade
at relatively low cost [27]. This has resulted in a large increase in studies successfully
employing ALE methods to evolve microbes for biotechnological applications. As whole­
genome sequencing has become readily available, combined with the possibility of direct
read­outs of specific growth rates during ALE experiments, correlation between pheno­
type and genotype are easily obtained [27] [28].
ALE as a tool to investigate evolutionary phenomena is valuable as it can give insight
into the evolutionary mechanisms whilst operating in a controlled laboratory environment.
The principle ALE experiment utilizes the concept of ”survival of the fittest”, where the
microbial cells that adapt and obtain advantages in the environment in which they exist
take over populations and out­compete inferior variants. ALE experiments usually take
advantage of several unique traits of microbial cells, including the short generation time
of microbial cells such as E. coli, with a generation time as low as 20 minutes [29]. This
allows the microbial cells to go through hundreds or even thousands of generations in
weeks and few months. Furthermore, there are certain microbial species often used for
ALE experiments that are easy to cultivate with simple nutrient requirements such as E.
coli and saccharomyces cerevisiae. In this study E. coli will be used for ALE experiments.
As a biotechnological research method, ALE experiments generally have clearly defined
conditions of growth for a long period of time. These conditions are carefully selected
and defined to create selective pressure towards an improved phenotype. The aim can
be improved antibiotic resistance, novel antibiotic resistance, faster growth on certain
substrates, ability to utilize new substrates etc. As the possibilities are many and the
processes taking place in microbial cells during cell­division and growth are very complex,
it is crucial that ALE experiments are set up with a clear goal and defined conditions
to reach it. The conditions used for growth of the microbial cells will for the most part
completely direct which phenotype the cells are most likely to evolve towards.
Many different vessels are used for ALE experiments and this study will use the bioreac­
tors from PioreactorTM to perform ALE experiments. As these bioreactors are new to the
laboratory of this study, focus will also be on evaluating them for continuous cultivation
experiments, including an assessment of the ease of use, the consistency of operations,
the quality of the bioreactor itself and the ability to maintain sterility and avoid leaks.
1.4.1
Growth­coupled selection and ALE
As mentioned above, the most defining force of an ALE experiment is the selective pres­
sure and where it is directed towards. A powerful tool, with biotechnological applications
6
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:15==
in mind, is the development of auxotrophic strains to direct the selective pressure. Aux­
otrophic strains can be useful when studying certain synthetic pathways, specific enzymes
or certain parts of the metabolic network of microbial cells. Developing auxotrophies for
certain compounds synthesized by a pathway, module or single enzyme of interest allows
for the users to complement the auxotrophy with that specific enzyme, pathway or mod­
ule. The growth recovery of auxotrophic strain relies on supplementation to the medium or
complementation with heterologous enzymes [30]. As ALE experiments generally select
for the strain with the highest fitness, the selective pressure will likely be on the bottleneck
reaction of the pathway recovering growth. Unless extensive kinetic and in vivo research
on the given pathway of interest has been done prior to ALE it is possible that the bot­
tleneck is not the reaction of interest. Those reactions can however be de­bottlenecked
during a long term ALE, letting selective pressure shift to other reactions.
1.4.2
Different types of ALE experiments
Several different experimental setups for ALE have been developed, ranging from sim­
ple serial passages in shake­flasks and continuous cultivations in bioreactors, to serial
plating on agar plates. Automated continuous fermentation vessels, software and tech­
nology have become widely available. This greatly decreases the workload related to
long continuous evolution experiments, decreases the chances of human error and does
not restrain passage times to work­hours.
Two common types of continuous evolution ALE experiments are chemostats and tur­
bidostats. Exemplary dilution schemes for both types of dilution schemes can be seen in
fig. 1.3. The most common continuous fermentation method used for ALE experiments is
the chemostat method represented in fig. 1.3a. The cells in a chemostat are fed with fresh
media at a constant flow rate. The only parameter to control in a chemostat experiment
is the flow rate of the inflowing media. The goal of a chemostat experiment is to enter a
phase where the net growth rate of the population becomes zero. This results in a state
where the OD of the culture is steady. The chemostat method has been used widely to
research biological phenomena such as antibiotic resistance, population dynamics etc.
[28].
A main limitation of the chemostat setup is the inability to constrain the OD of the cells
when they are growing exponentially. This is caused by the delicate relation between
dilution rate and growth rate of the cells, as an imbalance between these either causes
the cells to wash out or an undesired phase is obtained where the cells grow at inferior
growth rates to exponential phase. A turbidostat setup, however, is exactly designed to
be able to constrain the OD of cells growing in exponential phase. This method uses a
feedback loop where real­time OD measurements dictate when dilutions with fresh media
happen at a fixed OD threshold as represented in fig. 1.3b. This allows for the growth of
many generations of cells in exponential phase in a short amount of time [28] [31] [32].
Since the OD constraint is the only thing dictating the dilutions, cells that evolve with a
phenotype of increased growth rates have the chance to take over the population. This
study will use the turbidostat method.
1.5
Random mutagenesis
ALE is not the only tool available to attempt to increase the catalytic efficiency of the oxy­
genation reaction of RuBisCO. Another method used for DNA manipulation and to screen
mutational variants of enzymes is random mutagenesis. The advantages of random mu­
tagenesis is that DNA sequences encoding genes can obtain novel mutations improving
desired properties of enzymes. The methods involving random mutagenesis generally do
not require any prior structural or mechanistic information [33].
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.3: Overview of theoretical chemostat and turbidostat dilution schemes. a) The
chemostat scheme represents a dilution rate set so that the cell density is kept constant.
b)The turbidostat scheme represents when dilutions happen at 60% total cell density
reached in first batch phase of a continuous fermentation experiment. A hypothetical
increase in growth rate is shown at hour 309, and subsequent population take over can
be seen.
Random mutagenesis, coupled with a good screening platform to select for improved
variants only, is a strong tool for studying the sequences of proteins and their function.
Furthermore, it can be used as a tool to obtain improved phenotypes by use of growth­
coupling. Utilizing growth­coupled selection to screen protein variants is an efficient tool
when searching for improved variants in a library harboring random mutations [24] [33]
[34].
1.5.1
Random mutagenesis by error prone PCR (epPCR)
The methods developed to perform random mutagenesis by epPCR takes advantage of
the natural error­proneness of the DNA replication machinery [35]. During PCR amplifica­
tion, the DNA replication machinery is used in vitro and thus the inherent error­proneness
can be harnessed. EpPCR generates a mutant library pool of the sequence, amplified by
the PCR reaction. This library has random mutations scattered throughout the entire am­
plified sequence. The rate of errors can be controlled by tweaking the PCR conditions and
8
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:17==
the PCR reaction mixture. For this study, the standard Taq DNA polymerase was used as
it is especially error­prone due to not having any 3’ to 5’ proofreading exonuclease activity
[33] [36].
Modifying the PCR reaction mixture and creating an imbalance of dNTPs, increasing
MgCl2 concentrations, or introducing MnCl2 to the mixture are different ways to increase
the error­proneness of Taq polymerase. The modification to the PCR reaction mixture
increases the chances of incorporating mis­matched bases while replicating the DNA.
Furthermore, the levels of mutagenesis can be somewhat controlled by controlling the
cycles of the PCR reaction [33] [36].
Two very important considerations when performing random mutagenesis by epPCR are
on one hand that despite epPCR introducing mutations at random positions throughout the
sequence, the amino acid substitutions that happen might not be equal. The distribution
of A→C, A→G, A→T etc. mutations will not be uniformly distributed. From unpublished
data from collaborators, it is known that the method used in this study has a bias for
A→T mutations but generates all types of substitutions. The second consideration is that
mutations generated through random mutagenesis have no reference or relation to nature.
This means that a large number of mutations will be entirely unnatural and therefore will
be a ”waste” part of the mutant libraries generated [33].
1.6
Cluster based directed mutagenesis
Prywes et al. [21] developed and conducted a massive parallel, growth­coupled assay
on an engineered E. coli ∆rpiAB strain to systemically map the sequence to function
landscape of the R. rubrum cbbM form II RuBisCO. They constructed a library of almost
all single­amino­acid mutants in R. rubrum RuBisCO. Over 180,000 barcodes represent­
ing 8,760 variants, whose fitness was assayed under ten CO2 concentrations, were se­
quenced. By measuring the relative growth rate across the CO2 titration, they inferred the
apparent catalytic parameters Kcat via Vmax and CO2 affinity KC for thousands of mutants.
The study by Prywes et al. found many mutations that had a positive effect on the esti­
mated Vmax and KC which is the Km for CO2. The effect size on each parameter for all
mutations generated was made public and utilized in this study. The substrates of CO2
and O2 for RuBisCO are incredibly similar in properties, size, and structure. Therefore, it
is hypothesized that mutations that affect the carboxylation reaction also affect the oxy­
genation reaction [21]. The study by Prywes et al. solely focused on single amino acid
substitutions whereas this study will attempt to combine clusters of the beneficial muta­
tions and test them for the oxygenation reaction [21].
Based on the data from Prywes et al. [21], a cluster­based directed mutagenesis strat­
egy was designed for this study. As mentioned above, the relation between the catalytic
efficiency for carboxylation in terms of Vmax and KC are believed to be high. The results
generated in this study could be used to discuss that idea. However, for the directed
mutagenesis approach for this study, two critical assumptions are made related to this.
The first assumption is that the KC for CO2 co­varies with the KM for the promiscuous
oxygenation reaction with O2 as substrate. The second assumption is that the Vmax co­
varies for both reactions in a similar fashion. When making these two assumptions, the
use the DMS data for both kinetic parameters to construct initial mutant libraries becomes
possible. The aim is to jointly optimize for both parameters and generate a reduced size
mutant library for testing in this study.
The cluster based directed mutagenesis approach relies on structural analysis of a pro­
tein and co­evolution analysis of residues of the given protein. When a large data set with
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
9
==PAGE:18==
specific mutations to test is already available, these two analyses can help reduce the rel­
evant library sizes needed to test the mutations of interest. By clustering specific amino
acid residues together based on their structural vicinity or interaction with each other, and
if they have been subject to co­evolution, the total library size can be reduced. Highly
structurally related or co­evolved residues likely do not make sense to mutate separately
due to high chances of disrupting protein folding or the function of the protein. This allows
the partitioning of the set of mutations found to be jointly beneficial in the DMS performed
by Prywes et al. [21]. These clusters, once defined, will be synthesized with NNK de­
generacies in primers at the residues of interest. Codon degeneracy is a method used in
protein engineering for saturation mutagenesis. Including an NNK codon at a given site
will result in all amino­acid substitutions at this position.
The purpose of the clustering of amino acids in this type of protein engineering is also to
attempt to obtain beneficial mutations within clusters that can be recombined in a mod­
ular fashion. As the co­evolution and structural analysis has split them accordingly, the
method leverages the natural evolutionary constraints to build libraries which, after indi­
vidual assessment, can be combined in future experiments. This method avoids the large
workload of ad­hoc splitting all mutations and evaluating them all separately.
1.7
Research outline and evolutionary divergence vs
convergence
The scope of this study was to screen / evolve a better RuBisCO variant for the oxygena­
tion reaction. The purpose was to harness the oxygenation reaction of RuBisCO in a
biotechnological production scheme for glycolate. Furthermore, this study aims to aid in
the characterization of the promiscuous oxygenation reaction in vivo. In this study, several
different methods of evolution/mutagenesis was applied in a growth­coupled scheme for
the R. rubrum cbbM form II RuBisCO. The overall scheme for the evolution of RuBisCO’s
oxygenation reaction can be seen in fig. 1.4.
Firstly, the glycolate sensor strain GLY­AUX developed by Orsi et al. [34] with an addi­
tional deletion of the gcvTHP operon was used for growth­coupled assays and evolution
experiments. The auxotrophic GLY­AUX strain needs supplementation or production of
glycolate or glyoxylate for glycine synthesis; the selection scheme can be seen in fig. 1.5.
Prior studies have developed and tested the rescued growth of this auxotrophic strain by
introducing the prk and RuBisCO CBB module.
Secondly, the development of a stable and versatile expression plasmid for the CBB genes
was crucial for the purpose of growth­coupled selection and evolution in this study. A plas­
mid construct was obtained that could reliably rescue growth in GLY­AUX by expression
of the CBB module. The prk in this plasmid was from c. necator. The RuBisCO gene
studied is the R. rubrum cbbM RuBisCO, and was chosen as it is the archetypical form II
RuBisCO used in literature when studying RuBisCOs.
Lastly, the GLY­AUX strain was used for a parallel three­pronged evolution/mutagenesis
approach in this study by the use of ALE, epPCR random mutagenesis, and cluster based
directed mutagenesis based on data from literature [21].
A new bioreactor setup was used for continuous cultivation in the ALE experiment and was
evaluated in this study. The ALE experiment utilizes growth coupled selection by rescuing
growth in GLY­AUX solely by the glycolate produced through the CBB module [32] [37].
Furthermore, evolution observed in the ALE experiments was tested and re­constructed
in naive expression plasmids to confirm beneficial effects. The general setup, and details
10
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.4: Overview of the three methods utilized in this study with the aim of obtaining
an evolved RuBisCO variant with enhanced oxygenation activity.
Figure 1.5: Schematic overview of the selection scheme employed in the sensor strain
GLY­AUX constructed by Orsi et al. [34] with an additional deletion of the gcvTHP operon.
The overview is for an E. coli auxotroph and represents the need for glyoxylate or glycolate
for glycine synthesis in the strain. This strain needs formation supplied in the media to
form methionine, CoA and thymidine.
related to operation of the ALE experiment, are discussed, and especially the selective
pressure and turbidostat parameters is of focus in this discussion.
The epPCR random mutagenesis approach was employed in this study parallel to the ALE
experiment with the aim of using growth­coupled selection to sort out beneficial mutations.
The random mutagenesis approach of this study did not yield any beneficial mutations.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
11
==PAGE:20==
However, the nature of this approach and the pitfalls related to experimental execution
and theoretical mutational landscape obtained with epPCR random mutagenesis are dis­
cussed in depth [33] [36].
The cluster based directed mutagenesis approach was performed as described in section
1.6. The analysis utilizes an extensive data­set generated by Prywes et al. [21] and with
collaboration from Niklas Gesmar Madsen generated 4 mutational clusters to be tested
in this study. The partitioning of jointly beneficial mutations for carboxylation found by
Prywes et al. is performed with the goal of greatly reducing library size and to obtain mu­
tagenic clusters whose effects might be additive. The mutagenesis performed is done with
codon degeneracies, like NNK codons, in primers that contain overlaps for subsequent
gibson assembly to re­assemble the plasmids [21]. The work on this part of the study
was unfortunately not possible to finish within the time­limits of the study. Several of the
clusters remain to go through growth­coupled selection and no mutant variants effect on
growth rate of GLY­AUX was tested.
In summary, the overall goal of this study was to obtain a mutated R. rubrum cbbM Ru­
BisCO variant with an improved oxygenation reaction. Different evolution/mutagenesis
such as ALE, epPCR random mutagenesis, and cluster based directed mutagenesis were
used. The GLY­AUX sensor strain depending on the CBB module including RuBisCO for
growth was used for all purposes, and this choice is discussed further in the study. It
was expected that the selective pressure of this strain would have the chance of generat­
ing and fixing beneficial mutations in RuBisCO during an ALE experiment. Furthermore,
it was expected that by performing growth­coupled selection on mutant libraries gener­
ated with the mutagenesis approaches would fix and single out beneficial mutations as
well. Extensive use of next­generation sequencing (NGS) was used to relate growth to
sequence and thereby sequence to function in this study.
12
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:21==
2
Materials and Methods
A full overview of primers and plasmids used in this study is attached in appendix A table
1 and table 2.
2.1
Strains and media composition
All strains used in this study can be found in table 2.1:
Table 2.1: Full strain list of every bacterial strain used in this study. Including a short
description and a genotype overview split into deletions and insertions.
Strain
Description
Genotype
Reference or source
E. coli DH5a
Chemically competent cells available in the lab.
Used for plasmid isolation and transformation.
F–φ80lacZΔM15 Δ(lacZYA­argF)U169
recA1 endA1 hsdR17(rK–, mK+) phoA
supE44 λ–thi­1 gyrA96 relA1
Lab collection
E. coli DH10b
Strain designed for the propagation of large size
DNA cloning libraries. Used to propagate large
size error­prone PCR libraries.
F–mcrA Δ(mrr­hsdRMS­mcrBC)
φ80lacZΔM15 ΔlacX74 recA1
endA1 araD139 Δ(ara­leu)7697
galU galK λ–rpsL(StrR) nupG
Lab collection
E. coli SIJ488
GLY­AUX
E. coli glyoxylate/glycolate auxotrophic strain.
Used to perform growth­coupled selection and ALE.
∆gcl ∆aceBAK ∆glcGB ∆glyA ∆ltaE
∆ghrB ∆ghrA ∆kbl­tdh
Orsi et al., 2025
lab collection
E. coli SIJ488
GLY­AUX∆
E. coli glyoxylate/glycolate auxotrophic strain.
Used to perform growth­coupled selection and ALE.
∆gcl ∆aceBAK ∆glcGB ∆glyA ∆ltaE
∆ghrB ∆ghrA ∆kbl­tdh gcvTHP::FRT
This study
lab collection
Chemicals and reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich Co. (St. Louis. MO, USA)
unless stated otherwise. The Glycolate auxotrophic strains were grown in M9 minimal
medium containing 50 mM Na2HPO4, 20 mM KH2PO, 1 mM NaCl,20 mM NH4Cl, 100
µM CaCl2, and 2 mM MgSO2. In addition the following trace elements were added to
the medium: 17.1 mM EDTA, 3.07 mM FeCl3, 0.616 mM ZnCl2, 0.0765 mM CuCl2·2H2O,
0.042 mM CoCl2·6H2O, 0.16 mM H3BO3, and 0.0081 mM MnCl2·4H2O. The M9 minimal
media was prepared in two variants, selective and relaxing, only differing in which carbon
sources were added. The selective variant, M9S, was prepared with 20 mM glycerol and
5 mM formate, whilst the relaxing variant, M9R, was prepared with 20 mM glycerol, 5 mM
formate, and 2 mM glycolate. The only antibiotic used in this study was kanamycin at a
concentration of 50 µg/mL making M9S+kan and M9R+kan.
2.2
General molecular biology techniques
2.2.1
PCR and gel electrophoresis
colony PCR (cPCR)
When performing cPCRs single colonies were picked with a sterile toothpick.
When
desired, the toothpick was used to streak the colony onto a new solid media plate e.g.
LB+kan or LB plates. Hereafter, the toothpick tip was placed into a PCR tube contain­
ing the PCR reaction mix. The PCR reaction mix used can be seen in table 2.2. The
PCR tubes were placed in a Thermocycler (BioRad) operated with the settings seen in
table 2.3.
The size of DNA fragments were analyzed with gel electrophoresis. SYBR safe gel DNA
staining dye was added to TAE (Tris base, acetic acid and EDTA) buffer containing 1%
agarose. After solidifying, the gel was placed in a horizontal gel electrophoresis system
(BioRad). The electrophoresis was performed at 100 V and 400 mA for 25 minutes and
the DNA was visualized using a UV transilluminator (GelDoc XR+, BioRad).
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
13
==PAGE:22==
Table 2.2: Overview of all components and corresponding volumes for colony PCR reac­
tion mixes.
Component
Volume (µl)
DNA polymerase (OneTaq Mastermix 2x (NEB))
12.5
Forward primer
1.25
Reverse primer
1.25
DMSO (If needed)
1
MilliQ H2O
9
Picked colony
­
Total
25
Table 2.3: Overview of Thermocycler settings for cPCRs using OneTaq polymerase Mas­
termix 2x (neb).
Step
Temperature (°C)
Time (min:s)
Cycles
Initial denaturation
94
3:00
1
Denaturation
94
0:15
30
Annealing
45­68
0:30
Extension
68
0:30 / kb
Final extension
68
10:00
1
Hold
10
∞
∞
2.2.2
Cloning techniques
USER cloning
USER cloning was used for site­directed mutagenesis in this study. Primers were de­
signed using the AMUSER 1.0 tool from DTU Healthtech [38]. One primer was designed
entirely complementary to the DNA sequence right next to the target position, while the
other primer contained the mis­matching nucleotide which, during amplification by PCR,
will ensure that all amplicons except for the original template harbor the mutation. In this
study, USER cloning was only used for single nucleotide mutagenesis; however, it can
be used for multiple nucleotides and entire codons.
Gibson assembly
Gibson assembly was used for construction of all plasmid libraries in this study. Primers
were designed for both the insert and the vector as represented in fig. 2.1. The primer
sets amplifying the RuBisCO gene contained overlapping regions of approximately 40 bp
of the adjacent backbone sequence. The insert and vector were then amplified by PCR
using either Q5 Hot Start High­Fidelity 2x master mix (NEB) or Phusion High­Fidelity PCR
master mix with HF buffer 2x (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Amplicons were gel extracted
using the Zymogen Gel DNA recovery kit (zymogen). The DNA was mixed in a 3:1 in­
sert:vector ratio and mixed with NEBuilder HiFi DNA assembly master mix 2x (NEB) in a
1:1 ratio. The product was transformed into either E. coli DH10b or GLY­AUX. All plasmid
libraries in this study were performed by amplifying RuBisCO and pCBB2.1_prk backbone
from the same plasmid template, thus overhangs on only one of each primer per set was
necessary for gibson assembly.
14
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.1: Simple overview of Gibson assembly as performed in this study. Primer oligos
were constructed so that 25­40 bp of matching overhangs would be present in adjacent
fragments for assembly. The exact same method was used for multiple fragment assem­
bly.
2.3
DNA analysis
2.3.1
DNA extraction and purification
Plasmid purification
When purifying plasmids, the GeneJET Plasmid Miniprep Kit from ThermoFisher was
used according to manufacturer’s instructions, with minor deviations. The culture used
for plasmid purification was always at least 10 ml and the final DNA elution was always
performed with MilliQ H2O and not elution buffer.
Genomic DNA(gDNA) extraction
Genomic DNA extractions in this study were performed using the QIAGEN DNeasy Blood
and Tissue Kit. The manufacturer’s protocol was followed with minor deviations. Up to 5
ml of cell culture was used, the initial cell resuspension was in 180 µl ATL buffer and the
final gDNA elution was done using milliQ H2O.
2.3.2
DNA sequencing
Sanger sequencing
When sending PCR products for sanger sequencing, 1 µl of PCR product and 1 µl of 100
µM primer was diluted in 30 µl of MilliQ H2O. These components were mixed in tubes of
the ready­to­use Mix2Seq kits from eurofins and sent for sequencing.
Whole plasmid sequencing
All whole plasmid sequencing performed in this study was done by Plasmidsaurus. Sam­
ples were prepared according to instructions from Plasmidsaurus and sent for whole
plasmid sequencing. The sequencing method used in this service is Oxford Nanopore
sequencing, a technique capable of both short­ and long­read sequencing.
Whole genome sequencing (WGS)
All WGS performed in this study was done using the ”standard” bacterial genome se­
quencing service from Plasmidsaurus. The samples were prepared according to the in­
structions of the service including quality and concentration checks.
Sequencing data analysis and treatment
Sanger sequencing results were aligned using the alignment tool in Benchling. All whole
plasmid and whole genome sequencing data analysis was performed using Geneious
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
15
==PAGE:24==
prime. The raw reads from these services were downloaded as .fastq files and quality­
and adaptor­trimmed using BBDuk, a high­performance, k­mer–based trimming tool. The
trimmed reads were then aligned to the sequence map of the plasmid of interest as a ref­
erence using Minimap2 [39] [40]. Minimap2 is a pair­wise sequence alignment tool for nu­
cleotide sequences that efficiently maps both short­ and long­read sequencing. By map­
ping the reads to a reference using minimap2 a consensus contig based on all trimmed
reads and the input reference sequence is generated. The consensus sequence as well
as a read analysis can show mutations in the sequenced plasmids/genomes. Further­
more, using the raw reads of the sequencing services, instead of the assembled sequence
that is received from Plasmidsaurus, allows for analysis of populations of bacteria that are
not clonal. To locate all single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) observed throughout the
dataset of trimmed reads, the built­in function of Geneious Prime to ”Find­varitions and
SNPs” was used. The settings of this search was the standard settings for the tool.
2.4
Growth experiments
2.4.1
Standard growth conditions
All strains were grown on solid LB medium containing 1.2% agarose by streaking a frozen
cryostock onto the plate or by plating 100 µl liquid culture and spreading it with sterile glass
beads. The plates were incubated overnight (O/N) at 37°C. Single colonies were picked
and inoculated in 3 mL liquid LB. The liquid culture was incubated O/N at 37°C in a shaking
incubator set to 225 rounds per minute (rpm).
Gas composition
Strains incubated with a different gas composition, mainly related to %CO2 were incubated
in an isolated incubator with CO2 gas control at the same temperature and rpm, if in liquid
culture, as the standard growth conditions.
2.4.2
Pre­culturing conditions for plate reader experiments
The pre­culturing strategy used when performing plate­reader growth experiments in this
study have all been according to the scheme in fig. 2.2. The strains were streaked from a
frozen cryostock onto LB±kan; addition of kanamycin depended on strains. For GLY­AUX
or derivatives of GLY­AUX that harbored the pCBB2.1 plasmid, all experiments were con­
ducted with kanamycin. In this case kanamycin was a selection marker and largely pre­
vented contamination. Single colonies were picked and incubated in LB with kanamycin
if relevant. Next, 2 subsequent passages of 0.1% culture volume to M9S±+kan was per­
formed. Cultures were passed when approximately at an OD600 of 0.8­1.0.
Preparing cells for plate reader experiments
When the cells had grown sufficiently to an OD600 between 0.6­1.0 in the second pas­
sage in M9S±kan, they were harvested by centrifugation for 2 minutes at 4,700 rpm. The
cells were then washed three times by resuspending them in 1 mL M9 minimal media
without carbon source added. After the final washing step, the cells were resuspended in
M9S±kan and the final OD600 were measured in a spectrophotometer. The final OD600
value was used to inoculate fresh M9S±kan and M9R±kan with a starting OD600 of 0.01.
Three wells of a 96­well plate (technical triplicates) were loaded with 150 µL of the inocu­
lated fresh media and covered by pipetting 50 µL mineral oil carefully on top. The plates
were then placed in a microplate spectrophotometer (BioTek). The plate­readers were run
with orbital shaking at 200 rpm and at 37°C with OD600 measurements every 10 minutes.
Each condition or strain in plate­reader experiments in this study was made in technical
triplicates.
Calculation of growth rate and visualization of growth data
To process the growth data from the microplate spectrophotometer (BioTek), the data was
exported to excel and pre­processed to fit the growth2fig python data processing script
16
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:25==
Transfer 30 
µl to M9S ± 
kan50
Transfer 30 µl 
to M9S ± 
kan50
Streak 
onto LB ± 
kanamycin
Pick single 
colonies and 
inoculate liquid 
LB ± kan50
Inoculate 150 µl per well at 
OD600 0.01 in M9S ± kan50 and 
M9R ± kan50
Figure 2.2: Full overview of the standard pre­culturing strategy for plate­reader experi­
ments conducted in this study. Step 1: an auxotrophic strain was streaked onto LB+kan
agar plates from cryostock and inoculated at 37°C overnight. Single colonies were then
picked and grown overnight in liquid LB+kan. 0.1 % of the total culture volume was passed
to selective M9 minimal medium with kanamycin twice. Lastly, at sufficient density, the
cells were passed to selective or relaxing M9 medium and diluted to OD600 0.01 and the
plate reader experiment was started.
from Hai et al. [41]. The preprocessing steps included transforming day:hour:minute
format to seconds from start to finish of the experiment, deleting every row that was not
empty after the row of the last measurements and changing any outliers created from the
exporting back to their original measured values.
Hereafter, the measured values were calibrated to actual OD600 values by use of a cali­
bration curve made with the same strain, in the same media and on the same microplate
spectrophotometer (BioTek). The pre­processed data­sheet was then loaded into the
growth2fig script which was used to plot the data and calculate growth rate averaging
over three technical triplicates in all experiments [41].
2.5
Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE)
2.5.1
Equipment and standard operating settings
For all experiments related to ALE, small bench­top bioreactors from Pioreactortm were
used. These bioreactors are heat­controlled and, using a large magnetic stir bar, can
maintain constant stirring with up to 1000 rpm. OD is measured in real­time by IR­light
with scattering being recorded at a 90° angle at adjustable time intervals.
The vials used were 60 ml borosilicate glass vials with a working volume of 20 ml culture
in all ALE experiments. When setting up the vials with tubing through the caps to allow
media addition and waste removal, the tubes were positioned so the media inflow tubing
would drop the media straight into the liquid culture without touching other tubing or the
sides of the vessel, whilst the waste tube was positioned at the exact height of the surface
of the working volume in the vial. This allows the waste tube to only be able to remove
culture down to a minimum of the working volume intended for the experiment as well as
dosing automation setups to prevent any chances of the vial overflowing.
To run continuous evolution experiments two peristaltic pumps were used to precisely
control media in­flow and waste out­flow.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
17
==PAGE:26==
2.5.2
Calibration and experiment setup
Each reactor used was calibrated for OD600 measurements using cultures of GLY­AUX
inoculated in M9S±kan, as this is the strain used in all experiments related to the biore­
actors in this study. However, as the OD600 calibration software was faulty when this
study began, the calibrations were not used, and uncalibrated OD measurements were
used. Each individual peristaltic pump was calibrated with water to ensure precise and
controlled pumping of media and waste. The software used to perform each calibration
was the original software command­terminal based tools from Pioreactortm.
The setup used for the turbidostat experiments performed in this study was as follows
unless otherwise stated: temperature was 37 °C, the stirring was set to 750 rpm, and the
OD measurements were taken every 5 minutes.
The dosing automation used to control the peristaltic pumps of the bioreactors was a
pre­programmed turbidostat automation from Pioreactortm. This automation performs a
dilution of the culture in the vessel by adding 1 ml media and subsequently removing
2 ml, to prevent overflow of media, and then repeating these 2 steps as many times
as necessary until the ml media added, and thus dilution level, has reached the level
programmed by the user. For the experiments in this study the ml exchanged per dilution
was either 4, 6, 16, or 18 ml meaning either 20%, 30%, 80%, or 90% of the working
volume. The second input for the dosing automation is the OD threshold to start dilution
at. This value was chosen to be 60% of the final OD of a batch culture, grown in the same
exact bioreactor and vial, to keep all cells in the bioreactors constantly in exponential
growth phase.
Troubleshooting dry filters clogging
The issue of filters used between tubing in the bioreactor setup drying out and clogging
has been observed by several colleagues. To prevent this, a script using the formatting
specifically used for the bioreactors from Pioreactortm was created. The script is formatted
as an ”experiment profile” that can execute commands on the reactors at given intervals
independent of all other automations running on the specific bioreactor. The script to
prevent filters drying out and clogging by pumping media and waste in very small amounts
every 5 hours can be seen in listing 2.1
18
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:27==
1
Experiment_profile_name: Run media periodically
2
3
Metadata:
4
Author: Mathias Wagner
5
Description: Avoid drying the filter by running the media pump occasionally.
6
7
common:
8
jobs:
9
add_media:
10
actions:
11
- type: repeat
12
hours_elapsed: 0
13
repeat_every_hours: 5.0
# This value should be optimized for
using least amount of media to keep the specific filters in use
wet.
14
actions:
15
- type: start
16
hours_elapsed: 0
17
options:
18
ml: .20
19
remove_waste:
20
actions:
21
- type: repeat
22
hours_elapsed: 0.01
23
repeat_every_hours: 5.0
# This value should follow the
repeat_every_hours from the add_media job
24
actions:
25
- type: start
26
hours_elapsed: 0
27
options:
28
ml: .50
Listing 2.1: Experiment profile for periodically running a very small amount of media and
waste through the tubing of a pioreactorTM. This experiment profile ensures that the filters
between tubings do not dry out and clog when media is not being pumped for many
consecutive hours.
2.5.3
Preparing media and maintaining sterility while handling the
bioreactors
At all points of the process 70% v/v ethanol was used to keep pipettes, surfaces, hands
etc. sterile.
Maintaining sterility when preparing media
Both selective and relaxing media for the ALE experiments were prepared according to
section 2.1 as 2 liter aliquots. All individual components of the media, except carbon
sources and antibiotics, were sterilized by autoclaving at 125 °C for 15 minutes. All carbon
sources were sterilized by filter sterilization. The media was mixed under the hood of a
LAF bench, or in the immediate vicinity of a flame from a bunsen burner, to maintain
sterility.
Maintaining sterility when assembling the bioreactors and exchanging media
When assembling the bioreactors the tubing running from media to pump to vial and from
vial to pump to waste bottle was thoroughly sterilized by running absolute ethanol through
the tubing for a minimum of 15 seconds. The tubing was then cleaned by running fresh
media through for at least 30 seconds. Then, all tubing was connected and the system was
closed. When necessary, the media was replenished during continuous fermentation by
preparing fresh media in autoclaved 1 L bottles and carefully pouring it into the connected
media bottle via a slightly opened lid. This was done while working under the flame of a
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
19
==PAGE:28==
bunsen burner, ensuring that the insides of the media bottle and the tubing for the media
pump is never in contact with anything but sterile media.
Sampling during a continuous experiment
Sampling for cryostocks was performed once every 7 days from the beginning of the
experiment to the end, with a final cryostock also made at the very end of the experiment.
When sampling, a 12 cm sterile hypodermic needle was used with a 1 ml syringe. The
sampling was performed by inserting the syringe through the male luer lock of the vial
caps of the bioreactors, whilst working in the immediate vicinity of a bunsen burner flame
and using 70% ethanol v/v to keep hands and surfaces sterile. Each sample volume was
750 µl and was mixed in a 1:1 ratio with sterile 50% glycerol and immediately brought to
­70 °C freezers.
Regular cPCR to check for contamination
At certain points during the long­term ALE experiments of this study, as well as during
both initial test experiments using the bioreactors, samples of 100 µl were plated onto
LB+kanamycin plates and grown O/N. The following day, colonies were tested by cPCR,
from each reactor with primers MW_001 and MW_002, which amplify the region of the
gcvTHP operon in the genome of E. coli SIJ488 that has been knocked out in GLY­AUX.
Gel electrophoresis was then performed on all cPCR products in 1% agarose gels and
ran at 100 V, 400 mA for 25 minutes.
2.6
Error prone PCR (epPCR) mutagenesis of R. rubrum
RuBisCO
2.6.1
Library generation
To generate the libraries of mutated R. rubrum RuBisCOs by random mutagenesis using
error prone PCR, a specific PCR buffer mix was prepared with the components repre­
sented in table 2.4. This buffer mix was used as a component in the epPCR reaction mix,
which was prepared as shown in table 2.5. Primers were designed with 40 bp overlaps on
the ends of the RuBisCO fragment from the epPCR and the linearized plasmid template.
These 40bp overlaps are designed to use Gibson assembly to assemble the final plasmid
construct with the RuBisCO mutagenesis library inside.
Table 2.4: Overview of recipe used to make 30 aliquots of the error­prone PCR buffer mix
used in this study.
Component
Volume (µl)
10x PCR buffer (for taq polymerase)
300
MgCl2 (1M)
16.5
BSA (10 mg/ml)
15
dGTP (100 mM)
6
dATP (100 mM)
11
dCTP (100mM)
12
dTTP (100 mM)
40.5
MilliQ H2O
1099
The protocol used for the epPCR experiments in this study specifies that primers should be
designed to have an annealing temperature around 60 °C. The primers used for RuBisCO
amplification for the epPCR was MW_011 + MW_012 and the purified plasmid used as
template DNA was pCBB2.1. The primers for linearizing the pCBB2.1_prk backbone was
MW_007 + MW_008. The Thermocycler program used in the epPCR experiments is
shown in table 2.6.
20
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:29==
Table 2.5: Overview of the components used to prepare the epPCR reaction mix
Component
Volume (µl)
epPCR buffer mix
50
MilliQ H2O
42
Taq recombinant DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
6
Forward primer
2
Reverse primer
2
Template DNA
1 ( 30 ng/µl)
Total volume
100
Table 2.6: Overview of Thermocycler settings for error­prone PCRs using recombinant
taq DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Step
Temperature (°C)
Time (min:s)
Cycles
Initial denaturation
95
2:00
1
Denaturation
95
0:30
25
Annealing
60
0:30
Extension
72
1:00 / kb
Final extension
72
5:00
1
Hold
4
∞
∞
PCR product purification
The PCR products were exposed to dpnI digestion to digest all methylated template DNA
O/N at 37 °C. The digested PCR product mix was analyzed by loading all 100 µl into a large
well of a 1% agarose gel and handled as described in section 2.2.1. To purify the DNA
from the bands in the gel, the DNA was visualized for cutting using a UV Transilluminator.
A scalpel was used to precisely excise the bands of interest. The DNA gel purification was
done using the Zymogen gel DNA recovery kit according to manufacturer’s instructions,
with few exceptions. The final elution was done in 15 ml MilliQ H2O and not elution buffer.
Library assembly
The purified DNA fragments were combined in a 3:1 vector to insert molar ratio (pCBB2.1_prk
: RuBisCO mutant library) with the total amount of DNA being 1 µg and mixed with the
NEBuilder HiFi DNA assembly master mix 2x (NEB) in a 1:1 ratio and incubated O/N at
50 °C to perform gibson assembly. The assembled library was then cleaned and purified
using the Zymogen Clean and Concentrator ­5 kit according to manufacturers instructions
with the exception of eluding the DNA in 10 µl MilliQ H2O instead of elution buffer.
2.6.2
Library transformation in E. coli DH10b
Making the cells electrocompetent
All applicable steps were carried out in close proximity to a Bunsen burner flame. For
transforming plasmid libraries into E. coli DH10b, the following protocol was used in this
study. E. coli DH10b was inoculated either from a single colony on LB agar plate or directly
from cryostock in 5 ml liquid LB media. The culture was grown O/N at 37 °C. After O/N
growth 200 ml YT­broth was inoculated with 3 ml of the O/N culture in a 500 ml baffled
flask and grown at 37 °C for approximately 1.5 hours or till the OD600 value reached 0.4­
0.6. The 200 ml culture was split between 4 50 ml falcon tubes and centrifuged at 3500
g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. After centrifugation, the cells were kept on ice at any single
moment possible until after electroporation. The supernatant was then discarded for all 4
falcon tubes and the pellet of each tube was suspended in 1 ml ice cold 10% glycerol. The
resuspended pellets were combined in one 50 ml falcon tube and ice cold 10% glycerol
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
21
==PAGE:30==
was added until 50 ml was reached. The cells were then washed twice more using 50 ml
ice cold 10% glycerol and collected at 3500 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Lastly, the cells were
resuspended in 2 ml ice cold 10% glycerol.
Transformation of DNA library
In a chilled 0.2 cm gap electroporation cuvette (BioRad), 2 µl of the purified DNA library,
approximately 150 ng, was pipetted carefully into the gap. Hereafter, 400 µl of electro­
competent cells were pipetted carefully, into the cuvette making sure to avoid any bubble
formation. In total, 5 cuvettes were used per library transformation to ensure the trans­
formation of the entire purified plasmid library. Splitting the purified plasmid library into
multiple cuvettes avoids multiple plasmid copies being taken up by the same cell. The
cuvette sides were wiped with paper to remove any condensation and electroporated us­
ing a BioRad MicroPulser with the settings: 2.5 kV, 200 Ohms @ 25 uF. In this step, it is
crucial to observe that the time constant is between 4.5 ­ 5.2 with <5 being sub optimal
and 5.0­5.2 being optimal. Anything outside of this range is generally unusable and the
process must be repeated with more diluted DNA. After electroporation, the cells were im­
mediately resuspended in 1 ml SOC media pre­warmed to 37 °C. The cuvettes were then
washed by pipetting up and down gently twice. This was done 2­3 times to ensure collec­
tion of all cells. The resuspended cells in SOC media were combined from all cuvettes in
one 50 ml falcon tube and incubated at 37 °C for 2 hours at 250 rpm.
Library size evaluation and storage
After recovery for two hours the cells were collected by centrifugation at 4000 g for 10
minutes. The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml
liquid LB+kan media. To evaluate library size, 1 µl of resuspended cells were pipetted
into 99 µl milliQ H2O to make a 10­3 dilution in a sterile eppendorf tube. Further dilutions
of 10­5 and 10­7 were made by serial 100x dilution. These dilutions were plated on LB+kan
agar plates and incubated O/N at 37 °C. Hereafter, an additional 9 ml was added to the
cells, resuspended in 1 ml and incubated O/N at 37 °C with 250 rpm.
The following day, the total number of transformants were estimated by counting colony
forming units (CFU) on the dilution plates and dividing this by the dilution factor. The
storage of the library was done by making two cryostocks by pipetting 750 µl of the liquid
culture into 750 µl of sterile 50% glycerol and immediately put in a ­70 °C freezer. The re­
maining liquid culture was used for plasmid purification to obtain a purified plasmid library
to transform into GLY­AUX∆.
2.6.3
Purified library transformation in GLY­AUX∆coupled with growth
selection
Transformation in GLY­AUX
The protocol for transformation of the purified plasmid library into GLY­AUX was identical
to the one for E. coli DH10b except for after cell collection after recovery.
Transformation efficiency evaluation and serial dilution in selective media
After all cells were collected by centrifugation at 4000 g for 10 minutes, the cells were
resuspended in 1 ml liquid M9S+kan in a 50 ml falcon tube, and 1 µl of this resuspension
was used to make serial dilutions for plating and subsequent CFU estimation. Then 9
ml of liquid M9S+kan were added to the resuspension to a total volume of 10 ml. This
culture was grown O/N at 37 °C. After O/N growth, 750 µl of the culture was mixed with
50% sterile glycerol and cryostocked in a ­70 °C freezer. The culture then went through 3
serial passages of 100 µl into 10 ml fresh liquid M9S+kan equal to a 1% passage volume
for the serial dilution. Between each serial passage, the cultures were grown O/N at 37 °C
and 250 rpm. After all serial dilutions, a sterile inoculation loop was used to streak from
liquid M9S+kan to LB+kan agar plates for single colonies, and the plates were incubated
22
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:31==
at 37 °C.
Colony sequencing and growth comparison experiment
Due to physical limitations in handling large numbers of cells, 7 single colonies were
picked from the LB+kan plates of each library in this study and inoculated in 3 ml LB+kan.
The colonies went through the aforementioned protocol for preparing cells for plate­reader
experiments which can be seen in fig. 2.2. In the same plate reader, the growth of the
strains with the plasmids coming from this epPCR protocol were compared to the parental
GLY­AUX with naive pCBB2.1. The growth data was collected and handled as explained
above using the growth2fig python script [41].
A cPCR was also performed on each colony of the RuBisCO gene with primers MW_011
and MW_012 and the PCR products were sent for sanger sequencing with the same
primers. The sequences were mapped to the plasmid map of pCBB2.1 using the bench­
ling alignment tool and the multiple sequence alignment tool MAFFT [42].
2.7
Directed mutagenesis by orthogonality clustering based
on deep mutational scan
2.7.1
Identifying orthogonal clusters for directed mutagenesis
The raw data of the deep mutational scan performed by Prywes et al. [21] was used to
single out 4 clusters of three amino acids showed a significant positive effect on Vmax or
Kc (Km for CO2).
The analysis and identification of the 4 clusters to be tested was performed by collaborator
Niklas Gesmar Madsen. First, a pareto­frontier was formed and used to build a convex­
hull. This was used to highlight hot­spots in the amino acid sequence. These hot­spots
degree of co­evolution and the structural relation between the positions were analyzed.
The structural relation and likelihood of co­evolution was used to split the amino acid
positions of interest in the 4 clusters of three amino acids.
Library generation
The 4 mutagenesis libraries were generated by PCR using primers that include the de­
generative NNK or NTT codons at the positions to be mutated. The oligonucleotides were
synthesized corresponding to the two DNA Strands of the R. rubrum RuBisCO gene in the
pCBB2.1 plasmid. The oligos were synthesized with matching 40bp overhangs at the 5’
end to enable the use of gibson assembly for the libraries. Furthermore, the oligos were
synthesized with 3’ ends with matching Tm values. The optimal conditions for the design
of the 3’ ends of the oligos are 40­60% GC content, 50­60 °C Tm and fully annealing
primers should be avoided. Furthermore, highly stable hairpin loops should be avoided.
Two different oligo design methods were used to create the libraries, depending on the
sequence distance between the codons of interest within clusters. Cluster 1 and 2 were
amplified in two fragments, with one fragment harboring 2 codons of interest and the other
fragment harboring the third codon. The other design was a single plasmid linearization
PCR step making it a 1 fragment assembly of the library. Both oligo design methods can
be seen in fig. 2.3.
The fragments were amplified either using Q5 Hot Start High­Fidelity 2x master mix (NEB)
or Phusion High­Fidelity PCR master mix with HF buffer 2x (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For
fragments <500 bp, the PCR products were separated and analyzed in a 2% agarose gel,
and for fragments >500 bp 1% agarose gels were used. Fragment DNA purification was
done by gel excision and using the Zymogen Gel DNA recovery kit (Zymogen) according
to manufacturer’s instructions, except that the final dilution was in MilliQ H2O not elution
buffer.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.3: Overview of oligonucleotide design scheme for directed mutagenesis library
construction using oligos with degenerative codons. Design method 1 synthesizes two
sets of forward and reverse oriented oligos. Design method 2 synthesizes one forward
and one reverse oriented oligo that are used to linearize the entire pCBB2.1 plasmid
directly after the earliest degenerative codon. All degenerative codons for both methods
are exclusively synthesized in the forward oriented oligos.
The fragments were assembled using the NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly 2x Master Mix
(NEB). For the two fragment assemblies, a insert:vector molar ratio of 3:1 was used, with
the total DNA amount being 1 ng. For the one fragment assemblies, 1 µg of purified DNA
was used. For all assemblies purified DNA was mixed by gently pipetting up and down
in a 1:1 ratio with the NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly 2x Master Mix (NEB) in 200 µl PCR
tubes. The PCR tubes were then inoculated at 50 °C O/N to perform the assembly. Lastly,
before transformation, a desalting step of the Gibson assembly product was performed
using the Zymogen Clean and Concentrator ­5 (Zymogen) according to manufacturer’s
instructions, except the final dilution being in 10 µl MilliQ H2O.
Library transformation in DH10b and subsequent purification and transformation
in GLY­AUX
To ensure long­term storage of the plasmid library, the entire library was first transformed
into E. coli DH10b using the same protocol as described in section 2.6.2. The following
library purification and transformation in GLY­AUX was performed as described in section
2.6.3.
Time limitations
Time limitations prevented the successful construction of all libraries. The libraries that
were constructed and transformed, underwent only the growth selection phase via serial
passages in selective media, without a plate reader growth experiment.
24
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:33==
3
Results
3.1
Establishing a sensor strain with tight demand under
high CO2 conditions
The whole array of sensor strains constructed by Orsi et al. [34] was available for use in
this study. The GLY­AUX strain was chosen as the selection strain of choice for this study.
To ensure a stable and tight sensor strain for the RuBisCO oxygenation reaction, it was
necessary that the strain did not grow in selective conditions at high CO2 conditions. A
first test presented in fig. 3.1b, however, showed that the GLY­AUX strain by Orsi et al.
[34] grew under high CO2 conditions. The escape from auxotrophy was reasoned to be
caused by the reverse reaction of the glycine cleavage system converting methylene­
THF and CO2 to glycine as can be seen in fig. 3.1a. The deletion of the gcvTHP operon
was performed with the lambda­red recombineering system which was integrated in the
genome of the parental strain of GLY­AUX E. coli SIJ488 [25]. Upon testing the modified
GLY­AUX∆in fig. 3.1c, growth at high CO2 in selective conditions was not observed.
High CO2 concentrations were used to ensure that the growth rescue of the auxotrophic
strain was through the oxygenation reaction of the RuBisCO in the CBB module. With
this knock­out performed, a tight auxotrophy at high CO2 was established. The strain
was named GLY­AUX∆and was utilized for the purpose of growth coupled selection in
this study.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.1: a) A schematic overview of the metabolic pathways needed for glycolate aux­
otrophy, including an overview of the genomic knockouts performed shown in red. The
metabolite glycine shown in green is the metabolite that depends on glycolate for syn­
thesis. The metabolite that needs to be supplied by the CBB module on a plasmid is in
blue. b) Growth experiment with OD600 value over time was plotted. The strain growing
in this experiment contains the knockouts shown in a). This experiment was performed
at 10% CO2 and shows the censor strain without the CBB plasmid growing in selective
media at high CO2 concentrations. c) The same schematic overview as in a), however,
with the addition of the gcvTHP knockout. d) Growth experiment identical to b) but with a
strain harboring the deletions shown in c). The lack of growth in high CO2 conditions of
this strain indicates a tight auxotrophy also at high CO2 concentrations. All growth curves
are the mean of three technical triplicates for a single biological replicate with the shade
given by the standard deviation hereof.
3.2
Constructing a reliable and versatile CBB expression
plasmid
For the study of the oxygenation reaction, the pCBB plasmid constructed by Antonovsky et
al. [43] was originally used. However, assessing the oxygenation reaction with this plas­
mid construct proved difficult. This was due to a tendency of prk mutating if cells were
not grown in high CO2 conditions when in relaxing conditions. Furthermore, inconsistent
growth recovery in several of the sensor strains developed by Orsi et al. [34] was ob­
served with this plasmid by colleagues. The pCBB plasmid from Antonovsky et al. will be
called pCBB1.0 in this study. The pCBB1.0 plasmid harbored the two antibiotic resistance
genes cmR and ampR, which enables resistance to chloramphenicol and ampicillin. Fur­
thermore, it harbors a carbonic anhydrase gene annotated CA on fig. 3.2a. This enzyme
facilitates the conversion of CO2 and H2O to form carbonic acid and the dissociated ions
HCO3­ and H+, which aids CO2 transport. For the purpose of the study, in which pCBB1.0
26
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:35==
was constructed, the carboxylation reaction was of interest, making this a relevant part of
the plasmid. However, that is not the case in this study. The carbonic anhydrase actively
counteracts the study of the oxygenation reaction in vivo by increasing the available CO2
concentration, thereby decreasing oxygenation. The last genes of interest in the pCBB1.0
plasmid are the RuBisCO and prkA genes of the CBB module highlighted in fig. 3.2a. The
genes were in the same operon under the control of the strong constitutive Ptet promoter.
The module also includes two different ribosomal binding sites (RBS): the RBS controlling
the translation of RuBisCO (RBS 1) was designed to have a predicted translation initiation
rate(TIR) slightly more than 4x the strength of the prk RBS (2), as can be seen in fig. 3.2d
[44].
To enable a more stable growth­coupled selection scheme, a new plasmid design pCBB2.0
was proposed which modified the structure of the original pCBB1.0 plasmid. Several
defining changes were present in the pCBB2.0 plasmid and can be seen in fig. 3.2b.
The plasmid backbone architecture chosen for the assembly of the pCBB2.0 plasmid was
the pSEVA221 construct. This is a broad host range plasmid that enables the direct ap­
plication of the same plasmid in C. necator, which is the final goal of the overarching
project. The carbonic anhydrase gene was not included in the design. Further, both an­
tibiotic resistance genes were replaced by a single kanamycin resistance gene kmR. The
promoter controlling the CBB module expression was changed to the constitutive PJ5 pro­
moter and two new unique RBS sequences were used in front of RuBisCO and prk. The
RBS strength was chosen with a TIR for the RuBisCO RBS that is slightly under 15x the
TIR of the RBS in front of prk [44]. The increase in TIR for RuBisCO was based on the
lowered copy number of the plasmid construct, as can be seen in fig. 3.2d. However, after
construction and subsequent transformation in the glycolate/glyoxylate sensor strains of
the pCBB2.0 plasmid, the recovery of growth at ambient conditions was inconsistent and
rare. The issue of prk mutating, if not handled whilst growing exclusively at high CO2
when not in selective media, was, however, largely resolved.
The final plasmid construct pCBB2.1, which can be seen in fig. 3.2c, is identical to the
construct of pCBB2.0 with only one change. The RBS in front of prk was substituted with
a much stronger RBS that lowered the ratio between the TIRs of RuBisCO and prk. The
work on optimizing and testing different RBS strengths upstream of prk was also carried
out, in part, by Francesco Luppino. Several different orthologs of prks were tested from
different bacteria and plants with no major differences in recovered growth of the sensor
strain GLY­AUX∆observed. Thus, with the final goal of transferring this construct to C.
necator, the native prk gene was chosen for the final pCBB2.1 construct.
A selection of 9 different RuBisCO genes from 9 different species were cloned into the
pCBB2.1 vector and transformed into GLY­AUX∆with the aim of assessing their oxygena­
tion rate. The oxygenation rate was assessed using the growth rate as a proxy through
the growth­coupled selection scheme. These experiments were conducted by a fellow
student, Simone Cusimano, and indicated little to no difference between the selection of
9 RuBisCOs on the recovered growth rates of GLY­AUX. Thus, for the goal of evolving
the promiscuous oxygenation reaction of RuBisCO in this study, the pCBB2.1 plasmid
with the archetypical R. rubrum RuBisCO cbbM was chosen for all following evolution /
mutagenesis experiments.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.2: Overview of the iterative plasmid constructions used to express the CBB mod­
ule highlighting the RBSs and the predicted translation initiation rate (TIR) from each RBS
presented [44]. a) Plasmid map of the pCBB plasmid constructed by Antonovsky et al.
[43], named pCBB1.0 in this study. Aside from the CBB module, the plasmid contains two
antibiotic resistance genes for chloramphenicol and ampicillin, a carbonic anhydrase (CA)
gene, the p15A origin of replication and the IS5 transposase gene. The CBB module with
the prkA from synechococcus elongatus is highlighted and the RBSs are numbered. b)
Plasmid map of the broad host­range pCBB2.0 plasmid constructed, based on pSEVA221
architecture. Aside from the CBB module, the plasmid harbors a kanamycin resistance
gene and the RK2 origin of replication and transfer make it transferable to bacteria other
than E. coli. The CBB module is highlighted with the constitutive J5 promoter controlling
expression and the RBSs are numbered. c) Plasmid map identical to b) with the exception
of the RBS in front of prk in the CBB module. d) The predicted TIR of the different RBSs
in the various iterations of the CBB modules, and the copy number per cell of the plasmid
for the different origins of replication [45] [46] [47] [48].
3.3
Assembling, calibration and testing of Pioreactors as a
continuous fermentation vessel
The bioreactors produced by PioreactorTM were acquired by the lab of this study and
were to be used for continuous fermentation experiments, specifically focused on the
possibilities of performing long­term ALE experiments.
There are certain vital points for operating a long­term continuous fermentation exper­
iment such as consistency in growth among different bioreactors and over time, main­
taining sterility throughout the experiment, accurate and precise controlling of pumps and
stirring etc. Accurate pumping and stirring was ensured by performing the full program for
calibration in the software running the bioreactors. All bioreactors used in this study were
calibrated using the same standard for pumps and stirring and exhibited nearly identical
results across the bioreactors. To test the ability to run and maintain long­term contin­
uous fermentation experiments in terms of consistency and sterility, two smaller scale
experiments were conducted, MW_pio_001 and MW_pio_002. The experiments were
conducted for 6 and 5 days respectively. The same bioreactors as would be used for
the long­term ALE experiment was used for these tests. The full overview of the optical
28
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:37==
density during the two experiments can be seen in fig. 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Overview of the direct measured uncalibrated optical cell density values plot­
ted over time for GLY­AUX∆in the two continuous cultivation turbidostat experiments
MW_pio_001 and MW_pio_002. Both experiments were performed as control experi­
ments to test equipment and consistency before a long­term continuous cultivation ex­
periment. Either M9S+kan or M9R+kan media was used in the bioreacors and is shown
in the legends. a) The OD values recorded by each bioreactor from the MW_pio_001
experiment plotted over time. The colored phases are highlighted as shown in c). b) The
OD values recorded by each bioreactor from the MW_pio_002 experiment plotted over
time. The colored phases are highlighted as shown in c). c) Different phases of fermen­
tation during the continuous cultivation experiments. The 80% dilution turbidostat refers
to the volume of fresh media relative to the working volume used to dilute when target OD
is reached.
3.3.1
MW_pio_001 ­ Batch and turbidostat experiment 1
The experiment setup in MW_pio_001 was firstly to operate all functions of the bioreactors
in a fully closed system with fresh M9R+kan media yet to be inoculated for 20 hours.
The 20 hour initial phase was to ensure that the assembly method chosen and sterility
precautions taken were sufficient. Furthermore, it was to ensure that the M9R+kan media,
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
29
==PAGE:38==
tubing or vessel had not been contaminated during assembly and setup. As is evident in
fig. 3.3, there is no growth and no sign of any changes in the OD value from any of the
three bioreactors. The setup method was seemingly sufficient and will be used. Next,
all bioreactors were inoculated with 1 ml GLY­AUX∆O/N culture grown in M9R+kan in
the 19 ml of fresh M9R+kan, which was in the bioreactor since the day prior, to a total
working volume of 20ml for the fermentations. Each bioreactor was then run as a batch
experiment letting the cells grow to stationary phase as can be seen in the first yellow
phase in fig. 3.3a. The individual OD readings of each bioreactor were used to set up
the parameters needed to run the turbidostat dosing automation on the Pioreactor setup.
The parameters were target OD (when to start dilution) and dosing volume (how much
to dilute when target OD is reached). The target OD was set to 60% of the maximal OD
reached in the batch phase and the dosing volume was set to 16 ml. Because of how
the dilutions for the bioreactors work an 80% dilution in terms of dosing volume in effect
only dilutes the culture by approximately 40% as can be seen in fig. 3.3a­b. Media was
intentionally prepared to only suffice for 50% of the experiment so a change in media
would be necessary.
The results from this experiment indicated a consistent exponential growth phase between
dilutions in the turbidostat setup. There were no major outliers in the optical density read­
ings caused by irregular or too strong stirring, resulting in vortexing, where optical density
is measured. Furthermore, the culture at the end of the experiment was streaked onto
LB+kan agar plates and grown O/N. Then, 22 single colonies in total were picked at ran­
dom from the plates of the different bioreactors and a cPCR was performed with primers
that anneal on each side of the gcvTHP operon and would amplify to be 4.5kb if the gene
was intact, and amplify a fragment about the size of 380 bp if the gene was knocked
out as in GLY­AUX. This confirms that through 6 days of fermentation, several days of
turbidostat fermentation and a manual media refill, sterility was maintained.
3.3.2
MW_pio_002 ­ Batch and turbidostat experiment 2
The second preliminary experiment MW_pio_002 was conducted with the same condi­
tions as in MW_pio_001. However, M9S+kan media was used in two bioreactors and
M9R+kan media was used in the other two bioreactors. The much prolonged growth
phase was expected in selective media as the strains must rely on the CBB module of the
pCBB2.1 plasmid for growth recovery, whilst the M9R media is supplemented with 2mM
glycolate. This meant that due to the timing of the experiment, the stationary phase of the
selective bioreactors happened to be during the weekend so the turbidostat mode could
only be started on Monday, which can be seen at the 90 hour mark on fig. 3.3b. This ex­
periment setup was tested because it resembles the planned long­term ALE experiment
with two bioreactors each using M9S or M9R media. The Leo and Gemini bioreactor
setup of this experiment was identical to all the bioreactors in MW_pio_001.
The results, presented in fig. 3.3b, show that the rescue of growth of GLY­AUX∆at am­
bient CO2 concentrations with the pCBB2.1 plasmid was possible.
After the conclusion of this experiment the culture of each bioreactor was streaked onto
Lb+kan agar plates and grown O/N. Single colonies were picked and cPCRs were per­
formed like in MW_pio_001. The results of the cPCR in this experiment also indicated no
contamination, and all amplicons showed GLY­AUX∆characteristics.
30
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Long­term ALE turbidostat
In fig. 3.4a­c, the optical density measurements over the duration of the two long­term
ALE experiments performed are shown. In total, 4 bioreactors were run with selective
M9S+kan, media and two bioreactors were run with relaxing M9R+kan media as a control.
The control was chosen to aid in sorting out mutations that arise from the stress of being
in a long­term cultivation in this particular setup in regards to oxygen availability, shear
stress etc. from beneficial mutations.
Aries, Taurus, Capricorn and Virgo were the 4 bioreactors used for the selective condi­
tions, whilst Leo and Gemini were used for relaxing conditions. Once every 7 days a 750
µl sample was taken from each bioreactor and cryostocked. The technical difficulties that
are presented in fig. 3.4a­c were mainly consisting of the pioreactors losing connection
to the network, or the turbidostat dosing automation crashing because of software errors
related to the pumps. Both of these errors would affect the optical density readings of
the bioreactor, thus the software shuts off the OD measurements when they occur. For­
tunately the stirring as well as temperature control always stayed on, even when these
errors occurred, so the cultures never needed to get re­inoculated from a prior cryostock
generation. This means that in the almost 60 days that the MW_pio_003 experiment was
conducted, the only inoculation was the original one on day one. The same applies for
the MW_pio_004 experiment.
3.4.1
MW_pio_003
This experiment was performed with the same conditions as the two preliminary experi­
ments except for the dilution rate. The cultures were inoculated with 1 ml O/N culture into
19 ml of fresh media. The dosing volume of the turbidostat for the first approximately 750
hours was set to 20%, which effectively is an approximate 10% dilution of the bioreactors.
After hour 750 the dosing volume was increased to 30%, which approximately is a 15%
dilution of the culture.
At hour 380 in fig. 3.4a, the Aries bioreactor OD readings, showed an increase in target
OD for when dilutions happen. The cause of this was a technical error where the software
lost connection and rounded up the OD threshold for dilution from 0.025 OD to 0.03 OD.
For both bioreactors, Aries and Taurus, a small batch phase was run at hour 585 right
after the technical problems. The maximal OD from this batch phase was used to set the
OD threshold at 60% for the rest of the experiment.
For the entirety of the experiment, the bioreactors operating with selective M9S+kan me­
dia maintained a steady rhythm as expected in a turbidostat experiment with continuous
exponential growth between every dilution, except for very short durations of time. One
such period was towards the end of the experiment, where it is evident that the OD of Tau­
rus indicates a stationary phase culture or even a dying culture. That period overlapped
with several errors related to stirring which resulted in a not well­mixed culture and was
likely related. On the other hand, it is evident from the many stretches without consistent
dilutions in both bioreactors operating with relaxing media, that they were not operating
as cleanly as the ones in selective conditions. Especially the Leo bioreactor encountered
several periods of declining OD or flat­lined OD. These periods were not caused by faulty
stirring, as the technical operations of the bioreactors were running correctly through all
these periods.
The bioreactors operating with relaxing conditions were the only bioreactors where biofilm
formation in the air­liquid phase was observed. This was observed very heavily during
the first 900 hours of the experiment for both bioreactors Leo and Gemini. However when
increasing the dosing volume to 30% at approximately hour 950 the biofilm formation was
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.4: Overview of measured uncalibrated OD values plotted over time for GLY­
AUX∆in the two continuous cultivation turbidostat experiments MW_pio_003 and
MW_pio_004. Both experiments were performed as long­term ALE experiments. Either
M9S+kan or M9R+kan media was used in the bioreactors and as seen in the legends. a)
The OD values recorded on bioreactors (Aries, Taurus) from the MW_pio_003 experiment
plotted over time. The colored phases are highlighted as shown in d). b) The OD values
recorded on bioreactors (Capricorn and Leo) from the MW_pio_004 experiment plotted
over time. The colored phases are highlighted as shown in d). Inoculation of these two
bioreactors, came from the Taurus bioreactor at the time­point shown in the figure. c) The
OD values recorded on bioreactors Leo and Gemini from the MW_pio_003 experiment
plotted over time. Colored phases are highlighted as shown in d). d) Different phases
of fermentation during the continuous cultivation experiments. The % dilution turbidostat
refers to the volume of fresh media relative to the working volume used to dilute when tar­
get OD is reached. Technical problem phases were generally related to system shutdown
of the measuring devices in the bioreactors and did not impact stirring or temperature
control.
32
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:41==
no longer observed in Gemini and the OD readings and dilutions became very consistent.
The increased dosing volume did not impact biofilm formation in Leo and there continued
to be substantial biofilm formation in the air­liquid phase for the rest of the experiment.
3.4.2
MW_pio_004
The bioreactors Capricorn and Virgo used in this experiment were both operated with
selective M9S+kan media. This experiment was performed in parallel with MW_pio_003.
The OD curves shown in fig. 3.4b show that the growth and dilutions in both bioreactors
were consistent throughout the entire approximately 1050 hours of the experiment. Due
to a slight decrease in the time between dilution observed in the Taurus bioreactor in
MW_pio_003 when this experiment was started, it was decided to use 1 ml of inoculum
directly from that bioreactor in each bioreactor in this experiment. Thus, at around hour
300 in MW_pio_003, the MW_pio_004 experiment was started with the parental strain
being the culture from the Taurus bioreactor as indicated by the arrows in fig. 3.4b.
Another significant change in the setting of this experiment is the dilution rate of 90%,
which effectively results in a 45­50% dilution. The choice of operating two parallel ALE
turbidostat experiments with different dilution rates will be discussed later.
This experiment saw little to no biofilm formation in the entire duration of 1050 hours, and,
as is evident of the OD over time plot seen in fig. 3.4b, there were no times of stagnating
growth for more than one single growth phase between dilutions.
3.4.3
Whole Genome sequencing of mid­point samples
The two experiments above were run in parallel and are handled as one simultaneous
experiment in the coming analyses. The mid­point samples were taken as indicated on
fig. 3.4. Genomic DNA (gDNA) was extracted from all samples and the parental strain.
Then, the gDNA was sent for hybrid whole genome sequencing (WGS), meaning that both
Oxford Nanopore sequencing and Illumina sequencing were used to make a final genome
assembly scaffold. These samples were taken as several of the bioreactors operating
with selective media started to decrease the time between dilution slightly, indicating a
slight increase in growth rate, as can be seen in the appendix C fig. C.1. This WGS was
done on an entire population and thus, the single nucleotide polymorphisms, which were
looked for, must be present in a large part of the population to be considered relevant.
The quality­ and adapter­trimmed reads obtained from the WGS results were mapped to
the E. coli SIJ488 genome [25]. Geneious prime was used to analyze the WGS data and
the ”find SNPs/variations” mode was used with the cutoff of a minimum of 70% variant
frequency. To sort out mutations in the genome that were already present in the parental
strain, as it has several deletions and variations from the E. coli SIJ488, all mutations
present in the parental strain were disregarded in further analysis.
As the goal is to evolve RuBisCO for the promiscuous oxygenation reaction, it was nec­
essary to use the WGS to search for mutations in the genome that could account for the
increase in growth rate. Genes related to metabolism were of interest, and, as the venn
diagram shows in fig. 3.5a­b, there was only one commonality between the genomic muta­
tions observed in cultures from any of the 6 bioreactors. The purpose of the 2 bioreactors
operating with relaxing conditions were a control, as the CBB module was not under se­
lective pressure in these conditions. The mutations seen in the genome for these cultures,
were meant to be used to rule out mutations arising simply from the stress of being cul­
tivated in the bioreactors in long­term cultivations, under these conditions. However, the
only common mutation observed among 5 of the 6 bioreactors was the insH­7 sequence,
which is a putative transposase responsible for the insertion sequence element IS5 [49].
This could indicate that due to the stress the cells were exposed to, transposase activ­
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
33
==PAGE:42==
ity might have been up­regulated. This could increase the genetic shifts observed in the
populations but the knock­out of genes by the IS5 insertion element. However, IS5 se­
quences were not found inside any genes indicating no knockouts by IS5 insertion. The
mutation in the tfaX gene observed in G5 (Gemini generation 5) is proposed to play a
role in cell growth during glycolysis on glucose minimal media [50]. However, as it was
only observed in the control strain growing in relaxing media, and not in any of the pop­
ulations from selective conditions, this mutation will not be discussed further. All other
mutated genes that were present in a significant part of the populations sequenced were
not related to metabolism in any way according to data from UniProt and EcoCyc.
Figure 3.5: Venn diagram overview of the genomic mutations found with whole­genome
sequencing in the mid­point samples of the MW_pio_003 and MW_pio_004 ALE exper­
iments. Genes marked with red were observed both in bioreactors with relaxing and
selective conditions a) Genomic mutations observed in the L5 and G5 mid­point samples
from ALE with relaxing conditions. b) Genomic mutations observed in the A5, T5, V3,
CA3 mid­point samples from ALE with selective conditions.
As evident in fig. 3.5, very few significant mutations were observed in the genomes of the
samples from the ALE experiments. Furthermore, none of these mutations were common
among the cultures or related to metabolism in the samples from the bioreactors operating
with selective conditions. However, these sequencing results did not yield full coverage
of the pCBB2.1 plasmid harbored by the cells. Therefore, a whole plasmid sequencing
approach was necessary.
3.4.4
Whole plasmid sequencing of mid­ and end­point samples
Whole plasmid sequencing was performed at the end of both experiments by reviving the
mid­ and end­point samples from cryostock and purifying the evolved pCBB2.1 plasmid.
This was only done for the cultures that had operated in selective conditions in addition
to the parental strain. The sequencing was performed with Oxford Nanopore sequencing
and the delivered reads in fastq files were quality and adaptor trimmed using BBDUK. The
trimmed reads were mapped to the sequence of pCBB2.1 and SNPs were found using
Geneious Prime.
Interestingly the only 2 SNPs that were found in the sequencing data were the M115I mu­
tation in R. rubrum cbbM RuBisCO and N216T in C. necator prk. Both mutations observed
34
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:43==
were in the CBB module of the plasmid and interestingly between the different bioreactors
the exact same mutations seemingly took over the population. These sequencing results
were taken from a large clump from cryostock but will still only represent a part of the pop­
ulation of the sample taken. Therefore, it is subject to variation caused by the variation
between parts of the population in the bioreactor. The sequencing results are considered
a snapshot of part of the population.
As shown in table 3.1, the M115I mutation in the cbbM gene and the N216T mutation in
prk were observed in all bioreactors at the midpoint sample and significantly increased in
overall abundance in the end­point sample. The only case of lowered variant frequency is
in the sample from the Capricorn bioreactor. As mentioned in section 3.4.2, the Capricorn
and Virgo bioreactors were inoculated from the Taurus culture and thus the mutations in
these plasmids were likely propagated from this population. However, very interestingly
the Aries bioreactor which was isolated from the other cultures for the entire duration of the
experiments, harbored the same mutations and saw a significant increase in abundance
between mid­ and end­point samples. The cbbM M115I mutation increased from 0.6% of
the reads to 91.7% and the prk N216T mutation increased from 5.8% to 93.4%.
Importantly, the mutations observed in all these samples were not propagated from the
parental plasmid. The plasmids from the parental strain used as inoculation for the exper­
iments were purified and sequenced. The sequencing showed 0% of all reads, analyzed
from 3 different sequencing jobs, that harbored this mutation.
Table 3.1: Overview of results from whole plasmid sequencing of purified plasmids from
the mid­ and end­point samples from all bioreactors inoculated with selective media in­
cluding comparison to whole plasmid sequencing results from purified parental plasmid
stock from 3 different separated purifications.
Mid­point sample
End­point sample
Parental pCBB2.1
Bioreactor
Aries
Taurus
Virgo
Capricorn
Aries
Taurus
Virgo
Capricorn
Average of 3 samples
R. rubrum RuBisCO ­ M115I
0.6%
34.7%
17.2%
86.7%
91.7%
77.9%
86.7%
44.8%
0%
C. necator prk ­ N216T
5.8%
40.5%
100%
94.7%
93.4%
94.2%
79.3%
57.9%
0%
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
35
==PAGE:44==
Structural analysis of the R. rubrum cbbM M115I mutation
The cbbM gene is the main focus of this study. Therefore, structural analysis of the muta­
tion will only be performed for this gene. As shown in fig. 3.6 the M115 residue is situated
in the channel at the C­terminal end of one monomer and around the active site in the
other monomer. The structure of form II RuBisCOs is a dimer where the c­terminal of
each monomer forms a complex with the other monomer to form the active site structure.
Thus, each RuBisCO dimer complex has two active sites. This active site pocket of Ru­
BisCO is both where CO2, O2 and a magnesium ion enters. The magnesium ion is critical
for the activity of RuBisCO.
Figure 3.6: The 2RUS [51] Structure of the R. rubrum cbbM RuBisCO protein with the
residue MET­115, mutated in all ALE experiments in selective conditions, highlighted. The
channel towards one of the active sites in the interface between the RuBisCO monomers
in the dimer complex is highlighted as well as CO2 bound to K191 at the active site [51].
Furthermore, all residues within 4 Å of the active site bound CO2 are shown as yellow
sticks.
3.4.5
Growth comparison of mid­point samples and reproduction of the
R. rubrum cbbM M115I and prk N216T mutation
Growth comparison of mid­point samples to parental strain
To test the growth of the strains evolved and sequenced at the midpoint of the ALE ex­
periments, a plate reader experiment was conducted. As fig. 3.7a shows, all strains from
bioreactors operating with selective conditions seem to have a phase of faster growth than
the parental GLY­AUX∆with the parental pCBB2.1 after an initial growth burst of 8 hours.
The growth rates seen in fig. 3.7d are calculated in the phase where the ALE strains are
growing faster. It was decided to cure the evolved ALE strains of the evolved pCBB2.1
plasmid and re­transform the parental pCBB2.1 plasmid in them. The growth curves in
fig. 3.7b show the results from the cured and re­transformed strains. It is evident that the
re­transformed strains do not have faster growth than the parental strain as was observed
36
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:45==
in fig. 3.7a. This indicates that the faster growth phase of the ALE strains is not caused
by the genomic mutations in the evolved strains but instead, that it likely is because of
adaptation or because of the pCBB2.1 mutations.
The cause of faster growth could be adaptation as the cells were grown for many hundreds
of hours in the exact same media. Therefore, it was decided to reproduce these mutations
in a naive pCBB2.1 plasmid. The mutations were introduced in pCBB2.1 through USER
cloning to perform site­directed mutagenesis. Three different mutated pCBB2.1 variants
were cloned, one harboring only the cbbM mutation, one harboring only the prk mutation
and one harboring both. In fig. 3.7c the growth curves of the reproduced mutated pCBB2.1
in GLY­AUX∆can be seen. The single mutant in prk grows very similarly to the parental
strain with a slightly longer lag phase. However, interestingly the single RuBisCO mutant
seems to have a long phase of faster growth than the parental, single prk, and double
RuBisCO and prk mutants. In fig. 3.7d, the growth rate calculated for the single RuBisCO
mutant is higher than the parental growth rate. However, the error margins of each sample
overlaps for all strains in this experiment except for the double mutant which seemingly
has a very long lag phase but then grows with a slightly lower growth rate than the others.
These results are inconclusive as to the beneficial effects of the RuBisCO M115I and prk
N216T mutations for the growth of the GLY­AUX∆strain in selective conditions. However,
they do indicate that these mutations might be beneficial and further analysis is necessary.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.7: Overview of growth experiments performed related to the evolved strains and
mutations observed in the long­term ALE experiments operating with selective conditions
in this study. a) The OD600 values plotted over time for the A5, T5, V3, and CA3 mid­
point samples compared to the parental GLY­AUX∆strain with pCBB2.1. The growth
rates from this experiment is shown in d). b) The OD600 values plotted over time for the
evolved strains from the A5, T5, V3, and CA3 mid­point samples cured from the evolved
plasmid and re­transformed with the parental pCBB2.1. The growth rates like in a) are
shown in d). c) The OD600 values plotted over time for the parental GLY­AUX∆strain
transformed with the pCBB2.1 plasmid harboring the single mutation M115I in RuBisCO,
the single mutation in prk N216T or the double mutant harboring both mutations. These
mutations are the ones observed in the pCBB2.1 plasmids sequenced from the strains A5,
T5, V3 and CA3 from ALE experiments. d) Growth rates from a), b), and c) calculated
with the growth2fig script developed by He et al. [41].
3.5
epPCR library of R. rubrum cbbM
When transforming large mutant libraries it is vital to consistently achieve high transforma­
tion efficiencies. The protocol to perform the epPCR library generation and subsequent
transformation in E. coli DH10b and GLY­AUX∆was strictly followed and the right equip­
ment was vital. As shown in table 3.2, the first two electroporations performed in this
study yielded very low colony forming unit numbers in E. coli DH10b. The 3rd, 4th and
38
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:47==
5th libraries generated, however, yielded sufficiently high CFU values to be worth puri­
fying and transforming into GLY­AUX. The libraries 4 and 5 had very high CFU values,
as represented in table 3.2, and therefore theoretically covered a very large span of the
mutant libraries generated through epPCR.
Table 3.2: Overview of approximate CFU after electroporation in E. coli dh10b and GLY­
AUX∆respectively. CFU was calculated by plating a serial dilution of 10­3, 10­5 and 10­7
on LB+kan and counting colonies after O/N growth at 37 °C.
epPCR Library
1
2
3
4
5
CFU in E. coli DH10b
5,000
40,000
150,000
5,000,000
12,000,000
CFU in GLY­AUX∆
NA
NA
400,000
8,000,000
9,000,000
Growth­coupled selection was only performed on the 3rd, 4th and 5th libraries. After three
sequential passages in M9S+kan, an inoculation loop was used to streak onto LB+kan
agar plates, 7 single colonies were picked from each library and growth was monitored
in a plate­reader experiment. The growth rates calculated for each colony are shown in
table 3.3. As it is clear from table 3.3, there were no major differences from the parental
growth rate. Furthermore, every colony tested was either slightly below or within the error
margin of the growth rate of the parental strain GLY­AUX∆with pCBB2.1.
Table 3.3: Overview of growth rates from 7 individual colonies from epPCR libraries 3,4
and 5. Growth rates were calculated with the growth2fig script developed by He et al.
[41].
Colony
number
µ[h­1] from epPCR libraries
3
4
5
1
0.101±0.001
0.102±0.007
0.146±0.004
2
0.077±0.002
0.103±0.001
0.104±0.001
3
0.079±0.001
0.103±0.003
0.090±0.006
4
0.082±0.001
0.103±0.001
NA
5
0.140±0.024
0.084±0.001
NA
6
0.100±0.008
0.114±0.001
0.083±0.002
7
0.081±0.001
0.126±0.003
0.134±0.002
Parental
0.115±0.015
Sanger sequencing of the RuBisCO gene in all 21 colonies tested further confirmed the
conclusion that no positive mutations had arisen through the epPCR. In fact, all colonies
tested except colony 4 and 5, which had been incorrectly assembled, from library 5 had a
wild­type (WT) cbbM gene and it seemed that all the variants generated through epPCR
had been outcompeted by the WT cbbM. This raised suspicion to the degree of variation
introduced by epPCR.
To test the degree of variation introduced in the libraries generated in the epPCR protocol,
12 colonies were sequenced in total. The primer used for sanger sequencing annealed
before the cbbM gene of 1.4 kb in the plasmid. The maximum high quality sequences
offered by Eurofins is 1.1 kB, however, from experience ,the range of reliable sequencing
results is actually approximately 800 bp. After 800 bp the sequences often become very
low quality and contain many mixed peaks. Thus, this sanger sequencing only reliably
delivers 60% of the cbbM gene sequenced, but it was deemed sufficient to simply analyze
the degree of variation introduced by epPCR. Two single colonies were isolated from cryo­
stocks of each E. coli DH10b and GLY­AUX∆for each library streaked onto LB+kan agar
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
39
==PAGE:48==
plates. The cryostock used for GLY­AUX∆was the one prepared before growth­coupled
selection. This was done to test each library after each transformation to ensure that the
mutated variants were propagated through all steps. Shown in fig. 3.8 is a representation
of what was considered a real mutation from the sanger sequencing results. Only muta­
tions with a quality score of >20 from the AB1 files, generated by Eurofins as part of their
sanger sequencing services, were considered. The chromatograms from each of these
mutations were then inspected and only mutations with clean single peaks were further
considered to be true mutations. From the 12 colonies sequenced 10 of them harbored
>4 mutations that were considered true mutations. At least one colony from each library
in each strain was positively mutated and the only two colonies that were ”not” mutated,
yielded corrupted sequencing results with very low quality (<20) in the entire sequencing
files.
Figure 3.8: Snapshot of one sanger sequence alignment from a cPCR of an epPCR
GLY­AUX∆colony before growth­selection. The chromatogram obtained with sanger­
sequencing for a single mutant colony sequenced before growth­selection from the ep­
PCR library 5. The mutation observed is an A→C mutation introducing the T222P muta­
tion in the R. rubrum cbbM RuBisCO gene.
These results all indicate that the epPCR introduced mutations to an acceptable degree
and the cbbM gene was mutated in all colonies tested with sanger sequencing before
growth­coupled selection. However, there seems to have been no beneficial set of mu­
tations obtained through the process of the epPCR random mutagenesis as all colonies
sequenced and tested after growth­coupled selection were WT cbbM.
40
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:49==
3.6
Directed mutagenesis of R. rubrum cbbM on clusters
based on a DMS of RuBisCO
The paper by Prywes et al. focused entirely on the carboxylation reaction of RuBisCO.
However, the beneficial mutational landscape for carboxylation discovered in the paper
was hypothesized to also contain several positive mutations and hot­spots for the oxy­
genation. This was based on the same principle underlying RuBisCO’s ability to use both
CO2 and O2 as substrates. The substrates are highly similar in structure and hardly dif­
ferentiable by RuBisCO. The processing of the data from the DMS was performed by
collaborator Niklas Gedsmar Madsen. The DMS data relating to effect size of mutations
on Vmax and KC (km for CO2) was plotted as a convex­hull. The convex­hull is the con­
cave shape that outlines the entire point­cloud of data­points which can be seen in fig. 3.9.
The concave shape of the convex­hull is based on the pareto­frontier, which are the most
extreme mutations in any direction where increasing the Vmax effect size can only lead to
a decrease in kc effect size and vice versa.
The further analysis only considers the points within a certain distance of the concave
and disregards all points that have a negative effect size on either Vmax or kC. Then, by
finding the frequency of mutations at each position in this selection, amino acid hotspots
were discovered.
Figure 3.9: Full convex­hull plot generated by Niklas Gesmar Madsen. The convex­hull
is a concave shape which encapsulates the entire point­cloud by going through the ”best­
points” in either direction. To increase the points of interest, all points within ϵ = 0.6 of
the convex­hull are considered. The blue and green scatter points are potential mutations
which can be combined in a combinatorial library. Each of these selected points is im­
proved in at least one kinetic parameter or both from the parental protein. This plot was
generated with data from Prywes et al. [21]
A structural and co­evolutionary analysis was performed to identify 4 clusters of three
amino acids located at these hot­spots. The clusters were determined so that the amino
acids within each cluster are either likely co­evolved or are structurally related to each
other. The clusters were:
• Cluster1: Y36, G37, and G116
• Cluster2: 27, 79, and 81(NTT)
• Cluster3: 141, 145, and 149
• Cluster4: 458, 460, and 463
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
41
==PAGE:50==
The libraries were generated with primers including degenerate codons at these specific
positions and re­assembled with Gibson assembly. Due to time limitations, only cluster
1 was successfully PCR amplified, assembled, transformed into GLY­AUX∆and went
through growth­coupled selection. Cluster 2 and cluster 3 were successfully PCR ampli­
fied and the Gibson assembly was performed but the libraries were not transformed into
GLY­AUX.
Fig 3.10a shows the primer design for cluster 1 including the locations of the degenerate
NNK codons. NNK codons are designed to span the entire amino­acid space but only half
of the codon­space possible and only includes 1/3 stop codons possible. This means that
in codon­space this library has a maximal size of 32,768 variants, whilst only being 8000
variants in the amino acid space. The same transformation protocol as for the epPCR was
used and the transformation efficiency was more than 10­fold the maximal library size.
CPCR and sanger sequencing of the RuBisCO sequence was performed on 18 colonies
transformed with cluster 1 before growth­coupled selection. Every colony harbored unique
mutations at the positions 36, 37, and 116. In fig. 3.10b one such sequence from a colony
is shown with the mutations at each site indicated. These results indicate a successful
amplification including the degeneracy of the primers to introduce mutations. The trans­
formed GLY­AUX∆population was subjected to three serial passages in M9S+kan and
thereafter plated on LB+kan agar plates. 48 single colonies were picked and the cbbM
gene was sent for sanger sequencing with the same primers as used for the sanger se­
quencing from fig. 3.10b.
Of the 48 colonies sent for sequencing 4 failed, 8 colonies harbored mutations in R. rubrum
cbbM RuBisCO, and 36 colonies were WT. The overview of all mutations observed after
three times serial passage in M9S+kan can be seen in table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Overview of mutations obtained with directed mutagenesis in R. rubrum cbbM
RuBisCO that survived three serial passages in selective M9S+kan media.
Mutations
Amount of colonies
G37A + G116R
2
G116E
1
Y36L + G37R
+ G116R
1
Y36N + G37R
+ G116E
1
G116A
1
Y36F + G37T
1
G116D
1
Based on the overview in table 3.4 The G116R mutations is the only one observed three
times. This mutation is rather interesting as the position is also in the channel towards
the active site of RuBisCO. Furthermore, this exchange was from glycine, which is the
simplest amino acid, to a very large and positively charged amino acid. Interestingly, one
of the most beneficial mutations found in the study by Prywes et al. [21] was G116K,
which was also a substitution to a slightly smaller, positively charged amino acid. Due to
time limitations, it was not possible to obtain growth curves for GLY­AUX∆with growth
recovered by cbbM genes harboring these mutations. However, this should be the next
step in this line of experiments.
42
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.10: Overview of the location of primers for directed mutagenesis of cluster 1 and
sanger sequence alignment from sequencing of one colony with mutations from library as­
sembly. a) The sequence of the pCBB2.1 plasmid in the direct vicinity of the positions to
be mutated in cluster 1 of the directed mutagenesis approach of this study Y36, G37, and
G116. The positions of the degenerate NNK codons are highlighted. b) The sequence
alignment at the positions of interest from a) from the sequencing of 1 colony after muta­
genic library transformation in GLY­AUX. The mutations this specific colony harbors are
Y36S, G37L, and G116V.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:53==
4
Discussion
4.1
Expression system for evolution
4.1.1
Versatile and consistent expression plasmid
Moving through several iterations of expression plasmids was vital to the consistency of
this study as consistent growth recovery in the auxotrophic strains is crucial. The final
aim of the overarching project is to develop an efficient valorization of CO2 in the up and
coming cell factory chassis C necator. Thus, making a plasmid that can easily be propa­
gated to C.necator and E. coli was vital, and expressing the CBB module with a promoter
that is constitutive and strong in both bacteria is crucial. The J5 promoter was chosen
for this reason as it has relatively strong constitutive expression in E. coli and because
it is one of the most widely used constitutive promoters in C.necator [47]. Furthermore,
the testing performed of different prk variants from several different species did not show
any significant changes in recovered growth rates in GLY­AUX∆. Therefore, selecting the
native C.necator prk allowed for the expression of only one heterologous gene, RuBisCO,
from the CBB module when transferred to C.necator. One of the tools necessary to study
the evolution and perform evolution experiments like ALE is cultivation systems like biore­
actors or shake­flasks. For the use of the plasmid for growth recovery in an attempt to
evolve RuBisCO, table top bioreactors were used in this study.
4.2
Pioreactor setup and assembly
4.2.1
Pioreactor setup
The bioreactors from PioreactorTM were not prepared for experiments before the begin­
ning of this study and thus the setup was the first task. The main tasks for the setup was
the installment of the software on all bioreactors, calibrations, and the setup of the user­
interface (UI). The calibrations were, as explained, above done according to software
by PioreactorTM and all peristaltic pumps and the magnetic stirring was calibrated and
verified. However, during the calibrations of the OD measurements, it was evident that
the current software was of low quality. The bioreactors are equipped with IR­light emit­
ters and optical density sensors which can be oriented to record scatter at both 135°and
90°. However, the calibration software available at the beginning of this study constructed
faulty calibration curves and thus was discarded and not used for the entire study. Since
then the software has been updated and improved. However, this was during the long­
term ALE experiment of this study and thus couldn’t be applied. This is the reason for the
arbitrary optical density values on the 2nd­axis in all ALE plots.
Using arbitrary OD measurements for a turbidostat ALE and data analysis
Working with the directly measured and uncalibrated OD measurements in the ALE ex­
periments did not pose an issue. When fixing the target OD for when to dilute in turbido­
stat ALE experiments the important factor is that the cells are maintained in exponential
growth. The lag­phase, exponential growth phase, and stationary phase can easily be
separated even when using arbitrary OD values. Thus setting the target OD for each
bioreactor was performed relative to the phases and their according OD values in each
individual bioreactor.
The real OD600 value is not of crucial importance for the data analysis. The easiest to
measure and the two most important read­outs directly from the OD data from a turbido­
stat ALE experiment is the time between dilutions and the consistency of exponential
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
45
==PAGE:54==
growth between dilutions. The consistency of exponential growth between dilutions is
the most vital aspect and the purpose of a turbidostat ALE experiment. The constant ex­
ponential growth phase gives mutants with increased growth rate a chance to take over
the population [28]. The time between dilutions is directly related to the growth rate of
the bacteria. If growth is consistently in exponential phase, then a shorter time between
dilutions indicates a faster growth rate, as the target OD is reached faster.
However, with this in mind it is certainly true that operating with the real OD600 mea­
surements in real time is more informative and better practice. Furthermore, having all
bioreactors calibrated and showing the real OD600 values makes comparison better and
easier. Unfortunately, as the bioreactor setup in the lab of this study was new and the
software at that point in time was not optimal, it was not possible.
4.2.2
General assessment of the bioreactors from PioreactorTM for long
term cultivations
The bioreactors performed well and only experienced minor technical difficulties during
an experiment that ran continuously for almost 2 months. The peristaltic pumping system
stayed sterile and never had any leaks during the entire duration of the experiment. The
only problem was one pump causing an error that stopped all activity in the bioreactor.
This was, however, fixed by simply exchanging it for another pump. The software available
for the bioreactors for pumping and stirring worked without fault. Only the calibration
related to OD was inaccurate and did not make correct calibration curves. However, as
mentioned above, this has been fixed in the newer software updates after the start of the
experiments in this study.
The only tweaks necessary to the bioreactors available for this study was the addition
of a small spacer ring that lifts the OD sensors slightly higher, which allows for the use
of a larger magnet with higher stirring speeds. This was done to obtain better oxygen
availability in the media during fermentation, and was the reason for using 60 ml vials
leaving 40 ml of headspace. Collaborators from the laboratory of this study that did tests
on oxygen availability with different setups for these specific bioreactors recommended
this setup. However, it is unpublished data.
4.3
Selection of auxotrophic strain for evolution and testing
4.3.1
GLY­AUX∆as the sensor strain of choice for growth­coupled
selection
Choosing GLY­AUX as the sensor strain for this study was based on the fact that it has the
lowest demand for glycolate/glyoxylate of all the sensor strains available from the work
of Orsi et al. [34]. GLY­AUX was modified to GLY­AUX∆by the additional deletion of the
gcvTHP operon. GLY­AUX∆is the sensor strain that has been used for the testing of the
different iterations of pCBB plasmid. Since it has the lowest demand of glycolate/glyoxy­
late for growth recovery, GLY­AUX∆is the easiest of the sensor strains to work with. The
parallel studies conducted by other students as part of this project also mainly make use
of GLY­AUX. Using the same strain also aids collaboration.
Furthermore, a consistent cultivation protocol was in place for this strain. This informa­
tion was based on the work of prior students and enabled this study to immediately work
with the bioreactors for an ALE setup. The ALE of this study had the clear aim of evolv­
ing RuBisCO for its promiscuous oxygenation reaction, however, a vital part was also
the testing and experience with the PioreactorTM bioreactor setup. Testing the newly ac­
quired setup for performing long­term continuous cultivations was equally important and
the bioreactors did very well on this accord.
46
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:55==
4.3.2
Selective pressure in ALE experiments
With the aim of obtaining beneficial mutations in RuBisCO, the lowered selection pres­
sure of a less demanding strain such as GLY­AUX∆might not be ideal. This is due to the
lower demand for glycolate for production, the lower the selective pressure to keep ben­
eficial mutations. The selective pressure is certainly still relevant and present with lower
demand, however, it could be more intense. By choosing one of the more demanding
glycolate/glyoxylate sensor strains constructed by Orsi et al. such as the C1+GLY­AUX∆
or the TCA­AUX, the selective pressure could have been increased. The benefit of this
could be a potentially faster time­line for obtaining beneficial mutations in RuBisCO un­
til a certain limit. The selective pressure is a parameter that is vital to obtain mutations
as too weak selective pressure will lose beneficial mutations or will just not lead to evo­
lution and too strong selective pressure might force beneficial mutations into extinction
[52] [32]. Too strong selective pressure might also severely lower the chance of sets of
beneficial mutations arising that might require the gene to traverse through valleys of the
mutational landscape. It is true that proteins with hundreds of amino acids like RuBisCO
exist in a huge fitness landscape with many local peaks and valleys. Moving through this
fitness/phenotype landscape between genotypes is incredibly complex. Especially in a
continuous evolution experiment like an ALE experiment that is constantly selecting for
the best variants, obtaining a set of beneficial mutations can be very unlikely. This is
because individual parts of the set of mutations might force the enzyme into a local min­
ima, even though, if combined with another mutation, this set would be doubly beneficial.
Falling into a minima/valley like this will make it very unlikely that this set of mutations will
arise. Especially if very strong selective pressure is applied, mutations like this will be
extinct quickly.
Thus, for a growth­coupled selection scheme like this, choosing the right sensor strain with
a balanced selective pressure is vital [32] [52]. For this study, the selection strain chosen
potentially had a slightly too weak but still present and relevant selective pressure. The
recommendations based on this study is to obtain stable protocols for handling the TCA­
AUX or C1+GLYAUX strains and utilizing these for an ALE setup similar to the one of this
study. Different types of ALE experiments could be set up depending on the goal of the
study.
4.4
Choice of chemostat vs turbidostat and ALE parameter
setup
The reason for choosing a turbidostat setup in this study is that a chemostat setup does
not allow the user to specifically control the OD of the cells. In a chemostat the relation
between growth rate and dilution rate has to match otherwise the experiment loses pur­
pose. If the dilution rate is too high, compared to the growth rate, cells are washed out
completely while if it is too low, cells are forced to grow at a slower growth rate than the
growth rate observed in exponential phase. When using growth­coupled selection with
µmax as the main read­out of the module being tested, a turbidostat is the obvious choice.
A turbidostat setup enables the user to let the cells grow at a specific narrow OD range
similar to what is observed in a steady­state chemostat. The main difference is, however,
that the dilutions keeping the cells in exponential phase are not directed by a dilution rate
related to time, but instead related directly to the OD of the cells growing. This ensures
that the cells never wash out, and that because of the constant dilutions the cells stay in
exponential phase continuously [28].
In a turbidostat continuous cultivation setup there are three main parameters of impor­
tance: the passage volume, the population size, and the target OD. The target OD must
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
47
==PAGE:56==
be set so that the cells stay in exponential phase continuously.
4.4.1
Effect of population size and passage volume
Two of the parameters are related to volumes. One being the population size which is di­
rectly related to the working volume of the fermentation setup. For this study, the working
volume was 20 ml, which is rather small compared to e.g. serial passage shake­flask ALE
experiments, where the culture volume can be >100 ml. Population size is directly related
to the mutations observed in the ALE experiments according to Schenk et al. [37]. When
operating with smaller population sizes, high­rate structural variants and loss of function
point mutations are more prevalent, opposed to larger population size evolution experi­
ments that obtained low­rate mutations with a large benefits. Thus, the larger population
sizes evolved to higher resistance levels than what was observed for lower population
sizes in the study by Schenk et al. [37].
The 20 ml working volume, however, is also a technical trade­off. Increasing the work­
ing volume of continuous evolution experiments has several technical downsides. The
size and space for the equipment needed is generally much larger. The resources used
for a larger scale experiment will be significantly more expensive; especially the amount
of media consumed will significantly increase. Lastly the complete automation of larger
scale ALE setups is difficult without expensive and specialized equipment like larger 1­5
L bioreactors. The ease of use delivered by the small bench­top bioreactors offered by
PioreactorTM enables a study of this scale to simultaneously operate 6 parallel continuous
evolution experiments with minimal up­keep.
The passage volume is equally important to the setup of a turbidostat experiment. Too low
a passage volume risks washing out beneficial mutations before they have a chance to
take over, especially if several mutations are needed for the improved phenotype. How­
ever, too large of a passage volume does not give beneficial mutants the optimal chance to
take over the population. Just as in the case of the population size, it is important to have
a balanced passage volume. In this study, it was decided to use two different passage
volumes as can be seen in fig. 3.4a­b. Two bioreactors in selective media in fig. 3.4a
were operating with either 20% or 30% dilutions, which were effectively approximately
10­15% dilutions, and two bioreactors in selective media in fig. 3.4b were operating with
90% dilutions, which was effectively approximately 45% dilutions. The goal of these two
parallel experiments was to observe the consistency of growth between the two settings.
Furthermore, the aim was to use the final plasmid and genomic analysis to compare the
two and see if differences were observed in mutant populations.
The results obtained in this study related to the consistency showed that both settings
were very stable and consistent through almost the entire duration. The genomic and
plasmid DNA analysis, however, did not indicate any conclusive differences between
the operating modes. Even though no differences between the operating modes were
observed, mutations did arise in the RuBisCO and prk genes of all cultures growing in
selective conditions.
4.5
Structural analysis of RuBisCO mutation
Interestingly, the sole mutation in the cbbM gene observed in any of the bioreactors oper­
ating with selective media was the M115I mutation. The appearance of the mutation in the
bioreactors Virgo and Capricorn is likely due to propagation from the Taurus bioreactor,
since the culture of that bioreactor was used as inoculum. However, the same mutation
arose in both the Taurus and Aries bioreactors, which were never connected at any point.
Furthermore, the mutation increased in variant frequency and persisted in all 4 bioreac­
48
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:57==
tors until the end of the experiment. The M115 residue is located at the interface between
the two RuBisCO monomers forming a dimer, at the exact location of the channel to the
active site. It is quite interesting that a mutation that is this closely related to the active site
arose during the ALE experiment. The mutation replaces a methionine with an isoleucine,
which is relatively similar in size. However, a major difference is that the residue loses
the ability to form disulfide bridges. It is not known whether this residue forms disulfide
bridges, but the mutation removes the possibility.
A mutation near the active site like this is interesting when trying to evolve an enzyme to
be more catalytically efficient for a specific reaction. Therefore, reproducing this mutation,
along with the mutation observed in prk, was of great interest.
4.6
Reproducing mutations from ALE experiments
The reproduction of the 2 mutations, cbbM M115I and prk N216T, observed in the CBB
module in all strains, which had been exposed to selective conditions, unfortunately did
not yield conclusive results as to the benefit of either mutation, as can be seen in fig. 3.7c.
The growth curves seen in fig. 3.7c are quite inconsistent, and do not have a clean
growth phase structure with a lag­phase, exponential phase, and stationary phase sep­
arated clearly. The double mutant showed a significantly longer lag­phase but then a
relatively smooth exponential growth phase, whilst each single mutant and the parental
strain seems to exhibit diauxic growth with two separate growth phases.
The single mutant cbbM M115I has a higher growth rate calculated than the parental strain
and the double and single prk N216T mutant. However, with the inconsistencies of the
growth curves these results are not considered significant evidence that the mutation in
cbbM, which arose in all the bioreactors, is indeed beneficial for the oxygenation reaction
of RuBisCO. However, this poses an interesting question as to why this specific mutation,
which was never present when sequencing the parental plasmid, arose in two sets of
ALE experiments individually. Due to time limitations of this study, it was not possible
to delve more into the reasoning behind this, and it was also unfortunately not possible
to perform multiple repetitions of these growth experiments to obtain reproducible and
clean data. However, as the growth­coupled assay failed to produce clean data for the
single and double mutants, the mutations observed from this ALE experiment are still very
interesting and warrant further investigeation. Another approach to evolve RuBisCO and
make use of growth­coupled selection is random mutagenesis. This approach was also
employed in this study.
4.7
Random mutagenesis approach and the pitfalls of it
As evidenced by the results obtained in section 3.5 the method of epPCR is neither elegant
nor high efficiency method. It is true that epPCR allows the user to rapidly screen millions
of enzyme variants. However, one of the largest pitfalls is that an incredibly large number
of the mutations generated by random mutagenesis methods like epPCR are unnatural.
Breaking disulfide bridges that are vital for protein folding or substituting amino acids into
positions that have no natural relevance since they do not exist in nature are common
issues in large parts of the mutagenic libraries. As the epPCR used in this study lacks tar­
geting and functional relevance, the amount of non­functional mutants is likely very high.
Other random mutagenesis approaches like NNK degeneracies have been suggested to
create a majority of variants in an un­natural space in a pre­print by Weinstein et al. [53].
As the results show, the screening of up to 17 million different mutated RuBisCO genes
did not yield a single mutant that outcompeted the WT cbbM gene when serial passaged
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
49
==PAGE:58==
in selective media. Among the 21 colonies tested after selection, not a single colony
harbored a mutated cbbM gene, clearly indicating that from all three libraries tested the
WT cbbM had outcompeted all other variants.
Furthermore, the protocol used here is based on an unpublished method developed by
colleagues at the center. The data is unpublished, but the epPCR mutation rate is sup­
posedly around 4­5 SNPs per 1 kb, and as the cbbM gene is about 1.4 kb, the amount of
mutations per variant should average to 5.6­7 SNPs in the gene. This suggests that the
method is more suited for smaller genes. The chance of having a set of 6­7 mutations that
are all either beneficial or neutral, or a combination of beneficial and disadvantageous mu­
tations that complement each other to become a neutral variant is not high. Depending on
the mutational landscape of the protein of interest, obtaining any single variant that does
not harbor any mutations making it non­functional due to random, unnatural substitutions
as mentioned above is low. Furthermore, the potential library size with 6 mutations in a
gene of 1.4kb randomly spread among all positions is enormous and is several orders
of magnitude larger than the largest library obtained in this study. As a result, full library
coverage was not achieved.
4.7.1
Troubleshooting epPCR library generation and transformation
protocol.
With a random mutagenesis method like epPCR, it is crucial that the library generation is
well executed and transformation efficiencies are incredibly high. To reliably identify ben­
eficial mutations through this method the CFU from electroporation must reach the order
of millions. A significant portion of this study was devoted to optimizing a transformation
protocol for E. coli DH10b to obtain CFU values in the millions.
Several key factors changed between each iteration of epPCR libraries, which are shown
in table 3.2. From the first to second iteration, the volume of ice cold milliQ H2O used for
washing of the cells, to remove all salts, was increased to 50 ml per washing step. This
washes the cells much more thoroughly and increases efficiency. Between the second
and third iteration the change to the same type of MicroPulser(BioRad) as was indicated
in the protocol was done, instead of using the model used for all cloning in this study. This
model of MicroPulser(BioRad) has different preset programs and using the 0.2 cm E. coli
cuvette setting as specified in the protocol increased the efficiency of the protocol. For the
4th and 5th iterations, the changes included switching to 10% ice cold glycerol for each
50 ml washing step, and recovering the cells in SOC media pre­warmed to 37 °C.
Several of these changes are also reported by New England Biolabs on their ”Electropo­
ration tips” page. Small factors, such as how quickly the recovery medium is added to the
cells after electroporation, can significantly reduce efficiency. Overall, performing these
electroporations a number of times also helped optimize the timing of each step which
improved the transformation efficiency.
4.8
Directed mutagenesis
The method used for directed mutagenesis in this study is mutagenesis at specific loca­
tions using NNK or NTT degeneracies in primers. The clusters chosen for mutations as
explained were based on data from the DMS of Prywes et al. [21]. The study by Prywes
et al. was focused on improving the carboxylation reaction. However, as discussed in
Section 3.6 the substrate similarity and general conditions for either carboxylation or oxy­
genation suggests that some of the effects might be transferable. Especially the change
in Vmax, as this is the maximum reaction speed of the enzyme and improving it overall
should also enhance the oxygenation rate. The mutations may not have identical effects
50
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:59==
on both reactions and thus the randomized directed mutagenesis approach was chosen.
Because only hot­spots for mutations were located in the data analysis from the DMS of
RuBisCO, the degeneracies in the primers allow for variants with all different combinations
of the 20 amino acids in these locations.
The co­evolution and structural analysis performed to divide the mutational hot­spots into
clusters was aimed at generating orthogonal outcomes. This means, that certain mutant
variants from any 2 of the clusters that individually exhibited beneficial effects for the
RuBisCO oxygenation reaction, could theoretically have additive effects. By grouping
amino acids that are structurally in close proximity or are highly co­evolved, the overall
library size is reduced by avoiding biologically irrelevant variants. In the same way that
the random mutagenesis of epPCR makes large numbers of unnatural variants, mutating
all the hot­spots from the DMS and exhaustively creating every variant possible vastly
increases the library size in an unnecessary way.
Overall, the clustering had two purposes: to shrink total library size down by removing
a lot of un­natural variants and to create separate but orthogonal clusters where effects
might be additive. These two factors greatly reduce the workload needed to test the
mutant variants and thereby make it possible to screen all 4 cluster libraries in the matter
of weeks, assuming successful PCR amplification.
4.8.1
Troubleshooting PCRs for directed mutagenesis
In this study, multiple challenges were encountered when amplifying the PCR fragments
for the Gibson assembly of the directed mutagenesis libraries of cluster 2, 3, and 4. Clus­
ter 3 and 4 had primers designed according to the design method 2 shown in fig. 2.3
and contained all the NNK codons on the forward primer. This means that the forward
primers primers exceeded 80 bp for both clusters and because of the high GC content of
the regions around the positions of interest, they both had >60% GC content. Further­
more, because it is necessary to match the melting temperatures of the reverse primer
with the 3’ end before the first NNK codon of the forward primer, the melting temperatures
of the primers were calculated to be >72 °C for using Q5 or Phusion polymerases with the
New England Biolabs Tm calculator (https://tmcalculator.neb.com/#!/main). The prob­
lems encountered with the amplification of the fragments for cluster 2 were only related
to the small 179bp fragment inside RuBisCO. The issue observed was aspecific binding
and amplification. Changing from Q5 polymerase to Phusion polymerase, however, am­
plified without non­specific amplification. The amplification of the one fragment of cluster
3 was also achieved at the very end of this study, using Phusion polymerase and a high
GC­content buffer.
Due to the time limitations, this part of the study concluded with successful cloning, trans­
formation, and growth selection of cluster 1 mutant variants in GLY­AUX∆. Furthermore,
all fragments for clusters 2 and 3 were successfully amplified and Gibson assembly was
performed, but they were not transformed into either GLY­AUX∆or E. coli DH10b.
4.9
Comparison of the three methods of
mutagenesis/laboratory evolution used in this study
The three methods used in the attempt to enhance the promiscuous oxygenation reaction
of RuBisCO in this study were as explained above, ALE, epPCR random mutagenesis,
and directed mutagenesis using codon degeneracies in primers at specific positions.
4.9.1
The kind of mutations that arise
One benefit of performing an ALE experiment where the cells grow continuously over a
long period of time is that the mutations arising from the selective conditions determined
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
51
==PAGE:60==
are exclusively natural. This, ensures that time and resources are not spent on a large
number of irrelevant mutant variants that are completely non­functional. Compared to
the epPCR random mutagenesis approach as described above, a lot of resources and
time will likely be used on completely dys­functional variants. Using a tight screening
system and growth­coupled selection, these mutant variants should quickly get removed
from the libraries generated. However, this effectively also reduces the library size for
every dysfunctional mutant. The directed evolution method used in this study, reduces
this amount of dysfunctional variants by narrowing down the targets for mutations into
clusters based on real data. While narrowing down the selection of positions to mutate,
this method still allows for randomization by using full NNK degeneracies in the positions
of interest in almost all primers.
The primary drawback of ALE is the very large time­scales in which they operate, which
is usually in the order of months, but can be longer [31]. However, with smart planning
and neat experiment setup these factors can be reduced. Careful and intentional levels
of selective pressure and technical parameters of ALE experiments are crucial. EpPCR
random mutagenesis experiments do not take the same level of planning or maintenance.
This method is a less precise and more volume­based approach, where the goal is simply
to obtain as many variants as possible in any given direction in the mutational landscape
of the protein, and then have a solid screening platform in place to sort through them all.
In the case of this study, where >4 SNPs were observed in all variants, this method is,
however, much more likely to discover combinatorial beneficial mutations. The chances
of obtaining combinatorially beneficial mutants with >4 mutations through an ALE exper­
iment are very low, especially if the selective pressure is not well defined and optimal
for the experiment. The directed mutagenesis approach is the fastest and by far most
targeted mutagenic approach performed in this study. This approach only focuses on
smaller libraries that are precisely designed to have higher chances of having additive
effects. Furthermore, it is specifically targeted based on prior data, which makes the mu­
tations screened through this method much more informed. It is, however, still important
to have a solid screening platform to assess the mutant variants, and filter out all the
variants that are non­functional or have lower efficiency.
All three methods allow for iteration on top of beneficial mutations as an ALE experiment
could be kept running for longer durations, even though beneficial mutations have arisen,
in an attempt to further evolution. Repetitive iterations of the epPCR protocol could be
performed with the starting sequence being the best performing sequence from a prior
iteration. The directed evolution approach has the goal of obtaining separate benefi­
cial mutations through clustering, and then combining them into the same sequence to
observe the additive, if any, effects of the combinatorial mutations. The directed muta­
genesis approach will however not highlight or discover any new positions of interested
and thus needs input from other experiments that find the positions of interest for more
iterations to be possible.
4.9.2
Parallel set of evolution/mutagenesis experiments can expedite the
results
When studying and attempting to evolve mutant variants of an enzyme where growth­
coupled selection is available, performing parallel sets of experiments using multiple mu­
tagenesis and evolutionary strategies can accelerate identification of beneficial mutations.
As the goals of the parallel experiments are also aligned, the intermediate results can be
used to inform the design of the other experiments. If several mutations persist through
growth selection from an epPCR random mutagenesis approach, it could inform a round
of cluster­based directed mutagenesis to further study those specific positions. Further­
52
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:61==
more, if an ALE experiment obtains beneficial mutations, it could be the sequence starting
point for the other methods.
One objective of this study was to assess if these methods might lead towards a mutational
convergence which centers around specific residues or if a clear divergence was observed
and mutations would spread into different parts of the sequence. However, since this
study did not conclude on any clearly beneficial mutations from any of the methods, this
question remains unresolved.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:63==
5
Future recommendations
5.1
ALE experiment with higher selective pressure
In light of the results from this study, an ALE experiment using the same strategy, setup
and methods as performed in this study could be conducted using more metabolically
demanding strains available from Orsi et al. [34]. The likelihood of obtaining beneficial
mutations in a repeated experiment with stronger selective pressure is likely higher than
it was in this study. Additionally, a future ALE experiment could use a better control, as
the control of this study was the empty vector of the backbone from pCBB2.1. This is an
appropriate control when mutations are located on the genome as the plasmids, likely will
cause a similar burden on the cells during a continuous fermentation. However, when the
genes of interest are carried on the plasmid itself, it would make a better control to also use
the identical pCBB2.1 plasmid in the control bioreactors operating with relaxing conditions.
In case of several mutations observed in RuBisCO, this would better distinguish the ones
that arise from the technical conditions of a turbidostat experiment, and the ones that arise
with beneficial effects for enzyme catalytic efficiency.
Another valuable consideration for a future ALE experiment could be to start the experi­
ment with a pre­diversified library. Random mutagenesis by epPCR or directed mutage­
nesis as performed in this study could both be used for this purpose. This would increase
the number of potential mutational trajectories during the ALE [54].
5.2
Finishing the directed evolution libraries and combining
beneficial clusters
As the directed evolution experiment could not be fully completed within the timeline of
this study, there is still work to do. The transformation and growth coupled selection of
clusters 2 and 3, as well as the complete process—from PCR amplification to transforma­
tion and growth coupled selection for cluster 4 are yet to be performed. These clusters
have the potential to provide valuable insights into comparison of mutations’ effects on
carboxylation vs oxygenation in terms of positions to mutate. Furthermore, when libraries
have been constructed and growth selected, identifying and combining them would be the
next step in mind for this line of experiments. The design was intentionally structured to
increase the likelihood of obtaining orthogonal mutations in the clusters that can be com­
bined. Testing whether this hypothesis holds true in vivo remains a compelling direction
for future research.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:65==
6
Conclusion
The research methods presented in this study show several of the benefits but also pit­
falls of the given methods for protein engineering and use of growth­coupled selection for
evolving enzyme activity. A putative beneficial mutation for the promiscuous oxygenation
reaction of RuBisCO has been found through turbidostat ALE experiments. The epPCR
random mutagenesis method used in this paper has been attempted and discussed to a
large extent, highlighting advantages and disadvantages. A framework for cluster based
directed mutagenesis has been constructed and further research is needed to confirm the
effectiveness and advantages of this method. The PioreactorTM bioreactors have been
evaluated as tools for continuous evolution experiments and utilized for long­term ALE
experiments.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
57
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
UN Environment Programme (UNEP). Emissions Gap Report 2024. Oct. 2024.
[2]
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA). World Pop­
ulation Prospects 2024. Tech. rep. UN DESA, 2024.
[3]
Robert Becker Pickson et al. “Do population­related factors matter for carbon emis­
sions? Lessons from different income groups of countries”. In: Urban Climate 55
(May 2024), p. 101934. ISSN: 2212­0955. DOI: 10.1016/J.UCLIM.2024.101934.
[4]
J D WATSON and F H C CRICK. “Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A Structure
for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid”. In: Nature 171 (4356 1953), pp. 737–738. ISSN:
1476­4687. DOI: 10.1038/171737a0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/171737a0.
[5]
Jing Li et al. Advances in Synthetic Biology and Biosafety Governance. 2021. DOI:
10.3389/fbioe.2021.598087.
[6]
Vijai Singh. Recent advancements in synthetic biology: Current status and chal­
lenges. 2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.025.
[7]
Ryan McDaniel and Ron Weiss. Advances in synthetic biology: On the path from
prototypes to applications. 2005. DOI: 10.1016/j.copbio.2005.07.002.
[8]
Manoj Kumar Enamala et al. “Production of a Variety of Industrially Significant Prod­
ucts by Biological Sources Through Fermentation”. In: Microorganisms for Sustain­
ability. Vol. 17. 2019. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-8844-6_9.
[9]
Wei Jiang et al. Metabolic engineering strategies to enable microbial utilization of
C1 feedstocks. 2021. DOI: 10.1038/s41589-021-00836-0.
[10]
Wenlong Yan et al. Design and construction of microbial cell factories based on
systems biology. 2023. DOI: 10.1016/j.synbio.2022.11.001.
[11]
Filippo Federici, Enrico Orsi, and Pablo Iván Nikel. From Rags to Riches: Exploiting
the Calvin­Benson­Bassham Cycle for Biomanufacturing. 2023. DOI: 10.1002/cctc.
202300746.
[12]
Xueqin Lv et al. “C1­based biomanufacturing: Advances, challenges and perspec­
tives”. In: Bioresource Technology 367 (2023), p. 128259. ISSN: 0960­8524. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2022.128259. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0960852422015929.
[13]
Wanda Dischert and Philippe Soucaille. Method for producing high amount of gly­
colic acid by fermentation. 2015.
[14]
Outi M. Koivistoinen et al. “Glycolic acid production in the engineered yeasts Sac­
charomyces cerevisiae and Kluyveromyces lactis”. In: Microbial Cell Factories 12
(1 2013). ISSN: 14752859. DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-82.
[15]
DJ Loder. “Process for manufacture of glycolic acid”. In: Patent SShA 2152852
(1939).
[16]
Yu Cai He et al. “Bioproduction of Glycolic acid from glycolonitrile with a new bacte­
rial isolate of alcaligenes sp. ECU0401”. In: Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnol­
ogy 160 (5 2010). ISSN: 02732289. DOI: 10.1007/s12010-009-8607-y.
[17]
Yinon M. Bar­On and Ron Milo. “The global mass and average rate of rubisco”. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
116 (10 2019). ISSN: 10916490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1816654116.
[18]
Stephanie Arrivault et al. “Metabolite profiles reveal interspecific variation in opera­
tion of the Calvin­Benson cycle in both C 4 and C 3 plants”. In: Journal of Experi­
mental Botany 70 (6 2019). ISSN: 14602431. DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erz051.
58
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:67==
[19]
Vedantu. What is used, produced, and accomplished by the Calvin­Benson cycle.
URL: https://www.vedantu.com/question-answer/used-produced-and-accomplished-
by-the-class-11-biology-cbse-5fd18a4effa98e443701d8b2.
[20]
Tobias J. Erb and Jan Zarzycki. A short history of RubisCO: the rise and fall (?) of
Nature’s predominant CO2 fixing enzyme. 2018. DOI: 10.1016/j.copbio.2017.07.017.
[21]
“A map of the rubisco biochemical landscape”. In: Nature (2025). ISSN: 1476­4687.
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-08455-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08455-
0.
[22]
Fan Yang et al. “Exploring the oxygenase function of Form II Rubisco for production
of glycolate from CO2”. In: AMB Express 11 (1 2021), p. 65. ISSN: 2191­0855. DOI:
10.1186/s13568-021-01224-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13568-021-01224-6.
[23]
Pallabi Roy Chakravarty. What are E. coli Expression Strains? URL: https://goldbio.
com/articles/article/what-are-e-coli-expression-strains#_Toc142600663.
[24]
Enrico Orsi et al. Growth­coupled selection of synthetic modules to accelerate cell
factory development. 2021. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-25665-6.
[25]
Sheila I. Jensen et al. “Seven gene deletions in seven days: Fast generation of
Escherichia coli strains tolerant to acetate and osmotic stress”. In: Scientific Reports
5 (2015). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/srep17874.
[26]
Misganaw Asmamaw Mengstie and Belay Zawdie Wondimu. Mechanism and ap­
plications of crispr/ cas­9­mediated genome editing. 2021. DOI: 10 . 2147 / BTT .
S326422.
[27]
Martin Dragosits and Diethard Mattanovich. Adaptive laboratory evolution ­ princi­
ples and applications for biotechnology. 2013. DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-64.
[28]
Burak Okumus, Sadik Yildiz, and Erdal Toprak. Fluidic and microfluidic tools for
quantitative systems biology. 2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.copbio.2013.08.016.
[29]
Manlu Zhu and Xiongfeng Dai. “Stringent response ensures the timely adaptation
of bacterial growth to nutrient downshift”. In: Nature Communications 14 (1 2023).
ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36254-0.
[30]
Patrick V. Phaneuf et al. “Causal mutations from adaptive laboratory evolution are
outlined by multiple scales of genome annotations and condition­specificity”. In:
BMC Genomics 21 (1 2020). ISSN: 14712164. DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-06920-4.
[31]
Troy E. Sandberg et al. The emergence of adaptive laboratory evolution as an effi­
cient tool for biological discovery and industrial biotechnology. 2019. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ymben.2019.08.004.
[32]
Takashi Hirasawa and Tomoya Maeda. Adaptive Laboratory Evolution of Microor­
ganisms: Methodology and Application for Bioproduction. 2023. DOI: 10 . 3390 /
microorganisms11010092.
[33]
F. A. Myers. “Random Mutagenesis by PCR”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology.
Vol. 2633. 2023. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-3004-4_7.
[34]
Enrico Orsi et al. “Computation­aided designs enable developing auxotrophic metabolic
sensors for wide­range glyoxylate and glycolate detection”. In: Nature Communica­
tions 16 (1 2025), p. 2168. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-57407-3.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-57407-3.
[35]
Brigette Tippin, Phuong Pham, and Myron F. Goodman. Error­prone replication for
better or worse. 2004. DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2004.04.004.
[36]
Natalia Ossa­Hernández, Luis Fernando Marins, and Daniela Volcan Almeida. “Com­
bination of error­prone PCR (epPCR) and Circular Polymerase Extension Cloning
(CPEC) for improving the coverage of random mutagenesis libraries”. In: Scientific
Reports 14 (1 2024), p. 15874. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-66584-y.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-66584-y.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
59
==PAGE:68==
[37]
Martijn F. Schenk et al. “Population size mediates the contribution of high­rate and
large­benefit mutations to parallel evolution”. In: Nature Ecology and Evolution 6 (4
2022). ISSN: 2397334X. DOI: 10.1038/s41559-022-01669-3.
[38]
Hans Jasper Genee et al. “Software­supported user cloning strategies for site­
directed mutagenesis and DNA assembly”. In: ACS Synthetic Biology 4 (3 2015).
ISSN: 21615063. DOI: 10.1021/sb500194z.
[39]
Heng Li. “Minimap2: Pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences”. In: Bioinformat­
ics 34 (18 2018). ISSN: 14602059. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty191.
[40]
Heng Li. “New strategies to improve minimap2 alignment accuracy”. In: Bioinfor­
matics 37 (23 2021). ISSN: 14602059. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab705.
[41]
Hai He et al. “Adaptive laboratory evolution recruits the promiscuity of succinate
semialdehyde dehydrogenase to repair different metabolic deficiencies”. In: Nature
Communications 15 (1 2024), p. 8898. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-
53156-x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53156-x.
[42]
Kazutaka Katoh and Daron M. Standley. “MAFFT multiple sequence alignment soft­
ware version 7: Improvements in performance and usability”. In: Molecular Biology
and Evolution 30 (4 2013). ISSN: 07374038. DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst010.
[43]
Niv Antonovsky et al. “Sugar Synthesis from CO2 in Escherichia coli”. In: Cell 166
(1 2016). ISSN: 10974172. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.064.
[44]
Howard M. Salis, Ethan A. Mirsky, and Christopher A. Voigt. “Automated design of
synthetic ribosome binding sites to control protein expression”. In: Nature Biotech­
nology 27 (10 2009). ISSN: 10870156. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.1568.
[45]
Lior Zelcbuch et al. “Spanning high­dimensional expression space using ribosome­
binding site combinatorics”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 41 (9 2013). ISSN: 03051048.
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt151.
[46]
Rolf Lutz and Hermann Bujard. “Independent and tight regulation of transcriptional
units in escherichia coli via the LacR/O, the TetR/O and AraC/I1­I2 regulatory ele­
ments”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 25 (6 1997). ISSN: 03051048. DOI: 10.1093/
nar/25.6.1203.
[47]
Abayomi Oluwanbe Johnson et al. “An Engineered Constitutive Promoter Set with
Broad Activity Range for Cupriavidus necator H16”. In: ACS Synthetic Biology 7 (8
2018). ISSN: 21615063. DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.8b00136.
[48]
U. Kues and U. Stahl. Replication of plasmids in gram­negative bacteria. 1989. DOI:
10.1128/mmbr.53.4.491-516.1989.
[49]
Karin Schnetz and Bodo Rak. “IS5: A mobile enhancer of transcription in Escherichia
coli”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 89 (4 1992). ISSN: 00278424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.89.4.1244.
[50]
Mohd Zulkhairi Mohd Yusoff et al. “Four products from Escherichia coli pseudo­
genes increase hydrogen production”. In: Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications 439 (4 2013). ISSN: 0006291X. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.016.
[51]
Tomas Lundqvist and Gunter Schneider. “Crystal structure of the ternary complex of
ribulose­1,5­bisphosphate carboxylase, magnesium(II) and activator carbon dioxide
at 2.3­.ANG. resolution”. In: Biochemistry 30 (4 Jan. 1991). doi: 10.1021/bi00218a004,
pp. 904–908. ISSN: 0006­2960. DOI: 10.1021/bi00218a004. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1021/bi00218a004.
[52]
Marta Lukačišinová, Booshini Fernando, and Tobias Bollenbach. “Highly parallel lab
evolution reveals that epistasis can curb the evolution of antibiotic resistance”. In:
Nature Communications 11 (1 2020). ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-
16932-z.
60
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:69==
[53]
Eli N. Weinstein et al. “Manufacturing­Aware Generative Model Architectures En­
able Biological Sequence Design and Synthesis at Petascale”. In: bioRxiv (2024).
DOI: 10.1101/2024.09.13.612900. eprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
2024/10/24/2024.09.13.612900.full.pdf. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
2024/10/24/2024.09.13.612900.
[54]
Erika A. DeBenedictis et al. “Systematic molecular evolution enables robust biomolecule
discovery”. In: Nature Methods 19 (1 2022). ISSN: 15487105. DOI: 10.1038/s41592-
021-01348-4.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:71==
A
Oligonucleotides and plasmids
A.1
Primers
Table A.1: Overview of all primers used in this study
Name
Sequence
Short description
MW_001
ctcaatcttcaatgttggcacgc
FWD ­ Amplification of the gcvTHP
operon in the genome of E. coli
SIJ488
MW_002
cgatgctgggtttcgtggtg
REV ­ Amplification of the gcvTHP
operon in the genome of E. coli
SIJ488
MW_003
cagctgtctagggcggcg
FWD ­ 40 bp before RuBisCO in
pCBB2.1
MW_004
tagccatacagatccgcatccatg
REV ­ Inside kanamycin resistance
gene directly after CBB operon in
pCBB2.1
MW_005
ttacccaatcctgtcttttg
FWD ­ Amplification of the rpiA
gene in genome of E. coli SIJ488
MW_006
gctcctggtaaatgctttttc
REV ­ Amplification of the rpiA
gene in genome of E. coli SIJ488
MW_007
taagttcggtgtcaccac
FWD ­ Linearizing the pCBB2.1
backbone including everything but
the RuBisCO gene
MW_008
cattatacgacctccttacttatac
REV ­ Linearizing the pCBB2.1
backbone including everything but
the RuBisCO gene
MW_009
tgcgaaggatttcaagaggtataag
taaggaggtcgtataatggaccagtcatc
tcgttacg tcaatctgg
FWD ­ Amplication of RuBisCO
gene from pCBB2.1 including 40
bp overhang for gibson assembly
Iteration #1
MW_010
tgacataggcggctccgctttagtt
gtggtgacaccgaacttacgccggaagggc
gctg
REV ­ Amplication of RuBisCO
gene from pCBB2.1 including 40
bp overhang for gibson assembly
Iteration #1
MW_011
tgcgaaggatttcaagaggtataag
taaggag
FWD ­ Amplication of RuBisCO
gene from pCBB2.1 including 40
bp overhang for gibson assembly
Iteration #2
MW_012
tgacataggcggctccgctttag
REV ­ Amplication of RuBisCO
gene from pCBB2.1 including 40
bp overhang for gibson assembly
Iteration #2
MW_013
aggtggcugctgaacccccag
FWD ­ USER cloning for
introducing point mutation G­>A at
position 345 in R. rubrum RuBisCO
in pCBB2.1 fragment 1
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
63
==PAGE:72==
Name
Sequence
Short description
MW_014
agggtauaggcgacgtggaatacgcc
REV ­ USER cloning for
introducing point mutation G­>A at
position 345 in R. rubrum RuBisCO
in pCBB2.1 OR introducing G­>A
mutation at position 647 in prk in
pCBB2.1 fragment 1
MW_015
atacccuggttgtttcccatggtga
FWD ­ USER cloning for
introducing point mutation G­>A at
position 345 in R. rubrum RuBisCO
in pCBB2.1 fragment 2
MW_016
gaggctggccgtaggccggccgcga
tgcuggtggct
REV ­ USER cloning for
introducing point mutation G­>A at
position 345 in R. rubrum RuBisCO
in pCBB2.1 OR introducing G­>A
mutation at position 647 in prk in
pCBB2.1 fragment 2
MW_017
aggggguggacgtatccacgcacgg
FWD ­ USER cloning for
introducing point mutation A­>C at
position 647 in prk in pCBB2.1
fragment 1
MW_018
acccccuttatctcgcgcgaaatcc
REV ­ USER cloning for
introducing point mutation A­>C at
position 647 in prk in pCBB2.1
fragment 2
MW_019
catgcctgcaggtcg
REV ­ Used for cPCR of prk in
pCBB2.1
MW_020
gcctatatcatgaagcccaaggccg
gaNNKNNKtatgtggcgaccgcggcgc
FWD ­ Introducing random codons
at positions Y36, G37, G116 in R.
rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 1
MW_021
cataccctggttgtttcccatggtgagcg
REV ­ Introducing random codons
at positions Y36, G37, G116 in R.
rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 1
MW_022
caccatgggaaacaaccagggtatg
NNKgacgtggaatacgccaagatgcacg
FWD ­ Introducing random codons
at positions Y36, G37, G116 in R.
rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 2
MW_023
tccggccttgggcttcatgatataggc
REV ­ Introducing random codons
at positions Y36, G37, G116 in R.
rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 2
MW_024
cggcgagcatgtgctttgtgcctat
NNKatgaagcccaaggccggatatggc
FWD ­ Introducing random codons
at positions I29, E79, T81 in R.
rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 1
64
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:73==
Name
Sequence
Short description
MW_025
gcgggcctcgtccacctcatagacc
REV ­ Introducing random codons
at positions I29, E79, T81 in R.
rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 1
MW_026
ggtctatgaggtggacgaggcccgc
NNKctgNTTaagatcgcctatccgg
tggctttgttc
FWD ­ Introducing random codons
at positions I29, E79, T81 in R.
rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 2
MW_027
ataggcacaaagcacatgctcgccg
REV ­ Introducing random codons
at positions I29, E79, T81 in R.
rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 2
MW_028
gggctggcgcaaggccctgggcgtcNNKga
cNNKcgcagcNNKcttccggcgt
aagttcggtgtcaccacaacta
aagcggagcc
FWD ­ Introducing random codons
at positions E458, T460, A463 in
R. rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 1
MW_029
gacgcccagggccttgcgccagccc
ggatag
REV ­ Introducing random codons
at positions E458, T460, A463 in
R. rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 1
MW_030
tcgcgccctgtttgatggcccgagc
NNKaatatctcgNNKctgtggaa
aNNKctggggcggcccgaggtcgacg
FWD ­ Introducing random codons
at positions V141, A145, V149 in
R. rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 1
MW_031
gctcgggccatcaaacagggcgcgataagc
REV ­ Introducing random codons
at positions V141, A145, V149 in
R. rubrum RuBisCO in pCBB2.1
Fragment 1
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
65
==PAGE:74==
A.2
Plasmids
Table A.2: Overview of all plasmids used in this study.
Plasmid
name
Description of vital parts
Function
pCBB1.0
p15A ori, RuBisCO, prk,
chloramphenicol resistance,
ampicillin resistance
Tested to recover growth in
GLY­AUX∆but failed and prk
mutated often
pSEVA221
RK2 ori, kanamycin resistance
Used as the backbone architecture
for the pCBB2.0 and pCBB2.1
plasmids
pCBB2.0
RK2 ori, kanamycin resistance,
prk, RuBisCO
Tested to recover growth in
GLY­AUX∆but failed to do it
consistently
pCBB2.1
R. rubrum
RuBisCO
RK2 ori, kanamycin resistance,
prk, R. rubrum RuBisCO
Tested to recover growth in
GLY­AUX∆and was successful.
Used for all evolution experiments
and growth­coupled selection in
this study
66
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:75==
B
Gel pictures
Figure B.1: picture of 1% agarose gel loaded with cPCR of gcvTHP operon amplified from
single colonies from MW_pio_003 samples. Lanes 1­4 cPCR from A2. Lanes 5­8 cPCR
from T2. Lanes 9­11 cPCR from L2. Lanes 12­14 cPCR from G2
Figure B.2: picture of 1% agarose gel loaded with cPCR of gcvTHP operon amplified from
single colonies from MW_pio_003 and MW_pio_004 samples. Lanes 1­7 cPCR from A5.
Lanes 8­14 cPCR from T5. Lanes 15­21 cPCR from V3. Lanes 22­28 cPCR from CA3.
Lanes 29­34 cPCR from L5. Lanes 35­40 cPCR from G5.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure B.3: picture of 1% agarose gel loaded with cPCR of gcvTHP operon amplified from
single colonies from MW_pio_003 and MW_pio_004 samples. Lanes 1­2 cPCR from A7.
Lanes 3­4 cPCR from T8. Lanes 5­6 cPCR from V5. Lanes 7­8 cPCR from CA5.
Figure B.4: picture of 1% agarose gel loaded with cPCR of gcvTHP operon amplified from
single colonies from MW_pio_003 and MW_pio_004 samples. Lanes 1­2 cPCR from A9.
Lanes 3­4 cPCR from T9. Lanes 5­6 cPCR from V7. Lanes 7­8 cPCR from CA7. Lanes
9­10 cPCR from L9. Lanes 11­12 cPCR from G9.
68
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
==PAGE:77==
C
Time between dilution plots from
MW_pio_003 and MW_pio_004
Figure C.1: Overview of time between dilutions for each bioreactor for the entire durations
of MW_pio_003 and MW_pio_004. The time between dilutions is calculated from the point
the target OD is reached and the dilution automation is started on the bioreactors. Times
between dilutions longer than 20 hours have been set to a NULL value as they are not
relevant for the plots.
Evolving promiscuous enzyme activity in vivo through growth­coupled selection schemes in bacteria
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 220, Henrik Dams Allé
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://sem-cfb.com/
