==PAGE:1==
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
A Bayesian Approach to Learning from Interventions
Master Thesis
DTU
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
A Bayesian Approach to Learning from Interventions
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Axel Sorensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis investigates causal discovery through interventions, particularly in environ-
ments with limited or no observational data. It leverages active inference, a framework
from neuroscience for decision-making under uncertainty, to guide causal learning. The
work introduces goal equivalence, which ensures that interventions can reliably affect
a target variable even without full knowledge of the causal graph, and proposes causal
extrapolation, allowing active inference agents to learn state-invariant causal rules.
A
factorized probabilistic approach is presented to represent causal graphs, enabling eﬀi-
cient belief updates and uncertainty quantification. Two primary intervention strategies
are compared: accumulation, which incrementally adds edges to the causal graph, and
elimination, which prunes inconsistent models, evaluating their computational eﬀiciency
and effectiveness. Additionally, the thesis quantifies the number of interventions required
to discover the true causal structure, considering various complexities in causal relation-
ships.
A Python framework, DoLearn, is developed specifically for intervention-based
causal learning. DoLearn facilitates the visualization of beliefs over causal graphs and
tracks the evolution of causal models through interventions.
This work bridges active
inference and causal discovery, providing new insights into intervention-based learning,
uncertainty quantification, and causal reasoning.
ii
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Axel Sorensen, MSc Human Centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
This master’s thesis project, amounting to 30 ECTS, was carried out at DTU Com-
pute, the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical
University of Denmark.
I am truly grateful to my supervisor, Nina Gierasimczuk, for her continuous guidance and
generous support throughout every stage of this thesis. Our feedback meetings frequently
ran overtime because we both got carried away discussing new ideas and jotting down
concepts on cafe napkins. Beyond her expertise, Nina brought a genuine human touch to
our interactions, showing kindness, understanding, and interest beyond the scope of the
project.
Axel Sorensen - s234065
Signature
Date
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
iii
03/07/2025
==PAGE:6==
iv
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Learning Causality
3
2.1
Defining causality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Theoretical foundations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Approaches to Causal Discovery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Optimal Experiment Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Learning purely from interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Intervention-based Causal Discovery
17
3.1
Defining Intervention-based learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Learning by elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Limitations of current frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
DoLearn - A Python framework for Causal Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Demonstration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6
Uncertainty Quantification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
37
4.1
Introduction to Active Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Using Causal Models for Active Inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Causal Extrapolation in Active Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4
Using Active Inference for Causal Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Comparing Intervention-based Learning Strategies
59
5.1
Comparing learning paradigm and intervention selection strategy . . . . . .
59
5.2
Comparing fixed variable strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Discussion
63
6.1
Causal Discovery through Active Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
Variable assignments and non-linear causality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3
Learning in Non-Deterministic Settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.4
Learning without Observational Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.5
The Cognitive Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.6
Meta Learning with Causal Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Conclusion and future work
67
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
v
==PAGE:8==
A Environment Class
73
B Causal Graph to B matrix
75
C B Matrix to Causal Graph
76
vi
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Understanding the underlying causal structure of complex systems is a fundamental objec-
tive in science, engineering, and artificial intelligence. Whether it is diagnosing an illness,
predicting the effects of a new policy, or designing intelligent machines, we constantly rely
on our ability to reason about cause and effect. Causal understanding allows us to go be-
yond simply noticing patterns; it enables us to ask ”what if”, imagine different scenarios,
and make informed decisions about how to intervene in a system to bring about desired
outcomes.
Causal discovery is of growing importance across many domains. In medicine and public
health, causal inference is essential for identifying risk factors and evaluating treatment
effects (Glass et al., 2013). In climate science, it enables reasoning about the interac-
tions between environmental variables and their long-term consequences (Ebert-Uphoff
and Deng, 2015). In economics, causal models underpin the analysis of policy outcomes
and economic interventions (Pinto and Heckman, 2021). Within machine learning and
artificial intelligence, causality is now regarded as a key ingredient for building systems
that generalize beyond observed data, adapt to new conditions, and reason about hypo-
thetical scenarios (Schölkopf et al., 2021). As scientific and technological systems become
more complex and data-driven, the ability to eﬀiciently learn causal structure from limited
data will be crucial for accelerating discovery and supporting robust, explainable decisions
(Scherrer et al., 2022).
Traditional approaches to causal discovery have primarily relied on observational data.
While effective in many settings, these methods are fundamentally constrained by Markov
equivalence, where multiple causal models lead to the same distribution in the data. In-
corporating interventional data can reduce these equivalence classes and improve identifi-
ability, but many existing methods assume access to both observational and experimental
datasets. In practice, however, learning may have to rely exclusively on interventions,
especially in environments where observational data is insuﬀicient, biased, or unavailable.
My research focuses on what can be inferred from interventions alone and just as impor-
tantly, how to choose the most informative interventions to accelerate causal discovery.
Intervention-based learning presents distinct challenges compared to learning from obser-
vations: it requires actively intervening in the system, distinguishing direct from indirect
effects, and often working under practical constraints on the number or kind of interven-
tions that can be performed. To address these diﬀiculties, we need a framework that not
only guides which interventions to perform, but also systematically represents and updates
our uncertainty about the causal structure.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
1
==PAGE:10==
To tackle this, I explore the use of the active inference framework, a Bayesian approach
to decision-making under uncertainty that selects actions by minimizing expected uncer-
tainty, or “free energy.” Originally developed in neuroscience to model action and percep-
tion in biological systems, active inference provides a natural foundation for intervention-
based causal learning. By treating the causal structure as a hidden variable and interven-
tions as actions, the framework allows an agent to maintain a posterior belief over causal
graphs and to plan interventions that refine this belief over time.
Ultimately, this work addresses the problem of causal discovery when observational data is
limited and interventions are both necessary and costly. Rather than treating learning as a
fixed procedure, the challenge lies in finding a principled way to reason about uncertainty,
guide experimentation, and adapt to new information. Different strategies for intervention-
based learning are considered, including those that accumulate evidence over time as well
as those that systematically eliminate incompatible causal structures. A key aspect of this
process involves representing the current state of knowledge as a belief and updating it as
new data from interventions become available. Framing causal discovery in this way opens
new perspectives on how agents can explore uncertain environments and build structured
knowledge from limited interaction.
2
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Learning Causality
Understanding causality, the relationship between cause and effect, is crucial in many
fields.
Unlike correlation, causality reveals how changes in one variable influence an-
other. This chapter introduces formal definitions and graph based models such as Directed
Acyclic Graphs, along with key assumptions that support causal analysis. Methods for
learning causal structure from data are reviewed and highlight the importance of inter-
ventions in uncovering causal relations. Strategies for designing experiments to eﬀiciently
identify causal effects are discussed, as well as approaches for learning causal graphs from
interventional data alone.
2.1
Defining causality
Correlation does not imply causation. This often cited phrase highlights a fundamental
limitation in statistical analysis: while two variables may vary together, such covariance
does not necessarily imply a direct causal link. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries,
statisticians like Karl Pearson and Sir Francis Galton formalized the concept of correlation.
Pearson in particular developed the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient, a measure of the linear
relationship between two variables. In The Grammar of Science Pearson himself cautioned
against interpreting correlation as causation:
All causation as we have defined it is correlation, but the converse is not neces-
sarily true, i.e., where we find correlation we cannot always predict causation.
– (Pearson, 1957)
Correlations can still be useful for making predictions.
For example, if two variables
tend to change together, knowing one can help estimate the other. However it falls short
when it comes to understanding interventions. Correlational models cannot answer what
if questions, such as ”What would happen if we changed X” or ”What caused Y to
happen”. This distinction is formalized in Judea Pearl’s ladder of causation which divides
causal inference into three hierarchical levels (Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018). Pearl’s ladder
of causation consists of association, intervention, and counterfactuals. While association
captures observable patterns, intervention asks what happens when we change something,
and counterfactuals explore what might have happened under different circumstances.
Only by moving beyond association can we begin to answer causal questions and make
informed decisions based on interventions.
It is important not to confuse correlation with causation. The familiar folk tale that storks
deliver babies reflects this very confusion. In 2000 a study by Robert Matthews found a
high correlation between stork population and child birth across 17 European countries.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
3
==PAGE:12==
(Matthews, 2000). These results may lead the unwary interpreter to conclude that an
increase in stork population would result in an increase in child birth or vice versa. This
however is not the case, a third variable ’Rurality’ directly affected both child birth and
stork population. If one controlled for the third variable the spurious correlation between
the two variables in question would seize to exist.
Statistics can be a useful tool for
describing and summarizing the real world, however we are often interested in making
decisions based on the data we observe, and without knowing the causal relations between
variables we cannot make inferences about the effect of our interventions. The number
of child births in a certain country could help us estimate the stork population of that
country, but it would be wrong to infer that if we increased child birth, stork populations
would rise as well.
As such, the underlying causal structure must be known in order
to distinguish genuine cause-and-effect relationships from mere correlations, and to make
reliable predictions about the outcomes of our actions.
The study of causal discovery began to take formal shape in the mid-20th century. Early
contributions, particularly from Sewall Wright, introduced structural equation modeling
and path analysis, providing a statistical foundation for representing causal relationships
(Wright, 1934). The field advanced significantly in the 1980s with the development of
graphical models, most notably by Judea Pearl, who introduced causal graphs and do-
calculus, laying the groundwork for modern causal inference. In the 1990s, researchers
such as Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines further formalized causal
discovery with algorithms like the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2001). These contribu-
tions established causal discovery as a systematic scientific discipline at the intersection
of statistics, computer science, and philosophy.
Pearl presents a simple definition of causality:
A variable X is a cause of a variable Y if Y in any way relies on X for its
value... X is a cause of Y if Y listens to X and decides its value in response
to what it hears – (Pearl et al., 2016)
This definition is supported by Woodward, however framed from a more interventionist
perspective:
X causes Y if and only if there is a possible intervention on X that will change
Y or the probability distribution of Y. – (Woodward, 2008)
To formally reason about causality, Judea Pearl introduced the concept of an intervention,
captured mathematically by the do-operator, denoted do(·). Unlike passive observation,
which records how variables naturally co-occur, an intervention actively sets a variable to
a specific value. For example, P(Y | do(X = x)) represents the probability of Y when
we forcibly set X to x, ignoring its usual causes. This allows us to model causal effects
because we isolate the impact of changing X on Y , rather than mere correlation. The
next section will introduce the fundamental theoretical foundation of causal modeling and
representation.
2.2
Theoretical foundations
This section outlines the key definitions we need to properly understand and work with
causal relationships. For a more comprehensive introduction to graph-theoretic concepts,
see Diestel (2005).
4
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:13==
2.2.1
Graphs
Since graphs are commonly used to represent causal relationships, their basic properties
will be defined.
Definition 1 (Graph). A graph G = (V, E) consists of a finite set V of nodes and a set
E of edges, where each edge connects two nodes. In an undirected graph, each edge is an
unordered pair of distinct nodes, i.e.,
E ⊆

{u, v} | u, v ∈V, u ̸= v
	
.
△
Definition 2 (Directed Graph). A directed graph (or digraph) G = (V, E) consists of a
finite set V of nodes and a set E of directed edges, where each edge is an ordered pair of
nodes, written X →Y for (X, Y ) ∈E, indicating a direction from node X to node Y . For
a node X ∈V :
• The set of parents of X, Pa(X), is the set of nodes with edges pointing to X.
• The set of children of X, Ch(X), is the set of nodes to which X has edges.
• The ancestors An(X) are all nodes with directed paths to X.
• The descendants De(X) are all nodes reachable from X.
• The adjacent nodes Adj(X) are those directly connected to X by an edge (either
incoming or outgoing).
△
Definition 3 (Path). A path π = (X, . . . , Y ) is a sequence of distinct nodes where each
consecutive pair of nodes is connected by an edge. The path is said to be directed if each
edge goes from one node to the next in the given order.
△
Causal structures can be depicted in many ways, but is typically represented as a Directed
Acyclic Graph that encodes the directional dependencies and causal relationships between
variables. Acycilicity reflects the idea that a variable cannot cause itself. This becomes
a useful assumption when modelling causality however it is not always the case in the
real world. For example, in economics, supply, demand, and price form a feedback loop:
increased demand raises prices, higher prices encourage more supply, and greater supply
can lower prices, which then affects demand.
Definition 4 (Directed Acyclic Graph). is a graph G = (V, E) where:
• V is a set of nodes,
• E is a set of directed edges, with each edge being an ordered pair (u, v), where
u, v ∈V ,
• The graph contains no cycles, meaning there is no path that starts and ends at the
same node, following the directed edges.
△
A DAG with only two nodes (variables) may represent three possible models.
Either
X →Y (X causes Y), X ←Y (Y causes X) or X ̸⊥⊥Y (X and Y are independent). The
number of possible DAG’s of n nodes (denoted an) can be computed using the following
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
5
==PAGE:14==
recursive formula:
an =
n
X
k=1
(−1)k+1
n
k

2k(n−k)an−k,
with
a0 = 1
(2.1)
There’s no simple closed form due to the exponential growth and recursive nature of
counting acyclic orientations of labeled nodes with possible directed edges. However the
online encyclopedia of integer sequence provides the number of possible DAG’s computed
up until 7 nodes. Table 2.1 illustrates just how quickly the number of possible DAG’s
explode in size given a small change in the number of nodes.
Nodes
# Possible DAGs
1
1
2
3
3
25
4
543
5
29,281
6
3,781,503
7
1,138,779,265
Table 2.1: Number of possible DAGs as a function of nodes in a graph
Example:
In order to bring these concepts together, let us present a simple example.
Consider the DAG in Figure 2.1 with nodes {A, B, C, D} and edges {A →B, A →C, B →
D, C →D}.
- The parents of node D are Pa(D) = {B, C}. - The children of node A are Ch(A) =
{B, C}. - The ancestors of node D are An(D) = {A, B, C}. - The descendants of node A
are De(A) = {B, C, D}. - The adjacent nodes of A are Adj(A) = {B, C}.
Since there are no directed cycles, this graph is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG).
A
B
C
D
Figure 2.1: Example of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
With an understanding of the basic graph terminology, we move onto causal modelling.
2.2.2
Causal model
Causality, for the purposes of this thesis, refers to the effect of interventions on the distri-
bution of variables. We now formalize this notion and introduce the framework of causal
models used to represent and reason about such relationships.
Definition 5 (Causality). Let X and Y be random variables in a causal model, and let
P denote the probability distribution over these variables induced by the causal model.
6
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:15==
We say that X causes Y if and only if there exist values x, x′ ∈Dom(X) such that:
P(Y | do(X = x)) ̸= P(Y | do(X = x′)).
Here, P(Y | do(X = x)) denotes the probability distribution of Y under the intervention
that sets X to the value x. In other words, intervening to set X to different values leads
to a change in the distribution of Y . (Pearl, 2009)
△
A causal model represents the causal structure of a system.
Exogenous variables, are
variables whose values are determined outside the model, and endogenous variables, whose
values are determined within the model based on other variables.
Definition 6 (Causal Model). A causal model is a triple (S, F, A) where:
• S = (U, V, R) lists exogenous variables U, endogenous variables V , and their ranges
R.
• F = {FVj : R(U) × R(V \ {Vj}) →R(Vj)} are functions determining each Vj from
others.
• A assigns values to all variables so that for every Vj ∈V ,
A(Vj) = FVj
 A(U), A(V \ {Vj})

, 1
(Barbero and van der Torre, 2020)
△
Definition 7 (Direct and Indirect Cause). Let X and Y be variables in a structural causal
model. We say that X is a cause of Y if there is a directed path from X to Y in the causal
graph.
• X is a direct cause of Y if there is an edge X →Y , and Y depends on X in its
structural equation:
Y = fY (X, UY ),
where UY is exogenous noise.
• X is an indirect cause of Y if the directed path from X to Y passes through one or
more intermediate variables.
(Pearl, 2009)
△
Causal models may also be represented by a structural causal model (SCM)
Definition 8 (Structural causal model). A structural causal model consists of a set of
variables
Xj := fj(PAj, Nj),
j = 1, . . . , d,
where d is the total number of variables in the model. Each variable Xj is determined by
its parents PAj (a subset of the other variables) and a noise term Nj. The noise terms
represent independent randomness affecting each variable. (Peters et al., 2017)
△
It is important to note the difference between a direct and indirect causal relationship.
1Here, A(U) denotes the tuple of values (A(Ui))Ui∈U assigned by A to each variable in U. Similarly,
A(V \ {Vj}) denotes the tuple (A(Vk))Vk∈V \{Vj}.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
7
==PAGE:16==
Example:
Let us combine the notions of direct and indrect causes with an example.
Consider a structural causal model with the following variables:
• S: Smoking (binary: smokes or not),
• T: Tar level in lungs (continuous),
• C: Lung cancer (binary: cancer or not),
• UT , UC: Exogenous (unobserved) noise variables.
The model is defined by the structural equations:
T = fT (S, UT ),
C = fC(T, UC).
This implies:
• S is a direct cause of T,
• T is a direct cause of C,
• S is an indirect cause of C through T.
The causal graph of this model is shown below:
S
T
C
Intervening on S (e.g., setting S = 1) changes the distribution of T, which in turn changes
the distribution of C, so:
P(C | do(S = 1)) ̸= P(C | do(S = 0)).
Therefore, S causes C, however it is not a direct cause.
2.2.3
Graph Equivalence
When learning causal structure from observational data, an important limitation arises:
different causal graphs can represent the same statistical dependencies. This observation
motivates the concept of Markov equivalence, put forward by Verma and Pearl in 1990.
Definition 9 (Markov Equivalence). Two Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) G1 and G2
are Markov equivalent if they encode the same set of conditional independence relations
among the variables. That is,
I(G1) = I(G2),
where I(G) denotes the set of conditional independencies implied by the DAG G under
the Causal Markov Assumption. (Verma and Pearl, 1990)
△
Definition 10 (Markov Equivalence Class). A Markov equivalence class is the set of all
DAGs that are Markov equivalent to one another. These DAGs cannot be distinguished
using observational data alone. (Verma and Pearl, 1990)
△
Definition 11 (Interventional Markov Equivalence). Let G1 and G2 be directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) over a set of variables V = {X1, . . . , Xp}, and let I ⊆2V be a set of
intervention targets. We say that G1 and G2 are interventionally Markov equivalent with
respect to I if, for every intervention target I ∈I, the interventional distributions induced
by G1 and G2 under interventions on I are the same.
8
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:17==
Equivalently, G1 and G2 are interventionally Markov equivalent if they entail the same set
of conditional independence relations under both observational and interventional regimes
for all I ∈I. (Hauser and Bühlmann, 2012)
△
To move from equivalence classes to identifying causal structures, we need assumptions
that link statistical independencies to causal relationships.
The following assumptions
formalize this connection.
Example:
Let us consider an observational dataset where the variables X,Y and Z
always vary together, from purely observational data we are not able to distinguish between
the following graphs:
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
All three graphs would result in the same observational data, and are therefore markov
equivalent.
2.2.4
Assumptions
Causal inference from data requires a framework that justifies interpreting statistical de-
pendencies in terms of causation. The following assumptions are commonly used to sup-
port this connection.
Definition 12 (Causal Markov Assumption). Given a causal DAG G over a set of variables
V , the Causal Markov Assumption states that each variable is conditionally independent
of its non-descendants given its parents:
X ⊥⊥NonDescendants(X) | Pa(X),
∀X ∈V.
This implies that the joint distribution P(V ) factorizes according to the graph structure:
P(V ) =
Y
X∈V
P(X | Pa(X)).
(Pearl, 2009)
△
Here, non-descendants of a variable are those nodes that are not influenced by it through
any directed path. The Markov condition means that, given its direct causes (parents), a
variable is independent of all other variables that it cannot causally affect. This allows the
joint distribution to factorize into local conditional probabilities aligned with the graph.
Definition 13 (d-separation). In a directed graph G, two variables X and Y are d-
separated by a set Z (denoted X ⊥⊥Y | Z) if every path between X and Y is blocked by
Z. (Pearl, 2009)
△
D-separation provides a graphical criterion for detecting when two variables are condi-
tionally independent. The ”d” in d-separation stands for directional, referring to the fact
that it’s used in directed acyclic graphs (DAGs).
Definition 14 (Faithfulness Assumption). Let G = (V, E) be a Directed Acyclic Graph
(DAG) and P a probability distribution over the variables V . The distribution P is faithful
to G if for every three disjoint subsets X, Y, Z ⊆V ,
X ⊥⊥Y | Z in P
if and only if
X and Y are d-separated by Z in G.
In other words, all and only the conditional independencies in P correspond exactly to
the d-separations in G. (Spirtes et al., 2001)
△
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
9
==PAGE:18==
The Faithfulness Assumption guarantees that we can read off conditional independencies
from the graph and that these reflect actual patterns in the data. Without this assumption,
the statistical information could be insuﬀicient or misleading for recovering the causal
structure.
Definition 15 (Causal Suﬀiciency). A set of observed variables V is causally suﬀicient if
there are no unmeasured common causes affecting any pair of variables in V . Formally,
for all X, Y ∈V , there is no latent variable U such that
U →X
and
U →Y,
where U is not included in V . (Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018)
△
Causal suﬀiciency ensures that the dataset includes all relevant confounders. When this
assumption fails, observed dependencies may be driven by hidden influences that are not
captured in the graphical model.
Definition 16 (Acyclicity Assumption). We assume that the directed graph G = (V, E)
is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), meaning it contains no directed cycles. (Pearl, 2009)
△
The assumption of acyclicity is necessary for defining a consistent causal ordering among
variables. In models with feedback loops or mutual influence, alternative representations
such as cyclic graphs or structural equation models may be required.
2.2.5
Fundamental Structures and Graph Types in Causal Discovery
In causal discovery, understanding key graph structures and graph types is essential, as
they capture different aspects of causal relationships and equivalence classes.
Definition 17 (Basic Structures). Consider triplets of nodes (X, Z, Y ) in a directed graph:
• A chain is a configuration
X →Z →Y,
where Z lies on a directed path from X to Y .
• A fork is a common cause structure
X ←Z →Y
where Z influences both X and Y .
• A collider is a structure where two arrows converge:
X →Z ←Y.
The node Z is a collider on the path between X and Y .
• A immorality is a collider with non-adjacent parents:
X →Z ←Y,
where X and Y are not adjacent
Immoralities are the only structures identifiable from observational data because
their parent nodes are marginally independent but become dependent when condi-
tioning on their common child, a pattern unique to immoralities.
• A confounder is an unmeasured latent variable U that acts as a common cause:
U →X,
U →Y,
which induces spurious associations between X and Y .
10
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:19==
△
Definition 18 (Skeleton). The skeleton of a DAG G = (V, E) is the undirected graph
obtained by removing edge directions. Formally, it is the undirected graph S = (V, ES)
with
ES = {{X, Y } | (X, Y ) ∈E or (Y, X) ∈E}.
Skeletons capture adjacency information without edge orientation and are often recovered
using conditional independence tests. (Verma and Pearl, 1990)
△
Definition 19 (Essential Graph / Completed Partially Directed Acyclic Graph (CPDAG)).
An essential graph, also called a Completed Partially Directed Acyclic Graph (CPDAG),
represents a Markov equivalence class of DAGs. It contains:
• Directed edges X →Y for edges whose orientation is invariant across all DAGs in
the class.
• Undirected edges X −Y for edges whose orientation varies among DAGs in the class.
The CPDAG compactly encodes all DAGs sharing the same conditional independence
structure. (Spirtes et al., 2001)
△
The descendant graph captures the reachability structure within a DAG by extending the
notion of direct edges to include all indirect paths between nodes.
Definition 20 (Descendant Graph). Given a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G = (V, E),
the descendant graph of G is the directed graph G∗= (V, E∗), where
E∗= {(X, Y ) | there exists a directed path from X to Y in G}.
That is, (X, Y ) ∈E∗if and only if Y is a descendant of X in G.
The descendant graph G∗contains an edge from X to Y whenever Y can be reached from
X by following one or more directed edges in G. (Lewandowska and Gierasimczuk, 2024)
△
The descendant graph is said to be the transitive closure of the true graph, which means
it shows a direct connection from one node to another whenever there is any path between
them in the original graph, regardless of how many steps it takes.
Example:
The following illustration depicts a graph G (on the left) and the correspond-
ing descendants graph G∗(on the right). The descendant graph has a direct edge from
every variable to each of its descendants.
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
With a solid understanding of the fundamental language of causality we move on to the
main approaches of causal discovery.
2.3
Approaches to Causal Discovery
Causal discovery refers to the process of identifying the causal structure among a set
of variables, typically represented as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). Various algorith-
mic approaches have been proposed to infer such structures from data. These methods
generally fall into six main categories: constraint-based, score-based, hybrid, functional
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
11
==PAGE:20==
equation-based, and interventional approaches.
Each class of methods makes different
assumptions and offers trade-offs in terms of identifiability, scalability, and robustness to
noise.
Constraint-based Methods
Constraint-based methods infer causal structure by performing conditional independence
(CI) tests under the assumptions of the Causal Markov and Faithfulness conditions. The
classical PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2001) is a well known method in this class. It starts
with a complete undirected graph and iteratively removes edges between variables that
are conditionally independent given some subset of other variables. Edge orientations are
then inferred using a set of graphical rules, resulting in a Completed Partially Directed
Acyclic Graph (CPDAG) that encodes the Markov equivalence class of the underlying
DAG.
Score-based Methods
Score-based methods formulate causal discovery as an optimization problem. They search
over the space of possible DAGs to find the one that best fits the observed data according
to a scoring function. The Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) algorithm (Chickering, 2002)
is a prominent example. It performs a greedy forward and backward search over the space
of equivalence classes (CPDAGs), seeking local improvements in the score at each step.
Hybrid Methods
Hybrid methods leverage the strengths of both constraint-based and score-based ap-
proaches. These methods use CI tests to reduce the search space before applying score-
based optimization. One example is the Max-Min Hill Climbing (MMHC) algorithm (Tsamardi-
nos et al., 2006), which first constructs a skeleton using the Max-Min Parents and Children
(MMPC) algorithm, then performs greedy hill-climbing within the reduced graph.
Domain knowledge can also be incorporated into hybrid methods through expert con-
straints. These constraints, whether hard or soft, can restrict the set of admissible graphs,
leading to improved interpretability and faster convergence (de Campos and Ji, 2005).
Functional and Additive Noise Models
Unlike methods that rely on independence tests or scoring, functional causal models as-
sume specific cause-and-effect relationships in the data. These models exploit asymmetries
in the functional relationships between variables to infer causal direction.
The Linear Non-Gaussian Acyclic Model (LiNGAM) (Shimizu et al., 2006) assumes that
each variable is a linear function of its parents plus additive non-Gaussian noise. With
these assumptions, the true DAG is identifiable. Additive Noise Models (ANMs) (Hoyer
et al., 2009) generalize this framework by allowing nonlinear functions, provided the noise is
still additive and independent of the inputs. The direction of causality can then be inferred
by testing whether residuals from regression are independent of the input variable.
Interventional Approaches
While observational data alone can only identify a causal structure up to a Markov equiv-
alence class, interventional data can break this equivalence and enable the recovery of
unique causal directions.
Interventions, typically modeled using Pearl’s do-operator—
exogenously fix the value of a variable and thereby isolate its causal influence on down-
stream variables (Pearl, 2009).
One popular method in this category is the Greedy Interventional Equivalence Search
(GIES) algorithm (Hauser and Bühlmann, 2012), which extends GES to incorporate both
observational and interventional datasets. GIES modifies the scoring function to account
12
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:21==
for interventional distributions and performs a search over the interventional equivalence
classes. It is particularly effective when multiple intervention targets are available and can
orient a greater number of edges than observational methods alone..
The power of interventional approaches is their ability to unambiguously identify causal
directions that are not identifiable from purely observational data.
2.4
Optimal Experiment Design
Not all interventions are created equal. Some interventions tell us more about the true
causal graph than others. Due to this, Optimal experiment design (OED) is a pivotal area
in causal inference, focusing on selecting interventions that maximize information gain
while minimizing costs. In causal discovery, the objective is often to identify the complete
causal graph with the fewest interventions. Eberhardt et al. (2012) show that, assuming
the causal graph is acyclic, causally suﬀicient (i.e., no latent confounders), free of sample
selection bias, and that interventions are perfect and target only a single variable at a
time, at most N −1 experiments are suﬀicient to identify the causal structure among N
variables. Under these conditions, it is possible to design a sequence of interventions that
eﬀiciently uncovers the full causal graph. Several methods have been developed to address
the problem of optimal experiment design. In one classical approach (Hyttinen et al.,
2013) proposes constructing minimal sets of interventions using combinatorial techniques
that ensure full identification of causal graphs.
While this method is effective, it can
become computationally expensive as the size of the graph increases. In their 2008 paper,
(He and Geng, 2008) introduce a framework for active learning of causal networks through
intervention experiments and optimal experimental designs. They propose two strategies
for selecting interventions: the minimax criterion and the maximum entropy criterion.
These strategies aim to minimize the number of manipulated variables and reduce the
uncertainty in the set of candidate causal structures.
2.5
Learning purely from interventions
Let us start by specifying what exactly is meant by interventions.
Interventions can
be formally defined in the framework of structural causal models (SCMs). Consider a
causal model with variables V = {V1, . . . , Vn} governed by structural equations Vi =
fi(Pa(Vi), Ui), where pa(Vi) denotes the parents of Vi and Ui is an exogenous noise term.
A hard intervention on a variable Vj, denoted do(Vj = v∗
j ), replaces the original structural
equation for Vj with the constant assignment
Vj := v∗
j ,
removing all incoming edges into Vj in the causal graph. This corresponds to modifying
the model such that Vj is no longer influenced by its parents.
In contrast, a soft intervention modifies the causal mechanism of Vj without fixing its value
or removing influence from its parents. Formally, the structural equation for Vj changes
from
Vj = fj(Pa(Vj), Uj)
to
Vj = f′
j(Pa(Vj), Uj),
where f′
j ̸= fj is a different function or distribution, but the dependence on Pa(Vj) remain
the same.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
13
==PAGE:22==
The key distinction is that hard interventions sever incoming edges to the intervened
variable, while soft interventions alter the causal mechanism without deleting edges.
In the literature do-calculus is most often used to infer the outcome of interventions given
a known causal graph. For example, if it is known that X causes Y we can make predic-
tions about what will happen if X is changed. However much less attention has been given
to using interventions as a means of learning an unknown causal structure. Lewandowska
and Gierasimczuk (2024) propose a framework for learning causal relations purely from
interventions. This proves useful since observational data isn’t always available, especially
in the quantities required for CI tests. In fact, in order to discover any relationships be-
tween the variables in a dataset we must assume a certain amount of variation. Regardless
of the number of samples, if the values of the variables never change we will not be able
to detect dependencies between them. In an agent-based scenario for instance, where an
agent needs to infer the causal structure of its environment, it is not guaranteed that the
agent has access to an extensive and diverse dataset of the possible values the environment
may assume. For a concrete example, imagine an agent that has been dropped in to a
room with a light (turned on) and a switch (flipped). Observing that the light happens to
be on while the switch is flipped, is not suﬀicient to infer that the two are dependent, let
alone that one causes the other. The agent would have to interact with its environment
in order to learn the causal structure from scratch. This motivates the need for frame-
works that do not rely on observational data and independence tests and instead frames
interventions as the primary method for learning. This is especially relevant in real-world
scenarios such as robotics, scientific discovery, and reinforcement learning, where agents
must autonomously explore and reason about unfamiliar environments. The main learning
algorithm outlined by Lewandowska et al. can be broken down into the following steps.
• Intervene on a variable Xi
• Measure the post-intervention distribution of all other variables
• If a variable Xj changes as a result of the intervention, draw a directed edge from
the Xi to Xj
Learning purely from interventions does not come without its limitations. As Lewandowska
et al. note, the algorithm cannot distinguish between direct and indirect causal relation-
ships. Take for example the causal graph X →Y →Z. Since an intervention on X
affect both Y and Z, their algorithm will add direct edges (X, Y ) and (X, Z) although
the direct edge from X to Z is not present in the true graph. This highlights one of the
key differences between accumulation and elimination.
2.5.1
Accumulation vs elimination
In causal discovery, a causal graph may be learned from two different methodological
directions:
1. Accumulation We assume no edges exist between the variables initially and incre-
mentally add them based on observations
2. Accumulation We consider all possible graphs initially and prune or eliminate those
that are inconsistent with the observed data
Lewandowska et al.
approach causal discovery from the first direction, accumulation.
Starting with no edges and adding them incrementally is often less computationally ex-
pensive since it avoids the need to store and reason about the consistency of all possible
graphs. This approach generally scales better to problems with a large number of vari-
ables. However, one of the main limitations of accumulation is that interventions can lead
14
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:23==
to inferring incorrect edges. More formally, the existence of a direct effect of Xi on Xj
cannot be accurately assessed using interventions on a single variable when there exists
a directed path from Xi to Xj of length at least two. In such cases, accumulation might
mistakenly infer a direct edge where only indirect effects exist. This is because the incre-
mental addition of edges can be influenced by confounding paths or indirect causal chains
that are not fully resolved through single-variable interventions alone.
On the other hand, the elimination approach considers the entire space of possible graphs
upfront and prunes graphs that contradict the observed data. By maintaining a global
perspective on the causal graph, elimination can ensure that only those graphs consistent
with all observations and interventions are retained.
A key advantage of elimination
methods is that they provide a principled way to quantify the uncertainty in the inferred
causal structure. By identifying the set of all graphs consistent with the observed data,
elimination methods enable us to assess how confident we can be about the presence
or absence of particular edges, thus facilitating a more nuanced interpretation of causal
conclusions.
In practice, the choice between accumulation and elimination approaches often involves
a trade-off between computational feasibility and the accuracy or robustness of causal
inference. Accumulation methods can provide fast, scalable solutions but may suffer from
errors in edge orientation and lack of uncertainty quantification. Elimination methods,
while potentially more accurate in principle, may be limited to smaller-scale problems or
require careful approximations to be computationally tractable.
Summary:
This chapter examined the theoretical foundations of causality, starting with
key definitions and distinctions between correlation and causation. It introduced causal
models using Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), structural causal models (SCMs), and the
do-operator, along with assumptions such as faithfulness, causal suﬀiciency, and acyclicity.
A variety of causal discovery methods were reviewed, including constraint-based, score-
based, hybrid, and functional approaches. Particular attention was given to interventional
approaches, which offer the advantage of breaking Markov equivalence classes to reveal
unique causal directions. The problem of optimal experiment design was also introduced,
along with its importance when interventions are limited.
The challenges of learning
purely from interventions were discussed, especially when no prior observational data or
adjacency information is available, underscoring the need for new strategies that actively
manage uncertainty.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Intervention-based Causal
Discovery
This chapter explores how causal structures can be uncovered through interventions alone,
without relying on large amounts of observational data. By systematically manipulat-
ing variables and observing the effects, we can infer directional relationships and reduce
uncertainty about the underlying causal graph. Two core strategies are introduced: ac-
cumulation, where edges are added based on observed effects, and elimination, which
prunes inconsistent models from a hypothesis space. A Python framework, DoLearn, is
implemented specifically for intervention-based causal discovery. The framework enables
simulation, belief tracking, and visualization of the evolving equivalence class of causal
models.
3.1
Defining Intervention-based learning
In this thesis intervention-based learning refers to learning without relying on observational
data. This paradigm aligns well with the scenario of an agent placed in an unfamiliar
environment, where learning can only occur through intervention. This means that the
agent starts with no knowledge of the causal structure or adjacency of variables. This
increases the diﬀiculty of learning since the agent not only has to reason about the direction
of a causal edge but also its existence.
Causality can assume many forms and variables may influence each other in different
ways based on the the current assignment of values. Furthermore, certain intervention
values may affect the children of the intervention target differently based on the nature
and strength of the causal relationship. For the purpose of this thesis I will simplify the
meaning of a causal relationship to the following:
If X causes Y , Y will assume the value of X when X is intervened upon.
This corresponds to the structural causal model Y = f(X), meaning that Y is a function
of X. This simplification is made since we are not interested in learning the exact structural
models of each variable but only the causal structure. Since we infer that X causes Y
if changing X leads to a change in Y , we only focus on the change in a variable not the
exact value. Furthermore we assume linearity, meaning that if X causes Y , a change in
X will cause a change in Y , regardless of the value of other variables. Thereby there a
non-linear relationships governing the causal structure.
This thesis will focus on single-variable hard interventions. This means one variable will
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
17
==PAGE:26==
be intervened on at a time and set to value independent of its previous value. Algorithm
1 describes exactly how an intervention is performed and how it propagates through the
causal graph.
Algorithm 1 Perform Do-Intervention on Causal Graph
Require: Causal graph G = (V, E), target variable vtarget ∈V , optional value val, op-
tional fixed set F ⊆V
1: pre_dist ←current variable values
2: if val is not specified then
3:
val ←sample random value
4: end if
5: if F is specified then
6:
Remove incoming edges to all v ∈F in G
7: end if
8: Set vtarget := val
9: for all variable v downstream of vtarget in G do
10:
if v /∈F then
11:
Let Pa(v) be parents of v
12:
For each p ∈Pa(v), decide with some probability if p influences v
13:
if at least one p influences v then
14:
Update v as average of influencing parents’ values
15:
end if
16:
end if
17: end for
18: post_dist ←updated variable values
19: diff ←|post_dist −pre_dist|
20: return {pre: pre_dist, post: post_dist, diff: diff}
As illustrated in Algorithm 1 performing a do-intervention returns 3 objects, the distri-
bution of values before the intervention, the distribution of values after, and finally the
difference between them. All variables with non-zero values in the diff object are influ-
enced by a change in the target variable.
If certain variables are held fixed while carrying out the intervention, we refer to this as a
controlled intervention, since we are controlling for these variables in a sense.
Example: Let us consider a model consisting of variables A,B,C,D,E. Performing an
intervention on B (setting its value to 1) severs all ingoing edeges to the B node and
propagates the change throughout the graph. Since B causes C, C changes to value 1 as
well, which in turn affects the value of the E node.
A=0
B=0
C=0
D=0
E=0
18
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:27==
A=0
do(B=1)
C=1
D=0
E=1
Depending on the value the intervention target is set to it might not always be able to
detect the effect of an intervention. This can occur if the child of the intervention target
already is assigned to the value that intervention assigns. Let us demonstrate this with
another example.
Example: We consider the simple model X →Y . If both variables have the value 0 and
X is changed to 1, Y will mirror this value.
This is the equivalent of the structural causal model Y = X. This allows us to focus on
the causal structure without worrying about the strength or coeﬀicients of the structural
causal model.
Depending on the assignments of the variables when an intervention is
performed, we may fail to infer a causal relationship that actually exists. If for example
Y is already assigned the value 1, and X is changed from 0 to 1, we will not see a change
in Y , since the effect doesn’t differ from Y ’s current value.
To combat this, we can assign a random value to the variable in question. This increases
the chances of observing a meaningful change in downstream variables, as it avoids sys-
tematically choosing values that might mask the causal effect.
3.2
Learning by elimination
As mentioned in section 2.5.1, causal discovery can be approached from two angles: ac-
cumulation or elimination. Although the accumulation (adding edges to an empty graph)
proves less computationally eﬀicient, learning by elimination offers multiple advantages:
1. If all enumerated graphs follow certain assumptions/requirements, they always will.
In other words, since we are pruning graphs, we never risk introducing a new graph
that violates known constraints.
2. We gain information about the causal graph both when a variable is affected by an
intervention on another and when it isn’t. For example, suppose we intervene on
variable X and observe that Y does not change. This suggests that X is not a direct
cause of Y, allowing us to eliminate edges from X →Y in all graphs. Conversely, if
Y does change, it suggests a potential causal link from X to Y, helping to narrow
down the correct structure.
3. The equivalence class of possible graphs, offers an insight into the uncertainty asso-
ciated with our current beliefs. If there are N graphs in the class, our uncertainty
can be quantified as 1/N. The proportion of graphs containing a given edge (e.g.,
X →Y ) provides a measure of confidence in that edge.
This is important be-
cause understanding where uncertainty lies helps prioritize interventions and guides
decision-making under incomplete knowledge.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
19
==PAGE:28==
4. On average fewer interventions are needed to determine the true graph.
This is
because pruning eliminates entire sets of graphs at once. For example, if an inter-
vention shows no effect from X to multiple variables, we can rule out all graphs
with edges from X to any of those variables — significantly shrinking the search
space. This contrasts with the accumulation approach, which adds edges one by
one, potentially requiring more steps to identify the correct structure.
In the following sections we will explore how we may learn by elimination.
3.2.1
Reducing the equivalence class
In order to prune graphs that are inconsistent with interventional data, we need to define
a measure of consistency. In observational settings this is often framed as P(D|G), repre-
senting how likely the data is given a certain graph. However in the interventional setting
we need to take the intervention target vint into account. As the number of variables grow
calculating P(D|G, vint) becomes computationally expensive. Since we are only interested
in learning the structure of the graph (not the strength of each causal relationship) I
propose Algorithm 2. This algorithm takes in graph, the intervention target in question
and the observed changes (the difference between the pre-intervention distribution and the
post-intervention distribution) and checks whether the set of nodes that exhibit significant
changes after an intervention exactly matches the set of descendants of the intervention
node in the given directed graph. It returns true if and only if all significantly changed
nodes are descendants, and all descendants show significant changes; otherwise, it returns
false.
Algorithm 2 Check Graph Consistency
Require: Directed graph G = (V, E), intervention node vint ∈V , observed changes ∆:
V →R, threshold ε > 0
1: C ←{u ∈V \ {vint} | |∆(u)| > ε}
▷Significant changes
2: R ←descendants of vint in G
3: if C ̸⊆R then return false
▷Some changed nodes not reachable
4: end if
5: if R ̸⊆C then return false
▷Some reachable nodes did not change
6: end if
7: return true
In order to reduce the number of graphs in our equivalence class based on the results
of an intervention, Algorithm 3 filters the graphs by checking their consistency using
Algorithm 2 and returns the updated equivalence class.
A fundamental limitation of
learning from single variable intervention is not being able to distinguish between direct
and indirect causal relationships. To address this Algorithm 2 allows for the specification
of fixed variables. If certain variables have been fixed, the original graph is replaced by a
graph with all incoming edges to these variables removed.
Example:
Let us consider an equivalence class with the two graphs below (true graph on
the left). Regardless of which single-variable intervention we choose, we cannot distinguish
them since both graphs are interventionally equivalent (e.g, changing X affects Y and Z
in both graphs, see Definition 4).
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
20
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:29==
Algorithm 3 Filter Equivalence Class
Require: Equivalence class of graphs E = {G1, G2, . . . , Gn} where each Gi = (V, Ei) is
a DAG over the same set of nodes V , intervention node vint ∈V , observed changes
∆: V →R, threshold ε > 0, fixed nodes F ⊆V (optional)
1: F ←∅
2: for each graph G ∈E do
3:
if F ̸= ∅then
4:
Let G′ ←G with all incoming edges to nodes in F removed
5:
else
6:
Let G′ ←G
7:
end if
8:
if CheckGraphConsistency(G′, vint, ∆, ε) then
▷See Algorithm 2
9:
F ←F ∪{G}
10:
end if
11: end for
12: return F
However, if we hold Y fixed, this produces two new graphs where all incoming edges to
Y are removed. Given these graphs, only the first is consistent with the observation that
changing X affects Z, thereby successfully reducing the equivalence class to the true graph.
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
Using the algorithms above we can learn intervention by intervention, while reducing the
equivalence class with each step.
3.2.2
Learning without a skeleton
While observational data can only identify a causal graph up to its Markov equivalence
class, knowing which nodes are adjacent can be highly valuable when learning from inter-
ventions. Let us consider the following skeleton graph, produced by running conditional
independence tests on observational data to detect adjacencies and immoralities.
A
B
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
E
If we perform an intervention on E and find that C changes, (blue edge on right figure)
we can infer that there must be a direct edge from E to C. Given this we can further
deduce that that there must be a directed edge from C to B (since the opposite direction
would result in an immorality (see Definition 17) that would have been detected during
the CI tests). This same logic can be applied to deduce the edge from B to A and D to C.
And finally the we can infer that that there must be a direct edge from D to B, since the
opposite would violate the acyclicity assumption. With only 1 intervention we were able
to infer the true causal graph (assuming acyclicity and faithfulness). With intervention-
based learning on the other hand, no CPDAG is available to start with. This increases
the diﬀiculty of causal discovery in two major ways:
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
21
==PAGE:30==
1. Without a known skeleton graph, we must simultaneously learn both the existence
and direction of edges, which increases the risk of incorrectly inferring direct edges
to descendants and makes causal discovery significantly more diﬀicult.
2. More interventions are required to recover the full causal graph because, without
prior structure, each intervention provides limited information, and multiple targeted
interventions are necessary to distinguish between competing causal hypotheses.
3.2.3
Quantifying limitations of intervention-based learning
Eberhardt et al. (2012) states that for N > 2, there is an order reliable procedure that
in the worst case requires no more than N −1 experiments, allowing only single variable
interventions. However this assumes that for every experiment we apply the PC algorithm
to further learn adjacencies between the remaining variables. The PC algorithm relies on
suﬀicient data to perform CI tests which is not the case where we only have one observation
for each intervention.
The following propositions attempt to quantify the limitations of which graphs can be
learned through interventions and how many interventions are needed in the worst case
to discover them.
First I focus on the identifiability of DAG’s where every path has length at most 1. I will
refer to this as a shallow DAG.
Proposition 1 (Identifiability of Shallow DAGs from Interventions). Let G = (V, E) be
a causal DAG over N observed variables, where every directed path has length at most 1.
Assume the following:
1. Each variable Xi ∈V can be subject to a perfect intervention, which removes all
incoming edges to Xi.
2. For each intervention on Xi, we observe which other variables Xj ∈V \{Xi} change
as a result.
3. No conditional independence testing is available.
4. Faithfulness holds: any directed causal effect leads to a detectable change in the
affected variable.
Then, in the worst case, performing interventions on all N variables is necessary and
suﬀicient to uniquely recover the true DAG G from the intervention data.
Proof. Since every directed path in G has length at most 1, every causal effect is direct.
There are no indirect causal effects through intermediate nodes.
Define a binary matrix R ∈{0, 1}Na×N where
Rij =
(
1
if Xj changes when we intervene on Xi,
0
otherwise.
By perfect interventions and faithfulness, intervening on Xi will cause a detectable change
in all variables Xj for which there exists a direct edge Xi →Xj. Because there are no
indirect effects, the observed changes correspond exactly to the children of Xi.
Performing interventions on all N variables allows us to identify the children sets for each
node, and thus reconstruct the entire edge set E uniquely.
22
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:31==
Furthermore, because the DAG could be arbitrarily connected (e.g., each node may have
distinct children), in the worst case, interventions on fewer than all N variables would
leave some edges unidentified.
Therefore, interventions on all N variables are both necessary and suﬀicient to uniquely
recover the shallow DAG G.
When there exists paths of length > 2 the procedure described in the proof of Proposition
1 does not correctly identify the true graph. Instead refer to proposition 2.
Proposition 2 (Identifiability of Descendant Graphs from Interventions). Let G = (V, E)
be a causal DAG over N observed variables, where some directed paths have length greater
than 1. Assume the following:
1. Each variable Xi ∈V can be subjected to a perfect intervention, which removes all
incoming edges to Xi.
2. For each intervention on Xi, we observe which other variables Xj ∈V \{Xi} change
as a result.
3. No conditional independence testing is available.
4. Faithfulness holds: any directed causal effect along a path leads to a detectable change
in the affected variable.
Then, by intervening on all N variables and observing which variables change, one can
uniquely identify the descendant graph (i.e., the transitive closure) of G. However, the
true DAG G cannot in general be uniquely recovered.
Proof. Consider a pair of variables (Xi, Xj). Because of faithfulness and perfect interven-
tions, intervening on Xi will cause a detectable change in Xj if and only if there exists
at least one directed path from Xi to Xj in G. This holds regardless of the length of the
path.
Define the binary matrix R ∈{0, 1}N×N by
Rij =
(
1
if Xj changes when we intervene on Xi,
0
otherwise.
By intervening on every variable Xi, the matrix R encodes all pairs (Xi, Xj) for which Xj
is a descendant of Xi in G. In other words, R is the adjacency matrix of the transitive
closure of G.
However, the matrix R does not distinguish direct edges from indirect paths. Therefore,
while the descendant graph (transitive closure) of G can be uniquely identified from R,
the exact edge set E of the original DAG G generally cannot be recovered.
In order to learn the true graph (as opposed to the descendant graph) we need to perform
controlled interventions, where certain variables can be held fixed before performing the
intervention. This allows us to distinguish between direct and indirect causal relationships.
Proposition 3 (Identifiability of the True Causal Graph from Controlled Interventions).
Let G = (V, E) be a causal graph over n observed variables V = {X1, X2, . . . , Xn}. Suppose
the following hold:
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
23
==PAGE:32==
1. To determine whether Xi has a direct causal effect on Xj (i ̸= j), we perform an
intervention on Xi and simultaneously hold fixed all other variables Xk with k ̸= i, j.
2. Each variable that is intervened upon or held fixed counts as one intervention.
3. No additional assumptions (such as conditional independence testing, linearity, or
parametric forms) are available.
Then, the total number of interventions required to uniquely identify the true causal graph
G is
n(n −1)2.
Proof. To uniquely identify the causal graph, we must test every possible directed edge
Xi →Xj for i ̸= j.
Number of edge tests:
There are n choices for i and, for each i, n−1 choices for j ̸= i,
so the total number of edge tests is
n(n −1).
Controlled interventions per edge test:
For each test of whether Xi →Xj exists:
• We perform an intervention on Xi (1 intervention),
• We hold fixed all other variables Xk with k ̸= i, j (which counts as n −2 interven-
tions).
Thus, each test requires
1 + (n −2) = n −1
interventions.
Total interventions:
Multiplying the number of edge tests by the number of interven-
tions per test, we get
n(n −1) × (n −1) = n(n −1)2.
Therefore, the total number of controlled interventions required to identify the true causal
graph under these conditions is n(n −1)2.
As described, different strategies may be used for graphs with different path lengths.
Of course, in most cases we don’t know the length of the paths in an unknown graph
beforehand. If we perform interventions without fixing other variables we may end up
with a descendant graph where cannot distinguish between direct and indirect effects
and will need to check certain edges again with a new intervention. On the other hand,
depending on the true graph, checking the direct causal relationship between each variable
while holding the rest fixed may be very ineﬀicient.
3.2.4
Importance of true graph
As demonstrated above it is much harder to learn the descendant graph, than the true
graph purely from interventions. However, in some cases, knowing the true causal graph
might not be important for reasoning about the effects of interventions. Assuming the
description of causality given in Section 3.1, where a direct edge from X to Y , represents
the structural causal model: Y = X, it turns out that the descendant graph and the true
graph are interventionally equivalent.
24
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:33==
Proposition 4 (Interventional Equivalence of Descendant Graphs). Let G be the true
causal graph over a set of variables V, and let G′ be any graph obtained by replacing
directed paths in G with direct edges from a variable to its descendants—i.e., a descendant
graph of G. Suppose the structural equation for some variable Y ∈V is Y = X, so that
X is a direct cause of Y .
Then for any intervention do(X = x), the interventional distribution over all descendants
of X, including Y , is the same in G and G′. That is,
PG(Desc(X) | do(X = x)) = PG′(Desc(X) | do(X = x)).
Proof. In both G and G′, the intervention do(X = x) sets the value of X, removing all
incoming edges into X and fixing its value throughout the system.
By construction, G′ includes a direct edge from X to each of its descendants in G, collaps-
ing indirect causal chains into single-step relationships. For example, if G has X →Y →Z,
then G′ may contain both X →Y and X →Z, removing the intermediate step. How-
ever, because the structural relationships remain unchanged, the propagation of X’s value
through the system still leads to the same values for all descendants.
More formally, each descendant of X in G ultimately receives a functional dependence on
X, whether directly or via intermediate variables. Thus, the effect of setting X = x flows
through the same set of structural equations in both G and G′, leading to the same values
for each descendant under intervention.
Therefore, the interventional distribution over the descendants of X is preserved:
PG(Desc(X) | do(X = x)) = PG′(Desc(X) | do(X = x)).
Proposition 4 of course only holds for the simplifying assumption mentioned in section 3.1,
but it in this simple setup it shows how knowing the true graph is not always necessary
for knowing how to cause a change in a certain value by intervening on another.
3.2.5
Goal Equivalence
While Markov equivalence and interventional equivalence are standard notions in causal
inference, they describe global properties of a causal system. However, in many applica-
tions, the goal is to influence a particular variable in the system, rather than the entire
joint distribution. For this purpose, I propose a more targeted notion: goal equivalence.
Definition 21 (Goal Equivalence). Let G1 and G2 be two causal graphs over a set of
variables V, and let T ∈V be a designated goal variable. We say that G1 and G2 are goal
equivalent with respect to T if, for every intervention do(X = x) on any variable X ∈V,
the resulting interventional distribution over T is the same in both graphs. That is,
∀X ∈V, ∀x,
PG1(T | do(X = x)) = PG2(T | do(X = x)).
△
In this sense, two graphs can differ in structure and may not be Markov or interventional
equivalent, yet still agree on how all interventions affect a particular variable. This is
useful in contexts such as targeted decision-making or control, where we want to ensure
consistent behavior of a specific outcome variable across different causal models.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
25
==PAGE:34==
In many practical scenarios, we are not concerned with recovering the full causal structure
or ensuring full interventional equivalence across all variables. Instead, the objective is
often more targeted: we care about understanding how manipulating one variable X
affects a specific outcome variable Y . For example, in clinical or policy applications, X
might represent a treatment and Y a health or economic outcome. In such cases, it is
suﬀicient that different causal graphs agree on the causal effect of X on Y , even if they
differ elsewhere. This motivates the following notion of pairwise goal equivalence.
Definition 22 (Pairwise Goal Equivalence). Let G1 and G2 be two causal graphs over
a set of variables V, and let X, Y ∈V be two designated variables.
We say that G1
and G2 are goal equivalent with respect to the pair (X, Y ) if for every value x of X, the
interventional distribution of Y under do(X = x) is the same in both graphs. That is,
∀x,
PG1(Y | do(X = x)) = PG2(Y | do(X = x)).
△
This property ensures that, despite possible structural differences between G1 and G2, the
causal effect of X on Y is indistinguishable under interventions. It is particularly relevant
in settings where X is a manipulable input (e.g., treatment or control variable), and Y is
the targeted response or outcome. With these concepts and assumptions defined we can
implement intervention-based causal discovery.
3.3
Limitations of current frameworks
Several frameworks and packages exist for implementing causal discovery, however most
focus on learning from purely observational data and do not support learning only from
interventions (see Table 3.1). Amongst the two packages that do support interventional
structure learning only the GIES algorithm is provided.
Neither support tracking the
intermediate graphs resulting from each intervention and both still rely on suﬀicient data
for conditional independence tests.
Package / Framework
Language(s)
Intv. SL
Description
pcalg
R
Yes
R package with PC/FCI and inter-
ventional GIES.
CDT
Python
Yes*
Wrapper to R/pcalg’s GIES.
Tetrad
Java/Python/R
No
GUI/API tool with GES but no
GIES.
Causal‑Learn
Python
No
Python port of Tetrad’s GES/FCI
algorithms only.
DoWhy
Python
No
End‑to‑end causal‑inference API.
EconML
Python
No
Heterogeneous treatment‑effect li-
brary.
PyMC
Python
No
Probabilistic
programming
with
do‑operator.
pgmpy
Python
No
Bayesian‑network structure learn-
ing.
CausalNex
Python
No
Bayesian‑network “what‑if” toolkit.
Table 3.1: Support for interventional structure learning (Intv. SL) across causal‑discovery
frameworks.
*CDT exposes GIES by calling R’s pcalg under the hood.
26
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:35==
In order to facilitate a better understanding of how our beliefs are updated based on
each intervention it may prove helpful to visualize intermediate graphs and quantify the
uncertainty about possible causal explanations.
3.4
DoLearn - A Python framework for Causal Discovery
Causal discovery from few samples and relying on interventions to probe for structure is
surprisingly underexplored. Furthermore, there seems to be little to no focus on causal
learning in the absence of observational data. In order to fill this gap I have developed
”DoLearn”, a python framework for causal structure learning through interventions.
The DoLearn framework introduces a novel approach to causal discovery by focusing on
learning causal structure primarily through interventions, rather than relying on large
observational datasets.
By representing causal relationships as directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) and utilizing equivalence classes of plausible models, DoLearn enables systematic
elimination of inconsistent causal graphs through experimental probing. This allows re-
searchers to progressively narrow down the true causal structure even when starting with
minimal or no observational data.
DoLearn provides practical tools for:
• Defining and manipulating causal graphs with controlled interventions,
• Representing and visualizing equivalence classes of graphs consistent with experi-
mental outcomes,
• Filtering out incompatible models to reduce uncertainty about causal directions,
• Selecting optimal intervention targets to eﬀiciently learn the underlying causal struc-
ture,
• Quantifying uncertainty via equivalence class sizes and leveraging goal equivalence
for reasoning under ambiguity.
By prioritizing learning from interventions and accounting for uncertainty explicitly, DoLearn
fills a critical gap in causal discovery methodologies, enabling more effective causal infer-
ence in scenarios where observational data is limited or unavailable. 1
3.4.1
Causal Graph
DoLearn represents causal structure as a graph, using the CausalGraph class. A causal
graph can be instantiated by providing the following arguments:
• nodes (an array of strings)
• edges (an array of tuples describing to,from node)
• default_values (the initial values of each variable)
Only valid directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are accepted by the CausalGraph class. If
the provided edges form a cycle, the constructor will raise an error, ensuring that all
instantiated graphs represent valid causal structures.
A simple causal graph can be defined as follows. Since no default values have been pro-
vided, the values will be initialized to 0.
1
causal_model = CausalGraph(['x','y','z'],[('x','y'),('x','z')]]
1Follow the quickstart guide for DoLearn at https://AxelSorensen.github.io/do-learn/
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
27
==PAGE:36==
In order to display the graph, we can call the display() method which returns the graph
depicted in Figure 3.1.
1
causal_model.display()
Figure 3.1: Fork structure illustrating causal relationships where variable X influences
both Y and Z independently.
The graphs sample() method can be used to return the current value of each node in the
graph.
1
graph.sample()
2
# Output: {'x': 0, 'y': 0, 'z': 0}
And finally, the graphs do(target,value) method performs an intervention on the target
variable. If no value is provided the target variable assumes a number between 0 and 1.
The do() method returns the pre-intervention and post-intervention distributions and the
difference between them. As seen below, since X →Y and X →Z, all three variables
change as a result of do(x=1)
1
graph.do('x')
2
# Output:
3
# {
4
# 'pre': {'x': 0, 'y': 0, 'z': 0},
5
# 'post': {'x': 1, 'y': 1, 'z': 1},
6
# 'diff': {'x': 1, 'y': 1, 'z': 1}}
7
# }
3.4.2
Equivalence Class
In causal discovery we often consider multiple plausible causal models given our experi-
ments and attempt to reduce this number further through interventions. The term equiv-
alence class is usually used to describe a set of graphs that are observationally indistin-
guishable. Since we don’t assume any previous observational data, the equivalence class
28
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:37==
instead contains all graphs that are consistent with the outcomes of the experiments per-
formed. In order to represent this set, DoLearn provides the EquivalenceClass class. An
equivalence class can be instantiated by providing the following arguments:
• graphs (an array of causal graphs)
• probabilities (*optional: prior probability of each graph being the true graph)
All graphs in an equivalence class can be called with the display_all() method, or instead
the possible state of each edge can be depicted in one graph using the display_essential
_graph(). Figure 3.2 offers a concrete example of how multiple graphs may be represented
as one. The first depiction (left), visualizes the edge between X and Y as an undirected
dashed line signifying that the edge is either directed from X to Y , vice versa or the
variables are independent.
In the second depiction (middle), the edge is dashed and
directed from X to Y, representing the graphs in the equivalence class and excluding the
possibility of Y causing X.
Figure 3.2: Visualization of equivalence classes of causal graphs. The left panel shows an
essential graph with an undirected dashed edge between X and Y , indicating uncertainty in
the causal direction. The middle panel depicts the edge directed from X to Y , representing
a subset of graphs in the equivalence class that exclude the possibility of Y causing X.
Most importantly, the equivalence class provides the opportunity to filter out graphs that
are not consistent with the outcomes of an experiment using the filter_graphs method.
After carrying out an intervention and recording how variables change, filter_graphs
loops over each possible model and removes models that are inconsistent.
3.4.3
Utils
Finally, the DoLearn framework provides a set of useful utility functions:
• generate_dag(num_nodes=5, edge_prob=0.3, default_values=None) — gener-
ates a random DAG with a given number of nodes and edge probability.
• generate_all_dags(nodes, adjacency_list=None) — generates all valid DAGs
for a node set; optionally constrained by an adjacency list.
• is_graph_consistent(graph, intervention_node, diff, threshold=1e-5) —
checks if a graph structure is consistent with observed intervention effects.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
29
==PAGE:38==
• simulate_intervention(node, graph, equivalence_class) — simulates an in-
tervention and returns the number of consistent graphs in the equivalence class.
• calculate_intervention_subclasses(equivalence_class) — computes average
size of equivalence class across all possible models and all possible actions
• minimal_certain_graph(equivalence_class) — returns the graph with the fewest
edges in an equivalence class.
3.5
Demonstration
3.5.1
Learning a causal graph
Let us consider an environment with 3 variables: X,Y and Z. The true but unknown
causal structure is shown in 3.6
X
Y
Z
We define the true graph using the CausalGraph class. Using the generate_all_dags()
function we obtain all possible DAGs given 3 variables. Following equation 2.1 this amount
to 25 DAGs.
1
true_graph = CausalGraph(['X','Y','Z'],[('X','Y'), ('Z','X'), ('Z','Y')])
2
possible_graphs = generate_all_dags(['X','Y','Z'])
The possible graphs are fed into the EquivalenceClass and display_essential_graph
is called resulting in Figure 3.3
1
equivalence_class = EquivalenceClass(possible_graphs)
2
equivalence_class.display_essential_graph()
Figure 3.3: Essential graph representing the 25 possible dags in the equivalence class
If we carry out an intervention on X, observe how the variables change, and filter out all
graphs that are inconsistent, we reduce the equivalence class from 25 to only 5 graphs.
Figure 3.4 illustrates the essential graph associated with the 5 remaining graphs.
30
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:39==
1
intervention = true_graph.do('X')
2
equivalence_class.filter_graphs('X',intervention['diff'],0,True)
3
equivalence_class.display_essential_graph()
Figure 3.4: Essential graph representing the 5 possible dags in the equivalence class
Since X causes both Y and Z in the true causal graph, we observe a change in both
of these variables as a result of the intervention on X. The filter_graphs() method
removes all graphs where an intervention on X does not cause such changes. Hence, the
new equivalence class only contains graphs that are consistent with this observation. One
might think that we should see a solid directed edge from X to the variables affected,
however changes in Y and Z can be explained not only by a parent-child relationship but
also through mediation. For example the graph X →Y →Z could also explain a change
in X affecting Z.
In order to reduce the equivalence class further, we carry out one final intervention on
Y . Since Y doesn’t cause X nor Z in the true graph, we infer that either X influences Y
directly, through Z or both.
Figure 3.5: Essential graph representing the 3 possible dags in the equivalence class
Finally, we perform an intervention on Z, which reduces the equivalence class to a single
graph (see Figure 3.6, corresponding to the true causal structure we defined.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.6: Essential graph representing the 1 possible dag in the equivalence class
3.5.2
Using controlled interventions
As mentioned in section 3.2.1 it is not always possible to learn the true graph given
single variable interventions. For example, given the causal model X →Y →Z, even
after intervening on every variable the equivalence class can only be reduced to 2 graphs.
Figure 3.7 shows the essential graph and demonstrates the inability of the algorithm to
distinguish between a direct relationship between X and Z and the path mediated through
Y .
Figure 3.7: Essential graph representing the 2 possible dags in the equivalence class
One solution for this is to use the minimal_certain_graph() function (inspired by Lewandowska
and Gierasimczuk (2024)) to pick the graph with the fewest edges that remains consistent
with the data. Applying minimal_certain_graph() to our equivalence class reduces it
to only one possible graph: X →Y →Z. In this case, the learned graph is correct, but
is important to note that choosing the minimal certain graph is a heuristic and does not
guarantee selecting the true underlying causal structure. In order to differentiate between
a parent-child and ancestor-child relationship between X and Z, we would have to hold
Y fixed, intervene on X and see whether Z changes. DoLearn’s do() method accepts
a fixed parameter which allows us to fix values at certain values while performing an
intervention.
1
intervention = true_graph.do('X',fixed={'Y'})
2
equivalence_class.filter_graphs('X',intervention['diff'],0,True, fixed={'Y'})
3
equivalence_class.display_essential_graph()
32
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.8: Essential graph representing the 1 possible dag in the equivalence class
Observing no change in Z after changing X (holding Y fixed) the equivalence class is
reduced to the true graph (see Figure 3.8).
3.5.3
Optimal intervention selection
Finally, DoLearn provides useful functions for optimal intervention selection. The simulate
_intervention(intervention_target,true_graph,equivalence_class) function allows
us to simulate how an equivalence class would be reduced given the true graph and a cer-
tain intervention target.
Example: Given the following causal model, and an equivalence class representing all
possible DAG’s stemming from 3 variables, some interventions reduce the equivalence
class more than others.
X
Y
Z
The simulate_intervention() function returns the number of graphs remaining in the
equivalence class after learning from the intervention. If we run the simulation for each
variable in the graph, we can see that intervening on Z reduces our equivalence class much
less than that of X or Y .
1
simulate_intervention('X',true_graph ,equivalence_class)
2
# Output: 5
3
4
simulate_intervention('Y',true_graph ,equivalence_class)
5
# Output: 4
6
7
simulate_intervention('Z',true_graph ,equivalence_class)
8
# Output: 12
Of course, in most cases we don’t know the true graph. The calculate_intervention
_subclasses(equivalence_class) function calls the simulate_intervention() func-
tion for every model in the equivalence class across each intervention target and returns
the average number of consistent graphs after learning from the intervention.
Let us consider the equivalence class of all possible DAG’s from 3 variables. Running
calculate_intervention_subclasses returns the following:
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
33
==PAGE:42==
1
calculate_intervention_subclasses(equivalence_class)
2
# Output {'X': 8.04, 'Y': 8.04, 'Z': 8.04}
Since know nothing about the true causal graph, every intervention is equally attractive
(resulting in the same amount of possible graphs). However, if we carry out an intervention
on Y , filter inconsistent graphs from the equivalence class and calculate the intervention
subclasses again. This time intervening on X reduces the average equivalence class size
more than Y and Z.
1
calculate_intervention_subclasses(equivalence_class)
2
# Output {'X': 1.5, 'Y': 4.0, 'Z': 4.0}
Intervening on Y does not provide further information since we have already performed
the intervention, however the reader may notice that intervening on Z also doesn’t provide
new information. Taking a look at the equivalence class gives us a better understanding
of why this happens. Figure 3.9 shows the essential graph after intervening on Y . The
direct edge from Y to Z is certain and none of the possible graphs contain a direct edge
from either Y or Z to X. Given the ambiguity between a direct edge from X to the two
other variables, we can only learn more by intervening on X and observing whether Y or
Z change.
Figure 3.9: Essential graph representing the 4 possible dags in the equivalence class
In this simple example it might be intuitive that X should be the target of intervention
over Z, however in more complex structures, calculating the reduction in equivalence class
size may prove a useful tool for optimal intervention selection.
3.6
Uncertainty Quantification
One of the advantages of learning by elimination is our ability to quantify our certainty
about the causal structure as:
1
equivalence_class_size
Furthermore, enumerating all possible graphs and ruling out inconsistent ones, allows us
to reason about the effect of certain interventions even if we are still not certain about the
entire graph structure. This nicely ties in with the concept of goal equivalence (proposed
34
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:43==
in Definition 21). For example let us consider an equivalence of size 2, containing the
following graphs:
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
Although there exists uncertainty about the direction of the edge (X, Y ) we are certain
about the direct edge from Y to Z, since this edge exists in both graphs we consider
possible. This makes the graphs pairwise goal equivalent with respect to Y and Z (see
Definition 22).
Finally, enumerating all graphs we consider possible also allows us to
reason about possible outcomes of an intervention across each graph, letting us choose the
interventions that reduce the equivalence class the most.
Despite the advantages of learning by elimination, enumerating all possible graphs becomes
computationally intractable as the number of variables grow. Another method is needed
for quantifying our belief of the causal structure without this enumeration.
The next
chapter explores Active Inference, as a means to both representing causal beliefs and
handling optimal intervention selection.
Summary:
This chapter explored how causal structures can be inferred using inter-
ventions alone, without access to observational datasets. It formalizes intervention-based
learning in the context of agents interacting with unknown environments and introduced
two primary strategies: accumulation (incrementally adding edges based on observed ef-
fects) and elimination (pruning inconsistent graphs from a hypothesis space). The chapter
presented several theoretical results concerning the limitations and possibilities of pure in-
terventional learning, including propositions quantifying identifiability and the worst-case
number of required interventions. Concepts such as descendant graphs, goal equivalence,
and pairwise goal equivalence were introduced to highlight how different causal goals
may not require full structural recovery.
The DoLearn framework was presented as a
novel Python tool for simulating interventions, maintaining belief states, and visualizing
evolving equivalence classes. This framework provides a concrete implementation of the
proposed algorithms.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Causal Discovery through Active
Inference
This chapter highlights the potential advantages of combining active inference with causal
discovery. These advantages stem from two different perspectives. Firstly, causal models
can be used as environments in an active inference setting, making state transitions easier
to manage and improving the explainability of the underlying domain. Secondly, active
inference may be used for causal discovery, by representing the hidden states as possible
causal graphs and selecting interventions that maximize information gain. Both of these
angles are explored, presenting algorithms for translating between the language of causality
and that of active inference, as well as demonstrating the benefits of using active inference
as a means to optimal intervention selection.
4.1
Introduction to Active Inference
Active Inference is a framework for understanding sentient behavior by modeling percep-
tion, action, and planning as probabilistic inference. Developed by British neuroscientist
Karl J. Friston, it integrates brain, cognition, and behavior theories. Active Inference has
been applied to various fields, including psychology and AI (Smith et al., 2020; Albarracin
et al., 2023; Tschantz et al., 2020; Friston et al., 2009). While similar to Bayesian inference
in relying on probabilistic reasoning, Active Inference distinguishes itself by incorporating
action into the inferential process, focusing on active interaction with the environment.
The main objective of active inference is minimizing a property referred to as free en-
ergy (or surprise), a mathematical quantity that reflects the difference between an agent’s
model of the world and its sensory observations. Whenever the agent receives observations
that contradict its model of the world, it can either update its internal model or carry out
action to make the world conform to its predictions. When simulating Active Inference
we distinguish between the generative process (the causal structure of the world) and the
generative model (the beliefs of the agent). The generative process contains some ground
truth mapping between states and observations, and the goal of the agent is to infer the
current state of the world based on its observations (see Figure 4.1).
The agent avoids surprise by building a good model of the environment. The environment
has hidden variables, called states (s), which lead to observable outcomes (o). Meanwhile,
the brain tries to infer the hidden states (s) that could explain the observations (o). It does
this using Bayes’ Theorem: combining prior beliefs about the states p(s) with the likelihood
of observing something given a state p(o|s). This leads to a generative model, represented
as the joint probability of states and observations p(s, o).
Inference in the generative
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.1: A figure illustrating the distinction between the generative process and the
generative model. The generative process (on the left) represents the true causal structure
of the world, while the generative model reflects the agent’s beliefs about the world. The
agent receives observations from the generative process and attempts to infer the state of
the world while performing actions to change the generative process.
model concerns finding the posterior p(s|o). Calculating the posterior distribution p(s|o)
is often intractable because it requires evaluating the marginal likelihood p(o) = P
s p(o, s),
which involves summing over all possible hidden states s. To address this, an approximate
distribution q(s) over hidden states is introduced.
To address this, we introduce an approximate distribution q(s) and rewrite the posterior
in terms of a bound:
−log p(o) = −log
X
s
q(s)p(o, s)
q(s) .
Since the log function is concave we can use Jensens inequality to derive an upper bound
called Free Energy:
F =
X
s
q(s) log q(s)
p(o, s),
which in turn can be decomposed into the Kullback-Leibler divergence (a measure of the
difference between two distributions) between q(s) and p(s|o) minus log p(o) :
F = DKL(q(s)∥p(s|o)) −log p(o).
Minimizing Free Energy F ensures that the approximation q(s) gets closer to the true
posterior p(s|o), while simultaneously providing a way to avoid directly computing p(o).
Free Energy is calculated based on a given observation
Example:
To better understand how Free Energy is calculated let us consider the
following example. Imagine an agent guessing whether it is raining (s1) or not raining (s2)
based on observing if the ground is wet (o).
The agent’s current belief about rain is:
q(s1) = 0.6,
q(s2) = 0.4.
38
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:47==
The generative model gives the joint probabilities:
p(o, s1) = 0.5,
p(o, s2) = 0.2.
Free energy F is calculated as:
F =
X
s
q(s) log q(s)
p(o, s) = 0.6 log 0.6
0.5 + 0.4 log 0.4
0.2.
Calculations:
0.6 × log(1.2) ≈0.6 × 0.079 = 0.04,
0.4 × log(2) ≈0.4 × 0.3 = 0.12.
Total free energy:
F ≈0.04 + 0.12 = 0.16
This free energy quantifies how well the agent’s beliefs explain the observation of wet
ground. Free energy is always calculated based on a given observation.
The next two sections will offer a more concrete description of the main components of
active inference and a simple example of the active inference perception/action loop.
4.1.1
The Components of Active Inference
When implementing an Active Inference agent, we define both the generative process and
the generative model. These models are specified through five main components:
A: Likelihood Matrix
The matrix A encodes the likelihood mapping from hidden states to observations.
It defines the probability of perceiving an observation given a particular hidden
state. Formally, each element A[o, s] represents the likelihood P(ot | st = s), i.e.,
the probability of observing ot when the hidden state at time t is s. This matrix is
essential for perceptual inference, as it enables the agent to interpret sensory input
in terms of latent causes in the environment.
B: State Transition Matrix
The matrix B defines the transition dynamics over hidden states, conditioned on the
agent’s actions. It models the probability of transitioning from one hidden state to
another when a specific action is taken. Each entry B[st+1, st, a] corresponds to the
probability P(st+1 | st, at = a), representing how the environment evolves over time
as a function of the agent’s actions. This component allows the agent to predict
future states and plan accordingly.
C: Preference Vector or Matrix
The C component encodes the agent’s prior preferences over observations. It rep-
resents the subjective value or utility the agent assigns to different outcomes, and
is used to shape goal-directed behavior.
The entries in C can be thought of as
log-probabilities or expected utilities over observations, where higher values indicate
more desirable outcomes. These preferences guide the agent to act in ways that are
expected to lead to more preferred sensory experiences.
D: Prior Belief Vector
The vector D specifies the agent’s prior beliefs about the initial hidden state of
the environment. It defines the probability distribution P(s1) over hidden states at
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
39
==PAGE:48==
the start of the inference process, before any observations are made. These priors
serve as a baseline for state estimation and can encode either uncertainty or prior
knowledge about typical starting conditions.
E: Habitual Prior Over Actions
The E vector encodes habitual or prior tendencies over individual actions. It rep-
resents a prior probability distribution P(a) that biases the agent toward choosing
certain actions regardless of expected outcomes. This can model habitual behavior
or intrinsic biases, and is particularly useful for capturing learned action tendencies
in stable environments or under limited computational resources.
These components are essential to active inference and will be used in the following example
of an active inference scenario.
4.1.2
A Simple Example: Navigating a Two-Room Environment
To illustrate the components of Active Inference, consider a simple agent navigating be-
tween two rooms: Room 1 and Room 2. The agent can perceive which room it is in and
choose to move between them.
• Hidden States s: The agent’s location, which can be either s ∈{Room 1, Room 2}.
• Observations o: The sensory input indicating the room color, which is distinct for
each room: o ∈{Blue, Red}.
• Actions a: The agent can either stay in the current room or move to the other
room: a ∈{Stay, Move}.
Likelihood Matrix A:
The agent’s sensory mapping from states to observations might
be:
A =
P(Blue | Room 1)
P(Blue | Room 2)
P(Red | Room 1)
P(Red | Room 2)

=
0.9
0.1
0.1
0.9

This means the agent observes ”Blue” with 90% probability if it is in Room 1, and ”Red”
with 90% probability if in Room 2.
State Transition Matrix B:
The transition dynamics based on actions could be:
B =
P(st+1 = Room 1 | st = Room 1, a)
P(st+1 = Room 1 | st = Room 2, a)
P(st+1 = Room 2 | st = Room 1, a)
P(st+1 = Room 2 | st = Room 2, a)

For action Stay:
BStay =
1
0
0
1

For action Move:
BMove =
0
1
1
0

This means if the agent chooses to stay, it remains in the same room; if it moves, it
switches rooms.
40
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:49==
Preference Vector C:
Suppose the agent prefers to be in Room 2, which is ”red” and
more comfortable. The preference over observations could be:
C =
Blue
Red

=
0
1

Here, the agent assigns a higher preference to observing ”Red”.
Prior Beliefs D:
The agent might initially believe it is equally likely to be in either
room:
D =
0.5
0.5

Habitual Prior E:
If the agent has no habitual preference for actions, it can be uniform:
E =
0.5
0.5

The agent operates by iteratively performing the following steps:
1. Perception (State Inference): Given an observation ot (e.g., ”Red”), the agent
updates its beliefs about the current hidden state st by approximating the posterior
q(st) ≈p(st | ot) using the likelihood matrix A and its prior belief from the previous
time step. Formally, this involves minimizing the variational free energy to find the
best approximate posterior q(st).
2. Prediction: The agent predicts the next hidden state st+1 for each possible action
a using the state transition matrix B and its current belief q(st):
q(st+1 | a) =
X
st
B[st+1, st, a] q(st)
3. Evaluation (Expected Free Energy): For each candidate action a, the agent
estimates the expected free energy, which incorporates both the expected surprise
of observations and the agent’s preferences C. Actions that lead to preferred obser-
vations and reduce uncertainty are favored.
4. Action Selection: The agent chooses the action a∗that minimizes the expected
free energy over possible future observations. Since future observations ot+1 (which
is calculated using the B matrix and the A matrix) are uncertain, the agent considers
their distribution q(ot+1 | a) and minimizes the average free energy:
a∗= arg min
a Eq(ot+1|a)[F(ot+1)]
where F(ot+1) is the expected free energy given the expected observation of the
next timestep. This selects actions expected to produce the least surprising or most
informative outcomes.
5. Action Execution and Observation: The agent executes the selected action a∗,
which causes the environment (generative process) to transition to a new state st+1
and produce a new observation ot+1.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
41
==PAGE:50==
6. Loop Back: The agent receives ot+1 and repeats the loop, continuously refining its
beliefs and actions to reduce surprise and fulfill preferences.
This cycle of perception, prediction, evaluation, and action allows the agent to actively
infer the hidden causes of its observations, plan interventions that are both informative
and goal-directed, and adapt to changes in the environment over time.
The agent updates its likelihood A and transition B matrices based on posterior beliefs
q(st), q(st+1), observations ot, and actions at:
A[ot, s] ←A[ot, s] + η q(st = s)
for all s,
then normalize over o.
B[s′, s, at] ←B[s′, s, at] + η q(st+1 = s′) q(st = s)
for all s, s′,
then normalize over s′.
Here, η is the learning rate controlling update size. This incremental updating enables the
agent to improve its model from experience.
In summary, Active Inference models how agents infer hidden states of the environment
and select actions to minimize surprise by optimizing free energy. This process involves
updating internal beliefs to better explain observations and choosing actions expected to
produce informative and rewarding outcomes.
4.2
Using Causal Models for Active Inference
This section builds a bridge between the language of active inference and causal mod-
eling. Translations between the grammars of active inference and causal modelling will
be presented and a new concept of causal extrapolation is introduced, allowing agents to
extraploate causal knowledge into new states.
4.2.1
Causal models as environments
In Active Inference, the generative process is often implemented as an environment class
following the convention of OpenAI Gym. The main objective of this class is to keep track
of the current state, handle the transitions between states using the step method, and
return the observation corresponding to each state. The step method takes an action
as input, updates the current state based on the underlying logic and returns a new
observation. For complex environments the code necessary to instantiate said environment
can become lengthy (see Appendix A). I propose a new way of utilizing causal model and
simple do-calculus to replace the manual and tedious instructions regarding state changes.
For simplicity, we assume a deterministic binary causal model where each variable is
represented by Xi ∈{0, 1}.
Let us consider the following causal model:
A
B
C
D
We define our observations as an array of the values assigned to each variable (set to zero
by default):
[0, 0, 0, 0]
42
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:51==
the order of which corresponds to the order nodes in the causal model.
We may then replace the code within the step function with a simple call to the do method
of the causal model resulting in a new observation. Any causal model can be plugged into
the step function and the environment will adapt accordingly.
1
def step(self, action_label):
2
intervention = causal_model.do(action_label)
3
obs = intervention['post']
4
return obs
4.2.2
From causal model to B matrix
An essential, yet diﬀicult part of active inference is filling the necessary matrices with the
correct values. The A matrix (encoding the state-observation mapping) can be initialized
as an identity matrix, if observations are deterministically generated from the underlying
states. However, the B matrix (governing state transitions conditioned on each action)
may prove more diﬀicult to fill in. If we are to interact with a causal model through active
inference, we need a way to translate between the language of active inference and causal
discovery. In this section, I present an algorithm for this such a translation.
Translation from Causal Models to Transition Matrices.
The translation T maps
each structural assignment
Xj := fj(Pa(Xj), Uj)
in a causal model grammar GC to a conditional transition rule in the active inference
grammar GB. Given GC with structural assignments
Xj := fj(Pa(Xj)),
the translation T : GC →GB defines the transition matrix B as
B[s′, s, a] =





1
if for all j, x′
j =
(
v
if a intervenes on Xj with value v,
fj(Pa(Xj) in s)
otherwise,
0
otherwise,
where s = (x1, . . . , xn) and s′ = (x′
1, . . . , x′
n).
In other words, the next state s′ must be exactly the state obtained by applying all causal
functions fj to the current state s, modified by any intervention specified by action a.
For implementation, I propose Algorithm 4 which illustrates how to turn the state tran-
sition entailed by a causal model (represented by the CausalGraph class) into the corre-
sponding B matrix (see Appendix B for full code).
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
43
==PAGE:52==
Algorithm 4 Convert Causal Graph to Transition Matrix B
Require: A causal graph graph with variables and methods reset and sample
Ensure: Transition matrix B, list of binary states, and list of variables (actions)
1: Let variables ←[X0, X1, . . . , Xn−1] be the nodes of the graph
2: Let states ←all binary combinations of length n
3: Initialize B as a zero tensor of shape [2n, 2n, n]
4: for each action a from 0 to n −1 do
5:
Let var ←Xa
6:
for each binary state s in states do
7:
Set the graph to state s using graph.reset
8:
Define intervention: flip variable var in state s
9:
Apply intervention using graph.sample, get resulting state s′
10:
Set B[s′, s, a] ←1
11:
end for
12: end for
13: return B
Applicability Conditions.
The translation from a causal model to a transition matrix
B assumes the causal graph is deterministic, acyclic, and composed of discrete, finite-
valued variables. Interventions correspond to single-variable manipulations that deter-
ministically update variable states according to the structural assignments. Under these
conditions, the constructed B ∈{0, 1}|X|×|X|×n correctly encodes all state transitions in-
duced by the causal mechanisms, ensuring that for each prior state and intervention, the
next state predicted by B matches the causal model exactly.
As a simple example let us consider the causal model X →Y . We instantiate the model
with the CausalGraph class and call the causal_graph_to_B_matrix function to return
the corresponding B matrices.
1
true_graph = CausalGraph(['x', 'y',], [('x', 'y')])
2
B = causal_graph_to_B_matrix(true_graph)
Resulting in the following graph:
X
Y
Figure 4.2 illustrates the B matrix corresponding to the action do(x). Since X causes Y
a change in X will set Y to the same value. This is evident in the B matrix in Figure 4.2,
since every state where X = 0, will transition to a state where all variables are 1.
44
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.2: B matrix corresponding to the action do(x). The horizontal axis represents
previous states and the vertical axis represents next states. The do(x) action toggles the
value of the X (if it was 0 it will become 1 and vice versa). Since X causes Y , the value
of Y changes accordingly. The yellow shade represents 1 while the purple color represents
0.
4.2.3
Providing agent with causal model
Once a causal model has been defined we can use Algorithm 4 to generate the equivalent
B matrix and provide our active inference agent with a model of the true underlying
structure.
Example: Given the causal model X →Y we generate the equivalent B matrix and feed
it to the agent so it is fully aware of how to transition from state to state. We specify our
prior to [0,0] and the desired state to [1,1] and run the active inference loop for 5 timesteps
(see Figure 4.3). With a correct model of state transitions the agent knows exactly which
actions to carry out in order to end up in the desired state. First the agent chooses to
intervene on x, hereafter it performs a no-op action for the remaining timesteps in order
to stay in the desired state.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.3: Active inference with a known causal model X →Y . The agent is provided
the exact B matrix representing state transitions and starts in state (0, 0) with a goal to
reach (1, 1). Given perfect knowledge of the environment, the agent immediately selects
the optimal action x to reach the desired state, then consistently performs no-op to remain
there.
4.2.4
From B matrix to causal model
We can also translate from learned B matrices into a causal model. In complex envi-
ronments it becomes hard to grasp the underlying knowledge that the agent has gained.
Translating into a causal model not only helps to represent these matrices as a simple
graph, but also improves explainability of the agents model of the world.
Translation from Transition Matrices to Causal Models.
We define a translation
T −1 : GB →GC
from a deterministic transition matrix
B ∈{0, 1}|X|×|X|×n
to a causal graph with nodes X0, . . . , Xn−1. Here, X is the set of binary states of length
n, and B[s′, s, a] = 1 indicates the unique next state s′ ∈X reached from state s ∈X
after action a.
Edges are added from Xa to Xi whenever for some state s,
si ̸= s′
i
and
B[s′, s, a] = 1,
with i ̸= a. Formally, the edge set is
E =

(Xa →Xi)
 ∃s ∈X : i ̸= a,
si ̸= s′
i,
B[s′, s, a] = 1
	
.
For implementation, I propose Algorithm 5 for this translation. This algorithm constructs
a causal graph by analyzing a transition matrix and adding a directed edge from one
variable to another whenever taking an action causes a change in the state of a different
variable (see Appendix C for full code).
46
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:55==
Algorithm 5 Convert Transition Matrix B to Causal Graph
Require: Transition matrix B of shape (n_states, n_states, n_actions)
1: Define variables vars ←[X0, X1, . . . , Xn_actions−1]
2: Define states ←all binary combinations of length n_actions
3: Initialize empty causal graph g with nodes from vars
4: for each action a from 0 to n_actions −1 do
5:
for each state index sprev from 0 to n_states −1 do
6:
snext ←arg max(B[:, sprev, a])
7:
if B[snext, sprev, a] = 0 then
8:
continue
9:
end if
10:
Let p ←states[sprev]
11:
Let n ←states[snext]
12:
for each index i from 0 to n_actions −1 do
13:
if i ̸= a and p[i] ̸= n[i] then
14:
Add edge from Xa to Xi in g
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
end for
18: end for
19: return causal graph g
Example: Let us consider a simple example. We define a causal model wherein X causes
Y . Using Algorithm 4 we turn the graph into the corresponding B matrices (see Figure
4.4). The first matrix corresponds to the action x, the second to action y and the third to
no-op.
Figure 4.4: Conversion of the causal graph X →Y into B matrices using Algorithm 4.
Each matrix encodes the state transitions induced by actions x, y, and no-op, respectively,
capturing the causal influence of X on Y .
Algorithm 5 may be utilized to translate the B matrices back into a causal graph. The
algorithm correctly produces the original structure X →Y . The algorithm also works for
B matrices that have been learned by the agent.
One main limitation of the translation back into a causal graph is the matter of identifia-
bility. Since the algorithm looks at the B matrix of each action and draws a directed edge
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
47
==PAGE:56==
from the variable intervened upon to any other variable that has changed in the result-
ing state, it cannot distinguish between direct and indirect causes. Take for example the
causal model X →Y →Z. Using Algorithm 4, such a model would produce the following
B matrix for the action x (see Figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5: B matrix representing state transitions caused by action x in the causal model
X →Y →Z. The matrix encodes changes in both Y and Z following intervention on X,
reflecting both direct and indirect effects.
However, when translating back into a causal graph using Algorithm 5 we arrive at an
incorrect structure (see Figure 4.6).
Figure 4.6: Recovered causal graph from the B matrix of action x in the X →Y →Z
model. The algorithm incorrectly infers a direct edge from X to Z, failing to distinguish
indirect causation due to identifiability limitations.
48
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:57==
Applicability Conditions.
The translation algorithm assumes a deterministic causal
model with discrete, finite-valued variables X0, . . . , Xn−1 and a deterministic transition
matrix B ∈{0, 1}|X|×|X|×n, where B[s′, s, a] = 1 uniquely specifies the next state s′ after
action a in state s.
The algorithm adds an edge from variable Xa to any variable Xi whose value changes as a
result of intervening on Xa. Thus, it recovers direct causal edges but also includes edges to
all descendants of Xa, reflecting any indirect causal influence. Consequently, the output
corresponds to the descendant graph, potentially overestimating direct causation by
including all variables downstream of Xa.
This limitation mirrors that of inferring causal graph from observational data. Only by
holding Y fixed and then carrying out an intervention on x would we be able to detect the
existence of a direct causal effect of X on Z. However, this would require more actions,
not only changing the value of one variable at a time, but also setting other variables to
a fixed value. Such an action space could quickly explode in size if we need to account
for every possible combination of intervention targets and fixed variables. Mathematically
the action space would grow as follows:
n
k

=
n!
k!(n −k)!
Table 4.1 illustrates how the actions space grows exponentially with the number of vari-
ables.
Number of Variables n
Number of Possible Actions
1
1
2
4
3
12
4
32
5
80
6
192
7
448
8
1024
9
2304
10
5120
Table 4.1: Growth of the number of possible actions with number of variables n
4.3
Causal Extrapolation in Active Inference
When learning the state transitions of a causal domain in active inference, the agent typi-
cally learns the outcome of an action only for the specific state in which it was performed.
For example, learning that the action do(x) toggles the binary value of variable X in
state s does not immediately generalize to any other state s′. This localized learning can
be desirable, as not all actions are valid or have the same consequences across all states.
However, if we assume the environment is governed by a binary causal model and restrict
the action space to flipping the binary value of each variable, this opens the possibility
of learning higher-order causal rules that capture regularities in how actions affect state
transitions across different contexts. Such rules enable the agent to extrapolate its experi-
ence from one state to another, improving sample eﬀiciency and supporting generalization
in novel situations.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
49
==PAGE:58==
4.3.1
Implementing causal extrapolation
In order to transfer knowledge of an actions outcomes in one state to all states, a change
must be made to the functions responsible for updating the B matrices in the active
inference loop. Instead of updating only the transition probabilities between the previous
state and next state after performing an action, we attempt to learn higher level structure
that we use to infer the outcome of the same action in a different state.
For this I
propose Algorithm 6. The algorithm assumes that the environment consists of binary
variables, which are connected by an underlying causal structure. An action representing
an intervention on a variable flips the binary value of that variable. If a variable X causes
Y , Y will take on the value of X, if intervened upon (following the definition of causality
from section 3.1). For simplicity we do not allow for X affecting Y in other ways than
Y = X.
Example: To illustrate this, imagine that the agent starts in state (0,0) and performs
action x, this transitions the agent into state (1,1) since the action flips the value of X
and this in turn propagates to Y . On the other hand if the agent starts in state (0,1)
and performs action x this will not change the value of Y since it already takes on the
new value of X.
Algorithm 6 Causal Extrapolation for B matrix
Require: Transition matrix B of shape [S, S, A]
Require: State distributions qprev, qcurr
Require: Action index a, list of binary states S, learning rate α
1: sprev ←most likely state from qprev
2: scurr ←most likely state from qcurr
3: changed ←indices where sprev and scurr differ
4: noop ←True if a is the no-op action
5: for each source state v in S do
6:
s ←copy of v
7:
if noop then
8:
for each i in changed do
9:
Flip s[i]
10:
end for
11:
else
12:
Flip s[a]
13:
for each i ̸= a in changed do
14:
Set s[i] ←s[a]
▷Causal propagation
15:
end for
16:
end if
17:
Find index snew of state s in S
18:
B[snew, v, a] ←B[snew, v, a] + α
19:
Normalize B[:, v, a] so the column sums to 1
20: end for
4.3.2
Learning without causal extrapolation
I will first demonstrate the tedious nature of reaching a desired state and remaining there
when the active inference agent does not afford causal extrapolation.
Example: Given the causal model X →Y , we initiate the agent in state (0,0) with a
desire to reach state (1,1). Figure 4.7 illustrates the agent’s belief about the current state
and the probability over its action at each timestep. In the first timestep the probability
50
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:59==
distribution over possible actions is uniform, since the agent is completely oblivious to
which actions lead to which states. The agent chooses action y and moves to state (0,1).
In the second timestep, the agent finds itself in a new state and therefore the actions are
sampled from a uniform distribution since nothing has been learned yet about transitions
from these states. The agent chooses action y and reaches the desired state (1,1). At the
fourth timestep the agent has returned to state (0,0) and the probability of performing
action y has been reduced, since the agent has learned that this action didn’t lead to the
desired state. According to the probability distribution over actions performing action
x or no-op is equally likely. By chance, the agent chooses the no-op action leaving the
state at (0,0). Having tried both action y and no-op in this state without reaching the
desired state, the agent now favors action x. At timestep 9, the agent finally ends up at
the desired state (1,1) again and since the agent has learned that both action x and y
lead away from the desired state it chooses to perform no-op. This action leaves the agent
in the desired state, resulting in the probability of selecting this action being even higher
in the final timestep.
Figure 4.7: Active inference with no prior knowledge in a two-variable causal environment
X →Y .
The agent begins in state (0, 0) and explores actions with initially uniform
probabilities. Through trial and error, it learns which actions lead closer to the desired
state (1, 1). However, because learning is state-specific, the agent requires many trials
to discover and maintain the goal state, as knowledge about actions does not generalize
across states.
As illustrated in Figure 4.7 it takes the agent extensive trial and error to learn how to
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
51
==PAGE:60==
end up in the desired state and remain there. This happens because the agent has to
learn the results of its actions in each new state through trial and error. In other words,
learning that the no-op action doesn’t affect the variables in one state doesn’t transfer to
the others.
4.3.3
Learning with causal extrapolation
Utilizing Algorithm 6 and running the active inference loop in a similar environment as
before we see that the agent is able to use the knowledge learned in some states to aid
action selection in others. The agent once again starts in state (0,0) and since it has no
knowledge of its environment it randomly samples an action from a uniform distribution.
By chance, the agent selects action x and actually moves directly to the desired state (0,0).
Although this is a new state, the agent has transferred the knowledge that performing
action x will flip the value of X causing Y to take on the new value of X. Because of
this the agent highly disfavors the x action in the second timestep, since it knows this will
lead back to the initial state. The probability assigned to the remaining actions is equal
since the agent has not learned anything about them yet. The agent chooses to perform
action y and transitions to state (0,1), and in doing so learns the higher level rule that
action y only flips Y . Given this information, the probability assigned to action y is a bit
higher than that of action no-op in timestep 3, since the agent can use its knowledge of
the changes incurred by action y to infer that performing it again will flip Y back to 1 and
lead to the desired state (1,1). Since the agent has learned a higher order rule regarding
actions x and y it confidently selects the no-op action for the remanding timesteps in
order to stay in the desired state.
Figure 4.8: Visualizing active inference and causal extrapolation in a two-variable envi-
ronment. The agent progressively learns how actions x and y influence variables X and
Y , enabling targeted state transitions and goal maintenance.
4.4
Using Active Inference for Causal Discovery
In this section, we explore how Active Inference can be leveraged for causal discovery by
formulating causal structure learning as a process of hidden state inference. We present
a method for representing causal graphs within this framework, define the associated
observation model, and describe how optimal interventions can be selected to eﬀiciently
uncover the true causal structure of an environment.
4.4.1
Representing hidden states
In order to frame the problem of causal discovery in an active inference setting we must
first decide on what the hidden states are and how to represent them. In Active Inference
52
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:61==
the hidden states are the main variables of interest, since the primary objective is to infer
the hidden states based on observations and deduce which actions need to be performed
in order to reach a desired observation.
Causal Graphs as hidden states: Since causal discovery aims at uncovering the un-
derlying causal structure of the environment, the set of possible causal graphs would be a
natural fit for describing hidden states. Each hidden state would correspond to a possible
causal graph. For example, given an environment with only two variables, the hidden
states would represent all possible causal graphs stemming from two variables: X →Y ,
X ←Y and X ⊥⊥Y .
Three hidden states seem manageable, however even with a slight increase in variables
the number of hidden states increases exponentially (as seen in 2.1 in section 2.1). With
a mere 6 variables the number of hidden states already exceeds three million, which is
neither computationally tractable or easy to gain an overview of.
Factorized edge probability as hidden states: To avoid the explosion of possible
states as variable numbers increase we may instead factorize the A matrix into submatrices
corresponding to each edge (i, j). Each edge contains a probability distribution over 3
possible edge states, i →j, i ←j and i ⊥⊥j. A distribution of [1, 0, 0] for edge (i, j) would
represent the certain belief that i →j. On the other hand, the distribution [0, 0.5, 0.5
would represent an equal belief that i ←j or i ⊥⊥j. Combining these edge states we
are able to describe any causal model as well as any intermediary belief state about said
model. If for each edge, we select the index of the most probable state we can represent
our causal model as an array of edge states.
Example The following causal model:
X
Y
Z
would be represented as:
[0, 2, 1]
since edge (X, Y ) would be in state 0 (i →j), edge (X, Z) in state 2 (i ⊥⊥j) and edge
(Y, Z) in state 1 (i ←j). The number of possible states still equals that of all possible
graphs, however the number of possible edges only grow quadratically with n (number of
nodes). This allows us to drastically reduce the amount of distributions we need to keep
track of.
4.4.2
Defining the A matrix
Knowing how to represent all possible graphs in a computationally tractable manner,
we still need to define which observations lead to which states in order to define our A
matrix. Given that we are learning through interventions, we may refer to the definition
of causality in section 3.1 which states that a directed edge should be drawn from i to j if
intervening on i causes a similar change in j. In order to infer the state of an edge (i, j) we
need to know both the variable intervened on and whether the other variable changed as
a result. In a similar fashion a matrix can be defined for each edge pair and intervention
target. Edge pair (i, j) and intervention target i encode the following matrix:
A(i,j)[i] =
i →j
i ←j
i ⊥⊥j
nochange
0
0.5
0.5
change
1
0
0
The matrix above translates to: If we intervene on i and see no change in j we infer
it is equally probable that i ←j and i ⊥⊥j. On the other hand if j does change, we
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
53
==PAGE:62==
infer with certainty that i →j. This increases the complexity and size of the A matrix,
necessitating a nested array of size num_edges x num_vars x 2 x 3.
Given a causal
model X →Y →Z, we can infer the state of each edge, by indexing the A matrix as
A[edge_index, intervention_index, obs, :]. If an intervention was performed on X, we
loop over every possible edge between X and the other variables, observe whether the
other variable changes and infer the state of said edge.
This certainly increases the complexity of the A matrix, more precisely the total number
of cells of the A matrix as a function on n (num variables) is:
6n(n −1)
2
n
However this is still much more tractable than enumerating every possible graph. Table
4.2 shows how the number of cells grow as n increases.
n
Number of cells in A matrix
1
0
2
6
3
18
4
36
5
60
6
90
7
126
Table 4.2: Number of cells in A matrix as a function of n
4.4.3
Expected Information Gain
While the A matrix captures the likelihood of observations under different causal edge
states and interventions, the B matrix encodes the transition probabilities between hidden
states across time steps. However since the underlying causal structure is assumed to be
static over time, the actions do not change the state and the B matrix of each action would
be an identity matrix.
Usually the B matrix is essential for calculating the expected free energy of each action by
scoring its likelihood of leading to a state which has a high probability of generating the
preferred observation specified in the C vector. The action with the lowest expected free
energy will then be selected. Since the B matrix does not provide any useful information
we must instead rely on the expected information gain to aid action selection.
EIG(a) =
X
o∈O
P(o | a) · DKL (P(s | o, a) ∥P(s))
(4.1)
where a is an intervention (action), s is a latent state, o ∈O is a possible observation
(with O = {0, 1} in our case), and DKL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
Choosing the action with the highest EIG translates to choosing the intervention that
is expected to reduce your uncertainty about the world the most. This way the agent
eﬀiciently explores the space of possible causal structures, converging more rapidly on
the true model of the environment. This approach underlies active learning and active
inference strategies, aligning well with principles from Bayesian experimental design.
54
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:63==
4.4.4
Optimal intervention selection
Given a causal model X →Y ←Z, and initializing the prior over each edge state to be
a uniform distribution, we use Equation 4.1 to calculate the expected information gain
of each action, then perform the action that scores highest and update the agents beliefs
based on the states inferred from the (action, observation) pair. Interventions are assumed
to be performed with a random value every time and the learning rate is 1, leading to
the beliefs being changed fully after one observation as compared to a more gradual belief
update.
Step 1
EIG: do(X) = 1.0027, do(Y ) = 1.0027, do(Z) = 1.0027.
Intervene on Z, observed differences: [0, 1, 1].
Updated belief Qedge =


0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.5
0
0.5
0
1
0


Step 2
EIG: do(X) = 1.0212, do(Y ) = 0.5014, do(Z) = 0.
Intervene on X, observed differences: [1, 1, 0].
Updated belief Qedge =


1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0


Step 3
EIG: do(X) = 0, ...
Updated belief Qedge =


1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0


Converting the agents beliefs about edge states, we find that it has correctly identified the
underlying causal model: X →Y ←Z
4.4.5
Adding cost to interventions
In many cases some interventions may be more costly than others. This can be represented
through the E vector in active inference. The E vector represents the agents preferences
towards actions regardless of their outcome. Once the expected information gain of each
action has been calculated we can add the cost of each action and use the softmax function
to convert the values into a probability distribution.
F = σ(EIG −E)
A main issue with this approach is finding the right values of the E vector to achieve
a reasonable tradeoff between information gain and reducing cost. Since the expected
information gain differs based on the number of variables in our system this value would
have to be adjusted for every new setup.
Furthermore it is diﬀicult to reason about
what a certain cost value means. If the cost of an action is set too high, the action will
never be chosen regardless of its expected information gain. We need a cost function that
is information-aware. I propose defining the cost not as an absolute number but as an
information theoretical ratio. If instead of subtracting the absolute cost value, we divide
the EIG by it, each value of E the ratio of EIG needed to be equally attractive as an action
with E=1. This effectively ”penalizes” the action.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
55
==PAGE:64==
F = σ(EIG
E
)
Example: Given the causal model X →Y ←Z, and the vector E = [2, 1, 1], and a
uniform prior over the causal model. Figure 4.9 illustrates the issues accompanied with a
absolute cost value. For each timestep we calculate the probability of each action based on
EIG the subtraction of the absolute cost. In the first timestep the information gain is equal
for all three actions, however in the probability distribution over action the intervention
on the variable the first variable X, is disfavored due to the cost. The agent selects action
do(y) which makes the expected information gain in the following timestep drop to zero,
resulting in a strong preference for performing do(z). In timestep 3 it is only possible to
gain more information by intervening on X, however due to absolute cost value overuling
the EIG, the agent continues to disfavor action do(x).
Figure 4.9: Action selection probabilities computed by subtracting absolute costs from
expected information gain. Higher-cost actions have lower selection probabilities.
On the other hand, Figure 4.10 illustrates the benefit of using the cost as an information
theoretical ratio. With an equal EIG for each action, the agent disfavors action do(x)
since this action would have to return more than twice the amount information to be
favored over the other actions with cost = 1. Therefore in timestep 1, the agent chooses
do(y) in the following timestep, we see the results of the cost ratio. The probability of
do(x) is higher than do(y) since the latter does not provide additional information gain
(0/1 = 0), however do(z) is still preferred due to its lower cost. Finally in timestep 3, the
information gain of do(x) dominates the equation. Although the EIG of do(x) is divided
by 2, it remains higher than an EIG of 0.
56
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.10: Action selection probabilities computed by dividing expected information
gain by cost, reflecting an information-theoretic cost ratio.
Using a information theoretical ratio as the cost makes said cost invariant to the specific
values of information gain, as well as aids our mental model of what the cost actually
means, allowing us to define how much more information the action needs to provide in
order to prefer it to another.
Comparison with Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) Methods.
This cost ratio
can be related to the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) used in Monte Carlo methods.
UCB balances exploration and exploitation by encouraging selection of actions that have
either high average reward or have been tried less often. The UCB formula is given by
Q(a) + c
s
ln t
N(a)
where Q(a) is the average reward of action a, t is the total number of actions taken, N(a)
is the number of times action a has been selected, and c is a parameter controlling the
degree of exploration.
The main difference is that UCB bases exploration on the frequency of actions and their
observed rewards, whereas the cost ratio considers the expected information gain of each
action relative to its cost. This allows prioritizing actions that are expected to be most
informative rather than simply those that have been tried less often. In causal discovery,
exploring certain actions can change the information gained from other actions that have
not yet been tried, due to the dependencies encoded in the causal structure. As a result,
the expected information gain for some interventions may evolve as learning progresses,
allowing the cost ratio approach to dynamically focus on the most valuable actions for
uncovering the causal model, regardless of how often the action has been performed.
Summary
This chapter examined the integration of active inference with causal discov-
ery, presenting a framework in which causal models are treated as generative environments.
Interventions were incorporated into state transitions, allowing belief updates to reflect
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
57
==PAGE:66==
observed outcomes. Hidden states in the active inference model were interpreted as can-
didate causal graphs, enabling the formulation of optimal intervention strategies aimed at
reducing uncertainty. This approach supports eﬀicient exploration and provides a scalable
alternative to exhaustive graph enumeration. While certain limitations remain, such as
diﬀiculties in distinguishing indirect from direct effects and managing a growing action
space, the application of active inference offers a principled and adaptable methodology
for intervention-based causal learning.
58
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
Comparing Intervention-based
Learning Strategies
This chapter compares active inference to classical approaches as a means to optimal
intervention selection. The number of interventions needed to learn a given causal graph
will be compared across different intervention selection strategies.
5.1
Comparing learning paradigm and intervention selec-
tion strategy
Learning by accumulation, random interventions
Firstly, we generate 1000 ran-
dom graphs of 2,3,4,5 variables and for each of the following edge probabilities:
[0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 0.9, 1.0]
Table 5.1 shows the average interventions needed to learn the descendant graph (cor-
responding to the transitive closure of the true causal graph), by performing randomly
sampled interventions, without replacement (meaning that each intervention can only be
performed once) and when starting with an empty graph (learning by accumulation). As
illustrated when the edge probability is 1, as many interventions as variables are needed to
learn the descendant graph. This is logical since every variable has a high chance of being
connected to another variable, necessitating an intervention on each variable to add every
edge. As the edge probability drops, the number of interventions needed to reach the true
causal graph decreases, across graphs of all sizes tested. Since we are adding edges to an
empty graph, a low edge probability results in fewer edges to learn. If the learner is lucky,
after only one intervention the true graph will be discovered.
# Nodes / Edge prob
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.9
1.0
2
1.08
1.22
1.46
1.90
2.00
3
1.53
2.06
2.76
2.99
3.00
4
2.38
3.30
3.93
4.00
4.00
5
3.62
4.58
5.00
5.00
5.00
Table 5.1: Average interventions needed to learn descendant graph across DAG size and
edge probability (accumulation method)
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
59
==PAGE:68==
Learning by elimination, random interventions
Table 5.2 on the other hand, shows
the average interventions needed to learn the descendant graph (corresponding to the
true causal graph), by performing randomly sampled interventions, without replacement,
when filtering inconsistent graphs (learning by elimination). Due to the computational
complexity of enumerating and reasoning about all possible graphs of n variables, the
variable range was restricted to 2−4. Here we see the opposite pattern, as edge probability
increases, the number of required interventions decreases.
This occurs because denser
graphs (edge probability larger than .5) tend to produce more observable effects when
intervening, allowing the learner to eliminate a larger number of incompatible graphs with
each intervention. In sparse graphs (edge probability less than .5), interventions often
have limited impact, making it harder to rule out candidate structures, and thus requiring
more interventions to identify the true graph. Compared to Table 5.1, elimination based
dag_size
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.9
1.0
2
1.91
1.80
1.52
1.10
1.00
3
2.91
2.80
2.46
1.82
1.66
4
3.87
3.78
3.45
2.76
2.50
Table 5.2: Average interventions needed to learn descendant graph across DAG size and
edge probability (elimination method)
learning on average requires fewer interventions for denser graphs.
This occurs since
elimination based learning doesn’t only learn if other variables change as a result of an
intervention but also if they don’t. Furthermore some graphs are already ruled out due to
the acyclic assumption. This small reduction in X becomes negligible in the presence of
the computational power needed to enumerate all possible graphs.
Learning by elimination, interventions selected to maximize equivalence class
reduction
Table 5.3 shows the average interventions needed to learn the descendant
graph through elimination. This time the interventions are not chosen at random but
based on which intervention can reduce the equivalence class of graphs the most (using the
calculate_intervention_subclasses() method from the DoLearn framework described
in section 3.4). Apart from the computational complexity necessary for enumerating all
graphs, this experiment also needs to calculate possible reductions of equivalence class
based each intervention across all graphs in the equivalence class. Due to this, the number
of variables experimented on is reduced to the range 2-3. Comparing Table 5.2 and 5.3,
there is no significant change in the average number of interventions needed to uncover
the descendant graph.
# Nodes / Edge prob
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.9
1.0
2
1.91
1.79
1.49
1.10
1.00
3
2.86
2.72
2.31
1.83
1.65
Table 5.3: Average interventions needed to learn descendant graph across DAG size and
edge probability (entropy based method)
Learning by elimination, active inference approach
Finally we simulate learning
1000 graphs of different sizes and edge probabilities through active inference (see Table
5.4). The active inference approach chooses intervention based on which action lead to
60
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:69==
the highest expected information gain based on the agents current belief. Compared to
Table 5.1 fewer interventions are needed when using the active inference approach, but
only for denser graphs (edge probability higher than 0.5). Again this is attributed to the
fact that the method used to produce Table 5.1 starts from an empty graph, while the
active inference approach starts by considering all possible edge states. For denser graphs
fewer interventions are necessary to learn the descendant graph.
# Nodes / Edge prob
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.9
1.0
2
1.90
1.82
1.50
1.09
1.00
3
2.96
2.89
2.37
1.71
1.68
4
3.99
3.94
3.49
2.62
2.58
5
4.99
4.98
4.61
3.60
3.51
Table 5.4: Average interventions needed to learn descendant graph across DAG size and
edge probability (active inference method)
The experiments show that learning by accumulation performs best on sparse graphs,
where fewer edges need to be discovered. Elimination-based methods are more effective on
dense graphs, where each intervention can rule out many candidate structures. However,
entropy-based selection offers only minor gains over random elimination.
The Active
inference approach performs comparably to learning by elimination on dense graphs but is
more computationally tractable, since it avoids the need to enumerate all possible graphs
or equivalence classes.
5.2
Comparing fixed variable strategies
Since only the descendant graph can be learned without performing interventions while
fixing certain variables. As illustrated with Proposition 3 in section 3.2.3, to ensure that
an edge between a pair of variables actually exists, we must hold all other variables than
the pair in question fixed when performing an intervention. If intervening on one causes
the other to change, there must exist a directed causal arrow from the intervened variable
to the affected variable. This begs the question of whether an agent should perform such
controlled interventions every time, to ensure learning of the correct edges or wait until
the descendant graph is learned and then only perform controlled interventions on variable
pairs with both a direct path and a mediated path.
In order to test the eﬀiciency of each strategy, we simulate learning 1000 graphs of different
sizes and edge probabilities with each of the aforementioned approaches.
Fully controlled interventions
Table 5.5 presents the average number of interventions
required to recover the true causal graph when using a conservative strategy: checking
every potential edge while fixing all other variables. This brute-force method ensures that
every causal link is evaluated in isolation, thereby avoiding confounding via indirect or
mediated paths. However, the cost of this conservative approach increases rapidly with
graph complexity. For instance, with 5 nodes and an edge probability of 1.0, this approach
requires nearly 23 interventions on average. This trend is consistent across all settings:
as both the number of nodes and edge probability increase, the number of required inter-
ventions grows substantially, reflecting the explosion in pairwise combinations that must
be tested under controlled conditions.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
61
==PAGE:70==
# Nodes / Edge prob
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.9
1.0
2
2.12
2.20
2.49
2.88
3.00
3
3.75
4.58
6.26
7.35
7.50
4
7.00
9.35
12.60
13.94
14.17
5
12.40
16.77
21.14
22.70
22.90
Table 5.5: Average interventions needed to learn true graph across DAG size and edge
probability (checking each edge pair while holding all other variables fixed)
Only necessary controlled interventions
Table 5.6, by contrast, shows the results
of a more eﬀicient two-stage strategy. Here, the agent first learns the descendant graph
through unrestricted interventions and only performs controlled (mediator-fixed) inter-
ventions when both a direct and an indirect (mediated) path exist between a pair of
variables. Compared to Table 5.5, this method significantly reduces the number of inter-
ventions needed, especially for larger or denser graphs. For instance, in the same setting
of 5 nodes and edge probability 1.0, the average number of interventions drops to 15.00.
This eﬀiciency arises because the second approach avoids testing edge pairs unnecessarily,
focusing only on ambiguous cases where both direct and indirect effects might be con-
founded. Notably, in sparse or small graphs (e.g., 2 or 3 nodes), both strategies yield
similar intervention counts, as there are fewer possible mediating structures. However, as
the graph grows in size and density, the advantages of the descendant guided approach
become more favorable.
# Nodes / Edge prob
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.9
1.0
2
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
3
3.01
3.03
3.24
3.79
4.00
4
4.03
4.15
5.11
7.40
8.00
5
5.11
5.50
8.09
13.71
15.00
Table 5.6: Average interventions needed to learn true graph across DAG size and edge
probability (only holding mediators fixed after intervening on all nodes)
Summary:
Accumulation-based learning required fewer interventions in sparse graphs,
while elimination-based strategies were more eﬀicient in dense graphs due to greater ex-
clusion of incompatible structures. Entropy-guided intervention selection provided only
marginal gains over random elimination.
Active inference achieved lower intervention
counts in dense settings, matching elimination performance without full graph enumer-
ation.
Testing all variable pairs under fixed conditions proved costly, whereas a two-
stage approach—refining only ambiguous edges after learning the descendant graph—
substantially reduced intervention requirements in complex graphs.
62
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
Although framing intervention-based causal discovery in terms of active inference does not
significantly reduce the number of interventions needed to learn the true causal graph,
it offers several practical advantages. First, active inference represents uncertainty over
causal structure in a probabilistic manner, allowing the agent to maintain and update
beliefs about individual edges rather than tracking entire graph configurations. Second,
unlike elimination-based methods that require explicit enumeration of all possible graphs
or equivalence classes, active inference scales more effectively. It enables eﬀicient belief
updates and intervention selection without exhaustive search over the full graph space.
Third, active inference provides a way to incorporate prior knowledge or structural as-
sumptions into the learning process. If the agent has reason to believe that certain causal
connections are more likely than others, this information can be directly encoded into its
initial beliefs and used to guide further interventions more effectively. Together, these
advantages make active inference a flexible and computationally tractable framework for
causal discovery, particularly in complex or uncertain environments.
With this said, there are also important limitations to the active inference approach. One
key issue is that reasoning takes place at the level of individual edges rather than over
full graph structures. As a result, learning the presence or absence of one edge does not
directly constrain beliefs about other edges.
This limits the ability to eliminate large
sets of candidate graphs at once, which makes the learning process less eﬀicient in some
cases compared to elimination-based strategies. Another limitation arises from the action
space. When actions only include simple interventions on variables, the action space is
equal to the number variables. However, in order to represent all possible interventions
while holding other variables fixed, the action space becomes more complex. This makes
optimal intervention selection computationally expensive for larger systems, particularly
when many potential actions must be evaluated at each step. Finally, active inference
does not explicitly enforce global structural constraints such as acyclicity or faithfulness
during belief updates. This can lead to internal inconsistencies in the agent’s belief state,
especially in more complex graphs. Without additional constraints or post-processing, the
resulting learned structure may violate assumptions typically required for causal inter-
pretation. These limitations suggest that while active inference is scalable and flexible,
it may benefit from integration with structure-aware reasoning or constrained inference
techniques.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
63
==PAGE:72==
6.2
Variable assignments and non-linear causality
The current approach assumes that whenever an intervention targets a variable that
causally influences others, a change is observed in the affected variables. This simplifies
the learning process but does not always hold in more complex scenarios. For instance,
if a variable Z depends on both X and Y being true (e.g., Z = X ∧Y ), intervening on
only one of them may produce no observable effect, causing the underlying causal relation-
ship to be missed. This reflects a broader limitation of assuming simple or linear causal
effects. In many systems, causal influences are non-linear or conjunctive, requiring spe-
cific combinations of variable assignments for their effects to manifest. Without directly
targeting these combinations, such dependencies may remain undetected. Despite this,
the assumption of observable change (meaning that if X causes Y , intervening on X will
lead to a change in Y ) is maintained here, since learning under this condition is already a
challenging problem. Handling non-linear and higher-order interactions is considered an
important direction for future work.
6.3
Learning in Non-Deterministic Settings
In many real-world systems, causality is non-deterministic: intervening on a variable X
does not always lead to a consistent change in a downstream variable Y . Noise, unob-
served confounders, or probabilistic causal mechanisms can all cause the same intervention
to produce different outcomes at different times. For instance, intervening on X might
increase the probability of Y changing, but not guarantee it. This uncertainty compli-
cates learning, but does not make it impossible. If the learning process is sensitive to
every individual outcome occasional failures to observe an effect might lead to incorrect
conclusions. For example if seeing X cause Y leads the agent to believe with full certainty
in the edge X →Y . To avoid this, belief updates must be gradual, adjusting the agent’s
confidence in a causal link based on the accumulated pattern of evidence rather than any
single observation. A slower learning rate ensures that noisy outcomes don’t lead to pre-
mature elimination of valid hypotheses. However, this becomes more challenging when
the causal effect is not just noisy, but rare. Suppose intervening on X causes a change in
Y only 10% of the time. This makes detection extremely diﬀicult. Most interventions will
show no effect, and without many repeated trials, the agent may wrongly conclude that
X does not cause Y , or even favor alternative hypotheses like Y →X or no causal link
at all. Despite this, such sparse causal relationships can still be discovered with enough
data and a probabilistic inference process. Active inference is particularly well-suited for
this setting, because it maintains uncertainty over causal structure and updates beliefs
incrementally.
This contrasts with elimination-based approaches, which might discard
the true structure early if it fails to meet a strict threshold for consistency. By tracking
graded beliefs rather than binary accept/reject decisions, active inference allows learning
to continue even under high uncertainty. This makes it more robust in non-deterministic
environments, especially when causal effects are real but only occasionally observed.
6.4
Learning without Observational Data
Learning causal structure without observational data is considerably more challenging
because the agent lacks a skeleton graph to constrain which edges may exist. Typically,
observational data reveal statistical dependencies that provide a starting scaffold, allowing
some edge orientations to be inferred “for free” once a single edge is learned. This reduces
the total number of interventions required. In the absence of such data, however, the agent
must explicitly test both the presence and direction of every edge through interventions,
causing the number of required experiments to increase substantially.
64
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:73==
Without indirect constraints from observational correlations, optimal experiment design
offers limited gains beyond simply intervening on variables that have not yet been manip-
ulated. Although this purely interventional learning scenario may appear unrealistic, it
models situations where an agent is introduced into a new environment without prior data.
Humans, by contrast, often bring prior knowledge or common sense assumptions about
which variables or events are likely related. This background knowledge may effectively act
as a rough skeleton graph, guiding early interventions and dramatically improving learn-
ing eﬀiciency. Incorporating such prior beliefs into an agent’s initial state can help avoid
starting from scratch and reduce the otherwise large number of required interventions.
6.5
The Cognitive Angle
The principles of causal discovery via active inference align closely with key ideas in
cognitive science about how humans understand and learn about causality. In everyday
reasoning, people rarely operate with complete or noise-free data; instead, they form and
revise beliefs under uncertainty. Rather than treating causal relationships as binary facts,
humans often maintain probabilistic beliefs, updating them incrementally as new evidence
is observed. This perspective is supported by developmental research showing that even
young children engage in rational, model-based inference when learning about causes,
approximating Bayesian belief updating over time (Gopnik and Wellman, 2012).
Importantly, causal learning is not just passive.
Human learners, especially children,
actively explore their environment to reduce uncertainty. They select actions or ask ques-
tions designed to reveal informative patterns of cause and effect, a behavior that closely
mirrors the active inference principle of selecting interventions that maximize expected
information gain. These strategies evolve with development and are influenced by factors
like prior knowledge and cognitive constraints (Nussenbaum and Cohen, 2020).
Another key aspect of human causal reasoning is the use of prior expectations to guide
learning. People do not start from scratch when encountering a new situation; they bring
structural assumptions, for example, that causes precede effects (Shanks and Dickinson,
1987), or that simpler explanations are often more likely, reflecting a simplicity bias in
inference (Feldman, 2016), which help narrow the space of possibilities and make learning
more eﬀicient. Active inference naturally incorporates such priors, using them to shape
both inference and intervention.
It is interesting to consider whether the brain employs an accumulation-based or elimination-
based strategy for causal learning. An elimination-based approach, which involves ruling
out incorrect possibilities, may be computationally intractable given the limitations of
working memory. Since working memory has a finite capacity (Baddeley and Hitch, 1974),
holding and evaluating numerous hypotheses simultaneously could be too costly. In con-
trast, an accumulation-based strategy, which incrementally updates beliefs, might be more
eﬀicient and better suited to the constraints of memory.
6.6
Meta Learning with Causal Models
Meta-learning is the process by which an agent improves its ability to learn new tasks
by leveraging prior experience. Causal models are particularly valuable in this context
because they provide a structured representation of how variables influence one another
in the environment. By focusing on causal dependencies, the agent can prioritize learning
about variables and interventions that have the greatest impact on the system, reducing
the complexity of the learning problem. This targeted approach accelerates adaptation
by directing exploration and data collection to the most informative aspects of the envi-
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
65
==PAGE:74==
ronment. Furthermore, causal models decompose complex systems into modular compo-
nents. Learning about one causal relationship provides information that can be reused
and combined with other relationships, facilitating faster integration of new knowledge.
This modularity improves both learning eﬀiciency and robustness to changes in the envi-
ronment.
Without causal structure, agents risk relying on spurious correlations that may not gener-
alize well, leading to slower learning and poorer performance on novel tasks. In contrast,
causal models support meta-learning by providing reusable, interpretable, and generaliz-
able knowledge that enhances the agent’s ability to learn eﬀiciently across diverse settings.
Active inference implements this approach through a Bayesian framework, allowing the
agent to continuously update beliefs about causal structures and select interventions that
maximize information gain. This aligns with the goal of meta-learning: to improve learn-
ing strategies over time by accumulating and refining knowledge about causal mechanisms.
As we move toward smarter, more autonomous systems, being able to learn and reason
through intervening in an environment and build causal models of the world, might be an
essential cog in the path towards strong artificial intelligence.
66
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 7
Conclusion and future work
This thesis investigates the problem of learning causal structure through interventions
in settings where observational data is unavailable or insuﬀicient. In such environments,
agents must interact with the system to discover its causal properties, updating their un-
derstanding based on the outcomes of their actions. Intervention-based learning offers a
path forward in these scenarios, but it presents unique challenges, agents must not only
infer causal relationships but also decide which interventions are most informative given
limited resources. To address this, the thesis builds a bridge between active inference and
causal discovery by treating causal discovery as a form of Bayesian inference. Formal trans-
lations between the grammar of causal models and that of active inference is proposed.
These translations enable the extraction of causal models directly from active inference
agents, facilitating an understanding of the causal structure encoded within their internal
representations. Conversely, the framework allows embedding a given causal model into
the ”mind” of an active inference agent. Instead of considering intervention selection and
structure learning as separate tasks, this approach unifies them within a single probabilis-
tic framework. This use of active inference provides two main advantages. First, it offers a
principled method for quantifying uncertainty over causal graphs through a Bayesian pos-
terior. Second, it enables intervention planning that is grounded in expected information
gain, allowing the agent to select actions that contribute most to refining its structural
knowledge. Together, these capabilities support adaptive, goal-directed causal learning in
uncertain environments.
Causal discovery from few samples using interventions to probe for structure is surpris-
ingly underexplored. The thesis introduces DoLearn, a Python framework designed for
intervention-based causal learning. DoLearn provides tools for simulating single-variable
interventions, performing controlled experiments, and tracking the reduction of uncer-
tainty over time by maintaining and pruning a set of candidate graphs. The framework
focuses on reducing the Markov equivalence class by eliminating inconsistent structures,
offering insight into how causal beliefs evolve through experimentation.
Two comple-
mentary learning strategies are explored: accumulation, where causal edges are added
incrementally based on observed effects, and elimination, where graphs are removed from
a candidate set if they are inconsistent with observed outcomes. A series of formal propo-
sitions are introduced to characterize the identifiability of causal graphs under different
assumptions and to quantify the worst-case number of interventions needed to recover the
underlying structure. Concepts such as goal equivalence and pairwise goal equivalence are
proposed to formalize the type of knowledge suﬀicient to bring about a desired change in
a goal variable, without requiring full recovery of the true causal graph.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
67
==PAGE:76==
Comparative experiments are carried out to evaluate the performance of accumulation,
elimination, and active inference-based strategies. The results show that different strate-
gies are suited to different graph regimes: elimination performs well on dense graphs, accu-
mulation excels in sparse settings, and active inference demonstrates robust performance
without requiring full graph enumeration. A hybrid strategy that combines entropy-based
planning with constraint pruning is also proposed to reduce redundant interventions and
improve eﬀiciency.
This work provides a foundation for agent-based causal learning in settings where interven-
tions are necessary and observational data is unavailable. It contributes theoretical tools,
algorithms, and software for structured exploration and belief-driven learning, supporting
future research in adaptive experimentation and causal reasoning.
7.1
Future Work
While this thesis has demonstrated the potential of active inference as a Bayesian frame-
work for causal discovery, several important directions remain to be explored.
First, addressing the limitations arising from reasoning at the level of individual edges
rather than full graph structures is a promising avenue. Integrating structure-aware in-
ference methods that enforce global constraints such as acyclicity and faithfulness could
improve consistency and learning eﬀiciency. Developing scalable algorithms that combine
edge-level uncertainty with graph-level reasoning would help overcome current computa-
tional bottlenecks, especially in high-dimensional systems.
Second, extending the framework to handle non-linear and conjunctive causal relationships
is crucial for capturing real-world complexity. Designing intervention strategies that target
specific combinations of variables, or developing models capable of learning higher-order
interactions, would enhance discovery in systems where simple linear effects are insuﬀicient.
Third, incorporating prior knowledge and common sense constraints more systematically
into the active inference process can reduce the number of required interventions and accel-
erate learning. Investigating ways to encode background knowledge as skeleton graphs or
structural priors, potentially learned from limited observational data or domain expertise,
would bridge the gap between purely interventional learning and real-world scenarios.
Fourth, exploring richer intervention spaces, including continuous or soft interventions
and multi-variable manipulations, could improve experiment design and information gain,
particularly for complex causal systems.
Fifth, extending active inference to simulate beyond a single timestep could enable more
accurate long-term predictions and planning. By incorporating multi-step reasoning, the
framework could anticipate future states and optimize interventions over time, improving
decision-making and causal discovery in dynamic systems.
Finally, a main contribution of this thesis is the exploration of representing causal graphs
through a factorized distribution over edge probabilities. It would be valuable to formally
compare the uncertainty quantification arising from this factorized edge probability repre-
sentation with that obtained through full enumeration of graph structures. Additionally,
developing a rigorous characterization of the learning dynamics under the factorized model
would enhance understanding of its convergence properties and eﬀiciency.
68
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
Albarracin, M., Hipólito, I., Tremblay, S. E., Fox, J. G., René, G., Friston, K., and
Ramstead, M. J. D. (2023).
Designing explainable artificial intelligence with active
inference: A framework for transparent introspection and decision-making.
Baddeley, A. D. and Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 8:47–89.
Barbero, F. and van der Torre, L. (2020). Thinking about causation: A causal logic for
natural language. In Battilotti, G., Tallon, P. B., and Gärdenfors, P., editors, Causal
Conceptual Modeling, pages 65–87. Springer.
Chickering, D. M. (2002). Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3:507–554.
de Campos, C. P. and Ji, Q. (2005). Incorporating prior knowledge into the learning of
bayesian networks. In Proceedings of the 20th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence (UAI), pages 231–238.
Diestel, R. (2005). Graph Theory. Electronic library of mathematics. Springer.
Eberhardt, F., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. (2012). On the number of experiments suf-
ficient and in the worst case necessary to identify all causal relations among n variables.
Ebert-Uphoff, I. and Deng, Y. (2015). Using causal discovery algorithms to learn about
our planet’s climate. In Lakshmanan, V., Gilleland, E., McGovern, A., and Tingley,
M., editors, Machine Learning and Data Mining Approaches to Climate Science, Cham.
Springer International Publishing.
Feldman, J. (2016). The simplicity principle in perception and cognition. Wiley Interdis-
ciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 7(5):330–340.
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., and Kiebel, S. J. (2009). Reinforcement learning or active
inference? PloS One, 4(7).
Glass, T. A., Goodman, S. N., Hernán, M. A., and Samet, J. M. (2013). Causal inference
in public health. Annual Review of Public Health, 34:61–75. Epub 2013 Jan 7.
Gopnik, A. and Wellman, H. M. (2012). Reconstructing constructivism: Causal mod-
els, bayesian learning mechanisms, and the theory theory.
Psychological Bulletin,
138(6):1085–1108.
Hauser, A. and Bühlmann, P. (2012).
Characterization and greedy learning of inter-
ventional markov equivalence classes of directed acyclic graphs. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 13:2409–2464.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
69
==PAGE:78==
He, Y.-B. and Geng, Z. (2008).
Active learning of causal networks with intervention
experiments and optimal designs. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(84):2523–
2547.
Hoyer, P. O., Janzing, D., Mooij, J. M., Peters, J., and Schölkopf, B. (2009). Nonlinear
causal discovery with additive noise models. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 21:689–696.
Hyttinen, A., Eberhardt, F., and Hoyer, P. O. (2013). Experiment selection for causal
discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14:1593–1612.
Lewandowska, I. and Gierasimczuk, N. (2024). Association, dependence and causality:
Causal structure discovery from an agent perspective. Master Thesis, DTU.
Matthews, R. (2000). Storks deliver babies (p= 0.008). Teaching Statistics, 22:36 – 38.
Nussenbaum, K. and Cohen, A. O. (2020). Causal information-seeking strategies change
across childhood and adolescence. Cognitive Science, 44(12):e12911.
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press,
USA, 2nd edition.
Pearl, J., Glymour, M., and Jewell, N. P. (2016). Causal inference in statistics: A primer.
John Wiley & Sons.
Pearl, J. and Mackenzie, D. (2018). The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and
Effect. Basic Books, Inc., USA, 1st edition.
Pearson, K. (1957). The Grammar of Science. Meridian Books, New York,.
Peters, J., Janzing, D., and Schölkopf, B. (2017). Elements of causal inference: foundations
and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Pinto, R. and Heckman, J. J. (2021). The econometric model for causal policy analysis.
Annual Review of Economics. Highlights econometric causal models as foundational for
economic policy analysis.
Scherrer, N., Goyal, A., Bauer, S., Bengio, Y., and Ke, N. R. (2022). On the generalization
and adaptation performance of causal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04620.
Schölkopf, B., Locatello, F., Bauer, S., Ke, N. R., et al. (2021). Towards causal represen-
tation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11107.
Shanks, D. R. and Dickinson, A. (1987). Associative accounts of causality judgment. In
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, volume 21, pages 229–261. Academic Press.
Shimizu, S., Hoyer, P. O., Hyvärinen, A., and Kerminen, A. (2006). A linear non-gaussian
acyclic model for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7:2003–2030.
Smith, R., Schwartenbeck, P., Parr, T., and Friston, K. J. (2020). An active inference
approach to modeling structure learning: Concept learning as an example case. Frontiers
in Computational Neuroscience, 14.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. (2001). Causation, Prediction, and Search. The
MIT Press.
Tsamardinos, I., Brown, L. E., and Aliferis, C. F. (2006).
The max-min hill-climbing
bayesian network structure learning algorithm. Machine Learning, 65(1):31–78.
70
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:79==
Tschantz, A., Millidge, B., Seth, A. K., and Buckley, C. L. (2020). Reinforcement learning
through active inference.
Verma, T. S. and Pearl, J. (1990). Equivalence and synthesis of causal models. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI).
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Woodward, J. (2008). Causation and manipulability. In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy.
Wright, S. (1934). The method of path coeﬀicients. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
5(3):161–215.
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Environment Class
1
class GridWorldEnv():
2
3
def __init__(self,starting_loc = (0,0), cue1_loc = (2, 0), cue2 = 'L1',
reward_condition = 'TOP'):
4
5
self.init_loc = starting_loc
6
self.current_location = self.init_loc
7
8
self.cue1_loc = cue1_loc
9
self.cue2_name = cue2
10
self.cue2_loc_names = ['L1', 'L2', 'L3', 'L4']
11
self.cue2_loc = cue2_locations[self.cue2_loc_names.index(self.
cue2_name)]
12
13
self.reward_condition = reward_condition
14
print(f'Starting location is {self.init_loc}, Reward condition is {
self.reward_condition}, cue is located in {self.cue2_name}')
15
16
def step(self,action_label):
17
18
(Y, X) = self.current_location
19
20
if action_label == "UP":
21
22
Y_new = Y - 1 if Y > 0 else Y
23
X_new = X
24
25
elif action_label == "DOWN":
26
27
Y_new = Y + 1 if Y < (grid_dims[0]-1) else Y
28
X_new = X
29
30
elif action_label == "LEFT":
31
Y_new = Y
32
X_new = X - 1 if X > 0 else X
33
34
elif action_label == "RIGHT":
35
Y_new = Y
36
X_new = X +1 if X < (grid_dims[1]-1) else X
37
38
elif action_label == "STAY":
39
Y_new, X_new = Y, X
40
41
self.current_location = (Y_new, X_new) # store the new grid location
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
73
==PAGE:82==
42
43
loc_obs = self.current_location # agent always directly observes the
grid location they're in
44
45
if self.current_location == self.cue1_loc:
46
cue1_obs = self.cue2_name
47
else:
48
cue1_obs = 'Null'
49
50
if self.current_location == self.cue2_loc:
51
cue2_obs = cue2_names[reward_conditions.index(self.reward_condition)
+1]
52
else:
53
cue2_obs = 'Null'
54
55
if self.current_location == reward_locations[0]:
56
if self.reward_condition == 'TOP':
57
reward_obs = 'Cheese'
58
else:
59
reward_obs = 'Shock'
60
elif self.current_location == reward_locations[1]:
61
if self.reward_condition == 'BOTTOM':
62
reward_obs = 'Cheese'
63
else:
64
reward_obs = 'Shock'
65
else:
66
reward_obs = 'Null'
67
68
return loc_obs , cue1_obs , cue2_obs , reward_obs
69
70
def reset(self):
71
self.current_location = self.init_loc
72
print(f'Re-initialized location to {self.init_loc}')
73
loc_obs = self.current_location
74
cue1_obs = 'Null'
75
cue2_obs = 'Null'
76
reward_obs = 'Null'
77
78
return loc_obs , cue1_obs , cue2_obs , reward_obs
74
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:83==
Appendix B
Causal Graph to B matrix
1
def causal_graph_to_B_matrix(graph):
2
import itertools
3
import numpy as np
4
5
variables = list(graph.nodes)
6
n_vars = len(variables)
7
state_tuples = list(itertools.product([0, 1], repeat=n_vars))
8
state_to_index = {s: i for i, s in enumerate(state_tuples)}
9
n_states = len(state_tuples)
10
n_actions = len(variables)
11
12
B = np.zeros((n_states , n_states , n_actions))
13
14
for a_idx, var in enumerate(variables):
15
for s_idx, s in enumerate(state_tuples):
16
graph.reset(dict(zip(variables , s)))
17
new_state = graph.sample(interventions={var: 1 - s[a_idx]})
18
next_idx = state_to_index[tuple(int(round(new_state[v])) for v in
variables)]
19
B[next_idx , s_idx, a_idx] = 1.0
20
21
return B
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
75
==PAGE:84==
Appendix C
B Matrix to Causal Graph
1
def B_matrix_to_causal_graph(B, vars, no_op=True):
2
import itertools
3
import numpy as np
4
5
n_states , _, n_actions = B.shape
6
if no_op: n_actions -= 1
7
if not vars:
8
vars = [f"X{i}" for i in range(n_actions)]
9
states = list(itertools.product([0, 1], repeat=n_actions))
10
11
g = CausalGraph(vars)
12
for a in range(n_actions):
13
for s_prev in range(n_states):
14
s_next = B[:, s_prev, a].argmax()
15
if B[s_next, s_prev, a] == 0: continue
16
for i, (p, n) in enumerate(zip(states[s_prev], states[s_next])):
17
if i != a and p != n:
18
g.add_edge(vars[a], vars[i])
19
return g
76
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
==PAGE:85==
Causal Discovery through Active Inference
77
==PAGE:86==
All causation as we have defined it is correlation, but the converse is not necessarily true, i.e., where
we find correlation we cannot always predict causation – (Pearson, 1957)
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
