==PAGE:1==
Technical University Of Denmark
Understanding dynamics and evolution
of V. cholerae circulating in DRC using
whole genome sequencing and machine
learning
June 16, 2025
Author
Marie Fjeldgren Jensen
Superviser
Pimlapas Shinny Leekitcharoenphon
==PAGE:2==
Table of content
Acknowledgements
i
Declaration of Authorship
ii
Abbreviations
iii
Definition of Terms
iv
1
Objectives
1
2
Introduction
2
2.1
Vibrio Cholerae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Phylogeny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
15
3.1
Genomic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Phylogeny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Investigating Predictors of Outbreak Genomes via Machine Learning
. . . . . . .
19
4
Results
22
4.1
Quality and Analysis of the Genomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
SNP-Based Phylogeny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Phylodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Prediction of Outbreak genomes and Involved Genes and SNPs . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Discussion
49
6
Conclusion
53
Supplementary
61
Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Senior Researcher Pimlapas Shinny Leek-
itcharoenphon for her invaluable guidance, feedback, and support throughout every stage of this
project. I also wish to thank Professor Frank Møller Aarestrup for introducing me to the project
and providing initial direction and input at an important stage in the project. Special thanks go to
Nina Belusa, former Master’s student and now graduate, for her assistance with formatting and
designing the scripts used to download and clean genomic data from NCBI. I would like to express
my sincere gratitude to my twin sister, Amanda Fjeldgren Jensen, for introducing me to the QGIS
program, which greatly facilitated the creation of maps for this project. I also extend my thanks
to my boyfriend, Nusret Emirhan Salli, for his unwavering support and encouragement during
the process of completing this work.
i
==PAGE:4==
Declaration of Authorship
I hereby declare, that the work submitted in this thesis is my own, except for where otherwise
indicated. The work was carried out between 2nd of January 2025 and 17th of June 2025 in fulfil-
ment of the graduation requirements for a Master of Science degree in Quantitative Biology and
Disease Modelling amounting to 32.5 ECTS.
Date: June 16, 2025
Signature
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
7PET Seventh Pandemic El Tor.
AMR Antimicrobial Resistance.
AUC Area Under the Curve.
CT Cholera toxin.
DRC Democratic Republic of the Congo.
ESS The effective sample size.
GLR Great Lakes Region.
MCC Maximum Clade Credibility.
MCMC Markov Chain Monte Carlo.
MGEs mobile genetic elements.
MRCA Most Recent Common Ancestor.
QC quality control.
SNP Single Nucleotide Polymorphism.
SVM Support Vector Machine.
TCP toxin-coregulated pilus.
WGS Whole Genome Sequencing.
WHO World Health Organization.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Definition of Terms
Burn-in
The initial phase of a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation discarded to allow the chain
to reach equilibrium before sampling.
Clade
A group of genomes that includes a common ancestor and all its descendants in a phylogenetic
tree.
Collinearity
The condition when variables in a model are highly correlated, making it hard to determine their
individual effects.
Feature
An input variable used by machine learning models; here, binary indicators of SNPs or pangenome
gene presence/absence.
MCC Tree (Maximum Clade Credibility Tree)
A representative tree summarizing the most credible clade structures from a Bayesian posterior
distribution.
Mash Distance
An approximation of genomic similarity.
Likelihood
Likelihood evaluates the probability of observed data given a model.
Precision
The proportion of positive predictions that are true positives:
TP
TP+FP .
Recall
The proportion of true positives correctly identified:
TP
TP+FN .
Recombinations
DNA segments acquired through horizontal gene transfer that introduce clustered substitutions,
obscuring true phylogenetic signals by mimicking vertical inheritance
Symmetric Transmission Rate
A transmission rate between two regions assuming equal flow in both directions.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Cholera remains a major public health threat in sub-Saharan Africa, with the Democratic Repub-
lic of the Congo (DRC) among the most affected countries. This project integrates whole genome
sequencing (WGS), phylogenetic analysis, and machine learning to investigate the evolution and
transmission of Vibrio cholerae in the DRC and related regions. Publicly available genomes were
retrieved and filtered to retain those closely related to DRC isolates, with 1,555 genomes forming
the main dataset. SNP-based and BEAST time-scaled phylogeny revealed distinct sublineages and
a close evolutionary relationship between the DRC and neighboring countries, particularly Zam-
bia and Tanzania. Average SNP differences and BEAST-inferred transmission rates highlighted the
Great Lakes Region (GLR) as a hotspot of regional transmission with cross-border transmission
to the DRC dominated by Tanzania, Zambia, and Uganda.
Machine learning models achieved high classification performance in predicting outbreak asso-
ciated genomes with an AUC above 0.9. Feature importance analysis identified previously un-
characterized genomic markers, VC 0033 and VC 0817, along with a key SNP in VC 1983. While
class imbalance and sampling bias limited model generalizability in certain time periods, the re-
sults demonstrate that genomic features can be leveraged to forecast outbreak status and identify
important markers. These findings underscore the value of integrating genomics and machine
learning for cholera surveillance and support further exploration of genomic signatures involved
in epidemic spread.
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Objectives
Cholera is a diarrheal disease caused by the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. It has long been recog-
nized as a marker of social inequality, with the greatest burden observed in resource-limited
countries[1]. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) is among the countries most affected,
experiencing a high burden of cholera and frequent outbreaks. The recent 2023-2024 outbreak
was particularly severe, with thousands of cases reported across multiple provinces[2, 3]. This
underscores the urgent need for improved strategies to understand and control the epidemiology
and transmission dynamics of cholera.
The aim of this project is to investigate the evolutionary history and transmission patterns of
V. cholerae. This is achieved through the construction of SNP-based phylogenetic trees and the
application of Bayesian methods to explore how V. cholerae isolates have evolved over time and
to infer transmission links between the DRC and its neighboring countries.
In addition to phylogenetic and Bayesian analyses, the project also explores the use of machine
learning to predict whether a given V. cholerae genome sample is associated with an outbreak.
This is achieved by training machine learning models using genomic features. The objectives are
twofold: (1) to evaluate the predictive performance of different machine learning models, and (2)
to identify genomic features that are strongly associated with outbreak-related strains.
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Introduction
2.1
Vibrio Cholerae
Biology, Pathogenesis, and Resistance Mechanisms of Vibrio Cholerae
Vibrio cholerae is a Gram-negative γ-proteobacterium with a genome size of approximately 4 mil-
lion base pairs (Mbp)[4]. It is commonly found in aquatic environments, where it can form biofilms
on surfaces such as phytoplankton, cyanobacteria, and zooplankton[5, 6]. V. cholerae includes
both pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains, and the disease cholera is caused by pathogenic
strains belonging to serogroups O1 or O139[5]. The O1 serogroup can be further divided into
two biotypes: classical and El Tor, with the El Tor biotype having a sub-lineage known as the
Haitian variant or El Tor variant, which is characterized by a ctxB7 gene[7].
Infection typically occurs through ingestion of contaminated water or food. The bacterium colo-
nizes the small intestine, leading to symptoms such as profuse watery diarrhea (“rice-water stool”),
dehydration, and in severe cases, death within hours[5, 8]. V. cholerae can survive the acidic stom-
ach environment by transitioning between motile and biofilm-forming states to survive in both
environmental and host conditions[9].
The main virulence factors include Cholera toxin (CT), responsible for the characteristic diarrhea,
and the toxin-coregulated pilus (TCP), which facilitates intestinal colonization. CT consists of
two subunits encoded by the genes ctxA and ctxB, located on the CTXΦ prophage. TCP genes
are located within a pathogenicity island known as the Vibrio Pathogenicity Island (VPI)[9]. Ex-
pression of ctxA, ctxB, and other virulence genes such as tcpA is regulated by the transcriptional
activator ToxT. ToxT is activated by the membrane-bound regulator ToxR, encoded on the an-
cestral chromosome. ToxR also directly activates ompU, a gene that provides bile resistance and
enhances intestinal colonization, while repressing ompT, which encodes an alternative porin as-
sociated with lower bile resistance[5].
Cholera treatment primarily involves oral rehydration therapy (ORT), which is effective in the
majority of cases. However, severe cases require rapid intravenous rehydration and antibiotic
therapy. While antibiotics shorten disease duration and reduce symptom severity, rising antibi-
otic resistance in V. cholerae has compromised their effectiveness[10]. During the early stages
of the seventh pandemic, tetracycline and azithromycin were commonly used but resistance to
these drugs began to emerge in the late 1970s. Currently, doxycycline is considered the first-line
treatment. In resistant cases, azithromycin or ciprofloxacin is recommended, though resistance
to ciprofloxacin, linked to mutations in the parC gene, is increasing[10, 11].
The development of Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) in V. cholerae is facilitated by mobile genetic
elements (MGEs), such as plasmids, integrons, transposons, and integrative conjugative elements
(ICEs). These elements enable horizontal gene transfer and contribute to the spread of resistance
genes across bacterial populations. Common resistance genes found in MGEs include sul2 (sul-
2
==PAGE:10==
fonamide resistance), dfr1 and dfr15 (trimethoprim resistance), strA/strB (streptomycin resistance),
and floR1 (chloramphenicol resistance), many of which are repeatedly identified across different
MGEs[11].
Cholera Epidemic History
Historically, there have been seven recorded cholera pandemics. The first began in 1817, and
the most recent and still ongoing started in 1961. This current pandemic, known as the Seventh
Pandemic El Tor (7PET), is caused by the El Tor biotype of the O1 serogroup. It originated in
Asia and spread globally in three successive waves: wave 1 spanned from 1961 to 1999, wave
2 dominated from 1978 to 1984, and wave 3 has persisted from 1989 to the present day. After
originating in Asia, the 7PET spread to Africa in 1971 and the Americas by 1999[6, 12].
Cholera has long been recognized as a marker of social inequality. Due to its transmission routes,
access to clean water and adequate sanitation is essential to prevent infection. As a result, the
disease disproportionately affects populations in low-resource settings where such infrastructure
is lacking. Typical risk areas include regions without basic water and sanitation, those experi-
encing humanitarian crises, and areas with delayed or suboptimal surveillance and limited access
to healthcare resources[12, 13]. The most severely affected regions are in Africa, the Eastern
Mediterranean, and Southeast Asia, with the African region being the only one where cholera
mortality is increasing[12].
The burden of cholera remains significant with estimations between 1.3 and 4 million cases and
between 21,000 and 143,000 deaths annually[1]. These estimates vary widely due to significant un-
derreporting, as only an estimated 5–10% of cases are officially reported[1, 13]. Globally, cholera
cases have been increasing. In 2023 more than 535,000 cases and 4,007 deaths were reported
across 45 countries—representing a 13% increase in cases and a 71% increase in deaths compared
to 2022. This upward trend continued into 2024, when the World Health Organization (WHO) doc-
umented over 733,000 confirmed cases, primarily affecting the African and Eastern Mediterranean
regions[3].
Global control efforts have focused on early detection, rapid response, and vaccination. Oral
cholera vaccines provide effective short-term protection but immunity typically lasts for only
about three years[8]. Therefore, sustained efforts in infrastructure improvements and strength-
ened global coordination are essential to achieving the Global Task Force on Cholera Control
(GTFCC)’s goal of reducing cholera mortality by 90% by 2030[14].
There are two main theories regarding how cholera outbreaks begin. The Environmental Reser-
voir Theory suggests that outbreaks arise from the activation or amplification of environmental
populations of V. cholerae in aquatic ecosystems. In contrast, the Reintroduction Theory argues
that outbreaks are primarily driven by the reintroduction of epidemic strains through human
movement. V. cholerae can enter a viable but non-culturable (VBNC) state, complicating its de-
3
==PAGE:11==
tection and the study of its environmental role, but seasonal outbreaks linked to monsoons or
algal blooms provide support for the Environmental Reservoir Theory. However, the observation
that toxigenic epidemic strains often disappear from the environment following an outbreak lends
weight to the Reintroduction Theory[5, 6, 15]. It is likely that both mechanisms operate to varying
degrees, depending on regional context. The Environmental Reservoir Theory has more support
in Asian regions, while the Reintroduction Theory is generally favored in Africa[15].
Cholera in Africa and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
In Africa, several large cholera outbreaks have occurred since 2000. According to total case num-
bers reported by the WHO, the largest surges were observed in 2006, 2009, and most recently in
2023[16], as illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Number of cholera cases reported between 2000 and 2023 by WHO in the AFRO region
Globally, the DRC is among the leading countries in terms of cholera cases, contributing 5–14%
of the global case count annually[17]. In the DRC, as depicted in Figure 2, the case count pattern
differs from the overall trend in Africa. The largest surges occurred in 2017 and 2023, while the
years 2006 and 2009 saw only moderate case numbers.
4
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2: Number of cholera cases reported between 2000 and 2023 by WHO in DRC
In Africa, the Great Lakes Region (GLR) are among the regions most affected by large and re-
current cholera epidemics, and cholera is considered endemic in this area[18]. Located in the
southeastern part of the continent, the region includes a number of large lakes and comprises the
countries Burundi, the DRC, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zam-
bia, as illustrated in Figure 3. The region is also affected by wars and civil conflicts, particularly
along the border between eastern DRC and Rwanda[17, 19].
Figure 3: Map of the African Great Lakes Region showing selected countries, major lakes and the
Congo River. The map was created using QGIS[20], based on country and lake shapefiles obtained
from Natural Earth
5
==PAGE:13==
Cholera can spread from the GLR in the DRC to other parts of the country along the Congo River,
recently affecting areas that had previously been cholera-free for more than a decade. Although
the exact mechanisms of this spread remain unclear, conflict and the movement of internally
displaced persons have been identified as major contributing factors[18, 19].
In Africa, there have been at least 17 distinct introduction events of cholera from Asia, usually
from the Bay of Bengal, since the 7PET was first introduced in the 1970s. These introductions are
referred to as T1–T17 or AFR1–AFR17 sublineages. The currently dominant sublineages in Africa
are AFR10, AFR12, AFR13 and AFR15. AFR10 is the most prevalent in the DRC, AFR12 dominates
in Cameroon and Nigeria and AFR15 is prevalent in Zambia, Malawi, and Mozambique—although
Zambia also has a large presence of AFR10[21]. In Tanzania and Uganda the AFR13 and AFR10
are both present and in Kenya, AFR10 has been present previously, but more recently AFR13 has
been more dominant[22]
Initially, the DRC was dominated by the AFR5 sublineage as part of the first wave of 7PET. AFR5
remained dominant until the late 1990s, when AFR10 was introduced during the third wave and
then subsequently became the dominant sublineage. More recently, AFR15 has also been ob-
served in the DRC[21, 23]. The AFR10 lineage has been documented spreading across borders to
South Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia, establishing the DRC as both a regional reservoir
for cholera persistence and a source of cross-border transmission[2]. AFR10 has been further
subdivided into two sublineages: AFR10d and AFR10e. In the last decade, AFR10e has replaced
AFR10d as the dominant sublineage and is now more widely distributed across the DRC. In con-
trast, AFR10d remains primarily around Lake Tanganyika, which borders DRC, Tanzania, and a
small part of Zambia. AFR10e is distinguished by a specific substitution in the parC protein[17,
24].
2.2
Phylogeny
Phylogenetic trees are commonly used in epidemic and outbreak research to reconstruct the
evolutionary relationships between pathogen strains. Several approaches exist for constructing
these trees. When working with large datasets of assembled Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS)
genomes, a fast and computationally efficient method is to apply similarity-based clustering using
the MinHash technique. This approach reduces long genomic sequences into compressed sketch
representations and compares them using the Jaccard index. The resulting distance matrix can
then be used to construct a phylogenetic tree[25].
For a more precise, though computationally intensive approach, Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
(SNP)s can be used. SNPs represent single base-pair changes in the genome and capture genetic
variation among bacterial isolates. They are particularly valuable for phylogenetic analysis due to
their capacity to reflect microevolutionary changes. By aligning multiple genomes to a reference
strain and identifying core genome SNPs, a phylogenetic tree can be constructed that reflects
6
==PAGE:14==
the genetic relatedness between isolates. One method for constructing a phylogenetic tree from
SNP alignments is the maximum likelihood approach. This statistical method estimates the tree
topology and branch lengths that best explain the observed SNPs, producing a single best-fit tree
based on the given alignment[26, 27].
Instead of estimating a single best-fit tree, it is also possible to use computationally more de-
manding Bayesian methods to infer a posterior probability distribution over phylogenetic trees.
Bayesian phylogenetics relies on Bayes’ theorem as its foundational framework.
P(A | B) = P(B | A) · P(A)
P(B)
(1)
In Equation 1:
• P(A | B) is the posterior probability, the probability of hypothesis A (e.g., a specific tree
topology and model parameters) given the observed data B (the SNP alignment).
• P(B | A) is the likelihood, the probability of the observed data B assuming hypothesis A
is true.
• P(A) is the prior probability of the hypothesis A before observing any data.
• P(B) is the marginal likelihood, the total probability of the observed data under all pos-
sible hypotheses.
This theorem enables estimation of a distribution of phylogenetic trees and model parameters.
The posterior probability P(A | B) reflects the relative credibility of each tree, given the se-
quence data and a specified evolutionary model. Unlike maximum likelihood methods, which
produce a single best-supported tree, Bayesian methods yield a posterior distribution of trees,
allowing for the quantification of uncertainty in tree topology and parameter estimates. This pro-
vides a more comprehensive understanding of phylogenetic uncertainty and supports statistical
summaries such as confidence intervals and posterior clade support values[28].
BEAST
BEAST2 is a software platform for Bayesian phylogenetic inference that supports a wide range
of evolutionary models and molecular clock settings[29]. Its core objective is to estimate the
posterior distribution P(A | B) of phylogenetic trees and model parameters given observed data
B, as described by Bayes’ Theorem in Equation 1.
Due to the high dimensionality and complexity of the parameter space (e.g., tree topologies,
branch lengths, and substitution rates), direct calculation of the posterior is infeasible. This is
because the marginal likelihood, P(B) =
R
A P(B | A) · P(A) dA, requires integration over all
possible parameter values, which renders the integral intractable[28].
7
==PAGE:15==
To solve this, BEAST2 employs an Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm to approximate
the posterior distribution by generating a chain of samples. Each state A represents a specific
phylogenetic tree along with associated model parameters. A new state A′ is proposed by making
small changes to the current state, and the algorithm decides whether to accept this proposal
using the Metropolis-Hastings criterion:
α = min

1, P(B | A′) · P(A′) · q(A | A′)
P(B | A) · P(A) · q(A′ | A)

(2)
In Equation 2:
• A is the current state (a tree and associated model parameters),
• A′ is the proposed new state,
• P(B | A) is the likelihood — the probability of the observed SNP data given the current
state,
• P(A) is the prior probability of the current state,
• q(A′ | A) is the probability of proposing state A′ from state A.
If the proposed state has a higher posterior probability, it is always accepted. Otherwise, it may
still be accepted with probability α, which allows the algorithm to escape local optima and ex-
plore the full posterior space. After discarding an initial burn-in period and sampling across many
iterations, the resulting collection of trees and parameters approximates the true posterior distri-
bution[28].
After the MCMC chain has completed its specified length, it is important to evaluate whether the
chain has converged to the posterior distribution. This can be assessed using the software tool
Tracer[30], which visualizes the information stored in the .log file produced by BEAST2. Two key
diagnostics are used for this evaluation:
1. Inspection of trace plots for individual parameters, which should appear as stable without
strong trends or drifts.
2. The The effective sample size (ESS) for each parameter, which quantifies how many inde-
pendent samples the chain has effectively produced. An ESS greater than 200 is typically
considered sufficient for reliable parameter estimation[28].
If convergence is confirmed, the next step is to summarize the posterior tree distribution. This
is often done using BEAST’s TreeAnnotator tool to select a single representative tree, typically
the Maximum Clade Credibility (MCC) tree. Each tree in the posterior sample consists of a set of
clades and each clade has a posterior probability representing how frequently it appears across
8
==PAGE:16==
all sampled trees. The MCC tree is defined as the tree in the posterior sample with the highest
product of clade probabilities[29].
In this project, phylogenetic analyses were performed using the GTR+Γ substitution model, where
the General Time Reversible (GTR) model allows each type of nucleotide substitution to have its
own rate, and the gamma distribution (Γ) accounts for rate variation in the positions. A strict
molecular clock was used, meaning that all lineages are modeled to evolve at the same rate over
time. This implies that the number of substitutions is directly proportional to time. In contrast, a
relaxed clock allows the rate to vary among branches.
To estimate transmission dynamics, the FixedTreeAnalysis package in BEAST2 was applied to the
MCC tree. This approach treats geographic location as a discrete trait assigned to each sequence.
The tree topology and branch lengths are held constant, and the model estimates the rate at which
the trait changes along the branches. In this case, it quantifies how frequently the pathogen is
inferred to move between countries based on trait transitions along the tree[29].
Estimating population size
The Skyline and Skygrid models are coalescent priors used to estimate the effective population
size (Ne(t)) over time. In the context of infectious disease, the effective population size refers to
the number of pathogen lineages that are actively contributing to the genetic diversity observed
in the sampled sequences. It can be used as a proxy for how widely the pathogen is transmitting
at a given time, because greater transmission typically leads to more independent lineages coex-
isting and accumulating mutations. These independent lineages result in a deeper, more branched
phylogenetic tree, which reflects a larger estimated effective population size.
The Skyline and Skygrid models estimate the effective population size Ne(t) over time by averag-
ing across samples from the MCMC chain. Since Ne(t) is assumed to vary over time, both models
divide the timeline into discrete segments called effective groups. The Skyline model segments
time based on coalescent intervals in the phylogenetic tree and assumes a constant Ne within each
interval. In contrast, the Skygrid model divides time into equally spaced intervals and estimates a
separate constant Ne(t) for each. As a result, the Skyline model typically involves fewer parame-
ters than the Skygrid model, since its segments are determined by tree structure rather than fixed
time intervals. However, because the number of Skyline effective groups is chosen beforehand,
using too few can lead to low temporal resolution and abrupt changes in Ne(t) estimates [31, 32].
2.3
Machine Learning
The aim of classification in machine learning is to develop a model that can accurately assign a
category or class label to new, unseen data based on patterns learned from a training dataset. In
this project, the goal of the classification is to classify whether a given observation corresponds
to an outbreak (class 1) or is Endemic/Sporadic (class 0).
9
==PAGE:17==
To ensure that the model does not overfit the training data and remains generalizable to new,
unseen data, the standard approach is to divide the dataset into two parts: a training set and a
test set. The training set is used to fit the model, while the test set is reserved for final evaluation,
simulating how the model would perform with unseen data.
Model performance can be assessed using a variety of evaluation metrics. The metrics used in this
project are described below:
• Accuracy measures the proportion of correctly classified instances among all instances:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(3)
where TP (true positives) are instances correctly classified as positive (class 1), TN (true
negatives) are instances correctly classified as negative (class 0), FP (false positives) are
instances incorrectly classified as positive, and FN (false negatives) are instances incor-
rectly classified as negative. Although accuracy is intuitive and easy to interpret, it can be
misleading in cases of class imbalance[33].
• F1 Score, ranging from 0 to 1, is the harmonic mean of precision and recall:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP ,
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(4)
F1 Score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(5)
This metric is especially useful when dealing with imbalanced classes, as it balances the
trade-off between precision and recall[33].
• Area Under the Curve (AUC) summarizes the model’s ability to distinguish between the
two classes, ranging from 0 to 1, with 0.5 being equivalent to random guessing.
AUC is computed as the area under the ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve,
which plots the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR) at various
thresholds:
TPR =
TP
TP + FN ,
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(6)
In this project, AUC is calculated from the predicted probabilities using built-in functions,
providing a threshold-independent evaluation metric[33].
Before evaluating the final model performance, the model is first optimized through hyperparame-
ter tuning. To identify the best-performing model, a grid search can be used to systematically test
10
==PAGE:18==
different combinations of model hyperparameters. This process is combined with K-fold cross-
validation, where the training data is split into K subsets (folds). The model is trained on K −1
folds and validated on the remaining fold, and this is repeated K times so that each fold is used
once for validation. The average performance across all folds is then used to select the best set
of parameters. This process is crucial for managing the bias-variance trade-off: hyperparameters
that are too simple may lead to high bias and underfitting, while overly complex configurations
can result in high variance and overfitting[34].
Logistic Regression
Logistic regression is a type of Generalized Linear Model. Despite its name, it is a classification
method rather than a regression technique. The main idea is to model the probability that an
input belongs to a particular class based on a weighted sum of its features. Logistic regression is
a straightforward, fast, and highly interpretable model. Therefore it is often the first model tried
for binary classification tasks and in cases where the relationship between the input features and
the outcome is linear or close to linear, the Logistic regression model is difficult to beat by other
more complex models[33].
Logistic regression consists of two main steps: computing a linear combination of input features,
and transforming that value into a probability using the logistic sigmoid function. The model
calculates a weighted sum of the input features, as shown in Equation 7:
z = w1x1 + w2x2 + · · · + wnxn + b
(7)
Here, x1, x2, . . . , xn are the input features, w1, w2, . . . , wn are the corresponding model weights,
and b is the intercept term. The values of wi and b are the parameters that the model estimates
by minimizing a loss function. These parameters determine how much influence each feature has
on the prediction. The resulting value z represents how strongly the input features x support a
classification into the positive class, based on the current model.
The z value is passed through the logistic sigmoid function:
P(y = 1 | x) =
1
1 + e−z
(8)
This function transforms the linear output z into a probability value between 0 and 1. The output
can be interpreted as the model’s estimated probability that the input x belongs to class 1. If this
probability exceeds a chosen threshold (typically 0.5), the model predicts class 1; otherwise, it
predicts class 0[33].
Figure 4 illustrates this process.
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 4: The horizontal axis represents the value of z from the linear combination, while the
vertical axis shows the resulting predicted probability. The sigmoid function maps the linear
output z to a probability between 0 and 1. The dashed line at 0.5 represents the decision threshold
for binary classification. Example predictions are shown in green for the positive class and in red
for the negative class.
To prevent overfitting and improve predictive performance, regularization can be applied. This
penalizes large model coefficients, discouraging overly complex models that fit the noise in the
data. The type and strength of regularization are controlled using the penalty (L1 and L2) and C
parameters.
• L1 regularization: L1 adds the sum of the absolute values of the coefficients to the loss
function. This tends to shrink some coefficients to exactly zero, effectively performing fea-
ture selection.
• L2 regularization: L2 adds the sum of the squared coefficients to the loss function. This
shrinks coefficients toward zero more smoothly, usually retaining all features in the model.
The C parameter controls the regularization strength. It is the inverse of the regularization co-
efficient: smaller values of C apply stronger regularization, simplifying the model, while larger
values allow more flexibility and a closer fit to the training data. In this project, logistic regression
is implemented using the liblinear solver, which supports both L1 and L2 regularization[33, 35].
In machine learning, feature importance refers to how much an input variable contributes to
the model’s predictions. Understanding which features are most influential helps explain the
12
==PAGE:20==
model’s behavior and can provide insights into the underlying problem. In the context of outbreak
prediction, identifying important features can reveal which factors are most strongly associated
with the occurrence of outbreaks.
For logistic regression, feature importance can be directly interpreted from the model coefficients.
Because all input features in this project are binary (0 or 1), the coefficients clearly indicate how the
presence of a feature influences the log-odds of predicting an outbreak. A large positive coefficient
increases the likelihood of class 1 (Outbreak) when the feature is present, while a large negative
coefficient decreases it. This direct interpretability is a key advantage of logistic regression, and
the use of binary features makes this interpretation particularly meaningful[33].
Support Vector Machine
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a classification model that work by finding the optimal decision
boundary that separates classes with the largest possible margin. The goal is to identify a hyper-
plane in the feature space that maximally separates the data points from different classes, while
allowing some flexibility in how misclassified points are handled through regularization.
To handle non-linear relationships between features and class labels, SVM can apply kernel func-
tions. A kernel implicitly maps the input features into a higher-dimensional space (called the
kernel-induced feature space), where a linear decision boundary may become possible even if the
data is not linearly separable in the original space. Importantly, the model never needs to compute
this transformation explicitly[33].
In this project, several kernel functions were evaluated in the grid search:
• linear: A linear kernel, equivalent to training a standard linear hyperplane in the original
feature space.
• rbf (Radial Basis Function): Projects the data into a high (potentially infinite)-dimensional
space, allowing for complex, curved decision boundaries.
• poly: A polynomial kernel that allows curved boundaries of configurable degree.
• sigmoid: A kernel mimicking the behavior of neural networks by applying the hyperbolic
tangent function to model complex, non-linear relationships.
When using a linear kernel, SVMs operate directly in the original feature space, which is the
same input space defined by the features x1, x2, . . . , xn. The model searches for the best linear
hyperplane defined by a weighted sum of the input variables:
z = w1x1 + w2x2 + · · · + wnxn + b
Here, w1, . . . , wn are the feature weights and b is the bias (intercept) term—these are the param-
eters that the SVM model learns during training. The decision boundary is placed where z = 0,
13
==PAGE:21==
and the margin is maximized by adjusting these parameters such that the distance to the nearest
support vectors (data points closest to the boundary) is as large as possible.
This setup is structurally similar to logistic regression, in which the model computes a weighted
linear combination of input features. However, SVM differ in the objective: rather than modeling
probabilities, they optimize a margin-based loss function, which leads to more robust decision
boundaries, especially when data is not perfectly separable[33].
The C parameter, also included in the grid search, controls the trade-off between maximizing
the margin and minimizing classification error. Smaller values of C allow for a wider margin
with more misclassifications, while larger values penalize misclassifications more but can lead to
overfitting[33, 36].
For the linear SVM, feature importance can also be assessed by examining the model’s learned
weights. Like logistic regression, the SVM computes a linear combination of the input feature.
Each weight reflects the feature’s influence on the decision boundary, and as with logistic regres-
sion, the weight indicates how the presence of a feature affects the classification. This interpreta-
tion is only valid for the linear kernel, which was used in this project.
XGBoost
XGBoost (Extreme Gradient Boosting) is an ensemble learning algorithm that builds a sequence of
decision trees, where each new tree focuses on correcting the errors made by the previous ones.
This iterative training process is known as gradient boosting, which applies gradient descent
to minimize a specified loss function. In this project, the loss function used was logloss.
The final prediction is a weighted sum of the outputs from all trees, which allows XGBoost to
model complex, non-linear patterns and makes it highly effective for classification tasks. XGBoost
includes built-in regularization to prevent overfitting, handles missing values automatically, and
employs optimized techniques to construct trees efficiently[37].
The logloss function evaluates how well predicted probabilities match actual class labels. It pe-
nalizes confident but incorrect predictions more heavily than less confident ones, encouraging
well-calibrated outputs. For a single prediction, it is defined as:
Logloss = −[y log(p) + (1 −y) log(1 −p)]
(9)
where y is the true class label (0 or 1), and p is the predicted probability of class 1. The total loss
is the average logloss across the entire training set. Minimizing this loss helps the model produce
accurate predictions.
The XGBoost model includes several hyperparameters that control its complexity and learning
behavior. The parameters used in this project were:
• n estimators: Number of decision trees in the ensemble.
14
==PAGE:22==
• max depth: Maximum depth of each tree. Deeper trees can capture complex relationships
but may overfit.
• learning rate: Controls the contribution of each new tree. Smaller values result in
slower but more stable learning.
• subsample: Fraction of the training data used to grow each tree. Values below 1.0 intro-
duce randomness and help reduce overfitting.
Feature importance in XGBoost was assessed using the gain metric. Gain measures the average
improvement in the loss function when a feature is used to split the data in a tree. It reflects how
much each feature contributes to reducing classification error across the ensemble. This metric
is particularly valuable in the context of this project, where class imbalance could bias simpler
metrics like feature frequency[33, 37].
3
Methods
3.1
Genomic data
All publicly available Vibrio cholerae genome assemblies and metadata (TaxID: 666) were retrieved
from the NCBI Assembly database on 23 January 2025[38]. In parallel, all V. cholerae FASTA files
and associated metadata were downloaded from Pathogenwatch on 9 January 2025[39]. To pre-
vent filename conflicts among Pathogenwatch files, duplicate names were resolved by appending
“ d” to one of the duplicates. Additionally, any spaces or parentheses in Pathogenwatch filenames
were removed to avoid issues with tools used in the later analyses. The original filenames are re-
tained in the metadata for reference.
Raw sequencing reads and metadata from two Africa-focused projects were also acquired: Ger-
ald Mboowa et al. (Accession PRJNA1145341; downloaded 28 January 2025)[21, 40] and Ebenezer
Foster-Nyarko et al. (Accession PRJNA1192988; downloaded 13 February 2025)[41, 42]. The short-
read dataset (PRJNA1145341) was processed with the FoodQCPipeline, which performs qual-
ity control with FastQC(v0.11.5)[43], adapter trimming and filtering with BBduk/BBMap from
BBTools (v36.49)[44], and assembly with SPAdes(v3.11)[45]. The Long-read dataset (PRJNA1192988)
was assembled using Flye(v2.9.3)[46] - the sample SRR31565364 was downsampled to 20% of its
original size using seqtk(v1.4)[47] to mitigate flye issues with excessive coverage.
Assembly quality was assessed with QUAST(v5.2.0)[48] for genomes obtained from NCBI and
Pathogenwatch. FastQC reports were inspected for the Mboowa et al. assemblies, and Flye log
files were examined for the Foster-Nyarko et al. assemblies. Assemblies containing more than
500 contigs or differing in total length by ≥500 kbp from the expected ≈4 Mbp were excluded.
15
==PAGE:23==
Taxonomic validation was performed using KMA(kmerfinder, v1.2.5)[49, 50, 51], and any genome
not confirmed as V. cholerae was excluded.
Assemblies lacking information on collection year or sampling location, as well as duplicate en-
tries, were removed. In cases where genomes were available from both Pathogenwatch and NCBI,
the NCBI version was retained. Unfiltered metadata tables are listed in Supplementary Table 8 as
CSV files ID 1–4, while the filtered metadata is available as CSV ID 5 in the same table.
3.2
Phylogeny
Similarity-Based Clustering
To cluster genomes based on sequence similarity, a pairwise distance matrix was computed using
Mash(v2.3)[25]. This matrix was then converted into a Newick-formatted tree in R using the
hclust function and the phylotools package[52]. The resulting tree was visualized with iTOL[53],
where each genome was annotated by its continent of origin and whether it was sampled from
the DRC. As shown in Figure 5, the majority of DRC genomes clustered together in a distinct,
large cluster. A few smaller DRC-specific clusters were also observed and the clusters marked in
green in Figure 5 were selected for downstream analysis.
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5: Similarity-based clustering of V. cholerae genomes based on Mash similarity distances
and visualised using iTOL. The inner ring indicates whether a genome was sampled from DRC,
while the outer ring shows the continent of origin. Genomic clusters marked in green were se-
lected for downstream analysis. Clusters marked in red were investigated and excluded despite
consisting primarily of DRC genomes.
To investigate the DRC genomes located outside the main cluster, BLAST searches were per-
formed against the rfbV-O1 gene (accession: AE003852) using NCBI-BLAST(v2.2.31). These outlier
genomes did not match the O1 serogroup and a SNP-based tree with a randomly selected group
of DRC genomes (Supplementary Figure 43) further supports their phylogenetic separation from
the main DRC cluster. Consequently, these outliers were not included in the set of DRC genomes
selected for downstream analyses.
A total of 1,768 genomes were initially selected from the DRC-associated clusters for down-
stream analyses. Of these, 213 genomes were excluded, as they originated from the study by
Gerald Mboowa et al. (PRJNA1192988) but had been assembled using a different pipeline than the
FoodQCPipeline employed in this project for the same genomes. The remaining 1,555 genomes
were retained for downstream analysis and are hereafter referred to as the main set. For this
set, virulence genes, AMR markers, biotype, and serogroup determinants were identified by per-
17
==PAGE:25==
forming BLAST against reference genes using NCBI-BLAST(v2.2.31). Supplementary notes and
documentation on the reference genes are provided in Supplementary Files Table 9, ID 19.
The metadata for the selected genomes in the main set, including virulence, AMR, biotype, and
serogroup gene results from the BLAST analysis, is provided as CSV file ID 6 in Supplementary
Table 8. The BLAST results for the excluded outlier are available as CSV file ID 7, also in Sup-
plementary Table 8. The R script used for Mash phylogenetic tree construction is provided in
Supplementary Files Table 9 ID 1.
SNP Difference and Alignment
SNPs were identified and aligned using CSI Phylogeny[54], with the V. cholerae reference genome
N16961[55]. An initial SNP alignment was generated for the main set, with the filtering step being
skipped resulting in a total of 7,085 SNPs. A second alignment was created using a geographically
restricted subset of 1,134 genomes from countries in proximity to the DRC. This group is referred
to as the proximal subset. For this subset the default filtering was applied, resulting in 2,563 SNPs.
The SNP difference matrix generated by CSI Phylogeny was used to calculate average pairwise
SNP difference between countries. The average SNP difference between two countries, A and B,
with the number of genomes nA for country A and nB for country B, was calculated according
to Equation 10, where DA,B represents the average SNP difference and Di,j denotes the pairwise
SNP difference between genome i from country A and genome j from country B:
DA,B =
1
nA nB
nA
X
i=1
nB
X
j=1
Di,j
(10)
The lists of genomes and corresponding countries included in the proximal subsets are in Sup-
plementary Table 8 ID 8 and the Python script used to calculate average SNP difference between
countries based on the CSI Phylogeny matrix, are provided in the Supplementary Files Table 9 ID
2.
BEAST
In total, four separate BEAST analyses were performed. Prior to running BEAST, the SNP align-
ment files were processed with Gubbins(v2.3.4)[56] to remove recombinant regions. All BEAST
runs that did not use a fixed tree employed the GTR+Γ substitution model and a strict molecular
clock.
The first run was conducted on the main set SNP alignment using a Coalescent Bayesian Skyline
prior. While not all parameters initially achieved an ESS greater than 200, increasing the burn-
in period resulted in the most critical parameters exceeding this threshold, with all parameters
reaching an ESS above 100. The estimated parameters from this run were reused in a second
BEAST analysis, which employed a Coalescent SkyGrid prior. This second run was conducted
18
==PAGE:26==
due to the limited number of effective groups (four) in the initial Skyline analysis (see Figure 39
in the Supplementary Figures), which limited its temporal resolution. The second run achieved
the desired ESS values above 200 for all SkyGrid-related parameters.
A third BEAST run was performed using the proximal subset, applying a Coalescent Constant
Population prior. The 95% confidence intervals from the main set run were used as priors for this
analysis. This approach was intended to generate a smaller, lower-dimensional tree suitable for
the subsequent transmission rate analysis.
TreeAnnotator(BEAST package) was used to generate the MCC tree for both the main set and the
proximal subset. For the main set, the tree file was first subsampled from 50,000 to 5,000 trees to
reduce file size prior to annotation.
Finally for the last run, the BEAST2 tool FixedTreeAnalysis was applied to the MCC tree of the
proximal subset to estimate directional transmission rates between the DRC and its neighboring
countries. Only symmetric transmission rates were estimated, meaning that the inferred rate of
transmission from country A to country B is assumed to be equal to the rate from B to A.
This approach—using the proximal subset and symmetric (rather than asymmetric) transmission
rates—was necessary to limit model complexity and reduce the number of estimated parameters,
thereby allowing the model to initialize and run successfully in BEAST. All XML configuration
files and BEAST log files are provided in the Supplementary Files Table 9 ID 3-10.
3.3
Investigating Predictors of Outbreak Genomes via Machine Learning
Feature Preparation and Outbreak Status Labeling
To extract pangenome features, Prokka(v1.14.6)[57] was used to generate GFF annotation files
and Roary(v3.13.0)[58] was then employed to produce a gene presence/absence matrix based on
these annotations. To extract SNP features, the SNP alignment file was converted into a binary
SNP matrix, with each column representing a unique SNP site as illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Illustration of how a SNP alignment is converted into a binary matrix. Each unique SNP
variant is assigned a column. Genomes are encoded with 1 if the SNP is present and 0 otherwise.
Genomes were labeled to one of three categories regarding outbreak status: Outbreak, Endemic/Sporadic,
or Unknown. The Outbreak label was applied to genomes sampled during cholera outbreaks. The
Endemic/Sporadic label referred to genomes collected from regions with ongoing cholera presence
19
==PAGE:27==
but outside of defined outbreaks, or from isolated sporadic cases. The Unknown label was used for
genomes where outbreak association could not be determined.
This labeling was based on metadata and when the outbreak status was not explicitly reported in
the metadata, the status was assigned by comparing the sample’s location and collection date to
the regional epidemic activity. The list was restricted to African countries only. A complete list of
status assignments and supporting references is provided in the Supplementary Files Table 9 ID
11.
Figure 7: Pie Chart showing the distribution of labels assigned to the African genomes in the main
set with the total of 1,262 genomes.
Machine Learning Models, Parameter Tuning, and Feature Importance
Three types of feature sets were used to train machine learning models for predicting the outbreak
potential of a genome:
• Pangenome feature set – based on presence/absence of pangenome genes.
• SNP feature set – based on presence/absence of SNPs.
• Combined feature set – using both the pangenome and SNP features.
Three different machine learning models were applied for the classification task: Logistic regres-
sion and SVM from the scikit-learn Python package, and an XGBoost model implemented using
XGBoost(v1.7.4)[37]. The dataset was randomly split into a training set (80%) and a test set (20%).
Genomes assigned as Unknown were excluded, resulting in a total of 854 labeled genomes.
Hyperparameter tuning was performed using GridSearchCV from scikit-learn[59]. The parameter
grid and optimal values identified for each model are listed in Table 1.
20
==PAGE:28==
A simple baseline model, which predicted all genomes as belonging to the majority class (Out-
break), was included as a reference point for model performance to assess the added value of the
machine learning models.
Model
Parameter Grid
Best Parameters
Logistic regression
C: [0.01, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.125, 0.15, 0.2]
Penalty: [’l1’, ’l2’]
SNPs:
C = 0.075
Penalty = l2
Pangenome genes:
C = 0.125
Penalty = ’l2’
Combined:
C = 0.05
Penalty = ’l2’
SVM
C: [0.01, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.125, 0.15, 0.2]
Kernel: [’linear’, ’rbf’, ’poly’, ’sigmoid’]
SNPs:
C = 0.05
Kernel = ’linear’
Pangenome genes:
C = 0.01
Kernel = ’linear’
Combined:
C = 0.01
Kernel = ’linear’
XGBoost
n estimators: [25, 50, 100]
max depth: [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
learning rate: [0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3]
subsample: [0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 1.0]
SNPs:
n estimators = 25
max depth = 6
learning rate = 0.3
subsample = 0.7
Pangenome genes:
n estimators = 50
max depth = 6
learning rate = 0.25
subsample = 1.0
Combined:
n estimators = 100
max depth = 2
learning rate = 0.2
subsample = 1.0
Table 1: Hyperparameter grids and best-performing values for each model across the three feature
sets.
Feature importance was assessed for each model. For the logistic regression model and the SVM
model, feature coefficients were interpreted directly. For XGBoost, feature importance was ex-
tracted using the built-in booster.get score() method with gain as the evaluation metric.
The three models complement each other well. Logistic regression performs best when the re-
21
==PAGE:29==
lationship between the input features and the target is linear and additive. SVM offer flexibil-
ity, as it can model both linear and non-linear decision boundaries depending on the chosen
kernel. XGBoost, a powerful ensemble method, is particularly effective at capturing complex,
non-linear relationships. In the context of outbreak prediction using SNPs and pangenome gene
presence/absence data, a linear relationship implies that the effect of each SNP or gene on the
Outbreak probability is independent and additive, meaning that each feature pushes the model
toward class 1 or class 0 in a fixed, linear way, and their combined effect is just a sum of those
individual effects. In contrast, a non-linear relationship involves interactions, such as gene A only
contributing to Outbreak risk if gene B is also present, meaning the combined effect of features is
not simply the sum of their individual contributions. Because all features in this study are binary,
linear models like logistic regression are well-suited to detecting strong, individual predictors.
However, non-linear models can identify more complex patterns and interactions between fea-
tures that may be critical for distinguishing outbreak strains—especially in cases where no single
feature is predictive on its own, but combinations of features carry strong signal.
All scripts used for model training, evaluation, and interpretation are provided in the Supplemen-
tary Files Table 9 ID 12-18.
4
Results
4.1
Quality and Analysis of the Genomes
A total of 21,566 V. cholerae genomes were initially collected, the majority of which were obtained
from the NCBI database. Following all quality control (QC) and filtering steps, 14,384 genomes
remained, corresponding to approximately 66% of the original dataset.
The main reasons for genome removal varied by source. For the NCBI dataset, most genomes
were removed due to missing location information. From Pathogenwatch, the majority of re-
moved genomes were duplicates already present in the NCBI set. In project PRJNA1145341 (Ger-
ald Mboowa et al.), the most common reason for genomes being removed was due to having too
many contigs. In PRJNA1192988 (Ebenezer Foster-Nyarko et al.), only one genome was removed
and it was because it was not identified as V. cholerae. The number of genomes kept and removed
from each source is shown in Figure 8.
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 8: Number of genomes kept and removed after quality control, grouped by data source.
The distribution of collection years for all the kept genome samples is shown in Figure 9. Most of
the samples were collected within the last 35 years, with an increase in sampling over the last 15
years. Peaks in sampling occurred in 2017 and 2023, and a dip is observed during the COVID-19
years 2020–2021.
Figure 9: Distribution of genome collection years for all samples retained after quality control.
The distribution of genome sample counts by country and decade is shown in Figure 10. The coun-
tries contributing the highest number of samples were Bangladesh, the United States, India, China,
and the DRC. A general trend observed is that Asian countries such as India and Bangladesh had a
relatively lower proportion of recently sampled genomes compared to several African countries.
In contrast, countries like the DRC, Zambia, South Africa, and Malawi had a much higher ratio of
samples collected in the most recent decade, reflecting more recent sequencing efforts in Africa.
In terms of sample source, the majority of genomes originated from human hosts. However, a
substantial number were listed as having unknown origin, while approximately 1,000 genomes
(7%) were from environmental sources and another 1,000 from other non-human sources. The
23
==PAGE:31==
complete distribution of sample sources is presented in Supplementary Figure 41.
Figure 10: Number of genome samples per country in the whole set, colored by decade of collec-
tion. Only the top 30 countries with the highest number of samples are shown individually, the
remaining countries are grouped under ”Other”. The full version with all countries is in Supple-
mentary Figures 40
Main Set
The temporal distribution of genomes in the main set (Figure 11) differs notably from that of
the full dataset presented in the previous section. While the full dataset spans nearly a century,
the main set includes only samples collected from 1984 onward. Sampling peaks are observed
in 2003–2004, 2015, and 2022–2023, with a notable dip in 2013. The 2003-2004 peak was mostly
driven by genomes sampled outside Africa.
When focusing on samples from the DRC specifically (Figure 12), it is evident that WGS efforts
have intensified over the past decade. In the DRC, peak sampling years include 2015, 2019, and
2022–2023.
These temporal patterns do not closely mirror the cholera case data reported by the WHO (Fig-
ure 2). Key epidemic years based on case counts include 2002, 2008, 2012, 2017, and 2023. Of these,
only 2023 shows a peak in both reported cases and genome sequencing.
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 11: Number of genomes in the main set collected per year.
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 12: Number of genomes from DRC in the main set collected per year.
Figure 13 shows the distribution of genome sample counts by country and decade. As expected,
the DRC is the most represented country in the main set, reflecting the method used to extract
DRC-associated genomes. Nonetheless, several genomes originate from outside Africa, with In-
dia and Bangladesh contributing the highest numbers among non-African countries—although
their representation is less prominent than in the full dataset. Within Africa, the consistency of
genomes preserved in the main set varies depending on the country. In particular, Mozambique
and South Africa are entirely absent from the main set, while Malawi is only minimally repre-
sented and the number of Zambian samples is drastically reduced. This is most likely due to the
predominance of the AFR10 sub-lineage in the DRC, which may have influenced which genomes
26
==PAGE:34==
were retained during filtering. The vast majority of samples in the main set were collected from
human or unknown sources. Only a few genomes from environmental sources—typically from
lakes—and a small number fell into the “Other” category, with many of these samples originating
from fish. The source distribution is shown in Supplementary Figure 42.
Figure 13: Number of genomes in the main set by country, colored by decade of collection.
4.2
SNP-Based Phylogeny
SNP Tree
Figure 14 shows the SNP-based phylogenetic tree of the main set, with branches colored by coun-
try using the scheme in Figure 15. The outer ring represents the year of sample collection. The
tree reveals distinct clustering patterns by geography and time.
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 14: SNP-based phylogenetic tree of the 1,555 genomes in the main set. Branch colors
represent country of origin (Figure 15 is the color key), and the outer sand colored ring shows
collection year.
Figure 15: Country color key used in the phylogenetic tree. DRC neighbors are shown in shades
of blue, African countries close to DRC in dark green, African countries further from DRC and
island countries in lighter green, and non-African countries in red.
Most genomes from the DRC fall into one of three dominant clades: A recent 2023–2024 clade,
a large 2018–2023 clade, and an earlier 2011–2019 clade. Nearly all non-African genomes form
28
==PAGE:36==
a separate clade, with the exception of a few Haitian isolates embedded within DRC-associated
clades.
Zambian genomes from 2023–2024 and Tanzanian genomes from 2018–2022 cluster closely with
the DRC clades, suggesting recent transmission or a shared evolutionary origin. In contrast,
genomes from West and Central Africa form their own distinct clade. Between the DRC clades
and the 2011–2019 clade is a group consisting of genomes from DRC neighboring and proximal
countries, including Kenya, Madagascar, and Comoros. A smaller “mixed” clade appears between
the non-African and West and Central African clades. Most of the genomes in the mixed clade
were identified as the Haitian variant (see Supplementary Figure 44).
These patterns suggest a clear phylogenetic relationship between the DRC and its neighbors, es-
pecially Zambia and Tanzania, compared to more genetically distant groups from West Africa and
non-African countries.
Virulence Genes
Although all genomes in the main set belonged to the O1 serogroup, not all had a detectable match
for the ctx virulence genes ctxA and/or ctxB. One notable case involved a small clade of Tanzanian
genomes lacking matches to both genes (Figure 16). Half of these samples had unknown collection
sources, while the rest originated from fecal samples, suggesting likely symptomatic cases. This
raises the possibility that ctxA and ctxB were present but sufficiently diverged from the reference
sequences to avoid detection. Genomes in this group are listed in Supplementary Table 7.
Figure 16: Presence of the virulence genes ctxA and ctxB in the SNP tree.
Other virulence genes, such as toxR and ompU, were nearly universally present.
29
==PAGE:37==
Antimicrobial Resistance Genes
Although antibiotics are not the first-line treatment for cholera, it is still employed and AMR
genes were found across many genomes, suggesting the presence of co-resistance mechanisms.
These patterns were especially evident among genomes sharing similar phylogenetic lineages.
In Figure 17, genomes were screened against the fluoroquinolone resistance gene parC (from
accession: KJ596550). A perfect 100% match was observed in the recent DRC clades, the Tanzanian
2018–2022 clades, non-African isolates, and a subset of genomes from Uganda, Tanzania, and DRC
dated 2014–2015.
Figure 17: Detection of fluoroquinolone resistance gene parC in the SNP-based phylogeny.
Resistance to sulfonamides and trimethoprim was also widespread as demonstrated in Figure 18.
The genes dfrA15, dfrA1, and sul2, had near-universal presence except sul2 in the Zambian 2023–2024
clade. Genomes contained either dfrA1 or dfrA15, with older African genomes (1984–1997) harbor-
ing dfrA1 and newer genomes dfrA15. Additional resistance genes including strA, strB, and floR1
followed the same pattern as sul2 as demonstrated in Supplementary Figure 45. This indicates a
high degree of co-resistance which is commonly associated with sul2 in many bacterial species.
The rest of the testing genes had no matches except for parE and gyrA (both Quinolone resistance)
which had partial matches in nearly all genomes and catB9 (Chloramphenicol resistance) which
had perfect matches in all genomes.
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 18: Distribution of sulfonamide and trimethoprim resistance genes dfrA15, dfrA1, and sul2
in the SNP-based tree.
The SNP-based phylogeny reveals strong temporal and geographic clustering among V. cholerae
genomes. DRC and its neighboring countries (especially Zambia and Tanzania) form a genetically
close group, distinct from the more isolated West and Central African and non-African clades.
Virulence profiles were largely consistent, with a few exceptions likely due to genetic divergence
in key genes. Despite the secondary role of antibiotics in cholera treatment, resistance genes were
widespread, showing patterns of co-resistance and region-specific presence. Notably, the Zambian
2023–2024 group appears SNP-wise close to recent DRC clades but lacks several common AMR
markers, possibly indicating a diverging lineage or local evolutionary dynamics.
Country Average SNP Differences
The average SNP differences between countries in the main set are shown in the heatmap in
Figure 19. Three countries—Malawi, Burundi, and Rwanda—stand out as having particularly high
divergence, both internally and in relation to other countries.
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 19: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the main set. The
matrix is symmetric, with diagonal values representing average within-country SNP difference.
The variation in within-country diversity is further illustrated using boxplots in Figure 20. SNP
diversity appears highly dependent on both the number of genomes available per country and
the temporal span of sample collection. Countries with more extensive temporal coverage exhibit
higher within-country diversity, especially when also having low number of samples such as
Burundi.
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 20: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the main set for all years.
To reduce within-country variability, SNP differences were stratified by decade. While variability
remained high, a pattern emerged that indicated that countries bordering the DRC showed lower
SNP difference to DRC than more distant countries, reinforcing the regional clustering seen in
the SNP phylogeny. The figures stratified by decade are in Supplementary Figures 46 to 53.
Average pairwise SNP difference between the DRC and each proximal country are shown in Fig-
ure 21. Zambia and Tanzania exhibit the closest genetic proximity to DRC, in line with their
placement in the SNP tree. In contrast, Rwanda and Burundi display some of the highest SNP dif-
ference, though this may be influenced by the high internal SNP diversity within those countries.
(See Supplementary Figure 54-63 for heatmaps and boxplots for the proximal set)
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 21: Average SNP difference between DRC and selected proximal countries across all years.
Equatorial Guinea was excluded due to low sample count (n=2).
To investigate temporal dynamics, average SNP difference were calculated per decade. In the
earliest period (pre-1995) Figure 22, data were sparse, but both Rwanda and Burundi were much
closer to DRC—suggesting a more similar lineage than the overall SNP difference would suggest.
Figure 22: SNP difference between DRC and neighboring countries for genomes sampled before
1995.
Between 1995 and 2004, SNP difference between DRC and neighboring countries increased and
34
==PAGE:42==
became more uniform (Figure 23). This may reflect both internal diversification within the DRC
and the emergence of more distinct regional lineages. Nonetheless, countries in the GLR remained
the closest.
Figure 23: SNP difference between DRC and neighboring countries for genomes sampled from
1995 to 2004.
In the 2005–2014 period (Figure 24), Zambia appears notably closer to the DRC than in earlier
years, and the Central African Republic also shows a small difference.
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 24: SNP difference between DRC and neighboring countries for genomes sampled from
2005 to 2014.
In the most recent period (2015–2024), Tanzania and Zambia remain the closest countries to DRC
(Figure 25), supporting the SNP-based phylogenetic findings. Once again, countries in the GLR
consistently appear among those with the smallest genetic difference to DRC.
Figure 25: SNP difference between DRC and neighboring countries for genomes sampled from
2015 to 2024.
To further support this observation, Table 2 presents the proportion of genomes from the filtered
36
==PAGE:44==
whole set that were retained in the main set for each country. Countries bordering the lakes shared
with the DRC (highlighted in blue) generally show a higher proportion of retained genomes.
Exceptions include South Sudan and the Republic of the Congo; however, these countries had
fewer samples to begin with, which makes it more difficult to draw meaningful comparisons with
better-sampled countries.
Notably, Uganda and Zambia show the lowest sample retention rates among the GLR countries,
despite their geographic proximity to the DRC. This may be due to the higher prevalence of AFR13
in Uganda and AFR15 in Zambia that were likely excluded in the final filtered set.
Country
Percentage Retained
Full Count
South Sudan
100.00
17
Democratic Republic of the Congo
96.00
850
Burundi
85.71
7
Rwanda
71.43
14
Central African Republic
42.86
14
Republic of the Congo
40.00
5
Tanzania
38.03
213
Kenya
34.10
173
Uganda
34.09
88
Zambia
27.15
291
Cameroon
10.34
203
Zimbabwe
10.00
30
Malawi
2.22
90
Angola
0.00
21
Mozambique
0.00
188
Table 2: Proportion of genomes retained in the main set by country. Countries sharing GLR lake
borders with DRC are highlighted. Note that the DRC is not 100% because of the removal of
duplicates
Overall, SNP difference between the DRC and other countries reflect both temporal variation and
internal genetic diversity within countries. However, countries in the GLR consistently appear
closest to the DRC. The average difference was displayed on maps using QGIS[20] using the world
map from GADM[60].
37
==PAGE:45==
4.3
Phylodynamics
Phylodynamic Tree
Figure 26 shows the time-scaled tree inferred using BEAST for the main set. The estimated time
to the Most Recent Common Ancestor (MRCA) of all included genomes is 1964, which follows the
onset of the 7PET in 1961. The posterior probabilities for the nodes are shown in Supplementary
Figure 64.
From the root, the tree splits into two lineages: a smaller one that includes older African genomes,
including old DRC sequences, and a larger branch that contains most of the remaining genomes.
The older African genomes are likely part of the AFR5 wave and correspond to the DRC genomes
that did not cluster with the large group in the Mash similarity tree.
In 1986, the tree split into a lineage dominated by genomes from India and Bangladesh. This
lineage forms a distinct clade by 2004, containing many genomes from that time period.
In 1988, a lineage emerges that includes many recent genomes from both African and non-African
countries, these genomes belong to the Haitian variant. This clade may represent a travel-associated
or sporadically circulating global lineage with limited local transmission.
By 1989, most of the non-African genomes diverge into separate lineages from the African genomes,
with the notable exception of some Haitian genomes that remain closely related to the DRC clades.
The vast majority of DRC genomes are found within either the blue or green colored clades of the
phylogenetic tree. Most DRC genomes sampled after 2018 cluster into three closely related groups
within the blue clade, these are highlighted in Figure 65 in Supplementary Figures. In contrast,
DRC genomes from 2011 to 2019 are divided between two distinct lineages: one falls within the
green clade, while the other is part of the blue clade and is phylogenetically closer to the more
recent 2018–2024 genomes.
The recent blue lineage carries a parC mutation that is associated with fluoroquinolone resistance.
The presence of this mutation, along with the disappearance of the green clade around 2019, sug-
gests that the green clade corresponds to the AFR10d sublineage, while the blue clade represents
the AFR10e sublineage. Interestingly, the MRCA of AFR10d and AFR10e is estimated to date back
to the mid-1990s. This is earlier than the estimated introduction of AFR10 into Africa in the late
1990s, which suggests that diversification between AFR10d and AFR10e likely occurred prior to
the lineage’s introduction into Africa.
Genomes from West and Central African countries are phylogenetically more distant from the
DRC-associated clades, with a shared MRCA dated to 1990’s when the AFR10 was first introduced.
In contrast, genomes from countries in proximity to the DRC are more intermixed with DRC
genomes throughout the tree, supporting the existence of regionally circulating lineages distinct
from those in more distant parts of Africa.
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 26: Time-scaled phylogenetic tree inferred with BEAST. Nodes are colored by country
according to Figure 15; branches of clades heavily composed of DRC genomes are colored blue or
green. Tree visualized using the R package ggtree.
Skygrid Analysis
A Skygrid plot, constructed from the BEAST log file, is shown in Figure 27. The estimated effec-
tive population size (Ne) exhibits four peaks: a major one around 2004–2005, and smaller events
around 1997, 2015-2016, and with greater uncertainty the late 1980’s to start 1990’s. Although the
2004–2005 peak is the largest, it likely does not reflect African transmission, as case counts and
sampling were low across Africa and the DRC during this period. Therefore, this peak is likely
more influenced by the non-African genomes sampled richly in this period.
The 2015–2016 peak likely corresponds to events in the DRC. In this period there were many
sampled genomes and it was the beginning of a large epidemic that peaked in 2017.
The 1997 peak is around the period where AFR10 was first introduced, although surveillance
systems were not yet established, the WHO reported an increase in outbreaks including a major
outbreak among Rwandan refugees[61, 62]. Only a small number of genomes from this period
were sampled, so the peak may reflect other African lineages.
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 27: Skygrid plot of estimated effective population size (Ne) over time for the main set. Peaks
correspond to inferred coalescent events. Shaded area represents the 95% confidence interval.
Transmission Rate Estimates
Estimated symmetric transmission rates between countries in the proximal subset are displayed
in Figure 28. Most transmission rates are very low—close to zero—and reflect minimal inferred
movement between some countries. Confidence intervals varied widely across pairs and are pro-
vided in the Supplementary Table 8 ID 9.
A small number of transmission rates exceeded 1.0, suggesting comparatively high levels of in-
ferred transmission between certain country pairs. Notably, all high-rate pairs (except Republic
of the Congo and Equatorial Guinea) consist of countries that share a border. This geographic
association is consistent with the patterns observed in both the SNP-based phylogeny and the
phylodynamic tree.
40
==PAGE:48==
Figure 28: Heatmap of mean symmetric transmission rates between countries in the proximal set.
Color intensity reflects relative rate magnitude.
Figure 29 illustrates the transmission rates specifically between the DRC and other countries.
Transmission into the DRC is primarily driven by countries within the GLR, that directly border
the DRC. All other countries have mean transmission rates below 0.05, suggesting limited or no
contribution to recent transmission into the DRC. Tanzania has the highest inferred transmission
rate to the DRC, followed by Zambia and Uganda. This further supports earlier findings from the
SNP and coalescent analyses that identify these three countries as most closely associated with
recent DRC lineages.
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 29: Inferred symmetric transmission rates into the DRC from neighboring countries. Rates
are shown as means with associated 95% confidence intervals.
4.4
Prediction of Outbreak genomes and Involved Genes and SNPs
Model Performance
The performance of the machine learning models was evaluated using three metrics: F1 score,
AUC, and Accuracy. As outlined in the introduction, F1 score reflects the balance between preci-
sion and recall, AUC evaluates the model’s ability to distinguish between classes independent of
decision thresholds, and accuracy captures the overall proportion of correct classifications.
Figure 30 presents the results from the logistic regression model. All 3 feature-sets models per-
formed well, with F1 and AUC scores exceeding 0.9. Pangenome- and combined feature sets
outperformed SNPs, particularly in F1 and accuracy. The baseline model, while reasonably accu-
rate due to class imbalance, performed poorly in AUC, emphasizing that AUC is a more reliable
metric in imbalanced classification settings.
42
==PAGE:50==
Figure 30: Logistic regression performance across metrics and feature sets.
Figure 31 shows the results from the XGBoost model. Like logistic regression, XGBoost performed
well with all feature sets, achieving AUC values above 0.94. The model performed slightly better
with SNP features across all metrics, although the differences were minimal (below 0.02).
Figure 31: XGBoost performance across metrics and feature sets.
Results from the SVM model are shown in Figure 32. Again, scores were high across all metrics
and feature sets. The best results were obtained with pangenome features, which slightly outper-
formed the others in F1 and accuracy. This aligns with expectations, as the best-performing SVM
kernel was linear, making its behavior similar to logistic regression.
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 32: SVM performance across metrics and feature sets.
The top-performing feature set and corresponding AUC score for each model are summarized in
Table 3. Interestingly, each model favored a different feature set, though all achieved high AUC
values above 0.93. Logistic regression with combined features achieved the highest AUC (0.951),
but the margin of difference compared to the others was minimal (below 0.02). These results
demonstrate that outbreak potential can be predicted with high precision using either gene-level
or SNP-level genomic data or both. The ROC curves can be found in Supplementary Figures 66-68
Model
Highest AUC
Feature Set
Logistic regression
0.951
Combined Features
XGBoost
0.942
SNP Features
SVM
0.935
Pangenome Features
Table 3: Best AUC scores by model and feature set.
To assess temporal performance, AUC scores were also calculated in 5-year bins based on sam-
pling dates and using each model’s best-performing feature set. Table 4 shows that model perfor-
mance was highest for recent time periods, especially 2019–2024, where all genomes were labeled
outbreak and correctly classified. Model performance was notably lower for genomes sampled be-
tween 2004 and 2013, with XGBoost showing the most stable performance across all time periods.
44
==PAGE:52==
Model
1994–1998
(n=9)
1999–2003
(n=7)
2004–2008
(n=15)
2009–2013
(n=12)
2014–2018
(n=51)
2019–2024
(n=73)
XGBoost
0.79
0.92
0.69
0.58
0.95
All labeled and
predicted outbreak
Logistic regression
0.93
0.41
0.57
0.54
0.96
All labeled and
predicted outbreak
SVM
0.93
0.83
0.69
0.27
0.94
All labeled and
predicted outbreak
Table 4: AUC scores by model and time period (sample size in parentheses). Each score was
evaluated using the corresponding models best-performing feature set.
Figure 33 compares the genomes that were labeled unknown and the genomes with known labels
by decade. The majority of genomes with unknown outbreak status from 2019–2024 were pre-
dicted as outbreak, consistent with model performance and known label trends. A similar pattern
was seen in the early time periods, where models also performed well. For 2014–2018, predictions
were more balanced between outbreak and endemic/sporadic, reflecting both greater label diver-
sity and a larger sample size. Importantly, the distribution of predicted outbreak status among
unknown genomes approximately mirrored that of known labels, supporting the robustness of
the models in generalizing beyond the training set.
Figure 33: Distribution of Outbreak vs. Endemic/Sporadic classification by decade for genomes
with known and unknown outbreak status using the logistic regression model with the combined
feature set.
Figure 34 shows the distribution of predicted outbreak status for genomes belonging to the AFR10d
(green) and AFR10e (blue) sublineages. For both the known and unknown label categories, AFR10e
45
==PAGE:53==
genomes were more frequently predicted as Outbreak-associated compared to AFR10d. This pat-
tern aligns with findings from studies such as Hounmanou et al.[24], which describe AFR10d
as being more localized and endemic, whereas AFR10e is more widespread and associated with
recent epidemic spread. Notably, when considering only the three recent AFR10e clades (high-
lighted in Supplementary Figure 65), both known and unknown genomes are uniformly labeled
as Outbreak. This further underscores the lack of Endemic/Sporadic classifications among more
recently sampled isolates.
Figure 34: Predicted outbreak status for AFR10d and AFR10e genomes with known and unknown
labels using the logistic regression model and combined features.
Feature Importance
The top 10 most important features for the pangenome feature set across the three machine learn-
ing models are shown in Figure 35. For both the logistic regression and SVM models, feature im-
portance was determined using model coefficients, where positive values indicate that the pres-
ence of a gene or SNP increases the likelihood of the genome being classified as Outbreak, and
negative values indicate association with Endemic/Sporadic classification.
Unlike the linear models, XGBoost evaluates feature importance using ”gain” metric, which re-
flects the average improvement in accuracy brought by a feature when it is used for splitting in
decision trees. Both of the linear models (logistic regression and SVM) exhibited similar feature
rankings, with relatively uniform weights among the top features. This suggests that several fea-
tures contributed equally to the classification and were similarly informative for distinguishing
outbreak genomes. XGBoost assigned disproportionately high importance to a single gene, anno-
46
==PAGE:54==
tated as yihG 1, indicating its early and frequent use in tree splits and suggesting that it may be
a strong marker of outbreak-related genomes. This gene also appears among the top 10 features
in both linear models, further supporting its relevance.
Figure 35: Top 10 most important pangenome features across the three models. For linear models,
feature importance is based on coefficients. For XGBoost, gain is used.
The top 10 features from the SNP-only models are shown in Figure 36. Again, the linear models
display a more balanced distribution of importance across SNPs, while XGBoost strongly favors a
single variant, 4035A. This SNP is also ranked highest in the logistic regression model and second
in the SVM model, confirming its consistent predictive value across models.
Figure 36: Top 10 most important SNP features across models. SNP 4035A is dominant in all
models.
When combining pangenome and SNP features (Figure 37), the same general trends are observed.
The linear models again show relatively distributed feature contributions, with all top 10 features
exclusively associated with the positive Outbreak class. In contrast, XGBoost highlights a few
dominant features. Notably, SNP 4035A remains the second most important feature in all three
models with the combined feature set. Interestingly, yihG 1, which was the top pangenome fea-
ture in the XGBoost pangenome-only model, drops out of the top 10 in the combined XGBoost
model. Instead, the gene group 2939 becomes the most dominant feature in this setting. While not
47
==PAGE:55==
top-ranked in the linear models, it was the second most important pangenome gene in XGBoost,
reinforcing its specific utility within tree-based models.
Figure 37: Top 10 most important features using the combined feature set. XGBoost highlights a
few dominant features, while linear models rely on more distributed signals.
Overall, these results suggest that tree-based models like XGBoost may be more effective for
identifying dominant outbreak markers, while linear models capture more subtle, distributed pat-
terns. Three features consistently emerged as top predictors: the pangenome genes yihG 1 and
group 2939, and SNP 4035A. Their biological context is summarized in Table 5.
Feature 4035A corresponds to position 2,135,607 on chromosome NC 002505.1, located within the
gene VC 1983, a zinc metallopeptidase. The gene yihG 1 aligns to VC 0033, a phospholipid/glycerol
acyltransferase, while group 2939 maps to VC 0817, a transposase. None of these are directly
linked to virulence or antimicrobial resistance, but transposases like VC 0817 could facilitate the
mobility of AMR or virulence-associated elements. The high predictive value of these features
suggests that outbreak status is influenced not by a single known pathogenicity factor, but by a
more complex combination of genomic signals.
Feature Name
Feature Type
Gene Name
Function Description
Reference
yihG 1
Pangenome gene
VC 0033
Phospholipid/glycerol
acyltransferase
domain-
containing protein (putative)
[63]
group 2939
Pangenome gene
VC 0817
Transposase, putative
[64]
4035A
SNP
VC 1983
Zinc metallopeptidase; binds
Zn2+; functions include metal
ion
binding,
metalloen-
dopeptidase activity, peptide
metabolism, and proteolysis
[65]
Table 5: Top features and their corresponding gene annotations
48
==PAGE:56==
Figure 38 shows the distribution of the top three features between genomes labeled as Outbreak
and Endemic/Sporadic. SNP 4035A and the pangenome gene yihG 1 are almost entirely absent in
the Endemic/Sporadic group but present in over half of the Outbreak genomes, making them strong
independent predictors. Group 2939, in contrast, is found in more than half of the genomes from
both label categories, but is nearly universally present in the Outbreak group. It ranks among the
top two most important features in both the pangenome and combined feature sets. However, its
importance score is substantially higher in the combined set, suggesting that its predictive power
may be amplified through non-linear interactions with SNP features, as captured by the XGBoost
model.
Figure 38: Bar plot showing the presence ratio of top-ranked genomic features in genomes labeled
as Outbreak versus Endemic/Sporadic in the African genomes from the main set
5
Discussion
In this project, all publicly available assembled V. cholerae genomes and some raw WGS data
were initially downloaded, but only those with a similarity close to the samples from DRC were
selected for further analysis. As a result, many countries, not epidemiologically linked to the DRC,
are underrepresented in the final dataset. This is not problematic, given the primary focus on the
DRC. However, several neighboring African countries such as Malawi and Zambia had a large
number of genomes excluded, despite their geographic proximity. This likely reflects the fact that
these countries are predominantly affected by a different sublineage, AFR12, while the DRC is
dominated by AFR10. As a result, the transmission patterns inferred in this study mainly reflect
49
==PAGE:57==
the dynamics of AFR10. While this offers a representative view of cholera transmission within
and from the DRC, it does not fully capture the dynamics involving other sublineages. AFR12 has
recently been observed in the DRC, although it remains a minority sublineage. If it continues to
spread, it could introduce different transmission patterns compared to AFR10.
Although AFR10 has primarily been found in DRC and the countries proximal to the DRC, there
are some interesting observations in the time scaled tree in Figure 26. A few Haitian genomes
clustering within both the green and blue DRC clades. These genomes were sampled in 2018,
and given their scarcity compared to the large number of Haitian genomes in the full dataset,
they likely represent travel-associated, sporadic cases rather than local transmission. However,
since only a limited number of Haitian genomes have been sampled post-2020, it is also possible
that the apparent rarity of African-related genomes in Haiti reflects a sampling bias rather than
a true absence. Consequently, the existence of additional DRC-related genomes in Haiti cannot
be ruled out. If confirmed, such genomes would represent a novel discovery, as introductions
of V. cholerae from Africa are exceedingly rare, most known introductions typically originate in
South or Southeast Asia.
This observation highlights an important limitation with this project: Sampling bias. Differences
in data availability between regions or time periods influence phylogenetic inferences and trans-
mission estimates. Sampling bias also directly influences the shape and interpretation of phylo-
dynamic trees and the estimated effective population size. Undersampling can result in periods
with artificially long branches and fewer lineages in the phylogeny, as coalescent events may be
missed when genomes are not sampled. This issue is particularly relevant for the DRC, where few
genomes are available from before 2014. As a consequence increases in the estimated effective
population size may go undetected, for example from the outbreaks that occurred in 2002–2003
and 2008.
Sampling bias also impacts the estimation of SNP differences and inferred transmission rates.
Transmission rates from highly sampled countries may be overestimated compared to countries
with sparse data, particularly when using symmetric models that assume balanced transmission
between regions. This bias is amplified when sampling is not only spatially uneven but also tem-
porally skewed. For example, countries like Burundi and Rwanda are underrepresented in the
overall dataset, yet their genomes are relatively concentrated in earlier time periods. This imbal-
ance may distort the inferred timing and intensity of transmission events involving these coun-
tries. In the earlier decades, both countries exhibited closer genetic proximity to the DRC than
Tanzania, based on SNP differences. This suggests that Rwanda and Burundi may have played
a more central role in regional transmission in the past. However, the near-absence of genomes
from these countries in recent years limits the ability to assess their current genomic relationship
to the DRC, potentially causing an underestimation of their present-day transmission. Although
average pairwise SNP differences are less susceptible to underestimation due to undersampling
50
==PAGE:58==
insufficient sampling still results in analyses based on sparsely represented populations. This
limits the robustness of comparative inferences across regions or time periods and reduces the
confidence in the resulting estimates.
This also highlights key differences between using average SNP difference and BEAST-inferred
transmission rates. The BEAST approach is time-scaled and provides uncertainty estimates, mak-
ing it more precise for inferring transmission dynamics. However, it is computationally intensive
and best suited for smaller, well-balanced datasets. In contrast, average SNP difference is simple
to calculate and scales well to large datasets, but it lacks temporal information and is sensitive to
within-country diversity. In this project, the two methods complement each other. Both support
the overall conclusion that cross-border transmission in the DRC is dominated by spread within
the GLR. The SNP difference metric reveals that Rwanda and Burundi were closely related to the
DRC in earlier years, suggesting that their true transmission rates may be underestimated in the
BEAST model due to a lack of recent samples. Meanwhile, BEAST identifies Tanzania as the coun-
try with the highest transmission rate to the DRC, even though Zambia shows the lowest overall
SNP difference.
One advantage of BEAST is its ability to estimate asymmetric transmission rates—accounting
for the fact that movement from country A to country B is not necessarily equal to the reverse.
Unfortunately, this was not feasible here due to the high dimensionality of the dataset. Nonethe-
less, symmetric rates still offer insight. Given that V. cholerae is a waterborne pathogen and the
transmission primarily happens in the lake regions, symmetric rates likely approximate the true
dynamics reasonably well. To improve resolution, future work could focus on modeling only the
GLR countries, thereby reducing the number of parameters to estimate and allowing the use of
more complex, asymmetric models within this region of interest. So while this simplification may
not fully capture the true asymmetry of real-world transmission dynamics, it provides a reason-
able approximation in the context of geographically proximal countries.
Another way to improve the resolution of the analysis would have been to subdivide countries
into regions, as within-country transmission patterns can vary as much as with the other coun-
tries. However, this was not feasible due to limitations in the available metadata, many genomes
lacked specific regional information. Regional data could have revealed spatial patterns, such
as whether the three AFR10e clades were geographically distinct within the DRC. This reflects
a broader challenge when using publicly available genomes as a secondary data source, as the
data were not originally generated to address this specific research question. Consequently, key
contextual details such as precise sampling locations or outbreak status were frequently missing
or inconsistently reported. This had a direct impact on outbreak classification, as many genomes
could not be confidently labeled. The majority of labeled genomes came from outbreak periods,
which is understandable given that surveillance and interest is typically heightened during such
events. However, this created a class imbalance in the machine learning dataset, particularly for
51
==PAGE:59==
recent years where Endemic/Sporadic (class 0) samples were absent. As a result, even though the
models performed well overall, their ability to detect patterns specific to endemic transmission
may have been limited, potentially overlooking genomic endemic signatures in recent time win-
dows.
Despite these limitations, all three machine learning models achieved strong performance, with
AUC values exceeding 0.9 across all feature sets. While model performance varied only slightly
across feature sets and algorithms, the importance assigned to specific features differed between
models. While the linear models distributed weights more evenly among top features, XGBoost
emphasized a smaller set of predictors. Interestingly, the most influential features were not canon-
ical virulence or resistance genes. Instead, key predictors included genes and SNPs of unknown or
secondary function, suggesting that Outbreak-associated genomic signals are shaped by complex
and distributed patterns rather than well-characterized markers. For example, SNP 4035A and
the pangenome gene yihG 1 were both present in more than half of the Outbreak genomes but
nearly absent from the Endemic/Sporadic group. Similarly, the gene group 2939 was almost univer-
sally present in Outbreak genomes but also appeared in a substantial fraction of Endemic/Sporadic
genomes. This pattern illustrates that no single feature is sufficient for classification; instead, it
is the combination and interaction of multiple, potentially subtle features that enables accurate
prediction. These findings underscore the utility of machine learning for outbreak prediction and
call for further biological validation of the most predictive, yet uncharacterized, genomic features.
In the linear models, genes showed both positive and negative coefficients, while SNPs had exclu-
sively positive coefficients. The presence of both positive and negative coefficients among gene
features suggests that some genes are associated with outbreak settings, while others may con-
fer advantages in endemic contexts. In contrast, the top SNP features had exclusively positive
coefficients, likely reflecting their association with Outbreak lineages and these lineages tend to
be closely related and share many of the same mutations, making SNPs more consistent markers
of Outbreak status and not Endemic/Sporadic. Endemic lineages, being more genetically diverse,
may lack such shared SNP signatures.
Genomic features such as pangenome genes and SNPs are often highly correlated due to linkage
and shared evolutionary history. No dimensionality reduction was applied in this project in order
to retain the interpretability of individual features. Instead, model-specific strategies were used to
mitigate collinearity: L2 regularization was applied in the logistic regression and SVM models, and
XGBoost’s tree-based structure is inherently robust to correlated inputs. Collinearity means that
importance scores should be interpreted with caution. In linear models, this is due to shared vari-
ance being arbitrarily distributed across correlated features. In non-linear models like XGBoost,
correlated features may be down-weighted or excluded altogether if similar features are selected
earlier, meaning that highly ranked features may act as proxies for broader correlated groups
rather than uniquely important predictors. This implies that while top features such as yihG 1
52
==PAGE:60==
or SNP 4035A are strongly associated with outbreak status, they may be proxies for underlying
genomic patterns rather than direct causal drivers. Future work could explore this further by ap-
plying dimensionality reduction or clustering techniques to identify groups of correlated features
and assess whether the predictive signal is distributed across them. In addition, SHAP (SHapley
Additive exPlanations) interaction values can be used to identify and quantify feature interactions
captured by tree-based models, offering a data-driven approach to assess whether top features in-
teract with others or act independently. Together, these strategies can provide a more nuanced
understanding of how predictive signals are distributed across the genome.
Another direction for future work involves assessing the specificity of the identified top features to
outbreaks associated with the DRC. Since the machine learning models were trained and evaluated
exclusively on African genomes from the main set, which was curated to focus on DRC-related
genomes, expanding the analysis to include all V. cholerae in the whole dataset with the 14,384
genomes could bring insight into whether these features are unique to DRC related outbreaks or
if they are broadly associated with V. cholerae lineages across other regions and lineages.
6
Conclusion
This project provided a genomic analysis of cholera transmission dynamics in the DRC and prox-
imal regions. Using WGS data, SNP-based and Bayesian time-scaled phylogenetic methods, and
machine learning models, evolutionary relationships were reconstructed, regional transmission
patterns were estimated, and genomic features predictive of outbreak status were identified.
Despite limitations caused by uneven geographic and temporal sampling, results consistently in-
dicated strong regional clustering of V. cholerae in the Great Lakes Region, with Tanzania and
Zambia emerging as major contributors to cross-border transmission involving the DRC. While
symmetric transmission models were employed due to computational constraints, both SNP-based
and BEAST-based analyses supported similar regional spread patterns. The analysis also high-
lighted the recent dominance of sublineage AFR10e, which was further subdivided into three
distinct clades, each consisting exclusively of outbreak-associated genomes.
Machine learning models achieved high predictive performance (AUC > 0.93), and feature impor-
tance analysis revealed that outbreak-associated genomic signals were not virulence or resistance
genes. Notably, genes such as VC 0033 and VC 0817, along with a key SNP in VC 1983, consistently
appeared among the top predictors, despite lacking well-characterized biological functions. These
findings emphasized the potential of genome-based outbreak prediction and the importance of
enhanced metadata reporting and expanded sampling for finer-grained epidemiological inference
and biological interpretation.
53
==PAGE:61==
References
[1]
Mohammad Ali et al. “Updated global burden of cholera in endemic countries”. In: PLoS
Neglected Tropical Diseases 9 (6 June 2015). issn: 19352735. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pntd.0003832.
[2]
Leonid M. Irenge et al. “Genomic analysis of pathogenic isolates of vibrio cholerae from
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (2014-2017)”. In: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases
14 (4 Apr. 2020), pp. 1–16. issn: 19352735. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pntd.0007642.
[3]
World Health Organization. Multi-country outbreak of cholera: External Situation Report n.
21. Accessed: 2025-01-13. Dec. 2024. https : / / www . who . int / docs / default -
source / coronaviruse / situation - reports / 20241209 multi - country
outbreak-of-cholerasitrep21.pdf?sfvrsn=5dd738aa3.
[4]
John F. Heidelberg et al. “DNA sequence of both chromosomes of the cholera pathogen
Vibrio cholerae”. In: Nature 406.6795 (Aug. 2000), pp. 477–483. issn: 1476-4687. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/35020000. https://doi.org/10.1038/35020000.
[5]
Joachim Reidl and Karl E. Klose. “Vibrio cholerae and cholera: out of the water and into the
host”. In: FEMS Microbiology Reviews 26 (2 June 2002), pp. 125–139. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1574-6976.2002.tb00605.x.
[6]
M. Sirajul Islam et al. Environmental reservoirs of Vibrio cholerae. Feb. 2020. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.033.
[7]
Anirban Naha et al. “Deciphering the possible role of ctxB7 allele on higher production of
cholera toxin by Haitian variant Vibrio cholerae O1”. In: PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
14.4 (2020), e0008128. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008128.
https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.
pntd.0008128.
[8]
David A. Montero et al. Vibrio cholerae, classification, pathogenesis, immune response, and
trends in vaccine development. 2023. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.
1155751.
[9]
Anisia J. Silva and Jorge A. Benitez. Vibrio cholerae Biofilms and Cholera Pathogenesis. Feb.
2016. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004330.
[10]
Cholera Outbreak Response. Section 7: Case Management in Treatment Facilities. 2023. https:
//www.choleraoutbreak.org/book-page/section-7-case-management-
treatment-facilities.
[11]
Rituparna De. Mobile Genetic Elements of Vibrio cholerae and the Evolution of Its Antimicro-
bial Resistance. 2021. https://doi.org/10.3389/fitd.2021.691604.
54
==PAGE:62==
[12]
Irena Ilic and Milena Ilic. “Global Patterns of Trends in Cholera Mortality”. In: Tropical
Medicine and Infectious Disease 8 (3 Mar. 2023). issn: 24146366. https://doi.org/10.
3390/tropicalmed8030169.
[13]
Divya Ganesan, Sanjukta Sen Gupta, and Dominique Legros. Cholera surveillance and esti-
mation of burden of cholera. Feb. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.
2019.07.036.
[14]
Global Task Force on Cholera Control (GTFCC). Ending Cholera: A Global Roadmap to 2030.
Accessed: 15 January 2025. 2017. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/
255217.
[15]
David A. Sack et al. “Contrasting Epidemiology of Cholera in Bangladesh and Africa”. In:
Journal of Infectious Diseases 224 (Dec. 2021), S701–S709. issn: 15376613. https://doi.
org/10.1093/infdis/jiab440.
[16]
World Health Organization. Cholera – Reported Cases and Deaths. https://worldhealthorg.
shinyapps.io/page10choleradata/.
[17]
Leonid M. Irenge et al. “Genomic evolution and rearrangement of CTX- prophage ele-
ments in Vibrio cholerae during the 2018–2024 cholera outbreaks in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo”. In: Emerging Microbes Infections 13 (1 Dec. 2024). issn: 2222-1751.
https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2024.2399950. https://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/22221751.2024.2399950.
[18]
Benoit Ingelbeen et al. “Recurrent Cholera Outbreaks, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
2008–2017”. In: Emerging Infectious Diseases 25.5 (May 2019), pp. 856–864. https://doi.
org/10.3201/eid2505.181141.
[19]
Harry C´esar Kayembe et al. “Drivers of the dynamics of the spread of cholera in the Demo-
cratic Republic of the Congo, 2000–2018: An eco-epidemiological study”. In: PLoS Neglected
Tropical Diseases 17 (8 August Aug. 2023). issn: 19352735. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pntd.0011597.
[20]
QGIS Development Team. QGIS Geographic Information System. QGIS Association. 2025.
https://www.qgis.org.
[21]
Gerald Mboowa et al. Multicountry genomic analysis underscores regional cholera spread in
Africa. Nov. 2024. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.15.24317392. http:
//medrxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2024.11.15.24317392.
[22]
S. Xiao et al. “New Vibrio cholerae sequences from Eastern and Southern Africa alter our un-
derstanding of regional cholera transmission”. In: medRxiv (Mar. 2024). Preprint. https:
//doi.org/10.1101/2024.03.28.24302717. https://doi.org/10.1101/
2024.03.28.24302717.
55
==PAGE:63==
[23]
F-X Weill et al. “Genomic history of the seventh pandemic of cholera in Africa”. In: Science
358.6364 (2017), pp. 785–789. https://www.jstor.org/stable/26400786.
[24]
Yaovi M.G. Hounmanou et al. “Genomic Microevolution of Vibrio cholerae O1, Lake Tan-
ganyika Basin, Africa”. In: Emerging Infectious Diseases 29 (1 Jan. 2023), pp. 149–153. issn:
10806059. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2901.220641.
[25]
Brian D. Ondov et al. “Mash: fast genome and metagenome distance estimation using Min-
Hash”. In: Genome Biology 17.1 (June 2016), p. 132. issn: 1474-760X. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-
0997-x.
[26]
Nicholas J Croucher and Xavier Didelot. “The application of genomics to tracing bacterial
pathogen transmission”. In: Current Opinion in Microbiology 23 (2015). Host–microbe inter-
actions: bacteria • Genomics, pp. 62–67. issn: 1369-5274. https://doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2014.11.004. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1369527414001635.
[27]
Morgan N. Price, Paramvir S. Dehal, and Adam P. Arkin. “FastTree 2–approximately maximum-
likelihood trees for large alignments”. In: PLoS ONE 5.3 (2010), e9490. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009490.
[28]
Fabr´ıcia F. Nascimento, Mario dos Reis, and Ziheng Yang. “A Biologist’s Guide to Bayesian
Phylogenetic Analysis”. In: Nature Ecology & Evolution 1.10 (2017), pp. 1446–1454. issn:
2397-334X. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-017-0280-x. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41559-017-0280-x.
[29]
Remco Bouckaert et al. “BEAST 2.5: An advanced software platform for Bayesian evolution-
ary analysis”. In: PLoS Computational Biology 15.4 (2019), e1006650. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006650. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1006650.
[30]
Andrew Rambaut et al. “Posterior summarisation in Bayesian phylogenetics using Tracer
1.7”. English. In: Systematic biology 67 (Apr. 2018), pp. 901–904. issn: 1063-5157. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syy032.
[31]
A. J. Drummond et al. “Bayesian Coalescent Inference of Past Population Dynamics from
Molecular Sequences”. In: Molecular Biology and Evolution 22.5 (Feb. 2005), pp. 1185–1192.
issn: 0737-4038. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msi103. eprint: https:
//academic.oup.com/mbe/article- pdf/22/5/1185/6314417/
msi103.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msi103.
56
==PAGE:64==
[32]
Michael S. Gill et al. “Improving Bayesian population dynamics inference: a coalescent-
based model for multiple loci”. In: Molecular Biology and Evolution 30.3 (Mar. 2013), pp. 713–
724. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mss265.
[33]
C. Miller et al. “A review of model evaluation metrics for machine learning in genetics and
genomics”. In: Frontiers in Bioinformatics 4 (Sept. 2024), p. 1457619. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fbinf.2024.1457619.
[34]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning:
Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. 2nd. Springer Series in Statistics. Chapters 2, 4, 6, 7,
10, 12, and 18. New York: Springer, 2009. isbn: 978-0-387-84857-0. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7. https://link.springer.com/book/10.
1007/978-0-387-84858-7.
[35]
scikit-learn developers. sklearn.linear model.LogisticRegression. https : / / scikit -
learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear model.
LogisticRegression.html. Accessed: 2024-06-04. 2024.
[36]
scikit-learn developers. sklearn.svm.SVC. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/generated/sklearn.svm.SVC.html. Accessed: 2024-06-04. 2024.
[37]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 785–794. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2939672.2939785.
[38]
NCBI Assembly Database. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly.
Accessed: 2025-01-23. 2025.
[39]
Pathogenwatch. https://pathogen.watch. Accessed: 2025-01-09. 2025.
[40]
NCBI Sequence Read Archive: BioProject PRJNA1145341. Accessed: 2025-01-28. 2025. https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA1145341.
[41]
Ebenezer Foster-Nyarko et al. “Genomic Diversity and Antimicrobial Resistance of Vibrio
cholerae Isolates from Africa: A PulseNet Africa Initiative Using Nanopore Sequencing to
Enhance Genomic Surveillance”. In: bioRxiv (2024). https://doi.org/10.1101/
2024 . 12 . 17 . 628868. eprint: https : / / www . biorxiv . org / content /
early/2024/12/18/2024.12.17.628868.full.pdf. https://www.
biorxiv.org/content/early/2024/12/18/2024.12.17.628868.
[42]
NCBI Sequence Read Archive: BioProject PRJNA1192988. Accessed: 2025-02-13. 2025. https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA1192988.
[43]
Simon Andrews. FastQC: A Quality Control Tool for High Throughput Sequence Data. https:
//www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/. 2010.
57
==PAGE:65==
[44]
Brian Bushnell. BBTools: A Suite of Fast, Accurate, Multithreaded Bioinformatics Tools. https:
//sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/.
[45]
Andrey Prjibelski et al. “Using SPAdes De Novo Assembler”. In: Current Protocols in Bioinfor-
matics 70.1 (2020), e102. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/cpbi.
102. eprint: https://currentprotocols.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/cpbi.102. https://currentprotocols.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cpbi.102.
[46]
Mikhail Kolmogorov et al. “Assembly of long, error-prone reads using repeat graphs”. In:
Nature Biotechnology 37.5 (May 2019), pp. 540–546. issn: 1546-1696. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41587-019-0072-8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-
0072-8.
[47]
Heng Li. seqtk: Toolkit for processing sequences in FASTA/Q formats. https://github.
com/lh3/seqtk.
[48]
Alla Mikheenko et al. “WebQUAST: online evaluation of genome assemblies”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 51.W1 (May 2023), W601–W606. issn: 0305-1048. https://doi.org/
10 . 1093 / nar / gkad406. eprint: https : / / academic . oup . com / nar /
article-pdf/51/W1/W601/50737028/gkad406.pdf. https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gkad406.
[49]
Philip T. L. C. Clausen, Frank M. Aarestrup, and Ole Lund. “Rapid and precise alignment
of raw reads against redundant databases with KMA”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 19.1 (Aug.
2018), p. 307. issn: 1471-2105. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-018-2336-6.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-018-2336-6.
[50]
Mette V. Larsen et al. “Benchmarking of methods for genomic taxonomy”. In: Journal of
Clinical Microbiology 52.5 (May 2014). Epub 2014 Feb 26. PMID: 24574292; PMCID: PMC3993634,
pp. 1529–1539. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.02981-13.
[51]
Henrik Hasman et al. “Rapid whole-genome sequencing for detection and characterization
of microorganisms directly from clinical samples”. In: Journal of Clinical Microbiology 52.1
(Jan. 2014). Epub 2013 Oct 30. Erratum in: J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Aug;52(8):3136. PMID:
24172157; PMCID: PMC3911411, pp. 139–146. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.
02452-13.
[52]
Jinlong Zhangz. phylotools: Phylogenetic Tools for Eco-Phylogenetics. https://CRAN.
R-project.org/package=phylotools. Dec. 2017.
58
==PAGE:66==
[53]
Ivica Letunic and Peer Bork. “Interactive Tree of Life (iTOL) v6: recent updates to the phy-
logenetic tree display and annotation tool”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 52.W1 (Apr. 2024),
W78–W82. issn: 0305-1048. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae268. eprint:
https : / / academic . oup . com / nar / article - pdf / 52 / W1 / W78 /
58435928/gkae268.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae268.
[54]
Rolf S. Kaas et al. “Solving the Problem of Comparing Whole Bacterial Genomes across Dif-
ferent Sequencing Platforms”. In: PLOS ONE 9.8 (Aug. 2014), pp. 1–8. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0104984. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0104984.
[55]
NCBI. Vibrio cholerae O1 biovar El Tor str. N16961. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/datasets/genome/GCF900205735.1/. NCBI RefSeq: GCF 900205735.1,
updated October 2018. 2018.
[56]
Nicholas J. Croucher et al. “Rapid phylogenetic analysis of large samples of recombinant
bacterial whole genome sequences using Gubbins”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 43.3 (Nov.
2014), e15–e15. issn: 0305-1048. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gku1196.
eprint: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-pdf/43/3/e15/
48626914 / nar “ 43 “ 3 “ e15 . pdf. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar /
gku1196.
[57]
Torsten Seemann. “Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome annotation”. In: Bioinformatics 30.14
(2014), pp. 2068–2069. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24642063/.
[58]
Andrew J. Page et al. “Roary: rapid large-scale prokaryote pan genome analysis”. In: Bioin-
formatics 31.22 (July 2015), pp. 3691–3693. issn: 1367-4803. https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btv421.
[59]
scikit-learn developers. sklearn.model selection.GridSearchCV — scikit-learn 1.7.0 documen-
tation. https://scikit- learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn . model selection . GridSearchCV . html. Accessed 6 June 2025.
2025.
[60]
GADM database of Global Administrative Areas. https://gadm.org. Version 4.1. 2024.
[61]
World Health Organization. Cholera in Democratic Republic of the Congo. https://www.
who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news/item/19970415b-
en. Accessed: 2025-06-06. 1997.
[62]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cholera – Zaire, Rwanda, Burundi. https:
//www.cdc.gov/MMWR/preview/mmwrhtml/00052860.htm. Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), April 25, 1997. Accessed: 2025-06-06. 1997.
59
==PAGE:67==
[63]
UniProt Consortium. Phospholipid/glycerol acyltransferase domain-containing protein (puta-
tive) [VC 0033]. Accessed May 2025. 2024. https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/
Q9KVV5/entry.
[64]
UniProt Consortium. Transposase, putative [VC 0817]. Accessed May 2025. 2024. https:
//www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q9KTS1/entry.
[65]
UniProt Consortium. Zinc metallopeptidase [VC 1983]. Accessed May 2025. 2024. https:
//www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q9KQL5/entry.
60
==PAGE:68==
Supplementary
Figures
Figure 39: Skyline plot from the first BEAST skyline run
Figure 40: Number of genome samples per country in the whole set, colored by decade of collec-
tion.
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure 41: Distribution of genome collection sources for the whole set. The “Other” category
includes genomes isolated from food and animals.
Figure 42: Collection source categories for genomes in the main set. “Environmental” refers pri-
marily to lake water samples. “Other” includes animal-related samples such as fish.
62
==PAGE:70==
Figure 43: SNP tree with the DRC genomes that were left out of the main set (in red) together
with a random selection of other DRC genomes. The total number of SNPs = 52,566
Figure 44: SNP based tree displaying the biotype of the genomes
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure 45: Resistance genes strA, strB and floR presence compared with sul2 in the SNP tree
Figure 46: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the main set from
before 1995. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
64
==PAGE:72==
Figure 47: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the main set from before 1995.
Figure 48: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the main set from
1995 to 2005. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
Figure 49: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the main set from 1995 to 2005
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure 50: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the main set from
2005 to 2015. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
Figure 51: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the main set from 2005 to 2015
66
==PAGE:74==
Figure 52: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the main set from
2015 to 2025. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
Figure 53: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the main set from 2015 to 2025
67
==PAGE:75==
Figure 54: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the Proximal set for
all years. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
Figure 55: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the proximal set for all years
68
==PAGE:76==
Figure 56: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the Proximal set
from before 1995. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
Figure 57: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the proximal set from before 1995
69
==PAGE:77==
Figure 58: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the Proximal set
from 1995 to 2005. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
Figure 59: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the proximal set from 1995 to 2005
70
==PAGE:78==
Figure 60: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the Proximal set
from 2005 to 2015. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
Figure 61: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the proximal set from 2005 to 2015
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure 62: Heatmap of pairwise average SNP difference between countries in the Proximal set
from 2015 to 2025. Diagonal values represent within-country SNP diversity.
Figure 63: Boxplots of SNP differences within each country in the proximal set from 2015 to 2025
72
==PAGE:80==
Figure 64: BEAST tree, where branches are drawn with thickness proportional to their posterior
probability (range: thinnest for low support to thickest at for high support).
Figure 65: The Time-scaled BEAST tree with the three more recent clusters of the blue clade
colored red
73
==PAGE:81==
Figure 66: ROC curves for the different feature sets with the Logistic Regression model
Figure 67: ROC curves for the different feature sets with the SVM model
Figure 68: ROC curves for the different feature sets with the XGBoost model
74
==PAGE:82==
Tables
Term
Explanation
Perfect Match
%ID = 100%, Query length = cholerae gene length
Partial Match
%ID <100%, Query length = cholerae gene length
Non perfect match
%ID >95%, Query length <cholerae gene length
No Match
Query <cholerae gene length, %ID <95%
Table 6: Table explaining the output results for the NCBI-Blasts
File Name
year
Country
ctxA
ctxB
Source
GCA 002076235.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Fecal sample
GCA 002076735.1
2011
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Fecal sample
GCA 002076745.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Fecal sample
GCA 002078695.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Fecal sample
GCA 002078755.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Fecal sample
GCA 963872695.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963873245.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963873365.1
2011
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963873915.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963874195.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963913885.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963914035.1
2011
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963914245.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963914655.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
GCA 963917805.1
2012
Tanzania
No Match
No Match
Unknown
Table 7: Metadata for the Tanzanian genomes with no matches on the ctxA and ctxB genes
Tables in csv format
75
==PAGE:83==
ID
File Name (Click to Download)
Description
1
All NCBI metadata.csv
Metadata for all downloaded NCBI assem-
bled Genomes.
2
All Pathogenwatch metadata.csv
Metadata for all downloaded Pathogen-
watch assembled Genomes, original ID in
the strain id col.
3
All metadata PRJNA1145341.csv
Metadata for the downloaded raw se-
quences from project with accession PR-
JNA1145341.
4
All metadata PRJNA1192988.csv
Metadata for the downloaded raw se-
quences from project with accession PR-
JNA1192988.
5
Whole metadate set cleaned.csv
Metadata for the whole set of Genomes after
QC.
6
Main set Metadata.csv
Metadata for the main set, including Blast
results - see Supplementary table 6 for Blast
result output explanation.
7
Outliers Serotype.csv
Blast result for Outliers in the similarity
based clustering tree.
8
Proximal set Metadata.csv
Metadata for the Proximal set, the coun-
tries included in this set are:
”Demo-
cratic Republic of the Congo”, ”Malawi”,
”Cameroon”, ”Burundi”, ”Central African
Republic”, ”Republic of the Congo”, ”Zim-
babwe”, ”Rwanda”, ”South Sudan”, ”Tan-
zania”, ”Uganda”, ”Zambia”, ”Kenya” and
”Equatorial Guinea”
9
Transmission Rates.csv
Transmission rate results.
10
OutbreakLabeled.csv
Genome ID and their Outbreak Label.
Table 8: Supplementary Tables in CSV format. Each file is provided with a link to download.
Files
76
==PAGE:84==
ID
File Name (Click to Download)
Description
1
Similarity Tree Builder.R
R script that uses the similarity Matrix cre-
ated from Mash as input and outputs a tree
in newick format
2
SNP difference Functions.py
Python script that contains the functions
used to calculate and plot the average SNP
differences between and within countries
3
Main Set Skyline BEAST file.XML
.XML file for BEAST skyline run with the
main set, created using the BEAST2 tool
BEAUti
4
Main Set Skyline.log
.log file for the BEAST skyline run with the
main set
5
Main Set SkyGrid BEAST file.XML
.XML file for BEAST skyGrid run with the
main set, created using the BEAST2 tool
BEAUti
6
Main Set SkyGrid.log
.log file for BEAST skyGrid run with the
main set
7
Proximal Set BEAST file.XML
.XML file for BEAST Constant population
run with the Proximal set, created using the
BEAST2 tool BEAUti
8
Proximal Set.log
.log file for BEAST Constant population run
9
SymmetricTransmissionRates BEAST
file.XML
.XML file for BEAST FixedTreeAnalysis to
estimate transmission rates, created using
the BEAST2 tool BEAUti
10
SymmetricTransmissionRates.log
.log file for BEAST FixedTreeAnalysis to es-
timate transmission rates
11
Outbreak Labels.docx
Word document with description of the la-
beling on a project ID level with references
included as well as a download link to the
full label list
12
ML Functions.py
Python file with Machine learning functions
used to split data into training and test and
plot the evaluation metrics
13
XGBoostParameterSearch.py
Python file for finding the best parameters
for the XGBoost model
77
==PAGE:85==
ID
File Name (Click to Download)
Description
14
XGBoostModel.py
Python file used to train, predict and eval-
uate the performance and features for the
XGBoost model
15
LogRegParameterSearch.py
Python file for finding the best parameters
for the Logistic Regression model
16
LogRegModel.py
Python file used to train, predict and eval-
uate the performance and features for the
Logistic Regression model
17
SVMParameterSearch.py
Python file for finding the best parameters
for the SVM model
18
SVMModel.py
Python file used to train, predict and eval-
uate the performance and features for the
SVM model
19
BLAST Reference Notes.txt
text file with information on the BLAST ref-
erence genes
Table 9: Supplementary Files. Each file is provided with a link to download.
78
