==PAGE:1==
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern gener-
ation
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
Master’s Thesis
June, 2025
By
Lene Højberg Christensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Signature
Lene Højberg Christensen - s203879
Signature
Date
ii
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Ensuring effective detection of manufacturing defects in modern digital circuits is critical
as quality and reliability demands increase. Traditional fault models, such as the stuck-
at model, primarily target defects at the inputs and outputs of standard cells. However,
with advances in manufacturing processes, more intricate cell-internal defect mechanisms
are emerging, requiring new approaches to testing. This master’s thesis investigates
the effectiveness of transistor-level modeling in test pattern generation to improve the
detection of defects.
This involved converting an existing design using a 28 nm standard cell library to a 24 nm
cell-aware standard cell library, creating transistor-level models for combinational cells
from SPICE descriptions, and developing a user-defined fault model (UDFM) to target
transistor stuck-open faults. Furthermore, a gate exhaustive UDFM was generated for
use in comparisons. Test patterns were generated at cell-level, gate-level, and transistor-
level and evaluated through fault simulation on cell-aware faults.
Results showed that the lower the abstraction level is, the more traditional stuck-at cover-
age was reduced, reaching a 33.16 % reduction when going from cell-level to transistor-
level. While the custom transistor stuck-open UDFM did not improve stuck-at test cover-
age, it significantly enhanced cell-aware test coverage, achieving 97.50 % compared to
96.11 % for cell-level stuck-at test patterns. Likewise, the gate exhaustive method also
yielded a high cell-aware test coverage of 97.66 %, with both methods requiring at most
a 4 time increase in number of test patterns.
These findings demonstrate that while being unable to directly improve stuck-at test cov-
erage at lower abstraction levels, the created transistor stuck-open UDFM and gate ex-
haustive testing provide a cost-effective strategy for improving test quality. They enhance
physical defect detection without the extensive characterization effort required for a full
cell-aware library at the cost of an increased number of test patterns needed.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Flemming Stassen, Associate Professor, DTU
Supervisor on this project.
Thomas Aakjer, Assoc. Dir. Design, Microchip Semiconductor Corporation A/S
Co-supervisor on this project.
Henrik Bergendal, Sr. Tech. Staff, Microchip Semiconductor Corporation A/S
Co-supervisor on this project.
iv
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Multi-Detect Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Gate Exhaustive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Cell-Aware Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methods
7
3.1
Circuit Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Circuit Testability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Test Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Fault Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5
Test Pattern Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.6
Test Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Implementation Flow
17
4.1
Implementation of Missing Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Cell Replacement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Library Translation Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Transistor Model Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Transistor Functionality Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Test Setup
29
5.1
User Defined Fault Model Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Test Pattern Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
Results
35
6.1
Stuck-At Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Fault Simulation On Cell-Aware Faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7
Discussion
39
7.1
Stuck-At Test Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.2
Cell-Aware Test Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7.3
Cost Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7.4
Usefulness As Middle Ground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
8
Future Work
43
9
Conclusion
45
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
47
A Fault Statistics Reports
51
A.1 Original 28 nm Design Stuck-at Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.2 Converted 24 nm Design Stuck-at Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.3 Gate-level Stuck-at Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A.4 Transistor-level Stuck-at Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.5 Fault Simulation Of Cell-level Test Patterns On Transistor-level Stuck-at
Faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.6 Fault Simulation Of Gate-level Test Patterns On Transistor-level Stuck-at
Faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.7 Transistor-level UDFM With Stuck-at Top-up Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.8 Transistor-level UDFM Only Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.9 Gate-Exhaustive Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.10 Cell-aware Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.11 Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Cell-level Stuck-at Test Patterns . . . . . . . 64
A.12 Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Gate-level Stuck-at Test Patterns . . . . . . 65
A.13 Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Transistor-level Stuck-at Test Patterns . . . 66
A.14 Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Transistor-level UDFM + Stuck-at Top-up
Test Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.15 Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Transistor-level UDFM Only Test Patterns . 70
A.16 Cell-aware Fault Simulation of Gate exhaustive Test Patterns . . . . . . . . 71
B Code
72
B.1 Verilog NOR2 gate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
B.2 Transistor model translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
B.3 C-shell Script For Generating Gate-Exhaustive UDFM . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
C User Defined Fault Model For Transistor Stuck-open Stuck-at Faults
75
vi
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Definition
ATPG
Automatic Test Pattern Generation
AU
ATPG untestable
CMOS
Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
DFF
D flip-flop
DI
Detected by implication
DIN
Data input
DRC
Design rule check
DS
Detected by simulation
EDT
Embedded Deterministic Test
EMD
Embedded Multi-Detect
FC
Fault coverage
GND
Ground
IDD
Supply current
IDDT
Transient supply current
IDDQ
Quiescent supply current
MUX
Multiplexer
NMOS
N-type metal-oxide-semiconductor
PD
Possible-detected
PMOS
P-type metal-oxide-semiconductor
PT
Possible-detected testable
PU
Possible-detected untestable
SA0
Stuck-at 0
SA1
Stuck-at 1
SCOAP
Sandia Controllability/Observability Analysis Program
SE
Scan enable
SFF
Scan flip-flop
SI
Scan input
SO
Scan output
SPICE
Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis
SSA
Single stuck-at
TC
Test Coverage
TSD
Tri-state driver
UC
Uncontrolled
UD
Undetected
UDFM
User-defined fault model
UO
Unobserved
VDD
Supply voltage
X
Unknown value (don’t care)
Z
High impedance
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The increase in complexity of modern digital circuits has made checking for manufac-
turing defects in produced circuits an increasingly difficult task. Physical manufacturing
processes are not perfect, and being able to identify a defective circuit is important to
avoid selling a defective chip and to meet the increasing demand for quality and relia-
bility [1]. The increase in complexity has also made verifying the created design a more
cumbersome task, though the repercussions of design errors can be just as great, if not
greater than for failing to detect defective circuits, as a design error affects all produced
chips and not just some.
An example of the repercussions of a design error is when Intel released the Pentium
processor in 1994, which was discovered to have an error in the floating point unit. This
ended in them ultimately taking a $475 million pretax charge, to cover for the expenses of
replacements and write-offs for the affected processors [2]. This can be mitigated through
design verification, which is done during the design of a circuit [3, pp. 3–5].
Once the design is verified and the circuit is produced, testing is performed to ensure
that any manufacturing defects are detected, and the faulty chips discarded. Effective
testing aims at minimizing two undesired scenarios of having false negatives, meaning
faulty devices pass tests, and false positives, meaning good devices being discarded [3,
p. 5].
Testing consists of applying a series of test patterns to the circuit and observing the out-
put to detect whether a circuit is faulty. The test patterns can be generated using various
methods, though the simplest methods often lack a measure for the number of defects
the test patterns detect. To solve this, fault models are used to abstract physical manu-
facturing defects into a logical representation to simplify the analysis.
For larger circuits, scan chains are often implemented to give better access to more parts
of the circuit, enabling the ability to test combinational logic between different sequential
elements, by preloading data on the sequential elements and then capturing the response
of the combinational logic. Scan chains will be further explained in Section 3.3.
1.1
Problem Description
Since fault models abstract physical manufacturing defects, certain failure mechanisms
are not adequately captured by the use of traditional fault models. Hence, methods for
targeting faults more closely related to actual physical defects are becoming increasingly
needed. This is especially important in order to ensure the robustness of circuits in critical
applications, such as medical devices and the automotive industry [4].
This is especially true as the manufacturing processes become more and more advanced,
creating new failure mechanisms that are not detectable with current fault models [1]. As
such, the need to target faults more closely related to physical defects within the standard
cells becomes greater and greater.
This project was formulated and performed in collaboration with Microchip Semiconductor
Corporation A/S (Microchip), where the initial problem formulation came from them. The
problem formulation was then further refined to reach the finalized problem description
presented.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Objective
The objective of this project is to explore different methods for targeting traditional stuck-at
faults placed on the terminals of transistors in combinational standard cells, and evaluate
the potential test coverage gain from these.
One such method will be to create transistor-level descriptions of the combinational stan-
dard cells, and use them in automatic test pattern generation to target transistor-level
stuck-at faults.
Furthermore, a user-defined fault model will be created to specifically target transistor
gate stuck-open faults, assessing the performance of the model as both a standalone
model and when used in combination with the stuck-at model.
A comparative analysis will be performed by generating test patterns targeting gate-level
stuck-at faults, as well as using the gate exhaustive method. All test patterns will be fault
simulated on cell-aware faults, to examine improvements in test coverage and test pattern
quantity.
Finally, the usefulness of the created transistor-level test methods, as a middle ground
between the traditional stuck-at method and the cell-aware test method, will be discussed
compared to using already industry available test methods such as the gate exhaustive
test.
All the tests will be performed on a smaller design block from a real chip provided by
Microchip. The tests will only be simulations, as the number of proven defective chips
needed, to provide any insight into the effectiveness of the discussed methods, would be
too large for the scope of this project.
1.3
Technologies
Due to the project being performed in collaboration with Microchip, the tools used are the
ones they have provided access to.
For automatic test pattern generation and creation of the cell-aware library view, different
Tessent products, from Siemens EDA, are used.
For test pattern generation a combination of Tessent FastScan [5] and Tessent TestKom-
press [6] is used. FastScan is used to generate test patterns with the help of embedded
deterministic test (EDT), which shortens the scan chains, using a decompression circuit
to correctly distribute the compressed test patterns onto the scan chains, and then uses
a compactor circuit to give the combined response back. TestKompress is used to gen-
erate test patterns without the use of EDT. In this project EDT was turned off to ease the
use of transistor descriptions for combinational standard cells, resulting in mostly Tessent
TestKompress being used for test pattern generation.
To generate cell-aware models for the standard cells, Tessent CellModelGen was used.
CellModelGen performs fault model extraction from SPICE representations of the stan-
dard cells. This is used in combination with Tessent TestKompress to create cell-aware
test patterns [7].
For debugging purposes, the Questa Visualizer [8] has been used to perform Verilog
simulation of a transistor implementation of a standard cell.
With CellModelGen, a training standard cell library can be retrieved, which has been char-
acterized for cell-aware testing. It is also small enough to allow the characterization to be
performed in a relatively short amount of time. This will be done to get more familiar
2
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:13==
with the steps needed for cell-aware characterization. This standard cell library has been
created for a 24 nm technology.
This is in contrast to the design provided by Microchip, which is implemented using a
standard cell library for a 28 nm technology.
1.4
Overview
Chapter 2 gives an overview of related work on this topic. This includes different methods
for increasing the number of defects being detected.
Chapter 3 gives an explanation of all concepts needed to understand this report, as well
as concepts that give a general better understanding of testing.
Chapter 4 introduces and explains the steps performed to convert the provided 28 nm
design, into a design using the 24 nm cell-aware standard cell library.
Chapter 5 provides a detailed description of the process used to create a user-defined fault
model for the transistor-level stuck-at faults, causing stuck-open behavior. This chapter
also goes through the process of generating a gate exhaustive fault model for the 24 nm li-
brary. Furthermore, the procedure for generating the test patterns used, will be explained.
In Chapter 6, the performed experiments along with the results gathered, will be pre-
sented.
Chapter 7 discusses the previously obtained results, and uses them to estimate the cost
implications of the different methods, and evaluating the usefulness of these methods, in
increasing the number of defects being detected.
Then Chapter 8 will present experiments that were not done, due to the time constraint of
the project, along with ways the project could be further expanded upon.
At the end Chapter 9 presents a summary and final conclusions for the work done during
the project.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:15==
2
Related Work
The problem of test escapes using traditional fault models, like the stuck-at model, is
something that has been investigated multiple times before, such as using volume diag-
nosis to find the cause behind test escapes [9]. The volume diagnosis analysis showed
that intra-cell defects, meaning defects within standard cells, need more attention as they
are often missed by traditional methods. Methods like n-detect [10] and Embedded multi-
detect (EMD) [1] try to target these defects by increasing the amount of times cell-level
faults are detected in unique ways, to create more opportunities for the intra-cell defects
to be sensitized correctly. New testing methodologies like Cell-Aware Test [11] and Gate
Exhaustive Testing [12] have been created to try and find other alternative solutions for
detecting intra-cell defects.
2.1
Multi-Detect Methods
In general, multi-detection methods involve creating test patterns, which target traditional
faults multiple times in unique ways, to increase the statistical likelihood of unmodeled
cell-internal defects being detected. The effectiveness of multi-detect for stuck-at faults
has been shown in [13] and [14], where experimental results show a decreased number
of defective circuits passing the tests with a higher detection per fault.
2.1.1
N-detect
The n-detect test method consists of creating a stuck-at test set, where each stuck-at
fault is detected by a total of n different test patterns, or by the maximum number of test
patterns that can detect the fault, if this number is smaller than n [10]. These test sets are
know as n-detection test sets, denoting the n number of detections targeted by the test
set. The purpose of this is to increase the statistical probability of detecting unmodeled
defects not directly targeted by the test set. This has proven useful in detecting faulty
circuits that would pass regular stuck-at test sets, even when having test coverage of
100 % [13]. This does come with the downside of needing a maximum of n test patterns
per fault, increasing the size of the test set significantly.
2.1.2
Embedded Multi-Detect
Embedded multi-detect (EMD) expands on the concept of n-detect, in an attempt to de-
crease the size of the test set, while still having the benefit of detecting each fault multiple
times. EMD exploit the fact that many test patterns generated for stuck-at faults often do
not require all of the input values to be at a specific value. These are called don’t-care
bits, which can be used by EMD to embed additional detection of already detected faults
into the generated test patterns [1].
A targeted multi-detect value of m is used to sort out faults, which have already been
detected m times. This is done by categorizing the faults in groups based on the amount
of times they have been detected. Once a fault has been detected m times, it is no longer
considered for embedded detection. Once no more faults remain undetected, due to them
being detected at least once or categorized as undetectable, the test pattern generation
stops. This means that the resulting test set is the same size as a regular stuck-at test
set [1].
The downside of this method is that EMD cannot guarantee m detections of each fault,
unlike n-detect. While not as efficient at detecting additional defects, scenarios where
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
5
==PAGE:16==
performing true n-detection is infeasible, EMD can be used to increase the likelihood of
detecting defects compared to traditional stuck-at methods [1].
2.2
Gate Exhaustive
Gate exhaustive testing consists of testing every input combination at every gate in a
circuit, and then observing the output response of the gate at an observation point. An
observation point can either be a primary output of the circuit or a scan cell. The idea is
that it is not necessary to generate patterns which detect certain faults multiple times, but
instead ensure that every gate in the circuit has every input combination applied to it [12].
2.3
Cell-Aware Test
Cell-aware testing differs from the previously discussed methods by looking at the physi-
cal layout of cells and finding all possible defects within a specific cell. First, a netlist of all
transistors and parasitic elements, like capacitors, is extracted from the physical layout of
a cell. The netlist is used to perform analog simulations on the cell, both with and without
defects. The analog simulations done without defects are done for every input combina-
tion of the cell, to determine the steady state output voltage of all the cells outputs for each
input combination. The analog simulation done with defects is used to simulate the effect
of each defect for every input combination of the cell. A defect will then be considered
as detected if at least one input combination produces an output voltage which differs
by more than 50 % from the defect-free simulation voltage. Once the analog simulations
have been performed, a full detection matrix, containing which input combinations detect
which defects, is created. The Cell-aware library view is generated by optimizing the de-
tection matrix, and ends up containing one or more alternative conditions for detecting
each cell-internal defect [11].
Once the previous steps have been performed for all cells in a library, test patterns can be
generated repeatedly for any design using the library [11]. Though performing the layout
extraction and analog fault simulations for all cells in a library, is either a very time consum-
ing task to do, or it is expensive to buy a library which has already had the classification
done.
6
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:17==
3
Methods
In this chapter, explanations for general concepts will be given, to give the reader the
required knowledge for the rest of the report. Furthermore, the specific usage of the
concepts in Tessent tools, such as file formats and implementations, will also be explained.
3.1
Circuit Representation
Digital circuits can be represented at different abstraction levels, depending on the needs
and requirements of a certain task. The lowest level of abstraction is the physical imple-
mentation of the circuit, showing the individual layer masks needed to create a physical
chip. At this level it can be very difficult to get an understanding of the functionality of the
circuit, making it impractical to use in when designing a circuit. Above the physical imple-
mentation is the transistor-level representation, which represents the digital circuit using
only NMOS and PMOS transistors. At this level, understanding the overall functionality of
a bigger circuit can still be a challenge, which also makes it impractical during the design
phase. Meanwhile, it does give the benefit of getting a better understanding of what is
actually happening in smaller areas of a design, as it is very close to the actual physical de-
sign. By combining sections of transistors, the gate-level representation can be achieved.
Gates implement a specific functionality, either combinational (AND, OR, INVERT, etc.),
or sequential (latches, flip-flops, etc.). The gates can then be used to describe the logical
function of a circuit, without needing knowledge of transistor implementations or physical
layout. This does come with the downside that a gate-level description can mostly be
used for logic simulation and functional verification. The final level is the cell-level, which
uses standard cells instead of gates.
A standard cell is a well defined and well characterized block of hardware implementing a
certain functionality. This can be as simple as implementing an AND gate, but also more
complex functionalities like an AND-OR-INVERT or an OR-AND-INVERT. They can also
implement sequential functionalities, such as latches or flip-flops, which often have both
a scan and non-scan version. Scan cells and scan architecture will be explained in Sec-
tion 3.3. Standard cells are specific to a certain manufacturing process, and are provided
by the process manufacturer. The benefit of using standard cells is that it releases the
burden of classifying a circuit to ensure correct timing, as this information is a part of a
standard cell library.
In Tessent, a standard cell has anATPG description. This description is the logical function
of the standard cell, which is used for simulations. The description can either consist of
predefined primitives, or instances of other standard cell definitions [15]. This makes it
easy to create different variations of cells, without needing to write each of them from the
beginning.
3.2
Circuit Testability
When creating test patterns for a circuit, it can be very helpful to know how easily a certain
signal line can be set to either 0 or 1 by the primary inputs, and how easily the resulting
value can can be propagated to a primary output. This is where testability analysis is
useful, as it provides a measure for how easily each signal is controlled by the primary
inputs and observed by primary outputs [3, p. 40].
One testability analysis technique is the Sandia Controllability/Observability Analysis Pro-
gram (SCOAP), which performs the testability analysis by analyzing the topology of the
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
7
==PAGE:18==
circuit and calculating the controllability and observability of each signal line. The con-
trollability measure reflects the difficulty of setting a signal line to the needed value, and
ranges from 1 to infinity, with 1 being the controllability of the primary inputs. The observ-
ability measure reflects the difficulty of propagating the desired logic value from the signal
line to a primary output, and ranges from 0 to infinity, with 0 being the observability of the
primary outputs [3, pp. 40–41].
In SCOAP there are six different values being calculated for each signal line in the circuit,
three combinational testability measures and three sequential testability measures. These
describe the ability to set a signal line to 0, 0-controllability, the ability to set a signal line
to 1, 1-controllability, and the observability of the signal line [3, p. 41].
A signal line far from the primary inputs, will likely have a relatively high controllability
measure, meaning that it is more difficult to control the logical value of it. Likewise, sig-
nal lines far from the primary outputs, will also likely have a relatively high observability
measure, meaning that the logical value of the signal line is more difficult to propagate to
a primary output. An example can be seen in [3, pp. 42–43].
3.3
Test Architecture
To enable more effective testing of a large sequential circuit, the sequential design is
turned into a scan design. Scan design involves converting selected storage elements
into scan cells [3, p. 53]. In most cases, this is done by adding a multiplexer (MUX) to the
data input of a D flip-flop (DFF) to select between the regular input and the scan input, as
seen in Figure 3.1. This type of scan cell is called the muxed-D scan cell, where the scan
enable (SE) signal is used to select between the data input (DIN) and the scan input (SI)
[3, p. 55].
Figure 3.1: Implementation of
muxed-D scan cell, with a multi-
plexer connected to the data in-
put of a DFF.
Scan cells alone do not make it easier to test a large
circuit, as having one primary input for each scan
cell would very quickly become infeasible. Instead,
the scan cells are connected such that the scan out-
put (SO) is connected to the SI input of another scan
cell, while still being connected to the correct part of
the circuit. This configuration is called a scan chain,
and enables any test pattern to be shifted into the
scan cells, as well as any test response to be shifted
out of the scan cells [3, p. 53].
3.4
Fault Modeling
To know if a defective circuit is distinguishable from
a good circuit, the effect of physical defects need
to be known. As defects can manifest in many dif-
ferent ways, fault modeling is used to create an ab-
straction of the physical defects, which also eases the task of evaluating the test patterns
used. Fault modeling can also be useful for classifying fault effects in different ways to
know which faults are testable and which are not.
3.4.1
Fault Models
As not all faults behave in the same way, different fault models target different types of fault
effects from physical defects. There are two main categories of faults being targeted by the
models, static faults and dynamic faults. Static faults change the circuit logic permanently
and can be discovered at any speed. Dynamic faults only change the circuit function
8
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:19==
temporarily, like changing the delay leading to setup and hold-time violations. These faults
can only be discovered using the clocking speed of the circuit.
Stuck-at Faults
The stuck-at fault model describes a point in the circuit being a constant 0 or 1, noted
stuck-at-0 (SA0) and stuck-at-1 (SA1) respectively [3, p. 12]. Even though multiple stuck-
at faults could be present at the same time, it is most common to use the single stuck-at
(SSA) fault model, as it reduces the number of faults being considered.
Definition 4.4 in [16, p. 71] says:
”Definition 4.4 Single stuck-at fault. Three properties (or assumptions) char-
acterize a single stuck-at fault:
1. Only one line is faulty.
2. The faulty line is permanently set to either 0 or 1.
3. The fault can be at an input or output of a gate.
”
To detect a SSA fault, one needs to 1) set the faulty line to the opposite value of the
fault and 2) set the remaining outputs such that the fault effect is propagated to a primary
output.
Figure 3.2: Example of stuck-
at-1 fault on AND gate input
In Figure 3.2, the A input of an AND gate is SA1.
This will give rise to a faulty output of 1, when the
A input is set to 0 and the B input is set to 1. This
shows the importance of satisfying both of the two
detection conditions mentioned above, as the in-
put combination 00 sets the faulty line to the cor-
rect value, but the fault effect is blocked by the B
input being set to 0. With the input combination 11,
B is now set to 1 allowing the fault effect to propa-
gate, but since the faulty line is set to the same value
as the fault, the resulting output is indistinguishable
from the correct value. Hence, only the input com-
bination 01 is able to successfully detect the fault.
Transistor Faults
Transistor faults are faults on specific transistors in a gate, as opposed to the stuck-at
model that only operate on the gate itself. A transistor can either be stuck-open or stuck-
short.
The stuck-open/stuck-short fault model, models defects which cause a transistor to be
either permanently not conducting or permanently conducting respectively.
A stuck-short fault causes the faulty transistor to be permanently conducting, even when
it should be in a non-conducting state. This can cause a short circuit between the supply
voltage (VDD) and ground (GND). This ends up creating a voltage divider at the output
node, with the voltage level being a function of the resistances of the conducting transis-
tors. This voltage might not be interpreted as an incorrect logic level, however the fault can
be detected by measuring the amount of current drawn by the circuit, using test methods
called IDDQ and IDDT testing [3, p. 15], which will be explained in Section 3.5.1.
A stuck-open fault causes the faulty transistor to be permanently turned off. These faults
can cause sequential behavior in the circuit, and as such they require a certain sequence
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
9
==PAGE:20==
of test patterns to be detected [17]. To detect a stuck-open fault in an NMOS (PMOS), an
initializing pattern setting the output to 1 (0) needs to be applied, followed by test pattern
establishing a path through the NMOS (PMOS) being tested. If the output becomes 0
(1) the tested NMOS (PMOS) is not stuck-open, otherwise the output will remain at 1 (0)
with the output node being at a high impedance (Z) state. The defined logical value on
the output in the Z state comes from the load on the output and stray capacitances, like
parasitic capacitance from the transistors [18].
The stuck-open and stuck-short fault of an NMOS transistor, can be modeled as an SA0
and SA1 fault on the gate terminal respectively. The opposite is true for a PMOS transistor,
where stuck-open is an SA1 fault on the gate terminal and stuck-short is an SA0 fault on
the gate terminal.
Bridging Faults
Figure 3.3:
Bridging fault be-
tween two lines (From [3, p. 17])
When manufacturing a chip, sometimes extra ma-
terial ends up creating a connection between two
elements causing a short between them. This is re-
ferred to as a bridging fault, as the extra material
is creating a bridge between the elements, see Fig-
ure 3.3 where As and Bs denote source lines and Ad
and Bd denote the destination of the related source.
If an element, such as an input wire of a gate, is
shorted to VDD or GND, the fault is equivalent to
either an SA1 or SA0 respectively. If, on the other
hand, two signal wires are shorted, a model for the
bridging fault is required.
The simplest model for determining the output val-
ues of a bridging fault, is the wired-AND/wired-OR model [3, p. 17]. The logical value on
the shorted net is modeled as either a logical AND or a logical OR. For the wired-AND
model sets the logical value of the shorted net to 0 if one of the source lines are 0, while
the wired-OR model sets the logical value of the shorted net to 1 if one of the source lines
are 1 [3, p. 17]. These faults can be modeled with an additional AND or OR gate, which
can be seen in Figure 3.4a.
The wired-AND/wired-OR model does not accurately reflect the behavior of bridging faults
that are typically found in CMOS circuits, as it was originally developed for bipolar VLSI
and not CMOS VLSI. For this reason the dominant bridging fault model was proposed
[3, p. 18]. For the dominant bridging fault model, one driver is assumed to dominate the
logic value of the shorted nets. This means that the dominant source line determines the
logical value of the shorted nets, as if the other source was not connected. This makes
the dominant bridging fault more difficult to detect, as the faulty behavior can only be
observed on the dominated net, which will have no influence on the logical value of the
output [3, p. 18]. This effect can be seen in Figure 3.4b
The dominant bridging fault model has a different problem, as it does not always accu-
rately reflect the behavior of a resistive short. For this the dominant-AND/dominant-OR
fault model is proposed [3, p. 18]. This model is a combination of the previous two models,
where the dominant line is unaffected by the short, but the dominated line is determined
by either a logical AND or a logical OR, see Figure 3.4c. This model has four differ-
ent fault types for a single fault location, but has the advantage that if all four dominant-
AND/dominant-OR bridging faults are detected by a test pattern set, it means that the test
patterns will also detect all dominant bridging faults and all wired-AND/wired-OR faults at
10
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:21==
that fault location [3, p. 18].
Wired-AND
Wired-OR
(a) Wired-AND/wired-OR model
A dominating B
B dominating A
(b) Dominant bridging model
A dominant-AND B
A dominant-OR B
B dominant-AND A
B dominant-OR A
(c) Dominant-AND/dominant-OR model
Figure 3.4: Different bridging fault models (Figure 1.9 in [3, p. 17])
Transition Delay Faults
The transition delay fault model, describes physical defects that either delays a rising tran-
sition or a falling transition. For these transitions, the slow-to-rise transition fault describes
a delay in the rising transition, while the slow-to-fall transition fault describes a delay in
the falling transition. Like with stuck-at faults the transition delay faults occur on the inputs
and outputs of gates. The effect of the faults can be described as a temporary SA0 or
SA1 fault for the slow-to-rise and slow-to-fall faults respectively [19].
To test a transition delay fault two test patterns are required, an initialization pattern and
a transition propagation pattern. The initialization pattern makes sure the fault site is set
to the initial transition value, i.e., 0 for a slow-to-rise fault and 1 for a slow-to-fall fault.
The transition propagation pattern makes the transition at the fault site and propagates
the fault effect to a primary output. The primary output is measured at a certain time
interval after the primary inputs changed. A delay fault which is at least as large as the
time between the input change and the output measurement is detectable [19].
User-Defined Fault Modeling
User-defined fault models (UDFMs) is a file format in Tessent, which allows for definitions
of custom fault models. This includes the cell-aware testing, which uses UDFMs to define
all cell-aware faults for the standard cells in a standard cell library. They are also used
for gate exhaustive testing, as further definitions are needed to force the test pattern
generation to create patterns with all input combinations, and not just those that target
specific faults [20].
To create a UDFM file, one or more UDFM types should be defined. The UDFM type is a
string which is used as an identifier for the faults that are defined within the scope of the
type. The identifier is used to enable targeting specific types of faults, when investigating
the faults in the circuit. The faults can be defined for either a cell, module or instance in
the circuit. For cells and modules, the faults will be applied to all instances of the specified
cell or module, while instances only target one specific element. Then the fault is specified
with an identifier string, which specifies which fault is being considered. For each fault,
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
11
==PAGE:22==
one or more tests must be specified as either a static fault or a delay fault, where the
faulty value is specified and optionally also the fault-free value separated by a /. Finally
conditions for detecting the fault can be specified, though they are not required, as some
instance in a circuit might have a constant value and will be faulty if it is a different value,
no matter the input combinations [20].
3.4.2
Fault Classification
Once all faults for a specific circuit have been modeled, it is possible to determine if there
are faults that will not be detectable due to the circuit configuration. Therefore, two main
classes of faults will be discussed, the testable and untestable faults, where testable
faults are those for which a test that detects the fault can be created, and untestable
faults are those for which no test which detects the fault can be created [21].
Under the category of untestable faults, there are faults that have no impact on the logical
output of the circuit, making them not only untestable but also do not matter for the correct
operation of the circuit. These faults are known as redundant.
Redundant faults are faults that have no impact on the logical output of the circuit under
any circumstance. Some faults can only be classified as redundant when all input combi-
nations show that the faults has no impact on the logical output of the circuit [22]. Other
faults can be classified as redundant by analyzing the circuit construction. These faults
are often easy to identify [23] and can be classified as either unused, tied, or blocked,
which are the classifications used by Tessent.
Unused faults are faults on circuitry that is not connected to any primary output of the
circuit or other observation point such as a scan chain input. This can, for example, be
the inverted output of a DFF, if only the non-inverted output is needed.
Figure 3.5: Example of tied cir-
cuitry. The output of the AND
gate will always be 0.
Tied faults are faults on circuitry that is tied to the
same value as the fault value. An example of tied
circuitry is an AND gate with one input inverted,
where both the inverted and non-inverted input is
driven by the same value, see Figure 3.5. The out-
put of this gate will always be 0, so if there is a SA0
fault at this location it is a tied fault. The same goes
for faults that would cause the tied circuitry to obtain
the same value as the tied value. In Figure 3.5, this
would be if the fault SA0 was present on any of the
inputs on the AND gate or the output of the inverter,
or if the fault SA1 was present on the input of the
inverter.
Blocked faults are faults where the fault effect cannot be propagated to a primary output
or scan chain input, due to other tied circuitry. This can be if an AND gate has one input
which has been directly connected to ground. Then any fault on the other input would be
blocked.
3.5
Test Pattern Generation
The test patterns required for detecting various faults, can be created in many different
ways. These include creating test patterns for specific circuit functionality, or targeting
specific fault effects, current draw, or timing. This is often done using an automatic test
pattern generation (ATPG) tool, which uses fault models to generate test patterns that are
efficient at detecting the targeted faults.
12
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:23==
3.5.1
IDDQ And IDDT Test Generation
IDDQ testing involves measuring the supply current (IDD) of the circuit in the quiescent
state, meaning no switching activity in the circuit and all primary inputs are held at a con-
stant value. IDDQ testing is useful for detecting faults which might otherwise go unnoticed
by standard logic tests [24]. In the quiescent state, a fault-free circuit dissipates almost
no static current and its leakage current is negligible. On the other hand, in the case of
a defect such as a gate-oxide short, causing a stuck-short fault, a conducting path from
VDD to GND forms and the circuit dissipates significantly more current [25]. Therefore, by
measuring the supply current it is possible to distinguish between a faulty and fault-free
circuit.
IDDQ testing does come with the downside of being time-consuming, as the circuit needs
to stabilize after each test has been applied, which also leads to higher test cost [26].
Another problem is that in very deep submicron manufacturing technologies, the total
background leakage current is increasing sharply, making IDDQ testing less efficient [27].
For these reasons IDDT testing is used can be used as a compliment to other testing
methodologies. IDDT testing measures the transient supply current, as an indication of
the switching activity in the circuit. This way bridging faults that does not lead to a con-
ducting path from VDD to GND in the quiescent state, could be detected by examining the
transient supply current, as a conducting path from VDD to GND might appear temporarily
during switching, creating a visible spike in the transient supply current [28].
3.5.2
Functional Test Generation
Functional testing involves testing for the functionality of a combinational circuit, by check-
ing every entry of the truth table for the circuit and checking if it produces the correct
response. This method of test is considered to be testing the circuit as thoroughly as pos-
sible in a system-like mode of operation [3, p. 10]. Due to functional tests being derived
from the functional model of the circuit, they can be also be used as design verification
tests, ensuring that the implementation of the circuit is free from design errors [29, p. 305].
Though, since functional tests are created from the functional model of the circuit, there
is a lack of a quantitative measure for the test patterns effectiveness at detecting defects
in the circuit [3, p. 10].
3.5.3
Exhaustive And Pseudo-Exhaustive Test Generation
Exhaustive testing involves, for a combinational circuit, to apply all possible input patterns
to the primary inputs of the circuit. If the circuit has n primary inputs, this means applying
2n test patterns. This means that the actual applicability of exhaustive testing is fairly
limited, once n gets large.
Instead pseudo-exhaustive testing can be used, which consist of partitioning the circuit in
such a way that each part can be exhaustively tested.
For a circuit with multiple primary outputs, where no primary output depends on all primary
inputs, the exhaustive test can be performed for the primary inputs feeding each primary
output. This limits the exponent of each section, leading to less test patterns being applied
to the circuit [29, p. 313]. Some tests can even be done at the same time, if multiple
primary outputs depend on a unique subset of primary inputs.
If the circuit has only one primary output, or one or more of the primary outputs depends
on all primary inputs, then the previous partitioning technique is not applicable. Even for
circuits, where no primary output depends on all primary inputs, the pseudo-exhaustive
test set might still become too large to be practical, when the number of primary outputs
is relatively small compared to the number of primary inputs. In such cases, the circuit
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
13
==PAGE:24==
can be partitioned into smaller segments, where the number of inputs for each segment is
significantly smaller than the number of primary inputs [29, p. 314]. Though this technique
does come with some problems, as described in [29, p. 314]:
”The main problem with this technique is that, in general, the inputs of a seg-
ment are not PIs and its outputs are not POs. Then we need a means to control
the segment inputs from the PIs and to observe its outputs at the POs.”
To achieve control over the inputs and outputs of the segments, is to use sensitized par-
titioning, which is relies on path sensitization from the primary inputs to the inputs of the
segments, and from the outputs of the segments to the primary outputs of the circuit [29,
p. 314].
3.5.4
Random Test Generation
Random test generation involves creating test patterns by randomly generating logic val-
ues at the primary inputs, with an equal probability of choosing either a logic 0 or logic
1. Due to this, random test generation is one of the simplest methods for generating test
patterns, though the random test set is not truly random, as a pseudo-random number
generator is often used [3, p. 163].
The quality of a random test set is highly dependant on the circuit the test patterns are
being generated for. Some circuits contain faults that are very difficult to test, if the test
patterns are not created to target the specific fault. One example of this, as illustrated in
[3, p. 163], is a circuit containing an 8-input AND gate. If the output of the AND gate is
SA0, the only test pattern that would test this fault is for all inputs to be set to 1. Since the
probability of of setting each input to either 0 or 1 is equal, the probability of all inputs being
set to 1 is a 1 in 256 chance. These types of faults are called random-pattern resistant
faults [3, p. 163].
3.5.5
Structural Test Generation
Structural testing involves selecting test patterns based on the structural model of the
circuit, and a set of fault models. The test patterns created using structural testing, target
specific faults that could be caused by manufacturing defects. However, structural testing
is not able to guarantee detection of all manufacturing defects, as the test patterns are
generated based on a specific fault model. Though, since fault models are being used, it
is possible to get a quantitative measure for the effectiveness of the created test patterns,
when it comes to detecting the modeled faults [3, p. 10]. This is described further in
Section 3.6.1.
3.5.6
At-Speed Test Generation
At-speed testing is used for finding defects leading to higher delay in the circuit. At-speed
testing using the transition fault model presented in Section 3.4.1, apply, or launch, the
transition propagation test pattern and measure, or capture, the response at the same
speed as the circuit clock frequency [30].
For scan-based designs, two methods for performing at-speed test are often considered.
These are launch-off-shift and launch-off-capture. Launch-off-shift uses the last shift to
launch the required transition test pattern and then captures the response at the correct
time. To enable the capture of the circuit response, the SE signal needs to be 0 at the
time of capture. As the SE signal needs to be 1 to perform the last shift, the SE signal
timing critical becomes timing critical [31].
This is addressed by launch-off-capture, which instead shifts in the initialization test pat-
tern and then uses the circuit response to create the transition test pattern. This means
14
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:25==
that after the first test pattern has been shifted into the scan chain, there is no timing re-
quirement on the SE signal. Then two at-speed clock pulses are used to first launch the
created transition test pattern and then capture the response [30]. However, this method
does come with the drawback of having less control over the transition test pattern, due
to the dependency on the circuit response, which can lead to less faults being possible to
target [32].
3.6
Test Evaluation
Once a set of test patterns has been created, the effectiveness of the test patterns to
detect the modeled faults needs to be evaluated. If this is not done, there is no way
to know if the created test pattern set is able to detect the faults being modeled, which
means that it is uncertain whether or not it is possible to identify defective chips. For this a
numerical evaluation is done, based on simulations of the fault-free circuit and the circuit
in the presence of faults.
3.6.1
Coverage
To get a numerical evaluation of the chosen test pattern set, fault models are used to see
how many of the modeled faults would be detected by the test pattern set. This measure
is called fault coverage (FC) and is calculated as seen in Equation (3.1) [3, p. 10].
Fault coverage = Detected faults
Total faults
(3.1)
As previously explained, not all faults are testable, often meaning they will have lesser to
no impact on circuit performance. This means that when using Equation (3.1), it will not
be possible to get fault coverage of 1, or even one high enough to be satisfactory. For
this the effective fault coverage is used, which only considers the testable faults, and is
calculated as seen in Equation (3.2) [3, p. 10].
Effective fault coverage =
Detected faults
Total faults −undetectable faults
(3.2)
The effective fault coverage will for the rest of this report be referred to as test coverage
(TC), as this is the terminology used by the ATPG tool, and FC and TC will be described
in percentages. One difference being that the ATPG tool will include ATPG untestable
faults in the total faults, but not in the undetectable faults. An ATPG untestable fault is a
fault for which the tool cannot find a test which detects the fault, but also cannot classify it
as one of the previously described untestable faults. The ATPG tool also has a measure
for possible-detected faults, which are faults where fault-free simulation observes either
a 0 or 1, while the fault simulation observes an X. These faults are added to the detected
faults with a credit of 50 % [20]. This means that possible detected faults provide a positive
impact on the TC, while an ATPG untestable fault will provide a negative impact on the
TC.
Using Equations (3.1) to (3.2), it is possible to evaluate the effectiveness of a given test
pattern set to detect the modeled faults.
3.6.2
Fault Simulation
To be able to know if a test pattern detects a fault, the circuit is simulated with the test
pattern, both fault-free simulation and in the presence of faults. When a circuit is simulated
in the presence of faults, it is known as fault simulation. These simulations can then be
compared, to determine which faults are detected by the test pattern [29, p. 131].
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
15
==PAGE:26==
Fault simulation is often used during ATPG to continuously evaluate the generated test
pattern set and continue pattern generation until the TC is considered satisfactory [29,
pp. 131–132], see Figure 3.6a. This can be done in different ways, either by generating
random test patterns and only keeping the ones that contribute to the coverage, or by
generating test patterns for a specific fault and then simulating the pattern to find all faults
detected by the pattern, and continuing until all faults are detected. This method is know
as fault-oriented test pattern generation [29, p. 133], see Figure 3.6b.
(a) Use of fault simulation in general test pat-
tern generation (Figure 5.2 in [29, p. 132])
(b) Use of fault simulation in fault-oriented test
pattern generation (Figure 5.3 in [29, p. 133])
Figure 3.6: Overview of fault simulation uses in test pattern generation
For different fault models, the effectiveness of the generated test pattern sets can be diffi-
cult to compare, as the TC is calculated based on the modeled faults, which are different
for different fault models. To get a fair comparison between test patterns created for dif-
ferent fault models, a comparison fault model is chosen and the generated test patterns
are simulated on the faults from the chosen fault model. For this it is important to note
that to get the most accurate results, the fault models used for pattern generation should
all fall in the same category, i.e., static or dynamic. This is due to the difference in timing
requirements and patterns needed for the different faults, as static faults have no timing
requirements and often only require a single pattern to be detected, while dynamic faults
depend on the timing and will almost always require two sequential patterns to be de-
tected. This does mean that patterns generated using a dynamic fault model will likely
have some success in detecting static faults, while patterns generated using a static fault
model will have little to no success in detecting dynamic faults.
In this project, fault simulation will be used to compare test pattern sets generated on
different static fault models, when they are simulated on cell-aware faults, and will be
referred to as fault grading. This is to get a fair comparison, even between stuck-at faults
generated on different abstraction levels, as the ATPG tool sometimes has difficulty in
correctly classifying faults on lower abstraction levels, which leads to a lower TC.
16
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:27==
4
Implementation Flow
For this project, the 24 nm example standard cell library retrieved with CellModelGen will
be used, as this library has been characterized for cell-aware testing. Microchip has
provided a design block to use for running coverage tests, which is described using a
28 nm cell library. This means that in order to use this design, all standard cells used in it
will need to be replaced with an equivalent cell from the 24 nm library.
Figure 4.1: Translation flow used in the
project
As the 24 nm standard cell library is only
meant as an example, it is relatively small
when compared with a regular standard
cell library, which means it does not con-
tain all the cells used in the 28 nm de-
sign. Therefore, these cells need to be im-
plemented in such a way that the design
can utilize the cell-aware characterization
of the 24 nm cell library.
The 28 nm de-
sign then needs to have every cell used
in the design replaced with one from the
24 nm library, which is logically equivalent
to the replaced cell. This replacement will
be verified, to ensure the cells have been
replaced correctly, and that the circuit still
has the same logical functionality. After-
wards transistor models of the combina-
tional cells can be created, based on the
SPICE models included in the 24 nm stan-
dard cell library. These will then also be
verified, to ensure expected logical behav-
ior from each cell. Asummarized version of
the translation flow used during this project
can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
17
==PAGE:28==
4.1
Implementation of Missing Cells
Figure 4.2: Missing cell implementation
stage
In the missing cell implementation stage
of the process, see Figure 4.2, the cells
needed for the design which are missing
from the 24 nm cell library need to be im-
plemented. These cells need to be imple-
mented in a way, such that it will be possi-
ble to run get cell-aware faults on all cells
used in the design.
Initially, the cells were implemented by cre-
ating a SPICE model of all the missing
combinational cells by hand, and creating
a model template in the ATPG input file
used for the script described in Section 4.4.
Both combinational and sequential cells
were also implemented using gate primi-
tives, to have both a transistor model and
a gate model for comparison purposes.
This approach was later discarded, as the
newly created models did not have all the
files necessary to generate the cell-aware
fault model for the created cells.
This
meant that these cells would not be be
faulted, which would lead to less accurate
results.
After the first attempt was discarded, the
cells were implemented by using instances
of existing cells in the library. This should
mean that only the cells from the 24 nm li-
brary were relevant for the cell-aware fault-
ing.
This turned out to not be true, as
the cells were only recognized by their top
level name, and not by which cells they
were instances of.
Even when internal
faulting was turned on, the created cells
showed up as not having a UDFM defini-
tion. This means that the ATPG tool does
not have any fault information on these
cells from the UDFM files that have been previously loaded. As a result, this approach
was also discarded.
The final approach to implementing the missing cells, was to create the cells as modules
in the design. This is done during the cell replacement stage and will be described in
Section 4.2.
18
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:29==
4.2
Cell Replacement
Figure 4.3: Cell replacement stage
In the cell replacement stage of Figure 4.3,
all 28 nm standard cells used in the design
needed to be replaced by a logically equiv-
alent standard cell from the 24 nm library.
In the 28 nm design, there are multiple
versions of the same cells, utilizing differ-
ent drive strengths and transistor threshold
voltages. Due to this project only focusing
on simulation, all cells with the same logi-
cal function will be replaced with the same
cell from the 24 nm library.
The first step is to create a list of the cells
that need to be replaced. This is due to
the fact that the design includes RAM cells,
which are not part of the base 28 nm cell
library. Therefore, the list ends up contain-
ing the names of all cells used in the de-
sign, except for the RAM cells.
This list is then used to create a dictionary,
see Figure 4.4, where the key is name of
cell in the 28 nm library and the value is
the name of the 24 nm cell it should be re-
placed with, Figure 4.4a. For cells that do
not have a logical equivalent in the 24 nm
library the value is instead a cell creation
list, Figure 4.4b, which is a set with the
structure
• module_name
• input_ports
• output_ports
• internal_gates
• internal_connections
where module_name is the name the cell
should have, input_ports is a list of the
inputs on the cell, output_ports is a list of
outputs on the cell, internal_gates is a
list of gates needed to build the cell, and internal_connections is a set of lists describ-
ing the internal connections in the cell. To be able to create the cell, each internal gate
needs to have an instance name and gate type. This means that the structure of each
element in internal_gates is
• instance_name
• module
The syntax of the cell creation list then becomes
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
19
==PAGE:30==
1
[module_name {input_ports} {output_ports} {internal_gates_list} {
internal_connections}]
, or
1
[module_name {input_ports} {output_ports} {{instance_name module}} {{from_list
} {to_list}}]
when internal_gates and internal_connections are expanded.
(a) Dictionary structure for 28 nm cells with corresponding 24 nm cell
(b) Dictionary structure for 28 nm cells without corresponding 24 nm cell
Figure 4.4: Dictionary structure
After the dictionary has been created, every instance in the design is checked for whether
it is an instance of a ram cell or part of the base 28 nm library. If it is part of the 28 nm
library, the cell is looked up in the created dictionary. If the value for the 28 nm cell is only
one element, an instance of the 24 nm cell is created, with the name being the same as the
28 nm instance appended with ”_conv” to indicate it has been converted to a 24 nm cell.
All connections from the original instance are then disconnected and then reconnected
with the converted instance. Once that is done, the original instance is deleted from the
design.
If the value for the 28 nm cell is more than one element, it means that this cell needs to be
created. This is done by creating an empty module with the module name ”module_name”
from the cell creation list, and then creating an instance of it in the same way as the other
cells. Once the empty module has an instance, the input ports and output ports listed in
the cell creation list can be added to the module. Then all internal gates are created as
instances below the created instance to build the cell. Lastly the internal connections are
20
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:31==
created, and the instance can be connected to the design in the same way as before.
Once a module of a certain type has been created, new instances can be created of the
same module, without having to create the module from scratch for every instance of it.
It is worth noting that while the 24 nm library does have an ATPG description for the cell
DFFQRNSN, which is a DFF with active-low set and reset, it does not have the required
files to create a cell-aware fault model for this cell. This ends up affecting 23 instances in
the design, so this is not considered a problem.
Once all instances in the design have been checked and converted, the new design can
be saved and used in ATPG.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
21
==PAGE:32==
4.3
Library Translation Verification
Figure 4.5: Translation verification stage
In the translation verification stage of Fig-
ure 4.5, the correctness of the translation
needs to be checked. It is done to make
sure that the functionality of the design is
still the same as the original and that the
translation has been done correctly.
This is done by running stuck-at ATPG on
both designs and comparing their test cov-
erage, as they should be relatively close to
each other if the translation has been done
successfully.
When running stuck-at ATPG on the orig-
inal design, the TC is 99.43 %, while the
converted design has a TC of 98.78 %.
This may seem like a significant difference,
but it is due to the way the missing cells
have been implemented. Because regu-
lar stuck-at ATPG is performed on the in-
puts and outputs of cells, the missing cells
are technically internally faulted. This can
also be seen on the fault count, as the orig-
inal design has 7,807,391 faults, while the
converted design has 11,138,122. When
adding faults to the gates of the cells, it is
more difficult for the ATPG tool to generate
a test that specifically targets one of the
internal faults, without it leading to being
blocked by something else. For this rea-
son it is expected to see a slight drop in the
stuck-at TC, as this means the design is
only made up of gates which are character-
ized for cell-aware faults. The full stuck-at
statistics reports for the original design and
the converted design can be found in Ap-
pendix A.1 and Appendix A.2 respectively.
22
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:33==
4.4
Transistor Model Creation
Figure 4.6:
Transistor model creation
stage
In the transistor model creation stage of
Figure 4.6, the transistor models for the
combinational cells needs to be created, in
order to be used in test pattern generation.
For this, a Python script has been created,
which reads the files with the definitions for
all cells in the 24 nm library and writes the
new definitions to new files. When it en-
counters a combinational cell, it replaces
the body of the ATPG description with a
description made from _nmos and _pmos
primitives.
This is done by reading the
SPICE model for the cell provided with the
cell library, and using this data to create the
correctly implement the transistor-level de-
scription of the standard cell, in the same
way which is used for cell-aware charac-
terization. The full script can be found in
Appendix B.2.
For setup, the script defines the relative
path to the directory containing the orig-
inal standard cell library definitions, the
directory where the new standard cell li-
brary definitions go, and the directory for
the SPICE models of the cells. It also de-
fines a variable for whether or not a com-
binational cell has been written, to ensure
that the description is being created cor-
rectly. It then reads in a file, which contains
the names of all cells in the 24 nm library,
see Listing 4.1. The original standard cell
descriptions are needed as they contain
the correct pin names, as well as any set-
tings for the pins. This information remains
unchanged for the transistor-level descrip-
tion, so it can be copied directly, making
the task of automation much simpler.
1
written = False
2
src_dir = "../atpg/"
3
models = open("../scripts/all.cells", "r")
4
dest_dir = "atpg/"
5
spice_dir = "../spice/"
Listing 4.1: Initial setup for the Python script.
Once the setup is complete, the script reads the ”models” file line by line and checks if it
contains ”X1”. If it does not, that model is skipped and the next line in the ”models” file
is read. This check is done because the 24 nm contains multiple models for each cell,
e.g., AND2_X1 and AND2_X2, which are used to have different transistor sizes and drive
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
23
==PAGE:34==
strengths for the same cell. As the new library will only be used in simulation, it is not
necessary to have different versions of the cells, therefore only the cells with ”X1” in their
name will be considered, see line 1 to 4 in Listing 4.2. If the model name does contain
”X1”, the source file containing the original ATPG description for that model is opened, as
well as the destination file where the new description will be written to. The model name
is then checked to determine if the cell is a combinational cell or a sequential cell. If the
model name contains either ”DFF”, ”SFF” or ”LATCH” it means that the cell is a sequential
cell, which is then simply copied from the source file to the destination file, see line 7 to
10 in Listing 4.2.
1
for model_name in models:
2
model = model_name.strip() #Removes new line symbol from the end of the
line
3
if "X1" not in model:
4
continue
5
src = open(src_dir + model + ".atpg", "r")
6
dest = open(dest_dir + model + ".atpg", "w")
7
if "DFF" in model or "SFF" in model or "LATCH" in model:
8
for line in src:
9
dest.write(line)
10
else:
Listing 4.2: Cell version and type check
If the model is a combinational cell, the source file is checked to see when a line contains
the string "primitive", as this indicates the body of the standard cell description, which
should be replaced with the transistor description. Then, if the currently considered model
has not already been written, two lines are added at the beginning to define VDD and VSS.
The SPICE model for the cell is then opened and read line by line. When a line contains
the string "MOS", the line is split into the needed data, this being the name, drain, gate,
source and type of transistor. The name is used to for uniquification of the transistor
primitives, as this is needed to add fault locations to the terminals of the transistor. The
transistor type is then checked to see if the transistor is an nmos or a pmos, and inserting
the corresponding primitive. When the script reaches the end of the SPICE file, the file
is closed and the written variable is set to true, which skips any line containing the
string "primitive". This is done to prevent the script from writing the transistor definition
multiple times, as some of the more complex cells contain multiple primitives. If the line
does not contain the string "primitive", it is written to the destination file without being
modified, see Listing 4.3.
1
for line in src:
2
if "primitive" in line:
3
if not written:
4
dest.write("
primitive = _tie1 mlc_tie1_1 (VDD);\n")
5
dest.write("
primitive = _tie0 mlc_tie0_1 (VSS);\n")
6
spice = open(spice_dir + model + ".spi", "r")
7
for tran in spice:
8
if "MOS" in tran:
9
mos_data = tran.split()
10
name = mos_data[0]
11
drain = mos_data[1]
12
gate = mos_data[2]
13
source = mos_data[3]
14
mos_type = mos_data[5]
15
if "NMOS" in mos_type:
16
dest.write("
primitive = _nmos mlc_nmos_" + name +
" (" + source + "," + gate + "," + drain + ")";\n"
)
24
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:35==
17
if "PMOS" in mos_type:
18
dest.write("
primitive = _pmos mlc_pmos_" + name +
" (" + source + "," + gate + "," + drain + ")";\n"
)
19
written = True
20
spice.close()
21
continue
22
dest.write(line)
Listing 4.3: Combinatorial cell transistor description creation
Lastly, once the original model description has been read, the variable written is set
back to being false and both the source and destination files are closed. Once the script
reaches the end of the models file, the file is closed and the new transistor level ATPG cell
library has been created in the defined destination folder.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
25
==PAGE:36==
4.5
Transistor Functionality Verification
Figure 4.7:
Transistor implementation
verification stage.
The final stage of the process (Figure 4.7)
is to verify that the created transistor mod-
els work as intended.
To verify the correctness of the transistor
models, the combinational cells in the de-
sign will be replaced with their transistor-
level counterpart, one cell type at a time.
This is done by loading in the transis-
tor ATPG cell description of the desired
cell, after the general cell library has been
loaded in, as the ATPG tool uses the de-
scription loaded in last.
The first cell type tested was the 2-input
NOR gate cell NOR2. When inserted, the
design no longer passed all tests neces-
sary for being able to create test patterns.
When analyzing the failing tests, it was ob-
served that when the NOR2 cell got an X
value on one of the inputs, it would always
output an X, no matter what the value on
the other input was. A regular 2-input NOR
gate should always output a 0 when one of
the inputs is 1, even when the other input
is an X. This meant that the X value would
propagate through the logic, instead of be-
ing stopped early on as it was supposed
to. The X value comes from a primary in-
put which should have no influence on the
test, as the value from it would be stopped.
Therefore, the value of it is not set, which
simulates as an X.
To try and debug this problem, a Verilog
model using transistors was created for
the 2-input NOR gate, see Appendix B.1,
which was used to perform a Verilog simu-
lation to see whether this would give a dif-
ferent result. Running the Verilog simula-
tion showed correct functionality, where one input being 1 caused the output to be 0, even
when the other input was an X.
As the Verilog model simulated correctly, this model was used to generate the ATPG
description, using the tool Tessent LibComp. The generated ATPG description of the
NOR2 model was then inserted instead of the initially created model. This ended up
making no difference, as the X value was still being propagated through the gate, see
Figure 4.8.
Siemens EDAwas contacted to find a solution to this problem, which lead to the conclusion
that the problem lies in the bus analysis during design rule checks (DRC). This was found
as it was possible to implement a circuit consisting of a single 2-input NOR gate, which
26
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.8: Simulation model of the NOR2 cell, with simulation values from failing test
shown at the pins.
worked as it should. DRC is mostly done for larger circuits where test architecture has
been created by the Tessent tool.
The BUS component seen in Figure 4.8 is used, as multiple gates are driving the same
output. Bus analysis is used when the bus is driven by tri-state drivers (TSDs), which
includes transistors. In Figure 4.8 the transistors are implemented as switches, with an
inverter connected to the enable pin for PMOS transistors. When the enable pin of the
switch is set to X, it outputs an X regardless of the value on the data pin.
The bus analysis in Tessent can be set to either local analysis or global analysis. In
global analysis, when one or more of the bus inputs is X due to a TSD enable pin being
X, it assumes a consensus value, either 0 or 1, when data input values of the TSDs are
the same, and this value is being driven onto the bus. In local analysis, an X on one of
the TSD enable pins driving the bus, leads to an X being driven onto the bus regardless
of the value of the data input of the TSD [33].
By default global analysis is turned on, which means that in the case seen in Figure 4.8,
the bus should be driving a 0, as this is both being driven onto the bus, and is the data
input of the switch with X on its enable pin. As this happens during DRC and not when
creating a circuit small enough to not go through DRC, it is suspected that even when the
tool is set to use global analysis, it performs local analysis during DRC.
Once this was discovered, each combinational cells transistor implementation was tested,
and it was noted whether or not it passed DRC. Once all combinational cells had been
tested, the cells that caused the design to no longer pass DRC was analyzed closer, to
see if anything could be done to make them pass. One example was finding NOR gates
where one pin was connected to atpg_en as this pin is always 1 during testing. This
means that if any NOR gate with this input was causing the design to fail DRC due to
another pin being an X, the output of the NOR gate could be tied to 0 as it would always
be this value during testing. Alternatively, the design rule violations were analyzed and
when deemed to work correctly for pattern generation, the severity of the violation was
lowered to make more cells pass DRC.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
27
==PAGE:38==
Even with this effort there were still cells that were unable to have their transistor imple-
mentation added to the design, as a tie fix would result in altered circuit function, and
the remaining design rule violations could not have their severity changed. The cells that
could not be implemented have been sorted based on what design rule they violate, and
they are:
• R2 (Scan pins at the boundary of core instances could not be traced to the top level)
and R14 (Control pins at the boundary of a core instance could not be traced to the
top level)
– AND2
– MUX21
– OR2
• T3 (Scan path blocked)
– AOI22
– BUF
– INV
– NOR2, also T5 (Scan cell with unexpected clock event (X))
28
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:39==
5
Test Setup
To be able to compare the effectiveness of different models at different levels of abstrac-
tion, test patterns need to be generated for each method, in order to perform fault simu-
lation of cell-aware faults. This involves creating the needed UDFM files, namely one for
accurately generating patterns for SA0 and SA1 faults on the gates of NMOS and PMOS
transistors respectively and one for the gate exhaustive pattern generation.
Then the test patterns need to be generated for stuck-at faults at cell-level, gate-level and
transistor-level, for the created transistor UDFM, for the gate exhaustive UDFM, and for
cell-aware faults.
5.1
User Defined Fault Model Creation
As explained in Section 3.4.1, the stuck-open fault of the transistor behaves like an SA0
(SA1) fault for NMOS (PMOS) transistor gates. It is also noted that to detect a stuck-open
fault, a sequence of two patterns are needed to create the correct conditions for detection.
This requirement is not there for the stuck-at fault model [3, p. 15], so most ATPG tools
only generates single patterns when using the stuck-at fault model. This means that the
SA0 (SA1) faults on the transistor gates will be classified as ATPG untestable, as the
ATPG tool cannot find a single test pattern which can detect the fault. For this reason a
UDFM will be created for all possible stuck-open faults in the standard cells. Furthermore,
a UDFM for gate exhaustive testing will be generated, to test the impact of this fault model
on the detection of cell-aware faults, and compare the number of test patterns needed to
those of other models.
5.1.1
Transistor Gate Fault Model Creation
To ease the burden of creating the stuck-open UDFM, it is only done for the cells that can
have their transistor description inserted into the design. This means that even though
more combinational cells exist in the circuit they will not be described in the stuck-open
UDFM.
Figure 5.1: Transis-
tor implementation of
2-input NAND gate.
To create the definition for a cell, each transistor in the cell
needs to be examined, to find all conditions where the fault
would be detectable. For illustration, the creation of the UDFM
description for the 2-input NAND (NAND2) cell will be ex-
plained.
In Figure 5.1 shows the transistor-level implementation of the
NAND2 cell, with each transistor having a unique name. This
name is the same as the one they were given in Section 4.4,
when the SPICE file was read. This makes it easy to identify
which transistor that is being referenced and what fault is being
considered.
The first transistor being analyzed is M0. Looking at Figure 5.1,
if M0 has a SA0 fault at the gate terminal, the Z output will be
unable to change to 0. Due to the parasitic capacitance of the
transistors, the faulty value of the circuit is 1, while the fault-
free value would be 0. This is written in the UDFM as:
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
29
==PAGE:40==
1
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
To ensure that the test is targeting the SA0 fault on the gate of M0, the B input has to be
held at 1, while the A input changes from 0 to 1. This is written in the UDFM as:
1
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
This is the only test that specifically targets M0, as the gate input needs to change, in order
to target the fault. This means that the UDFM description for the M0 gate SA0 is:
1
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
2
Test {
3
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
4
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
5
}
6
}
The SA0 fault on the gate of M1 is almost identical to the one for M0, the only exception
being that the condition is flipped, such that A has to be held at 1, while B changes from
0 to 1. This means that the UDFM description for the SA0 fault on the gate of M1 is:
1
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
2
Test {
3
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
4
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01;}
5
}
6
}
It is important to note that even though the tests for M0 and M1 target a specific transistor,
by only switching one input, it is not possible to know if it is M0 or M1 that is faulty. This is
due to them being in series, so if one of them has an SA0 fault on the gate, this blocks
the GND signal from propagating, regardless of which transistor is faulty. Therefore, if the
gate of M0 is SA0, the test for M1 will also fail. This does come with the benefit of then
having to tests to see if one of either M0 or M1 has the gate SA0.
For M2 and M3, an SA1 fault on the gate will lead to the output being unable to become
1. This means that the faulty value of the circuit is 0, while the fault-free value is 1. For
these transistors it is important to only activate the one which is being tested. Otherwise,
if the gate of M2 is SA1, and both A and B are set to 0, the output Z will still become 1 as
M3 is creating the connection. Therefore, when testing for the gate of M2 SA1, B will have
to be held at 1, while A changes from 1 to 0. When testing for the gate of M3 Sa1, A will
have to be held at 1, while B changes from 1 to 0. This results in the UDFM description
for M2 and M3 being:
1
Fault ("M2-gate-sa1") {
2
Test {
3
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
4
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11;}
5
}
6
}
30
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:41==
7
Fault ("M3-gate-sa1") {
8
Test {
9
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
10
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10;}
11
}
12
}
Now that the UDFM definitions for all individual transistors have been created, these can
be combined to create the UDFM definition for the NAND2 cell, which can be seen in
Listing 5.1.
1
Cell ("NAND2_X1") {
2
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
3
Test {
4
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
5
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
6
}
7
}
8
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
9
Test {
10
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
11
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01;}
12
}
13
}
14
Fault ("M2-gate-sa1") {
15
Test {
16
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
17
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11;}
18
}
19
}
20
Fault ("M3-gate-sa1") {
21
Test {
22
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
23
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10;}
24
}
25
}
26
}
Listing 5.1: UDFM definition for the NAND2 cell.
The same process was used for the remaining cells, creating a UDFM file with the UDFM
type being transistor-stuck-at. The full file can be found in Appendix C.
5.1.2
Gate-Exhaustive Fault Model Creation
To be able to generate patterns for gate exhaustive testing, a UDFM file is needed as the
ATPG tool does not have a general setting for creating gate exhaustive patterns. This
UDFM can be created using Tessent CellModelGen, which has a switch for creating a
gate exhaustive UDFM for a specified cell. As this needed to be done for all cells in the
24 nm library, a C-shell script was created to run the required commands.
The script is given a file which contains a list of names for all cells in the 24 nm library.
For each cell name in the list, the script finds the line containing module and then the cell
name, as this contains all ports for the cell. One example is for the AND2_X1 cell, the line
is:
1
module AND2_X1 (A, B, Z);
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
31
==PAGE:42==
This line is copied into a temporary file, and spaces are added before and after each (,
, and ). This is done to be able to easily identify the ports, without having to search for
all possible combinations of , and ) after the port name. Once the spaces have been
added it is copied into a .ports file, which will be used to extract the port names, and the
temporary file is deleted. Then the script looks for if the cell has the QN, Q, SOUT or SDO, and
sets the value scanout accordingly, see Listing 5.2. This is where the spaces are used,
as just searching for "Q" would result in finding both Q and QN, and without the spaces it
would have to search for both "Q)" and "Q,", while with the spaces it just has to search
for " Q ".
1
grep -e 'module '$cell''
$curdir/$verilog_dir/${cell}.v >
${cell}.temp
2
sed -e 's/(/ ( /g' -e 's/)/ ) /g'
-e 's/,/ , /g'
< ${cell}.temp > ${cell}.
ports
3
rm -f $cell.temp
4
5
set cmd = "-cell_type combinational"
6
set celltype = "combinational"
7
8
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' '
${cell}.ports | grep " QN " `
!= "" ) set
scanout = "QN"
9
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' '
${cell}.ports | grep " Q " `
!= "" ) set
scanout = "Q"
10
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' '
${cell}.ports | grep " SOUT " ` != "" ) set
scanout = "SOUT"
11
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' '
${cell}.ports | grep " SDO " `
!= "" ) set
scanout = "SDO"
Listing 5.2: C-shell script adding necessary spaces and setting scanout value.
Afterwards the script needs to identify sequential elements, such as latches, DFFs, SFFs
and LSSDs. This is done by looking at the cell’s ports and using these to identify the type
of cell. For a latch, it will look for the port names " E ", " D " and " Q", the last one
being both Q and QN, as it is not used to set a variable in this case. For a DFF, it looks for
the port names " CLK ", " D " and " Q", again looking for both Q and QN. If the cell type
has previously been set to being a DFF, and the cell also contains either the port name "
SI " or " SDI ", the cell is an SFF. If the cell furthermore contains the port names " SC1
" and " SC2 ", then the cell is an LSSD. If the cell does not contain the specified ports
it is a combinational cell. Depending on the type of cell, different parameters need to be
given to CellModelGen, in order for it to correctly create the gate exhaustive UDFM, see
Listing 5.3.
1
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " CLK " ` != "" && \
2
`grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " D " ` != "" && \
3
`grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " Q" ` != "" ) \
4
then
5
set celltype = "dff"
6
set cmd = "-cell_type dff -clock_type CLK positive -set SN 1 -reset RN 1"
7
endif
8
9
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " E " ` != "" && \
10
`grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " D " ` != "" && \
11
`grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " Q" ` != "" ) \
12
then
13
set celltype = "latch"
14
set cmd = "-cell_type latch -latch_enable E 0"
15
endif
16
17
if ( (`grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " SI" ` != "" || \
32
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:43==
18
`grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " SDI" ` != "") && \
19
$celltype == "dff" ) \
20
then
21
set celltype = "sff"
22
set cmd = "-cell_type sff -clock_type CLK positive -scanin SI -scanout
$scanout -shift_enable SE -fix_port SE 0 -set SN 1 -reset RN 1"
23
endif
24
25
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " SC1 " ` != "" && \
26
`grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " SC2 " ` != "" && \
27
$celltype == "sff" ) \
28
then
29
set celltype = "lssd"
30
set cmd = "-cell_type lssd -clock_type CLK positive lssd_capture_clock -
clock_type SC1 positive lssd_shift_clock1 -clock_type SC2 positive
lssd_shift_clock2 -scanin SDI -scanout $scanout -set SN 1 -reset RN 1"
31
endif
Listing 5.3: C-shell script identifying the cell type and setting necessary parameters.
Once the cell specific command is set, CellModelGen can be invoked on the cell to create
the UDFM, see Listing 5.4.
1
cellmodelgen \
2
-flow_type $flowtype \
3
-cell_name $cell \
4
$cmd \
5
-gate_exhaustive \
6
-verilog_lib $curdir/$verilog_dir/$cell.v \
7
-verilog_lib $curdir/$verilog_dir/udps.v \
8
-fastscan_lib $curdir/$atpg_dir/$cell.atpg \
9
-fastscan_lib $curdir/$atpg_dir/udps.atpg \
10
-dont_cares off
Listing 5.4: C-shell script invoke CellModelGen.
Once all individual cells have their gate exhaustive UDFM created, CellModelGen can
be used to collect all the individual files into a single file. This is what gives the gate
exhaustive UDFM for the 24 nm library. The full script can be found in Appendix B.3.
5.2
Test Pattern Creation
All test patterns will be generated in the same way, by first generating patterns using the
switch -no_terminate_ineffective_atpg and an abort limit of 30, which is the default
value of the tool. The -no_terminate_ineffective_atpg switch works by disabling a
feature, which terminates the test pattern generation when the generated test patterns
are no longer efficient at detecting faults. This gives higher TC at the cost of creating
more test patterns that only detect very few faults. The abort limit specifies the number
of attempts the ATPG tool can use for generating a test pattern for a specific fault, before
that fault is aborted [33]. The abort limit is especially important in the redundant fault
identification process, which comes after the test pattern generation.
Then, the abort limit is set to 400 and test pattern generation is run on all previously
aborted faults, all otherwise undetected faults and all faults classified as possible-detected
testable, to see if these faults can be detected with the higher abort limit. This time the
pattern generation is run with the switches -no_terminate and -coverage_effort high.
The -no_terminate switch is a shorter form of the -no_terminate_ineffective_atpg
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
33
==PAGE:44==
switch, while -coverage_effort high means that the ATPG tool spends a lot of effort on
increasing the TC and reducing the number of aborted faults[33].
To create the cell-level stuck-at test patterns, only the regular standard cell descriptions
are loaded in, as the transistor models are not needed, and test patterns are generated
as described before.
To create the gate-level stuck-at test patterns, only the regular standard cell descriptions
are loaded in, as the gate-level descriptions of the standard cells are desired. To get gate-
level faults, the command set_internal_fault on needs to be run, before the tool is put
into test pattern generation mode. This command moves the fault sites from the inputs
and outputs of the cells, to the inputs and outputs of all named primitives in the ATPG
description of the cells. For the regular standard cells, these primitives are the gates that
build up the logic function of the cell, leading to the faults being placed at the inputs and
outputs of the gates, giving the gate-level faults. Then test patterns are generated as
described before.
To create the transistor-level stuck-at test patterns, the transistor descriptions for the stan-
dard cells will be loaded in after the regular standard cell description, meaning they will be
used instead of the regular descriptions for the cells that have them. Then the procedure
is the same as for the gate-level test patterns, where the command set_internal_fault
on, now moves the fault sites to all terminals of the transistors.
The created transistor stuck-at UDFM will first be used to generate test patterns for all
faults specified in the UDFM. This means that any cell not defined in the UDFM will not
be faulted during the generation of test patterns. The test patterns for the UDFM are
generated in the same way as all others, with the two test pattern generation runs. The
test patterns generated from the UDFM will then be fault simulated on the transistor-level
stuck-at faults, keeping all test patterns that are effective at detecting faults. Then top-up
test patterns will be generated in the same way as for the previous transistor-level stuck-at
patterns.
The created transistor stuck-at UDFM will be read, and then all port fault sites not covered
by the UDFM will have a UDFM definition added using the command add_fault_sites
-all [33]. Then test patterns are generated for the transistor stuck-at UDFM faults as well
as for the definitions added by the add_fault_sites -all command.
To create gate exhaustive test patterns, the generated gate exhaustive UDFM is used
instead of the transistor stuck-at UDFM. This UDFM ensures that it is not just the test pat-
terns needed to detect all stuck-at faults that are generated, but that all input combinations
for each cell is being targeted. For this only the UDFM description is used, meaning that
the command add_fault_sites -all is not run before test pattern generation. Once the
UDFM is loaded, the test patterns can be generated using the same method as described
previously.
To generate cell-aware test patterns, first the cell-aware UDFM is generated according to
the guide in [34]. Then this UDFM is used in the same manner as described for the tran-
sistor stuck-at UDFM, where fault sites are added using the command add_fault_sites
-all. These test patterns will be used to get a reference TC, for what is possible when
running full cell-aware ATPG.
34
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:45==
6
Results
After the design has been translated to the 24 nm standard cells, and the UDFMs for the
transistor implementations and gate exhaustive tests have been created, the effective-
ness of the different models is evaluated. This is done based on the stuck-at characteris-
tics where applicable, and all generated test patterns will be fault simulated on cell-aware
faults to enable comparison between the different methods.
6.1
Stuck-At Comparisons
First the stuck-at TC and fault count for the cell-level, the gate-level and the transistor-
level is examined. The results can be seen in Figure 6.1. All numbers being examined
are taken from the (total relevant) column of the full statistics reports, these can be
found in Appendix A.
#faults
TC
Cell-level
11,138,122
98.78 %
Gate-level
19,156,592
82.29 %
Transistor-level
27,739,379
65.62 %
Figure 6.1: Number of stuck-at faults and TC for cell-level, gate-level and transistor-
level.
From Figure 6.1 it can be seen that as the complexity of total circuit increases, the amount
faults increase while the TC decreases. To better compare the effectiveness of the differ-
ent patterns, the cell-level and gate-level patterns are fault simulated on transistor-level
stuck-at faults, the result of which can be seen in Figure 6.2.
TC
Cell-level
76.10 %
Gate-level
76.12 %
Transistor-level
65.62 %
Figure 6.2: TC of cell-level, gate-level and transistor-level patterns fault simulated on
transistor-level stuck-at faults
To further investigate this, the number of faults which the ATPG tool has classified as
detected by simulation (DS), ATPG untestable (AU), possible-detected (PD) will be com-
pared for the three levels, the result of which can be seen in Figure 6.3. The PD category
consists of possible-detected testable (PT) faults and possible-detected untestable (PU)
faults.
The DS change, AU change and PD change columns seen in Figure 6.3 describes the
percent change from the previous level, where cell-level is the base, gate-level is com-
pared to cell-level and transistor-level is compared to gate-level. From Figure 6.3 it can
be seen that the number of faults classified as AU when using cell-level and gate-level
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
35
==PAGE:46==
#DS
DS change
#AU
AU change
#PD
PD change
Cell-level
14,218,326
-
3,111,945
-
5,131,551
-
Gate-level
14,221,395
+0.02 %
3,111,945
-
5,132,865
+0.03 %
Transistor-level
13,775,147
-3.14 %
8,359,228
+168.62 %
7,467
-99.85 %
Figure 6.3: Number of, and change in DS, AU and PD faults for cell-level, gate-level
and transistor-level.
patterns are the same, but more than doubles for transistor-level patterns. At the same
time, the number of faults classified in the PD category decrease drastically, when go-
ing to transistor-level patterns, while staying almost the same for cell-level and gate-level
patterns.
At the transistor level, the stuck-at TC is relatively low compared to the other levels, as
seen in Figure 6.1. It was examined whether generating test patterns using the UDFM,
containing the gate faults of the transistors for the cells that could use the transistor im-
plementation, and simulating these patterns on the stuck-at faults while also generating
top-up stuck-at test patterns, would increase the stuck-at TC. The result from this can be
seen in Figure 6.4.
TC
Stuck-at only
65.62 %
Gate UDFM + stuck-at
65.62 %
Figure 6.4: TC for transistor level stuck-at faults, when generating test patterns using
only the stuck-at model, and when generating test patterns using the created UDFM,
and creating top-up stuck-at test patterns.
Figure 6.4 shows that there is no change to the stuck-at TC when using the UDFM com-
pared to just generating patterns for the transistor-level stuck-at faults. To investigate the
reason behind this, the number of faults classified as DS, AU and PD will me compared,
along with the faults classified as detected by implication (DI) and undetected (UD). The
UD category consists of faults that are uncontrolled (UC) and faults that are unobserved
(UO). The results can be seen in Figure 6.5.
#DS
#DI
#AU
#PD
#UD
Stuck-at only
13,775,147
2,182,214
8,359,228
7,467
19
Gate UDFM + stuck-at
13,775,149
2,182,215
8,355,634
7,592
3,486
Figure 6.5: Number of faults classified as DS, DI, AU, PD and UD for the transistor-
level stuck-at fault comparison.
From Figure 6.5 it can be seen that the number of faults in each category is almost the
same, with only slight variations. The biggest difference is in the number of faults classified
as AU and the number of faults classified as UD.
36
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:47==
The fault statistics for the transistor-level test patterns generated using only the stuck-open
UDFM and for the test patterns generated using the gate exhaustive UDFM, as described
in Section 5.2, will not be commented on by themselves, as these are generated using
very different fault models compared to the stuck-at model. Therefore, the reported TC
from the test pattern generation, will not be comparable to that of the stuck-at methods
previously mentioned. Their statistics reports can be found in Appendix A.8 and A.9.
6.2
Fault Simulation On Cell-Aware Faults
To get a better understanding whether transistor-level modeling can be used as a mid-
point between cell-level stuck-at faults and full cell-aware fault modeling, the test patterns
generated using the different methods will be fault simulated on cell-aware faults. New
cell-aware test patterns will be generated, to give a target measurement for the TC. Like-
wise the cell-level patterns being simulated on cell-aware faults, will be used to give a
lower bound to see if any improvement has been achieved. The resulting TC and number
of test patterns can be seen in Figure 6.6.
TC
#Test patterns
Cell-level stuck-at
96.11 %
1,514
Gate-level stuck-at
96.18 %
1,525
Transistor-level stuck-at only
96.13 %
1,479
Transistor-level UDFM + stuck-at
97.08 %
4,022
Transistor-level UDFM only
97.50 %
5,515
Gate exhaustive
97.66 %
3,280
Cell-aware
98.39 %
2,141
Figure 6.6: TC and number of test patterns for different methods when fault simulated
on cell-aware faults
In Figure 6.6 it can be seen that all methods presented gives a higher cell-aware TC
than the cell-level stuck-at test patterns. For gate-level and transistor-level stuck-at test
patterns the increase is minor, while for the transistor level patterns created with the UDFM
has a bigger increase, though the biggest increase comes from the gate exhaustive test
patterns. It can also be seen that the number of test patterns needed to achieve the
reported TC, is within a reasonable margin for all methods compared to running pure
cell-aware, with the transistor-level UDFM methods giving the largest difference from the
stuck-at patterns.
To ensure that the increase in TC is related to the number of faults being detected by the
test patterns, the number of faults being classified as DS, AU, PD and UD is compared.
The results can be found in Figure 6.7.
Looking at Figure 6.7, it can be seen that the number of detected faults do increase in
a way which matches the increase in TC seen from Figure 6.6. It can also be seen that
for the cell-aware test patterns, the number of fault classified as AU is somewhat higher
than for the other methods, the only exception being for the test patterns generated using
the UDFM and stuck-at top-up. Meanwhile, the number of faults classified as UD is sig-
nificantly lower for the cell-aware test patterns than for any of the other methods. For all
methods other than cell-aware, a correlation between the number of detected faults rising
and the number of undetected faults falling can be observed.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
37
==PAGE:48==
#DS
#AU
#PD
#UD
Cell-level stuck-at
80,832,803
763,313
22,144
2,568,574
Gate-level stuck-at
80,890,135
763,313
21,815
2,511,570
Transistor-level stuck-at only
80,851,938
763,313
21,338
2,550,244
Transistor-level UDFM + stuck-at
81,658,813
988,482
27,626
1,505,798
Transistor-level UDFM only
82,023,509
768,455
20,248
1,374,102
Gate exhaustive
82,163,212
768,455
25,305
1,229,342
Cell-aware
82,164,763
1,341,764
18,489
21,913
Figure 6.7: Number of faults classified as DS for the different methods when fault
simulated on cell-aware faults
38
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion
In Chapter 6, the effectiveness of using transistor level modeling has been investigated.
From the results gathered, different aspects of the problem can be discussed. These
include the stuck-at test coverage for different levels of abstraction, the estimated cost
of using the presented methodologies compared to cell-aware, and the usefulness of
the presented methodologies as a middle ground between regular cell-level stuck-at test
pattern generation and the cell-aware test flow.
7.1
Stuck-At Test Coverage
Initially, the TC for cell-, gate-, and transistor-level stuck-at faults was compared to see if
anything could be gained by changing the level of abstraction used for the stuck-at fault
model. The results seen in Figure 6.1 show that, when using a lower level of abstraction,
the stuck-at TC drops significantly. This is due to the increase in complexity of the circuit,
as faults placed on gates or transistors can be difficult to set to the correct value and
then propagate the fault effect to an observation point. This is especially true for high
complexity cells, as controlling all values internally in the cell is a difficult task, even if
the inputs of the cell is connected directly to the primary inputs of the circuit, and only
becomes more difficult when the cell is placed deeper within a circuit, as explained in
Section 3.2.
To get a better comparison between the effectiveness of the test patterns, the test patterns
generated for cell- and gate-level stuck-at faults were fault simulated on transistor-level
stuck-at faults. This gave the result seen in Figure 6.2, which indicates that the cell- and
gate-level test patterns are significantly better at detecting transistor-level stuck-at faults,
than the patterns generated for these faults. This is because the transistor-level TC is
taken from the statistics report generated after the patterns have been generated, while
the cell- and gate-level TC is from their respective patterns being fault simulated on the
transistor-level stuck-at faults. Looking at Figure 6.3, it can be seen that the significant
change in TC between the levels probably comes from the major difference in faults classi-
fied as AU and PD, when comparing the transistor-level test patterns to the ones from cell-
and gate-level. The impact PD and AU faults have on TC is described in Section 3.6.1.
Many of the PD faults are most likely the result of the cell- and gate-level patterns being
fault simulated on the transistor-level faults. As there is a finite number of patterns, the
ATPG tool is unable to prove that no test pattern is able to get a binary difference between
the fault-free and the faulty circuit and classifies these faults as PD. Meanwhile, during
test pattern generation the ATPG tool goes through a lot more patterns, which makes it
certain that the faults where it is not possible to create a test pattern which detects the
fault, but is unable to prove the fault redundant.
If the number of faults classified as PD for the cell- and gate-level test patterns is set to
the same as for the transistor-level test patterns, the TC can be recalculated, giving the
result shown in Equation (7.1) and Equation (7.2).
16,400,660 + (7,467 · 0.5)
24,922,083
· 100 = 65.82 %
(7.1)
16,403,706 + (7,467 · 0.5)
24,922,083
· 100 = 65.83 %
(7.2)
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
39
==PAGE:50==
This gives a result closer to what is seen for the transistor-level TC in Figure 6.2, though
still marginally higher.
It was then investigated whether creating a UDFM for the transistor-level stuck-at faults,
which simulated the effect of a stuck-open fault, would increase the transistor-level stuck-
at TC. The result seen in Figure 6.4, show that the created UDFM did not help increase
the stuck-at TC. When the fault classifications which contribute to calculating the TC were
compared, as shown in Figure 6.5, it showed that using the UDFM helped detect just 3
extra faults. Furthermore, looking at the difference in the number of faults classified as
AU, PD and UD, it adds up to there being a total difference of 2 faults more when using
only stuck-at test patterns, spread across those categories, as shown in Equation (7.3)
(8,359,228 −8,355,634) + (7,467 −7,592) + (19 −3,486) = 2
(7.3)
The difference from the extra 3 fault detected by the UDFM, is caused by the fact that
when generating the pure stuck-at test patterns, there was one more fault identified to
be redundant than when generating the top-up stuck-at patterns after fault simulating the
ones generated using the UDFM. This can be found in the statistics reports in Appendix
A.4 for the pure stuck-at test pattern generation and in Appendix A.7 for the stuck-at test
patterns generated on top of the UDFM ones.
The lack of increase in coverage could be caused by either the conditions created in the
UDFM are wrong, or that the ATPG tool is still unable to classify the faults targeted by the
UDFM as detected. One reason for this could be that the ATPG tool is not able to simulate
the parasitic capacitance of transistors, such that when the output is not being driven to a
specific value it does not keep the previous value, but instead simulates a Z. This would
make the ATPG tool unable to propagate the fault to an observation point.
7.2
Cell-Aware Test Coverage
After seeing that it was not possible to increase the stuck-at TC by using transistor-level
test patterns, the different test pattern generation methods were evaluated on their ability
to detect cell-aware faults. This meant fault simulating the test patterns, generated using
the different methods, on cell-aware faults. The resulting TC is shown in Figure 6.6, which
shows that just using different levels of abstraction for stuck-at test pattern generation, did
not give any significant improvement in the TC compared to using the standard cell-level
test patterns. On the other hand, generating test patterns using the created transistor-
level stuck-at UDFM increased the cell-aware TC significantly compared to using stuck-at
test patterns. This is especially true for the test patterns generated using only the UDFM,
without adding extra stuck-at test patterns. The same effect is seen from using the gate
exhaustive test patterns, being slightly better than using the transistor UDFM.
Since the cell-aware faults more closely represent the physical defects which might be
present in a circuit [35], means that even though the stuck-at TC was not increased by
using the created transistor UDFM, the effectiveness of the test patterns at detecting phys-
ical defects was increased.
7.3
Cost Estimation
Since the gate exhaustive test patterns and the transistor-level UDFM test patterns seem
to give an increased defect detection, the next step is to analyze if these methods are
worth using or not. One way of determining this, is to compare the number of test patterns
needed for each method, shown in Figure 6.6, relative to the cell-aware TC gain.
40
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:51==
This is done as the test cost heavily depends on the number of test patterns used [36]. The
test cost is important to worry about, “according to the international roadmap for device
and systems, test costs are now a major part of the manufacturing cost” [37], meaning
that test costs should be monitored in order to keep manufacturing costs low.
When determining if an increase in the number of test patterns is acceptable, it is impor-
tant to remember that the methods presented only apply to static faults. It can be a good
idea to compare the increase in test patterns to the increase in test patterns needed when
performing transition tests. The results presented in [38] show that the required number
of test patterns for transition tests are on average 4 times greater than those required
for stuck-at tests, though this is when counting the initialization and propagation test pat-
terns as 1, making the increase closer to 8 when counting all patterns. The increase in
the number of test patterns for the gate exhaustive test patterns and the transistor-level
UDFM test patterns, when compared to the number cell-level stuck-at test patterns and
the number of cell-aware test patterns, can be found in Figure 7.1.
Stuck-at
Cell-aware
Transistor-level UDFM + stuck-at
2.66
1.88
Transistor-level UDFM only
3.64
2.58
Gate exhaustive
2.17
1.53
Figure 7.1: Increase in number of test patterns for considered methods, compared to
cell-level stuck-at and cell-aware test patterns.
Looking at Figure 7.1, it can be seen that the number of test patterns needed for the listed
methods is about 3 times the number of cell-level stuck-at test patterns on average, and
about 2 times the number of cell-aware test patterns on average. While still being more
than double the number of regular stuck-at patterns, the effect on the total number of
test patterns needed for the circuit is roughly an increase of 1.11 times when doubling
the number of static test patterns and roughly an increase of 1.22 times when tripling the
number of static test patterns.
Combining the information from Figure 6.6 and Figure 7.1 it can be seen that the gate
exhaustive test patterns give the biggest increase in TC, while having the lowest increase
in the number of test patterns.
7.4
Usefulness As Middle Ground
The usefulness of the discussed methods as a middle ground between the cell-level stuck-
at model and the full cell-aware test, has multiple factors which need to be considered.
Firstly, to get the full benefit of cell-aware testing, two different approaches can be used.
One involves taking the information provided with a standard cell library, and then per-
forming the cell-aware classification on all standard cells within the library. This approach
is very time-consuming, as multiple analog simulations need to be done for each cell. The
24 nm standard cell library used in this project only contains 151 standard cells, includ-
ing cell variations, but still took more than 12 hours to create the cell-aware UDFM files
for all of the cells. This library is quite small compared to the current industry standard:
“Current industrial standard cell libraries consist of at least a few hundred to a thousand
cells per threshold voltage (VT), and this number keeps increasing with every new pro-
cess node” [39]. To generate the most comprehensive cell-aware models, a license will
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
41
==PAGE:52==
be required which does add to the cost. The other approach involves purchasing a stan-
dard cell library, which has already been classified for cell-aware test. This approach is
more expensive, but does save the time of running the analog simulations needed for the
classification.
Compared to the cell-aware approaches, the discussed methods save on the cost, as
no licenses are necessary for any of the methods. They do still have the downside of
being very time-consuming, especially for the ones using the transistor UDFM, as this
was created by hand.
Secondly, while the gate exhaustive and UDFM test patterns did get a higher cell-aware
TC than the regular stuck-at patterns, the increase in the number of test patterns might
be a deal breaker, if a very compacted test set is desired.
If the downsides to these methods are manageable, and the expenses that come with full
cell-aware testing are too great, then either the gate exhaustive method or the transistor
UDFM methods can be used as a way to probably increase the amount of physical defects
being detected by the test patterns.
42
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:53==
8
Future Work
Due to the time constraints of the project, some experiments were not done as they were
thought of at a too late stage in the project. If time had allowed it, the transistor-level stuck-
at test patterns would also have been fault simulated on transistor-level stuck-at faults,
as this would have given a more fair comparison for Figures 6.2 to 6.3. Likewise, the
cell-level stuck-at test patterns, gate-level stuck-at test patterns, transistor-level stuck-at
test patterns, and the test patterns generated with both methods using the transistor-level
UDFM would have been fault simulated on cell-level stuck-at faults, to analyze whether
an increase in the cell-level TC would be achieved by using transistor-level test patterns.
Another set of test patterns could have been created by first generating transistor-level
stuck-at test patterns, simulating these test patterns on the created transistor-level UDFM,
and then generating top-up patterns using the UDFM instead of the stuck-at model. This
might lead to less test patterns being needed for a similar result.
To further improve the project, a full UDFM implementation for all transistor-level stuck-at
faults should be created, as other transistor-level stuck-at faults might be difficult for the
ATPG tool to find a regular stuck-at test pattern for. For this, a deeper understanding of the
UDFM format is needed, to ensure that the created fault model is implemented correctly,
and functions as expected.
Another improvement to the project, could be a program to generate the transistor-level
UDFM based on transistor descriptions of the cells. Such a program would remove the
manual task of creating the UDFM, making it a more viable option, as creating it by hand
for each new technology is very time consuming and labor intensive.
To increase the effectiveness of the UDFM, it would be relevant to examine the effect of
adding a bus_keeper = zhold statement [15] to the output of the transistor ATPG de-
scriptions. This might allow for the ATPG tool to classify the currently described UDFM
faults as detected.
Lastly, the effect of transistor-level modeling on transition delay testing could be explored.
Likewise, the transistor-level UDFM could be extended to include delay faults, though the
necessity for this would need to be examined.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:55==
9
Conclusion
During this project, the effectiveness of transistor-level modeling for test pattern genera-
tion, has been explored. Different test generation methods have been analyzed, and they
have been evaluated on their ability to detect cell-aware faults.
It was initially explored whether using transistor-level fault modeling would give an in-
crease in the stuck-at test coverage, compared to using cell-level fault modeling. This
was found to not be the case, as increasing the complexity of the circuit and increasing
the number of faults being considered, only led to the test coverage decreasing drasti-
cally. It was speculated that the drop in test coverage could be caused by the fact that
generating test patterns with the stuck-at model, only single pattern combinations were
created for each fault. This meant that the stuck-at faults on the gates of the transistors,
especially those causing the transistor to be stuck-open, would not be detectable.
For this reason, a user-defined fault model was created, which defined the required series
of test patterns to detect the stuck-open behavior of stuck-at faults on the gates of the
transistors. This proved to not give any increase in the stuck-at test coverage, though it
was considered whether this was due to the patterns not being correct, or if it was due to
the ATPG tool not being able correctly categorize the targeted faults.
Since the transistor-level methods were unable to increase the test coverage when using
the stuck-at model, it was analyzed if transistor-level modeling would increase the number
of defects being detected, even when having worse stuck-at test coverage than the cell-
level test patterns. Therefore, test patterns generated using the different methods were
simulated on cell-aware faults. This showed that using only the stuck-at model gave the
same outcome, no matter which level of abstraction the test patterns were created for.
On the other hand, it was discovered that even though the user-defined fault model did
not help increase the stuck-at test coverage, it did increase the number of cell-aware
faults being detected. This means that using the created user-defined fault model, it could
be possible to detect more physical defects compared to using the traditional stuck-at
method. It was also discovered that using gate exhaustive testing, did not result in as big
an increase in the number of test patterns as was originally expected.
As such, both the user-defined fault model and the gate exhaustive method could be used
to increase the number of physical defects being detected, if the transition to cell-aware
testing is not desired, or not financially feasible.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
45
==PAGE:56==
46
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Jeroen Geuzebroek et al. “Embedded multi-detect ATPG and Its Effect on the De-
tection of Unmodeled Defects”. In: 2007 IEEE International Test Conference. 2007,
pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1109/TEST.2007.4437649.
[2]
Intel Corporation. 1994 - Annual Report. https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/
en/history/history-1994-annual-report.html. 1994.
[3]
Laung Terng Wang, Cheng Wen Wu, and Xiaoqing Wen. VLSI Test Principles and
Architectures: Design for Testability. eng. Elsevier, 2006, pp. 1–777. ISBN: 978-0-
12-370597-6. DOI: 10.1016/B978-012370597-6/50000-7.
[4]
F. Hapke et al. “Cell-aware Experiences in a High-Quality Automotive Test Suite”.
eng. In: 2014 19th Ieee European Test Symposium (ets 2014) (2014). ISSN: 15581780,
15301877.
[5]
Tessent FastScan Automatic test pattern generation. Factsheet. https://static.sw.
cdn.siemens.com/siemens-disw-assets/public/81222/en-US/Siemens-SW-Automatic-
test-pattern-generation-Tessent-FastScan-FS-81222-C1. Siemens EDA, 2019.
[6]
Tessent TestKompress Hierachical ATPG compression. Factsheet. https://static.
sw . cdn . siemens . com / siemens - disw - assets / public / 81230 / en - US / Siemens - SW -
Hierarchical-ATPG-compression-Tessent-TestKompress-FS-81230-C1. Siemens EDA,
2019.
[7]
Tessent TestKompress Siemens EDA’s automotive-grade ATPG. Factsheet. https:
//static.sw.cdn.siemens.com/siemens-disw-assets/public/585HOJMFhQOJTV4hhjZpZs/
en-US/Siemens%20SW%20Tessent%20TestKompress%20automotive%20FS%2082705%
20C1%20(1).pdf. Siemens EDA, 2019.
[8]
Questa Visualizer State-of-the-art testbench debug. Factsheet. https://static.sw.
cdn . siemens . com / siemens - disw - assets / public / 6JT7GNFVXyQxaWu7nvqcuH / en -
US/78700_Siemens%20SW%20Questa%20Visualizer%20FS%2078700%20C3.pdf.
Siemens EDA, 2019.
[9]
Stefan Eichenberger et al. “Towards a world without test escapes: The use of vol-
ume diagnosis to improve test quality”. eng. In: Proceedings - International Test
Conference (2008), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 2378-2250. DOI: 10.1109/TEST.2008.4700604.
[10]
I. Pomeranz and S.M. Reddy. “On n-detection test sets and variable n-detection
test sets for transition faults”. In: Proceedings 17th IEEE VLSI Test Symposium
(Cat. No.PR00146). 1999, pp. 173–180. DOI: 10.1109/VTEST.1999.766662.
[11]
F. Hapke et al. “Defect-Oriented Cell-AwareATPG and Fault Simulation for Industrial
Cell Libraries and Designs”. eng. In: Itc: 2009 International Test Conference (2009),
pp. 1–10. ISSN: 2378-2250.
[12]
Kyoung Youn Cho, Subhasish Mitra, and Edward J. McCluskey. “Gate exhaustive
testing”. eng. In: Proceedings - International Test Conference 2005 (2005), 7 pp.–
777. ISSN: 2378-2250. DOI: 10.1109/TEST.2005.1584040.
[13]
S.C. Ma, P. Franco, and E.J. McCluskey. “An experimental chip to evaluate test
techniques experiment results”. In: Proceedings of 1995 IEEE International Test
Conference (ITC). 1995, pp. 663–672. DOI: 10.1109/TEST.1995.529895.
[14]
J.T.-Y. Chang et al. “Analysis of pattern-dependent and timing-dependent failures
in an experimental test chip”. In: Proceedings International Test Conference 1998
(IEEE Cat. No.98CH36270). 1998, pp. 184–193. DOI: 10.1109/TEST.1998.743151.
[15]
Tessent Cell Library Manual. Siemens EDA. 2024.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
47
==PAGE:58==
[16]
Michael L. Bushnell and Vishwani D. Agrawal. Essentials of Electronic Testing for
Digital, Memory and Mixed-Signal VLSI Circuits. eng. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2002, Online–Ressource (unknown). ISBN: 978-0-306-47040-0.
[17]
Xinyue Fan et al. “Stuck-open fault diagnosis with stuck-at model”. In: European
Test Symposium (ETS’05). 2005, pp. 182–187. DOI: 10.1109/ETS.2005.35.
[18]
Madhukar K. Reddy and Sudhakar M. Reddy. “Detecting FET Stuck-Open Faults in
CMOS Latches And Flip-Flops”. In: IEEE Design & Test of Computers 3.5 (1986),
pp. 17–26. DOI: 10.1109/MDT.1986.295040.
[19]
JA WAICUKAUSKI et al. “TRANSITION FAULT SIMULATION”. eng. In: Ieee Design
and Test of Computers 4.2 (1987), pp. 32–38. ISSN: 1558-1918. DOI: 10.1109/
MDT.1987.295104.
[20]
Tessent Scan and ATPG User’s Manual. Siemens EDA. 2024.
[21]
M. Syal and M.S. Hsiao. “Untestable fault identification using recurrence relations
and impossible value assignments”. In: 17th International Conference on VLSI De-
sign. Proceedings. 2004, pp. 481–486. DOI: 10.1109/ICVD.2004.1260967.
[22]
Tetsuro Minamiyama and Yuzo Takamatsu. “Identification of redundant faults in
combinational circuits”. In: Systems and Computers in Japan 31.6 (2000), pp. 65–
73.
[23]
M. Harihara and P.R. Menon. “Identification of undetectable faults in combinational
circuits”. In: Proceedings 1989 IEEE International Conference on Computer Design:
VLSI in Computers and Processors. 1989, pp. 290–293. DOI: 10.1109/ICCD.1989.
63374.
[24]
Y. Higami et al. “Fault models and test generation for IDDQ testing”. eng. In: Pro-
ceedings Asp-dac 2000. Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference
2000 With Eda Technofair 2000. (cat. No.00ex389) (2000), pp. 509–14. DOI: 10.
1109/ASPDAC.2000.835152.
[25]
Rochit Rajsuman. “Iddq testing for CMOS VLSI”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee
88.4 (2000), pp. 544–566. ISSN: 1558-2256. DOI: 10.1109/5.843000.
[26]
D. H. Yoon, H. S. Kim, and S. Kang. “Dynamic power supply current testing for
open defects in CMOS SRAMs”. eng. In: Etri Journal 23.2 (2001), pp. 77–84. DOI:
10.4218/etrij.01.0101.0205.
[27]
Anis Nazer, Ali Chehab, and Ayman Kayssi. “Dynamic current testing for CMOS
domino circuits”. eng. In: Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems 2 (2006),
pp. 259–263. ISSN: 1558-3899. DOI: 10.1109/MWSCAS.2006.382260.
[28]
ST SU, RZ MAKKI, and T NAGLE. “TRANSIENT POWER-SUPPLY CURRENT
MONITORING - A NEW TEST METHOD FOR CMOS VLSI CIRCUITS”. eng. In:
Journal of Electronic Testing-theory and Applications 6.1 (1995), pp. 23–43. ISSN:
15730727. DOI: 10.1007/BF00993128.
[29]
Miron Abramovici, Melvin A. Breuer, and Arthur D. Friedman. Digital Systems Test-
ing and Testable Design. eng. John Wiley & Sons, 1994. ISBN: 9780470544389.
DOI: 10.1109/9780470544389.
[30]
S. Pateras. “Achieving at-speed structural test”. In: IEEE Design & Test of Comput-
ers 20.5 (2003), pp. 26–33. DOI: 10.1109/MDT.2003.1232253.
[31]
Xijiiang Lin et al. “High-frequency, at-speed scan testing”. In: IEEE Design & Test
of Computers 20.5 (2003), pp. 17–25. DOI: 10.1109/MDT.2003.1232252.
[32]
N. Ahmed and M. Tehranipoor. “Improving transition delay fault coverage using
hybrid scan-based technique”. In: 20th IEEE International Symposium on Defect
and Fault Tolerance in VLSI Systems (DFT’05). 2005, pp. 187–195. DOI: 10.1109/
DFTVS.2005.69.
[33]
Tessent Shell Reference Manual. Siemens EDA. 2024.
48
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:59==
[34]
Tessent CellModelGen Tool Reference. Siemens EDA. 2024.
[35]
Friedrich Hapke et al. “Cell-aware test”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Computer-
aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 33.9 (2014), pp. 1396–1409. ISSN:
1937-4151. DOI: 10.1109/TCAD.2014.2323216.
[36]
Takashi Hirayama, Yasuaki Nishitani, and Seiji Kitamura. “A testable realization for
decimal multipliers”. eng. In: Proceedings - 41st Ieee International Symposium on
Multiple-valued Logic, Ismvl 2011 (2011), pp. 248–253. ISSN: 2378-2226. DOI: 10.
1109/ISMVL.2011.45.
[37]
Tai Song et al. “Chip test pattern reordering method using adaptive test to reduce
cost for testing of ICs”. eng. In: Ieice Electronics Express 18.2 (2021), p. 20200420.
ISSN: 1349-2543. DOI: 10.1587/ELEX.17.20200420.
[38]
Xiao Liu et al. “Efficient techniques for transition testing”. eng. In: Acm Transactions
on Design Automation of Electronic Systems 10.2 (2005), pp. 258–278. ISSN: 1084-
4309. DOI: 10.1145/1059876.1059880.
[39]
Vibhav Kumarswami Salimath and Carl Sechen. “Essential Standard Cell Library
Composition”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 2022 Ieee Dallas Circuits and Systems
Conference, Dcas 2022 (2022), 6 pp. DOI: 10.1109/DCAS53974.2022.9845567.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:61==
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
51
==PAGE:62==
A
Fault Statistics Reports
A.1
Original 28 nm Design Stuck-at Statistics
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
7,808,428
7,807,391
UO (unobserved)
2 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DS (det_simulation)
6,656,976 (85.25%)
same (85.27%)
DI (det_implication)
1,069,740 (13.70%)
same (13.70%)
PU (posdet_untestable)
1,986 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
UU (unused)
6,842 ( 0.09%)
same ( 0.09%)
TI (tied)
1,155 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
BL (blocked)
441 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
RE (redundant)
26,666 ( 0.34%)
same ( 0.34%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
44,620 ( 0.57%)
43.583 ( 0.56%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
EDT (edt_logic)
10 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
SCAN (scan_path)
609,461 ( 7.81%)
same ( 7.81%)
SEN (scan_enable)
138,866 ( 1.78%)
same ( 1.78%)
CLK (clock)
314,887 ( 4.03%)
same ( 4.03%)
SR (set_reset)
4 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
6 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
6,506 ( 0.08%)
same ( 0.08%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
15,826 ( 0.20%)
same ( 0.20%)
TC (tied_cells)
20,243 ( 0.26%)
same ( 0.26%)
MPO (mask_po)
221 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
2,008 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
168 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
869 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
5,285 ( 0.07%)
same ( 0.07%)
UC+UO
EAB (edt_abort)
2 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
Coverage
test_coverage
99.41%
99.43%
fault_coverage
98.97%
98.98%
atpg_effectiveness
100.00%
100.00%
#test_patterns
2,893
#simulated_patterns
3,056
CPU_time (secs)
1,220.7
Figure A.1: Stuck-at statistics for the original 28 nm design
52
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:63==
A.2
Converted 24 nm Design Stuck-at Statistics
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
11,139,616
11,138,122
DS (det_simulation)
9,460,124 (84.92%)
same (84.93%)
DI (det_implication)
1,161,377 (10.43%)
same (10.43%)
PU (posdet_untestable)
1,980 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
PT (posdet_testable)
165 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UU (unused)
6,962 ( 0.06%)
same ( 0.06%)
TI (tied)
341,435 ( 3.07%)
same ( 3.07%)
BL (blocked)
463 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
RE (redundant)
35,889 ( 0.32%)
same ( 0.32%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
131,221 ( 1.18%)
129727 ( 1.16%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
677,185 ( 6.08%)
same ( 6.08%)
SEN (scan_enable)
137,080 ( 1.23%)
same ( 1.23%)
CLK (clock)
340,106 ( 3.05%)
same ( 3.05%)
SR (set_reset)
12 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
8 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
6,986 ( 0.06%)
same ( 0.06%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
93,070 ( 0.84%)
same ( 0.84%)
TC (tied_cells)
23,024 ( 0.21%)
same ( 0.21%)
MPO (mask_po)
339 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
174 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
237 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
1,257 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
13,120 ( 0.12%)
same ( 0.12%)
Coverage
test_coverage
98.77%
98.78%
fault_coverage
95.36%
95.37%
atpg_effectiveness
100.00%
100.00%
#test_patterns
2,057
#simulated_patterns
2,075
CPU_time (secs)
1,002.8
Figure A.2: Stuck-at statistics for the converted 24 nm design
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
53
==PAGE:64==
A.3
Gate-level Stuck-at Statistics
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
19,158,466
19,156,592
DS (det_simulation)
12,135,460 (63.34%)
same (63.35%)
DI (det_implication)
2,182,282 (11.39%)
same (11.39%)
PU (posdet_untestable)
2,079 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
PT (posdet_testable)
159 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UU (unused)
2,082 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
TI (tied)
1,611,424 ( 8.41%)
same ( 8.41%)
BL (blocked)
47,292 ( 0.25%)
same ( 0.25%)
RE (redundant)
94,465 ( 0.49%)
same ( 0.49%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
3,083,223 (16.09%)
3,081,349 (16.09%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,606,291 ( 8.38%)
same ( 8.39%)
SEN (scan_enable)
185,648 ( 0.97%)
same ( 0.97%)
CLK (clock)
390,293 ( 2.04%)
same ( 2.04%)
SR (set_reset)
42 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
8 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
UDN (undriven)
1,161,584 ( 6.06%)
same ( 6.06%)
PC (pin_constraints)
160,616 ( 0.84%)
same ( 0.84%)
TC (tied_cells)
1,731,795 ( 9.04%)
same ( 9.04%)
MPO (mask_po)
341 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
1,221 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
285 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
1,589 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
25,792 ( 0.13%)
same ( 0.13%)
Coverage
test_coverage
82.28%
82.29%
fault_coverage
74.74%
74.75%
atpg_effectiveness
100.00%
100.00%
#test_patterns
2,062
#simulated_patterns
2,080
CPU_time (secs)
2,144.1
Figure A.3: Gate-level stuck-at statistics for 24 nm design
54
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:65==
A.4
Transistor-level Stuck-at Statistics
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
27,741,754
27,739,379
UO (unobserved)
19 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DS (det_simulation)
13,775,147 (49.65%)
same (49.66%)
DI (det_implication)
2,182,214 ( 7.87%)
same ( 7.87%)
PU (posdet_untestable)
7,308 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
PT (posdet_testable)
159 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UU (unused)
6,236 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
TI (tied)
3,332,811 (12.01%)
same (12.01%)
BL (blocked)
47,744 ( 0.17%)
same ( 0.17%)
RE (redundant)
28,513 ( 0.10%)
same ( 0.10%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
8,361,603 (30.14%)
8,359,228 (30.13%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,606,256 ( 5.79%)
same ( 5.79%)
SEN (scan_enable)
185,630 ( 0.67%)
same ( 0.67%)
CLK (clock)
390,293 ( 1.41%)
same ( 1.41%)
SR (set_reset)
31 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
4 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
UDN (undriven)
1,162,037 ( 4.19%)
same ( 4.19%)
PC (pin_constraints)
153,825 ( 0.55%)
same ( 0.55%)
TC (tied_cells)
1,768,804 ( 6.38%)
same ( 6.38%)
MPO (mask_po)
375 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
32,206 ( 0.12%)
same ( 0.12%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
422 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
1,953 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
5,241,981 (18.90%)
same (18.90%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
19 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
Coverage
test_coverage
65.61%
65.62%
fault_coverage
57.53%
57.54%
atpg_effectiveness
100.00%
100.00%
#test_patterns
2,042
#simulated_patterns
2,064
CPU_time (secs)
5,483.3
Figure A.4: Transistor-level stuck-at statistics for 24 nm design
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
55
==PAGE:66==
A.5
Fault Simulation Of Cell-level Test Patterns On
Transistor-level Stuck-at Faults
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
27,741,754
27,739,667
UC (uncontrolled)
27,981 ( 0.10%)
same ( 0.10%)
UO (unobserved)
249,946 ( 0.90%)
same ( 0.90%)
DS (det_simulation)
14,218,326 (51.25%)
same (51.26%)
DI (det_implication)
2,182,334 ( 7.87%)
same ( 7.87%)
PT (posdet_testable)
5,131,551 (18.50%)
same (18.50%)
UU (unused)
6,138 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
TI (tied)
2,763,731 ( 9.96%)
same ( 9.96%)
BL (blocked)
47,715 ( 0.17%)
same ( 0.17%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
3,114,032 (11.23%)
3,111,945 (11.22%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,606,256 ( 5.79%)
same ( 5.79%)
SEN (scan_enable)
185,746 ( 0.67%)
same ( 0.67%)
CLK (clock)
390,294 ( 1.41%)
same ( 1.41%)
SR (set_reset)
34 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
4 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
UDN (undriven)
1,163,572 ( 4.19%)
same ( 4.19%)
PC (pin_constraints)
166,306 ( 0.60%)
same ( 0.60%)
TC (tied_cells)
1,781,692 ( 6.42%)
same ( 6.42%)
MPO (mask_po)
375 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
314 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
1,773 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Coverage
test_coverage
76.10%
76.10%
fault_coverage
68.37%
68.37%
atpg_effectiveness
89.75%
89.75%
#test_patterns
1,408
#simulated_patterns
2,057
CPU_time (secs)
1,732.1
Figure A.5: Fault statistics for cell-level test patterns fault simulated on transistor-level
stuck-at faults
56
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:67==
A.6
Fault Simulation Of Gate-level Test Patterns On
Transistor-level Stuck-at Faults
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
27,741,754
27,739,667
UC (uncontrolled)
27,932 ( 0.10%)
same ( 0.10%)
UO (unobserved)
245,635 ( 0.89%)
same ( 0.89%)
DS (det_simulation)
14,221,395 (51.26%)
same (51.27%)
DI (det_implication)
2,182,311 ( 7.87%)
same ( 7.87%)
PT (posdet_testable)
5,132,865 (18.50%)
same (18.50%)
UU (unused)
6,138 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
TI (tied)
2,763,731 ( 9.96%)
same ( 9.96%)
BL (blocked)
47,715 ( 0.17%)
same ( 0.17%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
3,114,032 (11.23%)
3,111,945 (11.22%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,606,256 ( 5.79%)
same ( 5.79%)
SEN (scan_enable)
185,723 ( 0.67%)
same ( 0.67%)
CLK (clock)
390,294 ( 1.41%)
same ( 1.41%)
SR (set_reset)
34 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
4 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
UDN (undriven)
1,163,572 ( 4.19%)
same ( 4.19%)
PC (pin_constraints)
166,306 ( 0.60%)
same ( 0.60%)
TC (tied_cells)
1,781,692 ( 6.42%)
same ( 6.42%)
MPO (mask_po)
375 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
314 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
1,773 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Coverage
test_coverage
76.11%
76.12%
fault_coverage
68.38%
68.39%
atpg_effectiveness
89.76%
89.76%
#test_patterns
1,398
#simulated_patterns
2,062
CPU_time (secs)
2,594.9
Figure A.6: Fault statistics for gate-level test patterns fault simulated on transistor-level
stuck-at faults
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
57
==PAGE:68==
58
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:69==
A.7
Transistor-level UDFM With Stuck-at Top-up Statistics
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
27,741,754
27,739,379
UC (uncontrolled)
12 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UO (unobserved)
3,474 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
DS (det_simulation)
13,775,149 (49.65%)
same (49.66%)
DI (det_implication)
2,182,215 ( 7.87%)
same ( 7.87%)
PU (posdet_untestable)
7,019 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
PT (posdet_testable)
573 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UU (unused)
6,236 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
TI (tied)
3,332,811 (12.01%)
same (12.01%)
BL (blocked)
47,744 ( 0.17%)
same ( 0.17%)
RE (redundant)
28,512 ( 0.10%)
same ( 0.10%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
8,358,009 (30.13%)
8,355,634 (30.12%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,606,256 ( 5.79%)
same ( 5.79%)
SEN (scan_enable)
185,631 ( 0.67%)
same ( 0.67%)
CLK (clock)
390,293 ( 1.41%)
same ( 1.41%)
SR (set_reset)
31 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
4 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
UDN (undriven)
1,162,037 ( 4.19%)
same ( 4.19%)
PC (pin_constraints)
153,825 ( 0.55%)
same ( 0.55%)
TC (tied_cells)
1,768,804 ( 6.38%)
same ( 6.38%)
MPO (mask_po)
375 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
32,203 ( 0.12%)
same ( 0.12%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
422 (0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
1,953 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
5,238,390 (18.88%)
same (18.88%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
3,486 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
Coverage
test_coverage
65.61%
65.62%
fault_coverage
57.53%
57.54%
atpg_effectiveness
99.99%
99.99%
#test_patterns
6,305
#basic_patterns
317
#clock_sequential_patterns
5,988
#simulated_patterns
8,224
CPU_time (secs)
19,268.7
Figure A.7: Transistor-level stuck-at statistics for test patterns generated with transistor
stuck-open UDFM and top-up stuck-at test patterns
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
59
==PAGE:70==
60
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:71==
A.8
Transistor-level UDFM Only Statistics
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
20,702,858
20,700,798
UC (uncontrolled)
1,126 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
UO (unobserved)
4,852 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
DS (det_simulation)
14,207,805 (68.63%)
same (68.63%)
DI (det_implication)
2,177,645 (10.52%)
same (10.52%)
PU (posdet_untestable)
2,191 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
PT (posdet_testable)
156 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UU (unused)
2,170 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
TI (tied)
1,033,485 ( 4.99%)
same ( 4.99%)
BL (blocked)
56,275 ( 0.27%)
same ( 0.27%)
RE (redundant)
28,474 ( 0.14%)
same ( 0.14%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
3,188,679 (15.40%)
3,186,619 (15.39%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,606,271 ( 7.76%)
same ( 7.76%)
SEN (scan_enable)
186,222 ( 0.90%)
same ( 0.90%)
CLK (clock)
385,104 ( 1.86%)
same ( 1.86%)
SR (set_reset)
34 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
14 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
UDN (undriven)
1,161,918 ( 5.61%)
same ( 5.61%)
PC (pin_constraints)
149,523 ( 0.72%)
same ( 0.72%)
TC (tied_cells)
1,761,595 ( 8.51%)
same ( 8.51%)
MPO (mask_po)
349 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
23,891 ( 0.12%)
same ( 0.12%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
317 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
1,743 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
89,343 ( 0.43%)
same ( 0.43%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
5,934 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
Unclassified
44 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
Coverage
test_coverage
83.68%
83.69%
fault_coverage
79.15%
79.16%
atpg_effectiveness
99.97%
99.97%
#test_patterns
8,362
#basic_patterns
615
#clock_sequential_patterns
7,747
#simulated_patterns
8,403
CPU_time (secs)
27,394.7
Figure A.8: Transistor-level fault statistics for test patterns generated with transistor stuck-
open UDFM and adding uncovered fault sites
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
61
==PAGE:72==
A.9
Gate-Exhaustive Statistics
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
11,367,676
11,366,790
UC (uncontrolled)
515 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UO (unobserved)
474 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DS (det_simulation)
6,900,795 (60.71%)
same (60.71%)
DI (det_implication)
44,839 ( 0.39%)
same ( 0.39%)
PU (posdet_untestable)
7,916 ( 0.07%)
same ( 0.07%)
PT (posdet_testable)
540 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UU (unused)
1,124 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
TI (tied)
4,419 ( 0.04%)
same ( 0.04%)
BL (blocked)
246 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
RE (redundant)
1,731,464 (15.23%)
same (15.23%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
2,675,344 (23.53%)
2,674,458 (23.53%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SEN (scan_enable)
41 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
CLK (clock)
44,798 ( 0.39%)
same ( 0.39%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
3,309 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
TC (tied_cells)
8,761 ( 0.08%)
same ( 0.08%)
MPO (mask_po)
213 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
591 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
205 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
681 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
2,661,584 (23.41%)
same (23.42%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
989 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
Coverage
test_coverage
72.17%
72.17%
fault_coverage
61.14%
61.14%
atpg_effectiveness
99.99%
99.99%
#test_patterns
3,828
#simulated_patterns
3,846
CPU_time (secs)
115,175.3
Figure A.9: Gate exhaustive statistics for 24 nm design
62
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:73==
A.10
Cell-aware Statistics
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
86,026,963
86,014,643
UC (uncontrolled)
70 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UO (unobserved)
21,843 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
DS (det_simulation)
82,164,763 (95.51%)
same (95.52%)
DI (det_implication)
1,789,695 ( 2.08%)
same ( 2.08%)
PU (posdet_untestable)
16,481 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
PT (posdet_testable)
2,008 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
UU (unused)
21,603 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
TI (tied)
21,244 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
BL (blocked)
1,859 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
RE (redundant)
633,313 ( 0.74%)
same ( 0.74%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
1,354,084 ( 1.57%)
1,341,764 ( 1.56%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,018,481 ( 1.18%)
same ( 1.18%)
SEN (scan_enable)
137,797 ( 0.16%)
same ( 0.16%)
CLK (clock)
617,319 ( 0.72%)
same ( 0.72%)
SR (set_reset)
43 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
20 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
16,035 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
132,660 ( 0.15%)
same ( 0.15%)
TC (tied_cells)
116,224 ( 0.14%)
same ( 0.14%)
MPO (mask_po)
5,251 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
12,534 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
2,563 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
9,757 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
1,075,095 ( 1.25%)
same ( 1.25%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
268 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
Unclassified
21,645 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
Coverage
test_coverage
98.38%
98.39%
fault_coverage
97.60%
97.62%
atpg_effectiveness
99.97%
99.97%
#test_patterns
2,141
#simulated_patterns
2,666
CPU_time (secs)
16,863.1
Figure A.10: Cell-aware statistics for 24 nm design
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
63
==PAGE:74==
A.11
Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Cell-level Stuck-at Test
Patterns
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
86,026,963
86,020,826
UC (uncontrolled)
792,399 ( 0.92%)
same ( 0.92%)
UO (unobserved)
1,776,175 ( 2.06%)
same ( 2.06%)
DS (det_simulation)
80,832,803 (93.96%)
same (93.97%)
DI (det_implication)
1,789,695 ( 2.08%)
same ( 2.08%)
PT (posdet_testable)
22,144 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
UU (unused)
21,603 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
TI (tied)
20,835 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
BL (blocked)
1,859 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
769,450 ( 0.89%)
763,313 ( 0.89%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,018,481 ( 1.18%)
same ( 1.18%)
SEN (scan_enable)
137,797 ( 0.16%)
same ( 0.16%)
CLK (clock)
617,319 ( 0.72%)
same ( 0.72%)
SR (set_reset)
43 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
20 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
16,035 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
42,293 ( 0.05%)
same ( 0.05%)
TC (tied_cells)
110,355 ( 0.13%)
same ( 0.13%)
MPO (mask_po)
5,177 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
769 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
5,368 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
605,488 ( 0.70%)
same ( 0.70%)
Coverage
test_coverage
96.10%
96.11%
fault_coverage
96.06%
96.06%
atpg_effectiveness
97.00%
97.00%
#test_patterns
1,514
#simulated_patterns
2,057
CPU_time (secs)
1,289.0
Figure A.11: Cell-aware fault statistics for cell-level stuck-at test patterns fault simulated
on cell-aware faults
64
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:75==
A.12
Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Gate-level Stuck-at Test
Patterns
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
86,026,963
86,020,826
UC (uncontrolled)
774,060 ( 0.90%)
same ( 0.90%)
UO (unobserved)
1,737,510 ( 2.02%)
same ( 2.02%)
DS (det_simulation)
80,890,135 (94.03%)
same (94.04%)
DI (det_implication)
1,789,696 ( 2.08%)
same ( 2.08%)
PT (posdet_testable)
21,815 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
UU (unused)
21,603 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
TI (tied)
20,835 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
BL (blocked)
1,859 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
769,450 ( 0.89%)
763,313 ( 0.89%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,018,481 ( 1.18%)
same ( 1.18%)
SEN (scan_enable)
137,797 ( 0.16%)
same ( 0.16%)
CLK (clock)
617,319 ( 0.72%)
same ( 0.72%)
SR (set_reset)
43 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
21 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
16,035 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
42,293 ( 0.05%)
same ( 0.05%)
TC (tied_cells)
110,355 ( 0.13%)
same ( 0.13%)
MPO (mask_po)
5,177 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
769 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
5,368 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
605,488 ( 0.70%)
same ( 0.70%)
Coverage
test_coverage
96.17%
96.18%
fault_coverage
96.12%
96.13%
atpg_effectiveness
97.07%
97.07%
#test_patterns
1,525
#simulated_patterns
2,062
CPU_time (secs)
6,272.7
Figure A.12: Cell-aware fault statistics for gate-level stuck-at test patterns fault simulated
on cell-aware faults
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
65
==PAGE:76==
A.13
Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Transistor-level Stuck-at
Test Patterns
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
86,026,963
86,020,826
UC (uncontrolled)
786,852 ( 0.91%)
same ( 0.91%)
UO (unobserved)
1,763,392 ( 2.05%)
same ( 2.05%)
DS (det_simulation)
80,851,938 (93.98%)
same (93.99%)
DI (det_implication)
1,789,696 ( 2.08%)
same ( 2.08%)
PT (posdet_testable)
21,338 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
UU (unused)
21,603 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
TI (tied)
20,835 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
BL (blocked)
1,859 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
769,450 ( 0.89%)
763,313 ( 0.89%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,018,481 ( 1.18%)
same ( 1.18%)
SEN (scan_enable)
137,797 ( 0.16%)
same ( 0.16%)
CLK (clock)
617,319 ( 0.72%)
same ( 0.72%)
SR (set_reset)
43 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
21 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
16,035 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
42,293 ( 0.05%)
same ( 0.05%)
TC (tied_cells)
110,355 ( 0.13%)
same ( 0.13%)
MPO (mask_po)
5,177 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
769 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
5,368 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
605,488 ( 0.70%)
same ( 0.70%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
268 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
Unclassified
21,645 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
Coverage
test_coverage
96.13%
96.13%
fault_coverage
96.08%
96.08%
atpg_effectiveness
97.02%
97.02%
#test_patterns
1,479
#simulated_patterns
2,042
CPU_time (secs)
11,288.1
Figure A.13: Cell-aware fault statistics for transistor-level stuck-at test patterns fault sim-
ulated on cell-aware faults
66
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:77==
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
67
==PAGE:78==
A.14
Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Transistor-level UDFM +
Stuck-at Top-up Test Patterns
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
86,026,963
86,014,709
UC (uncontrolled)
462,679 ( 0.54%)
same ( 0.54%)
UO (unobserved)
1,043,119 ( 1.21%)
same ( 1.21%)
DS (det_simulation)
81,658,813 (94.92%)
same (94.94%)
DI (det_implication)
1,789,693 ( 2.08%)
same ( 2.08%)
PT (posdet_testable)
27,626 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
UU (unused)
21,603 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
TI (tied)
20,835 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
BL (blocked)
1,859 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
1,000,736 ( 1.16%)
988,482 ( 1.15%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,018,481 ( 1.18%)
same ( 1.18%)
SEN (scan_enable)
137,797 ( 0.16%)
same ( 0.16%)
CLK (clock)
617,319 ( 0.72%)
same ( 0.72%)
SR (set_reset)
43 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
18 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
16,035 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
134,394 ( 0.16%)
same ( 0.16%)
TC (tied_cells)
142,724 ( 0.17%)
same ( 0.17%)
MPO (mask_po)
5,251 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
8,548 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
2,497 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
9,757 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
697,565 ( 0.81%)
same ( 0.81%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
268 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
Unclassified
21,645 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
Coverage
test_coverage
97.07%
97.08%
fault_coverage
97.02%
97.03%
atpg_effectiveness
98.23%
98.23%
#test_patterns
4,022
#basic_patterns
276
#clock_sequential_patterns
3,746
#simulated_patterns
6,369
CPU_time (secs)
17,044.3
Figure A.14: Cell-aware fault statistics for transistor stuck-open, with stuck-at top-up test
patterns fault simulated on cell-aware faults
68
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:79==
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
69
==PAGE:80==
A.15
Cell-aware Fault Simulation Of Transistor-level UDFM
Only Test Patterns
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
86,026,963
86,020,397
UC (uncontrolled)
390,534 ( 0.45%)
same ( 0.45%)
UO (unobserved)
983,568 ( 1.14%)
same ( 1.14%)
DS (det_simulation)
82,023,509 (95.35%)
same (95.35%)
DI (det_implication)
1,789,693 ( 2.08%)
same ( 2.08%)
PT (posdet_testable)
20,248 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
UU (unused)
21,603 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
TI (tied)
20,928 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
BL (blocked)
1,859 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
775,021 ( 0.90%)
768,455 ( 0.89%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,018,481 ( 1.18%)
same ( 1.18%)
SEN (scan_enable)
137,797 ( 0.16%)
same ( 0.16%)
CLK (clock)
617,319 ( 0.72%)
same ( 0.72%)
SR (set_reset)
43 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
18 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
16,035 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
42,293 ( 0.05%)
same ( 0.05%)
TC (tied_cells)
110,355 ( 0.13%)
same ( 0.13%)
MPO (mask_po)
5,177 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
131,881 ( 0.15%)
same ( 0.15%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
1,197 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
5,369 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
478,749 ( 0.56%)
same ( 0.56%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
268 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
Unclassified
21,645 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
Coverage
test_coverage
97.49%
97.50%
fault_coverage
97.44%
97.45%
atpg_effectiveness
(98.39%)
(98.39%)
#test_patterns
5,515
#basic_patterns
615
#clock_sequential_patterns
4,900
#simulated_patterns
8,362
CPU_time (secs)
23,216.6
Figure A.15: Cell-aware fault statistics for transistor stuck-open test patterns fault simu-
lated on cell-aware faults
70
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:81==
A.16
Cell-aware Fault Simulation of Gate exhaustive Test
Patterns
Fault Classes
#faults
#faults
(total)
(total relevant)
FU (full)
86,026,963
86,020,397
UC (uncontrolled)
371,518 ( 0.43%)
same ( 0.43%)
UO (unobserved)
857,824 ( 1.00%)
same ( 1.00%)
DS (det_simulation)
82,163,212 (95.51%)
same (95.52%)
DI (det_implication)
1,789,693 ( 2.08%)
same ( 2.08%)
PT (posdet_testable)
25,305 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
UU (unused)
21,603 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
TI (tied)
20,928 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
BL (blocked)
1,859 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
775,021 ( 0.90%)
768,455 ( 0.89%)
Fault Sub-classes
DI (det_implication)
SCAN (scan_path)
1,018,481 ( 1.18%)
same ( 1.18%)
SEN (scan_enable)
137,797 ( 0.16%)
same ( 0.16%)
CLK (clock)
617,319 ( 0.72%)
same ( 0.72%)
SR (set_reset)
43 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
DIN (data_input)
18 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
MBISR
16,035 ( 0.02%)
same ( 0.02%)
AU (atpg_untestable)
PC (pin_constraints)
42,293 ( 0.05%)
same ( 0.05%)
TC (tied_cells)
110,355 ( 0.13%)
same ( 0.13%)
MPO (mask_po)
5,177 ( 0.01%)
same ( 0.01%)
SEQ (sequential_depth)
131,881 ( 0.15%)
same ( 0.15%)
OCC (on_chip_clock_control)
1,197 ( 0.00%)
deleted
IJTAG (ijtag)
5,369 ( 0.01%)
deleted
Unclassified
478,749 ( 0.56%)
same ( 0.56%)
UC+UO
AAB (atpg_abort)
268 ( 0.00%)
same ( 0.00%)
Unclassified
21,645 ( 0.03%)
same ( 0.03%)
Coverage
test_coverage
97.65%
97.66%
fault_coverage
97.60%
97.61%
atpg_effectiveness
98.56%
98.56%
#test_patterns
3,280
#simulated_patterns
3,828
CPU_time (secs)
29,221.5
Figure A.16: Cell-aware fault statistics for gate exhaustive test patterns fault simulated on
cell-aware faults
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
71
==PAGE:82==
B
Code
B.1
Verilog NOR2 gate
1
module NOR2_X1(
2
input A,
3
input B,
4
output Z
5
);
6
wire ab;
7
supply1 VDD;
8
supply0 VSS;
9
10
nmos(Z,VSS,A);
11
nmos(Z,VSS,B);
12
13
pmos(ab,VDD,A);
14
pmos(Z,ab,B);
15
endmodule
Listing B.1: Verilog implementation of 2-input NOR gate using transistors
B.2
Transistor model translation
1
def main():
2
written = False
3
src_dir = "../atpg/"
4
models = open("../scripts/all.cells", "r")
5
dest_dr = "atpg/"
6
spice_dir = "../spice/"
7
for model_name in models:
8
model = model_name.strip()
9
if "X1" not in model:
10
continue
11
src = open(src_dir + model + ".atpg", "r")
12
dest = open(dest_dir + model + ".atpg", "w")
13
if "DFF" in model or "SFF" in model or "LATCH" in model:
14
for line in src:
15
dest.write(line)
16
else:
17
for line in src:
18
if "primitive" in line:
19
if not written:
20
dest.write("
primitive = _tie1 mlc_tie1_1 (VDD);\n")
21
dest.write("
primitive = _tie0 mlc_tie0_1 (VSS);\n")
22
spice = open(spice_dir + model + ".spi", "r")
23
for tran in spice:
24
if "MOS" in tran:
25
mos_data = tran.split()
26
name = mos_data[0]
27
drain = mos_data[1]
28
gate = mos_data[2]
29
source = mos_data[3]
30
mos_type = mos_data[5]
31
if "NMOS" in mos_type:
32
dest.write("
primitive = _nmos mlc_nmos_" + name + " (" +
source + "," + gate + "," + drain + ");\n")
33
if "PMOS" in mos_type:
72
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:83==
34
dest.write("
primitive = _pmos mlc_pmos_" + name + " (" +
source + "," + gate + "," + drain + ");\n")
35
written = True
36
spice.close()
37
continue
38
dest.write(line)
39
written = False
40
src.close()
41
dest.close()
42
models.close()
43
44
if __name == "__main__":
45
main()
Listing B.2: Python script for generating transistor models of cells
B.3
C-shell Script For Generating Gate-Exhaustive UDFM
1
#!/bin/csh -f
2
#set echo
3
4
if ( "$1" == "" ) then
5
echo "Error: call is $0 <cell list file>"
6
exit(1)
7
endif
8
9
set flowtype = ref
10
11
set cells = `cat $1`
12
13
set curdir = `pwd`
14
15
set verilog_dir = lib/verilog
16
set atpg_dir = lib/atpg
17
18
mkdir -p data
19
cd data
20
21
foreach cell ($cells)
22
mkdir -p $cell
23
cd $cell
24
grep -e 'module '$cell''
$curdir/$verilog_dir/${cell}.v >
${cell}.temp
25
sed -e 's/(/ ( /g' -e 's/)/ ) /g'
-e 's/,/ , /g'
< ${cell}.temp > ${cell
}.ports
26
rm -f $cell.temp
27
28
set cmd = "-cell_type combinational"
29
set celltype = "combinational"
30
31
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' '
${cell}.ports
| grep " QN " `
!= "" )
set scanout = "QN"
32
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' '
${cell}.ports
| grep " Q " `
!= "" )
set scanout = "Q"
33
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' '
${cell}.ports
| grep " SOUT " ` != "" )
set scanout = "SOUT"
34
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' '
${cell}.ports
| grep " SDO " `
!= "" )
set scanout = "SDO"
35
36
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " CLK " ` != "" &&
`
grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " D " ` != "" &&
`grep -
e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " Q" ` != "") then
37
set celltype = "dff"
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
73
==PAGE:84==
38
set cmd = "-cell_type dff -clock_type CLK positive -set SN 1 -reset RN 1"
39
endif
40
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " E " ` != "" &&
`grep
-e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " D " ` != "" &&
`grep -e '
module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " Q" ` != "") then
41
set celltype = "latch"
42
set cmd = "-cell_type latch -latch_enable E 0"
43
endif
44
if ( (`grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " SI" ` != "" ||
`
grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " SDI" ` != "") &&
$celltype == "dff") then
45
set celltype = "sff"
46
set cmd = "-cell_type sff -clock_type CLK positive -scanin SI -scanout
$scanout -shift_enable SE -fix_port SE 0 -set SN 1 -reset RN 1"
47
endif
48
if ( `grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " SC1 " ` != "" &&
`
grep -e 'module '$cell' ' $cell.ports | grep " SC2 " ` != "" &&
$celltype == "sff") then
49
set celltype = "lssd"
50
set cmd = "-cell_type lssd -clock_type CLK positive lssd_capture_clock -
clock_type SC1 positive lssd_shift_clock1 -clock_type SC2 positive
lssd_shift_clock2 -scanin SDI -scanout $scanout -set SN 1 -reset RN 1"
51
endif
52
cellmodelgen \
53
-flow_type $flowtype \
54
-cell_name $cell \
55
$cmd \
56
-gate_exhaustive \
57
-verilog_lib $curdir/$verilog_dir/$cell.v \
58
-verilog_lib $curdir/$verilog_dir/udps.v \
59
-fastscan_lib $curdir/$atpg_dir/$cell.atpg \
60
-fastscan_lib $curdir/$atpg_dir/udps.atpg \
61
-dont_cares off
62
cd ..
63
end
64
65
cd ..
66
67
cellmodelgen \
68
-export \
69
-flow_type ${flowtype} \
70
-cell_file $1 \
71
-data_dir data \
72
-udfm_file 24nm_GE.udfm \
73
-verilog_dir lib/verilog
74
endif
75
76
exit(0)
Listing B.3: C-shell script used to generate the gate exhaustive UDFM for the 24 nm library
74
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:85==
C
User Defined Fault Model For
Transistor Stuck-open Stuck-at Faults
1
UDFM {
2
version : 1;
3
UdfmType ("transistor -stuck-at") {
4
Cell ("AND3_X1") {
5
Fault ("M4-gate-sa1") {
6
Test {
7
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
8
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C": 11;}
9
}
10
}
11
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
12
Test {
13
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
14
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C": 11;}
15
}
16
}
17
Fault ("M6-gate-sa1") {
18
Test {
19
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
20
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C": 10;}
21
}
22
}
23
Fault ("M7-gate-sa1") {
24
Test {
25
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
26
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : -1; "C": -1;}
27
}
28
Test {
29
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
30
Conditions {"A" : -1; "B" : 01; "C": -1;}
31
}
32
Test {
33
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
34
Conditions {"A" : -1; "B" : -1; "C": 01;}
35
}
36
}
37
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
38
Test {
39
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
40
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C": 11;}
41
}
42
}
43
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
44
Test {
45
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
46
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C": 11;}
47
}
48
}
49
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
50
Test {
51
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
52
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C": 01;}
53
}
54
}
55
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
75
==PAGE:86==
56
Test {
57
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
58
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 1-; "C": 1-;}
59
}
60
Test {
61
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
62
Conditions {"A" : 1-; "B" : 10; "C": 1-;}
63
}
64
Test {
65
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
66
Conditions {"A" : 1-; "B" : 1-; "C": 10;}
67
}
68
}
69
}
70
Cell ("AND4_X1") {
71
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
72
Test {
73
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
74
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C": 11; "D" : 11;}
75
}
76
}
77
Fault ("M6-gate-sa1") {
78
Test {
79
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
80
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C": 11; "D" : 11;}
81
}
82
}
83
Fault ("M7-gate-sa1") {
84
Test {
85
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
86
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C": 10; "D" : 11;}
87
}
88
}
89
Fault ("M8-gate-sa1") {
90
Test {
91
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
92
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C": 11; "D" : 10;}
93
}
94
}
95
Fault ("M9-gate-sa1") {
96
Test {
97
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
98
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : -1; "C": -1; "D" : -1;}
99
}
100
Test {
101
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
102
Conditions {"A" : -1; "B" : 01; "C": -1; "D" : -1;}
103
}
104
Test {
105
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
106
Conditions {"A" : -1; "B" : -1; "C": 01; "D" : -1;}
107
}
108
Test {
109
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
110
Conditions {"A" : -1; "B" : -1; "C": -1; "D" : 01;}
111
}
112
}
113
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
114
Test {
115
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
116
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C": 11; "D" : 11;}
117
}
76
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:87==
118
}
119
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
120
Test {
121
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
122
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C": 11; "D" : 11;}
123
}
124
}
125
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
126
Test {
127
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
128
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C": 01; "D" : 11;}
129
}
130
}
131
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
132
Test {
133
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
134
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C": 11; "D" : 01;}
135
}
136
}
137
Fault ("M4-gate-sa0") {
138
Test {
139
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
140
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 1-; "C": 1-; "D" : 1-;}
141
}
142
Test {
143
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
144
Conditions {"A" : 1-; "B" : 10; "C": 1-; "D" : 1-;}
145
}
146
Test {
147
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
148
Conditions {"A" : 1-; "B" : 1-; "C": 10; "D" : 1-;}
149
}
150
Test {
151
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
152
Conditions {"A" : 1-; "B" : 1-; "C": 1-; "D" : 10;}
153
}
154
}
155
}
156
Cell ("NAND2_X1") {
157
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
158
Test {
159
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
160
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
161
}
162
}
163
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
164
Test {
165
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
166
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01;}
167
}
168
}
169
Fault ("M2-gate-sa1") {
170
Test {
171
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
172
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11;}
173
}
174
}
175
Fault ("M3-gate-sa1") {
176
Test {
177
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
178
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10;}
179
}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
77
==PAGE:88==
180
}
181
}
182
Cell ("NAND3_X1") {
183
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
184
Test {
185
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
186
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 11;}
187
}
188
}
189
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
190
Test {
191
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
192
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 11;}
193
}
194
}
195
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
196
Test {
197
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
198
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
199
}
200
}
201
Fault ("M3-gate-sa1") {
202
Test {
203
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
204
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 11;}
205
}
206
}
207
Fault ("M4-gate-sa1") {
208
Test {
209
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
210
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 11;}
211
}
212
}
213
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
214
Test {
215
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
216
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
217
}
218
}
219
}
220
Cell ("NAND4_X1") {
221
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
222
Test {
223
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
224
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 11; "D" : 11;}
225
}
226
}
227
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
228
Test {
229
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
230
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 11; "D" : 11;}
231
}
232
}
233
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
234
Test {
235
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
236
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 01; "D" : 11;}
237
}
238
}
239
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
240
Test {
241
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
78
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:89==
242
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 11; "D" : 01;}
243
}
244
}
245
Fault ("M4-gate-sa1") {
246
Test {
247
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
248
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 11; "D" : 11;}
249
}
250
}
251
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
252
Test {
253
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
254
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 11; "D" : 11;}
255
}
256
}
257
Fault ("M6-gate-sa1") {
258
Test {
259
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
260
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 10; "D" : 11;}
261
}
262
}
263
Fault ("M7-gate-sa1") {
264
Test {
265
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
266
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 11; "D" : 10;}
267
}
268
}
269
}
270
Cell ("NOR3_X1") {
271
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
272
Test {
273
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
274
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
275
}
276
}
277
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
278
Test {
279
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
280
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
281
}
282
}
283
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
284
Test {
285
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
286
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
287
}
288
}
289
Fault ("M3-gate-sa1") {
290
Test {
291
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
292
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
293
}
294
}
295
Fault ("M4-gate-sa1") {
296
Test {
297
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
298
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
299
}
300
}
301
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
302
Test {
303
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
79
==PAGE:90==
304
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
305
}
306
}
307
}
308
Cell ("NOR4_X1") {
309
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
310
Test {
311
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
312
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00; "D" : 00;}
313
}
314
}
315
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
316
Test {
317
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
318
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00; "D" : 00;}
319
}
320
}
321
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
322
Test {
323
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
324
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01; "D" : 00;}
325
}
326
}
327
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
328
Test {
329
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
330
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 00; "D" : 01;}
331
}
332
}
333
Fault ("M4-gate-sa1") {
334
Test {
335
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
336
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00; "D" : 00;}
337
}
338
}
339
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
340
Test {
341
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
342
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00; "D" : 00;}
343
}
344
}
345
Fault ("M6-gate-sa1") {
346
Test {
347
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
348
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10; "D" : 00;}
349
}
350
}
351
Fault ("M7-gate-sa1") {
352
Test {
353
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
354
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 00; "D" : 10;}
355
}
356
}
357
}
358
Cell ("OR3_X1") {
359
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
360
Test {
361
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
362
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
363
}
364
}
365
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
80
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:91==
366
Test {
367
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
368
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
369
}
370
}
371
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
372
Test {
373
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
374
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
375
}
376
}
377
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
378
Test {
379
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
380
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : -0; "C" : -0;}
381
}
382
Test {
383
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
384
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : 10; "C" : -0;}
385
}
386
Test {
387
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
388
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : -0; "C" : 10;}
389
}
390
}
391
Fault ("M4-gate-sa1") {
392
Test {
393
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
394
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
395
}
396
}
397
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
398
Test {
399
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
400
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
401
}
402
}
403
Fault ("M6-gate-sa1") {
404
Test {
405
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
406
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
407
}
408
}
409
Fault ("M7-gate-sa1") {
410
Test {
411
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
412
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 0-; "C" : 0-;}
413
}
414
Test {
415
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
416
Conditions {"A" : 0-; "B" : 01; "C" : 0-;}
417
}
418
Test {
419
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
420
Conditions {"A" : 0-; "B" : 0-; "C" : 01;}
421
}
422
}
423
}
424
Cell ("OR4_X1") {
425
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
426
Test {
427
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
81
==PAGE:92==
428
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00; "D" : 00;}
429
}
430
}
431
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
432
Test {
433
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
434
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00; "D" : 00;}
435
}
436
}
437
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
438
Test {
439
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
440
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01; "D" : 00;}
441
}
442
}
443
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
444
Test {
445
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
446
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 00; "D" : 01;}
447
}
448
}
449
Fault ("M4-gate-sa0") {
450
Test {
451
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
452
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : -0; "C" : -0; "D" : -0;}
453
}
454
Test {
455
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
456
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : 10; "C" : -0; "D" : -0;}
457
}
458
Test {
459
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
460
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : -0; "C" : 10; "D" : -0;}
461
}
462
Test {
463
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
464
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : -0; "C" : -0; "D" : 10;}
465
}
466
}
467
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
468
Test {
469
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
470
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00; "D" : 00;}
471
}
472
}
473
Fault ("M6-gate-sa1") {
474
Test {
475
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
476
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00; "D" : 00;}
477
}
478
}
479
Fault ("M7-gate-sa1") {
480
Test {
481
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
482
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10; "D" : 00;}
483
}
484
}
485
Fault ("M8-gate-sa1") {
486
Test {
487
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
488
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 00; "D" : 10;}
489
}
82
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:93==
490
}
491
Fault ("M9-gate-sa1") {
492
Test {
493
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
494
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 0-; "C" : 0-; "D" : 0-;}
495
}
496
Test {
497
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
498
Conditions {"A" : 0-; "B" : 01; "C" : 0-; "D" : 0-;}
499
}
500
Test {
501
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
502
Conditions {"A" : 0-; "B" : 0-; "C" : 01; "D" : 0-;}
503
}
504
Test {
505
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
506
Conditions {"A" : 0-; "B" : 0-; "C" : 0-; "D" : 01;}
507
}
508
}
509
}
510
Cell ("XOR2_X1") {
511
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
512
Test {
513
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
514
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00;}
515
}
516
}
517
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
518
Test {
519
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
520
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01;}
521
}
522
}
523
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
524
Test {
525
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
526
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : -0;}
527
}
528
Test {
529
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
530
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : 10;}
531
}
532
}
533
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
534
Test {
535
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
536
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
537
}
538
}
539
Fault ("M4-gate-sa0") {
540
Test {
541
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
542
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01;}
543
}
544
}
545
Fault ("M5-gate-sa1") {
546
Test {
547
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
548
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00;}
549
}
550
}
551
Fault ("M6-gate-sa1") {
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
83
==PAGE:94==
552
Test {
553
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
554
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10;}
555
}
556
}
557
Fault ("M7-gate-sa1") {
558
Test {
559
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
560
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00;}
561
}
562
Test {
563
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
564
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01;}
565
}
566
}
567
Fault ("M8-gate-sa1") {
568
Test {
569
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
570
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11;}
571
}
572
}
573
Fault ("M9-gate-sa1") {
574
Test {
575
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
576
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10;}
577
}
578
}
579
}
580
Cell ("XOR3_X1") {
581
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
582
Test {
583
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
584
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
585
}
586
}
587
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
588
Test {
589
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
590
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
591
}
592
}
593
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
594
Test {
595
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
596
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
597
}
598
Test {
599
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
600
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
601
}
602
}
603
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
604
Test {
605
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
606
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
607
}
608
}
609
Fault ("M4-gate-sa0") {
610
Test {
611
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
612
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
613
}
84
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:95==
614
}
615
Fault ("M5-gate-sa0") {
616
Test {
617
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
618
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
619
}
620
Test {
621
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
622
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
623
}
624
Test {
625
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
626
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
627
}
628
Test {
629
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
630
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
631
}
632
}
633
Fault ("M6-gate-sa0") {
634
Test {
635
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
636
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
637
}
638
Test {
639
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
640
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
641
}
642
}
643
Fault ("M7-gate-sa0") {
644
Test {
645
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
646
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
647
}
648
Test {
649
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
650
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
651
}
652
Test {
653
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
654
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 01; "C" : 10;}
655
}
656
Test {
657
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
658
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 10; "C" : 10;}
659
}
660
Test {
661
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
662
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
663
}
664
Test {
665
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
666
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
667
}
668
Test {
669
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
670
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
671
}
672
Test {
673
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
674
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
675
}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
85
==PAGE:96==
676
}
677
Fault ("M8-gate-sa0") {
678
Test {
679
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
680
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 11;}
681
}
682
Test {
683
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
684
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 11;}
685
}
686
Test {
687
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
688
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 11;}
689
}
690
Test {
691
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
692
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 11;}
693
}
694
}
695
Fault ("M9-gate-sa0") {
696
Test {
697
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
698
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
699
}
700
Test {
701
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
702
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
703
}
704
}
705
Fault ("M10-gate-sa1") {
706
Test {
707
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
708
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
709
}
710
}
711
Fault ("M11-gate-sa1") {
712
Test {
713
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
714
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
715
}
716
}
717
Fault ("M12-gate-sa1") {
718
Test {
719
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
720
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
721
}
722
Test {
723
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
724
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
725
}
726
}
727
Fault ("M13-gate-sa1") {
728
Test {
729
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
730
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
731
}
732
}
733
Fault ("M14-gate-sa1") {
734
Test {
735
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
736
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
737
}
86
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:97==
738
}
739
Fault ("M15-gate-sa1") {
740
Test {
741
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
742
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
743
}
744
Test {
745
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
746
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
747
}
748
Test {
749
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
750
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
751
}
752
Test {
753
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
754
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
755
}
756
}
757
Fault ("M16-gate-sa1") {
758
Test {
759
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
760
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
761
}
762
Test {
763
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
764
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
765
}
766
}
767
Fault ("M17-gate-sa1") {
768
Test {
769
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
770
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
771
}
772
Test {
773
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
774
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
775
}
776
Test {
777
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
778
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
779
}
780
Test {
781
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
782
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
783
}
784
Test {
785
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
786
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
787
}
788
Test {
789
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
790
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 01; "C" : 01;}
791
}
792
Test {
793
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
794
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
795
}
796
Test {
797
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
798
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 10; "C" : 01;}
799
}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
87
==PAGE:98==
800
}
801
Fault ("M18-gate-sa1") {
802
Test {
803
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
804
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 11;}
805
}
806
Test {
807
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
808
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 11;}
809
}
810
Test {
811
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
812
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 11;}
813
}
814
Test {
815
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
816
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 11;}
817
}
818
}
819
Fault ("M19-gate-sa1") {
820
Test {
821
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
822
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
823
}
824
Test {
825
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
826
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
827
}
828
}
829
}
830
Cell ("XNOR2_X1") {
831
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
832
Test {
833
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
834
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00;}
835
}
836
}
837
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
838
Test {
839
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
840
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01;}
841
}
842
}
843
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
844
Test {
845
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
846
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : -0;}
847
}
848
Test {
849
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
850
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : 10;}
851
}
852
}
853
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
854
Test {
855
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
856
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
857
}
858
}
859
Fault ("M4-gate-sa0") {
860
Test {
861
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
88
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:99==
862
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01;}
863
}
864
}
865
Fault ("M5-gate-sa0") {
866
Test {
867
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
868
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00;}
869
}
870
Test {
871
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
872
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01;}
873
}
874
Test {
875
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
876
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10;}
877
}
878
Test {
879
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
880
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11;}
881
}
882
}
883
Fault ("M6-gate-sa1") {
884
Test {
885
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
886
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00;}
887
}
888
}
889
Fault ("M7-gate-sa1") {
890
Test {
891
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
892
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10;}
893
}
894
}
895
Fault ("M8-gate-sa1") {
896
Test {
897
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
898
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00;}
899
}
900
Test {
901
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
902
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01;}
903
}
904
}
905
Fault ("M9-gate-sa1") {
906
Test {
907
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
908
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11;}
909
}
910
}
911
Fault ("M10-gate-sa1") {
912
Test {
913
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
914
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10;}
915
}
916
}
917
Fault ("M11-gate-sa1") {
918
Test {
919
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
920
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00;}
921
}
922
Test {
923
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
89
==PAGE:100==
924
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10;}
925
}
926
Test {
927
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
928
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01;}
929
}
930
Test {
931
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
932
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
933
}
934
}
935
}
936
Cell ("XNOR3_X1") {
937
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
938
Test {
939
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
940
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
941
}
942
}
943
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
944
Test {
945
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
946
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
947
}
948
}
949
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
950
Test {
951
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
952
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : -0; "C" : 00;}
953
}
954
Test {
955
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
956
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
957
}
958
}
959
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
960
Test {
961
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
962
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
963
}
964
}
965
Fault ("M4-gate-sa0") {
966
Test {
967
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
968
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
969
}
970
}
971
Fault ("M5-gate-sa0") {
972
Test {
973
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
974
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
975
}
976
Test {
977
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
978
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
979
}
980
Test {
981
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
982
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
983
}
984
Test {
985
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
90
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:101==
986
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
987
}
988
}
989
Fault ("M6-gate-sa0") {
990
Test {
991
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
992
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
993
}
994
Test {
995
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
996
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
997
}
998
}
999
Fault ("M7-gate-sa0") {
1000
Test {
1001
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1002
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
1003
}
1004
Test {
1005
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1006
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
1007
}
1008
Test {
1009
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1010
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 01; "C" : 10;}
1011
}
1012
Test {
1013
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1014
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 10; "C" : 10;}
1015
}
1016
Test {
1017
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1018
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
1019
}
1020
Test {
1021
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1022
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
1023
}
1024
Test {
1025
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1026
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
1027
}
1028
Test {
1029
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1030
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
1031
}
1032
}
1033
Fault ("M8-gate-sa0") {
1034
Test {
1035
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1036
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 11;}
1037
}
1038
Test {
1039
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1040
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 11;}
1041
}
1042
Test {
1043
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1044
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 11;}
1045
}
1046
Test {
1047
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
91
==PAGE:102==
1048
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 11;}
1049
}
1050
}
1051
Fault ("M9-gate-sa0") {
1052
Test {
1053
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1054
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
1055
}
1056
Test {
1057
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1058
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
1059
}
1060
}
1061
Fault ("M10-gate-sa0") {
1062
Test {
1063
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1064
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
1065
}
1066
Test {
1067
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1068
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
1069
}
1070
Test {
1071
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1072
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
1073
}
1074
Test {
1075
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1076
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
1077
}
1078
Test {
1079
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1080
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
1081
}
1082
Test {
1083
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1084
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 10; "C" : 01;}
1085
}
1086
Test {
1087
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1088
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
1089
}
1090
Test {
1091
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1092
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 01; "C" : 10;}
1093
}
1094
Test {
1095
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1096
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 11;}
1097
}
1098
Test {
1099
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1100
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 10; "C" : 10;}
1101
}
1102
Test {
1103
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1104
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
1105
}
1106
Test {
1107
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1108
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 11;}
1109
}
92
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:103==
1110
Test {
1111
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1112
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 01; "C" : 01;}
1113
}
1114
Test {
1115
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1116
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
1117
}
1118
Test {
1119
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1120
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 11;}
1121
}
1122
Test {
1123
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1124
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 11;}
1125
}
1126
}
1127
Fault ("M11-gate-sa1") {
1128
Test {
1129
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1130
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
1131
}
1132
}
1133
Fault ("M12-gate-sa1") {
1134
Test {
1135
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1136
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
1137
}
1138
}
1139
Fault ("M13-gate-sa1") {
1140
Test {
1141
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1142
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
1143
}
1144
Test {
1145
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1146
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
1147
}
1148
}
1149
Fault ("M14-gate-sa1") {
1150
Test {
1151
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1152
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
1153
}
1154
}
1155
Fault ("M15-gate-sa1") {
1156
Test {
1157
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1158
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
1159
}
1160
}
1161
Fault ("M16-gate-sa1") {
1162
Test {
1163
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1164
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
1165
}
1166
Test {
1167
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1168
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
1169
}
1170
Test {
1171
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
93
==PAGE:104==
1172
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
1173
}
1174
Test {
1175
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1176
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
1177
}
1178
}
1179
Fault ("M17-gate-sa1") {
1180
Test {
1181
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1182
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
1183
}
1184
Test {
1185
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1186
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
1187
}
1188
}
1189
Fault ("M18-gate-sa1") {
1190
Test {
1191
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1192
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
1193
}
1194
Test {
1195
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1196
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
1197
}
1198
Test {
1199
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1200
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
1201
}
1202
Test {
1203
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1204
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
1205
}
1206
Test {
1207
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1208
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
1209
}
1210
Test {
1211
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1212
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 01; "C" : 01;}
1213
}
1214
Test {
1215
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1216
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
1217
}
1218
Test {
1219
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1220
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 10; "C" : 01;}
1221
}
1222
}
1223
Fault ("M19-gate-sa1") {
1224
Test {
1225
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1226
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 11;}
1227
}
1228
Test {
1229
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1230
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 11;}
1231
}
1232
Test {
1233
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
94
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:105==
1234
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 11;}
1235
}
1236
Test {
1237
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1238
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 11;}
1239
}
1240
}
1241
Fault ("M20-gate-sa1") {
1242
Test {
1243
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1244
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
1245
}
1246
Test {
1247
StaticFault {"Z" : 1/0;}
1248
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
1249
}
1250
}
1251
Fault ("M21-gate-sa1") {
1252
Test {
1253
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1254
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "C" : 00;}
1255
}
1256
Test {
1257
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1258
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "C" : 00;}
1259
}
1260
Test {
1261
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1262
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "C" : 10;}
1263
}
1264
Test {
1265
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1266
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "C" : 00;}
1267
}
1268
Test {
1269
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1270
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "C" : 00;}
1271
}
1272
Test {
1273
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1274
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 01; "C" : 01;}
1275
}
1276
Test {
1277
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1278
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "C" : 01;}
1279
}
1280
Test {
1281
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1282
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 10; "C" : 01;}
1283
}
1284
Test {
1285
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1286
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "C" : 11;}
1287
}
1288
Test {
1289
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1290
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 01; "C" : 01;}
1291
}
1292
Test {
1293
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1294
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "C" : 01;}
1295
}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
95
==PAGE:106==
1296
Test {
1297
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1298
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "C" : 11;}
1299
}
1300
Test {
1301
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1302
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 10; "C" : 10;}
1303
}
1304
Test {
1305
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1306
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "C" : 10;}
1307
}
1308
Test {
1309
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1310
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "C" : 11;}
1311
}
1312
Test {
1313
StaticFault {"Z" : 0/1;}
1314
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "C" : 11;}
1315
}
1316
}
1317
}
1318
Cell ("HA_X1") {
1319
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
1320
Test {
1321
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1322
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00;}
1323
}
1324
}
1325
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
1326
Test {
1327
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1328
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01;}
1329
}
1330
}
1331
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
1332
Test {
1333
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1334
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : -0;}
1335
}
1336
Test {
1337
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1338
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : 10;}
1339
}
1340
}
1341
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
1342
Test {
1343
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1344
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
1345
}
1346
}
1347
Fault ("M4-gate-sa0") {
1348
Test {
1349
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1350
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01;}
1351
}
1352
}
1353
Fault ("M5-gate-sa0") {
1354
Test {
1355
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1356
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11;}
1357
}
96
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:107==
1358
}
1359
Fault ("M6-gate-sa0") {
1360
Test {
1361
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1362
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01;}
1363
}
1364
}
1365
Fault ("M7-gate-sa0") {
1366
Test {
1367
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1368
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 1-;}
1369
}
1370
Test {
1371
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1372
Conditions {"A" : 1-; "B" : 10;}
1373
}
1374
}
1375
Fault ("M8-gate-sa1") {
1376
Test {
1377
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1378
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00;}
1379
}
1380
}
1381
Fault ("M9-gate-sa1") {
1382
Test {
1383
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1384
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10;}
1385
}
1386
}
1387
Fault ("M10-gate-sa1") {
1388
Test {
1389
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1390
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00;}
1391
}
1392
Test {
1393
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1394
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01;}
1395
}
1396
}
1397
Fault ("M11-gate-sa1") {
1398
Test {
1399
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1400
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11;}
1401
}
1402
}
1403
Fault ("M12-gate-sa1") {
1404
Test {
1405
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1406
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10;}
1407
}
1408
}
1409
Fault ("M13-gate-sa1") {
1410
Test {
1411
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1412
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11;}
1413
}
1414
}
1415
Fault ("M14-gate-sa1") {
1416
Test {
1417
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1418
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10;}
1419
}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
97
==PAGE:108==
1420
}
1421
Fault ("M15-gate-sa1") {
1422
Test {
1423
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1424
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : -1;}
1425
}
1426
Test {
1427
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1428
Conditions {"A" : -1; "B" : 01;}
1429
}
1430
}
1431
}
1432
Cell ("FA_X1") {
1433
Fault ("M0-gate-sa0") {
1434
Test {
1435
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1436
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1437
}
1438
Test {
1439
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1440
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 00;}
1441
}
1442
Test {
1443
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1444
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1445
}
1446
}
1447
Fault ("M1-gate-sa0") {
1448
Test {
1449
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1450
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1451
}
1452
Test {
1453
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1454
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1455
}
1456
Test {
1457
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1458
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1459
}
1460
}
1461
Fault ("M2-gate-sa0") {
1462
Test {
1463
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1464
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 00;}
1465
}
1466
Test {
1467
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1468
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1469
}
1470
Test {
1471
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1472
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1473
}
1474
Test {
1475
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1476
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1477
}
1478
Test {
1479
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1480
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1481
}
98
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:109==
1482
Test {
1483
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1484
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1485
}
1486
}
1487
Fault ("M3-gate-sa0") {
1488
Test {
1489
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1490
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1491
}
1492
Test {
1493
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1494
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 11;}
1495
}
1496
Test {
1497
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1498
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1499
}
1500
}
1501
Fault ("M4-gate-sa0") {
1502
Test {
1503
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1504
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1505
}
1506
Test {
1507
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1508
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1509
}
1510
Test {
1511
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1512
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1513
}
1514
}
1515
Fault ("M5-gate-sa0") {
1516
Test {
1517
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1518
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1519
}
1520
}
1521
Fault ("M6-gate-sa0") {
1522
Test {
1523
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1524
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1525
}
1526
}
1527
Fault ("M7-gate-sa0") {
1528
Test {
1529
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1530
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 1-; "CIN" : 00;}
1531
}
1532
Test {
1533
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1534
Conditions {"A" : 1-; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1535
}
1536
}
1537
Fault ("M8-gate-sa0") {
1538
Test {
1539
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1540
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 01;}
1541
}
1542
Test {
1543
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
99
==PAGE:110==
1544
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 01;}
1545
}
1546
}
1547
Fault ("M9-gate-sa0") {
1548
Test {
1549
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1550
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 00;}
1551
}
1552
Test {
1553
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1554
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1555
}
1556
Test {
1557
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1558
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1559
}
1560
Test {
1561
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1562
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1563
}
1564
}
1565
Fault ("M10-gate-sa0") {
1566
Test {
1567
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1568
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 00;}
1569
}
1570
Test {
1571
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1572
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1573
}
1574
Test {
1575
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1576
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1577
}
1578
Test {
1579
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1580
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1581
}
1582
}
1583
Fault ("M11-gate-sa0") {
1584
Test {
1585
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1586
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 01;}
1587
}
1588
Test {
1589
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1590
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 01;}
1591
}
1592
}
1593
Fault ("M12-gate-sa0") {
1594
Test {
1595
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1596
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1597
}
1598
Test {
1599
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1600
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1601
}
1602
Test {
1603
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1604
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1605
}
100
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:111==
1606
Test {
1607
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1608
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 11;}
1609
}
1610
}
1611
Fault ("M13-gate-sa0") {
1612
Test {
1613
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1614
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 01;}
1615
}
1616
Test {
1617
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1618
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 01;}
1619
}
1620
}
1621
Fault ("M14-gate-sa0") {
1622
Test {
1623
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1624
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1625
}
1626
Test {
1627
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1628
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1629
}
1630
}
1631
Fault ("M15-gate-sa0") {
1632
Test {
1633
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1634
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1635
}
1636
Test {
1637
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1638
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1639
}
1640
Test {
1641
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1642
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 10;}
1643
}
1644
Test {
1645
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1646
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 10;}
1647
}
1648
}
1649
Fault ("M16-gate-sa0") {
1650
Test {
1651
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1652
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1653
}
1654
Test {
1655
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1656
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1657
}
1658
Test {
1659
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1660
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 01;}
1661
}
1662
Test {
1663
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1664
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 01;}
1665
}
1666
}
1667
Fault ("M17-gate-sa0") {
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
101
==PAGE:112==
1668
Test {
1669
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1670
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1671
}
1672
Test {
1673
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1674
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1675
}
1676
}
1677
Fault ("M18-gate-sa0") {
1678
Test {
1679
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1680
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1681
}
1682
Test {
1683
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1684
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1685
}
1686
Test {
1687
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1688
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : -0; "CIN" : 11;}
1689
}
1690
Test {
1691
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1692
Conditions {"A" : -0; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1693
}
1694
}
1695
Fault ("M19-gate-sa1") {
1696
Test {
1697
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1698
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 00;}
1699
}
1700
Test {
1701
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1702
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1703
}
1704
Test {
1705
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1706
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1707
}
1708
}
1709
Fault ("M20-gate-sa1") {
1710
Test {
1711
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1712
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1713
}
1714
Test {
1715
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1716
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1717
}
1718
Test {
1719
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1720
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1721
}
1722
}
1723
Fault ("M21-gate-sa1") {
1724
Test {
1725
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1726
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 00;}
1727
}
1728
Test {
1729
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
102
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:113==
1730
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1731
}
1732
Test {
1733
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1734
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1735
}
1736
Test {
1737
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1738
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1739
}
1740
Test {
1741
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1742
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1743
}
1744
Test {
1745
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1746
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1747
}
1748
}
1749
Fault ("M22-gate-sa1") {
1750
Test {
1751
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1752
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1753
}
1754
Test {
1755
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1756
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 11;}
1757
}
1758
}
1759
Fault ("M23-gate-sa1") {
1760
Test {
1761
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1762
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1763
}
1764
Test {
1765
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1766
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1767
}
1768
}
1769
Fault ("M24-gate-sa1") {
1770
Test {
1771
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1772
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1773
}
1774
}
1775
Fault ("M25-gate-sa1") {
1776
Test {
1777
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1778
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1779
}
1780
}
1781
Fault ("M26-gate-sa1") {
1782
Test {
1783
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1784
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : -1; "CIN" : 00;}
1785
}
1786
Test {
1787
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1788
Conditions {"A" : -1; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1789
}
1790
}
1791
Fault ("M27-gate-sa1") {
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
103
==PAGE:114==
1792
Test {
1793
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1794
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 10;}
1795
}
1796
Test {
1797
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1798
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 10;}
1799
}
1800
}
1801
Fault ("M28-gate-sa1") {
1802
Test {
1803
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1804
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 00;}
1805
}
1806
Test {
1807
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1808
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1809
}
1810
Test {
1811
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1812
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1813
}
1814
Test {
1815
StaticFault {"S" : 1/0;}
1816
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1817
}
1818
}
1819
Fault ("M29-gate-sa1") {
1820
Test {
1821
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1822
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 00;}
1823
}
1824
Test {
1825
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1826
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 00;}
1827
}
1828
Test {
1829
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1830
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1831
}
1832
Test {
1833
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1834
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 00;}
1835
}
1836
Test {
1837
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1838
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 01;}
1839
}
1840
Test {
1841
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1842
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 01;}
1843
}
1844
}
1845
Fault ("M30-gate-sa1") {
1846
Test {
1847
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1848
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 10;}
1849
}
1850
Test {
1851
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1852
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 10;}
1853
}
104
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:115==
1854
}
1855
Fault ("M31-gate-sa1") {
1856
Test {
1857
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1858
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1859
}
1860
Test {
1861
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1862
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1863
}
1864
Test {
1865
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1866
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1867
}
1868
Test {
1869
StaticFault {"S" : 0/1;}
1870
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 11;}
1871
}
1872
}
1873
Fault ("M32-gate-sa1") {
1874
Test {
1875
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1876
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 10;}
1877
}
1878
Test {
1879
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1880
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 10;}
1881
}
1882
}
1883
Fault ("M33-gate-sa1") {
1884
Test {
1885
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1886
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1887
}
1888
Test {
1889
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1890
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1891
}
1892
Test {
1893
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1894
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1895
}
1896
Test {
1897
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1898
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 11;}
1899
}
1900
}
1901
Fault ("M34-gate-sa1") {
1902
Test {
1903
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1904
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1905
}
1906
Test {
1907
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1908
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1909
}
1910
Test {
1911
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1912
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 01;}
1913
}
1914
Test {
1915
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
105
==PAGE:116==
1916
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 01;}
1917
}
1918
}
1919
Fault ("M35-gate-sa1") {
1920
Test {
1921
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1922
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1923
}
1924
Test {
1925
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1926
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 11;}
1927
}
1928
Test {
1929
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1930
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 10;}
1931
}
1932
Test {
1933
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1934
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 10;}
1935
}
1936
}
1937
Fault ("M36-gate-sa1") {
1938
Test {
1939
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1940
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 1-; "CIN" : 00;}
1941
}
1942
Test {
1943
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1944
Conditions {"A" : 1-; "B" : 10; "CIN" : 00;}
1945
}
1946
Test {
1947
StaticFault {"CO" : 1/0;}
1948
Conditions {"A" : 10; "B" : 10; "CIN" : --;}
1949
}
1950
}
1951
Fault ("M37-gate-sa1") {
1952
Test {
1953
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1954
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 01; "CIN" : --;}
1955
}
1956
Test {
1957
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1958
Conditions {"A" : 01; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 11;}
1959
}
1960
Test {
1961
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1962
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 01; "CIN" : 11;}
1963
}
1964
Test {
1965
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1966
Conditions {"A" : 11; "B" : 00; "CIN" : 01;}
1967
}
1968
Test {
1969
StaticFault {"CO" : 0/1;}
1970
Conditions {"A" : 00; "B" : 11; "CIN" : 01;}
1971
}
1972
}
1973
}
1974
}
1975
}
106
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
==PAGE:117==
Listing C.1: UDFM created to model tests needed for detecting SA0 (SA1) faults on NMOS
(PMOS) transistors. A - in Conditions indicates a don’t care value.
Cell-aware fault models for test pattern generation
107
==PAGE:118==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 45 25 30 31
compute.dtu.dk
