==PAGE:1==
 
.  
 
1 
                                                                                           
 
 
 
 
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical 
Audiological Dataset 
Auditive fænotyper fra et stort klinisk audiologisk datasæt  
 
MASTER THESIS 
 
15th June, 2025 
 
 
 
Shardul Joshi (s223236) 
M.Sc. Engineering Acoustics 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
.  
 
2 
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset 
Shardul Joshi, Gerard-Encina Llamas, Abigail Anne Kressner 
Abstract - Accurate phenotyping of hearing loss is essential for improvement of personalized auditory rehabilitation strategies. 
This study presents a comprehensive framework for identifying auditory phenotypes using both synthetic and large-scale 
clinical audiological datasets. Synthetic audiograms were generated based on established profiles (Bisgaard et al., 2010; Dubno 
et al., 2013; Parthasarathy et al., 2020), incorporating speech discrimination (DS) scores to simulate behavioural variability. 
Dimensionality reduction techniques, namely Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Uniform Manifold Approximation 
and Projection (UMAP) were employed to visualize and assess separability of audiometric profiles. Gaussian Mixture Models 
(GMMs) were further implemented to conduct probabilistic clustering to uncover hidden phenotype structures. This model 
was subsequently applied to a clinical dataset comprising approximately 300,000 audiograms and DS scores from 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. The analysis revealed nine interpretable auditory clusters, with varying degrees of 
separation and classification confidence, representing the existence of both known and novel phenotypes. The findings 
highlight the utility of synthetic data modelling for verifying unsupervised learning techniques, and demonstrate the potential 
of data-driven approaches in refining hearing loss classification, for further clinical and research applications. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Impairments in hearing are among the most commonly 
reported concerns around the world, with a direct correlation 
to age, genetics, environments and exposures to aggravating 
factors. With growing populations exposed to excessive 
noise and ototoxins, identification of auditory pathologies 
has been of significant importance (Blazer et al., 2016; Priya 
& Hohman, 2025). Conductive and sensorineural hearing 
losses can be better evaluated on the basis of the audiometric 
patterns produced by subjects. Accordingly, a well defined 
classification system of audiograms permits the opportunity 
to categorize similar pathologies in the future, as well as 
produce targeted solutions in required directions (Salmon et 
al., 2025). 
Audiometry, the study of the sensitivity of an individual’s 
hearing, has evolved over the last century, through which 
steps have been undertaken for the development of the 
audiometer, categorization and determination of severity of 
hearing loss, and planning for applicable treatment (The 
History of Audiometry and Audiometers, n.d.). The 
subjective test for evaluating absolute hearing thresholds, 
Pure-tone audiometry (PTA), remains the industry-standard 
clinical assessment for hearing loss diagnosis and has 
progressed into PC-based measurements to enhance clinical 
workflows 
for 
providing 
precise, 
efficient 
hearing 
assessments and individualized hearing aid fittings (Carl et 
al., 2025). 
The necessity for identification of auditory phenotypes 
among the patients with hearing deficiencies stems from this 
need for personalised hearing aid configurations for defined 
hearing loss profiles. The current solutions include 
implementing hearing aid performance based on averaged 
audiometric profile identification, i.e. normalised hearing 
aids for patients with a specific nature of hearing loss 
(Sanchez-Lopez et al., 2020). A common feedback from 
current patients is non-usage of the hearing aids due to over-
exposure of signals of all frequencies and inefficiency of 
hearing aids to boost required frequencies, indicating the 
absence of identification of nature of hearing losses in 
individual patients (Chung, 2004). 
Elevated hearing thresholds often indicate peripheral 
auditory damage, but they do not capture all such 
impairments. Since the mid-20th century, studies have shown 
that auditory nerve (AN) damage may not exhibit significant 
threshold shifts. Exposure to loud noise can cause both 
temporary and permanent damage, with temporary threshold 
shifts (TTS) sometimes followed by irreversible synaptic 
loss, known as cochlear synaptopathy (CS) (Ryan et al., 2016; 
Natarajan et al., 2023; Encina-Llamas, 2024). CS, a key form 
of hidden hearing loss (HHL), has been widely studied across 
animal models and to some extent in humans (Kujawa & 
Liberman, 2009; Schaette & McAlpine, 2011; Parthasarathy 
& Kujawa, 2018). Notably, auditory brainstem response 
(ABR) and distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) 
tests show that substantial synaptic or inner hair cell (IHC) 
loss may not affect audiometric thresholds, highlighting the 
limitations of pure-tone audiograms in detecting certain 
auditory pathologies, and thus emphasizing the need for more 
refined phenotyping strategies (Bramhall et al., 2018; 
“Missed Hearing Loss in Tinnitus Patients with Normal 
Audiograms,” 2025). 
Audiograms have been studied to obtain deeper information 
regarding the pathologies underlying the auditory system. 
Despite variabilites in mean thresholds from subject to 
subject, comparable audiogram features point towards 
aforementioned underlying pathologies. Thus, clustering 
these audiograms with similar characteristics becomes 
interesting to create a defined standard hearing loss profiles, 
referred to as ‘phenotypes’ (Wang et al., 2021). They are 
described in terms of the means of conforming audiograms, 
==PAGE:3==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
3 
confined within upper and lower limits defined across the 
frequency range of interest. 
Multiple analytical studies have been conducted over the 
years on large datasets of audiograms collected in normative 
and clinical setups. Their results showed that clustering was 
observed to a certain degree, however a large extent of the 
audiograms did not conform to a singular profile. 
The earliest traces of the analysis of audiometric phenotypes 
being referred to in this project is the identification of 
Bisgaard phenotypes (Bisgaard et al., 2010). With an initial 
proposal of five standard audiograms to be used as reference 
against 15000 audiograms, the results were underwhelming, 
with only 26% of the dataset conforming to a reference 
profile. The use of Vector Quantization (VQ) generated new 
standard profiles from a larger dataset of 28,244 pure-tone 
audiograms, covering a larger range of hearing loss profiles. 
Ten profiles were proposed, seven of which conformed to the 
mild to moderate sloping group of audiometric profiles, 
while three represented the steep sloping groups (Fig. 1). The 
refined standard profiles improved the association to the 
dataset up to 46% and were incorporated into the IEC 60118-
15 (IEC 2012) audiogram measurement standard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 – Bisgaard  Standard Phenotype Classification (n1-n7 and s1-s3), 
showing moderately sloping (N1–N7, left) and steeply sloping (S1–S3, 
right) profiles across frequencies (0.25 to 8 kHz) 
A different investigation conducted analysis for phenotypes 
in presbycusis-based (age-related) hearing loss profiles, 
which revealed the presence of two main pathologies 
producing combined reduction in hearing (Dubno et al., 
2013). The pathologies were classified as sensory and 
metabolic hearing loss, affecting the hair cells and the stria 
vascularis respectively in the organ of Corti. Machine 
learning classifiers were applied to assess the conformation 
of a limited dataset to the exemplar training set, producing 
robust sensory, metabolic and mixed hearing loss profiles 
(Fig. 2). More recently, an approach was developed to 
estimate the percentages of the sensory and metabolic 
components for an individual by studying gerbil hearing loss 
characteristics (Vaden et al., 2022). The study provided 
evidence that audiograms may include information about 
deeper cochlear pathologies contributing to presbycusis. 
In another study, the segmentation of audiometric 
phenotypes was conducted on a large clinical dataset of 
132,504 filtered audiograms to assess the degree and root 
source of hearing loss (Parthasarathy et al., 2020a). Gaussian 
Mixture Models (GMMs) were used to cluster the 
audiograms, producing convergence on ten auditory 
phenotypes (Fig. 3). These profiles featured varying degrees 
of frequency-specific losses and predictable dependencies on 
age and gender of patient. Despite such progress through the 
years and the development of better-fitting probabilistic 
models, a large portion of the audiograms analyzed remain 
unclassified among the standard profiles discovered. 
 
Fig. 2 – Dubno Phenotype Classification, representing five patterns of 
age-related hearing loss: Older-Normal, Pre-Metabolic, Metabolic, 
Sensory, and Metabolic + Sensory, for underlying cochlear pathologies. 
Shaded regions show threshold ranges (dB HL) across frequencies (0.25 to 
8 kHz) 
These aforementioned standard phenotypes are considered 
as references for the synthetic audiogram dataset in this 
project. The generation of synthetic data is based on means 
and limits described by these standard phenotypes. This 
synthetic dataset is used to generate the individual blocks of 
the model that can be utilized for statistical analysis on the 
data. This statistical analysis includes clustering algorithms 
and machine-learning protocols, to visualise and compare 
obtained clusters with the already existing phenotypes, so as 
to verify the validity of the created model. Further, additional 
behavioural tests, namely speech-in-quiet and speech-in-
noise are included to obtain further dimensions of the data 
that are useful for better clustering (Billings et al., 2023). 
This model is implemented on a real audiogram dataset of 
pure-tone audiograms and speech audiograms, to generate 
==PAGE:4==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
4 
phenotypic clusters and comment on viability of finding 
novel phenotypes. 
 
Fig. 3 – Parthasarathy Phenotype Classification (m1-m10), displaying 
average hearing thresholds ( dB HL) across frequencies (0.5 to 8 kHz), 
showing audiometric phenotypes identified through data-driven clustering. 
Shaded regions indicate normal hearing limits 
This project is thus envisioned with the aims to:  
1. create a robust, reproducible model on a synthetic 
dataset for clustering analysis, 
2. implement the created model on the real dataset to 
observe unsupervised clustering, and 
3. analyze and compare generated clusters with known 
standard phenotypes to identify similar and novel 
phenotypes.  
 
2. METHODS 
2.1   Synthetic Audiogram Dataset Generation 
Historically defined hearing loss profiles provide a 
foundation for understanding the typical characteristics that 
govern hearing loss and provide evidence on the pathologies 
that are responsible for similarities in audiometric responses 
across test subjects (Allen & Eddins, 2010; Dubno et al., 
2013; Parthasarathy & Kujawa, 2018). The previously 
discovered phenotypes, used as input functions, become very 
useful tools for reimagining the statistical and analytical 
steps employed to obtain the standard profiles of hearing 
loss. It becomes interesting to use idealised structures of 
these audiogram profiles as they would assure the 
correctness of the created model by comparing the obtained 
clusters with the pre-defined profiles, thus assuring its 
applicability on future datasets with the aim to generate 
novel phenotypes. 
The synthetic audiogram dataset utilized in this analysis was 
generated through controlled sampling from multiple 
canonical audiometric phenotypes, namely those defined by 
Bisgaard et al. 2010, Dubno et al. 2013, and Parthasarathy et 
al. 2020a phenotypes. These phenotypes served as central 
reference templates, representing typical audiogram shapes 
(e.g. n1–n7 and s1-s3 in the Bisgaard et al. 2010 phenotype 
classification, 
Fig. 
1) 
across 
standard 
audiometric 
frequencies. Each phenotype represented a distinct 
configuration of hearing loss severity and frequency profile, 
making them suitable foundations for data generation. 
To create variability around these fixed templates, a 
controlled stochastic variation was included around each 
phenotype’s mean audiogram. For each profile, a specified 
number of synthetic samples were generated, which varied 
the phenotype’s frequency-specific thresholds within a pre-
defined absolute range. This attempted to introduce realistic 
but bounded variability, ensuring synthetic samples 
remained 
physiologically 
plausible 
and 
phenotype-
consistent. 
The synthetic data generation process was parameterized to 
specifically control the following characteristics; 
- Number of observations per phenotypal profile 
- Range of deviation allowed from mean audiogram of 
profile 
- Inclusion or exclusion of specific phenotypes (e.g. normal 
or steep-sloping profiles, as required) 
- Downstream addition of speech discrimination scores 
(DS), with fixed or variable distribution 
A strict control on the generation of the synthetic data was 
crucial to facilitate an unbiased statistical analysis while 
maintaining physiologically reasonable inputs. The speech 
discrimination score, a feature of data that was not observed 
in previous phenotypal studies, behaved as a supplementary 
variable to improve the dimensionality of the dataset. DS 
values were either fixed per profile, varied according to 
distributions, or were multimodal, thus enabling a better 
representation of clinical data. Conjugated with the 
aforementioned parameters, it was made possible to simulate 
complex audiological patterns. 
Synthetic datasets provide a powerful approach to systematic 
exploration and validation of unspervised statistical analysis 
methods, which are explored further. The model’s robustness 
to variability can be tested without dependence on realistic 
patient data, thus making it valuable in developing 
classification tools. 
2.1.1 Bisgaard Synthetic Dataset 
A synthetic dataset was constructed using standard 
audiometric phenotypes defined in Bisgaard et al. 2010, 
which proposes a set of ten reference audiograms derived 
from a clinical dataset of 28,244 measurements. These 
included seven flat or moderately sloping profiles (N1–N7) 
==PAGE:5==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
5 
and 
three 
steeply 
sloping 
profiles 
(S1–S3), 
each 
characterized by audiometric thresholds across eleven 
frequencies from 125 Hz to 8000 Hz. These profiles 
represent the typical range of hearing loss encountered in 
adult populations and are commonly used in hearing aid 
standardization and benchmarking studies. 
In this study, these phenotypes were recreated by initializing 
a tabulated dataset matrix corresponding to the threshold 
levels defined in the Bisgaard phenotypes. These threshold 
values were encoded for each frequency band (as described 
in Tables 2 and 4 of Bisgaard et al. 2010). The flat and 
moderately sloping profiles (N1–N7) depicted very mild to 
profound sensorineural hearing loss, while the steeply 
sloping types (S1–S3) showed rapid threshold drops at 
higher frequencies and represented audiograms with more 
pronounced high-frequency loss. 
To simulate variability among observations within a profile, 
a controlled perturbation model was applied where each 
synthetic audiogram was generated by sampling a single 
threshold per frequency within a fixed ±n dB range around 
the mean reference value. These per-frequency values were 
plotted together across the frequency range to simulate an 
individual’s audiogram. Every singular threshold value was 
sampled by first expanding into candidate values of ±5 dB, 
and then smoothing using a centered moving average. This 
step was added to ensure physiological plausibility, i.e. 
reduce abrupt and jagged variations between frequencies, 
thereby providing a smooth overall gradient of the 
audiogram. 
This process was repeated to generate a fixed number of 
synthetic samples per phenotype, maintained above a 
minimum number (discussed further in appendix A.4). Each 
synthetic audiogram was stored as a vector of frequency 
thresholds along with its phenotype label. This structured 
and reproducible data generation approach provided a well-
controlled 
Bisgaard 
synthetic 
dataset 
for 
applying 
dimensionality reduction methods (principal component 
analysis (PCA), uniform manifold approximation and 
projection (UMAP)) and clustering algorithms (Gaussian 
mixture models (GMM)) further (Encina-Llamas, Erik 
Kjærbøl, Abigail Kressner 2024). 
 
 
 
2.1.2 Dubno Synthetic Dataset 
A second synthetic dataset was generated using audiometric 
phenotypes 
that 
proposed 
a 
biologically 
informed 
classification of age-related hearing loss based on both 
animal models and human audiometric patterns (Dubno et 
al., 2013). The study identified five distinct audiogram 
shapes: older-normal, pre-metabolic, metabolic, sensory, 
and metabolic + sensory. These phenotypes were 
hypothesized to represent specific underlying cochlear 
mechanisms - namely, strial degeneration, outer hair cell 
(OHC) loss, or a combination of both (Schuknecht et al., 
1974; Dubno et al., 2013). 
The phenotypes were implemented in the present study by 
encoding the mean threshold values across eleven 
audiometric frequencies (125 Hz to 8000 Hz) for each 
profile. For instance, the older-normal phenotype maintained 
near-zero thresholds across all frequencies, while the 
metabolic profile exhibited flat elevated thresholds (∼25–45 
dB HL) across the spectrum. In contrast, the sensory and 
mixed profiles showed frequency-dependent declines that 
were particularly steep in the high-frequency range, 
representing the typical sloping patterns observed in 
sensorineural loss due to OHC damage. 
Random variations were introduced across the frequency 
bands, simulating within-phenotype variability, as observed 
for Bisgaard synthetic dataset in section 2.1.1. These varied 
thresholds were smoothed using a centered moving average 
to preserve the physiologically sensible shape of each curve. 
The 
resulting 
synthetic 
dataset 
retained 
consistent 
phenotypic labels while allowing for realistic, graded 
variation among individual audiograms. 
The Dubno-based synthetic dataset becomes a useful tool for 
testing classification frameworks that aim to differentiate 
types of age-related hearing loss, or even comment on 
underlying cochlear pathology from threshold data alone. 
2.1.3 Speech Audiometry – Discrimination Scores 
To extend the synthetic audiometric dataset beyond 
threshold-based 
information, 
synthetic 
speech 
discrimination (DS) scores were incorporated as an 
additional variable (Lopez, n.d.). These scores were assigned 
to each audiogram based on its associated audiometric 
phenotype. Two primary strategies were implemented to 
model this data: fixed DS assignment and variable DS 
sampling from predefined distributions.  
==PAGE:6==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
6 
Fig. 4 – DS Score Distributions (Gamma, Normal, Hybrid); Left: Gamma distributions as predicted in Bisgaard phenotypes (better score for mild profiles). 
Middle: Normal distributions as predicted for Bisgaard phenotypes. Right: Combination of gamma and normal distributions, simulating real DS distributions
In the fixed DS implementation, each phenotype was 
mapped to a single DS value that represented typical clinical 
expectations for that profile. For example, audiograms 
categorized as Bisgaard N1 (very mild loss) were assigned a 
DS score of 95%, while N7 (profound loss) received a score 
of 25%. These fixed scores provided a deterministic addition 
of the speech audiometry performance and improved the 
behaviour of dimensionality reduction algorithms due to the 
added behavioural information. 
To introduce variability of DS scores within individual 
phenotypes and simulate more realistic distributions, a 
second approach of assigning of DS scores based on 
phenotype-specific Gaussian distributions was used (Fig. 4). 
Each phenotype was associated with a mean and standard 
deviation, and DS values were drawn with boundary 
limitations at 0% and 100%. Additionally, bimodal and 
trimodal distributions were also attempted within the same 
phenotype, where for example, the population within 
Bisgaard N7 profile was evenly split across three subgroups 
centered at 25%, 50%, and 90%. This implementtation 
represented atypical DS performance in subjects with similar 
audiogram behaviour, and tested the ability of clustering 
models (GMM) and projections (UMAP) to consider such 
outlier subgroups. 
Alternative modelling approaches were also explored, 
including assigning DS scores from Gaussian, gamma, 
normal, binomial or hybrid distributions with phenotype-
specific parameters, to simulate differing levels of functional 
unpredictability. These manipulations enabled assessment of 
how DS score inclusion alters the structure and separability 
of the dataset in the eventual projections, and how it may 
help in distinguishing otherwise overlapping audiometric 
profiles. 
All DS scores were included in the same datasets containing 
the PTA information, and used in PCA and UMAP 
computations for analyzing the improvements they provide. 
Despite some limitations within defined boundaries 
(discussed in section 4.4), the generated synthetic datasets 
remain a robust and reproducible foundation for audiological 
modelling and unsupervised pattern analysis. 
 
2.2   Statistical Analysis Tools 
The investigation on synthetic audiometric profiles was 
conducted using a range of statistical and unsupervised 
analysis 
techniques. 
These 
methods 
included 
data 
dimensionality reduction, visualization of latent structures, 
and observation of potential subgroups in both PTA 
thresholds and extended datasets that include speech DS 
scores. 
PCA was first employed to perform linear dimensionality 
reduction on the synthetic datasets. PCA projects the high-
dimensional audiometric data onto orthogonal principal 
components that demonstrate the greatest variance in the 
dataset, i.e. it describes the dependence of the data on its two 
most influential dimensions (Vanhatalo et al., 2017). This 
allowed for visualization of the global structure of the data, 
identification of key axes of variation, and projection of 
phenotype centroids into this reduced space. Variable 
contributions (mean, slope, distributions, etc.) to principal 
components were also examined to identify characteristics 
that cause the observed separation. 
To understand potential relationships and describe more 
complex topology in the dataset, UMAP was used. UMAP 
constructs a high-dimensional plot representing local 
relationships among data points and optimizes it onto a low-
dimensional space that preserves both local and global 
structure, i.e. overall layout of the data (Understanding 
UMAP, n.d.; How UMAP Works — Umap 0.5.8 
Documentation, n.d.). Custom hyperparameters, including 
number of neighbours, minimum distance between 
neighbours, and initialization type, were utilized to produce 
consistent and interpretable 2D representations of audiogram 
profiles. 
In addition to visualization, clustering was performed using 
GMM, which is a probabilistic unsupervised learning 
==PAGE:7==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
7 
algorithm that models the dataset as a weighted sum of 
Gaussian distributions (Gaussian Mixture Model). GMMs 
provide flexibility in modelling overlapping clusters with 
soft assignment probabilities, so as to model uncertainties. 
They were used to identify overall structure in both pure 
audiometric data and datasets incorporating DS score 
variability. The resulting clusters obtained from GMMs were 
overlaid on UMAP projections to compare alignment results 
with known phenotypes or newly emergent subtypes. 
Altogether, these statistical methods enabled a detailed 
understanding of structure of synthetic audiometric datasets. 
They served as fundamentals for evaluating the correctness 
of the model, by comparison with pre-discovered 
phenotypes. These statistical methods are discussed in 
further detail in this section. 
2.2.1 Principal Component Analysis (PCA) – Pure-Tone 
Audiometric Synthetic Data 
PCA was employed to reduce the dimensionality of the pure-
tone audiometric threshold data and to identify dominant 
axes of variation among synthetic hearing profiles 
(Vanhatalo et al., 2017). The analysis was initially performed 
on datasets comprising only the PTA threshold values at 
standard audiometric frequencies (125 Hz to 8000 Hz).  
Prior to conducting the PCA, all frequency-based variables 
were centered around the mean, and scaled to unit variance 
by dividing each column by its standard deviation. These 
steps were incorporated to ascertain that differences in 
absolute threshold values did not dominate the analysis due 
to differing units or magnitudes. 
PCA was computed and eigenvalues corresponding to the 
principal components (PCs) were examined to assess the 
proportion of variance represented by each component. The 
first two PCs were retained for visualization, as they captured 
the majority of the variance and provide a low-dimensional 
representation suitable for comparison of audiometric 
phenotypes. Scree plots were used to visualize the decay of 
these eigenvalues, ensuring the decision regarding choice of 
components to retain (Fig. A.3 (iii) in appendix). 
The resulting PCA space provided individual data points 
projected onto the first two PCs. Reference phenotypes, such 
as the Bisgaard phenotypal audiograms, were also projected 
into this space, to assess how well the synthetic data 
preserved the known structure of hearing loss types. 
Furthermore, contribution plots (cos2 plots) were generated 
to quantify how much each frequency band contributed to 
the principal components (Fig. A.3 (i) and (ii) in appendix). 
This provided insight into which frequency regions were 
most influential in distinguishing profiles. 
This analysis was useful for assessing the initial structure of 
the synthetic dataset, evaluating phenotype separability, and 
identifying patterns of pure-tone audiometric variation prior 
to the inclusion of any speech-based or behavioural features. 
2.2.2 Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection 
(UMAP) – Pure-Tone Audiometric Synthetic Data 
The structure of the synthetic audiogram dataset was further 
explored with the application of UMAP as an unsupervised 
dimensionality reduction technique. UMAP is particularly 
effective in uncovering both global and local data patterns by 
constructing 
a 
high-dimensional 
graph 
representing 
neighborhood relationships among observations and then 
optimizing to a low-dimensional layout that preserves these 
relationships (Understanding UMAP, n.d.). 
UMAP was applied to the same standardized matrix of PTA 
thresholds (11 frequencies ranging from 125 Hz to 8000 Hz) 
used for PCA. Several key hyperparameters were adapted to 
optimize mapping quality and maintain biologically 
plausible separability among phenotypes. 
One of the hyperparameters specifically considered in this 
study was the number of neighbours, which imparts control 
on the size of the local neighborhood UMAP considers when 
constructing its high-dimensional plot. Relatively high 
values were selected to prioritize global structure while still 
retaining sensitivity to local clusters.  
The minimum distance between neighbours was a second 
crucial parameter, which regulates how tightly UMAP packs 
points together in the low-dimensional space. It presents a 
balance between cluster compactness and inter-cluster 
spacing.  
A correlation was observed between the aforementioned 
hyperparameters, 
and 
considering 
the 
dimensional 
dependence of the data, logical combinations were 
considered (Understanding UMAP, n.d.).  
Ideal combinations of hyperparameter values were chosen 
based on visual inspection of UMAP embeddings and 
assessment of whether pre-discovered phenotype clusters 
were meaningfully separated while maintaining internal 
cohesion. Additionally, the initialization methods were 
explored to improve global structure preservation. All 
frequency-based variables were scaled using Z-score 
normalization, consistent with the standardization applied 
during PCA. 
The resulting two-dimensional UMAP layout was expected 
to provide an intuitive visualization of phenotypic separation 
that PCA was not able to fully capture. Known Bisgaard 
phenotypes were also projected into the UMAP space using 
the same transformation to allow direct comparison with the 
==PAGE:8==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
8 
synthetic observations and to evaluate the fidelity of 
phenotype representation. 
2.2.3 PCA + UMAP – Pure-Tone Audiogram + Speech 
Discrimination Scores 
For exploration of variation patterns beyond PTA thresholds, 
a second set of dimensionality reduction analyzes was 
conducted using the synthetic audiogram dataset augmented 
with speech DS scores. These DS scores were generated 
synthetically based on fixed mappings or variable 
distributions (as discussed in section 2.1.3), assumed from 
expected performance of subjects in relation to an 
audiometric 
phenotype, 
simulating 
realistic 
speech 
perception outcomes in quiet. The DS values were expressed 
as percentages and added as an additional numerical variable 
to each synthetic observation. 
This extension introduced a new clinically relevant 
dimension to the dataset, providing a scope to examine 
whether profiles with similar audiometric features could 
diverge 
in 
their 
speech 
perception 
performance. 
Incorporating this variable allowed the dimensionality 
reduction techniques to capture both threshold-based and 
suprathreshold auditory function. 
The updated dataset matrix consisted of 12 features per 
observation (11 frequencies + 1 DS score). PCA was 
implemented again with centering and scaling enabled to 
ensure that the DS variable was on the same standardized 
scale as the frequency-based features. This extended PCA 
was intended for identification of PCs that combined both 
audiogram configuration and speech perception ability, and 
to understand whether certain phenotypes remained distinct 
or overlapped once DS variability was introduced. 
In parallel, UMAP was used to plot the combined 
audiogram–DS data into two dimensions. The same UMAP 
hyperparameters as in the audiogram-only analysis were 
used, ensuring consistency and comparability between 
projections. The incorporation of DS as a behavioural 
dimension was conducted to identifynew cluster patterns that 
were not solely driven by threshold configurations 
(discussed further in section 3.1.3). 
This combined analysis was intended to gain insight into 
heterogeneous hearing profiles, as in case of identifying 
situations where audiometric loss may appear similar but 
speech perception differs substantially. Identification of 
subtypes with functional divergence was the goal here, a 
promising direction for unsupervised phenotyping in 
audiology (refer sections 4.5.2 and 4.5.3 for real data 
implementation). 
 
2.2.4 Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) 
The previous dimensionality reduction techniques were 
complimented by GMM as a probabilistic clustering 
approach, to define groupings within the synthetic dataset. 
Both PTA thresholds and speech DS scores were considered 
in the dataset. Unlike PCA or UMAP, which reduce 
dimensionality 
to 
aid 
in 
visualization 
or 
feature 
interpretation, GMM performs unsupervised clustering by 
estimating the probability that each data point belongs to one 
or more Gaussian-distributed components in the high-
dimensional space (Gaussian Mixture Model). 
A GMM assumes that the data are generated from a mixture 
of several multivariate Gaussian distributions, each 
representing a possible cluster. The model estimates the soft 
assignment probabilities of each data point i.e. the 
probability of belonging to each cluster, which allows for 
overlapping clusters and more flexible boundary modelling 
compared to hard clustering methods such as k-means. 
The GMM implementation was performed using the mclust 
package in R, which allows specification of model 
parameters such as the covariance structure (modelNames) 
and number of clusters (G). Two strategies were tested with 
respect to G: 
1. Fixed-cluster models, in which the number of clusters G 
was predefined (e.g. G = 7, G = 8), and 
2. Data-driven models, in which G was not specified, but 
instead determined via the Bayesian Information 
Criterion (BIC) to identify the most closely fitting 
model (Parthasarathy et al., 2020a). 
Several covariance structures were explored through the 
modelNames argument (e.g. "VVV" for ellipsoidal, variable 
volume/shape/orientation; 
"EEE" 
for 
equal 
volume/shape/orientation), allowing the model to flexibly 
adapt to the geometry of the data. Models with varying 
values of G and modelNames were compared, and those with 
the highest BIC scores were selected for further 
interpretation. 
The input to the GMM consisted of the same standardized 
features used in PCA and UMAP, i.e. audiometric thresholds 
at 11 frequencies plus a single DS score per observation. 
Clustering was performed on this 12-dimensional space 
without prior dimensionality reduction, ensuring that the full 
variability in the combined audiometric and behavioural data 
was considered during cluster estimation. 
This analysis was meant for the identification of functionally 
meaningful subgroupings that may not align strictly with 
existing phenotypes, but represent joint variations in hearing 
thresholds and speech perception. These data-driven clusters 
==PAGE:9==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
9 
were visualized and compared to known phenotypes, 
providing further perspective to explore the heterogeneity 
present within the synthetic datasets. 
2.2.5 Sensory and Metabolic Components 
To enhance the physiological interpretation of the synthetic 
audiometric dataset, a parallel model was implemented 
where each audiogram was categorized into metabolic and 
sensory 
components, 
based 
on 
the 
concepts 
and 
methodology from Vaden et al. 2022. This approach comes 
from a distinction between metabolic hearing loss (MHL), 
associated with broadly elevated thresholds due to strial 
atrophy and reduced cochlear amplification, and sensory 
hearing loss (SHL), resulting from damage to cochlear hair 
cells, particularly in high-frequency regions. 
In the implementation for this study, each audiogram from 
the synthetic dataset was modeled as a weighted linear 
combination of two canonical hearing loss vectors, where 
one represented metabolic and the other sensory loss. These 
vectors, based on average profiles observed in prior studies, 
capture the frequency-specific threshold elevations seen in 
each pathology (Dubno et al., 2013; Vaden et al., 2022). The 
vectors were constructed across eight frequencies ranging 
from 250 Hz to 8000 Hz, excluding low-frequency points 
that introduce greater uncertainty. 
The individual contributions were estimatied by applying a 
non-negative least squares (NNLS) (section A.6 in appendix) 
optimization (Chen et al., 2011). This minimizes the root 
mean square error (RMSE) between the observed audiogram 
and the predicted combination of metabolic and sensory 
components (Vaden et al., 2022). Two scalar weights, i.e. 
Metabolic_HL and Sensory_HL, were derived for each 
audiogram. Audiograms for which the RMSE exceeded 15 
dB HL were excluded from interpretation, and those entries 
were marked as NA to reflect unreliable fits. This RMSE is 
calculated with the following expression: 
 
These estimated component values were attached to the 
synthetic dataset, and then used to colour individual data 
points in the PCA projections of audiogram-only data. 
Continuous colour gradients were defined to represent the 
spatial distribution of metabolic and sensory dominance 
across the dataset. 
Here, though the sensory/metabolic decomposition did not 
influence the clustering or dimensionality reduction inputs 
directly, it served as a valuable interpretive layer for 
understanding phenotypic heterogeneity within the synthetic 
dataset. Also, this model allows direct comparison between 
synthetic and real audiograms by projecting empirical data 
onto the same component axes, supporting future 
applications of the model to clinical datasets. 
 
2.3 Real Dataset – Matrix Generation 
The realistic dataset of audiogram profiles and speech DS 
scores was provided by Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. It was initially received in a tidy long-format 
structure, where each row represented an individual 
frequency-specific observation for a given subject. Each row 
included the subject's age at examination, gender, ear side 
(denoted as either left l or right r), audiometric test frequency 
in Hz, the corresponding audiometric threshold in dB HL, 
and a speech DS score (val_wds). A unique DS score was 
provided across each frequency for a given ear and subject, 
giving the appearance of frequency-specific DS scores. 
To prepare the data for analysis, the structure was first 
standardized by ensuring that each unique combination of 
subject and ear side corresponded to a single value of 
val_wds. This was conducted by calculating the mean of all 
DS score values (individual val_wds) across all frequencies 
for a single subject-ear side combination. Such a mean 
val_wds value was obtained for all subject-ear side 
combinations, thus providing a similar structure to the data 
matrix as in case of the synthetic datasets. The assumption, 
consistent with the clinical context, was that the speech DS 
score is an overall ear-level measure and not frequency-
specific. In addition, age at examination and gender were 
assumed to be constant across observations for each subject 
and were troubleshooted accordingly. 
Further inspection of this dataset revealed that some subjects 
had undergone repeated audiometric testing for the same ear, 
which was represented as multiple sets of threshold values 
across the frequency range. To tabulate this repetition, a 
test_no variable was introduced that indexed each distinct 
test instance per subject-ear pair. This was achieved by 
identifying repeated sequences beginning with the lowest 
recorded frequency (typically 125 Hz) for the same subject, 
which marked the start of a new test. Each frequency-
threshold pair was assigned a unique test index. 
Subsequently, the dataset was reshaped into a wide matrix 
form, where each row now represented a unique subject-ear-
test instance. Columns included id_num, ear_side, test_no, 
age_years_exam, sex, mean val_wds, and the audiometric 
thresholds (val_audgrm) at each frequency (e.g. f_125, 
f_250, ..., f_8000). This conversion preserved the details 
obtained from repeated testing and ensured consistency and 
==PAGE:10==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
10 
integrity of the data. The resulting data matrix provided a 
clean, structured basis for the further statistical and machine 
learning analyzes (Fig. A.7). 
 
2.4 Real Dataset – PCA, UMAP, GMM 
The analysis of the complex realistic phenotypes thus 
included this high-dimensional dataset consisting of real-
world hearing test results (288,311 observations, 12 
variables), comprising the threshold measurements across 
frequencies and speech DS scores. Prior to dimensionality 
reduction, missing values in the speech DS variable were 
evaluated using the mean of the available values. 
PCA was firstly performed to reduce data dimensionality 
while preserving most of its variance. The top 10 principal 
components were retained, yielding a PCA-reduced matrix 
used for all subsequent modelling. This step was executed to 
improve computational efficiency and control excessive 
collinearity in the dataset. 
On this PCA-reduced data, a high-performance UMAP was 
applied, 
namely 
uwot, 
which 
provides 
a 
rapid 
implementation of UMAP optimized for large datasets, using 
parallel computation and efficient memory management 
(Melville, 2019). The hyperparameter combinations were 
maintained consistent to findings on the synthetic dataset 
(Understanding UMAP, n.d.). This resulting  UMAP 
projection was visualized with all data points rendered in 
grey to represent the unclustered distribution of phenotypes. 
To uncover the hidden cluster structures within the data, a 
random subsample of 10,000 rows was created from the 
PCA-reduced matrix. GMM was performed on this 
subsample using the Mclust package, allowing for model-
based clustering without predefining the number of clusters. 
The optimal number of mixture components was selected 
based on the BIC score (Parthasarathy et al., 2020a). Cluster 
assignments were first visualized in PCA space to evaluate 
separation and interpretability. 
Following GMM training, the model was used to predict 
cluster allocation for the entire dataset. These predicted 
clusters were then mapped onto the UMAP coordinates to 
visualize how GMM-defined phenotypes were distributed in 
the low-dimensional space. A final plot overlayed the 
coloured GMM clusters from the full dataset onto the UMAP 
plot of the complete data landscape. This approach enabled 
robust unsupervised classification and visualization of 
hearing loss phenotypes in the large clinical audiological 
dataset, thus aligning with the intended aim of the project. 
 
3. RESULTS 
3.1   Synthetic Dataset 
3.1.1 PCA, UMAP – Pure-Tone Audiometric Synthetic Data 
Dimensionality reduction was conducted using PCA and 
UMAP to characterize the structure of the synthetic dataset. 
Both 
methods 
revealed 
distinct 
clustering 
patterns 
corresponding to the seven hearing loss profiles (N1–N7) 
based on Bisgaard et al. 2010 and five hearing loss profiles 
based on Dubno et al. 2013, demonstrating that the synthetic 
data preserved the intended phenotypic separability. 
 
Fig. 5 – PCA Projections, Top: Distribution based on Bisgaard synthetic 
data (N1–N7), with Dim1 explaining 84.5% of the variance. Bottom: 
Distribution based on Dubno synthetic profiles, showing greater spread 
along Dim2 (19.6%), reflecting etiological distinctions. 
The Bisgaard PCA projections (Fig. 5), for example, 
revealed that the first principal component (PC1) accounted 
for a substantial majority of the variance (84.3%), depicting 
the mean degree of hearing loss across frequencies. A smooth 
gradient along PC1 was observed, progressing from milder 
profiles (N1, N2) on the left to more severe and profound 
phenotypes (N6, N7) on the right. PC2 captured only a minor 
proportion of variance (4.9%) and did not strongly 
differentiate between profiles. By conducting the PCA 
analysis on more datasets representing steeper-sloping 
audiogram profiles, a greater contribution was observed in 
==PAGE:11==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
11 
PC2, suggesting it depicts the slope. Some overlap between 
adjacent classes was observed, but the general linear 
ordering of phenotypes was preserved, validating the 
underlying synthetic structure (Bisgaard et al., 2010). 
 
Fig. 6 – UMAP Projections, Top: Map of Bisgaard synthetic data (N1–N7), 
showing distinct but overlapping clusters in 2D space. Bottom: UMAP plot 
of Dubno synthetic data, showing broader groupings due to underlying 
cochlear pathologies. Standard centroids are annotated for reference. 
In contrast, the UMAP projections (Fig. 6) of Bisgaard 
profiles for instance, showed a more pronounced separation 
of phenotypes. Unlike PCA, which aligned the phenotypes 
along a single axis of increasing severity, UMAP presented a 
unique manifold where clusters representing each phenotype 
emerged as distinct but spatially adjoined regions. The 
projection of original audiograms (shown as labeled black 
points) aligned well with centroids of their corresponding 
synthetic clusters, further confirming the fidelity of the data 
generation process. 
Together, the PCA and UMAP results demonstrate that even 
without incorporating behavioural variables, the synthetic 
PTAs contain sufficient structure to differentiate pre-defined 
audiometric phenotypes in an unsupervised framework. 
3.1.2 Sensory and Metabolic Components 
The synthetic audiogram datasets were decomposed into 
metabolic (MET) and sensory (SEN) contributions within 
the PCA-reduced audiometric space, and their corresponding 
scalar weights were projected onto the PCA coordinates. 
Reference PCAs are provided in Fig. B.1 in Appendix B. 
This visualization was performed for synthetic datasets 
based on both the Dubno and Bisgaard phenotypes. Grey 
points indicate audiograms for which component estimates 
were deemed unreliable, as their predicted error exceeded the 
pre-defined 15 dB HL threshold. 
 
 
Fig. 7 – Sensory and metabolic components, Dubno synthetic dataset; Top: 
Sensory (SEN) component intensity, showing subjects with high-frequency 
hearing loss. Bottom: Metabolic (MET) component intensity, showing 
patterns with low-frequency hearing loss, represented in PCA space. 
In the Dubno-derived dataset, PCA revealed a structured 
separation of metabolic and sensory contributions (Fig. 7). 
MET values formed a smooth gradient along the first 
principal component (Dim1), with higher MET components 
dominating the right-hand side of the space. On the other 
hand, SEN estimates varied primarily along Dim2, with 
elevated SEN values clustering toward the upper quadrant 
(Vaden et al., 2022). Such a separation is consistent with the 
underlying conceptual PCA, in which metabolic and sensory 
pathologies produce orthogonal audiometric patterns. The 
small fraction of grey points indicates that most Dubno 
synthetic audiograms could be reliably reconstructed using 
the two-component model (Dubno et al., 2013). 
The Bisgaard-derived dataset represented a similar 
behaviour but more compressed clustering (Fig. 8). MET 
values again increased along the first principal axis, aligning 
with the ordered hearing loss severity of Bisgaard 
phenotypes. However, the separation of SEN values was less 
pronounced, suggesting the fact that Bisgaard profiles were 
not explicitly designed to represent sensory pathology.  
==PAGE:12==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
12 
 
Fig. 8 – Sensory and metabolic components, Bisgaard N-synthetic dataset; 
Top: Sensory (SEN) component intensity, showing high-frequency loss 
patterns along the positive Dim1 axis. Bottom: Metabolic (MET) 
component intensity increasing along Dim1, indicating low-frequency 
impairment, represented in PCA space. 
A larger proportion of data points were excluded due to high 
reconstruction error. MET–SEN model offers a less optimal 
fit for these standardized audiograms (Bisgaard et al., 2010). 
The Dubno dataset, with its well-defined sensory and 
metabolic profiles, showed clearer projection patterns than 
the Bisgaard dataset, supporting its utility in representing 
etiologically informed dimensions of hearing loss. This 
visualization shows that perceptual and cognitive (hearing) 
factors may behave differently with metabolic and sensory 
degradation, even when audiograms may appear similar. 
3.1.3 UMAP – Pure-Tone Audiogram + Speech 
Discrimination Scores 
Speech DS scores were incorporated as an additional 
dimension into the UMAP analysis of the synthetic datasets. 
Multiple condititons of choosing DS values were considered, 
with different phenotypes being assigned to different DS 
probability distributions (Fig. 4). Comparisons were made 
between models using fixed DS values (DS_Fix) and 
variable DS distributions (DS_Variable), under two different 
sets of UMAP hyperparameters.  
In the Bisgaard dataset, the inclusion of DS scores enhanced 
the separability of phenotypic clusters relative to pure-tone 
data alone (Fig. 9). Under the DS_Fix condition, UMAP 
maintained the original ordering of phenotypes but exhibited 
 
Fig. 9 – UMAPs, Bisgaard Synthetic PTA + different hyperparameters and 
models for DS. Top: UMAP clusters with more neighbours and smaller 
distance between neighbours, using fixed (left) and variable (right) DS. 
Bottom: UMAPclusters with lesser neighbours and greater distance, with 
fixed and variable DS. Better cluster separation observed in variable DS, 
mimicing real data expectations. 
 
relatively compact and uniform clusters, especially for 
intermediate profiles (N3–N5). However, when variable DS 
scores 
were 
introduced, 
there 
was 
a 
pronounced 
improvement in inter-cluster separation. The UMAP 
projection under both hyperparameter combinations revealed 
clearer boundaries and distinct spatial organization, 
especially for phenotypes N6 and N7. The addition of 
individualized DS variability likely contributes meaningful 
dimensionality by capturing heterogeneity of the data. 
 
Fig. 10 – UMAPs, Dubno Synthetic PTA + different hyperparameters and 
models for DS. Top: UMAP clusters with more neighbours and smaller 
distance between neighbours, using fixed (left) and variable (right) DS. 
Bottom: UMAPclusters with lesser neighbours and greater distance, with 
fixed and variable DS. Better cluster separation observed in variable DS, 
mimicing real data expectations. 
Similar observations were made in the Dubno dataset, where 
variable DS scores produced superior cluster distinction 
(Fig. 10). The DS_Variable condition generated discrete, 
phenotype-specific groupings with minimal overlap, 
==PAGE:13==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
13 
particularly between "metabolic" and "sensory" profiles. 
DS_Fix showed more diffuse clusters. This was consistent 
across both UMAP hyperparameter sets, though the 
configuration (n_neighbors = 50, min_dist = 0.8) produced 
slightly more dispersed and evenly distributed clusters.  
These findings suggest that the integration of DS scores 
introduces an orthogonal dimension of clinical relevance, 
improving the projection in the UMAP space and supporting 
more detailed classification of hearing loss types. 
3.1.4 GMM 
In the GMM analysis conducted using the synthetic dataset 
(including 
DS 
scores), 
several 
parameters 
were 
systematically varied to assess their influence on the 
clustering behaviour. As observed, the BIC score was used 
as the primary metric to evaluate the fit of different GMM 
model structures (e.g. EEE, VVV, VII, etc.) and to determine 
the optimal number of clusters, G (Parthasarathy et al., 
2020a). With increasing dataset sizes (200, 300, 400 
observations per phenotype), the BIC curves (Fig. B.2(i) in 
Appendix B) produced diminishing returns in model 
improvement beyond G = 6–8 components (Fig. 11). This 
suggests that the intrinsic structure of the synthetic data may 
be adequately captured by a relatively small number of 
clusters despite its high-dimensional composition. 
The plots in Fig. 11 illustrate how clustering assignments 
evolved with changes in dataset size,  G specification, and 
modelName. With smaller datasets (e.g. 200 observations), 
clusters appeared more diffuse and overlapping, while larger 
sample sizes facilitated clearer, more stratified cluster 
formation. When G was fixed to match the number of 
reference Bisgaard phenotypes (G = 7 or 8),
Fig. 11 – GMM variation with (num_obs) for Bisgaard profiles. Each column represents a different number of observations per profile (200, 
300, 400). GMM clusters reveal structure in the data that partially overlaps with known Bisgaard subtypes (as seen compared to UMAP in 
bottom row), showing capacity of unsupervised learning to identify phenotype groupings. 
 
Fig. 12 – GMM variation with either fixed G or fixed modelNames configurations for Bisgaard profiles. Fixed number of observations per profile (400). 
Cluster assignments vary with model constraints, impacting alignment with known Bisgaard subtypes. The comparison illustrates how covariance structures 
influence GMM clustering in UMAP space.
==PAGE:14==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
14 
GMM models often produced well-separated clusters, many 
of which visually resembled the distribution of Bisgaard 
phenotypes in UMAP projections shown for comparison 
(Fig. 12). However, allowing GMM to automatically infer G 
and the optimal model structure led to mixed results, where 
some combinations (e.g. EEE with G = auto) favoured 
creation of fewer clusters, while others overfitted and 
fragmented the space into highly granular groupings, 
potentially obscuring higher-level phenotypic categories. 
The results demonstrate that GMM clustering is highly 
sensitive to both the model constraints (e.g. equal vs. variable 
covariance assumptions) and the number of observations. 
GMM provided soft probabilistic cluster assignments, 
offering better interpretation than hard clustering methods. 
Its utility lies in identifying novel or intermediate subtypes 
within the audiogram + DS space (Gaussian Mixture Model).  
 
3.2   Real Dataset 
3.2.1 PCA, UMAP 
The application of UMAP to the full PCA-reduced dataset (n 
≈ 288,311 observations) resulted in a smooth, continuous 
two-dimensional plot representing the global distribution of 
audiometric profiles (Fig. 13). The projection revealed a 
global structure in the low-dimensional space, representing 
the linkages between all points in the dataset showing a 
gradient in the phenotypic expression of hearing loss, rather 
than discrete and naturally separable groups.  
Fig. 13 – Global UMAP structure of real PTA and DS data (N = 288,000+). 
Each point represents an individual audiogram, with 2D plot capturing the 
structure of phenotypic variation across the dataset. The crescent-shaped 
topology may suggest nonlinear relationships in hearing thresholds and DS. 
GMM was performed on a randomly selected subsample of 
10,000 observations to identify underlying cluster structure, 
following which BIC scores were computed across a range 
of covariance models and component numbers (Fig. 14). The 
BIC curve showed an improvement in fit with increasing 
component (cluster) count, peaking around 9 components 
under the VVV model (variable volume, shape, and 
orientation), indicating the presence of defined subclusters 
within the data that benefits from permitting flexible cluster 
boundaries. 
 
Fig. 14 – BIC Plot, 10000 obs. subsample, showing variation of BIC 
scores for different G-modelName combinations. (Unable to see here, but 
best BIC observed at G=9 for VVV model – seen in summary() ). 
On projecting the GMM cluster assignments onto the full 
UMAP space (Fig. 15), the clustered points provided a clear 
visual depiction of regional groupings within the mapping. 
Some clusters appeared well-localized, suggesting tighter, 
phenotype-specific groupings, while others exhibited 
moderate spatial overlap, representing partly continuous 
transitions and possible overlaps in audiogram patterns. It 
was noticed that clusters populated both the central and 
peripheral regions of the UMAP structure, capturing 
phenotypic diversity across the spectrum of hearing loss 
severity and configuration. The centroids representing the 
mean audiogram profile for each cluster were also plotted, 
for better visual separation of phenotypic clusters. These 
results collectively demonstrate that unsupervised learning 
using GMM, characterized by PCA and UMAP projection, 
can uncover interpretable subgroups within large-scale 
audiological data, even in the absence of predefined 
diagnostic 
labels 
(“Dimensionality 
Reduction 
for 
Visualizing High-Dimensional Biological Data,” n.d.).
==PAGE:15==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
15 
Fig. 15 – GMM clusters (10000 obs. subsample) overlayed on global UMAP, showing milder profiles localized in the center (eg. clusters 1,4,8), and steeper-
sloping clusters around the periphery (eg. 7 and 9). Cluster centroids are marked and labeled, showing distinct regions of the UMAP manifold corresponding 
to major data-driven phenotypic groupings.
3.2.2 Centroid Audiogram Profiles 
Each cluster’s centroid was identified and visualized in two 
representations, i.e. spatially on the global UMAP structure 
of the full dataset (Fig. 15), and in terms of mean audiometric 
thresholds across frequency (Fig. 16). 
The centroid audiogram profiles exhibited distinct patterns 
of hearing loss across clusters. Clusters 1 and 4 showed 
moderate high-frequency sloping losses, which began with 
relatively normal thresholds at low frequencies (< 1 kHz) and 
progressed gradually to more elevated thresholds beyond 2–
4 kHz. Cluster 3 represented a near-normal audiometric 
profile, with thresholds below 20 dB HL across all 
frequencies. Cluster 2 presents a sharp downward inflection 
starting at 2 kHz, showing steeply sloping high-frequency 
loss. 
Clusters 5 and 6 displayed relatively flat moderate losses 
across the frequency range, but with slight differences, 
wherein cluster 5 skewed toward high-frequency threshold 
elevation. Cluster 7 showed a progressive loss leading to 
severe thresholds at 6–8 kHz. Cluster 8 demonstrated a 
plateaued moderate loss up to 2 kHz, followed by a steeper 
deterioration, which seemed like an atypical profile. 
 
Fig. 16 – Centroid audiogram profiles per GMM cluster, plotted across 
frequencies (125 to 8000 Hz), mostly distinct configurations with some 
similar ones (eg. 5 and 6), indicating influence of DS dimension 
Cluster 9 stood out with the most severe configuration, 
presenting mildly sloping profound hearing loss across all 
frequencies.  
Revisiting the UMAP space in Fig. 15, clusters with more 
severe losses (e.g. 7 and 9) are located toward the periphery 
of the UMAP, while the milder profiles (e.g. 1, 4 and 8) 
appear to localize more centrally. This spatial organization 
points towards the underlying structure in the audiometric 
variability that GMM clustering successfully uncovers. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
16 
4. DISCUSSION 
4.1 Synthetic Data Fidelity – PCA 
The multistep statistical analysis implemented in this study, 
which involves PCA, UMAP and GMM, provides a 
systematic framework for evaluating whether the synthetic 
audiometric datasets contain sufficient dimensionality to 
implement unsupervised discovery 
of hearing loss 
phenotypes. Beginning with PCA applied to synthetic 
audiograms, the results showed that a significant proportion 
of the variance (~84% for Bisgaard profiles and ~56% for 
Dubno profiles) could be captured by just the first two 
principal components. These findings demonstrate that the 
synthetically generated dataset continues to retain the 
dominant structural axes corresponding to configuration 
(PC1, mean) and severity (PC2, slope) of hearing loss. The 
projection of known reference phenotypes into the PCA 
space provided with visual verification that synthetic 
observations cluster around their originating standard 
profiles, affirming the fidelity of phenotype-specific 
generation procedures. 
 
4.2 Synthetic Data – UMAP and Hyperparameters 
Complementing PCA, visualisation with UMAP enabled 
more refined exploration of local similarity structures within 
the data. UMAP plots consistently produced clear, adjacent 
clusters 
corresponding 
to 
the 
original 
phenotypes, 
particularly 
when 
optimal 
hyperparameters 
(e.g. 
n_neighbors = 100, min_dist = 0.5) were selected (discussed 
further in section 4.2.1).  
4.2.1 Hyperparameters: 
In the process of applying UMAP for dimensionality 
reduction 
of 
synthetic 
audiometric 
data, 
key 
hyperparameters were explored to optimize cluster 
separability and alignment (Understanding UMAP, n.d.). 
The two main hyperparameters—number of nearest 
neighbors (n_neigh) and minimum distance (min_dist)—
were varied across a range of values to assess their influence 
on the resulting mapping. These parameters control the 
balance between local and global structure preservation:  
- 
While lower values of n_neigh improves preservation of 
fine-grained local relationships, higher values lead to 
smoother, more global plots. 
- 
Similarly, a smaller min_dist allows denser clustering of 
similar samples, whereas larger values create greater 
spacing between neighbouring points in the 2D space.  
Multiple configurations were tested on the same dataset for 
both Bisgaard and Dubno synthetic phenotypes, with 
observations visually confirming that lower min_dist and 
moderate-to-high n_neigh yielded the clearest portrayal of 
phenotype groups, for example under settings like n_neigh = 
100 and min_dist = 0.2 or 0.5. 
A major observation made through this analysis was that 
though UMAP provides a powerful dimensionality reduction 
technique that preserves global and local structures, the 
representation of the data is typically distorted, with 
randomized placement of clusters in the 2D space, however 
the relation between datapoints is maintained. Specifically, 
the spatial arrangement of clusters in UMAP plots can vary 
significantly across different runs, even when applied to the 
same dataset. This uncertainty complicates reproducibility 
and interpretation, possibly due to UMAP’s reliance on 
random initialization and optimization strategies. As a result, 
the visual presentation of clusters may appear rotated or 
repositioned between iterations, which pose challenges for 
clinical interpretation.  
This iterative, trial-and-error approach highlighted an 
important consideration that hyperparameter tuning in 
UMAP is highly data-dependent and must be empirically 
validated against known structural references or other 
metrics. Since synthetic datasets benefit from predefined 
phenotypic labels, they provide a valuable reference for 
calibrating these settings before applying the same 
framework to realistic, unlabeled clinical data. In such cases, 
using silhouette scores, continuity metrics, or phenotype-
matching overlays could help guide optimal choices 
(“Parametric UMAP Embeddings for Representation and 
Semisupervised Learning,” 2025). Also, experiments were 
conducted on the n_epochs parameter, which controls the 
number of training iterations in UMAP's stochastic 
optimization; however it did not produce meaningful 
variation in the cluster mapping, indicating its relatively 
minor influence under stable inputs. Future studies might 
need to revalidate this for noisy or large-scale datasets. But 
for the current analyzes, focusing on n_neigh and min_dist 
parameters remains the most productive strategy for tuning 
UMAP representations. 
4.2.2 Discrimination Scores: 
The inclusion of speech DS scores as an additional 
dimension resulted in increased separation between 
phenotypic clusters. This increased distance between groups 
not only suggested an improvement in clustering quality, but 
also helped reveal hidden subclusters, especially within 
severe profiles like n7 in Bisgaard et al. 2010 or 
metabolic+sensory category in Dubno et al. 2013.  
==PAGE:17==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
17 
The comparison of fixed DS scores to variable (gamma-
distributed) DS scores helped visualise the importance of 
modelling realistic intra-group variability. While fixed DS 
scores produced more constrained and artificial separations, 
the variable DS modelling better represented inter-subject 
diversity, resulting in better separated and physiologically 
plausible UMAP clusters. 
 
4.3 Synthetic Data - GMM 
GMM further substantiated the dataset's internal clusters, by 
assigning probabilities of cluster association to datapoints. 
The performance of GMM was highly responsive to 
parameters such as the number of components (G) and the 
covariance structure (modelName).  
4.3.1 Parameters: 
The aforementioned parameters directly influence how the 
model interprets underlying distributions: 
- 
G dictating the granularity of clustering, and  
- 
modelName controlling the geometric assumptions of 
each cluster (e.g. equal shape, volume, and orientation 
in EEE, or full flexibility in VVV). 
In this study, parameter exploration was conducted through 
both manual and automated approaches. Fixed values of G 
(e.g. G = 7, corresponding to the seven Bisgaard N-
phenotypes) were systematically evaluated across a range of 
model structures. Alternately, model types were kept 
constant while varying G. Each configuration was assessed 
using the BIC scores, where higher (less negative) values 
indicate better balance between model fit and complexity 
(Parthasarathy et al., 2020a). The summary(gmm_model) 
output served as a diagnostic tool to extract log-likelihoods, 
BIC values, and clustering assignments for each parameter 
combination. 
This iterative approach suggested that non-aggressive 
covariance structures, such as the EEE or VEV models, 
consistently yielded superior BIC scores and more 
interpretable clusters, specially with larger datasets. Though 
the VVV model provides maximal flexibility, it frequently led 
to overfitting in smaller datasets or where phenotype 
structures were not highly separable. It was also observed 
that automatic selection of both G and modelName 
sometimes produced under- or over-fitted models depending 
on the sample variability and size, which showed the 
limitations of purely data-driven selection in the absence of 
domain constraints (Jiao et al., 2022). These observations 
showcase the necessity of a similar iterative, trial-and-error 
strategy as seen in UMAP (section 4.2.1), when applying 
GMMs to real-world data. The increasing clarity of cluster 
separation with growing sample sizes also confirms the 
scalability and robustness of the approach, making it suitable 
for application to larger real-world datasets. 
4.3.2 Projection on UMAP space: 
To assess the correctness of the statistical models developed, 
a crucial verification step was to compare GMM-derived 
clusters projected on the UMAP space, with the original 
standard phenotype profiles used to generate the synthetic 
data. When unsupervised cluster boundaries align with 
known phenotype classes, this agreement asserts confidence 
that the models are effectively recovering true structural 
variation, rather than overfitting or recalibrating artifacts of 
the data generation process. Overlaying phenotype profiles 
onto PCA or UMAP spaces, as conducted through this study, 
offers a visual affirmation for such alignment.  
It can thus be established that the clustering behaviour 
observed across the multiple statistical models provides 
sufficient evidence that the synthetic datasets retain 
qualitative phenotype-level characteristics, and that the 
combined PCA, UMAP and GMM model is well-suited for 
discovering and validating phenotypic clusters, both known 
and novel. 
 
4.4 Synthetic Data - Considerations and Limitations 
In the previous sections, the synthetic audiogram dataset has 
been discussed to be highly advantageous for the initial 
aspect of this research. However, working with synthetic 
data has certain intrinsic constraints. 
Synthetic datasets are directly dependent on, and are limited 
by the assumptions and shapes of the reference phenotypes; 
real-world audiograms often deviate from these idealized 
profiles, as they exhibit irregularities and mixed pathologies 
of the test subjects. 
The models used for variability are uniformly applied across 
all profiles and do not capture aetiology-specific patterns, 
measurement 
uncertainities, 
or 
patient-specific 
characteristics. It includes smoothing of highly jagged and 
noisy measurements, thus not taking into consideration 
greater or lesser intrinsic variability at specific frequency 
regions. They are thus lacking true biological or 
measurement-based 
sources 
of 
variance, 
such 
as 
measurement-noise, test-retest differences or clinician 
consistency (Trials et al., 2001).  
Extensions like DS scores are modeled assumptions, not 
empirically measured data, and need to be interpreted as 
conceptual simulations. Realistic instances may show 
uncertain distributions of DS scores, thus not providing the 
==PAGE:18==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
18 
advantage of dimensionality to the data. For instance, 
patients with similar PTA thresholds can show noticeably 
different DS performance due to cognitive factors, central 
auditory system deficits or language backgrounds, none of 
which are captured in the synthetic construction (Shehabi et 
al., 2025). 
Despite these limitations, the synthetic datasets prove to be a 
robust and reproducible foundation for audiological 
modelling and unsupervised pattern analysis, as observed in 
the above sections. 
 
4.5 Real Data – Model Application 
Equipped with the statistical analysis pipeline of combining 
dimensionality reduction and probabilistic clustering 
techniques and an executable matrix of realistic audiometric 
data, the study proceeded with the utility to uncover 
phenotypic structure within a large-scale audiometric 
dataset. On applying PCA, the dimensionality of the data was 
efficiently reduced while preserving its primary variance, 
enabling scalable downstream analysis. The PCA-reduced 
data was then mapped onto a two-dimensional space using 
UMAP, which effectively captured both local and global 
relationships across the dataset. The resulting unclustered 
UMAP projection provided a high-resolution visual 
overview of the global phenotypic distribution, showcasing 
a continuous structure without discrete separations, which 
suggested the presence of underlying gradients in 
audiometric configurations. 
Latent clusters within this continuous space were visualized 
using GMM on a randomly selected subset of 10,000 
samples. BIC-based model selection indicated that a 9-
cluster model provided the best balance between model fit 
and complexity. These GMM-based cluster assignments 
were then extended to the full dataset and visualized in the 
UMAP space. As seen in the final UMAP plot (Fig. 15), the 
clusters occupied distinct yet overlapping regions across the 
2-dimensional space, demonstrating partial phenotype 
separation. Certain clusters appeared localized toward the 
edges or tips of the UMAP structure, while others showed 
diffuse spread through central regions. Such variability of 
cluster spreads highlighted the varying degrees of 
homogeneity and heterogeneity in the phenotypes captured. 
The distribution of clusters across the UMAP structure 
indicates that some hearing loss profiles may cluster 
distinctly (e.g. steeply sloping or profound losses), while 
others are characterized by gradual changes in threshold 
profiles or speech DS performance. This observation is 
consistent with known clinical heterogeneity in audiological 
presentations, where severity and configuration of hearing 
loss do not always form sharply separable categories. 
Overall, this iterative unsupervised framework is able to 
work as a great scalable and interpretable strategy for 
breaking down large auditory datasets, and is a strong 
foundation for phenotype-driven stratification in clinical 
research and personalized hearing care. 
4.5.1 Cluster Classification Confidence: 
The robustness of cluster assignments was analyzed by 
evaluating the classification probabilities derived from the 
GMM applied to the PCA-reduced data (Jiao et al., 2022). 
The overall average classification confidence across all 
points was 0.749, which means the GMM model assigned 
most data points to clusters with moderately high certainty 
(~75%). This measure represents how distinctly the GMM 
clusters are separated in the high-dimensional space, and 
how well the fitted model would generalize from the 10,000-
point subsample to the full dataset. A perfect separation 
would yield an average posterior near 1.0, but values in the 
range of 0.7–0.8 are expected in real-world data with 
overlapping phenotypic observations. 
Fig. 17 – GMM cluster-wise classification confidence across the 9 
clusters, showing model certainty in assigning individuals to specific 
clusters.Cluster 5 shows highest confidence (0.883) indicating strong 
separability, while clusters 4 and 8 show lower certainty, 
Further analysis was conducted to observe variation in 
confidence in each of the nine clusters (Fig. 17). Cluster 3 
demonstrated the highest classification confidence (0.889), 
which could be inferred as a distinct and well-defined 
audiometric phenotype with minimal overlap. A strong 
average confidence ( >0.78) was also exhibited by clusters 
5, 8, and 9, meaning they are relatively cohesive and well-
modeled by the GMM. On the other hand, clusters 1 and 4 
showed the lowest confidences (0.661 and 0.680, 
respectively). This may indicate one or more combinations 
of the following: 
- 
They encompass more heterogeneous data. 
- 
They are boundary clusters that include transitional 
cases. 
==PAGE:19==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
19 
- 
They include overlapping configurations that cannot be 
easily separated by GMM.  
These findings show that some clusters are clearly separable 
in the 2D space while others may represent noisy 
phenotypes, for which further model refinement or 
supervised validation may be required (“Parametric UMAP 
Embeddings for Representation and Semisupervised 
Learning,” 2025). Filtering out the low-confidence 
assignments or using semi-supervised techniques to create 
cluster boundaries could be considered in the future. 
4.5.2 Comparison of centroid audiogram profiles with 
Parthasarathy et al. 2020 profiles 
The centroid audiogram profiles derived from GMM-based 
clustering (Fig. 18) were visually compared against the M1–
M10 audiometric phenotypes previously reported by 
Parthasarathy et al. 2020 in a clinical population (Fig. 3). 
This comparison was conducted to evaluate the extent to 
which the new data-driven clusters align with established 
clinical profiles, and to assess the emergence of potentially 
novel patterns. As described in section 3.2.2, the identified 
centroid profiles encompassed a range of configurations, 
including flat, gently sloping, and steep high-frequency loss 
patterns. 
Several clusters displayed strong resemblance to known 
clinical profiles. Cluster 3 displayed a relatively flat 
audiogram 
with 
mild 
threshold 
elevations, 
closely 
resembling the M1 phenotype, which is typically associated 
with mild sensorineural hearing loss. Cluster 9, though 
primarily showing a steeply sloping high-frequency loss, 
mirrored the M10 phenotype in terms of both shape and 
threshold 
severity, 
but 
also 
reflected 
the 
sloping 
characteristics observed in M4 and M5. Cluster 7 also 
mimics characteristics from the M10 profile, showing 
progressive 
threshold 
decline 
and 
steep-sloping 
configuration, with a slightly exaggerated high-frequency 
drop in cluster 7 than M10. Clusters 1 and 8 presented 
audiograms with a mid-frequency notch beyond which 
thresholds were elevated, wherein the overall shape and 
levels broadly aligned with the M3 phenotype. Cluster 2 
showed an intermediate profile which is typically observed 
in early sensory presbycusis or noise-induced loss profiles. It 
shows a combination of elements of M5 (high-frequency 
slope) and M8 (more uniform moderate loss), indicating a 
blended configuration not distinctly defined by a single 
existing phenotype. 
In contrast, other clusters presented configurations not 
previously described in Parthasarathy et al. 2020. For 
example, Cluster 4 demonstrated an atypical flat-low and 
moderately sloping-mid/high profile, which did not clearly 
map onto any M1–M10 category. Clusters 5 and 6 presented 
a more flat, gradually declining configuration with a shallow 
slope, characterized by greater low-frequency loss, which is 
a pattern that is rarely observed in typical clinical  
classifications. Also, it is notable that the distinct concavity 
of Cluster 7 was not prominently observed in any of the M1–
10 audiograms. 
Another aspect to be noted is that certain centroid audiogram 
profiles, such as those corresponding to clusters 5 and 6 (Fig. 
18), exhibit similarities in their PTA threshold plots, and 
would typically be grouped together in the analysis based 
only on audiometric data. This indicates that the inclusion of 
DS scores plays a crucial role in the separate representation 
of these clusters. This observation is further discussed in 
section 4.5.3. 
Thus new GMM clusters recover clinically recognized 
audiometric phenotypes and also identify novel or under-
characterized patterns. This suggests that the current data-
driven model has the potential to expand the existing 
phenotypic classification of hearing loss, and thus lead to 
improved strategies in audiological rehabilitation. 
==PAGE:20==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
20 
 
Fig. 18 – Separated centroid audiogram profiles per GMM cluster, with hearing thresholds (dB HL) plotted against standard frequencies (0.125-8 kHz. 
Profiles show different audiometric configurations, including flat, sloping, and high-frequency loss patterns, reflecting the heterogeneity in phenotypes 
identified through unsupervised GMM clustering.
4.5.3 Comparison of Mean DS scores across clusters 
The analysis of the mean speech DS scores across GMM-
derived clusters showed significant variation, showing the 
importance of incorporating speech metrics besides PTA 
thresholds in phenotype classification (Fig. 19). While 
several clusters demonstrated comparable audiogram 
configurations, their DS score distributions showed 
variations. This was significant in the case of clusters 5 and 
6, where cluster 6 was associated with relatively high mean 
DS scores and a small confidence interval (signaling 
preserved speech discrimination ability) whereas cluster 5 
showed lower mean DS scores with greater variability. This 
suggests that GMM-clustering algorithms are sensitive to 
both audiometric and functional speech metrics and are 
better equipped to distinguish clinically meaningful clusters. 
These findings support the necessity of including speech 
identification measures while constructing data-driven 
auditory phenotypes. 
4.5.4 Processing Power Limitation: 
A limitation was imposed by the hardware available for 
analysis. Due to memory limitations on a system with 16 GB 
RAM, it was not feasible to fit the GMM directly on the full 
dataset of 288,311 observations. This resulted in training the  
 
Fig. 19 – Mean DS scores across GMM clusters. Bars show average DS 
score for each cluster, and error bars show standard deviations. Clusters 
3 and 8 exhibit near-ceiling DS scores, while clusters 5 and 7 show much 
lower averages, showing variability in speech perception across 
phenotypes. 
GMM on a random subsample of 10,000 data points to 
ensure compliant model fitting and computation. This 
approach seemed to be sufficient for uncovering dominant 
phenotypic structures, but it may limit the resolution or 
stability of less prominent or overlapping clusters. With 
access to better computing resources (more RAM, GPU 
acceleration and processing power), model training could be 
extended to the full dataset, and refinement strategies can be 
included in future work. This would allow for a more 
==PAGE:21==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
21 
detailed representation of the phenotype space, improved 
cluster boundary estimation, and may increase classification 
confidence across the full data spectrum. 
 
4.6 Future Scope 
The current study establishes a strong foundation for 
synthetic modelling and unsupervised phenotyping of large-
scale audiometric data. However, there are several promising 
directions for future exploration. These extensions would 
enhance both the interpretability and clinical relevance of the 
phenotypes discovered, leading towards further optimization 
of model creation within the synthetic framework, as well as 
extension toward discovery in real-world clinical datasets. 
The directions are outlined in the following points: 
1. Quantitative assessment of clusters in synthetic datasets: 
Although this study provides qualitative (visual) 
affirmation of phenotype separability via UMAP, future 
analyzes could incorporate quantitative validation 
metrics such as the adjusted Rand index (ARI) or 
normalized mutual information (NMI) to evaluate 
alignment between known synthetic phenotypes and 
model-derived clusters (Willie et al., 2023; Kumawat, 
2024). This would ensure that clustering accuracy and 
reproducibility across synthetic datasets are assessed 
more rigourously with known standard phenotypal 
profiles. 
 
2. Refinement of clustering parameters in synthetic 
datasets: 
In the current study, GMMs provided a flexible 
probabilistic framework. Instead, clustering in the future 
could be conducted from manifold-based (structure-
aware) models (e.g. spectral clustering, density-based 
methods) that better represent the nonlinear geometry 
captured by UMAP. Also, some partial supervisation 
approaches could be incorporated (“Parametric UMAP 
Embeddings for Representation and Semisupervised 
Learning,” 2025). These could include available clinical 
annotations, 
such 
as 
aggregate 
audiogram 
classifications, etiology labels, or patient-reported 
outcomes, and could help increase both stability and 
clinical validity of the clustering process. Formal 
evaluations of cluster affinity with known phenotypes 
should be prioritized in future work. 
 
3. Comparison of clusters with pre-defined synthetic 
phenotypes: 
Synthetic data generated from predefined phenotypes 
should be explicitly compared with predefined cluster 
centroids and boundaries, i.e. with the means and limits 
of known standard phenotypes. This would help 
determine whether the unsupervised model is accurately 
able to recover original structures or identify new 
intermediate states between these canonical profiles. 
 
4. Filtering out known phenotypes to quantitatively 
determine 
novel 
clinical 
clusters: 
An important future direction is the comparative overlay 
of pre-discovered phenotypes onto new UMAP-GMM 
cluster maps derived from real-world data, besides 
purely visual comparison and speculation. Data points 
that align with known profiles could then be removed, 
isolating newly emerging or previously uncharacterized 
clusters. The quantitative methods to conduct such 
comparisons could include Euclidean distance or RMSE 
analysis, dynamic time warping (DTW) or computing 
correlation coefficients like the Pearson correlation 
(Rujasiri & Chomtee, n.d.). This helps to potentially 
view novel audiological subclusters with unique clinical 
or etiological significance. 
These steps represent the logical next lines of action toward 
refining the data-driven phenotyping framework in clinical 
and research settings, so as advance both hearing loss 
research and patient-centered audiological care. 
 
5. CONCLUSION 
This study demonstrates a comprehensive framework for 
generating, analyzing, and validating synthetic audiometric 
datasets based on established hearing loss phenotypes. 
Clinically standardized profiles and speech DS scores were 
employed to generate synthetic data. Through sequential 
application of PCA, UMAP and GMM, the structural 
relationships within this synthetic population were explored 
and visualised. These statistical tools provided robust 
separability of phenotype clusters, particularly where DS 
variability provided dimensional richness of the dataset. 
Projection of reference phenotypes and comparison of 
cluster integrity across PCA, UMAP, and GMM highlighted 
the consistency of the synthetic dataset and the functionality 
of the analytical model, thus supporting their utility for 
applying unsupervised learning approaches on realistic 
audiological data.  
Proceeding with implementation on large-scale real 
audiometric data, the dimensionality reduction (PCA) and 
high-performance 
mapping 
(UMAP/uwot, 
GMM) 
algorithms revealed latent (hidden) structure of clusters 
within the real audiogram dataset consisting of nearly 
==PAGE:22==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
22 
300,000 test observations. The UMAP projection revealed a 
continuous, high-density phenotypic space without obvious 
natural boundaries, while GMM clustering successfully 
partitioned this space into nine probabilistically-defined 
clusters within the global structure. 
The resulting phenotypic clusters displayed both localized 
and overlapping spatial distributions, indicating a complex 
correlation of underlying hearing profiles. While some 
clusters closely resembled established standard phenotypes, 
others diverged from known profiles, indicating the potential 
discovery of novel audiometric patterns. These findings 
highlight the heterogeneity of audiometric data, influence of 
DS scores as a major additional dimension and the potential 
of unsupervised learning to characterize real-world hearing 
loss beyond conventional pure-tone audiometry.  
This data-driven approach presented here emphasizes the 
value of controlled synthetic modelling as a critical step 
toward the development of phenotype-informed diagnostics 
and personalized auditory rehabilitation strategies. With the 
anticipation to perform as a foundation for refined 
classification of hearing loss, this study hopes to support 
future efforts in personalized hearing care, epidemiological 
classification, and genotype–phenotype association studies. 
 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research has benefited from collaborative support and 
intellectual input from the Copenhagen Hearing and Balance 
Center, Rigshospitalet, in providing the opportunity to work 
with the clinical audiological dataset that this study largely 
operates on. Our sincere gratitude to the Technical 
University of Denmark, whose research environments have 
facilitated interdisciplinary exploration in hearing science 
and computational modelling.  
Our appreciation further extends to the authors of previous 
studies, particularly Bisgaard et al. (2010), Dubno et al. 
(2013), and Vaden et al. (2022), whose work on audiometric 
phenotype characterization has provided the scientific basis 
and inspiration for this study. 
Our grateful acknowledgements extend to Gerard Encina-
Llamas for his foundational contributions to the development 
of the analytical framework that supports the current work. 
Also, our appreciation extends to Abigail Kressner for her 
guidance and expertise in audiological data analysis, which 
has informed the methodological direction of this study. 
Finally, we acknowledge the broader research community 
dedicated to advancing audiology and machine learning for 
their ongoing efforts, which continue to shape and elevate 
this field of inquiry. 
 
==PAGE:23==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
23 
ACRONYMS 
  
 
ABR 
Auditory Brainstem Response 
 
AN 
Auditory Nerve 
 
ARI 
Adjusted Rand Index 
 
BIC 
Bayesian Information Criterion 
 
CS 
Cochlear Synaptopathy 
 
dB HL 
Decibel Hearing Level 
 
DPOAE 
Distortion Product Otoacoustic Emission 
 
DS 
Discrimination Score (Speech Discrimination Score) 
 
f_125 – f_8000 
Frequency in Hertz (125 Hz to 8000 Hz, audiometric test 
frequencies) 
 
G 
Number of Clusters in GMM 
 
GMM 
Gaussian Mixture Model 
 
HL 
Hearing Level 
 
HHL 
Hidden Hearing Loss 
 
IHC 
Inner Hair Cell 
 
IEC 
International Electrotechnical Commission 
 
MET 
Metabolic Hearing Loss component 
 
MHL 
Metabolic Hearing Loss 
 
NMI 
Normalized Mutual Information 
 
NNLS 
Non-Negative Least Squares 
 
OHC 
Outer Hair Cell 
 
PC 
Principal Component 
 
PCA 
Principal Component Analysis 
 
PTA 
Pure-Tone Audiometry 
 
RMSE 
Root Mean Square Error 
 
SEN 
Sensory Hearing Loss component 
 
SHL 
Sensory Hearing Loss 
 
TTS 
Temporary Threshold Shift 
 
UMAP 
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection 
 
VQ 
Vector Quantization 
 
VVV, EEE, etc. 
Covariance structure types in GMM (e.g. VVV: variable volume, 
shape, and orientation; EEE: equal volume, shape, and orientation) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
24 
REFERENCES 
1. Allen, P. D., & Eddins, D. A. (2010). Presbycusis phenotypes form a 
heterogeneous continuum when ordered by degree and configuration of 
hearing 
loss. 
Hearing 
Research, 
264(1–2), 
10–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2010.02.001 
2. Billings, C. J., Olsen, T. M., Charney, L., Madsen, B. M., & Holmes, C. 
E. (2023). Speech-in-Noise Testing: An Introduction for Audiologists. 
Seminars in Hearing, 45(1), 55–82. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-
1770155 
3. Bisgaard, N., Vlaming, M. S. M. G., & Dahlquist, M. (2010). Standard 
Audiograms for the IEC 60118-15 Measurement Procedure. Trends in 
Amplification, 
14(2), 
113–120. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1084713810379609 
4. Blazer, D. G., Domnitz, S., Liverman, C. T., Adults, C. on A. and A. H. 
H. C. for, Policy, B. on H. S., Division, H. and M., & National 
Academies of Sciences, E. (2016). Hearing Loss: Extent, Impact, and 
Research Needs. In Hearing Health Care for Adults: Priorities for 
Improving Access and Affordability. National Academies Press (US). 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK385309/ 
5. Bramhall, N. F., Konrad-Martin, D., & McMillan, G. P. (2018). Tinnitus 
and Auditory Perception After a History of Noise Exposure: 
Relationship to Auditory Brainstem Response Measures. Ear and 
Hearing, 
39(5), 
881–894. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/AUD.0000000000000544 
6. Carl, A. C., Hohman, M. H., & Cornejo, J. (2025). Audiology Pure Tone 
Evaluation. 
In 
StatPearls. 
StatPearls 
Publishing. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK580531/ 
7. Chen, J., Richard, C., Bermudez, J. C. M., & Honeine, P. (2011). Non-
negative least-mean-square algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Signal 
Processing, 
59(11), 
5225–5235. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSP.2011.2162508 
8. Chung, K. (2004). Challenges and Recent Developments in Hearing 
Aids: Part I. Speech Understanding in Noise, Microphone Technologies 
and Noise Reduction Algorithms. Trends in Amplification, 8(3), 83–
124. https://doi.org/10.1177/108471380400800302 
9. Dimensionality reduction for visualizing high-dimensional biological 
data 
| 
Request 
PDF. 
(n.d.). 
ResearchGate. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2022.104749 
10. Dubno, J. R., Eckert, M. A., Lee, F.-S., Matthews, L. J., & Schmiedt, R. 
A. (2013). Classifying Human Audiometric Phenotypes of Age-Related 
Hearing Loss from Animal Models. Journal of the Association for 
Research 
in 
Otolaryngology, 
14(5), 
687–701. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10162-013-0396-x 
11. Encina-Llamas, G. (2024). La sinaptopatía coclear. Auditio, 8, e103–
e103. https://doi.org/10.51445/sja.auditio.vol8.2024.103 
12. Gabriel, H. (2024, May 22). Searching auditory phenotypes beyond 
audiometry from a large clinical dataset. Computational Audiology. 
https://computationalaudiology.com/searching-auditory-phenotypes-
beyond-audiometry-from-a-large-clinical-dataset/ 
13. Gaussian 
Mixture 
Model. 
(18:17:49+00:00). 
GeeksforGeeks. 
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/gaussian-mixture-model/ 
14. How UMAP Works—Umap 0.5.8 documentation. (n.d.). Retrieved June 
15, 
2025, 
from 
https://umap-
learn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how_umap_works.html 
15. Jiao, L., Denœux, T., Liu, Z., & Pan, Q. (2022). EGMM: An evidential 
version of the Gaussian mixture model for clustering. Applied Soft 
Computing, 129, 109619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2022.109619 
16. Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2009). Adding insult to injury: 
Cochlear nerve degeneration after “temporary” noise-induced hearing 
loss. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society 
for 
Neuroscience, 
29(45), 
14077–14085. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2845-09.2009 
17. Kumawat, S. (2024, December 28). Performance Metrics for 
Clustering. 
Medium. 
https://medium.com/@Sunil_Kumawat/performance-metrics-for-
clustering-9badee0b7db8 
18. Lopez, S. (n.d.). Clinical auditory profiling and profile-based hearing-
aid fitting. 
19. Melville, J. (2019). uwot: The Uniform Manifold Approximation and 
Projection (UMAP) Method for Dimensionality Reduction (p. 0.2.3) 
[Dataset]. https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.uwot 
20. Missed Hearing Loss in Tinnitus Patients with Normal Audiograms. 
(2025). ResearchGate. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2019.107826 
21. Natarajan, N., Batts, S., & Stankovic, K. M. (2023). Noise-Induced 
Hearing Loss. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 12(6), 2347. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12062347 
22. Parthasarathy, A., & Kujawa, S. G. (2018). Synaptopathy in the Aging 
Cochlea: Characterizing Early-Neural Deficits in Auditory Temporal 
Envelope Processing. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official 
Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 38(32), 7108–7119. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3240-17.2018 
23. Parthasarathy, A., Romero Pinto, S., Lewis, R. M., Goedicke, W., & 
Polley, D. B. (2020a). Data-driven segmentation of audiometric 
phenotypes across a large clinical cohort. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 
6704. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-63515-5 
24. Parthasarathy, A., Romero Pinto, S., Lewis, R. M., Goedicke, W., & 
Polley, D. B. (2020b). Data-driven segmentation of audiometric 
phenotypes across a large clinical cohort. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 
6704. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-63515-5 
25. (PDF) Parametric UMAP Embeddings for Representation and 
Semisupervised 
Learning. 
(2025). 
ResearchGate. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01434 
26. Priya, J. S., & Hohman, M. H. (2025). Noise Exposure and Hearing 
Loss. 
In 
StatPearls. 
StatPearls 
Publishing. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK594247/ 
27. Rujasiri, P., & Chomtee, B. (n.d.). Comparison of Clustering 
Techniques for Cluster Analysis. 
28. Ryan, A. F., Kujawa, S. G., Hammill, T., Le Prell, C., & Kil, J. (2016). 
Temporary and Permanent Noise-Induced Threshold Shifts: A Review 
of Basic and Clinical Observations. Otology & Neurotology : Official 
Publication of the American Otological Society, American Neurotology 
Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology, 37(8), 
e271–e275. https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0000000000001071 
29. Salmon, M. K., Brant, J., Hohman, M. H., & Leibowitz, D. (2025). 
Audiogram Interpretation. In StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK578179/ 
30. Sanchez-Lopez, R., Fereczkowski, M., Neher, T., Santurette, S., & Dau, 
T. (2020). Robust Data-Driven Auditory Profiling Towards Precision 
Audiology. 
Trends 
in 
Hearing, 
24, 
2331216520973539. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2331216520973539 
31. Schaette, R., & McAlpine, D. (2011). Tinnitus with a normal 
audiogram: Physiological evidence for hidden hearing loss and 
computational model. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official 
Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 31(38), 13452–13457. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2156-11.2011 
32. Schuknecht, H. F., Watanuki, K., Takahashi, T., Belal, A. A., Kimura, 
R. S., Jones, D. D., & Ota, C. Y. (1974). Atrophy of the stria vascularis, 
a common cause for hearing loss. The Laryngoscope, 84(10), 1777–
1821. https://doi.org/10.1288/00005537-197410000-00012 
33. Shehabi, S., Comstock, D. C., Mankel, K., Bormann, B. M., Das, S., 
Brodie, H., Sagiv, D., & Miller, L. M. (2025). Individual Differences in 
Cognition and Perception Predict Neural Processing of Speech in Noise 
for Audiometrically Normal Listeners. eNeuro, 12(4), ENEURO.0381-
24.2025. https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0381-24.2025 
34. The History of Audiometry and Audiometers. (n.d.). Auditdata. 
Retrieved 
June 
15, 
2025, 
from 
https://www.auditdata.com/insights/blog/the-history-of-audiometry-
and-the-evolution-of-audiometers/ 
35. Trials, I. of M. (US) C. on S. for S.-N.-P. C. R., Charles H. Evans, J., & 
Ildstad, S. T. (2001). Design of Small Clinical Trials. In Small Clinical 
Trials: Issues and Challenges. National Academies Press (US). 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK223329/ 
36. Understanding UMAP. (n.d.). Retrieved June 15, 2025, from 
https://pair-code.github.io/understanding-umap/ 
==PAGE:25==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
25 
37. Vaden, K. I., Eckert, M. A., Matthews, L. J., Schmiedt, R. A., & Dubno, 
J. R. (2022). Metabolic and Sensory Components of Age-Related 
Hearing Loss. Journal of the Association for Research in 
Otolaryngology, 23(2), 253–272. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10162-021-
00826-y 
38. Vanhatalo, E., Kulahci, M., & Bergquist, B. (2017). On the structure of 
dynamic principal component analysis used in statistical process 
monitoring. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 167, 1–
11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemolab.2017.05.016 
39. Wang, Q., Qian, M., Yang, L., Shi, J., Hong, Y., Han, K., Li, C., Lin, J., 
Huang, Z., & Wu, H. (2021). Audiometric Phenotypes of Noise-
Induced Hearing Loss by Data-Driven Cluster Analysis and Their 
Relevant Characteristics. Frontiers in Medicine, 8, 662045. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2021.662045 
40. Willie, E., Yang, P., & Patrick, E. (2023). The impact of similarity 
metrics on cell-type clustering in highly multiplexed in situ imaging 
cytometry 
data. 
Bioinformatics 
Advances, 
3(1), 
vbad141. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioadv/vbad141 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
26 
APPENDIX A 
A.1 SYNTHETIC DATASET GENERATION 
Synthetic dataset is generated in the format of a data.frame() in R, 
thus making it pliable for addition of data columns and recalculation 
within columns. It also becomes the ideal format for rapid reading 
and comparison of row-wise data, for further plotting purposes in 
the statistical analysis usecase. Each phenotype is stored as a named 
row with an associated aud_type label and eleven frequency 
columns f_125 through f_8000. The dataframe created by the 
gen_phenotypes() function contains the PTA values relative to the 
following frequency information: 
gen_phenotypes_bisgaard <-  
  function(data_in = data.frame('f_125' = numeric(), 'f_250' = numeric(), 
                                'f_500' = numeric(), 'f_750' = numeric(), 
                                'f_1000' = numeric(), 'f_1500' = numeric(), 
                                'f_2000' = numeric(), 'f_3000' = numeric(),  
                                'f_4000' = numeric(), 'f_6000' = numeric(), 
                                'f_8000' = numeric() )) { 
Mean assignments of standard audiogram datasets are generated by 
mapping the frequency spectrum to the respective aggregate PTA 
thresholds observed in the research studies of the standard profiles. 
An example code block of the assignments is given below: 
# Very-Mild N1 standard audiogram 
   aud_pheno__bisgaard_n <- aud_pheno__bisgaard_n %>% 
      add_row(aud_type = "n1", 'f_125' = 10, 'f_250' = 10, 'f_500' = 10, 
            'f_750' = 10, 'f_1000' = 10, 'f_1500' = 10, 'f_2000' = 15,  
            'f_3000' = 20, 'f_4000' = 30, 'f_6000' = 40, 'f_8000' = 50) 
  # Mild N2 standard audiogram 
     aud_pheno__bisgaard_n <- aud_pheno__bisgaard_n %>% 
       add_row(aud_type = "n2", 'f_125' = 20, 'f_250' = 20, 'f_500' = 20,  
            'f_750' = 22.5, 'f_1000' = 25, 'f_1500' = 30, 'f_2000' = 35,  
            'f_3000' = 40, 'f_4000' = 45, 'f_6000' = 50, 'f_8000' = 50) 
…………contd. 
The generated observations are then shuffled by row, so as to 
simulate a realistic dataset where random hearing loss patterns and 
pathologies would be observed per test subject. Following this 
randomization, the synthetic dataset created has the following 
structure: 
 
Fig. A.1 – Synthetic Dataset (synth_dataset) Structure, PTA only 
A.2 DISCRIMINATION SCORES 
Speech DS scores were assigned using the dplyr::case_when() 
function within a row-wise mutation block. In the fixed-score 
version, a deterministic mapping was applied based on the aud_type 
string (e.g. "n1" ~ 95, "n7" ~ 25). For variable DS values, 
phenotype-specific Gaussian distributions were used with means 
ranging from 25% to 90% and a standard deviation of 5–10 
percentage points, ensuring plausible clinical variance. Values were 
sampled using rnorm() and truncated between 0% and 100% using 
pmin() and pmax(). For trimodal modelling in the N7 group, a 
runif() random draw determined membership in one of three 
Gaussian components centered at 25, 50, or 90, each with its own 
sampling kernel. These DS values were then appended to the 
synthetic dataset for use in joint PCA, UMAP, and clustering 
analyzes.  
Code Block – Fixed DS Score Mapping 
synth_dataset_ds_fix <- synth_dataset %>% 
mutate(ds_fix = case_when( 
    aud_type == "n1" ~ 95, 
    aud_type == "n2" ~ 90, 
    aud_type == "n3" ~ 80, 
    aud_type == "n4" ~ 75, 
    aud_type == "n5" ~ 50, 
    aud_type == "n6" ~ 33, 
    aud_type == "n7" ~ 25, 
TRUE ~ NA_real_ )) 
 
Code Block – Variable DS Score Mapping 
synth_dataset_ds_var <- synth_dataset %>% 
   
rowwise() %>% 
   
mutate(ds_fix = case_when( 
    aud_type == "n1" ~ pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 50, sd = 10), 
0), 100), 
 aud_type == "n2" ~ pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 50, sd = 10), 
0), 100), 
 aud_type == "n3" ~ pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 50, sd = 10), 
0), 100), 
 aud_type == "n4" ~ pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 50, sd = 10), 
0), 100), 
 aud_type == "n5" ~ pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 50, sd = 10), 
0), 100), 
 aud_type == "n6" ~ pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 50, sd = 10), 
0), 100), 
     
    aud_type == "n7" ~ { 
       
         rand <- runif(1) 
       
         if (rand < 0.33) { 
         
           # Bad-fit group (low scores) 
         
           pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 25, sd = 5), 0), 100) 
       
         } else if (rand < 0.66) { 
         
          # Moderate-fit group (medium scores) 
         
          pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 60, sd = 5), 0), 100) 
       
        } else { 
         
         # Good-fit group (high scores) 
         
         pmin(pmax(rnorm(1, mean = 90, sd = 5), 0), 100) 
       
       } 
     
}, 
     
TRUE ~ NA_real_ 
   
)) %>% 
   
ungroup() 
 
==PAGE:27==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
27 
Table A.2 represents the fixed and variable DS Score modelling 
parameters by phenotype: 
Phenotype 
Description 
Fixed 
DS 
Score 
(%) 
Variable 
Mean 
(%) 
SD 
(±) 
Notes 
N1 
Very mild hearing 
loss 
95 
95 
5 
High DS retained 
N2 
Mild loss 
90 
90 
5 
- 
N3 
Moderate loss 
80 
80 
7 
- 
N4 
Moderate–severe 
loss 
75 
75 
8 
- 
N5 
Severe loss 
50 
50 
10 Wide variation possible 
N6 
Severe–profound 
loss 
33 
33 
10 Reduced clarity 
expected 
N7 
Profound loss 
25 
25 / 50 / 
90 
5 
Modeled as trimodal 
(low/med/high DS) 
 
Table A.2: Parameters used to generate fixed and variable DS 
scores for Bisgaard phenotypes. The “Variable Mean” and SD 
columns define Gaussian sampling parameters. N7 includes a 
trimodal implementation with equal proportions of each mode. 
Variable DS (DS_Var) scores were evaluated from different 
distributions, including Gamma, Normal (Gaussian) and hybrid 
spreads. Within the normal distribution, following cases were 
assumed for DS_Var, applied on Bisgaard Synthetic Dataset: 
    
 
Fig. A.2 (i)                                                   Fig. A.2 (ii) 
      
  
Fig. A.2 (iii)                                                   Fig. A.2 (iv) 
      
 
Fig. A.2 (v)                                                   Fig. A.2 (vi) 
Fig. A.2 – DS_Var Score Distribution Cases; 
A.2 (i) – All distri. From mean 90,  
A.2 (ii) – n1 from mean 90, n2-n7 from mean 50,  
A.2 (iii) – n1-n3 from mean 90, n4-n7 from mean 50, 
A.2 (iv) – n1-n6 from mean 50, n7 from mean 90,  
A.2 (v) – n1-n7 from diff. means, 30,35,45,50,65,80,90 respectively,  
A.2 (vi) – n1-n6 from mean 50, n7 bimodal from mean 90 
 
A.3 PCA 
A.3.1 Scaling and Centering 
Prior to PCA, all frequency-based variables were mean-centered 
and scaled to unit variance to ensure that differences in absolute 
threshold values did not dominate the analysis due to differing units 
or magnitudes. This scaling and centering step is performed within 
the prcomp() function, using the code: 
synth_dataset.aud_only.pca <- 
prcomp(synth_dataset.aud_only, scale = TRUE, center = 
TRUE) 
where,  
- 
center = TRUE: subtracts the mean of each 
variable (each frequency column) so that each 
column has a mean of zero. 
- 
scale = TRUE: divides each column by its 
standard deviation so that all variables have unit 
variance. 
This standardization ensures that all frequency bands contribute 
equally to the PCA, preventing frequency regions with larger raw 
values or variances from disproportionately influencing the 
principal components. This step is essential for any PCA involving 
variables measured on the same scale but with different variances, 
which is the case with audiometric thresholds across frequencies. 
A.3.2 Reference Phenotypes 
Reference phenotypes — such as the Bisgaard N1–N7 audiograms 
— were also projected into this space to assess how well the 
synthetic data preserved the known structure of hearing loss types. 
This projection step is done using the predict() function in the code: 
aud_pheno__bisgaard_n.pca_coord <- 
predict(synth_dataset.aud_only.pca, 
newdata = aud_pheno__bisgaard_n) 
It projects the known Bisgaard N1–N7 phenotype audiograms into 
the PCA space defined by the synthetic dataset. This means the PCA 
transformation (rotation, scaling) learned from the synthetic data is 
applied to the original Bisgaard profiles, placing them in the same 
coordinate system. The coordinates of the projected phenotypes are 
then stored in aud_pheno__bisgaard_n.pca_coord. 
Projecting the known phenotypes into the same PCA space helps to: 
- 
Visually evaluate how closely the synthetic audiograms 
resemble their reference patterns. 
- 
Assess whether the synthetic data spans the correct regions of 
audiometric variation. 
- 
Use reference phenotypes as anchors or interpretive 
landmarks in the reduced-dimensional plot. 
==PAGE:28==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
28 
This is followed by a visualization using fviz_add() to add arrows 
and labels for the Bisgaard points in the PCA scatter plot: 
plt_indv_bisgaard_n <- fviz_add(plt_indv, 
aud_pheno__bisgaard_n.pca_coord,  
       colour = 'black', geom  = c("point", "arrow"), 
                                labelsize = 4, pointsize = 3, repel = TRUE) 
 
A.3.3 cos² Contribution Plots 
 
Alongside the typical projections, contribution plots were generated 
to quantify how much each frequency band contributed to the 
principal components, offering insight into which frequency 
regions were most influential in distinguishing profiles. This was 
conducted using the code:  
 
fviz_pca_var(synth_dataset.aud_only.pca, col.var = "cos2",  
             gradient.cols = col_pal, repel = TRUE) + 
  theme_classic(base_size = 12) 
 
where, 
 
- 
fviz_pca_var() is from the factoextra package and is used to 
visualize variable contributions (in this case, the audiometric 
frequencies) to the principal components. 
- 
col.var = "cos2" maps the colour of each variable (frequency) 
to its squared cosine (cos²), which reflects how well the 
variable is represented in the PCA space — a measure of its 
contribution or influence. 
- 
gradient.cols = col_pal applies a colour gradient to highlight 
high- vs low-contributing features. 
- 
repel = TRUE ensures that frequency labels don’t overlap. 
 
 
Fig. A.3 (i) – cos² Contribution vector plot 
 
 
Fig. A.3 (ii) – cos² Contribution PCA space 
 
Fig. A.3 (iii) – Scree plot, representing dimensional contributions 
 
These plots are useful to see which frequency regions are most 
responsible for the variance captured by PC1 and PC2. For 
example: 
 
- 
High-frequency bands (e.g. 4000–8000 Hz) might contribute 
more in distinguishing steeply sloping hearing losses. 
- 
Mid-frequencies may drive variation in flat or moderate 
hearing losses. 
This plot is helpful for interpreting the PCA dimensions as well as 
for understanding which parts of the audiogram are driving 
phenotype separation. 
A.4 UMAP 
 
Fig. A.4 (i) – UMAP min. observations, n_neigh = 100 
The application of UMAP is fundamentally dependent on a 
constraint related to the number of observations required for 
dimensionality reduction to function effectively. Specifically, the 
total number of data points must be greater than the number of 
neighbors (n_neighbors) hyperparameter. As illustrated in Fig. A.4 
(i), attempting to run UMAP with 10 observations per phenotype 
(total obs. = 70, fewer than the chosen n_neighbors = 100) results 
in an error: "number of neighbors must be smaller than number of 
items" in the current analysis. This highlights a minimum 
==PAGE:29==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
29 
observation threshold for the UMAP's construction of local 
neighborhood graphs. With 15 observations per profile (total obs. = 
105), the UMAP is functional, verifying this limitation. However, 
resulting embeddings exhibit limited separation and structure, 
underscoring that performance remains suboptimal until sample 
sizes increase further. These findings reinforce the need for 
adequately sized datasets when deploying UMAP. 
Further, a comparitive analysis was conducted on the performance 
of the UMAP when varying the number of observations across 
different distributions of DS scores. Two main conclusions were 
reached; firstly, UMAP is demonstrably sensitive to the number of 
observations: at lower sample sizes (20–50), clusters are diffuse and 
poorly resolved, whereas clearer and more structured clusters 
emerge beginning around 100 observations and stabilize with 
increasing data volume. This confirmed that sufficient sampling 
density is crucial for UMAP to accurately preserve local 
relationships in the data. Secondly, UMAP is also influenced by the 
distributions of the added speech DS. Different DS distributions 
cause notable changes in cluster shape and orientation, proving that 
the structure of the high-dimensional input space directly impacts 
the resulting 2D UMAP plot. 
 
Fig. A.4 (ii)  – UMAP variations w.r.t. normal distributions and no. of observations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
30 
A.5 GMM 
Soft assignment probabilities in GMMs refer to the idea that each 
data point is assigned a probability of belonging to each cluster, 
rather than being assigned to a single cluster specifically (as in hard 
clustering like k-means). 
GMM assumes the data is generated from a mixture of several 
Gaussian distributions (clusters). For each data point, the algorithm 
computes posterior probabilities, which represents how likely it is 
that the point came from each of the Gaussian distributions (these 
probabilities sum to 1 for each point and represent the degree of 
membership in each cluster). 
This allows GMMs to model uncertainty in clustering. It is highly 
useful for overlapping clusters, where a data point could reasonably 
belong to more than one group. Each point can still  be assigned to 
the cluster with the highest probability, or be assigned as part of the 
full probability distribution for more clear interpretation. 
Each data point can be shaded with a mix of colours representing 
its partial membership in multiple groups. 
A.6 Sensory and Metabolic Components – NNLS and RMSE 
Non-negative least squares (NNLS) is a variant of standard least 
squares regression where the estimated coefficients are constrained 
to be ≥ 0, i.e. it finds the best-fitting linear combination of some the 
vectors (metabolic and sensory profiles) to match the observed data. 
However it only allows non-negative weights (physiologically: a 
person's audiogram would not be expected to have "negative" 
contributions from a type of hearing loss). 
The optimization is implemented in mathematical terms as: 
 
where: 
- 
y is the observed audiogram, 
- 
A is the matrix of basis vectors (MET and SEN components), 
- 
x is the vector of non-negative weights to be estimated 
(Metabolic and Sensory contributions). 
This is implemented using the code: 
# Cost function 
CF <- function(ms) { 
  sqrt(mean((y - (ms[1] * MET + ms[2] * SEN))^2, na.rm = TRUE)) 
} 
 
# Optimize MET and SEN coefficients 
OptEstim <- optim(fn = CF, par = c(0, 0), lower = c(0, 0), method = 
"L-BFGS-B") 
Here, ms is the vector of two weights (Metabolic_HL, Sensory_HL). 
The CF function computes the RMSE between the actual 
audiogram (y) and the estimated one (a linear combination of the 
MET and SEN profiles, weighted by ms). The optim() function uses 
the "L-BFGS-B" method, which allows limits (i.e., lower and upper 
bounds). Optim() also sets lower = c(0, 0), which constrains both 
weights to be ≥ 0, fulfilling the non-negativity requirement. 
This ensures that each audiogram is explained only by additive 
contributions from the metabolic and sensory components, and 
illogical solutions are avoided where one component "cancels out" 
the other. 
The RMSE is calculated as: 
 
where: 
-   RMSE is the Root Mean Square Error, 
-   m is the weight/coefficient of metabolic loss component, 
-   s is the weight/coefficient of sensory loss component, 
-   n is number of frequency bands used in audiogram, 
-   yi is the observed synthetic hearing threshold at frequency i 
-   METi is the value of metabolic reference audiogram component 
at frequency i 
-   SENi is the value of sensory reference audiogram component at 
frequency i 
 
The formula computes the RMSE between the observed hearing 
threshold yi and the predicted threshold formed by linearly 
combining the MET and SEN component audiograms scaled by 
weights mmm and sss, respectively. The aim is typically to find the 
values of m and s that minimize the RMSE, indicating the best 
fitting linear combination of the MET and SEN templates to the 
observed audiogram. 
A.7 REAL DATASET GENERATION 
The following figure Fig. A.7 represents the structure of the Real 
Dataset Matrix. As discussed in section 2.3, the generation of the 
matrix included the primary step of averaging the word 
discrimination score (WDS) for a subject across the range of 
frequency, represented by val_wds. It was followed by assigning 
test indices, given by test_no, to represent multiple tests conducted 
on the same subject, thereby depicted on separate rows in the 
matrix. Finally, the age_years_exam and val_wds were normalized 
to the first value, for all test repetitions of the same subject. With 
all test subject-ear side pairs, 288,311 observations, i.e. datapoints 
were available in the matrix to conduct further statistical analysis. 
 
Fig. A.7 – Real Dataset (real_dataset_aud_ds) Structure, PTA + DS 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
31 
A.8 GMM TRAINING AND CLUSTERING 
The GMM training was conducted on the subsample of 10000 
points randomly chosen from the real dataset, thus producing 9 
clusters that when projected onto the PCA space, provided a clear 
plot of the boundaries and clustering affinity along the components 
(Fig. A.8). Multiple iterations of this analysis were conducted where 
a new random subsample of 10000 points was selected, to verify 
the repeatability of the selected clusters, and similar results were 
observed.  
 
Fig. A.8 – GMM Clusters, 10000 points, projected on PCA space 
The ideal choice for GMM parameters was made by analysing the 
BIC information from the summary() function for GMM. Using the 
plot for BIC as shown in section 3.2.1, Fig. 14, alongside the more 
granular details for BIC obtained from the summary() function, the 
( VVV - G=9 ) combination of GMM parameters was considered as 
ideal for further analysis. 
Summary(): 
----------------------------------------------------  
Gaussian finite mixture model fitted by EM algorithm  
----------------------------------------------------  
Mclust VVV (ellipsoidal, varying volume, shape, and orientation) 
model with 9 components:  
 log-likelihood              n        df               BIC              ICL 
        -54145.31     10000     593     -113752.4     -119987.3 
Clustering table: 
   1         2         3         4         5        6        7        8        9  
1002   1039   1238   1751    913    983    763   1782    529 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
Auditory Phenotypes From A Large Clinical Audiological Dataset  
.  
 
32 
APPENDIX B 
B.1 SENSORY AND METABOLIC COMPONENTS 
For reference to results (section 3.1.2) of sensory and metabolic 
components present within the synthetically generated datasets for 
Bisgaard and Dubno profiles - underlying PCA structures for 
comparison to result plots (Fig. 7), (Fig. 8):  
               
 
Fig. B.1 (i) – PCA structure, Bisgaard N-phenotypes                               Fig. B.1 (ii) – PCA structure, Dubno phenotypes 
 
 
 
B.2 GMM BIC SCORES 
For reference to results (section 3.1.4) of GMM clustering 
behaviour with respect to parametric variation – BIC plots 
providing the choice of G-modelName combination shown in result 
plots (Fig. 11), (Fig. 12): 
 
Fig. B.2 (i) – BIC plots for GMM variation with (num_obs) 
 
 
Fig. B.2 (ii) – BIC plots for GMM variation with G, modelNames 
