==PAGE:1==
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
Identifying Market Barriers and
Optimizing Venture Support
Master Thesis
DTU Entrepreneurship
Department of Entrepreneurship
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
Identifying Market Barriers and
Optimizing Venture Support
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Ola Dybvadskog
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Entrepreneurship, Skylab, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den­
mark
https://www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Entrepreneurship,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Technology Entrepreneurship (cand.tech.)
Ola Dybvadskog ­ s233303
Signature
Date
ii
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
10.06.2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Agriculture plays a significant role within Kenyan economy as well as in its cultural fab­
ric. With crop yields stagnating since the 1990s, AgriTech ventures could play a vital
role in pushing the sector forward. However, in a fragmented market with over six mil­
lion farmers, currently most AgriTech ventures fail in the pilot stage. There is a limited
understanding of the specific barriers these ventures face and how venture support pro­
grams, such as incubators and accelerators, can be optimally designed to assist them in
the Kenyan context. This study aimed to identify the primary barriers to market entry and
sustainable success for AgriTech ventures in Kenya and to determine key programmatic
elements for venture support programs designed to foster their growth. A qualitative,
grounded theory approach was employed, utilizing semi­structured interviews with key
ecosystem stakeholders (founders, investors, and ecosystem enablers) to gather rich,
contextualized insights. The findings revealed that primary barriers are twofold: signifi­
cant external hurdles rooted in foundational ecosystem deficiencies and farmer adoption
challenges, alongside internal venture­specific issues like misaligned Product­Market­Fit
(PMF). Effective venture support programs require context­specificity, tailored support by
venture stage and sector as well as a continuous focus on achieving PMF. These findings
culminated in a conceptual pyramid model illustrating the interconnected dynamics of the
ecosystem. The study concludes that in order for AgriTech ventures to achieve sustain­
able success, the farmers they aim to serve must also be empowered to succeed.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ola Dybvadskog, MSc Technology Entrepreneurship, DTU
Maria­Theresa Norn, Associate Professor, DTU
Thanks for your insightful guidance, challenging questions and consistent support. It was
a pleasure working with you.
My Family
Thanks for always believing in me and letting me find my own ways in life.
The Waiyaki Family
Thanks for hosting me during my entire stay in Kenya, your support was crucial during
this research process.
iv
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Learning Objectives
1
2
Introduction
2
3
Literature Review
4
3.1
Introduction to the Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Entrepreneurship and Innovation in Emerging Markets . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
Agriculture and AgriTech Innovation in Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Incubators and Accelerators as a Mechanism for Startup Support . . . . . . 20
3.5
Gaps in the Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Methodology
27
4.1
Overall Research Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Research Setting and Rationale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Research Design and Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Data Collection and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Data Management and Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.6
Data Analysis Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.7
Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.8
Limitations of the Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Findings
42
5.1
Priority of Challenges: Stakeholder Rankings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.2
A Conceptual Model of the Kenyan AgriTech Entrepreneurial Ecosystem . . 43
6
Discussion
53
6.1
Interpreting the Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.2
Implications of the Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.3
Limitations and Directions for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
A Appendix A
69
A.1 Interview Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.2 Ranked Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:9==
1
Learning Objectives
The aim of the thesis is to enable the student to complete and communicate a problem­
orientated academic research project and thereby demonstrate the ability to think and
work academically, as well as utilize this in a future professional context.
The grade 12 is awarded in cases where the Master’s thesis meets the following require­
ments to an excellent degree, i.e. with no or only few deficiencies.
To achieve the grade 12, students should meet the following learning objectives with no
or only minor mistakes or errors:
• Articulate a delineated topic relevant to the Master of Science (MSc) in Technol­
ogy Entrepreneurship program’s field of study that can facilitate and structure the
student’s work on the thesis and its contents.
• Select and apply scientific theories through analysis in order to address the chosen
topic.
• Substantiate chosen methods and research design, and apply them to address the
chosen topic.
• Ensure a logical coherence between problem statement, analysis and conclusion.
• Discuss the analytical and (if relevant) empirical results raised by the research.
• Extract the implications in relation to practice.
• Communicate the contents of the thesis – in writing and verbally
• Argue for the significance of the choices made during the work with the thesis.
• Reflect on limitations of the work.
• Demonstrate the ability to work independently and reflect on own learning, academic
development, and specialization.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
Agriculture constitutes a fundamental pillar of the Kenyan economy, underpinning the
livelihoods of a significant majority of its population and shaping the nation’s social and
economic structure. The sector is largely characterized by small­scale farming operations,
with over 6 million households engaged in agricultural activities, more than half of these
cultivating less than two acres [1]. This landscape is further defined by a heavy reliance
on rainfed systems, affecting approximately 70% of farms [1]. This dependency con­
tributes to persistent challenges, notably low average yields for staple crops like maize,
which have stagnated since the 1990s at around 1.5 t/ha, significantly below global po­
tential [2]. In response to these structural and environmental factors constraining a sector
of immense potential, agricultural technology (AgriTech) and innovation are increasingly
viewed as critical avenues for driving transformation, enhancing productivity, and foster­
ing resilience within this vital part of the economy and ultimately peoples livelihoods [3,
4].
Kenya’s active innovation ecosystem is clearly visible in the AgriTech space, with the na­
tion recognized as a hotspot for Digital Farmer Services (DFS) and digitally­enabled agri­
culture (D4Ag) solutions within the context of Sub­Saharan Africa [5]. While numerous
AgriTech ventures are being launched to address long­standing agricultural challenges,
their path to sustainable success and widespread impact often encounters significant dif­
ficulty [4]. This situation, where a multitude of actors strive for viability in a complex en­
vironment, reflects broader discussions about entrepreneurial ecosystems in Emerging
Markets and Developing Economies (EMDEs). For instance, Coad et al. [6] have argued
that some African economies might not suffer from a lack of entrepreneurs but rather from
having ’too many’ less productive ones, suggesting a strategic focus on supporting the
’right kind’ of high­potential ventures. A similar structural complexity is observable in the
Kenyan agricultural sector itself, which forms the primary market for these AgriTech ven­
tures: The sheer number of smallholder farmers who predominantly operate on smaller
plots of land, creates a highly fragmented market. This fragmentation inherently con­
strains the scaling of AgriTech ventures and contributes to limited adoption. These is­
sues, combined with a challenging set of other demand­ and supply­side gaps—such as
individual farmer constraints, market access hurdles, and infrastructural deficits—further
impede the growth of these ventures [7, 8].
In response to these entrepreneurial difficulties, venture support organizations like incu­
bators and accelerators (I/As) play an increasingly prominent role [9]. However, while
these I/As aim to nurture early­stage ventures, a deeper, context­specific understanding
of their effectiveness is needed, particularly concerning how their program designs can be
optimized to address the unique barriers confronting AgriTech startups in Kenya [10], an
imperative often highlighted for effective entrepreneurial support in EMDEs [11]. There­
fore, a critical gap exists in first, thoroughly identifying the critical barriers to market entry
and sustainable success for ventures in this sector, and second, understanding how incu­
bator and accelerator (I/A) models in Kenya can be strategically tailored to help startups
effectively address these challenges, enhance their viability, and thereby unlock their full
potential to contribute to the nation’s agricultural advancement.
To address this critical research gap, this study aims to explore the aforementioned pri­
mary barriers facing AgriTech ventures in Kenya and to investigate how venture support
2
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:11==
programs (I/As) can optimize their design to effectively assist these ventures in overcom­
ing these multifaceted challenges and foster success within the sector. Thus the following
two problem statements are guiding this study:
1. What are the primary barriers to market entry and sustainable success for AgriTech
ventures in Kenya?
2. What are the key programmatic elements and support mechanisms for venture sup­
port programs specifically focused on fostering the growth of AgriTech ventures in
the Kenyan context?
This study adopts a grounded qualitative approach, using semi­structured interviews,
participant engagement, and contextual immersion to address the aforementioned prob­
lem statements concerning entrepreneurial challenges and I/A design within the Kenyan
AgriTech ecosystem. Rather than applying a predefined theoretical lens, this research
emphasizes inductive analysis, allowing themes and insights to emerge directly from the
data, in line with grounded theory methodologies [12]. Ethnographic elements, such as
field immersion and informal conversations, also inform the study’s contextual depth.
Existing literature concerning entrepreneurship in emerging markets and developing economies
(EMDEs) critiques the direct application of frameworks developed in Western contexts,
calling for research that recognizes the need for differentiated entrepreneurial considera­
tions and solutions tailored to diverse market conditions [13, 14, 15]. This further under­
scores and validates the choice of an inductive, grounded approach for this study, aiming
to understand the specific entrepreneurial landscape within Kenyan AgriTech from the
perspectives of those embedded within it.
Specifically, this study is anticipated to contribute by providing rich, context­specific in­
sights into the operational realities, challenges, and support needs of Kenyan AgriTech
ventures, drawing directly from the experiences of key ecosystem stakeholders including
founders, I/A managers, and investors. Furthermore, it will examine the current practices
and perceived effectiveness of existing I/A support mechanisms, identifying aspects that
are, or need to be, tailored for the Kenyan AgriTech sector. Ultimately, this research aims
to generate a bottom­up, empirically grounded understanding of the AgriTech venture
landscape, offering valuable knowledge that can inform both the development of academic
theory and the practical design of more impactful entrepreneurial support interventions in
Kenya.
This thesis comprises six chapters. Chapter 3 reviews literature by three major themes;
entrepreneurship and innovation within the context of EMDEs, Kenyan agriculture and
AgriTech, and lastly looking at the role of incubators and accelerators. Chapter 4 out­
lines the research methodology, detailing the grounded theory approach, data collection
methods, and data analysis procedures and ethical considerations. Chapter 5 presents
empirical findings, culminating in a conceptual pyramid model that highlights key themes
and relationships within the AgriTech sector in Kenya. Chapter 6 interprets these findings
in relation to the problem statements detailed above and relevant literature, discussing
their theoretical and practical implications ending with limitations and directions for future
research. Chapter 7 concludes by summarizing contributions as well as emphasizing
research significance.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
3
==PAGE:12==
3
Literature Review
3.1
Introduction to the Literature Review
This chapter reviews existing literature relevant to understanding the dynamics of AgriTech
entrepreneurship in Kenya, the role of support programs such as incubators and accel­
erators (I/As), and the broader context of entrepreneurship in Emerging Markets and De­
veloping Economies (EMDEs).
As this study utilizes grounded theory principles for data collection and analysis, the ex­
tensive literature review was delayed until the data was collected and the initial stages
of analysis had begun. This is done to unsure that theoretical categories can emerge di­
rectly from the data rather than being imposed by preconceived concepts. The literature
is then engaged later in the process to compare and situate the emergent observations
and findings within the broader academic landscape. The process was initially defined by
Glaser and Strauss [12], and further emphasized by scholars like Charmaz [16].
To achieve this aim, the literature review is structured into three main sections. It begins
by exploring Entrepreneurship and Innovation in Emerging Markets(Section 3.2), which
outlines challenges and opportunities entrepreneurs operating in in the context of EMDEs
should consider(change these last two words). Subsequently, Section 3.3.1 delves into
Agriculture and AgriTech Innovation in Kenya, providing background on the national agri­
cultural sector and its farmers, as wll as the current landscape of AgriTech. Section 3.4
then examines Incubators and Accelerators as a Mechanism for Startup Support, outlining
their definitions, core functionalities and effectiveness, with a particular focus on EMDEs
and the AgriTech sector. The chapter concludes with Section 3.5 which identifies Gaps
in the Literature, highlighting areas where further research is needed and thereby under­
scoring the specific contribution this study aims to make. Collectively, these sections are
designed to equip the reader with a comprehensive understanding of the existing knowl­
edge base, which is essential for contextualizing the problem statements, interpreting the
study’s findings, and its overall contribution to the field.
3.2
Entrepreneurship and Innovation in Emerging Markets
Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (EMDEs) has become a popular term used
in academic papers, as well as in financial and economic analyses. There is however no
single definition of what constitutes an emerging market and economy. Dabrowski [17]
points out, that without a single definition, it makes empirical identification of emerging­
market economies difficult. The World Economic Outlook(WEO) report that is published
by the International Monetary Fund(IMF) on an semi­annual basis, divides all countries
into two categories ­ Namely the 39 advanced economies(AE) and the 155 emerging
market and developing economies(EMDE). Still, they do not offer any explicit definition
on either of the categories [17].
An indicator of their growing global economic significance, EMDEs’ collective share of
global Gross Domestic Product (GDP) based on Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) rose
from under 40% in 1990 to approximately 60% by 2024 (see Figure 3.1). Cavusgil’s [18]
re­characterization of ’emerging markets’ as ’growth markets’ underscores the dynamic
opportunities present, driven by factors such as market liberalization and strategic invest­
ments. Though still referred to as ’emerging markets’ in both business and academic
circles, they argue that the term is inaccurate. What unites these countries is consistent
4
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3.1: The Rising Share of Emerging Market and Developing Economies (EMDEs)
in Global GDP (PPP) from 1990 to 2024. Adapted from IMF World Economic Outlook
Data [19]
growth over a long period, making them better described as ’growth’ markets. Their eco­
nomic transformation is dynamic and largely uninterrupted, marked by industrialization,
infrastructure modernization, economic and political reforms, as well as strategic invest­
ments. Often, there has been effective collaboration between the business sector and
government, driving economic renewal [18].
From an entrepreneurial perspective, Bruton et.al [14] define emerging economies as:
”economies that are increasingly moving to market orientation and seeking to rapidly ad­
vance economically”. They highlight that emerging markets present distinct institutional
and cultural constraints that shape entrepreneurial behavior, yet these very conditions
also create unique opportunities for those who can navigate and leverage the local en­
vironment. Thus, understanding the evolving nature of EMDEs, including its challenges
and opportunities, is crucial for situating entrepreneurship research within the broader
dynamics of economic transformation and institutional development.
Building on this earlier discussion by Bruton et al. [14], their review not only offers the
first comprehensive examination of the existing literature on entrepreneurship in emerg­
ing economies, but also underscores the urgent need to move beyond uncritical transfers
of Western theories. They demonstrate that strategic insights and models validated in
mature markets often fail to capture the realities of lower­income, institutionally weaker
contexts­ where factors such as high­ versus low­trust social norms dramatically alter
how entrepreneurs identify and exploit opportunities. Despite entrepreneurship’s already
recognized role as an engine of growth in developing regions, only forty­three articles
addressed this domain over the seventeen years preceding their review, and none fo­
cused on entrepreneurs in Sub­Saharan Africa or the Middle East. Moreover, much of
the literature attributes deviations from Western entrepreneurial norms to culture alone,
without examining the institutional environment that both constrains and enables local ac­
tors. Bruton et al. argue that entrepreneurs in emerging economies not only navigate
existing institutional regimes but also act as institutional entrepreneurs—actively shaping
financial systems, legal frameworks, and labor markets to better support innovation. They
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
5
==PAGE:14==
call for future research to recognize that different market conditions require different en­
trepreneurial solutions, rather than assuming Western norms are universally applicable.
This call has been echoed and amplified in subsequent research. For instance Hamdan
et al. [13] further emphasize the critical interplay between formal and informal institu­
tional contexts in EMDEs, particularly highlighting how these interactions shape the en­
trepreneurial landscape in regions such as Sub­Saharan Africa. They too advocate for a
shift away from uncritical applications of Western theories, suggesting that local contexts
necessitate tailored approaches to entrepreneurship that consider the interplay of social
norms, resource mobilization, and institutional voids.
Confirming these earlier observations, Cao and Shi’s [15] more recent review of en­
trepreneurial ecosystems in advanced and emerging economies. Their findings reaffirm
that ’advanced economies’ dominate academic attention, while EMDEs remain underex­
plored. They observe that while entrepreneurs in emerging markets often leverage per­
sonal networks and alternative funding channels to overcome resource scarcities, persis­
tent challenges such as institutional voids and structural gaps constrain broader ecosys­
tem development. Notably, Cao and Shi’s research employ ecosystem models largely
derived from Western contexts, an approach critiqued by Bruton et al.[14] for its limited
applicability to EMDE realities.
Together, these analyses suggest that entrepreneurial ecosystems in emerging markets
are shaped by a complex interplay between formal regulations and informal socio­cultural
norms. This dual influence not only constrains entrepreneurial activity through institutional
voids and structural gaps, but also creates space for alternative forms of resource mobi­
lization and innovation. As such, entrepreneurship in EMDEs operates under fundamen­
tally different conditions compared to advanced economies, requiring a reconceptualiza­
tion of traditional Western models to better accommodate local institutional specificities.
To move forward, it is essential to examine both the unique challenges and the context­
specific opportunities that define entrepreneurship in these settings. The following sec­
tions will delve into these aspects within the context of EMDEs, subsequently exploring
what challenges and opportunities exist.
3.2.1
Challenges of Entrepreneurship in EMDEs
As discussed above, entrepreneurs in EMDEs face a unique set of systemic and structural
barriers that differ significantly from those in advanced economies. While EMDEs are of­
ten grouped together, they encompass a diverse range of countries with distinct political,
economic, and cultural contexts. Nonetheless, there are common systemic challenges
that frequently emerge across these regions, which will be explored in the following sub­
sections.
Institutional and Regulatory Challenges
Entrepreneurs in EMDEs often operate in environments characterized by weak or under­
developed institutions. Institutional voids refer to the absence or inadequacy of formal
and informal institutions that facilitate economic, political, and social interactions. These
voids are particularly prevalent in EMDEs, where the lack of specialized intermediaries,
transparent regulatory systems, and reliable contract enforcement mechanisms can hin­
der entrepreneurial activities and broader economic development [20].
In such contexts, the regulatory environment is often underdeveloped, inconsistently ap­
plied, or lacking in transparency—creating legal uncertainty for entrepreneurs and making
it difficult to protect property rights, enforce contracts, or scale innovative ventures. More­
over, these gaps in formal systems frequently give rise to corruption, as entrepreneurs
6
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:15==
and businesses may be forced to navigate bureaucratic processes through informal net­
works, favoritism, or bribery. This not only undermines fair competition but also deters
both domestic and foreign investment [21].
In addition to institutional weaknesses, regulatory and bureaucratic burdens pose fur­
ther obstacles to entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurs must often contend with complex and
unpredictable regulations, combined with inefficient administrative procedures, which ob­
struct formal business registration and growth. The involvement of government in busi­
ness operations can introduce further complications, especially when regulatory decisions
are affected by political changes. In such environments, predicting the behavior of regu­
latory bodies becomes difficult, particularly during periods of administrative transition [21,
22].
As a result, institutional voids contribute to a climate of mistrust, inefficiency, and risk.
Investment firms and venture capitalists often hesitate to enter these markets due to
the absence of dependable institutional infrastructure that can guarantee transparency,
legal protection, and accountability—core conditions for sustainable innovation and en­
trepreneurship. Most challenges discussed in this section are caused to a varying degree
by institutional voids.
In some cases, larger firms adapt to these conditions by forming close relationships with
the state. These alliances may offer strategic advantages but can also lead to preferential
treatment, reinforcing unequal access to resources. A prominent example of this dynamic
is found in South Korea, where conglomerates known as chaebols developed strong ties
with the government. While this relationship contributed to rapid industrial development, it
also concentrated economic power and creates an uneven playing field for new ventures
[23].
Limited Access to Finance:
Building on limitations in the form of institutions, entrepreneurs often face high interest
rates as well as a lack of credit history, underdeveloped capital markets, and limited ac­
cess to formal funding channels. Often relying on informal sources such as family or
community lending instead. Limited access to finance in EMDEs significantly impacts en­
trepreneurs by constraining their ability to secure necessary capital for business growth
and innovation. Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in these regions often face high
collateral requirements and complex application processes, which disadvantage those
lacking substantial assets and resources. The underdeveloped financial systems and
lack of collateral further restrict access to credit, curbing opportunities for investment and
productivity growth. Consequently, entrepreneurs resort to personal savings or retained
earnings, limiting their expansion plans and reducing expenditures on research and de­
velopment [22, 24].
Infrastructure Deficiencies:
Infrastructure is a cornerstone of economic development, enabling the efficient movement
of goods, services, and people, and facilitating access to essential services like energy
and digital connectivity. However, EMDEs face significant challenges in developing and
maintaining robust transportation, energy, and digital infrastructure. These deficiencies
not only hinder economic growth but also exacerbate social and economic inequalities.
One of the most significant deficiencies in transportation infrastructure is the poor quality
of roads and railways. In many African countries, for instance, the lack of paved roads and
unreliable rail networks hinder entrepreneurial endeavors by impeding the efficient move­
ment of goods and people, leading to increased operational costs, constrained market
access, and reduced trade volumes for businesses [25, 26].
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
7
==PAGE:16==
Beyond transportation, deficiencies in energy and digital infrastructure present significant
challenges for entrepreneurs in EMDEs. Unreliable power grids, characterized by fre­
quent outages and voltage fluctuations, force businesses to invest in costly backup gen­
erators, disrupt production schedules, and can lead to the damage of sensitive equipment,
thereby increasing operational costs and reducing competitiveness. Similarly, inadequate
digital infrastructure, including limited internet connection, low bandwidth, and high data
costs, restricts entrepreneurs’ access to crucial market information, online payment sys­
tems, cloud­based services, and digital marketing channels, challenging their ability to
innovate, scale, and reach a wider customer base [27].
Human Capital Constraints:
Entrepreneurs in EMDEs face significant human capital constraints, often stemming from
shortages in technical and manegerial experitse, compounded of lower average levels of
formal education within the broader population. These limitations directly constrain en­
trepreneurial productivity, and restrict the ability of new and growing ventures to effectively
scale their operations.
The challenge of securing skilled labor is amplified by broader economic shifts. Vivarelli
[28] highlights that globalization and innovation are reshaping labor markets in emerging
economies, leading to an increased demand for higher­skilled workers as part of structural
change and technological upgrading. While these trends are vital for economic catch­
up, they often mean that entrepreneurs face a fiercely competitive environment when
searching for individuals with the requisite capabilities. The argument that technology
transfer and skill­enhancing trade can alter employment outcomes implies that unless
local human capital development keeps pace, startups, in particular, may struggle to find
or afford the specialized talent needed to innovate and remain competitive.
Beyond formal skills, the general health of the workforce also presents a human capital
constraint for entrepreneurs in some EMDEs. Research in Sub­Saharan Africa by Camp­
bell and Alderino [29], for instance, found a significant positive relationship between gov­
ernment health expenditure and labor productivity. This suggests that in contexts with
under­investment in public health, entrepreneurs may face challenges not only from skill
shortages but also from a workforce potentially impacted by lower health outcomes, lead­
ing to reduced on­the­job productivity, higher rate of absence, and increased training costs
due to employee turnover or incapacity.
The quest for skilled talent becomes even more acute for startups situated in large capi­
tals within EMDEs, where they must compete directly with large multinational corporations
(MNCs) and established local firms. These larger organizations typically offer superior
salaries, greater job security, and more extensive benefits, making it difficult for newer
ventures to attract top­tier professionals. Compounding this, as highlighted by observa­
tions in regions like Sub­Saharan Africa, the relative lack of widely publicized, high­profile
entrepreneurial success stories can diminish the perceived rewards of joining an early­
stage venture. Unlike in some advanced economies where the potential for significant
gains from successful startup exits might incentivize risk­taking by employees, this narra­
tive is often less compelling in many EMDEs, making talent acquisition a persistent chal­
lenge. The situation is so pronounced in some areas, such as Nigeria’s IT sector, that
even established companies face difficulties due to demand far exceeding the available
supply of skilled professionals [30].
Illustrating the severity of this challenge, recent research by Kumari et al. [31] on the
scaling issues of Indian startups identifies talent acquisition as a primary hurdle. Their
findings indicate that intense competition with established companies for skilled profes­
8
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:17==
sionals, a direct manifestation of human capital constraints, is recognized as a significant
contributor to the high failure rates observed among Indian startups, reportedly around
90%.
Collectively, these human capital dynamics—ranging from skills deficits and health im­
pacts on productivity to intense talent competition and risk aversion due to a lack of visible
role models—create a challenging operational environment for entrepreneurs. Overcom­
ing this requires not only systemic improvements in human capital development but also
fostering an ecosystem where entrepreneurial success becomes more visible, thereby
inspiring and attracting the talent necessary for innovation and growth.
Market and Social Structure Challenges
EMDEs represent an environment in which substantial growth potential coexists with
structural and institutional complexity. Although these contexts are often characterized
by rapidly expanding populations and under­served consumer segments, high levels of
informality, market fragmentation, and cultural diversity pose significant barriers to firm en­
try, efficient distribution, and scalable operations. These conditions directly constrain en­
trepreneurs, limiting their ability to leverage economies of scale and complicating their ef­
forts to develop and execute consistent market strategies across diverse customer bases.
Market fragmentation found in emerging markets often stems from uneven patterns of
development and is marked by a wide range of ethnicities, cultural norms, capabilities,
and consumer demands. The traditional and cultural aspects often conflict with modern
living needs, resulting in a complex and segmented market landscape. This is particularly
evident in markets composed primarily of consumers at the so­called “bottom of the pyra­
mid,” who live below the poverty line and are frequently served by small, informal, and
unregulated enterprises. For entrepreneurs targeting these segments, achieving compet­
itive advantage hinges more on ensuring accessibility and affordability than on offering
superior product features that may be out of reach for the intended consumers [32].
These fragmented conditions present significant challenges for entrepreneurs attempting
to scale, particularly due to the diversity in consumer preferences and behavioral patterns
across market segments. Chea [33] underscores the importance of context­specific mar­
ket segmentation strategies in emerging economies, noting that a nuanced understand­
ing of consumer subgroups—based on demographics, values, needs, and behaviors—is
essential for effectively tailoring offerings. For startups operating in such environments,
success often depends on a deep understanding of localized consumer needs and the
ability to balance functional features with cost­sensitive value propositions. Consequently,
for entrepreneurs navigating these culturally and economically diverse markets, strategic
segmentation and deep customer insight are not just beneficial tactics but fundamental
prerequisites for survival and growth.
Macroeconomic and External Risks
Entrepreneurs in EMDEs operate within a landscape characterized by heightened macroe­
conomic and external risks that can severely impede their ventures’ growth and stability.
Negative spillovers from major economies, such as policy uncertainty or escalating trade
tensions, can translate directly into challenges for startups, including volatile exchange
rates that affect import costs and export revenues, reduced foreign direct investment
flows critical for ecosystem development, and disrupted global supply chains essential
for hardware components or market access. Internally, domestic policy uncertainty and
geopolitical issues further compound this unpredictability, making long­term planning and
investment decisions precarious for entrepreneurs. As Ruch [34] notes, increased vul­
nerabilities in external, corporate, and sovereign sectors since the global recession mean
that many EMDEs, and by extension the entrepreneurs within them, possess diminished
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
9
==PAGE:18==
resilience to these systemic shocks, rendering them particularly susceptible to economic
downturns should such risks materialize.
3.2.2
Opportunities for Entrepreneurship in EMDEs
Despite the structural and institutional challenges that characterize emerging markets, the
literature increasingly emphasizes that these very constraints can give rise to unique en­
trepreneurial opportunities. Rather than viewing difficulties such as institutional voids, in­
frastructure gaps, and fragmented markets as purely limiting, scholars argue they often act
as catalysts for innovation. These conditions compel entrepreneurs to devise contextually
grounded, resource­efficient solutions, frequently leading to ’frugal innovation’—an ap­
proach centered on ’making ingenious use of existing resources and technologies rather
than pushing the technology frontiers’ [35]. Such opportunities are not just byproducts of
underdevelopment but rather systemic characteristics of EMDEs and can be strategically
leveraged. The absence of entrenched legacy systems, coupled with large underserved
populations and dynamic demographic and policy shifts, enables new models of context­
specific entrepreneurship. Furthermore, informal networks, diaspora engagement, and
alignment with global development agendas often provide alternative support structures
that complement or even substitute for formal institutions. The following subsections ex­
plore these areas of opportunity in greater depth, drawing on recent academic contribu­
tions across development economics, entrepreneurship, and innovation studies [20].
Leapfrogging Technologies:
A significant entrepreneurial opportunity within emerging markets is the potential for tech­
nological leapfrogging. This involves bypassing older, often more costly, intermediary
technologies and infrastructure stages to directly adopt more advanced, efficient, and of­
ten decentralized solutions. Examples include the widespread adoption of mobile money
systems over traditional banking infrastructure, the deployment of off­grid renewable en­
ergy solutions instead of relying solely on centralized grid expansion, and the use of versa­
tile digital platforms for commerce and service delivery. Jugessur and Hamel [36] define
this as “a process of technological development whereby advantage is taken of some
selected key technologies, especially new and advanced technologies for industrial and
economic growth, without going through all the technological stages followed by the de­
veloped countries.”
Technological leapfrogging, by enabling the adoption of strategically selected advanced
technologies, can accelerate socio­economic development in EMDEs, particularly by im­
proving the efficient delivery of goods and services to underserved market segments. The
introduction of M­PESA in Kenya is a seminal example of this phenomenon in the financial
sector. Launched in 2007 by Safaricom and Vodafone, M­PESA allowed users to deposit,
withdraw, transfer money, and pay for services using basic mobile phones, thereby by­
passing the need for traditional bank accounts and physical branch infrastructure. This
innovation dramatically transformed financial inclusion, with 90% of Kenyan adults hold­
ing an M­PESA account by 2016. Its success not only facilitated economic activity and
poverty reduction in Kenya but also served as a powerful model for mobile money initia­
tives across Sub­Saharan Africa, showcasing the transformative potential of leapfrogging
solutions tailored to local contexts and needs [37].
Underserved Markets:
Underserved markets, which is typically composed of low­income populations, rural com­
munities, and informal economic segments, represent a significant source of entrepreneurial
opportunity in EMDEs. These markets are often neglected by established firms due to per­
ceived risk, low profit margins, and logistical challenges. However, their unmet demand
for essential goods and services—such as healthcare, education, energy, transportation,
10
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:19==
and financial inclusion, creates space for innovative, scalable solutions tailored to local
needs [38, 39]. In academic literature, this segment closely aligns with the Bottom of the
Pyramid (BoP) framework, introduced by Prahalad and Hart[40], which reconceptualizes
low­income consumers not as passive recipients but as active participants in value cre­
ation. Consequently, entrepreneurs who develop context­specific knowledge and employ
alternative business models are uniquely positioned to overcome structural constraints
and effectively serve these otherwise excluded populations [41].
The success of ventures like the aforementioned M­PESA in Kenya illustrates the poten­
tial of targeting underserved markets. By offering SMS­based mobile money services,
M­PESA catered directly to the unbanked rural population who lacked access to formal
financial institutions and consistent internet access, thereby unlocking a vast market pre­
viously excluded from such services [37]. This highlights how entrepreneurs can identify
and fill critical service gaps for populations whose needs are not met by conventional
providers.
Alternative Support Structures
Given the significant barriers posed by weak infrastructure, limited finance, and inefficient
formal institutions in EMDEs (as previously discussed), entrepreneurs have utilized and
often spearheaded a variety of alternative support frameworks to navigate and even tran­
scend these systemic limitations[15]. Rather than relying solely on formalized systems,
they frequently leverage informal personal and professional networks, global affiliations,
and engage with adaptive policy landscapes to acquire essential resources and legiti­
macy, particularly in environments characterized by resource scarcity[21]. This proac­
tive engagement resonates with the concept of ’institutional entrepreneurship,’ where en­
trepreneurs in emerging economies not only adapt to existing conditions but also actively
contribute to shaping local policies and frameworks to foster a more innovation­friendly
environment [14].
A key alternative support structure identified in the literature is network­based growth,
sometimes referred to as ’network capitalism’ [42]. Peng et al. [43] reaffirm that exten­
sive subsequent research validates the central role of personal and inter­firm relationships
and networks—often acting as substitutes for formal institutional mechanisms—in driving
venture growth across emerging economies. This ’hybrid’ strategy allows firms to navi­
gate institutional voids by leveraging informal ties and interorganizational collaborations.
While offering flexibility and adaptability in uncertain contexts, such networks can also
present risks, including ambiguous roles and potential deterioration of trust, particularly
as formal institutions mature. Nevertheless, network­driven strategies remain critical for
firm expansion in institutionally constrained settings, with Peng et al. [43] emphasizing
their particular utility for early­stage ventures: “For emerging economies undergoing in­
stitutional transitions, relationships and networks can be especially useful for start­ups in
their quest for survival and growth in a rapidly changing and uncertain environment.”
Beyond local networks, another vital support structure stems from global diaspora com­
munities. Defined by Shaffer [44] as “ethnic minority groups of migrant origins residing
and acting in host countries but maintaining strong sentimental and material links with their
countries of origin,” diaspora engagement is increasingly recognized as a critical driver of
entrepreneurship and innovation in EMDEs.
In recent years, the strategic engagement of diaspora communities has been increasingly
recognized by scholars and policymakers as a critical driver of entrepreneurship, innova­
tion, and development in emerging economies. Members of the diaspora often act as
as a bridge for remittances, foreign direct investment, access to international markets,
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
11
==PAGE:20==
managerial capabilities, and specialized knowledge—all resources that are often scarce
in their countries of origin [45].
One particularly impactful phenomenon is what has been termed contemporary diasporic
entrepreneurship (CDE), referring to business ventures initiated by returning diaspora
members. These individuals frequently possess international education, industry experi­
ence, and access to global networks, enabling them to transfer not only capital but also
advanced skills and entrepreneurial know­how. In this way, diaspora engagement be­
comes a catalyst for domestic innovation capacity and ecosystem development. As Lin
[46] argues; these returnees can significantly enhance the innovation output of their home
countries by launching new ventures, adapting foreign technologies, and institutionaliz­
ing global business practices. The contributions of such returning diaspora members are
thus increasingly emphasized as pivotal for the entrepreneurial dynamism of emerging
economies.
The case of China has often been cited as a successful model of diaspora engagement,
where government­supported policies enabled the return of skilled expatriates who played
a pivotal role in developing high­tech clusters and entrepreneurial ecosystems. Drawing
from such examples, many developing countries have begun to establish targeted pro­
grams and incentives to harness the potential of their global diaspora for national innova­
tion and private sector growth [46].
While informal networks are crucial, the landscape of entrepreneurial finance in EMDEs
is also evolving, with formal mechanisms like venture capital (VC) gaining traction, often
interacting with or building upon these networks. A recent study by Welker and Zhou [47]
highlights a significant growth trajectory for VC investment in emerging markets between
2010 and 2020, with a compound annual growth rate of 35.2% and an increase in the
global share of VC from 11.8% to 31.5% during this period. This increasing VC activity,
driven by market size and human capital, suggests a growing formalization of financial
support, although access remains uneven and often still influenced by the strength of local
networks and ecosystem maturity. The development of such formal funding channels can
be seen as an outcome of, and a contributor to, a more robust support ecosystem overall.
This recognition of the power of informal networks, diaspora contributions, and evolv­
ing VC interest is paralleled by a growing policy focus on systematically fostering en­
trepreneurial ecosystems in EMDEs. Governments and international development orga­
nizations are increasingly investing in dedicated support programs, such as incubators,
accelerators, and technology hubs. These initiatives aim to formalize and scale up sup­
port for entrepreneurs, providing them with mentorship, training, access to networks, and
seed funding, thereby attempting to address some of the systemic challenges and build
upon the opportunities inherent in these markets
Youth Demographics, Growing middleclass and Urbanization:
The rise of a ’new middle class’ in EMDEs, largely since the 1980s and driven by glob­
alization and market liberalization, presents a distinct entrepreneurial opportunity. While
middle­class households have long existed, this expanding demographic, which could
reach 2.6 billion globally by 2050, has unique characteristics. Though sharing purchasing
power with traditional middle classes, this group often exhibits different consumer behav­
iors, social habits, and higher educational attainment, creating novel demands, according
to Cavusgil et al. [48]. For local entrepreneurs, this expanding and increasingly affluent
consumer base signifies a substantial domestic market eager for a wide array of goods
and services, moving beyond basic necessities to aspirational products and modern con­
veniences.
12
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:21==
The transformative impact of a rapidly growing middle class on entrepreneurship can be il­
lustrated by China’s experience. Their expanding middle class is profoundly reshaping the
economy by boosting domestic consumption and fostering a shift from export­led growth.
This surge in purchasing power and consumer sophistication has spurred entrepreneur­
ship, innovation, and the growth of sectors like retail and technology. Consequently, the
demand for skilled labor and emphasis on education have increased, mirroring trends in
other transition economies. As China’s middle class continues to expand, its capacity to
fuel national economic strength and innovation serves as a compelling example for other
EMDEs [49].
Beyond the growing middle class, two interconnected demographic trends in EMDEs—a
growing youth population and rapid urbanization—further amplify entrepreneurial oppor­
tunities. Young individuals are often early adopters of new technologies and services.
As rural populations increasingly migrate to urban centers, demand surges for innovative
solutions in areas such as affordable housing, transportation, logistics, education, and lo­
calized consumer services. This confluence of a youthful, urbanizing populace with rising
disposable incomes (from the growing middle class) creates a dynamic domestic market,
opening diverse entrepreneurial avenues that cater to evolving urban lifestyles and are
often less reliant on traditional export­based models.
Global Development Goals and Impact Investment:
The increasing global focus on sustainable development, as embodied by the United
Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), presents a distinct opportunity for en­
trepreneurs in emerging economies by unlocking new funding avenues. Literature in­
dicates that entrepreneurs who strategically align their ventures with specific SDGs are
becoming more attractive to international funding initiatives and development finance in­
stitutions [50]. For instance, initiatives like the Joint SDG Fund actively direct public and
private capital towards projects in developing countries that demonstrably contribute to
the 2030 Agenda [51]. This targeted funding recognizes the crucial role of entrepreneur­
ship in achieving these global goals and prioritizes ventures offering innovative solutions
to challenges like poverty, inequality, and climate change, thereby enhancing their access
to capital.
Concurrently, the rapid growth of Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) invest­
ing is significantly influencing funding landscapes in emerging economies. Investors are
increasingly incorporating ESG factors into their decision­making processes, recogniz­
ing the long­term value and reduced risk associated with sustainable and responsible
businesses [52, 53]. Entrepreneurs in emerging markets who proactively integrate and
demonstrate strong ESG practices, often aligning their positive social and environmental
impact with the SDGs, can more effectively attract this growing pool of ESG­focused cap­
ital. This investor shift creates a tangible advantage, enabling ventures with sustainability
at their core to appeal to those local and international investors seeking both financial
returns and demonstrable positive impact [54].
The convergence of the SDG framework and ESG investing is thus creating a positive
feedback loop for entrepreneurs in emerging economies. By aligning their ventures with
the SDGs, they can effectively communicate their social and environmental value propo­
sition, which in turn makes them more attractive to the growing field of ESG­conscious
investors and international development funds [55]. Consequently, entrepreneurs who
strategically embed the SDGs into their business strategies are increasingly unlocking
access to crucial funding that can fuel their growth and contribute to sustainable develop­
ment outcomes in their respective economies.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
13
==PAGE:22==
While the alignment with SDGs and ESG practices presents clear funding opportunities,
entrepreneurs in EMDEs, particularly early­stage startups with limited resources, may
face challenges in navigating the increasing complexities of impact measurement, veri­
fication, and reporting standards demanded by funding institutions. Keeping up with so­
phisticated reporting requirements, coupled with the risk of ’impact washing’ or ’green­
washing’ scrutiny, means that demonstrating and substantiating their contributions can
lead to significant operational hurdles. It is therefore important to realise that while the
opportunity is substantial, the capacity to meet requirements might be a critical factor for
startups aiming to leverage SDG and ESG­related funding.
3.2.3
Navigating the Tension Between Constraints and Innovation
Academic research increasingly employs specific theoretical frameworks to understand
how entrepreneurs in EMDEs navigate the inherent tension between structural limita­
tions and emergent opportunities, and, in some instances, achieve success despite these
seemingly contradictory circumstances. This subsection will explore some of these rele­
vant frameworks.
One influential lens for understanding this adaptive behavior is entrepreneurial bricolage,
as introduced by Baker and Nelson [56]. Bricolage refers to the practice of ’making do’ by
recombining resources at hand to address new problems and opportunities, particularly in
resource­constrained environments. In EMDEs, where access to capital, infrastructure,
and skilled labor is often limited, bricolage enables entrepreneurs to mobilize informal
networks, repurpose existing assets, and construct novel solutions using locally available
inputs. This process­oriented approach allows ventures to emerge even in environments
that might be considered hostile or unviable by traditional standards. Consequently, en­
trepreneurial bricolage has become commonly utilized as a theoretical lens for research
on entrepreneurship in low­income settings [39, 20].
Complementing bricolage, effectuation theory, as proposed by Sarasvathy [57], offers an­
other critical perspective by shifting the focus of entrepreneurial behavior from predictive,
goal­driven strategies to flexible, means­driven logic. Effectual entrepreneurs start with
their existing resources—who they are, what they know, and whom they know—and from
there co­create opportunities with stakeholders through an iterative approach. This logic
is particularly relevant in EMDEs, where uncertainty is high, institutional reliability is low,
and the ability to plan is often constrained. By providing a robust alternative to traditional
causation (goal­driven) models, effectuation helps explain how entrepreneurs effectively
navigate and make progress in unpredictable and institutionally underdeveloped environ­
ments, aligning closely with their empirical realities [57].
A third perspective, the Composition­Based View (CBV), offers particular insights into how
firms in emerging economies can achieve competitive advantage despite resource limita­
tions [58]. The CBV posits that even firms lacking access to cutting­edge proprietary re­
sources or advanced technologies can forge a competitive edge by innovatively compos­
ing novel combinations from basic, widely accessible inputs such as low­cost labor, deep
local market knowledge, and simple yet efficient processes. Contrasting with the tradi­
tional Resource­Based View (RBV)—which prioritizes the accumulation and safeguarding
of unique resources—the CBV frames entrepreneurial strategy around intelligent compo­
sition rather than mere resource possession. This viewpoint powerfully underscores how
firms in EMDEs can effectively ’do more with less,’ thriving through strategic improvisa­
tion and contextual adaptation instead of attempting to replicate the resource­intensive
trajectories typical of firms in advanced economies [58].
Together, these frameworks provide a theoretical basis for understanding how entrepreneurs
14
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:23==
in EMDEs navigate the structural tension between constraint and innovation [59]. They
move the discussion beyond simply identifying barriers and opportunities, toward explain­
ing the mechanisms through which entrepreneurial action happens in contexts marked by
scarcity, uncertainty, and institutional underdevelopment. In doing so, they offer valuable
insights for scholars and practitioners seeking to understand or support entrepreneur­
ship in emerging markets. Fisher [59] characterizes these as alternative frameworks,
contrasting sharply with more traditional, planning­oriented approaches often dominant
in stable environments. Such traditional approaches typically align with what Sarasvathy
[57] terms causation processes—strategies that commence with a predetermined goal
and focus on identifying and securing the optimal means to achieve it, often assuming a
degree of predictability that facilitates confident long­term planning. In stark comparison,
bricolage, effectuation, and the CBV all underscore adaptability, resource recombination,
and contextually­driven logic, rendering them particularly effective within the dynamic and
often unpredictable settings of EMDEs.
3.3
Agriculture and AgriTech Innovation in Kenya
Kenya’s economy and livelihoods remain deeply rooted in agriculture, yet the sector’s
historical reliance on smallholder, rain­fed production has left it vulnerable to climatic
shocks, market failures, and technological gaps. Building on the preceding discussion of
entrepreneurship in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (EMDEs), this chapter
turns to Kenya as a compelling case study. It examines how structural constraints and
digital opportunities collide in a critical food­producing region, particularly through the lens
of AgriTech innovation.
We begin by quantifying agriculture’s economic and social importance in Kenya (Section
3.3.1), then unpack the core structural, environmental, and market challenges that hin­
der productivity and resilience (Section 3.3.2). In Section 3.3.3, we examine the rise of
Digital Farmer Services (DFS) and AgriTech startups, surveying the breadth of innova­
tion while highlighting current adoption and scaling bottlenecks. Section 3.3.4 outlines
the state of investments within the sector and the chapter concludes with Section 3.3.5,
which synthesizes these key aspects of Kenya’s agricultural and AgriTech landscape.
3.3.1
Agriculture in Kenya
Agriculture remains a foundational pillar of Kenya’s economy and social fabric. According
to the 2024 Kenya Census of Agriculture, the sector contributes approximately 21.8% of
the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and employs over 40% of the total popula­
tion, including about 60% of the rural population [60]. These figures underscore agricul­
ture’s critical role not only in national income but also in rural livelihoods, poverty allevia­
tion, and food security. Key cash and food crops include maize, wheat, coffee, tea, and
macadamia nuts, while livestock farming is largely focused on cattle and goats.
The sector’s influence extends beyond production. The 2015/16 Kenya Integrated House­
hold Budget Survey (KIHBS) reports that household spending on food and non­alcoholic
beverages accounted for 32.9% of total consumption expenditures, underscoring agricul­
ture’s significance in shaping both food prices and inflation trends [60]. This interdepen­
dence makes the health of the agricultural sector directly relevant to Kenya’s macroeco­
nomic stability.
Kenya’s agricultural landscape is largely characterized by small­scale farming. The 2019
Kenya Population and Housing Census found that 52% of all households were engaged
in agricultural activities—equivalent to more than 6 million households [1]. A significant
portion of these operate on very small plots: 34.9% farm on less than one acre, and 24.6%
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
15
==PAGE:24==
on between one and two acres. This prevalence of small landholdings, coupled with the
fact that 70% of these farms are rain­fed, exposes a vast segment of the agricultural
sector to high climate vulnerability. Furthermore, the data indicate that only 25.7% of
these farming households are engaged in commercial crop production, with the majority
(74.3%) primarily producing for household consumption, underscoring the subsistence
nature of much of Kenyan agriculture [1].
Beyond economics, agriculture also holds deep cultural significance in Kenya, shaping
community identity, traditional practices, and (inter)generational knowledge transfer. For
many rural communities, farming is not just a livelihood but a way of life. Despite its
significance, the sector faces multiple structural and environmental challenges, which are
explored in the next section.
3.3.2
Core Challenges Facing Kenyan Farmers
Kenya’s agricultural sector, while vital to the country’s economy and livelihoods, faces a
multitude of challenges that constrain productivity, resilience, and long­term development.
These challenges are particularly acute for the country’s dominant smallholder farmers,
who operate under structural, financial, and environmental constraints that limit their ability
to invest, innovate, and scale.
A defining characteristic of Kenya’s agricultural system is the predominance of small­
scale farming. Over 50% of all farms occupy less than two acres, and approximately
70% rely entirely on rain­fed irrigation [1]. This dual condition—limited land size and cli­
mate dependency—makes the sector highly vulnerable to external climate shocks such as
droughts, floods, and erratic rainfall. As a result, farmers struggle to adopt and ultimately
afford mechanized or climate­resilient practices, reinforcing a cycle of low productivity and
exposure to risk.
This structural vulnerability is directly reflected in crop yield patterns. As detailed in Table
3.1 (average yields for major crops, 2019­2023), maize—Kenya’s most widely cultivated
staple—has consistently underperformed, with yields fluctuating between 1.46 and 1.79
tons per hectare. These figures are not only marked by significant year­over­year volatility
(see Table 3.2) but also lag considerably behind global benchmarks. For instance, 2023
maize yields reached 3.30 tons per hectare in India and 11.26 tons per hectare in the
United States [61, 62]. While countries like India have demonstrated consistent yield
improvements since 2015, Kenya’s maize yields have largely stagnated since the 1990s,
indicating persistent underlying challenges [2].
16
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.1: Crop Yields in Kenya (Tons per Hectare), 2019–2023 [63]
Crop
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Maize
1.79
1.75
1.52
1.46
1.76
Wheat
2.68
3.22
2.80
3.08
2.96
Rice (Irrigated)
4.97
5.73
6.09
4.67
5.97
Sorghum
1.22
1.41
0.67
0.58
0.96
Finger Millet
0.85
0.91
0.79
0.70
0.82
Pearl Millet
1.34
1.56
0.32
0.45
0.58
Beans
0.63
0.67
0.59
0.59
0.71
Cowpea (Grains)
0.69
0.75
0.53
0.58
0.69
Green grams
0.61
0.74
0.45
0.44
0.59
Pigeon Peas
0.79
0.92
0.82
0.60
0.61
Irish Potatoes
9.52
9.48
9.78
7.91
9.65
Sweet Potatoes
12.83
12.43
11.12
10.90
12.30
Table 3.2: Year­over­Year Percentage Change in Crop Yields (Tons/Ha), 2020–2023 [63]
Crop
2020
2021
2022
2023
Maize
­2.23%
­13.14%
­3.95%
20.55%
Wheat
20.15%
­13.04%
10.00%
­3.90%
Rice (Irrigated)
15.29%
6.28%
­23.32%
27.84%
Sorghum
15.57%
­52.48%
­13.43%
65.52%
Finger Millet
7.06%
­13.19%
­11.39%
17.14%
Pearl Millet
16.42%
­79.49%
39.47%
60.56%
Beans
6.47%
­11.94%
­0.17%
20.34%
Cowpea (Grains)
9.34%
­28.80%
9.43%
18.63%
Green grams
21.97%
­38.04%
­2.31%
36.64%
Pigeon Peas
16.94%
­10.87%
­27.11%
1.67%
Irish Potatoes
­0.42%
3.13%
­19.13%
21.96%
Sweet Potatoes
­3.11%
­10.54%
­1.96%
12.84%
Beyond land and climate constraints, Kenyan farmers face persistent barriers in access­
ing critical agricultural inputs. Limited financial infrastructure and high costs for seeds,
fertilizer, fuel, and mechanization restrict production capacity, especially for resource­
constrained smallholders. Both input and output markets are often inefficient, and dis­
tribution is dominated by middlemen who limit farmers’ ability to sell directly or secure
favorable pricing [64].
Further systemic issues exacerbate these difficulties, including declining soil fertility due to
continuous cropping without adequate replenishment, inefficient water resource manage­
ment, recurrent pest and disease outbreaks, and limited access to impactful agricultural
extension services or modern agronomic training. Collectively, these constraints not only
suppress current yields but also severely restrict farmers’ adaptive capacity in the face of
ongoing climatic and market fluctuations [65].
Despite these enduring challenges, there is a growing optimism that digital tools and
innovations—particularly Digital Farmer Services (DFS)—can help overcome key bottle­
necks. By lowering the cost and improving the accessibility of agronomic advice, input
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
17
==PAGE:26==
sourcing, and market connections, DFS solutions hold the potential to unlock productivity
gains for smallholder farmers [2]. The following sections will examine how such innova­
tions are being deployed, and where critical gaps remain.
3.3.3
Digital Farmer Services (DFS) and AgriTech Startups
As Kenya’s agricultural sector continues to face productivity challenges, particularly among
smallholder farmers, digital innovations have emerged as a potential catalyst for transfor­
mation.
Digital Farmer Services (DFS)—a component of the broader digitalization for agriculture
(D4Ag) movement—are increasingly recognized as pivotal tools for modernizing small­
holder farming across low­ and middle­income countries (LMICs). A 2023 sectoral review
by Beanstalk [5] underscored this, identifying approximately 1,400 active D4Ag solutions
in LMICs. Notably, 50% of these originated in Sub­Saharan Africa, with nearly half of that
African cohort developed in either Kenya or Nigeria, firmly positioning Kenya at the fore­
front of digital agricultural innovation in the region. However, despite this vibrant innova­
tion ecosystem, a significant hurdle persists: achieving widespread, meaningful adoption
and sustained use of these digital tools among farmers
Despite the proliferation of DFS, numerous studies indicate that many ventures in the sec­
tor struggle to progress beyond the pilot phase. Abate et al. [7] highlight that a significant
number of D4Ag solutions fail to scale due to a combination of supply­ and demand­side
barriers. These include underinvestment beyond initial seed funding stages, inadequate
infrastructure, regulatory bottlenecks, and the dominance of noncompetitive market struc­
tures. This underscores a critical realization: technological systems alone are insufficient
without concurrently addressing the need for robust parallel support systems and the foun­
dational infrastructure essential for widespread adoption and sustainable scale
Adoption rates among Kenyan farmers starkly reflect this scalability challenge. Data from
the 2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census show that only 50.4% of farming house­
holds owned a mobile phone, and just 15% reported using the internet in the preceding
three months [1]. More recently, a 2023 impact survey by 60 Decibels [66] found that while
56% of farmers who owned phones had some interaction with a DFS(primarily for infor­
mation and advisory services), this translated to only 15% of the total farmer sample re­
porting ’meaningful engagement’—defined as use leading to a tangible positive outcome.
The same study revealed that while farmers perceived DFS as slightly more convenient
and trustworthy than traditional information sources, most remained hesitant to rely on
these digital services for critical farming decisions [66].
A primary inhibitor of deeper farmer engagement with DFS is financial constraint. Autio et
al. [8] highlight that smallholder farmers face high input costs, logistical challenges, and
post­harvest losses due to poor supply chain infrastructure and storage capacity. These
systemic inefficiencies reduce disposable income and limit the ability to invest in new agri­
cultural technologies, including DFS. Meanwhile, access to formal credit remains severely
restricted; commercial banks are often risk­averse towards smallholder agriculture, and
many farmers are unable or unwilling to offer land, their primary asset, as collateral [7].
The broader DFS ecosystem also struggles with sustainability. Only 39% of DFS ven­
tures in Sub­Saharan Africa report operating at break­even or above, and 77% have not
raised any external funding, as of 2023 [5]. The lack of consistent capital across funding
stages—from pre­seed to Series A—has been identified as a major bottleneck to scale.
Consequently, without bridging finance and viable business models, even technologically
promising DFS solutions often fail to achieve meaningful market traction and long­term
18
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:27==
impact
These findings collectively indicate that AgriTech startups in Kenya confront a multi­layered
predicament. They not only grapple with the broad spectrum of institutional, infrastruc­
tural, and market challenges common to entrepreneurial ventures in EMDEs (as detailed
in Section 3.2.1), but they also face the specific, acute difficulty of marketing and deliv­
ering technology­based products and services to a primary customer base—smallholder
farmers—that often has limited connectivity and digital literacy. This ’last­mile’ adoption
hurdle introduces an additional layer of complexity that these startups must innovatively
navigate to survive and scale
3.3.4
Investment Landscape
The investment landscape for AgriTech startups in Africa has undergone significant trans­
formation over the past decade. According to Briter Bridges [67], the sector experienced
virtually no deal activity prior to 2014, but has since attracted over 700 investments totaling
more than $1.56 billion. This signals growing investor confidence in agriculture­focused
innovation across the continent.
Kenya has emerged as a regional leader in this space, capturing 33% of total deal count
and 56% of the total capital invested in African AgriTech ventures, according to Briter
Bridges. Investment sizes tend to cluster at two ends of the spectrum—below $250,000
and between $1 million to $9 million, indicating the coexistence of early­stage support and
mid­level growth financing. However, numbers from 2024 reveal a strong concentration
at the lower end: 59% of deals had a ticket size of less than $100.000 and only 20% of
investments reached a ticket size bigger than $1 million. The services attracting the most
funding include farm management platforms, agricultural marketplaces, and Agri­fintech
solutions, reflecting investor focus in digital tools that enhance production efficiency, mar­
ket access, and financial inclusion.
African ecosystems have seen funding for Financial Technology dominate the last decade.
Cleantech, Mobility, E­commerce, and Health have all historically received more invest­
ment than the AgriTech sector. However, this trend is beginning to shift. While AgriTech
ticket sizes remain comparatively small, contributing to lower total funding volumes, the
number of deals in the sector has grown substantially over the past five years. In fact,
by 2024, AgriTech was second only to FinTech in terms of the number of deals closed,
signaling increased investor engagement and market traction, especially at early stages
[24].
The investor ecosystem backing AgriTech is diverse. Commercial funders account for the
majority (58%), including venture capital (VC) firms, private equity (PE) groups, and angel
networks. Semi­commercial actors, such as development finance institutions (DFIs) and
impact investors, represent about 16%, while non­commercial funders (12%)—such as
philanthropic foundations and development agencies—continue to play a key role. En­
trepreneur support organizations (14%), including accelerators, incubators, and venture
builders, are often co­funded by actors from across this spectrum, underscoring the im­
portance of blended financing models to sustain AgriTech innovation [67].
Despite the positive funding trends, access to capital remains uneven, particularly for
AgriTech startups seeking growth financing beyond the early stages. A critical factor,
as Malik Fal [68] argued in the context of broader African entrepreneurship in Accel­
erating Entrepreneurship in Africa, is ’preparedness for funding.’ Fal emphasized that
entrepreneurs must not only identify appropriate capital sources but also strategically tai­
lor their growth plans to meet investor expectations: ’For venture capital to succeed in
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
19
==PAGE:28==
Africa, entrepreneurs must demonstrate to investors that they are profit­driven... and
have a potentially profitable business’ [68]. This insight highlights a persistent tension
within the AgTech sector: while overall capital availability for African tech has increased,
many startups still struggle to align their business models, demonstrate traction, articulate
their stage of growth, and define their capital needs in a manner that resonates with the
prevailing investor landscape.
This funding challenge is especially acute in AgriTech, where market readiness, infras­
tructure gaps, and regulatory hurdles may delay revenue generation and complicate tra­
ditional investment logic. As the next section explores, incubators and accelerators may
play a critical role in bridging these gaps by helping ventures become more ’investment
ready’ through capacity building, strategic alignment, and tailored support.
3.3.5
Connecting Context to Innovation
Kenya’s agricultural sector is characterized by deep­rooted structural constraints, includ­
ing small farm sizes, acute climate vulnerability, and pervasive market inefficiencies, all
coexisting with an emergent but significantly challenged AgriTech ecosystem. While Dig­
ital Farmer Services and innovative startup ventures hold considerable promise for bridg­
ing these gaps, these entities themselves must operate within the very institutional voids
and resource limitations previously identified. This dual reality—where innovation both
arises from and is simultaneously constrained by local socio­economic and infrastructural
conditions—underscores the critical need for a closer examination of the mechanisms
through which AgriTech startups identify, adapt to, and strive to overcome such systemic
barriers. While the AgriTech space in Kenya is dynamic and expanding, there remains
limited academic insight into how these startups strategically navigate and attempt to
overcome the array of challenges detailed throughout this chapter. Understanding these
operational dynamics and adaptive strategies is crucial for fostering a more resilient, scal­
able, and impactful AgriTech ecosystem. This research, therefore, aims to contribute to
filling this knowledge gap by identifying the main barriers to market entry and sustained
success, as well as investigating the role and effectiveness of specific support mecha­
nisms, such as incubators and accelerators, in enhancing the capacity of these startups.
The next section will explore what role incubators and accelerators play as a mechanism
for startup support, both within the general scope of entrepreneurship and with a more
sector­specific focus.
3.4
Incubators and Accelerators as a Mechanism for Startup
Support
Incubators and accelerators have become prominent mechanisms for supporting entrepreneurial
ventures across various stages of development. These programs vary widely in structure,
duration, and services, yet their underlying rationale is to reduce the uncertainty and re­
source constraints faced by startups. To understand how incubators and accelerators are
designed and deployed, it is helpful to first consider the typical life cycle of a startup.
Drawing on the framework by Picken [69], entrepreneurial ventures can be broadly cat­
egorized into four stages: Startup, Survival/Transition, Scaling, and Maturity/Exit. Each
stage is characterized by distinct operational challenges and resource needs. Conse­
quently, the design and timing of incubator and accelerator interventions are often tai­
lored to these distinct phases. For instance, early­stage incubators typically concentrate
on crucial foundational elements like product­market fit validation and founder skill devel­
opment, while accelerators targeting later­stage ventures tend to prioritize strategies for
rapid scaling, access to growth capital, and, in some cases, exit preparation.
20
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:29==
The relevance and effectiveness of these support mechanisms are highly dependent on
contextual factors. In emerging and developing economies (EMDEs), additional structural
challenges previously detailed (see Section 3.2.1) necessitate that incubators and accel­
erators thoughtfully adapt their program designs and delivery models. Similarly, within
sector­specific domains such as AgriTech, support programs must be carefully tailored
to address the unique nuances and obstacles of that industry to effectively facilitate the
success of participating ventures.
The subsections that follow will first clarify how incubators and accelerators differ, outline
their expected support mechanisms, and then discuss how their roles and designs shift
across both geographic and sectoral contexts. Particular attention will be paid to the
AgriTech sector in Kenya.
3.4.1
Definitions and Distinctions
Accelerators are typically defined as fixed­term, cohort­based programs that provide star­
tups with education, mentorship and often financial resources over a period of typically
three to six months. They are often structured such that the program culminates in a type
of graduation event, typically referred to as ’demo day’, where the participating startups
pitch to a broad audience of investors and relevant stakeholders. This fixed­term, cohort­
centric model distinguishes accelerators—also referred to as seed accelerators, startup
accelerators, or business accelerators—from other forms of startup interventions, such
as angels investors or incubators, as the design inherently emphasizes a time­bound, in­
tensive process aimed at rapidly advancing a startup’s readiness for subsequent funding
rounds or market entry [70, 71].
Incubators, sometimes referred to as seed incubators, startup incubators, or business
incubators, are less structured. They tend to focus on nurturing early­stage ventures over
a longer period, and usually with less emphasis on formal educational programming or
structured mentorship. Cohen and Hochberg [70] describe them as ’co­working spaces
with shared resources and mentorship that is ad­hoc at best’, while also recognizing that
there exists a large variability in program offerings and usage of the terms incubator and
accelerator. It is worth noting that some scholars argue that incubator programs have
evolved over time to be more active partners in creation of ventures, rather than just
providing office spaces and limited business services. Arguments have also been made
that accelerators are a new iteration in the evolution of incubator models [71, 72].
In its essence, while accelerators aim to expedite growth and market validation through
a compressed schedule, incubators will generally offer a more continuous, yet hands­off,
framework for startup support. In order to ensure consistency throughout this paper, we
will define accelerator according to Cohen and Hochberg’s [70] definition:
”A fixed­term, cohort­based program, including mentorship and educational components,
that culminates in a public pitch event or demo­day.”
While a universally precise definition of an ’incubator’ remains more elusive in the litera­
ture, the description offered by Pauwels et al. [72] is widely utilized and accepted. They
define an incubator as:
”A program in which an incubation entity provides support to start­ups to improve the
probability of survival of the portfolio companies and accelerate their development.”
Pauwels et al. [72] further characterize incubators as being:
”Primarily designed to provide physical resources or office support services over a long
period of time.”
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
21
==PAGE:30==
The subsequent section will delve deeper into the core functionalities and specific support
mechanisms commonly found within both accelerator and incubator programs.
3.4.2
Core Functions and Support Mechanisms
Building upon the distinctions discussed previously, it is evident that both incubator and
accelerator programs exhibit a significant degree of variability in their structure, duration,
and intended outcomes. This section aims to delineate the core functions and support
mechanisms commonly associated with each model. Furthermore, it will explore the the­
oretical pathways through which these services are understood to benefit participating
ventures.
Pauwels et al. [72] identified four broad models within incubation: business innovation
centres (focused on regional economic development), university incubators (technology
commercialisation), research incubators (embedded in research institutes, also for com­
mercialisation), and stand­alone incubators (selecting and supporting promising startups).
Despite these varying models, incubators commonly offer at least four of the following five
key resources crucial for early­stage ventures: (1) access to physical resources, (2) of­
fice support services, (3) capital availability, (4) process support (e.g., business planning
guidance), and (5) network access. The primary focus is often on mitigating the liabilities
of newness, thereby enhancing the startup’s survival and success prospects
The same study by Pauwels et al. [72] also highlighted several defining characteristics of
accelerators, including: (1) the opportunity for upfront investment, frequently in exchange
for equity; (2) highly structured support delivered through programmed events and inten­
sive mentoring sessions; (3) an application process that is typically open to all, yet often
highly competitive; (4) cohort­based participation, with all ventures commencing the pro­
gram simultaneously; (5) a distinct focus on small, cohesive teams rather than individual
founders; and (6) a fixed program duration, culminating in a high­profile event, such as a
’demo day,’ where participants pitch to investors and key industry stakeholders.
Beyond these structural characteristics, accelerators should, according to Cohen et al.
[71], provide direct access to critical resources, including seed capital, co­working space,
and a systematic schedule of mentorship. The mentorship component comprises both
internal advisors and an extensive external network, which supplies technical, operational,
and strategic guidance, thereby enhancing the venture’s capability to refine its business
model and investment pitch.
This curated support system within accelerators is often further augmented by formal ed­
ucational programs and intensive feedback mechanisms. These elements are designed
to help startups overcome inherent resource limitations and navigate the challenges of
bounded rationality that can affect early­stage decision­making processes [73]. In con­
trast, while incubators also provide support, it is typically characterized as being less in­
tensive and less formally curated compared to the structured, time­bound environment of
accelerators.
Research on accelerators identifies three key design choices made by accelerators: (1)
whether to space out or concentrate consultations with mentors and customers, (2) whether
to foster privacy or transparency between peer ventures participating in the same pro­
gram, and (3) whether to tailor or standardize the program for each venture. They further
suggest that a specific set of choices is associated with improved venture development
[73].
The common ground between incubators and accelerators is that participating ventures
gain access to a broader network of stakeholders and a varying degree of operational
22
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:31==
support. Understanding these core functions and support mechanisms provides a crucial
framework for analyzing their effectiveness in the specific context of AgriTech startups in
Kenya.
3.4.3
The Role of Incubators and Accelerators in Overcoming EMDE
Challenges
Incubators and accelerators in emerging and developing economies (EMDEs) play a po­
tentially vital role in helping ventures overcome the structural challenges detailed in Sec­
tion 3.2.1. Entrepreneurs in these contexts often face institutional voids, inadequate in­
frastructure, and limited access to capital and markets. In such environments, the im­
portance of informal institutions, robust peer networks, and effective knowledge sharing
mechanisms is magnified, necessitating that startup support programs adapt their designs
and delivery models. Research suggests that the arrival and proliferation of incubators
and accelerators contribute positively to regional entrepreneurial ecosystems, including
enhanced partnerships between startups and established firms [13, 71, 11].
Incubator and accelerator programs in EMDEs are theorized to mitigate challenges in
both startup preparation by providing guidance on idea generation and validation, devel­
opment of a business plan, as well as securing early­stage funding (including grants) for
prototyping, and startup implementation by offering access to reliable networks and on­
going mentorship for navigating business and market entry operations. These programs
have been proven to positively and significantly influence the performance of participat­
ing ventures not only in Western markets but also in emerging markets such as Romania
and Kenya. However, to maximize the effectiveness of these programs, the local context
must be considered. As evidenced by Bruton et al. [14] (in Section 3.2.1), local contexts
necessitate tailored approaches to entrepreneurship that consider the interplay of social
norms, resource mobilization, and institutional voids [11, 74, 75].
The subsequent subsection will narrow this focus further, examining research on support
programs specifically targeted at AgriTech ventures, with a particular emphasis on the
Kenyan context.
3.4.4
Sector­Specific Incubators and Accelerators: The Case of AgriTech
in Kenya
Over the last decade, Kenya has distinguished itself as a significant center for new venture
creation and technological innovation within the African context, leading to a correspond­
ingly growing ecosystem of venture support programs. However, as explored in Section
3.3.1, the nation’s agricultural sector is characterized by deep fragmentation, with millions
of smallholder farmers who often lag behind in terms of modern infrastructure, access to
appropriate technology, and financial resources. Consequently, ventures aiming to offer
products and services to these farmers confront an array of challenges highly specific to
this sector and market. This underscores a pronounced need for incubators and acceler­
ators that are specifically designed and purposed for the unique demands of the AgriTech
sector in Kenya.
While a substantial and growing number of venture support programs operate in Kenya,
recent feedback from Kenyan AgriTech founders indicates concerns regarding the qual­
ity of support offered to startups and the overall impact on the AgriTech ecosystem [4].
Founders frequently express a desire for more AgriTech­focused incubators and acceler­
ators capable of meeting the nuanced needs of firms operating along the entire agricul­
tural value chain. Such specialized programs could potentially facilitate key partnerships
among firms offering complementary services and further leverage Kenya’s strong posi­
tion among foreign funders to attract more venture capital, as participation in reputable
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
23
==PAGE:32==
programs can enhance a startup’s credibility with investors. Moreover, there is a consen­
sus among these founders that significant institutional voids persist, partly attributed to
aspects of government operations, leading to an increased demand for support mecha­
nisms rooted in informal institutions and networks [76, 4].
Drawing insights from other emerging markets, a study by Isher et al. [9] on the Indian
AgriTech ecosystem highlights the significant contribution of sector­specific support sys­
tems to the success rates of participating ventures. Their research, utilizing Garrett’s
Ranking Technique, identified access to funding/grants as the most impactful service, fol­
lowed by access to mentorship and IPR/legal support. The study further emphasizes the
importance of ongoing investment and development in these specialized venture support
programs to foster technological advancements and a robust ecosystem.
Reinforcing the value propositions of such tailored support, Barto et al. [10] found that
founders participating in accelerators and incubators reported gaining valuable skills,
particularly in customer research, business development, and marketing—competencies
highly relevant for navigating the complexities of the Kenyan AgriTech market.
In conclusion, the landscape of venture support in Kenya, while growing, concerns have
been raised regarding its effectiveness and specific relevance for the AgriTech sector.
The expressed need for more specialized, AgriTech­focused incubators and accelera­
tors, capable of addressing the unique challenges and fostering crucial value chain link­
ages within Kenya’s fragmented agricultural market, is evident. Insights from the Indian
AgriTech ecosystem underscore the potential of such sector­specific support in enhanc­
ing venture success, particularly through access to funding, mentorship, and intellectual
property resources. Moreover, the skills acquired by founders through participation in
these programs, such as customer research and business development, are deemed vi­
tal for navigating the complexities of the Kenyan context, especially in light of existing
institutional voids. Understanding the current landscape and the identified needs for spe­
cialized AgriTech support programs forms a crucial foundation for examining their actual
role and impact on AgriTech startup success in Kenya.
3.5
Gaps in the Literature
The preceding literature review has provided a comprehensive overview of the entrepreneurial
landscape within emerging and developing economies (EMDEs), with a specific focus
on the agricultural technology (AgriTech) sector in Kenya.
Several key themes have
emerged:
• The unique nature of entrepreneurship in EMDEs, characterized by a dynamic in­
terplay between systemic constraints and emergent opportunities, underscores the
need to move beyond the direct application of Western­derived theories towards
developing more context­specific analytical approaches.
• The significant potential of AgriTech to modernize smallholder farming systems in
Kenya and similar EMDEs is apparent; however, pervasive infrastructural deficits
and financial constraints for both farmers and ventures critically hinder the widespread
adoption and scaling of these innovative solutions.
• While the Kenyan ecosystem of incubators and accelerators(I/As) is expanding,
there is a clear call from AgriTech founders for more sector­specific support pro­
grams meticulously designed to address the particularly challenging market dynam­
ics associated with serving smallholder farmers.
24
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:33==
Despite these insights, a closer examination of the existing body of academic work reveals
several critical gaps, particularly concerning the nuanced realities of AgriTech incubation
and acceleration within the Kenyan context. These gaps can be understood across con­
textual, empirical, methodological, and practical dimensions:
3.5.1
Context­Specific and Empirical Gaps
While the broader challenges of EMDE entrepreneurship and the general functions of I/As
are discussed, there is a notable scarcity of detailed, peer­reviewed academic research fo­
cused specifically on AgriTech entrepreneurship and its support ecosystem within Kenya.
• Limited Focus on Kenyan AgriTech I/A Program Design: The literature provides
general models of I/A support but offers limited insight into how existing Kenyan
I/As are actually tailoring their programs for the unique needs of AgriTech ventures.
Specific details on curriculum adjustments, mentorship strategies focused on agri­
cultural value chains, network curation that bridges technology and farming com­
munities, and support mechanisms addressing AgriTech­specific hurdles (e.g., sea­
sonality, farmer digital literacy, last­mile logistics) are largely underexplored. Un­
derstanding these tailored approaches is crucial for identifying best practices and
areas for improvement.
• Under­Researched Founder Experiences within Kenyan AgriTech I/As: While
founder critiques are noted, a systematic academic exploration of Kenyan AgriTech
founders’ experiences within I/A programs is largely missing.
Key unanswered
questions include:
– What specific venture support elements (e.g., access to investor networks, ex­
pert workshops, regulatory navigation for agricultural products, client outreach
strategies) do Kenyan AgriTech founders perceive as most and least valuable?
How do these compare to insights from other EMDEs like India (e.g., Isher et
al. [9]), and what is unique to Kenya?
– How do these needs and valuations vary based on the AgriTech sub­sector
(e.g., agri­fintech, precision agriculture, market linkage platforms), the startup’s
stage of development, or the diverse backgrounds of founders?
– Crucially, what are the significant unmet needs that even existing specialized
AgriTech I/As in Kenya may not be adequately addressing from the founders’
perspectives? Addressing this gap is vital for ensuring support programs are
demand­driven and impactful.
• Scarcity of In­Depth Ecosystem Studies: Much of the available information on
the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem, including the specific impact of infrastructural and
resource constraints on ventures, often comes from reports by research centers
and industry bodies (e.g., [10, 4]) rather than in­depth, peer­reviewed academic
studies that employ rigorous qualitative or quantitative methodologies to analyze
the ecosystem comprehensively. This limits the depth of academic understanding
of the interplay between ventures and their specific operating environment.
3.5.2
Methodological Gaps
A significant portion of entrepreneurial research, including studies on I/As, tends to ap­
ply theoretical lenses and methodologies developed primarily in Western, industrialized
contexts.
• Need for Grounded, Context­Sensitive Approaches: There is a methodological
gap concerning the application of research approaches that are deeply embedded
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
25
==PAGE:34==
in the local context. The lack of studies employing a grounded, bottom­up research
method specifically within the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem—involving key actors
such as founders, investors, I/A managers, and even farmers—hinders the devel­
opment of context­specific insights. Adopting such an approach can reveal nuances
and generate theories that are truly reflective of the lived realities in these settings,
rather than testing the fit of pre­existing, often externally derived, frameworks.
3.5.3
Gaps in Practical Application and Program Design Guidance
While some initiatives exist (e.g., the CGIAR’s focus on agricultural innovation), there
appears to be a deficiency in academic research that directly and empirically informs the
strategic design and practical implementation of highly effective, evidence­based AgriTech
support programs in Kenya.
• Lack of Actionable Insights for I/A Program Enhancement: Without detailed
studies on what works, for whom, and under what conditions within Kenyan AgriTech
I/As, it is challenging to provide actionable recommendations for optimizing program
structures, resource allocation, and support mechanisms to better foster venture
success and impact on the agricultural sector.
3.5.4
Addressing the Identified Gaps through Current Research
This study aims to directly address several of these interconnected gaps. By employing a
grounded, qualitative research approach, this research will investigate the critical barriers
faced by AgriTech startups operating in Kenya. It will further explore how incubator and
accelerator models are currently functioning within this specific context and how they can
be potentially optimized to more effectively lower these barriers.
Specifically, this study will contribute by:
• Providing rich, context­specific insights into the operational realities, challenges, and
support needs of Kenyan AgriTech ventures, gathered directly from key ecosystem
stakeholders (founders, I/A managers, investors).
• Examining the current practices and perceived effectiveness of I/A support mecha­
nisms tailored (or needing to be tailored) for the Kenyan AgriTech sector.
• Generating a bottom­up understanding of the AgriTech venture landscape, which
can inform both academic theory development and the practical design of more
impactful entrepreneurial support interventions in Kenya.
In summary, the literature review reveals a compelling need for more nuanced, context­
specific, and empirically grounded research on AgriTech entrepreneurship and its sup­
port systems in Kenya. This study seeks to contribute to filling these voids by utilizing a
bottom­up qualitative methodology to identify firsthand the major challenges and bottle­
necks experienced by key stakeholders, ultimately aiming to provide actionable insights
for enhancing the AgriTech innovation ecosystem.
26
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:35==
4
Methodology
This chapter details the methodological framework adopted for this study. It begins by out­
lining the overall research approach, emphasizing the qualitative nature and its foundation
in grounded theory principles. Subsequently, the chapter describes the specific research
setting and rationale, followed by a transparent account of the research design and pro­
cess undertaken. The methods employed for data collection and the strategies for data
management will then be presented. Finally, crucial ethical considerations that guided
the research will be discussed, ensuring the transparency and integrity of the study.
4.1
Overall Research Approach
This study employs a qualitative methodology, drawing substantially on the principles of
grounded theory as articulated by Charmaz [16]. Grounded theory offers a logically con­
sistent set of data collection and analytic procedures aimed at developing theory from
systematically obtained and analyzed data. These methods provide systematic, yet flex­
ible, strategies for an inductive, bottom­up approach, particularly suited to shaping and
handling extensive qualitative materials.
The selection of a grounded theory approach is particularly appropriate for this research,
which aims to explore the complex and dynamic entrepreneurial ecosystem of Kenyan
AgriTech. As acknowledged in the literature review, established theories—often devel­
oped in Western contexts—may not fully capture the unique nuances and lived realities
within Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (EMDEs). Grounded theory is ide­
ally suited for such contexts because it facilitates the development of an understanding
rooted directly in the perspectives and experiences of participants actively involved in
the area of study. It prioritizes building theoretical analysis from what is discovered to
be relevant within the specific empirical world being investigated, rather than imposing
pre­existing theoretical frameworks.
This study, therefore, embraces an inductive research strategy. This means that rather
than beginning with pre­defined hypotheses to be tested, the research process empha­
sizes following emergent leads gained from a close examination of the data itself. Such
an approach encourages key issues, concepts, and relationships to emerge organically
from the data, rather than being forced into preconceived categories or viewed through
a predetermined theoretical lens. A fundamental principle of this grounded approach is
the simultaneous engagement in data collection and analysis, where insights from early
analysis iteratively shape subsequent data gathering efforts. The intended outcome is
the development of a rich, conceptual analysis that explains the processes and behaviors
observed within the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem.
4.2
Research Setting and Rationale
This study takes place in Nairobi, Kenya, which is known as a hub for entrepreneurial ac­
tivity and AgriTech innovation within the context of Sub­Saharan Africa. Due to its relative
stability and (perceived) safety, Nairobi also attracts an international pool of businesses
looking for an office to run their African or East­African operations.
The study is done as part of a master’s thesis at the Technical University of Denmark(DTU)
and it’s program ’Technology Entrepreneurship’. Thus the requirements of first and fore­
most having an entrepreneurial focus.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
27
==PAGE:36==
4.3
Research Design and Process
The research design for this study was emergent and iterative, aligning with the principles
of a grounded theory approach. It unfolded systematically through distinct phases, moving
from broad exploration to focused inquiry. This section details this two­phase process,
outlining how initial exploratory fieldwork informed the subsequent, more targeted data
collection efforts.
Phase 1: Initial Broad Exploration and Topic Identification (1­2 months duration)
Given the researcher’s lack of prior direct experience with Nairobi’s entrepreneurial ecosys­
tem, the initial phase of this research (approximately one to two months in duration)
commenced with an exploratory stance. Guided by a foundational question central to
grounded inquiry, ‘What is happening here?’, initial engagements were sought with a di­
verse range of Kenyan stakeholders, including investors, venture support managers, and
startup founders. These interactions, occurring in both formal meeting settings and infor­
mal networking environments, were aimed at gaining a broad overview of the ecosystem,
identifying prevalent themes and general challenges, and allowing the research scope to
be progressively narrowed based on emergent insights. This iterative process of following
leads defined in the data is a core practice within grounded theory methodology.
The responses to this initial inquiry were diverse, highlighting a spectrum of active sectors,
ongoing innovations, and significant entrepreneurial challenges. While acknowledging
the prominent traction of sectors like FinTech in the Kenyan and broader African context
in recent years (as noted in the literature review), the insights gained about the agri­
cultural sector—with its profound economic and cultural significance juxtaposed against
immense systemic challenges—became particularly compelling. Learning about these
complexities, alongside impactful narratives such as the trajectory of Twiga Foods (a
heavily funded venture that faced significant scaling issues despite its aim to organize
smallholder farmers), was pivotal in steering the research focus specifically towards the
AgriTech domain.
Phase 2: Focused Data Collection within the AgriTech Sector (2­3 months duration)
Building upon the insights and thematic directions identified in the initial exploratory phase,
the research then transitioned into a focused data collection period (approximately two to
three months in duration) centered specifically on the AgriTech sector. During this phase,
key stakeholders directly involved with AgriTech in Kenya were targeted for engagement.
These included founders and key employees of AgriTech ventures, investors with a port­
folio or interest in the AgriTech sector, and personnel from organizations providing venture
support (such as incubators and accelerators) to AgriTech companies.
Data gathered from both the initial exploratory phase and the early stages of this focused
phase informed the establishment of key emergent themes. These themes, in turn, guided
the development of a semi­structured interview guide designed to delve deeper into spe­
cific areas of interest. It was also during this period that the study’s two guiding problem
statements began to form:
1. What are the primary barriers to market entry and sustainable success for AgriTech
ventures in Kenya?
2. What are the key programmatic elements and support mechanisms for venture sup­
port programs specifically focused on fostering the growth of AgriTech ventures in
the Kenyan context?
This two­phased research design, moving from broad exploration to focused inquiry within
the Kenyan AgriTech sector, laid the groundwork for specific data gathering activities. The
28
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:37==
following section details the primary data collection methods employed to address the
aforementioned research questions.
4.4
Data Collection and Methods
To address the problem statements and explore the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem, a com­
bination of data collection methods was employed, primarily focusing on in­depth interac­
tions with key stakeholders. These methods resulted in 14 formal interviews with exten­
sive notes, as well as 20+ more informal, shorter conversations with key stakeholders in
the local entrepreneurial ecosystem. The methods deployed are detailed below.
4.4.1
Semi­Structured Interviews
The primary method of data collection was semi­structured interviews, selected for their
ability to provide both consistency across key topics and the flexibility needed to explore
emergent themes in depth. An interview guide (see Appendix) was developed based
on initial exploratory findings (phase 1) and the guiding problem statements. This guide
served as a tool to ensure core areas were covered—such as perceptions of the AgriTech
ecosystem, specific operational challenges, and experiences with support programs—
rather than a script to be strictly adhered to. This allowed for a conversational flow, en­
abling the pursuit of unexpected insights and allowing participants to elaborate on issues
most pertinent to their experiences. The guide was also iteratively refined throughout the
data collection period as new themes and insights began to emerge from early interviews,
a practice consistent with a grounded approach.
A distinctive component of these interviews, introduced during the second phase of data
collection, was a structured ranking exercise. Drawing inspiration from common chal­
lenges identified in the initial exploratory phase, a predefined list of typical venture chal­
lenges (e.g., related to funding, market access, talent acquisition, regulatory hurdles, and
infrastructure) was presented to most interviewees. Participants were asked to rank these
challenges from most to least difficult as experienced by, or observed within, Kenyan
AgriTech ventures. This exercise provided a quantifiable overlay to the qualitative discus­
sions, helping to systematically identify and compare perceptions of the most pressing
barriers. It is also worth noting that the exercise was done as the last part of the interview,
thus also helping to make sure that these topics were covered..
Interviews were conducted with a range of key stakeholders, including AgriTech startup
founders, managers of incubator and accelerator programs, investors active in the sector,
and other relevant ecosystem actors. This diverse sampling aimed to capture a multi­
faceted understanding of the sector in question.
The interviews were not recorded, instead the researcher took notes during conversation
and expanded upon the notes after the interview concluded. The decision of not recording
the interviews was motivated by the desire to have an honest and less formal conversa­
tion with the interview subjects. It was vital for this study that the interview subjects felt
comfortable speaking honestly about their experiences and views on the sector.
4.4.2
Participant Observation and Field Engagement
Beyond formal interviews, the research incorporated elements of ethnographic engage­
ment to gain a richer, contextualized understanding of the ecosystem. This involved the
researcher’s active presence and immersion in the field over several months. Activities
included:
• Attending various industry­specific events, such as conferences, startup pitching
events, and ecosystem networking gatherings. These events provided insights into
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
29
==PAGE:38==
current trends, common discourses, and the interactions between different stake­
holders.
• Engaging in numerous informal conversations with entrepreneurs, mentors, and
other ecosystem participants met during these events and visits. While not struc­
tured as interviews, these interactions often yielded spontaneous insights, helped
build rapport, and sometimes led to referrals for formal interviews.
• Engaging in informal conversations with the general public about agriculture, AgriTech,
and surrounding topics. This includes taxi drivers, restaurant workers, and scholars
at The University of Nairobi.
Although systematic, detailed field notes were not maintained for every informal interac­
tion, reflective notes were made following significant events or conversations to capture
key observations, emerging themes, and the researcher’s own evolving understanding
of the field. This immersive approach was invaluable for getting different perspectives
on information gathered in interviews and for appreciating the range of knowledge and
relational dynamics within­ and outside of the ecosystem.
4.4.3
Sampling Strategy
Participants for this study were selected using a combination of purposive and snowball
sampling strategies. Initially, a purposive sampling approach was employed to identify
and contact individuals and organizations known to possess significant experience and
insights relevant to Kenya’s AgriTech startup ecosystem. This included targeting key in­
formants such as established AgriTech founders, active investors in the sector, and man­
agers of prominent venture support programs. As the fieldwork progressed, snowball
sampling was also utilized, whereby initial participants were asked to recommend other
relevant individuals, thereby helping to expand the network of interviewees and access
diverse perspectives within the ecosystem. This combined strategy aimed to ensure a
sample rich in information relevant to the problem statements and broader ecosystem.
4.4.4
Participant Overview
Table 4.1 provides an overview of the individuals who participated in this study. To main­
tain confidentiality and ensure anonymity, participants are described by their primary roles
and key areas of expertise without revealing identifying personal details.
Table 4.1: Participant Overview
Participant Code
Primary Role
Brief Description
Investor1
Investor
Met in person.
Part of a equity­based
development fund.
Invests exclusively in
Agriculture­focused ventures across SSA
Investor2
Investor
Met online.
Part of a VC fund.
Invests
in early­stage African tech­enabled ventures
in FinTech, HealthTech, AgriTech, Logistics
and E­Commerce
Investor3
Investor
Met in person. Part of a VC fund & does an­
gel investments on their own. Working expe­
rience across 10+ African countries
Continued on next page
30
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.1 – continued from previous page
Participant Code
Primary Role
Brief Description
Employee1
Key Employee
Met in person.
Holds a key position
within a successful AgriTech scale­up based
in Nairobi but operations across multiple
African countries.
Enabler2
Ex­
Founder/Investor/Ecosystem
Enabler
Met in person. 20+ years of experience with
venture building and investing across Africa.
Between projects at the time of the interview.
Enabler3
Managing Director
Met in person.
Co­Founder and manag­
ing director at a venture builder and consul­
tancy firm. Extensive experience across the
African continent within agriculture.
Enabler4
Key Employee
Met online. Works with logistics at a develop­
ment fund which offers loans and core prod­
ucts to farmers across the continent.
Founder1
Founder & CEO
Met online.
Demo­Farm for teaching local
community & developing IT solutions for in­
creasing farmer knowledge
Founder2
Founder & CEO
Met online. CEO of an AgriTech venture re­
lated to farmer inputs.
Founder3
Founder & CEO
Met online. CEO of an AgriTech venture re­
lated to farmer storage solutions.
Founder4
Founder & CEO
Met in person. Serial entrepreneur, and cur­
rently CEO of an AgriTech venture which of­
fers educates agronomists which is linked to
a software platform
Founder5
Co­Founder
Met in person.
Co­Founder of pre MVP­
stage deeptech AgriTech venture. Still a stu­
dent.
Founder6
Ex­Founder
Met in person.
Previously founded an
AgriTech venture that failed. Now has a con­
sultancy business for software development
and is involved in the local ecosystem.
Founder7
Founder & CEO
Met in person. CEO of an AI­chatbot solution
directed at farmers. Goal of shortening the
knowledge gaps.
4.5
Data Management and Preparation
Effective management of the qualitative data was crucial for ensuring the integrity of this
study and the confidentiality of its participants. This involved a systematic approach to
recording, storing, anonymizing, and preparing the interview data for analysis.
The primary data consisted of detailed notes captured during and immediately after each
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
31
==PAGE:40==
semi­structured interview. To ensure a comprehensive and accurate record, handwrit­
ten notes were digitized promptly after each interview. The researcher then immediately
elaborated upon all notes, expanding on abbreviated points, clarifying ambiguities, and
capturing contextual nuances or immediate reflections important to the interview content.
This process resulted in a rich textual dataset for each interaction.
To safeguard participant anonymity and ensure confidentiality, a multi­step process was
implemented. While raw notes might have contained temporary identifiers like first names
during the immediate post­interview elaboration, all data was formally anonymized before
analysis. A system of aliases was established where each participant was assigned a
unique code (Founder1, Enabler2, Investor1, etc.,) based on their stakeholder category.
These codes are used for all references to participants throughout this study, including in
figures where abbreviations (e.g., I1) may be used.
All digitized, elaborated, and anonymized interview notes were securely stored on a password­
protected cloud drive. Access to this data was restricted solely to the researcher, ensuring
data protection and maintaining the confidentiality pledged to participants. This systemati­
cally organized and secured dataset then formed the corpus for the subsequent qualitative
data analysis procedures.
4.6
Data Analysis Procedures
The analysis of the collected data was systematically guided by the inductive and iterative
principles of grounded theory, primarily drawing upon the procedural framework outlined
by Charmaz [16]. The analytical process commenced with an intensive data familiar­
ization phase, followed by a structured coding process encompassing initial coding and
focused coding, ultimately aimed at the development of conceptual categories that repre­
sents the data collected throughout this study.
According to Charmaz[16], important considerations to keep in mind while going through
the coding process is the following:
• Begin the interpretation of the data from the respondent’s point of view.
• Study the emerging data.
• The resulting categories should be derived directly from the data, not from precon­
ceived concepts or hypotheses.
4.6.1
Data Familiarization
Following the systematic management and anonymization of the interview data, the ana­
lytical process commenced with a data familiarization phase. This involved the researcher
repeatedly reading and re­reading the elaborated interview notes. The aim of this thor­
ough immersion was to develop a deeper understanding of the dataset, identify initial
impressions, and begin to discern potential patterns or areas of significance before the
formal coding process began. This iterative engagement with the textual data was crucial
for grounding the subsequent analysis firmly in the participants’ accounts.
4.6.2
Coding process
The core analytical work involved a systematic coding process, which Charmaz [16] de­
scribes as ”the first major analytic phase of the research... In short, coding is the process
of defining what the data are all about.” A fundamental premise guiding this stage was ”to
let the key issues emerge rather than to force them into preconceived categories” [16].
This process facilitates the link between collecting data and developing an emergent the­
ory in order to present the data.
32
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:41==
Throughout all stages of coding, the constant comparative method was employed. This
involved continuously comparing data incidents with other incidents, data segments with
codes, codes with other codes, and eventually codes with emerging categories. This iter­
ative comparison was vital for refining understanding, ensuring consistency, and ensuring
that the developing analysis remained deeply grounded in the participants’ accounts.
While it is common for grounded theory studies to utilize specialized qualitative data anal­
ysis software (QDAS) [77, 78], the initial coding for this study was conducted manually
directly on the researcher’s detailed interview notes, given their condensed nature. The
subsequent transition from the extensive list of initial codes to a more refined set of fo­
cused codes was performed with the assistance of the AI tool Gemini 2.5 Pro from Google,
as detailed further below. This hybrid approach aimed to combine deep human immer­
sion in the data with computational assistance for pattern recognition across a large set
of initial codes.
Initial Coding
The analytical process commenced with initial coding, which involved a meticulous line­
by­line examination of the detailed interview notes. Adhering to grounded theory princi­
ples [16], the objective was to define the actions, events, or meanings occurring or rep­
resented in each segment of data. During this intensive phase, an open approach was
taken, where an effort was made to code all potentially relevant data to ensure compre­
hensive coverage. A key principle was to phrase codes as actively and specifically as
possible to better capture underlying processes and stay close to the participants’ per­
spectives.
Examples of how segments from the interview notes were translated into initial codes
include:
• The statement, ”He finds the funding landscape difficult and confusing,” generated
the codes: ”Experiencing funding challenges” and ”Perceiving funding landscape
as difficult.”
• The observation, ”He also mentions that farmers are not technical to the degree of­
ten necessary in order to effectively utilize the application services available,” led to
the codes: ”Identifying farmer technical limitations,” ”Assessing farmer digital liter­
acy (low),” and ”Recognizing barriers to tech utilization by farmers.”
• From ”He reaches new customers through farmer networks on Facebook and What­
sapp,” the following codes were derived: ”Utilizing social media for customer acquisi­
tion (Facebook),” ”Utilizing WhatsApp networks for customer acquisition,” ”Leverag­
ing existing farmer digital networks,” and ”Employing low­cost customer outreach.”
This initial coding process was systematically applied to the notes from all 14 interviews,
resulting in a comprehensive list of 523 initial codes.
Focused Coding
The phase of focused coding is a crucial step toward generating final categories. This
stage involves systematically reviewing the extensive list of initial codes to identify pat­
terns, discern relationships, and note codes that appear particularly significant due to
their frequency or the emphasis placed on them by participants. The objective is to move
towards a more selective and conceptual understanding of the data [16].
Given the large volume of initial codes (523), the transition to a more manageable set of
focused codes was performed with the analytical assistance of the AI tool Gemini 2.5 Pro
(Google). The tool was provided with the research problem statements, the guiding chap­
ter on Grounded Theory by Charmaz [16], and the complete list of initial codes. It was
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
33
==PAGE:42==
then prompted to assist in identifying patterns and suggesting consolidated focused codes
based on the principles outlined by Charmaz. This AI­assisted process yielded an initial
suggestion of 16 focused codes. These suggestions were then meticulously reviewed,
critically considered, and compared against the original list of initial codes to ensure that
no key concepts were overlooked and that the resulting focused codes accurately repre­
sented the underlying data. Table 4.2 depicts the focused codes generated as a result of
this process.
Table 4.2: Focused Codes and Their Descriptions.
Code ID
Focused Code Name
Description (Consolidated Initial Codes)
FC1
Perceiving High Sectoral Risk
(AgriTech)
Consolidates: AgriTech being very challeng­
ing, difficult to succeed in, investor cau­
tion, predicting failure for smallholder mod­
els, questioning viability.
FC2
Identifying Foundational Infras­
tructure Deficits
Consolidates: infrastructure as a major bar­
rier, lack of roads/grid, connectivity issues,
logistical challenges, needing to solve the
”whole sector,” infrastructure fixes costly but
necessary.
FC3
Navigating
Farmer
Adoption
Barriers
Consolidates: farmer scepticism, distrust of
new inputs/tech, poor tech adopters, techno­
logical illiteracy, needing demos/social proof,
valuing tangible benefits,
requiring clear
value proposition, incentive­driven participa­
tion, overcoming customer­side barriers.
FC4
Experiencing Farmer Financial
Constraints & Limited Purchas­
ing Power
Consolidates: farmers lacking financial re­
sources, difficulty monetizing from small­
holders, farmers struggling, needing innova­
tive financing, impact of input costs on farm­
ers.
FC5
Confronting
Input
System
Challenges
Consolidates:
issues with fertilizer/seeds,
fake inputs, declining input quality, rising in­
put costs, government involvement in inputs,
impact of bad inputs on trust/harvests.
FC6
Dealing with Market Access &
Supply Chain Inefficiencies
Consolidates: market linkage as key, com­
plex supply chains, excessive middlemen,
value capture by intermediaries, low farmer
share of price, price volatility, connecting
supply with demand, post­harvest losses.
FC7
Recognizing
Farmer
Knowl­
edge Gaps & Learning Prefer­
ences
Consolidates:
farmers lacking knowledge
(various
types),
learning
from
neigh­
bours/lead farmers, limited internet use for
learning, valuing practical impact of knowl­
edge, needing accessible advice, critiquing
research­to­practice gap.
Continued on next page
34
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.2 – continued from previous page
Code ID
Focused Code Name
Description (Consolidated Initial Codes)
FC8
Building (or Lacking) Trust in
the Ecosystem
Consolidates:
pervasive farmer distrust,
skepticism due to past negative experiences,
history of exploitation, need for trust with ser­
vice providers, trust as key, distrust of ex­
ternal solutions, distrust in contracts, trust
linked to individual reputation.
FC9
Facing Startup Funding & Fi­
nancing Challenges
Consolidates:
perceiving funding as diffi­
cult, lack of startup funding (AgriTech), fund­
ing disparities, funding landscape confusing,
lack of early­stage grants, critique of soft
funding, need for impactful investment, capi­
tal allocation challenges, difficulty accessing
later­stage funding, bootstrapping.
FC10
Questioning VC Models & In­
vestor Expectations Context
Consolidates: critiquing Western VC mod­
els, mismatch between VC expectations
and local realities, AgriTech not always VC­
compatible, arguing against unicorn hunting,
founders unprepared for VC engagement.
FC11
Highlighting Need for Context­
Specific & Foundational Solu­
tions
Consolidates:
solutions not copy­paste,
need for adaptation, focus on core farmer
operations, building foundations first, bun­
dled solutions needed, questioning efficacy
of past development aid/spending.
FC12
Assessing Role & Design of
Support Programs (I/As)
Consolidates:
experiences with I/A pro­
grams, critiquing I/A curriculum, need for
sector­specific
programs,
advocating
for
stage­appropriate/tailored support, views on
program fees/equity, role in providing skill­
s/networks, need for I/As to address farmer
priorities.
FC13
Identifying Human Capital &
Talent Acquisition Issues
Consolidates:
talent acquisition as ma­
jor challenge, competition from international
firms, human capital constraints for ventures
vs. knowledge being cheap – captures the
differing views.
FC14
Observing Systemic Power Dy­
namics & Governance Issues
Consolidates:
Price control by intermedi­
aries, government involvement, corruption
linked to subsidies, lack of local/governmen­
tal solutions, institutional voids, perceived
bias in funding.
Continued on next page
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.2 – continued from previous page
Code ID
Focused Code Name
Description (Consolidated Initial Codes)
FC15
Recognizing Importance of Lo­
cal Leadership & Community
Engagement
Consolidates: targeting community leaders,
influence of lead farmers, leveraging exist­
ing farmer networks (WhatsApp, Facebook),
importance of co­creating spaces, valuing
proximity to farmers.
FC16
Entrepreneurs’ Motivations &
Approaches
Consolidates: returning to help community,
applying analytical methods, founding ven­
tures based on observed needs/research,
bootstrapping, personal farming experience.
Following the refinement of these 16 focused codes, the original data (interview notes)
were reviewed again through the lens of these codes. This step aimed to further under­
stand how these focused concepts related to each other and how they could be consoli­
dated into the development of overarching theoretical categories.
Development of Theoretical Categories
The culmination of the coding process is the development of theoretical categories. The
original proposers of grounded theory, Glaser and Strauss [12], implied that categories
inherently reside in the data, ready to ”leap out” at the researcher. However, this study
aligns more closely with Charmaz’s [16] perspective, which argues that categories are
an analytical construct reflecting the dynamic interaction between the observer and the
observed data; they are actively developed by the researcher through an interpretive pro­
cess.
Consequently, the theoretical categories developed in this research, namely Foundational
Ecosystem Deficiencies, The Smallholder Farmer Enigma: Adoption, Trust and Viability,
Contested Views on Agricultural Development & Ecosystem Actors, AgriTech Venture
Viability in Kenya, Strategic Imperatives for AgriTech Solutions in Kenya, and The Role
and Gaps of Incubators and Accelerators, are the product of interpretive engagement
with the data. They have been purposefully constructed to best encapsulate and provide
a structured understanding of the core insights that emerged from the iterative analysis
of focused codes and the underlying primary data. The formation of these categories
was consistently driven by the objective to comprehensively address the study’s central
problem statements.
Each theoretical category identified is substantively supported and delineated by a col­
lection of focused codes. To visually and conceptually represent the interconnections
and hierarchical relationships among these categories, they have been organized within
a conceptual pyramid model (as illustrated in Figure 4.1). Within this framework, each
category contains a specific selection of focused codes. It is important to note that some
focused codes are integral to multiple categories; this overlap is intentionally highlighted
in the pyramid model through color­coding to clearly indicate where these codes serve as
foundational elements for several distinct theoretical categories.
A more detailed and comprehensive analysis of these categories, their properties, and
how they reflect the findings of this study will be presented in the Findings chapter.
36
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.1: Conceptual Pyramid Model
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
37
==PAGE:46==
Structured Challenge Ranking Exercise
In addition to the qualitative discussions during the semi­structured interviews, a struc­
tured ranking exercise was administered to most participants. This exercise was de­
veloped during the second phase of data collection, informed by common themes and
difficulties that emerged during the initial exploratory phase. Its purpose was to gain a
more direct and comparative understanding of how different stakeholders perceived the
severity of common obstacles faced by AgriTech ventures in Kenya.
Participants(11 out of 14 interviewed) were presented with a predefined list of common
venture challenges and were asked to rank them from most difficult to least difficult from
their perspective or experience within the Kenyan AgriTech sector. The list of challenges
presented for ranking included the following key operational and strategic areas:
• Access to Funding & Financing (including sub­categories like Grants/Soft Funding
and Hard Funding/Equity)
• Infrastructure Constraints (encompassing supply chain issues, unreliable logistics,
and limited connectivity)
• Product Development & Technical Challenges
• Achieving Product­Market­Fit
• Profitability & Margins
• Talent Acquisition & Team Building
• Customer Acquisition & Market Access (including finding the right customers and
overcoming customer­side barriers like technical illiteracy or purchasing power)
The data generated from this ranking exercise were not intended for complex statistical
analysis but rather to serve as a complementary layer of information to the qualitative
interview data. The aggregated rankings will be presented in the Findings chapter.
Analytically, these rankings are used in conjunction with the qualitative findings in several
ways:
• Triangulation and Validation: The rankings help to triangulate and validate the
prominence of challenges that emerged as strong themes from the qualitative in­
terview narratives. For instance, if a challenge was frequently discussed as severe
in interviews and also consistently ranked highly, this convergence strengthens the
finding.
• Highlighting Perceived Severity and Priorities: The exercise provides a clearer
indication of the relative severity or priority participants assign to different pre­identified
challenges, offering a different lens than purely open­ended discussion.
• Comparing Stakeholder Perspectives: Differences in how various stakeholder
groups (e.g., founders, investors, ecosystem enablers) ranked the same challenges
are noted and will be explored in later chapters to highlight varying priorities and
viewpoints within the ecosystem.
• Adding Nuance to Categories: The ranking data informs the ”weight” or ”intensity”
of certain focused codes and properties within the broader theoretical categories
developed in this study. For example, if ”Infrastructure Constraints” is a key aspect
of the category ‘Foundational Ecosystem Deficiencies‘ and is also ranked as a top
38
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:47==
challenge by multiple participants, this adds a dimension of perceived critical impact
to that category.
In essence, this structured ranking data brings an additional layer of systematically gath­
ered perceptions, which, when integrated with the rich qualitative narratives, contributes
to a more robust and multi­faceted understanding of the challenges confronting AgriTech
ventures in Kenya and the context in which support programs should focus their venture
assistance.
4.7
Ethical Considerations
Throughout this research, importance was placed on upholding rigorous ethical standards
to ensure the protection, dignity, and confidentiality of all participants. Key ethical princi­
ples guiding this study included informed consent, voluntary participation, confidentiality
and anonymity, secure data management, mitigation of potential risks, and researcher
reflexivity.
4.7.1
Informed Consent and Voluntary Participation
Prior to each interview, participants were provided with clear information regarding the
study’s purpose, the nature of their potential involvement, and how the data collected
would be utilized for this Master’s thesis on AgriTech in Kenya. It was explicitly stated that
their participation was entirely voluntary and that they could choose not to answer any
specific questions or withdraw from the study at any point without consequence, although
no participants chose to do so. Verbal consent to participate under these conditions was
obtained from all interviewees before commencing the interviews. Participants were also
made aware that their contributions would be anonymized in the final research report.
4.7.2
Confidentiality, Anonymity, and Data Management
To ensure confidentiality and anonymity, several measures were implemented. As de­
tailed in the ”Data Management and Preparation” section (Section 4.5), all interview notes
were anonymized using a system of coded aliases (as previously described) to prevent
the direct identification of individuals or their specific organizations in the thesis. Further­
more, all collected data, consisting of elaborated interview notes, was securely stored on
a password­protected cloud drive accessible only to the primary researcher, safeguarding
it against unauthorized access.
4.7.3
Researcher Positionality and Objectivity
The researcher undertaking this study is a Master’s student at the Danish Technical Uni­
versity (DTU) and had no prior personal or professional relationships with any of the par­
ticipants or their affiliated companies and organizations before the commencement of
the research. Moreover, the researcher has no vested interests or historical involvement
in companies or organizations directly operating within the Kenyan AgriTech sector or
related industries. This ”outsider” status may have facilitated a degree of neutrality in
discussions. However, the researcher was also mindful that this positionality could influ­
ence the interpretation of data and made conscious efforts to ground all analysis strictly
within the participants’ expressed viewpoints and experiences, adhering to the principles
of grounded theory.
4.7.4
Incentives and Benefits to Participants
Participation in this study was on a voluntary basis, and participants were not offered any
monetary rewards, gifts, or other forms of direct incentives for their time and contributions.
The primary benefit to participants was the opportunity to contribute their valuable insights
and experiences to academic research focused on a sector of significant importance to
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
39
==PAGE:48==
them and to Kenya’s development. Where requested, an offer was made to share a
summary of the research findings with participants upon completion of the thesis.
By adhering to these ethical principles, this study aimed to ensure that all research activ­
ities were conducted responsibly, respectfully, and with the utmost consideration for the
individuals who generously shared their knowledge and perspectives.
4.8
Limitations of the Methodology
It is important to acknowledge the inherent limitations of this study to provide a balanced
perspective on its findings and conclusions. While efforts were made to ensure method­
ological rigor, certain constraints related to the research design, sample characteristics,
researcher positionality, and data collection methods should be considered
4.8.1
Sample Characteristics and Generalizability
As often is characteristic of qualitative research, particularly studies employing a grounded
theory approach, the findings are contextualized and shaped by the specific sample of
participants. While this study purposefully sought a diverse range of founders, investors,
and ecosystem enablers to capture varied perspectives, the composition of the sample
inevitably influences the emergent themes
A notable characteristic of the founder sample was a predominance of ventures in the
pre­scaling or seed phase. Although insights from Employee1 provided a valuable view
from a scaled AgriTech venture, a more extensive inclusion of founders from other suc­
cessfully scaled AgriTech enterprises within the Kenyan context would have offered a
richer comparative dimension and potentially highlighted different challenges or strategic
imperatives associated with later stages of growth.
Consequently, while the study aims to develop a robust understanding of the Kenyan
AgriTech ecosystem, the findings may not be statistically generalizable to all AgriTech
ventures or stakeholders in Kenya or similar markets. The conceptual pyramid model
generated, however, may offer transferable insights for future research in similar contexts.
4.8.2
Researcher’s Background and Field Immersion
The researcher embarked on this study without prior direct experience in Kenya or an
established local professional network. This initial ’outsider’ status meant that building
rapport and accessing key informants relied heavily on snowball sampling and navigating
the ecosystem progressively
While the five­month fieldwork period allowed for significant immersion and data collec­
tion, this timeframe, coupled with the initial lack of local grounding, may have limited the
depth of cultural interpretation or the breadth of perspectives that could have been ac­
cessed with longer­term engagement or pre­existing networks. Every effort was made to
engage respectfully and learn from participants to mitigate this.
4.8.3
Potential for Researcher Bias
Despite the systematic procedures of grounded theory, and efforts towards reflexivity,
the interpretation of qualitative data is an inherently subjective process. The researcher’s
own background, perspectives, and evolving understanding of the field inevitably shape
the analytical lens through which the data is filtered and themes are constructed. As out­
lined in Section 4.6.2, the resulting categories can be considered an analytical construct
reflecting the dynamic interaction between the observer and the observed data. While
strategies were employed to remain grounded in the participants’ accounts, the final con­
ceptual model represents one possible interpretation of the complex realities observed.
40
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:49==
4.8.4
Limitations of Snowball Sampling
While snowball sampling was used in expanding the participant pool and accessing rel­
evant stakeholders, this non­probability sampling technique may have introduced an el­
ement of selection bias. Typically, participants are more likely to refer individuals within
their own networks, potentially leading to a sample that shares similar characteristics or
viewpoints and inadvertently excluding other diverse perspectives that exist outside these
initial networks.
In conclusion, this chapter has detailed the qualitative, grounded theory­informed method­
ology employed to investigate the Kenyan AgriTech entrepreneurial ecosystem. It has
outlined the research design, data collection and analysis strategies, and addressed eth­
ical considerations and inherent limitations. Despite the limitations, the chosen approach
is deemed robust and appropriate for generating rich, contextualized insights into the
challenges and opportunities faced by AgriTech startups in Kenya and the role of sup­
port mechanisms. The findings derived from this methodology will be presented in the
subsequent chapter.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
41
==PAGE:50==
5
Findings
This chapter presents the key findings from the grounded theory analysis of 14 inter­
views conducted with key stakeholders in the Kenyan AgriTech entrepreneurial ecosys­
tem. Through the iterative process of coding the qualitative data as well as considering
the ranking of the challenges presented to the participants, the analysis culminates in six
core categories that encapsulate the experiences, challenges and dynamics observed
during this study.
The subsequent sections presents the results of the challenges ranked by key stakehold­
ers, as well as a cover the six core categories, their interconnections and how they fit into
the hierarchical nature of the conceptual pyramid model (see Figure 4.1) in which they
have been placed.
As this study is based on grounded research principles, the findings in this chapter draw
upon detailed interview notes taken during and immediately following conversations with
14 key stakeholders. Participant perspectives are presented through careful paraphras­
ing, summaries of key points, and illustrative phrases captured in these notes to accurately
convey their insights and experiences.
5.1
Priority of Challenges: Stakeholder Rankings
Analysis of the rankings reveals disparities in perceived challenge severity both between
and within stakeholder groups. Notably, the largest divergences in average rankings be­
tween the founder group and the investor group occurred for ”Access to Funding and
Financing” and ”Talent Acquisition & Team Building” (as shown in Figure 5.1).
Within the founder group (n=8, including E1), there was a strong consensus placing ”Ac­
cess to Funding and Financing” among the most critical challenges (all but one founder
ranked it in their top three). Conversely, ”Talent Acquisition & Team Building” was gen­
erally perceived as less critical by founders, with most placing it in their bottom three
challenges.
The investor group (n=3) exhibited greater internal variation in their rankings for these
particular challenges. For instance, Investor1 ranked ”Access to Funding and Financing”
as their most pressing concern, while Investor3 (I3) considered it least challenging among
the options. Similarly, I3 identified ”Talent Acquisition & Team Building” as the most sig­
nificant challenge, whereas Investor2 ranked it as the least challenging on the list. This
highlights a more diverse range of prioritized concerns among the participating investors
compared to the more unified founder perspective on these two specific issues. A figure
depicting all responses is included in the Appendix(A)
These prioritized challenges, as highlighted by the ranking exercise, provide a quantitative­
like lens on the difficulties within the ecosystem. The subsequent section will now delve
into the focused codes derived from the qualitative interview data, which gives a deeper
insight into elements found within these common startup challenges.
42
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.1: Average scores categorized by investors and founders (including E1)
5.2
A Conceptual Model of the Kenyan AgriTech
Entrepreneurial Ecosystem
The 16 focused codes (see Table 4.2, Section 4.6.2) were used as basis for forming 6 core
categories. These categories were then placed within a pyramid structure in order to better
capture the relationship between and to provide a layered approach to view/understand
the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem.
The pyramid consists of three layers, the base layer, which consists of the three cate­
gories: ”Foundational Ecosystem Deficiencies”, ”The Smallholder Farmer Enigma: Adop­
tion, Trust and Viability” and ”Contested Views on Agricultural Development & Ecosystem
Actors,” the middle layer which consists of categories ”Strategic Imperatives for AgriTech
Solutions in Kenya” and ”AgriTech Venture Viability in Kenya,” and at the top there is
one category namely ”The Role and Gaps of Incubators and Accelerators.” The follow­
ing subsections will cover all layers and their corresponding categories, as well as the
interconnection between them.
5.2.1
Base layer
The base layer of the conceptual pyramid brings together categories that reflect the most
fundamental and widely influential contextual realities shaping the AgriTech landscape in
Kenya. Its categories, namely ”Foundational Ecosystem Deficiencies,” ”The Smallholder
Farmer Enigma: Adoption, Trust and Viability”, and ”Contested Views on Agriculture De­
velopment & Ecosystem Actors” are all crucial to consider for a comprehensive under­
standing of the Kenyan agricultural context—not only as a sector but also as the market
in which AgriTech companies operate. The foundational deficiencies and challenges iden­
tified within these base layer categories directly contribute to the complexities of farmer
engagement, foster the contested viewpoints observed within the ecosystem(as identi­
fied in this study), and collectively play a significant role in shaping the primary barriers
to market entry for AgriTech ventures. Consequently, these elements establish the oper­
ational terrain upon which the strategic imperatives and venture viability issues, detailed
in the subsequent layers of this pyramid, are predicated, and they critically inform how
incubators and accelerators might be most effectively designed and deployed.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
43
==PAGE:52==
Foundational Ecosystem Deficiencies
Foundational ecosystem deficiencies refers to the fundamental infrastructural, systemic,
and institutional gaps that impede AgriTech development and farmer progress. This cate­
gory encapsulates the prominent structural barriers such as infrastructure deficits, lacking
market access, input challenges and systemic power dynamics, which were consistently
identified by participants as primary obstacles across the sector.
A primary concern voiced by participants was the significant impact of infrastructural weak­
nesses on not only AgriTech ventures, but also on the farmers. Infrastructure was explicitly
identified as a major barrier to entry by an investor (I2), a sentiment echoed by a founder
(F6) who pointed to specific deficits and linked venture challenges directly to these short­
comings. This founder (F6) highlighted prevalent logistical issues and connectivity prob­
lems that hamper operations. While an employee(E1) at a one of the more successful
AgriTech ventures in the region asserted that phone penetration and basic connectivity
were less of a major barrier, the experiences of Founder6 suggest that reliable connectiv­
ity suitable for software­based AgriTech solutions remain a challenge. The ranked chal­
lenges(as described in Section 5.1) mirror the sentiments gathered from the interview
data, with participants ranking ”Infrastructure Constraints” as their second most pressing
challenge on average. Underscoring the severity of these issues, another founder(F3)
emphasized the necessity of ”infrastructure­level solutions” in order to create a more en­
abling environment for the sector, encompassing both ventures and farmers
Beyond physical infrastructure, inefficiencies within market access and supply chains
were highlighted as critical deficiencies. Founders (F7,F3) reported that these issues,
compounded by inadequate storage options, often lead to significant post­harvest losses,
with one estimating them to be as high as 40%. Interview data revealed that middlemen
often act as the primary off­takers, and deals are regularly made between the farmers
and the off­takers before the harvesting commences. A key aspect of this relationship as
noted by founders (F7,F3,F6,F1) is the significant value capture by these intermediaries,
which results in farmers receiving a disproportionately low share of the final price of their
produce. Furthermore, Founder6 highlighted another critical dimension of market access,
explaining that the ability to reach more lucrative segments, such as supermarkets and
other higher­end markets, is often contingent upon achieving very high crop quality, a
standard many smallholders struggle to meet consistently. Additionally, Founder7 points
out that the prices are changing every day and linked the volatility in pricing to supply
chain uncertainty, especially for farmers that lack proper storage. They (F7) stated that
the farmer is often forced to sell to the off­taker at an unreasonable price, or else they risk
their crops turning bad. The strategic importance of robust market linkage was further
stressed by Investor2 as crucial for farmer prosperity and ultimately for venture success.
The challenges extend to the agricultural input system itself, creating further foundational
barriers. Several participants (E1,E4,F2,F3,F7) mentioned an event where the govern­
ment had given out free fertilizer to farmers as part of a governmental subsidy program,
and that later it was found that the fertilizer was ”fake” and thus ruined an entire sea­
son worth of crops for the farmers that used it. Additionally, there have been challenges
related to fake seeds being sold (according to F7), a situation that only accelerates the
difficulty of introducing innovative agricultural input products. These conditions necessi­
tate a careful approach by farmers and ventures looking to operate within this space; as
one founder (F3) stressed, there must be a dual consideration for both the cost and the
quality of inputs to ensure value and most importantly build trust
The foundational deficiencies detailed above, which spans infrastructure, market access,
44
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:53==
and input systems, are frequently underpinned and intensified by systemic power dy­
namics and critical governance issues. For instance, the significant value capture by
intermediaries in supply chains, as highlighted by several founders (F7,F3,F6,F1), points
to power imbalances that disadvantage farmers. Similarly, the incident involving ”fake”
government­subsidized fertilizer (E1,E4,F2,F3,F7) underscores a profound governance
failure in regulation and program execution, eroding farmer trust and in some instances
causing direct economic harm. These systemic failings, including the lack of robust in­
put controls and accountability, compound the existing structural challenges. Together,
these interconnected deficiencies, rooted in both tangible gaps and intangible governance
weaknesses, establish the challenging operational context for farmers and, consequently,
for the AgriTech ventures striving to serve them.
The Smallholder Farmer Enigma: Adoption, Trust and Viability
The smallholder farmer enigma refers to the complex challenges related to engaging
smallholder farmers as customers and beneficiaries of AgriTech solutions. This category
delves into their inherent constraints, observed behaviors regarding technology adoption,
knowledge gaps and the trust deficit found within the agricultural ecosystem. Understand­
ing this engima is key for designing and deploying interventions that meet farmer needs,
while overcoming uptake barriers.
A foundational aspect of the smallholder enigma lies in understanding the general farmer
knowledge levels as well as how they typically acquire new information. Several founders
(F1,F2,F7) and an ecosystem enabler (E3) all identified that knowledge gaps within the
smallholder farmer community is a ’big problem’. The direct negative consequences of
these knowledge gaps were highlighted by Founder7, who had previously worked as a
supply chain coordinator and noted significant amount of crops lost due to lack of knowl­
edge from the farmers. To bridge these gaps, multiple participants emphasized the impor­
tance of farmer training, with Investor1 highlighting a preference of investing in companies
which can provide direct training models. Moreover, Founder2 mentioned that farmers are
open­minded when it comes to learning, but will only show up for training if they are given
something tangible in return(signaling that the gain of knowledge itself is not enough).
This aligns with observations from Founder1, stating that farmers predominantly learn
from their neighbours and that co­created spaces such as local ’demo­farms’ are vital for
practical learning. Founder2 further pointed out that internet is rarely used by farmers
for learning purposes, noting the prevalence of the informal learning channels such as
neighbours and ’lead farmers’ within the local community.
Adding to the knowledge gaps is a widespread lack of trust within the agricultural ecosys­
tem, a factor critical to farmer engagement. This was identified as a common ecosystem
theme by one Enabler2, while another (Enabler4) stressed that trust is a ’key factor’ for
facilitating successful interactions. An investor (I1) also emphasized the ’critical need for
trust.’ This distrust is also found among farmers themselves; Founder2 spoke of ’per­
vasive farmer distrust,’ and Employee1 validated this farmer skepticism, attributing it to
past negative experiences, and further observing its widespread nature in Kenya. This
participant (E1) noted that such experiences lead farmers to always maintain one or more
’backup plans’ due to their acute risk perception. The issue of mistrust is not confined to
farmer­AgriTech interactions; Founder3 identified a lack of trust between various stake­
holders across the ecosystem, complicating broader collaborations and partnerships.
The economic vulnerability of smallholder farmers presents another substantial layer of
complexity. Founder3 explained that farmers in their community is experiencing declining
yields, emphasizing widespread ’smallholder suffering,’ and even stated that farming is
becoming ’economically unviable’ for many. Thus significantly limiting their purchasing
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
45
==PAGE:54==
power and which is exacerbated by restricted access to formal financial services. An in­
vestor (I2) highlighted farmers’ general lack of financial resources and their limited access
to financing. Which aligns with what was noted by Investor1, who emphasized that ’most
farmers have bad credit as they do not have a financial record’. This difficulty was further
detailed by Employee1, who pointed to the significant risk aversion of banks and the con­
sequent high cost of lending, effectively creating a situation where financial institutions
are hesitant to lend due to a perceived risk of farmers being unable to make repayments.
These interconnected issues of knowledge deficits, distrust, and severe financial con­
straints collectively culminate in significant barriers to the adoption of new agricultural
technologies and practices. Founder2 described farmers as ’open­minded but not good
at adopting technology’, technical illiteracy among farmers were also noted in interviews
with other founders (F1,F6).
As highlighted by both Founder1 and Founder6, limited
resources—both financial and knowledge­based—are primary factors inhibiting farmers
from trusting and embracing change in the form of new knowledge and technology, thereby
perpetuating the cycle of the smallholder farmer enigma. Addressing these underlying fac­
tors is therefore paramount for fostering meaningful technology adoption and achieving
sustainable impact in the Kenyan AgriTech sector.
Contested Views on Agricultural Development & Ecosystem Actors
This category captures a set of differing viewpoints expressed by participants regarding
broader agricultural policy, the prevailing emphasis on smallholder farming, the impact of
development aid, and the overall effectiveness of various ecosystem actors. While many
interviews touched upon specific operational challenges, some experienced stakehold­
ers, notably Investor3 as well as Enabler3 and Enabler4, articulated more fundamental
critiques of the existing agricultural development paradigms in Kenya and similar con­
texts. Their perspectives, detailed below, offer a contrasting lens on the sector’s core
issues and potential pathways forward.
Enabler3 (E3), with extensive experience across farming, development, and investment
in the sector, was critical of what they termed the ”Grow your own food” system often
pushed in African contexts. They argued that this approach inefficiently incentivizes indi­
viduals who may not be skilled at farming to continue, while more capable farmers lack
the resources and opportunities to expand and scale their operations. Drawing a par­
allel, E3 noted that in Western countries, farming is largely left to those proficient in it,
rather than being a widespread household activity. He contended that in the African con­
text, larger (farming) corporations are often unfairly viewed negatively, when in reality,
they could be what the sector needs for true modernization and efficiency, as ”farming is
first and foremost a business”. They further claimed that the ’safety nets’ woven around
the smallholder farmers by western development funds ’keeps them going’, while ’letting
them fail’ without free inputs could enable the successful farmers to buy their land and
expand their business. Larger farms, with more capital, are able to invest in machines
and technology that ultimately increases productivity and crop yields. Further stating that
bigger businesses typically invests in local infrastructure and enable smaller businesses
to operate, as a higher percentage of the local community is now getting paid regularly by
the bigger farms.
Similarly, Investor3 (I3) also offered a critical view on the AgriTech sector’s viability, par­
ticularly when business models are heavily reliant on smallholder farmers. They stated
that with approximately 7 million smallholder farms in Kenya, creating a scalable and
economically sensible solution for this fragmented market is ”impossible”. The primary
problem, in their view, lies in the sheer number of farms, their small size, and the con­
sequently inefficient processes stemming from inherent constraints. They are thus ’very
46
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:55==
careful with investing in this sector,’ asserting that even a great team with a good product
will ’most likely fail’ if their primary market is smallholders. While further emphasizing that
due to these circumstances, products and services serving smallholder farmers ’must be
undeniable’ in order to achieve scale and mass adoption.
Adding another layer to these contested views, Enabler4 (E4), a key employee at a promi­
nent development fund with operations across numerous African countries, provided an
introspective critique from within the development sector itself. They explained that their
organization directly supports smallholder farmers through small loans and by setting up
local shops that sell agricultural inputs and basic tools, with their main mission being
food security and enabling smallholder prosperity. Furthermore, they share that locals
are expressing disappointment regarding the necessity of NGOs to address these persis­
tent agricultural challenges. They further pointed to a critical tension where aid, despite
its intentions, can sometimes become a ’hindrance for locals,’ potentially fostering over­
reliance rather than empowering communities to ’fix their own systems.’ While acknowl­
edging that development funds provide essential assistance to smallholder farmers, they
do not perceive such interventions as the ultimate answer to the agricultural challenges
and questions surrounding food security in the region.
These reflective and perhaps contrarian perspectives from experienced actors like E3, I3,
and E4 highlight significant fault lines in the prevailing approaches to agricultural devel­
opment and support in Kenya. They collectively question the long­term viability of pre­
dominantly smallholder­centric models, the overall efficacy of development aid, and the
assumptions underpinning certain investment strategies imposed by western funds. This
critical stance resonates with a critical question raised by Founder3 (F3): ”How much so­
cial return have we gotten from all the money invested in agriculture in the last 10 years?”
Such fundamental questioning underscores the complexities and systemic challenges in­
herent in the ecosystem. These contested views form an essential backdrop, shaping the
environment in which AgriTech ventures must strategize for impact and survival, as will
be explored in the subsequent middle layer of the pyramid.
5.2.2
Middle layer
The middle layer of the conceptual pyramid marks a critical transition, moving from the
foundational ecosystem challenges to the active strategies and operational realities faced
by AgriTech ventures and their stakeholders in Kenya. This layer encompasses two key
categories: ”AgriTech Venture Viability in Kenya” and ”Strategic Imperatives for AgriTech
Solutions in Kenya.” These are situated within the middle layer because they collectively
articulate how entrepreneurs, investors, and ecosystem enablers attempt to navigate the
complexities established in the base layer, revealing factors perceived to influence venture
success and thus the inherent viability of operating within this demanding sector.
AgriTech Venture Viability in Kenya
This category encompasses the overarching difficulties, high risks, and contested viability
associated with launching and scaling AgriTech ventures that target Kenyan smallholder
farmers. Given the challenging ecosystem detailed in the base layer, many stakeholders,
from investors observing past failures to founders grappling with funding, openly question
the general viability of AgriTech enterprises in this specific market. This category ex­
plores these perceptions, delving into participant views on market­appropriate solutions,
the prevailing investment paradigms, and crucial lessons from notable ventures.
A critical aspect of venture viability, as highlighted by Employee1 (E1) from a successful
AgriTech venture, hinges on market fit and a focus on farmers’ fundamental needs. E1
explained that the perception of low viability in the sector has been ’influenced by solu­
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
47
==PAGE:56==
tions that do not fit the market and thus will most liekly fail or have to massively pivot.’
However, international VCs still choose to invest in such companies, consequently losing
their money, and thereby branding the sector as a whole as ’too challenging’. E1 strongly
emphasized the need for products and services considered core to farmer operations
in Kenya, such as ”water, soil, seeds, fertilizer and basic tools.” Also acknowledging that
while software is central in agriculture within developed economies, it is rarely prioritized in
the local context. This necessity of addressing core agricultural needs was also implicitly
supported by Investor1 (I1), whose agriculture­focused fund strongly prefers companies
applying direct training to farmers. I1 shared an example of a portfolio company that ’lever­
ages clusters of mid­sized, leased commercial farms to provide smallholder farmers with
access to intensive agronomy training, quality and cost­effective farm inputs, and direct
access to markets,’ indicating a model grounded in fundamental operational support.
The prevailing investment models themselves were also a significant point of discussion
concerning venture viability. Multiple participants (Employee1, Enabler4, Investor2) em­
phasized that the ”Silicon Valley model of VC investing” often does not fit the Kenyan
AgriTech context, with Employee1 suggesting, ’instead of hunting for unicorns they should
be looking for elephants and giraffes’. This sentiment reflects a call for investment ap­
proaches that appreciate longer timelines, different scaling patterns, and perhaps alter­
native success metrics. Moreover, VCs appear acutely aware of the sector’s challenges,
with Investor2 claiming that ’most agriculture­focused ventures are not good VC­cases’
and suggesting that ’both the investors and the ventures would be best off without each
other’ in many instances.
The complexities of achieving viability are further illustrated by high­profile market experi­
ences. Enabler4 (E4), drawing on extensive venture building and investment experience
in Africa, brought up the example of Twiga Foods. While its mission was to connect small­
holder farmers to a single marketplace with over $100M raised, it is now widely considered
a cautionary tale. However, E4 also argued that this case should not just be seen as a
sectoral failure but also as ’evidence that it is possible to raise a large amount of VC
money within the sector’ . Employee1 also referenced Twiga Foods, noting its eventual
pivot towards farming its own produce as an example of a business model that initially
”ignored the core farmer operations.”
Despite the challenging investment landscape and market realities, the sentiment that
’the money is there, but the challenge is getting it into the right hands’ was shared by both
Enabler3 (E3) and Investor3 (I3). This perception of available capital sharply contrasts
with the direct experiences of founders in this study, reflected in ”Access to Funding &
Financing” ranking as their number one challenge on average. Founder2 (F2) articulated
this by stating, ”VC world in Africa is crazy, founders lack knowledge and don’t know
how to play the game”. Yet, amidst these substantial hurdles to viability, many founders
persist, often driven by a strong motivation to contribute to their local communities and
effect positive change within a sector they deeply understand.
Strategic Imperatives for AgriTech Solutions in Kenya
This category gathers the perspectives on what makes an AgriTech solution more likely
to succeed or be impactful – focusing on context­specificity, addressing core needs, and
building trust within communities. Perhaps more importantly, it explores the entrepreneurs’
motivations for launching ventures in this particularly complicated and challenging sector,
and the strategic considerations that emerge from their experiences and those of other
ecosystem actors.
A recurrent theme among the interviewed founders is a deep­seated motivation rooted in
48
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:57==
community ties and a desire to return and contribute meaningfully after gaining educa­
tion elsewhere. Several founders indicated they had left their local areas for education
and later returned with the specific goal of starting businesses to help their communities.
This farmer­centric approach was further emphasized by Founder2 (F2), who stated, ’if
your primary market is the farmers, then you should stay close to the farmers.’ This ded­
ication was evident in how founders discussed their business models; multiple founders
(Founder1, Founder3, Founder7) had not initially prioritized monetization strategies for
their solutions. Instead, their primary focus was on reaching as many farmers as pos­
sible, with Founder1 and Founder3 still offering their services for free. When prompted
about future revenue generation, both indicated that income streams should ideally orig­
inate from actors higher up the agricultural supply chain, rather than directly from the
often resource­constrained smallholders. This approach underscores a strong sentiment
among these entrepreneurs: their primary drive is to serve the farmers’ needs.
Navigating Product­Market Fit (PMF) presents a complex picture within this context. While
PMF was ranked as the fifth most difficult challenge on average by participants, Em­
ployee1 (E1), from one of the few interviewed ventures that had scaled across multi­
ple countries, identified it as by far the most critical challenge. Conversely, Founder2,
Founder7, and Investor1 ranked PMF as least challenging. This apparent discrepancy
might stem from the deep community integration of many founders; those like Founder4,
Founder6, and Founder1, who are still actively farming alongside running their busi­
nesses, may feel inherently confident in their understanding of market needs. Investor3
(I3) offered a broader perspective applicable across sectors, noting that venture success
fundamentally requires two things: ”a deep understanding of your customer, extremely
deep understanding” and the ”ability to execute”.
The imperative for context­specific and foundational solutions was well understood across
all participant groups. Interviewees highlighted several practical strategies that aim to
tackle the foundational inefficiencies identified in the base layer of the ecosystem:
• Accessible Financing for Core Inputs: Recognizing that farmers often cannot afford
larger one­time payments for physical products, some startups are collaborating
with cooperatives and banks. This enables them to offer financing structures where
purchases can be paid off over one to two years, a model endorsed by Employee1
and Founder3, with Investor2 also emphasizing the importance of offering financing
alongside product offerings.
• Leveraging Existing Networks and Farmer Knowledge: To enhance accessibility and
relevance, solutions like the farming­oriented AI­ChatBot developed by Founder7
which utilizes WhatsApp as its interface.
• Focus on Core Farmer Operations: A clear strategic direction observed within the
data was the emphasis on products and services directly addressing fundamental
farming activities. All but one of the founders participating in this study are develop­
ing solutions that fall into this category.
Given the challenges detailed previously, building trust and fostering farmer adoption
were consistently iterated as key strategic imperatives. While most founders acknowl­
edged this as a major hurdle, they also demonstrated acute awareness of how to navi­
gate it. Community building emerged as a core component of the business models for
Founder4, Founder7, Founder1, Founder2, and Founder3. This typically involves direct
engagement, such as visiting farmer communities and establishing permanent ’demo­
farms’ where farmers can learn about products and services firsthand. However, Founder2
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
49
==PAGE:58==
cautioned that simple presence is not enough, noting that ’no one will show up unless they
are given something tangible in return,’ citing free t­shirts as an example of an initial in­
centive. While this approach can lead to ’high customer acquisition cost,’ Founder2 firmly
stated that ’through trust comes adoption,’ highlighting the belief that successfully con­
vincing a few initial adopters will lead to wider acceptance.
However, these farmer­centric and trust­building strategies operate within a demanding
business environment. As Enabler3 (E3) asserted in the context of broader agricultural
development, ’farming is first and foremost a business’, and so is running a startup. Em­
ployee1 (E1) reinforced this by pointing to the ’extreme difficulty of running a business
at scale within this sector,’ which necessitates ’an immense amount of financial planning
and having the right priorities’. It was a notable finding from this study’s sample that none
of the interviewed founders had yet reached significant scale with their ventures, nor had
they secured equity investments at the time of the interviews.
Ultimately, the strategic imperatives for AgriTech solutions in Kenya revolve around a del­
icate balance: deeply understanding and prioritizing farmer needs, building trust through
contextually relevant engagement, and simultaneously navigating the harsh realities of
business viability and the long road to scale in a resource­constrained and challenging
sector. These strategies and the motivations underpinning them set the stage for consid­
ering the role of external startup support mechanisms, which will be explored in the top
layer of the pyramid
5.2.3
Top layer
The top layer of the conceptual pyramid builds upon the foundational ecosystem chal­
lenges established in the bottom layer and the operational realities and strategies explored
in the middle layer. It delves deeper into the specific role, design, and perceived effec­
tiveness of venture support programs, primarily incubators and accelerators (I/As), within
this Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem. A thorough understanding of the preceding layers is
therefore essential for these I/As to design and deliver meaningful, impactful support that
genuinely addresses the core needs and hurdles faced by AgriTech ventures.
The Role and Gaps of Incubators and Accelerators
This category examines participant experiences with incubators and accelerators, cri­
tiques of current program designs, and suggestions for how these support mechanisms
can be better tailored to the Kenyan AgriTech context, particularly in addressing funding
challenges and the need for context­specific solutions.
Participants shared varied experiences with support programs, offering insights into ben­
eficial components and areas for improvement. Founder4, for instance, recounted a posi­
tive experience with an accelerator, which, although focused on affordable housing rather
than AgriTech, provided foundational startup knowledge and a grant that aided their ven­
ture’s initial development.
More detailed design recommendations came from Enabler2 (E2), whose Kenyan­based
venture builder company has seen hundreds participate in diverse I/A programs since
2016. E2 emphasized the critical need for context­specific programs tailored to the ven­
ture’s stage, advocating for separating ’idea­stage’ founders from those who have achieved
product­market fit. Furthermore, E2 recommended greater sector­specificity, enabling
I/As to invest in relevant experts for talks and workshops. A key strategy, according to
E2, is identifying the main challenges for each participating startup early on to offer tailored
support, which implies smaller, more focused cohorts. While many of E2’s programs were
grant­funded and free for participants, they also raised the point that charging a small fee
could enhance commitment from both the startups and the program providers, ensuring a
50
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:59==
continued focus on quality. E2’s company also selectively invested in promising ventures
concluding their programs.
Founder2 (F2) shared their experience with an incubator hosted by the World Food Pro­
gram, involving coaching and entrepreneurship classes. F2 described it as intensive and
time­consuming, to the extent that they could not manage holding a job on the side for
income, highlighting the need for stipends for participants in such programs. When asked
about preferred accelerator elements, F2 stressed the importance of sector­specific pro­
grams catering to ventures at similar maturity levels and pointed out a significant gap: a
lack of education on ’VCs, fundraising and due diligence,’ which they considered a short­
coming.
Echoing the need for tailored support, Founder5 (F5), who found their team and green­
tech idea through an incubation program for targeted at young innovators, valued the
exposure to potential customers and learning materials. However, F5 suggested improve­
ments such as the inclusion of financing opportunities and physical bootcamps, as their
program had been entirely online. Given their venture’s deep­tech orientation, F5 also ex­
pressed a desire for access to laboratory facilities through the incubator and emphasized
the importance of support in building a capable team.
Building on the strategic imperatives identified in the middle layer, a strong theme emerged
regarding the need for I/As to foster context­specific solutions that address Kenya’s foun­
dational ecosystem deficiencies. Investor2 (I2) provided a compelling vision for such a
program: if provided with excess capital, they would establish an accelerator or incu­
bator specifically for startups tackling ”infrastructure­related challenges”. This would in­
clude ventures increasing farmer connectivity, enhancing solar capacity, expanding grid­
connectivity, improving mobile and internet access, developing roads, or providing cold­
storage solutions. I2 termed these ventures ”ENABLERS,” emphasizing that such com­
panies would build the foundational infrastructure upon which other AgriTech innovations
could then be built, rather than necessarily becoming ”unicorn companies” themselves.
A critical role identified for incubators and accelerators is to better prepare startups for the
challenging funding landscape and manage expectations regarding investment. As estab­
lished in the middle layer, accessing appropriate finance is a major hurdle. Founder2’s
critique that accelerators often fail to teach about ”VCs, fundraising and due diligence”
directly points to a significant gap in current support offerings. This suggests a clear
imperative for I/A programs to incorporate robust training on navigating various funding
sources (angel, VC, development funds), understanding different investor models and ex­
pectations, and effectively preparing for the investment process. Such focused support
could help bridge the disconnect often observed between ventures and the investment
community.
Knowledge sharing between ventures was highlighted by Employee1, their company were
looking into hosting an incubator for AgriTech ventures. Using their existing knowledge to
enable others. Utilizing a large dataset of information on their customers was suggested
to be the core of helping other ventures find the right customers. Offering guidance on
key elements mentioned in the middle layer such as offering financing solutions for their
product offerings as well as sharing of farmer networks would make a significant impact
for participating ventures.
In essence, to be truly effective in the Kenyan AgriTech sector, incubators and accelerators
must move beyond generic startup support. The findings suggest they need to offer deeply
contextualized programs that are stage­appropriate, sector­specific, address foundational
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
51
==PAGE:60==
ecosystem needs by supporting ”enabler” ventures, and critically, equip founders with
the financial literacy and strategic tools to navigate the complex investment landscape.
Knowledge sharing between participating ventures should also be highly encouraged.
52
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:61==
6
Discussion
This study embarked on an exploration of the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem, aiming to
understand the critical barriers faced by startups and to investigate how incubator and
accelerator (I/As) programs can be effectively designed and deployed to mitigate these
challenges. The core problem statements aimed to identify these key barriers and to de­
termine how I/A models can be effectively structured and deployed to lower them. Through
a grounded theory approach, the preceding Findings chapter unveiled a conceptual model
illustrating the intricate landscape: from foundational ecosystem deficiencies and the com­
plex dynamics of smallholder farmer engagement, to the strategic imperatives for AgriTech
solutions and the contested viability of ventures, culminating in an assessment of the roles
and gaps related to local I/As. This chapter now transitions to a deeper interpretation of
these findings. It will connect the emergent themes back to the initial problem statements
and the existing body of literature, explore the theoretical and practical implications arising
from the study, and conclude by acknowledging the research limitations and suggesting
relevant directions for future research.
6.1
Interpreting the Findings
The following discussion directly addresses the two problem statements guiding this study,
drawing upon the findings presented in the preceding chapter.
1. What are the primary barriers to market entry and sustainable success for AgriTech
ventures in Kenya?
The primary barriers to market entry and sustainable success for AgriTech ventures in
Kenya are mostly found within the base layer of the conceptual pyramid. Foundational
ecosystem deficiencies as well as lack of trust, knowledge, resources and ultimately the
ability to adopt new products and services are impeding farmer progress and thus forming
an array of barriers related to market entry and success for the AgriTech ventures aiming
to serve them. In order for AgriTech to succeed and scale, it is vital that a significant
portion of the millions of smallholder farmers are succeeding and scaling as well. In order
for farmers to be able to finance the offerings provided by local AgriTech businesses, they
must be able to successfully grow, harvest and sell their crops/produce.
Beyond these broader ecosystemic and farmer­centric challenges, the findings also sug­
gest that a critical barrier to the sustainable success of AgriTech ventures can be internal.
Specifically, this refers to the development of products and services that are misaligned
with the actual needs and contextual realities of Kenyan smallholder farmers. As high­
lighted by participants like Employee1, a significant issue arises when solutions are im­
ported or designed without a deep understanding of core local farming operations, leading
to poor adoption and venture failure. This was further underscored by Investor3’s asser­
tion that for a product to succeed in this challenging market, its value proposition must be
’undeniable,’ addressing fundamental farmer problems rather than offering only marginal
benefits. Therefore, a lack of deep market understanding leading to inappropriate solution
design constitutes a primary internal barrier impacting AgriTech venture viability.
In essence, the barriers confronting Kenyan AgriTech ventures are twofold. On one hand,
they face substantial external hurdles rooted in the foundational deficiencies of the ecosys­
tem and the adoption capabilities of their target market, the smallholder farmers. On the
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
53
==PAGE:62==
other hand, significant internal barriers can arise from the ventures themselves, partic­
ularly when solutions are developed without a sufficiently deep understanding of local
market needs and contextual realities, leading to offerings that are inappropriate or pre­
mature. What is particularly salient about this latter set of barriers is the agency that ven­
tures possess; unlike the broader systemic issues, challenges related to solution design
can be proactively addressed by the entrepreneurs themselves through diligent market
analysis, continuous validation of their product­market fit, and an iterative approach to
development. Understanding this dual nature of the barriers, both those imposed by the
environment and those inadvertently created by ventures, is crucial. It not only clarifies the
landscape but also sets the stage for exploring how targeted support, such as that poten­
tially offered by I/As, can be structured to help AgriTech startups effectively navigate and
mitigate these multifaceted challenges, which forms the focus of the subsequent problem
statement and discussion.
2. What are the key programmatic elements and support mechanisms for venture support
programs focused on fostering the growth of AgriTech ventures in the Kenyan context?
A primary theme emerging from the findings, crucial for effective venture support program
design in the Kenyan AgriTech context, is the imperative for context­specificity and tailored
support, as strongly articulated by Enabler2 (E2). Having designed and ran multiple pro­
grams, E2’s experience suggests that a ’one­size­fits­all’ approach is ineffective. Instead,
I/As should consider segmenting programs based on the venture’s developmental stage—
clearly distinguishing between, for instance, ’idea­stage’ ventures and those further along,
perhaps having already achieved product­market fit. This stage­specific tailoring should
be complemented by greater sector­specificity, allowing programs to provide highly rel­
evant expertise, such as specialized workshops and mentorship from experts within the
industry. Furthermore, E2 highlighted the importance of early diagnosis of each startup’s
unique challenges to enable focused support, a strategy that inherently points towards the
utility of smaller, more manageable cohort sizes to facilitate such personalized attention.
The value of physical presence was also noted, with participants like Founder5 suggesting
that in­person workshops and bootcamps are preferred for fostering peer­to­peer learning
and relationship building, an aspect potentially diluted in purely online formats.
A significant gap identified by founders like Founder2 is the lack of comprehensive train­
ing on navigating the fundraising landscape, particularly understanding venture capital
(VC) models, the due diligence process, and how to effectively engage different types
of investors. Incorporating robust modules on these topics appears to be a critical pro­
grammatic element, such as having a representative from a VC firm hold a workshop or
a keynote for the program participants.
A critical component for entrepreneurial success across all sectors is the continuous pro­
cess of aligning a venture’s product or service offering with its target market to ensure
a strong, validated match; this dynamic alignment and the resulting state are commonly
referred to as Product­Market Fit (PMF). The imperative for such support is highlighted
by this study’s findings regarding the varied perceptions of PMF difficulty among partic­
ipants and the significant emphasis on its importance by experienced stakeholders like
Employee1. While the specific intensity of validation activities may vary according to a
venture’s developmental stage, the fundamental principle of consistent engagement with,
and iterative learning from, the target market of smallholder farmers remains essential
throughout a startup’s lifecycle. Consequently, I/A programs should provide startups with
robust methodologies for ongoing customer discovery, facilitate direct interactions with
potential and existing end­users to gather critical feedback, and offer structured guidance
54
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:63==
on refining solutions based on these market insights. Such programmatic elements are
vital for de­risking new ventures and reducing the likelihood of developing solutions mis­
aligned with the nuanced needs and operational realities of Kenyan farmers: a common
mistake and significant barrier to achieving sustainable success.
Beyond education, direct access to, or facilitation of, funding opportunities is a key support
mechanism. Founder4’s (F4) positive experience with an accelerator that provided a grant
for further development underscores this need. Accelerators could play a vital role in
connecting startups to early­stage grants or even providing seed funding themselves, as
suggested by E2’s venture builder model.
For hardware­focused or deep­tech AgriTech ventures, access to physical resources is
paramount. Founder5’s (F5) desire for laboratory access through their incubator high­
lights the need for programs supporting such ventures to provide or facilitate access to
essential prototyping and testing facilities.
Drawing from the broader ecosystem challenges, particularly farmers’ limited purchasing
power, a key support mechanism for AgriTech I/A would be to actively assist ventures in
developing and implementing financing models for their end­customers. This could in­
volve the program fostering partnerships between their cohorts and financial institutions
like cooperatives or banks, enabling farmers to adopt crucial products and services, as
suggested by insights from Employee1, Founder3, and Investor2 concerning farmer ac­
cess to finance.
Having answered the core problem statements with our findings, this discussion now com­
pares these insights to the literature from Chapter 3. Exploring consistencies, differences,
and this study’s new contributions to understanding AgriTech entrepreneurship and sup­
port ecosystems in Kenya, highlighting the significance of the results.
6.1.1
Dialogue with Existing Literature
The call by Bruton et al. [14] for research to recognize that diverse market conditions
necessitate tailored entrepreneurial solutions, rather than assuming the universal appli­
cability of Western norms, is strongly supported by the findings of this study. This principle
applies not only to how AgriTech ventures in Kenya must approach their target market to
enhance adoption and overcome contextual barriers but also extends critically to invest­
ment models. Multiple participants in this study noted that the ’Silicon Valley’ venture
capital approach is often not transferable to the Kenyan ecosystem, particularly within
the nuanced AgriTech space. This aligns with the arguments of Hamdan et al. [13], who
similarly suggested that local contexts demand bespoke entrepreneurial strategies and
support systems.
Limited access to finance emerged as the most significant challenge for founders in this
study, a finding consistent with literature identifying it as a common impediment for en­
trepreneurs within EMDEs [22, 24]. The literature review for this study also highlighted
other prevalent EMDE challenges, including infrastructure deficiencies—such as inade­
quate road networks, energy supply, and digital infrastructure [25, 26, 27]—and human
capital constraints, often characterized by fierce competition for talent [28, 30, 32], a con­
straint that was also highlighted by Investor2 in this study. Notably, this research found
that in the Kenyan AgriTech sector, limited access to financing and foundational ecosys­
tem deficiencies represent significant, intertwined challenges shared by both the small­
holder farmers and the AgriTech ventures aiming to serve them.
The challenge of fragmented markets hindering economies of scale, as highlighted by
Chea [33] and other scholars [32], necessitates context­specific market segmentation
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
55
==PAGE:64==
strategies, a profound understanding of localized consumer needs, and the ability to
balance functional features with cost­sensitive value propositions. These observations
resonate strongly with the findings from Kenyan AgriTech, where participant narratives
emphasized ensuring accessibility and affordability over offering complex product fea­
tures potentially out of reach for intended smallholder consumers. This underscores that
a continuous and adaptive focus on achieving Product­Market Fit (PMF) by addressing
fundamental local needs is arguably even more vital for venture success within the de­
manding contexts of EMDEs. However, the findings also suggests that the reasons for
the high levels of market fragmentation is caused by the massive amount of smallholder
farmers, with Enabler2 calling for allowing farmers to fail and for larger farms/businesses
to grow. This view closely resembles that of Coat et al. [6] who call for the enabling of
larger enterprises rather than more entrepreneurs in the African context. Furthermore, the
findings suggest that great importance should be placed on identifying the best farmers
and assisting them in growing their farms and ultimately their business.
The concept of diminished resilience in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies
(EMDEs), as observed by Ruch [34], who noted that actors within these economies are
often less equipped to handle systemic shocks and economic downturns is reflected in
this study’s findings concerning smallholder farmers. The ”Contested Views on Agricul­
tural Development & Ecosystem Actors” category, for instance, revealed critical perspec­
tives from participants like Enabler3 and Enabler4 on the nature of development aid. They
argued that the ’safety nets’ provided by development funds and subsidy programs, while
well­intentioned, may lead to a dependency on external support rather than helping farm­
ers build their own resilience. This over­reliance could, in turn, leave farmers more vul­
nerable to economic shocks, such as a sudden end to aid or the failure of a subsidy
program. Therefore, the critiques from these participants illustrate how certain support
structures might unintentionally contribute to the lack of resilience that Ruch identifies as
a key challenge in EMDEs.
While the literature outlines several opportunities common in EMDEs—such as leapfrog­
ging technologies [36], underserved markets [38, 39], and impact investment [50, 51]—
their manifestation in Kenyan AgriTech is nuanced. M­PESA, for instance, stands as a
prime example of successful technology leapfrogging, acting as a mobile payment system
that facilitates payment plans for smallholder farmers making larger purchases, particu­
larly valuable given limited traditional banking access and variable digital connectivity.
However, attempts at direct technological leapfrogging within the AgriTech product/ser­
vice sector itself have often struggled. Participants such as Employee1, Founder2 and
Founder7 attributed these failures to the critical prerequisite of first establishing and ad­
dressing core farmer operational needs and foundational infrastructure before more ad­
vanced technologies can be effectively adopted.
Underserved markets, typically described in literature as comprising low­income popula­
tions, rural communities, and informal segments often neglected by established firms due
to perceived risks, low margins, and logistical hurdles, are also presented as potentially
fertile ground for tailored, scalable innovations [38, 39]. The findings from this study cat­
egorize Kenya’s smallholder farmers within this definition of an underserved market: it is
perceived as particularly risky by investors like Investor2, profitability is elusive for many
ventures targeting them (as noted by Employee1), and logistical challenges are pervasive
(highlighted by Founder7). However, despite the theoretical potential, the findings also
indicate that a broadly innovative and scalable solution capable of comprehensively cap­
turing this fragmented market has yet to emerge, underscoring the depth of the associated
challenges.
56
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:65==
Participant impressions gathered in this study suggest a high level of mobile phone own­
ership among farmers, particularly smartphones for those engaged in commercial agricul­
ture, primarily used for social networking and communication with off­takers and peers.
This perception appears to diverge somewhat from the 2019 Kenya Population and Hous­
ing Census[1], which reported that 50.4% of farming households owned a mobile phone
at that time. This apparent discrepancy might be attributed to the timeframe difference,
ongoing mobile adoption trends, or the specific segment of the farming population­likely
more market­engaged or technology­inclined—that typically interacts with AgriTech ven­
tures and thus formed the pool from which participants drew their impressions, rather than
a direct contradiction of broader national statistics.
Previous research on Digital Farmer Services (DFS) consistently highlights significant
challenges in achieving widespread and meaningful adoption of digital tools among small­
holder farmers [5, 66]. Abate et al. [7], for instance, attributed failures to scale to a com­
bination of supply­ and demand­side barriers. While Autio et al. [8] recognizes a primary
inhibitor of deeper farmer engagement with digital offerings to be financial constraints as a
result of high input costs, logistical challenges, post­harvest losses and restricted access
to formal credit. These findings collectively suggest that the core challenge is not a lack
of digital solutions, but a mismatch between available services and farmers’ perceived
needs and constraints
The findings of this study on AgriTech in Kenya strongly align with these documented
difficulties, with the base layer of the conceptual pyramid reflecting many of these same
demand­side and systemic barriers. However, where this study offers a distinct contribu­
tion is in identifying a clear strategic direction that emerged from participant insights as
crucial for progressing the sector and fostering greater adoption of technological offerings.
This direction involves a focused development of products and services that directly ad­
dress core farmer operations—specifically, solutions related to soil health, quality seeds,
water access and management, effective storage, appropriate fertilizers, and potentially
extending to reliable energy access. This emphasis on foundational agricultural needs,
repeatedly highlighted by participants, appears to be a critical prerequisite for building trust
and demonstrating value, thereby paving the way for the future uptake of more advanced
digital solutions.
The critical need for incubator and accelerator (I/A) programs to segment ventures based
on their developmental stage, a point emphasized by participants like Enabler2 and Founder2,
finds strong theoretical backing in frameworks such as that proposed by Picken [69].
Picken categorized entrepreneurial ventures into distinct stages—Startup, Survival/Tran­
sition, Scaling, and Maturity/Exit—each characterized by unique operational challenges
and resource requirements. The perspectives gathered in this study underscore the prac­
tical implications of Picken’s model for I/A design in the Kenyan AgriTech context; the call
from participants for differentiated support based on venture maturity directly reflects an
understanding that a ’one­size­fits­all’ program structure is inadequate to address the di­
verse needs encountered at different points in a venture’s lifecycle.
This study’s findings also highlight the demand for I/A support that is highly tailored, both
to the specific sector of the venture and to the pressing individual challenges identified
early in the program. This resonates with the work of Cohen et al. [73], who identify inten­
sive mentorship and strategic guidance as vital programmatic elements within accelerator
programs. The emphasis on personalized support and expert engagement found in this
research aligns with their characterization of effective accelerator interventions. However,
while they list seed capital and co­working spaces as key accelerator offerings, this study
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
57
==PAGE:66==
found that guaranteed seed capital is notably less common in the Kenyan accelerator
context as perceived by participants. This disparity likely reflects differing resource envi­
ronments and dominant accelerator models, with Cohen et al.’s research predominantly
covering North American programs, thus underscoring the need to adapt theoretical mod­
els of I/A support to specific EMDE realities.
The desire expressed by participants, such as Founder5, for I/A programs to facilitate net­
working opportunities and connections to the broader industry aligns with established lit­
erature on the positive ecosystem contributions of such support organizations. Research
by Pauwels et al. [72] and Momanyi et al. [74], for instance, indicates that I/As can
enhance regional entrepreneurial ecosystems, partly by fostering partnerships between
startups and established firms. Furthermore, studies specifically examining the Kenyan
I/A landscape have consistently emphasized that program effectiveness is significantly
enhanced when local contextual factors are deeply considered [10, 74]. This crucial point
from Kenya­specific literature strongly correlates to a central argument of the present
study: that for I/As to effectively lower barriers for AgriTech ventures, their design and
support mechanisms must be profoundly attuned to the unique challenges and opportu­
nities of the local ecosystem.
Founders in this study expressed confusion and frustration regarding the funding land­
scape, with Founder2 stating that ’VC world in Africa is crazy’. This feeling is reflected in
”Access to Funding & Financing” ranking as their main challenge on average. This dif­
ficulty underscores the relevance of Malik Fal’s [68] work, which emphasizes the impor­
tance of founders focusing on ’preparedness for funding.’ Fal explains that such prepared­
ness includes identifying funding sources suitable for a venture’s specific growth stage.
Given Fal’s emphasis on this subject and the knowledge gaps founders expressed, it’s
clear that venture support programs could provide vital assistance in this important area.
Having addressed the guiding problem statements through a detailed interpretation of this
study’s findings, as well as related these findings to relevant existing literature. Thus high­
lighting how the present research contributes to or nuances the established understanding
of entrepreneurship, AgriTech innovation, and venture support within the Kenyan context.
The subsequent section delves into the implications of these findings and the study as
a whole. Exploring its broader significance and offering actionable recommendations for
founders, investors, support programs, and other key stakeholders operating within or
influencing the sector.
6.2
Implications of the Research
Having addressed the guiding problem statements and contextualized the findings within
the relevant academic literature, thereby establishing this study’s contributions and nu­
ances, the focus now turns to the broader significance of this research. This section will
outline the key implications of the research, including its theoretical contributions and prac­
tical recommendations for entrepreneurs, investors, venture­builders, and policymakers
in Kenya’s AgriTech ecosystem.
6.2.1
Theoretical Contributions
The grounded theory methodology adopted in this study facilitates the generation of empirically­
derived theoretical frameworks that explain complex phenomena within specific contexts.
The primary theoretical contribution of this research is the conceptual pyramid model.
This model presents a hierarchical structure of the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem, illustrat­
ing how foundational ecosystem deficiencies and challenges related to smallholder farmer
engagement (the base layer) directly influence the strategic imperatives for solutions and
58
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:67==
the viability of AgriTech ventures (the middle layer). These factors, in turn, delineate the
necessary roles and identify existing gaps for support programs such as incubators and
accelerators (the top layer).
This model offers a structured and context­specific understanding of the interconnected
barriers and operational realities affecting AgriTech ventures in Kenya, moving beyond
isolated challenges to explain their collective impact. While developed from the Kenyan
AgriTech context, the model’s framework—which demonstrates how systemic contextual
factors impact venture strategies and subsequently define support requirements—may
serve as an analytical template for examining similar innovation ecosystems in other
emerging markets or related sectors. Furthermore, the model contributes by theoretically
framing the systemic environment, thereby highlighting the comprehensive understanding
I/As require to design and implement effective support for AgriTech ventures.
6.2.2
Practical Recommendations
To succeed in the Kenyan AgriTech market, entrepreneurs must strategically align their
offerings with the fundamental needs of farmers and identify their most promising cus­
tomer segment. As highlighted by the challenges in building trust, solutions that cater
directly to core farming operations—delivering tangible, immediately visible value, such
as functional irrigation or reliable solar power—are paramount. These types of product
offerings clearly demonstrate efficacy, making them highly effective in engaging farmers.
The key to unlocking sustainable growth and overcoming funding hurdles, lies in identi­
fying and prioritizing ’excellent farmers.’ These are the individuals with the drive and po­
tential to significantly increase their yields and profitability if provided with the right tools
and support, including access to financing for new products and services. By focusing
sales and service efforts on these high­potential farmers, ventures are not just acquiring
customers, but investing in partners who will grow their operations and, in turn, become
loyal, recurring customers for their expanding suite of solutions.
Furthermore, enabling these ’excellent farmers’ to expand their land, invest in critical in­
frastructure, and enhance their productivity creates a powerful ripple effect. Their success
stories can inspire other farmers in the community to adopt innovative practices and fol­
low a similar path to prosperity. This targeted approach not only builds a robust customer
base for promising ventures, but also contributes to a positive ”trickle­down effect,” fos­
tering broader economic development and community well­being.
Venture support programs that are specifically targeting AgriTech ventures should be
acutely aware of these strategic measures, and facilitate for awareness among their par­
ticipants, driving them to ultimately adopt these practices. Furthermore, focus should
extend to developing sustainable business models, ensuring product­market­fit and fa­
cilitating partnerships in order to develop financing models that enable farmers to adopt
impactful AgriTech solutions.
The current approach of providing broad safety nets for all farmers, such as the widespread
distribution of free seeds, subsidized fertilizers, or the provision of ”less­than­optimal
loans” that may not foster long­term viability, should be carefully reviewed. While the
imperative to address food security and prevent starvation is undeniable and a strong
motivating factor for such programs, these interventions may inadvertently hinder the sec­
tor’s evolution. As observed in numerous Emerging Markets and Developing Economies
(EMDEs) that have achieved significant agricultural progress over the last two decades,
a common trajectory involves a degree of centralization into larger, more commercially
viable farming businesses, with a corresponding shift in the labor force towards other
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
59
==PAGE:68==
income­generating activities. The research suggests that some prevailing aid and sub­
sidy models in Kenya, and potentially across other African nations, might be slowing this
necessary structural transformation.
The government and it’s policy makers should be aware of this conundrum, and do their
best to facilitate an environment which encourages farmers who are doing well, and busi­
nesses that are eager to push them in the right direction with innovative products and
services directed at the core farmer operations. While this study is not calling for an end
to all foreign and local aid directed towards farmers and rural communities, it is rather en­
couraging awareness and stating the importance of measuring the impact of the resources
invested in this area. As Founder3 states ”How much social return have we gotten from all
the money invested in agriculture in the last 10 years,” which also relates to the statement
from Enabler3 ”The money is there, but the challenge is getting it into the right hands”
Ultimately, the thoughtful adoption of these interconnected recommendations by all stake­
holders can help pave the way for a thriving Kenyan AgriTech sector. Enabling the farmers
to do well will ultimately enable other stakeholders within the sector to do well.
6.3
Limitations and Directions for Future Research
While this study offers valuable insights into the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem and the role
of support programs, its conclusions should be considered in light of certain methodolog­
ical limitations, which are discussed in full in Chapter 4. Key among these are the qual­
itative nature of the research and the specific characteristics of the participant sample—
predominantly featuring ventures in pre­scaling or seed phases—which means that while
theoretically insightful, the findings may not be statistically generalizable. Furthermore,
the reliance on researcher­generated notes rather than transcripts of recordings, and the
inherent subjectivity in qualitative analysis despite the rigor of grounded theory, are ac­
knowledged, as is the potential for selection bias from the use of snowball sampling.
These limitations and the study’s findings suggest several directions for future research. A
primary area would be to investigate the AgriTech ecosystem from the direct perspective
of smallholder farmers. This study captured farmer­related challenges mainly through
the views of ventures and ecosystem enablers; research centering farmer voices would
provide more detailed insights into their specific needs, adoption barriers, and perceptions
of AgriTech solutions.
The literature review also touched upon theories such as entrepreneurial bricolage, effec­
tuation, and the Composition­Based View as lenses for understanding how entrepreneurs
navigate constraints in EMDEs [59, 57, 56]. While this study did not employ these theories
as its primary analytical framework for the presented results, certain participant narratives
did resonate with their core concepts. For instance, descriptions of founders leveraging
existing community networks or repurposing basic mobile technologies(e.g. Founder7
utilizing WhatsApp as chatbot interface) to deliver services align with the principles of
bricolage in terms of making do with resources at hand(Founder1 utilizing demo farms).
A detailed application of these theories was beyond the scope of the current analysis,
but they may offer valuable frameworks for future research aiming to dissect specific en­
trepreneurial behaviors observed in this context.
60
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:69==
7
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to gain insight into the Kenyan AgriTech ecosystem, identify the crit­
ical barriers confronting startups, and explore how venture support programs (specifi­
cally incubators and accelerators, hereafter I/As) can assist in enabling their success.
To achieve this, a qualitative, grounded research approach was utilized, a method par­
ticularly suited for capturing contextualized insights directly from local entrepreneurs, in­
vestors, and ecosystem enablers. The research was guided by two central problem state­
ments: first, to identify the primary barriers to market entry and sustainable success for
AgriTech ventures in Kenya, and second, to discover key programmatic elements and
support mechanisms for I/A programs focused on enhancing the probability of success
for these ventures.
In addressing the first problem statement, this study revealed that the primary barriers
confronting AgriTech ventures in Kenya are twofold, as illustrated by the conceptual pyra­
mid model developed through the research. Ventures face significant external hurdles
rooted in foundational ecosystem deficiencies and the challenging adoption capabilities
of their target market, the smallholder farmers (base layer of the pyramid). Concurrently,
critical internal barriers also arise from the ventures themselves, particularly when solu­
tions are developed without a deep understanding of local market needs and realities,
leading to offerings with limited demand (middle layer of the pyramid). Furthermore, a
significant operational barrier highlighted by founders was the difficulty in raising funds,
with frustrations expressed regarding the perceived inflexibility of investment approaches
within the local context.
Concerning the optimization of venture support, the findings identified several key pro­
grammatic elements crucial for I/As supporting Kenyan AgriTech ventures. For program
structure, recommendations included segmenting cohorts by venture stage and sector,
engaging mentors with relevant backgrounds, incorporating physical workshops and boot­
camps, and maintaining fixed­term programs culminating in public pitch events. This rec­
ommended structure closely aligns with that of an accelerator model. In terms of program
content, a continuous emphasis on achieving Product­Market Fit, which requires deep
market knowledge and alignment of offerings with farmer demand, was deemed essential.
Furthermore, dedicated training on fundraising and understanding venture capital models,
alongside facilitating partnerships to enable farmer financing for AgriTech products, were
highlighted as critical support mechanisms to help ventures overcome identified financial
barriers
This study’s primary theoretical contribution is the development of a conceptual pyra­
mid model, which offers a structured framework for understanding the complex Kenyan
AgriTech ecosystem, and it’s inherent challenges and interdependencies. Practical con­
tributions have also been identified, offering actionable insights for entrepreneurs, venture
support programs, and other stakeholders. Among these, a key recommendation emerg­
ing from the findings is for AgriTech ventures to strategically identify and prioritize ’ex­
cellent farmers,’ who are individuals with the drive and potential to significantly increase
their yields and profitability when provided with appropriate tools, support, and financing.
This will not only help ventures build a loyal customer base but can also create power­
ful ripple effects, potentially leading to expanded local employment, investment in local
infrastructure as well as inspiring greater adoption of innovative practices within their com­
munities. Ultimately, this research underscores a fundamental reality: AgriTech coexists
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
61
==PAGE:70==
with the realities of agriculture, and the success of agriculture is directly linked to the well­
being and progress of local farmers. Given that over six million farming households in
Kenya face climatic vulnerabilities and other operational hurdles, solutions that service
core farming operations are vital for farmer survival and prosperity. Consequently, for
AgriTech ventures to achieve sustainable success, the farmers they aim to serve must
also be empowered to succeed.
62
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. Statistical Report. Also available as PDF: ISBN
978­9914­9651­7­9. Website: https://www.knbs.or.ke. Nairobi, Kenya: Kenya Na­
tional Bureau of Statistics, 2022. ISBN: 978­9914­9651­8­6.
[2]
Hannah Reed et al. The promise of digital farmer services. Dec. 2024. URL: https:
//blogs.worldbank.org/en/agfood/the-promise-of-digital-farmer-services.
[3]
Bethi S K and Sagar Surendra Deshmukh. “Challenges and Opportunities for Agri­
Tech Startups in Developing Economies”. In: International Journal of Agriculture
Sciences 15.9 (Nov. 2023), pp. 12661–12666. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/375696436.
[4]
D Paquette et al. “Agricultural technology ecosystems in East Africa ­ Taking stock
in Kenya, Rwanda, and Uganda”. In: FAO eBooks (Feb. 2023). DOI: https://doi.
org/10.4060/cc3828en.
[5]
AgTech Beanstalk. State of the Digital Agriculture Sector. Harnessing the Potential
of Digital for Impact Across Agricultural Value Chains in Low­ and Middle­Income
Countries. Nov. 2023. URL: https://www.beanstalkagtech.com/d4aglmic.
[6]
Alex Coad et al. “Does Africa need entrepreneurial ecosystems thinking?” In: The
Journal of Technology Transfer (May 2025). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-
025-10213-x.
[7]
Gashaw T. Abate et al. “Digital tools and agricultural market transformation in Africa:
Why are they not at scale yet, and what will it take to get there?” In: Food Policy
116 (Apr. 2023), p. 102439. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2023.102439.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306919223000374.
[8]
Antti Autio et al. “Constraints for adopting climate­smart agricultural practices among
smallholder farmers in Southeast Kenya”. In: Agricultural Systems 194 (Dec. 2021),
p. 103284. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103284.
[9]
Ashish Kumar Isher. “Driving Innovation and Economic Development: The Role of
Business Incubators in Agri­Tech Start­Up Ecosystems”. In: Economic Affairs 69.2
(June 2024). DOI: https://doi.org/10.46852/0424-2513.3.2024.7.
[10]
Leah Barto et al. Entrepreneurial Ecosystems in Agriculture: The Impact of Suc­
cessful Founders and How Decision Makers Can Support Them. Sept. 2021. URL:
https://www.lemelson.org/wp- content/uploads/Entrepreneurial- Ecosystems- in-
Agriculture.pdf.
[11]
Silviu Florin Rata et al. “Fueling the Growth Engines: A Cross­Country Study on
Business Accelerators’ Role in Startup Sustainability”. In: Sustainability 16.24 (Dec.
2024), p. 11049. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/su162411049.
[12]
Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: strategies
for qualitative research. 1967. URL: http://www.sxf.uevora.pt/wp-content/uploads/
2013/03/Glaser_1967.pdf.
[13]
Allam Hamdan et al. “Entrepreneurship Growth in Emerging Economies: New In­
sights and Approaches”. In: Journal of Sustainable Finance Investment 12.1 (July
2021), pp. 1–12. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/20430795.2021.1944750.
[14]
Garry D. Bruton, David Ahlstrom, and Krzysztof Obloj. “Entrepreneurship in Emerg­
ing Economies: Where Are We Today and Where Should the Research Go in the
Future”. In: Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 32.1 (2008), pp. 1–14. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6520.2007.00213.x.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
63
==PAGE:72==
[15]
Zhe Cao and Xianwei Shi. “A systematic literature review of entrepreneurial ecosys­
tems in advanced and emerging economies”. In: Small Business Economics 57
(Mar. 2020). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-020-00326-y.
[16]
Kathy Charmaz. “The Search for Meanings – Grounded Theory”. In: Rethinking
Methods in Psychology. Ed. by Jonathan A. Smith, Rom Harré, and Luk Van Lan­
genhove. London: Sage Publications, 1996, pp. 27–49.
[17]
Marek Dabrowski. “Emerging Markets and Their Role in a Global Economy”. In:
Entrepreneurial Finance in Emerging Markets (2020), pp. 3–17. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-46220-8_1.
[18]
S. Tamer Cavusgil. “Advancing knowledge on emerging markets: Past and future re­
search in perspective”. In: International Business Review 30.2 (Jan. 2021), p. 101796.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2021.101796.
[19]
IMF. GDP based on PPP, share of world. 2025. URL: https://www.imf.org/external/
datamapper/PPPSH@WEO/OEMDC/ADVEC/WEOWORLD.
[20]
Theodore A. Khoury and Ajnesh Prasad. “Entrepreneurship Amid Concurrent Insti­
tutional Constraints in Less Developed Countries”. In: Business Society 55.7 (July
2016), pp. 934–969. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0007650314567641.
[21]
Tarun Khanna and Krishna G. Palepu. Why Focused Strategies May Be Wrong
for Emerging Markets. July 1997. URL: https://hbr.org/1997/07/why- focused-
strategies-may-be-wrong-for-emerging-markets.
[22]
AKANINYENE UDO. Regulatory Compliance and Access to Finance: Implications
for Busines Growth in Developing Economies. Feb. 2024. URL: https : / / www .
researchgate.net/publication/378506641_REGULATORY_COMPLIANCE_AND_
ACCESS _ TO _ FINANCE _ IMPLICATIONS _ FOR _ BUSINESS _ GROWTH _ IN _
DEVELOPING_ECONOMIES.
[23]
dela Rama and BM Dalton. “The Visible Arm of Government ­ Corporate Gover­
nance of South Korean Chaebols”. In: Uts.edu.au (Dec. 2014). DOI: http://hdl.
handle.net/10453/33981. URL: https://opus.lib.uts.edu.au/handle/10453/33981.
[24]
Briter Bridges. Africa Investment Report 2024. 2025. URL: https://intelligence.briter.
co/research/resources/101bff5c-371f-4dc7-b674-6f9920b11905.
[25]
Matías Herrera Dappe and Mathilde Lebrand. “Infrastructure and Structural Change
in Africa”. In: The World Bank Economic Review 38.3 (Mar. 2024), pp. 483–513.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/wber/lhae002.
[26]
Xolani THUSI and Victor H MLAMBO. “The Effects of Africa’s Infrastructure Crisis
and its Root Causes”. In: International Journal of Environmental, Sustainability, and
Social Science 4.4 (July 2023), pp. 1055–1067. DOI: https://doi.org/10.38142/
ijesss.v4i4.671. URL: https://www.journalkeberlanjutan.com/index.php/ijesss/article/
download/671/646.
[27]
César Calderón and Luis Servén. Infrastructure and Economic Development in Sub­
Saharan Africa. Sept. 2008. URL: https : / / papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ?
abstract_id=1265484.
[28]
Marco Vivarelli. “Globalization, Structural Change and Innovation in Emerging Economies:
The Impact on Employment and Skills”. In: Econstor.eu (2018). DOI: http://hdl.
handle.net/10419/185309. URL: https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/185309.
[29]
Omolara Campbell and Esther Aderinto. “Human Capital Development and Labour
Market Outcomes in Africa: Evidence from Sub­Saharan African Countries”. In:
Journal of Economics and Sustainable Development (Mar. 2022). DOI: https://
doi.org/10.7176/jesd/13-6-05.
64
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:73==
[30]
Edward Perekebina Agbai and Ngozi U Okechukwu. “Tackling Talent Acquisition
Challenges in Nigerian IT Sector: Problems and Prospects”. In: 01.01 (June 2024),
pp. 01–09. DOI: https://doi.org/10.70315/uloap.ulmdi.2024.0101001.
[31]
Pankhudi Kumari, Shilpi Sarna, and Pradeep Bhardwaj. “Bottleneck to Success:
Case Study on Scaling Up Issues of Indian Start­ups”. In: Lloyd Business Review
(July 2024), pp. 1–14. DOI: https://doi.org/10.56595/lbr.v3i2.31.
[32]
Yuting Qiu and Yiyang Fan. “Rethinking Global Innovation Strategy: Emerging Mar­
ket Perspectives”. In: Business and Management Research 2.3 (July 2013). DOI:
https://doi.org/10.5430/bmr.v2n3p33.
[33]
Ashford C Chea. “Global Marketing: Emerging Market Economies’ Challenges, Op­
portunities and Effective Marketing Strategy for Success”. In: Business and Eco­
nomic Research 13.4 (Nov. 2023), pp. 103–103. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5296/
ber . v13i4 . 21482. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication / 375795024 _
Global_Marketing_Emerging_Market_Economies’_Challenges_Opportunities_and_
Effective_Marketing_Strategy_for_Success.
[34]
Franz Ulrich Ruch. Prospects, Risks, and Vulnerabilities in Emerging and Develop­
ing Economies: Lessons from the Past Decade. Mar. 2020. URL: https://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3553575.
[35]
Jaideep Prabhu. “Frugal innovation: doing more with less for more”. In: Philosoph­
ical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences 375.2095 (May 2017), p. 20160372. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.
2016.0372.
[36]
S. Jugessur and J.L Hamel. “Is Technology Leap￿Frogging Possible for Africa?
Dominant Technologies in Africa in 2025”. In: African Development Review 7.2
(Dec. 1995), pp. 199–208. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8268.1995.tb00077.x.
[37]
Ahmad Hassan Ahmad, Christopher Green, and Fei Jiang. “Mobile money, finan­
cial inclusion and development: A review with reference to African experience”. In:
Journal of Economic Surveys 34.4 (May 2020), pp. 753–792. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1111/joes.12372.
[38]
Joshua K Ault. “An institutional perspective on the social outcome of entrepreneur­
ship: Commercial microfinance and inclusive markets”. In: Journal of International
Business Studies 47.8 (Oct. 2016), pp. 951–967. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1057/jibs.
2016.18.
[39]
Marleen Wierenga. “Uncovering the scaling of innovations developed by grassroots
entrepreneurs in low­income settings”. In: Entrepreneurship Regional Development
(July 2019), pp. 1–28. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/08985626.2019.1640478.
[40]
C.K. Prahalad and Stuart L. Hart. “The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid”. In:
Strategy+Business 26 (Jan. 2002). Available at: https://www.strategy-business.com/
article/11518, pp. 54–67.
[41]
Dennis A. Pitta, Rodrigo Guesalaga, and Pablo Marshall. “The quest for the fortune
at the bottom of the pyramid: potential and challenges”. In: Journal of Consumer
Marketing 25.7 (Oct. 2008). Ed. by Dennis Pitta, pp. 393–401. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1108/07363760810915608.
[42]
Mike W. Peng and Peggy Sue Heath. “The Growth of the Firm in Planned Economies
in Transition: Institutions, Organizations, and Strategic Choice”. In: The Academy
of Management Review 21.2 (1996), p. 492. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/258670.
URL: http://innovation-research.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/peng-enterprise-
soviet.pdf.
[43]
Mike W. Peng et al. “The growth of the firm in (and out of) emerging economies”.
In: Asia Pacific Journal of Management 35.4 (Oct. 2018), pp. 829–857. DOI: https:
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
65
==PAGE:74==
/ / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10490 - 018 - 9599 - 3. URL: https : / / personal . utdallas . edu /
~mikepeng/documents/Peng18_APJM_L%20V%20W%20S_online.pdf.
[44]
William R. Shaffer. Modern Diasporas in International Politics. London: Croom Helm,
1986.
[45]
Jean­Marie Nkongolo­Bakenda and Elie Virgile Chrysostome. “Engaging diaspo­
ras as international entrepreneurs in developing countries: In search of determi­
nants”. In: Journal of International Entrepreneurship 11.1 (Dec. 2012), pp. 30–64.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10843-012-0098-1.
[46]
Xiaohua Lin. “The diaspora solution to innovation capacity development: Immigrant
entrepreneurs in the contemporary world”. In: Thunderbird International Business
Review 52.2 (Mar. 2010), pp. 123–136. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/tie.20319.
[47]
Adam Welker and Helper Zhou. “Determinants of Venture Investment in Emerging
Markets”. In: Journal of Emerging Market Finance (Dec. 2024). DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1177/09726527241301197.
[48]
Aybegüm G. Belbağ et al. “The new middle class in emerging markets: How values
and demographics influence discretionary consumption”. In: Thunderbird Interna­
tional Business Review 61.2 (May 2018), pp. 325–337. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1002/tie.21980.
[49]
Terry Sicular, Xiuna Yang, and Björn Gustafsson. “The Rise of China’s Global Middle
Class in an International Context”. In: China World Economy 30.1 (Jan. 2022),
pp. 5–27. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/cwe.12400.
[50]
Nikolaos Apostolopoulos et al. “Entrepreneurship and the Sustainable Develop­
ment Goals”. In: Entrepreneurship and the Sustainable Development Goals 8 (Sept.
2018), pp. 1–7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1108/s2040-724620180000008005.
[51]
UN Joint SDG Fund. 2022 – Global Context and SDG Impact. Jan. 2022. URL:
https://annualreport.jointsdgfund.org/2022-global-context-and-sdg-impact/.
[52]
Zheng Tao, Shuning Gao, and Beijia Jin. “Industry­Level Impact of Environmental,
Social and Governance (ESG) Factors for Alternative Investment”. In: Financial En­
gineering and Risk Management 5.6 (2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.23977/ferm.
2022.050615.
[53]
Amir Amel­Zadeh and George Serafeim. Why and How Investors Use ESG Infor­
mation: Evidence from a Global Survey. Rochester, NY, July 2017. URL: https :
//papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2925310.
[54]
OECD. Global Outlook on Financing for Sustainable Development 2021. Nov. 2020.
ISBN: 9789264344860. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/e3c30a9a- en. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1787/e3c30a9a-en.
[55]
UNCTAD. World Investment Report 2024. 2024. URL: https://unctad.org/publication/
world-investment-report-2024.
[56]
Ted Baker and Reed E. Nelson. “Creating Something from Nothing: Resource Con­
struction through Entrepreneurial Bricolage”. In: Administrative Science Quarterly
50.3 (Sept. 2005), pp. 329–366. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2189/asqu.2005.50.3.329.
URL: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.2189/asqu.2005.50.3.329.
[57]
Saras D. Sarasvathy. “Causation and effectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from
economic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency”. In: Academy of Management
Review 26.2 (Apr. 2001), pp. 243–263. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2001.
4378020. URL: https://journals.aom.org/doi/abs/10.5465/amr.2001.4378020.
[58]
Yadong Luo and John Child. “A Composition­Based View of Firm Growth”. In: Man­
agement and Organization Review 11.3 (Sept. 2015), pp. 379–411. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1017/mor.2015.29.
66
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:75==
[59]
Greg Fisher. “Effectuation, Causation, and Bricolage: A Behavioral Comparison of
Emerging Theories in Entrepreneurship Research”. In: Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 36.5 (Sept. 2012), pp. 1019–1051. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1540-6520.2012.00537.x. URL: https://www.effectuation.org/wp-content/uploads/
2017/06/Fisher-2012-Entrepreneurship_Theory_and_Practice-copy.pdf.
[60]
KNBS. 2024­25 Kenya Census of Agriculture ­ Pilot Report ­ Kenya National Bureau
of Statistics. Jan. 2024. URL: https://www.knbs.or.ke/reports/2024-25-kenya-census-
of-agriculture-pilot-report/.
[61]
Samiappan Senthilnathan et al. “Impact of Climate Variability on Maize Yield Under
Different Climate Change Scenarios in Southern India: A Panel Data Approach”. In:
Earth 6.1 (Mar. 2025), p. 16. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/earth6010016.
[62]
USDA. Kenya Corn Area, Yield and Production. Apr. 2025. URL: https://ipad.fas.
usda.gov/countrysummary/default.aspx?id=KE&crop=Corn.
[63]
Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. NATIONAL AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION
REPORT. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 2024. URL: https://www.knbs.or.
ke/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/National-Agriculture-Production-Report-2024.pdf.
[64]
Central Bank of Kenya. Agriculture Sector Survey of January 2024 | CBK. 2024.
URL: https://www.centralbank.go.ke/2024/02/09/agriculture- sector- survey- of-
january-2024/.
[65]
Dennis Karugu Gichuki. et al. “Assessing Preparedness for Smart Farming and
Technology Adoption among Kenyan Farmers”. In: International Journal of Research
and Innovation in Applied Science IX.VIII (2024), pp. 548–555. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.51584/ijrias.2024.908048.
[66]
Ellie Turner, Hanadi Al­Saidi, and Riya Yadav. Digital Agriculture Services in Kenya:
The Farmer Perspective. Aug. 2024. URL: https://60decibels.com/insights/digital-
agriculture-kenya/.
[67]
Briter Bridges. State of AgTech Investment in Africa 2024 | AgBase. 2024. URL:
https://agbase.briter.co/research/resources/state-of-agtech-investment-in-africa-
2024?utm_source=disrupt-africa&utm_medium=website&utm_campaign=agtech-
2024.
[68]
Malik Fal. “Accelerating Entrepreneurship in Africa”. In: Innovations: Technology,
Governance, Globalization 8.3­4 (July 2013), pp. 149–168. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1162/inov_a_00193.
[69]
Joseph C. Picken. “From startup to scalable enterprise: Laying the foundation”. In:
Business Horizons 60.5 (Sept. 2017), pp. 587–595. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bushor.2017.05.002. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0007681317300605.
[70]
Susan Cohen and Yael V. Hochberg. Accelerating Startups: The Seed Accelerator
Phenomenon. Rochester, NY, Mar. 2014. URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2418000.
[71]
Susan Cohen et al. “The design of startup accelerators”. In: Research Policy 48.7
(Sept. 2019), pp. 1781–1797. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.04.003.
[72]
Charlotte Pauwels et al. “Understanding a new generation incubation model: The
accelerator”. In: Technovation 50­51 (Apr. 2016), pp. 13–24. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.technovation.2015.09.003.
[73]
Susan L. Cohen, Christopher B. Bingham, and Benjamin L. Hallen. “The Role of
Accelerator Designs in Mitigating Bounded Rationality in New Ventures”. In: Ad­
ministrative Science Quarterly 64.4 (July 2018), pp. 810–854. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1177/0001839218782131.
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
67
==PAGE:76==
[74]
Joseph Segera Momanyi et al. “The Influence of Business Incubation on Perfor­
mance of Start­Ups in Nairobi City County”. In: European Journal of Business and
Management Research 8.2 (Apr. 2023), pp. 244–249. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
24018/ejbmr.2023.8.2.1712. URL: https://ejbmr.org/index.php/ejbmr/article/view/
1712.
[75]
Benjamin L. Hallen, Susan L. Cohen, and Christopher B. Bingham. “Do Accelerators
Work? If So, How?” In: Organization Science 31.2 (Mar. 2020), pp. 378–414. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2019.1304.
[76]
Alisa Sydow et al. “Entrepreneurial Workaround Practices in Severe Institutional
Voids: Evidence From Kenya”. In: Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice (June
2020), p. 104225872092989. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1042258720929891.
[77]
Hongjun Guan et al. “Research on Innovation Behavior and Performance of New
Generation Entrepreneur Based on Grounded Theory”. In: Sustainability 11.10 (May
2019), p. 2883. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11102883.
[78]
Nuno Calheiros­Lobo et al. “Internationalization of Small and Medium­Sized Enter­
prises: Best Practices and the Emerging Concept of Foreign Champion, an Empir­
ical Investigation”. In: Administrative Sciences 14.8 (July 2024), pp. 159–159. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.3390/admsci14080159. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-
3387/14/8/159.
68
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:77==
A
Appendix A
A.1
Interview Guide
1. What is the name of your startup and what year were you founded?
2. What is the product/service you offer/sell?
3. What problem do you aim to solve?
4. What stage is your startup currently in (ideation, prototype, early traction, scaling,
etc.)?
5. Who are your target customers, and how do you currently reach them?
6. Have you leveraged any existing distribution networks or partnerships to reach farm­
ers?
7. What has been your experience dealing with farmers?
8. What has been your primary source of funding so far?
9. Have you applied for grants or participated in accelerators/incubators? If yes, what
was your experience?
10. What financing options do you believe are most effective for AgriTech startups?
11. How did you build your team?
12. What kind of support do you think an accelerator/incubator should provide for AgriTech
startups?
13. What do you see as the biggest barriers to scaling your business in Kenya and
beyond?
14. If you could change one thing about the AgriTech startup ecosystem in Kenya, what
would it be?
15. Rank the challenges
16. Is there anything we haven’t discussed that you think is crucial for understanding
the challenges of AgriTech startups?
A.2
Ranked Challenges
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.1: All Rankings ­ Ranked Challenges by Participants
70
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
==PAGE:79==
Empowering Kenyan AgriTech Startups
71
==PAGE:80==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Skylab
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk/
