==PAGE:1==
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End
Graphics Hardware
Julian Dominik Sempruch-Szachowicz
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
Julian Dominik Sempruch-Szachowicz
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Julian Dominik Sempruch-Szachowicz
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Julian Dominik Sempruch-Szachowicz
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over a period of five months at the Institute of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science of Technical University of Denmark, DTU in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng in Computer Science
and Engineering. It was supervised by J. Andreas Bærentzen, Professor, Institute of
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science
and Computer Graphics.
Julian Dominik Sempruch-Szachowicz - s230211
Signature
Date
ii
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
12/06/25
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project involves the research of CPU optimizations of a proprietary terrain mesh
grid generation pipeline, as well as a comparison with an alternative mesh-less approach
based on height maps. To evaluate optimizations, the output of frame-by-frame mesh
generation in runtime for low-end market devices using different approaches are com-
pared quantitatively in terms of performance (processing ticks) and memory utilization
(bytes).
The baseline is a proprietary algorithm (based on Marching Triangles) which accepts two-
dimensional height field input (a mask created by painting on a 2D plane), and generates
a single-object output mesh. In runtime, the mesh is generated every frame which can
lead to performance and memory issues closer to the upper bounds of terrain sizes. The
final mesh is used both for terrain visual and physics engine interactions.
Optimizations are proposed to the proprietary algorithm which include data parallelization,
thread parallelization or subdivision of tasks (mesh chunking) to achieve better work dis-
tribution on low-end devices. Further research is made with attention to solutions offered
by the proprietary game engine Unity, within which the baseline algorithm was initially im-
plemented. Alternatives are proposed in the form of ray marching rendering techniques
which offload the creation of the terrain to graphics processing.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgments
Andreas, for his guidance and direct feedback.
Arendse, for the warm Triband welcome.
Karolina, for being my rock and keeping me sharp.
Krecik, for reminding me to go for a walk (with him).
iv
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Origin and goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Theory background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related work
7
2.1
Survey into adjacent topics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Existing solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Method
15
3.1
Optimizations to CPU-based algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Creating terrain with GPU shader programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Implementation & results
27
4.1
Project details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
CPU optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
GPU-based alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5
Discussion
63
5.1
Summary of the two methodologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.2
Considerations on the determining the correct tool for a given task . . . . . 64
5.3
Final verdict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Bibliography
69
A Appendix
73
A.1 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.2 Implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years the industry for video games and interactive media has seen a continual
rise in the investment into Live Service Games (also known as Games-as-a-Service) [1].
These are products which offer a continuous stream of content, often in the format of
a subscription, therein deriving profit over time rather than through retail transactions.
A frequent feature of such games is User Generated Content (UGC), identified as an
essential part of the evolving video game industry [2]. UGC can drive game longevity
and player engagement at little cost to the game’s ongoing maintenance and content
creation. This format often takes the form of custom-made game levels, modes or variants
of game world objects [2] which in effect boils down to two key elements of implementation:
efficient data management and robust algorithms for transforming that data back into the
game world. Data management is usually the more clearly defined of the two, whereas
user-facing algorithms which can take a large range of non-moderated input through an
equally large range of possible user devices require care, attention to quality and fool-
proofing. Such algorithms are in-game editor tools or generators which are used by the
player to create content. Often games are made to run on a variety of devices ranging
from low-end (smartphones or hand-held consoles) to high-end (desktop computers with
dedicated graphics cards), therefore the implementations of these algorithms must be
versatile enough to support the performance capabilities of whatever target platform they
are deployed to. In a more general sense, the implementation of user generated content
incurs an additional development cost of making dynamically generated content function
in the challenging context that is runtime. This means that not only the domain of resource
usage is broad, but so is the complexity of user expectation.
1.1
Origin and goals
This thesis will focus on terrain mesh generation for the use of player-created game lev-
els. Terrain generation has long been a staple in game world design via various methods.
These methods can be classified into two categories - those that are computed in the
computer’s main processing unit (synchronously on a single thread or asynchronously on
multiple threads) and those that are computed - rendered - in the graphics processing
unit at the final step of the game’s current frame. Hereafter, these classifications will be
referred to as CPU-based and GPU-based. Specifically, CPU-based refers to polygoniza-
tion algorithms such as Marching Cubes, whereas GPU-based refers to grid-mesh vertex
displacement with graphics programs or mesh-less ray-marching/rendering.
The commonality between these methods is the input data which can be defined as a
scalar height field (height map). Users will use editors to paint onto terrain with brushes
which can lower or raise terrain, thus modifying the terrain’s height map texture for later
terrain re-generation.
The thesis has been prepared on the basis of an industry use case in collaboration with
Triband [3], a Copenhagen-based games studio which is primarily invested in making
live ops games. One of their projects is What The Car? [4], a comedy game which
employs a significant amount of User Generated Content in the form of player-made levels
which can be shared amongst the player community. The game has been created with
technological simplicity as a core principle which is in line with the game’s accessibility
distribution strategy of deploying to as many platforms as possible. The game is presently
deployed to low-end target platforms, and the project actively investigates opportunities
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
1
==PAGE:10==
for distribution expansion which includes other least-performant platforms. At the moment,
the low-end platforms on which the game is available (and further referred to in this thesis)
are Apple smartphones, starting at the iPhone X.
The inclusion of low-end platforms brings the need to re-evaluate current implementations
of algorithms and improve performance bottlenecks to increase quality of the user expe-
rience on all available platforms. One such bottleneck was identified in the user-facing
level editor used by players to generate content in What The Car?. More specifically, the
pipeline for terrain mesh generation which players use to draw terrain in runtime with the
use of a brush. The root-cause of the investigation is quite simply we have noticed a sig-
nificant drop in frame rate while creating terrain in the level editor. An additional difficulty
of the terrain editor source code is the substantial investment required before research
into optimization can begin. An obstacle created by circumstance that is the source code
having been ported from an earlier project, created by persons no longer associated and
implemented with little regard for future handling (meaning obfuscated and difficult to un-
derstand). A trifecta of properties which is commonly referred to as Technical Debt (and
more precisely Code Debt [5]) in engineering lingo.
Figure 1.1: The view inside the game engine with wireframe overlay (Left). A player’s view in the
What The Car? level editor as they paint one of the available terrain layers (Right).
While the performance concerns of this specific feature in the game have been on the
development team’s radar for some time, it remains tolerably functional. Paired together
with the high level of entry due to its complexity, the upgrade or refactoring of the current
system has routinely been delayed to the far end of the project backlog. On the other
hand, this makes it a good opportunity for robust investigation into not only optimizations
in the current framework (CPU-based algorithms), but to also observe possible GPU-
based alternatives and how they compare against a staple implementation of terrain in
game worlds. With this, the goal of this thesis is to present the results of experiments
in methodologies of generating terrain for games, while abstracting the specific example
of the What The Car? project to answer a common dilemma in game development (and
software engineering for that matter) that is what is the value of investigating alternative
solutions to status quo implementations, with tangents into discussions about how Code
Debt can affect the decision-making process in software development strategies.
2
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:11==
Triband’s What The Car? is a project made in the Unity game engine [6], therefore the
implementation investigation done as part of this thesis will also be done inside the Unity
ecosystem. Where relevant, practices unique to the Unity framework will be discussed to
provide additional context for broader understanding.
1.2
Structure of the thesis
The thesis will generally follow a parallel structure for most of the chapters. Investiga-
tion into CPU-based optimizations and GPU-based alternatives will remain in their own
sections until Discussion will be used to examine the differences between the two method-
ologies directly. The list below outlines the content of each following chapter:
2. Related work
This chapter is dedicated to a discussion about the existing solution for the terrain
mesh generation pipeline in the What The Car? project as well as a survey of related
research and topics utilized in the preparation of this thesis.
3. Method
This chapter describes the concepts behind the introduced optimization and GPU-
based alternatives. These two categories of terrain implementations will remain in
separate sections.
4. Implementation & results
This chapter illustrates the technical configuration of the investigation project, imple-
mentation of algorithms and results. The results are divided into quantitative results
(primarily for CPU-based results) and qualitative (primarily for GPU-based results).
Results are presented together with implementation details to keep the subject mat-
ter closely coupled.
5. Discussion
This final chapter summarizes the results in a discussion which attempts to address
the goal of the thesis, that is the feasibility of alternative solutions to terrain genera-
tion via polygonization. Future work is also discussed which presents possible next
steps out of scope for this thesis.
1.3
Theory background
This section is provided at the reader’s discretion as a short refresher for the primary
concepts this thesis is based on. These are more general concepts in the domain of
Computer Graphics which do not warrant further discussion in Related work.
1.3.1
Family of Marching Cubes algorithms
Marching Cubes [7] is an algorithm which transforms a defined iso-surface into a triangle-
based mesh (polygonization). Commonly used for generating terrains or stylized algo-
rithmic structures in games.
The algorithm is well suited for creating meshes where
gaps, tunnels or empty spaces inside the mesh are required. Discrete scalar fields are
used as input in the Marching Cubes algorithm. The algorithm will iterate through the
grid (march cubes), possibly parallelized, and check the configuration of each cube as it
passes through the field. The cube grid cells are also referred to as voxels (volumetric
elements). The vertices of a grid cell determine the configuration - a vertex can either be
inside or outside of the terrain surface.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.2: Possible unique configurations of a grid cell. In total there are 256 configurations which
are rotations or symmetries of the 15 unique cases [8].
Marching Cubes can be generalized for any dimension or uniform grid. In two-dimensional
space the algorithm takes the form of Marching Squares and in the case of a uniform trian-
gle grid Marching Triangles (also referred to as contouring). Together these are referred
to as the family of Marching Cubes algorithms.
While Marching Cubes is a powerful tool used to this day for polygonization in various use
cases, the algorithm remains constrained by the limitations of mesh grids - which primarily
is the impact of grid resolution. Higher resolutions create smoother polygons which can
be a desirable effect, but come at a cost of memory and processing. On the other hand,
lower resolutions result in a stylized low-poly effect which may be beneficial for specific
artistic use cases.
Figure 1.3: Various formations of the same iso-surface across a range of different grid sizes [9].
1.3.2
Data locality - making use of caching
Targeting memory efficiency and implementing optimizations for data locality bring great
performance improvements due to the widening gap between modern processors and
memory speeds. A substantial part of memory efficiency is data caching, where memory
blocks are stored in the processor cache. Designing implementations around the con-
cept of storing and using data in local memory blocks avoids bottlenecks on data bussing
between the processor and memory. Programs which display good use of memory man-
agement are referred to as exhibiting good locality.
1.3.3
Scalar distance fields
Scalar fields are an association of scalar numbers to an 𝑛-dimensional space. A common
usage of scalar distance fields in the domain of Computer Graphics is the definition of
surfaces in two- or three-dimensional space. Within the domain they may be referred to
4
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:13==
as signed distance fields, and the sign of the distance indicates the relative direction to the
surface, that is inside or outside. Typically such fields are constrained to be continuous
which allows the reliable computation of the gradient at any given point. To make use
of such fields in rasterization and rendering pipelines, polygonization algorithms may be
used to transform the field at a given granularity into a mesh grid, or ray-based rendering
techniques could be used to directly render a surface. Ray marched distance fields are
better suited to representing miniscule details, as each ray is responsible for intersecting
with terrain no matter how detailed or unusual the shape may be.
An important distinction should be made for the differences between two-dimensional
distance fields and three-dimensional distance fields. Both dimensional variants of a field
may be used for a three-dimensional surface. A three-dimensional field will provide the
absolute distance to the nearest point of the surface, whereas a two-dimensional field will
only provide the distance to the surface in a plane. This introduces constraints on the
complexity of algorithms for rendering these fields, as two-dimensional distance fields are
agnostic to the true terrain distance in three-dimensional space.
1.3.4
Height maps
Another format for storing surface information are height maps, which are commonly two-
dimensional textures. Instead of distances, height maps record heights in the form of
orthogonal offsets from a surface. This is done in texture space and can be applied to
any topological shape, the offset is always in the direction of the surface normal.
Height maps are scalar fields, but conversely to a two-dimensional distance field, they
provides an offset to a known surface in the vertical dimension (surface normal), rather
than providing a distance to an implicit line in a plane which can be a slice of a three-
dimensional surface. In this thesis the terms height field and height map are used inter-
changeably.
1.3.5
Ray marching
Ray marching is a rendering technique used to generate an output render frame often
used in conjunction with data-based signed distance fields. A ray for each fragment of
the frame is marched along a line until the distance to the object is within a valid threshold.
The distance is measured via comparisons with the input distance field. The scalar field
can also be used to generate normals of the surface for lighting calculations.
Using a constant uniform step is inefficient. Some optimizations can be introduced to
decrease the workload, such as using Lipschitz continuity in the case of implicit surfaces.
This way the ray reaches the surface more quickly but does not overshoot. An alternative
option, when ray marching height fields instead of a distance field, is the use of binary
search for exact intersections with a surface at lower cost (less ray steps), also referred
to as bisection.
Instead of using the fullscreen viewport of a camera for the ray creation, a simplified
bounding polygon can be created and rendered with the rasterization pipeline to constrain
the ray creation to a smaller part of the screen, closer to the ray intersection points. These
can be cubes, spheres, or any other shape which can be easily created to contain the
surface inside of it. Additionally, ray renders may write to the frame z-buffer which would
allow the mixing of renders together with the output of the rasterization pipeline [10].
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:15==
2
Related work
The chapter starts with the results of a survey into adjacent subjects to lay the groundwork
for the proposed methodologies. As this thesis project has a concrete and defined start-
ing point, the following section provides a thorough explanation of the existing solution
implemented in the What The Car? terrain mesh editor. This is to provide context as well
as present the baseline methodologies currently used in the industry project.
2.1
Survey into adjacent topics
2.1.1
Optimizations for polygonization algorithms
The domain of polygonization and optimization of the related algorithms is a domain of
interest in Computer Graphics and especially for its use in runtime settings. To make im-
plementation simpler for polygonization implementations, engineers may generate mesh
geometry data without inter-connectivity, opting for a triangle soups format of data instead.
This relaxation allows the polygonization problem to be embarrassingly parallel which in
turn permits the application of parallelization for performance upgrade. This pertains to
the family of Marching Cubes algorithms.
The Marching Cubes family is particularly well suited for data parallelization and use
with Single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) concepts such as loop vectorization. An
implementation of data-parallelized Marching Cubes utilizing GPU Compute buffers in a
browser environment (WebGPU) [11] uses exclusive scanning and stream compaction to
produce good results. These two methods are used to support parallelized writing to a
shared voxel output data structure for unknown (at the time of execution) output sizes.
In higher-level threaded frameworks this would be replaced with the availability of paral-
lelized list or vector data structures with dynamic sizes.
Implementations of thread parallelization can be nuanced in terms of thread counts, as
shown by the authors of Parallelized Generation and Smoothing of 2D Contour Lines [12].
At larger numbers of threads the performance boost decreases compared to a lower num-
ber of threads used for parallelization with a comfortable peak at 16 threads for 16 hyper-
threaded cores, having noted a decrease due to context-switching costs at 32 threads.
2.1.2
Optimizations in the context of game engines
Unity’s scripting language is C# paired with the Roslyn compiler (part of Mono) [13, 14].
Substantial benefits in performance are driven by applying generic knowledge of behind-
the-scenes behavior and functioning of the tools used in the implementations of algorithms
(backed by anecdotal investigations such as Exploring performance issues and patterns
in C# by analyzing open-source projects [15]). This subsection will survey improvements
introduced by usage of modern technology and avoiding common performance pitfalls in
source code hot spots.
The careful use of performance-friendly data structures whenever possible in high traffic
functions can greatly increase the efficiency of the algorithm implementations. Memory
management can take up to a third of the processing time in algorithms [16] which is a
direct result of a frequently forgotten aspect of data structures in high-level programming
frameworks in the cost of convenience, that is the cost of memory management overhead.
The additional work expended on conversion can bring positive effects to the net execu-
tion time. Such an improvement is noted in Performance Analysis of Span Data Type in
C# Programming Language [17], where the use of the unmanaged Span array-like data
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
7
==PAGE:16==
structure over the managed List data structure. In this context management refers to
the responsibility over memory management where unmanaged memory has less safe-
guards and no automated garbage collection, but its lifetime must be controlled by the
programmer.
Investments in the development of memory efficient implementations has been a fruitful
endeavour for Unity Technologies with the introduction of the Unity Burst compiler [18].
The compiler based on SIMD concepts is an optional module for the game engine which
introduces impressive performance increases at the cost of abandoning the modern con-
veniences of the C# programming language, for a high performance subset referred to as
High Performance C# - HPC# [19, 20]. While the Unity game engine makes this available
as a convenient plug-and-play module, the behind-the-scenes is possible to replicate in
other frameworks. At its core the Burst compiler uses memory aliasing and loop vector-
ization to optimize data-heavy code compilation into native code. These two properties of
the compilation process target large loops which are simplified to vectorized data trans-
formations from a source to destination memory block. Loops can be vectorized which
transforms loops into chunks executed at once. Additionally, the use of unmanaged data
structures improves execution times due to data locality and avoiding the overuse of un-
necessary memory reads. Internally, the Burst compiler itself uses the LLVM compiler
[21] which is a modern and efficient code optimizer.
The benefits of data locality are thoroughly described in the chapter Memory and data
locality [22] of Programming Massively Parallel Processors as well as successful cases
of data locality improvements described in Refactoring for data locality [23] and Improving
data locality with loop transformations [24].
2.1.3
Ray marching methods for height map terrain rendering
Parallax mapping [25] is an alternative to normal mapping used in texture mapping to gen-
erate more detail in flat surface geometry by recreating the parallax motion effect based
on a height map. The technique uses ray marching in GPU fragment shaders to step
into the scalar field created by the height map. The rays originate at the actual geometry
surface and march in the outward direction from the viewer’s position. Intersections occur
with the scalar field that is suspended inside of the geometry. As the output is dependent
on the angle between the surface and the viewer, the surface appears to have far more
details than just the two triangles it is made of. Similar techniques exist which utilize the
same concept such as Relief mapping [26] which supports shadowing.
Polygon-assisted ray marching [27] introduces the use of bounding meshes to improve
the performance of ray marching by constraining the area of interest. Both the start and
end of the geometry are stored into reference textures which are ultimately used in the
ray marching implementation to determine the ray origin and limit. The primary strength
of polygon-assisted ray marching is avoiding full screen renders which are costly due to
the employment of all available screen fragments and a potentially distant viewer position
used as the ray origin. Polygon-assisted ray marching brings the benefits of both the
rasterization pipeline and the rendering workflow, wherein meshes are transformed to
their screen positions and then used for ray-marching in that constrained space. A pre-
render of the same mesh can be used to write the positions of the backface fragments to
a shared texture which become ray marching terminal positions.
Due to the nature of these ray marching techniques there is a large domain for optimiza-
tions and improvements which can be introduced to implementations for the sake of per-
formance. Maximum mipmaps [28] introduces the use of mipmaps on height maps as a
means of organizing ray marching into a tree-like structure. Each mipmap stores the max-
8
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:17==
imum height value for its level of detail, which can be beneficially used to quickly march
over larger sections of the height map by computing only a single comparison. This tech-
nique is also introduced in Quadtree Displacement Mapping with Height Blending [29].
A common staple in game engines is to provide physics and collision modules which
are based on mesh data for calculating intersections. The use of ray marching rendered
terrains requires the use of custom collision logic to determine intersections in runtime.
A common solution is to read the height map at a texture position corresponding to the
given position in world space, which is aptly implemented in VoxelSpace [30] for terrains
rendered using CPU-based voxel space. More complex physics interactions can be sim-
ulated using multiple effectors on a single object which track the height of the terrain at
specific relative offsets, and are used to apply gravity at those offsets thereby providing
motion to the object without direct mesh-to-mesh interactions. An example of this method
is provided in the implementation of buoyancy effectors for water waves with vertex off-
setting in Stylized Water Shader [31].
2.2
Existing solution
The terrain mesh generation pipeline is part of the level editor ecosystem referred to as
GolfTerrain - which immediately demonstrates the existence of Code Debt and remnant
nature of this module, as it was ported directly from a previous Triband project that is
What The Golf?. Parts of the ecosystem have been modified over the development and
maintenance phases of the What The Car? project, but the implementation at the core of
the pipeline remains as it was created over five years ago.
The GolfTerrain ecosystem is responsible for the generation of terrain via engine editor
tools or user-generated content. Terrain generation mainly concerns the visible terrain
mesh, but is invariably connected to other systems including physics (meshes) or shader
properties (materials).
While the terrain generator suffices for start-time generation, the pipeline reaches a perfor-
mance ceiling in the context of runtime level creation, that is frame-by-frame regeneration
and hydration of the terrain mesh (and terrain dependents/down-streams). The flow of a
single frame of terrain update is presented in Figure 2.1.
TerrainCar (Player controller)
RemixerTerrain (Level editor controller)
GolfTerrain (Game object instance of terrain)
MeshUtil (Library for mesh generation)
Player input: draw terrain
Trigger refresh of terrain
Generate a new mesh
Provide prepared mesh with post-processing
Trigger baking of physics mesh
Figure 2.1: Script flow chart for a single game frame of updating terrain via the level editor in What
The Car?.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
9
==PAGE:18==
The entry point to dynamic runtime terrain generation class is the player controller. The
player uses the terrain car to mark where terrain should be added or removed from a
given terrain layer. When the player is actively painting terrain, the system updates every
terrain layer as drawing one layer also removes any other terrain layer for the same brush
position.
The focus for the analysis of this thesis is the MeshUtil library, which the GolfTerrain
script refers to for the actual mesh generation.
2.2.1
Mesh generation library
The mesh generation is less a library and more a factory of a single entry point, and
can be cleanly divided into three steps which are explained in the list below. Their sub-
components are further depicted in Figure 2.2. The essential inputs for this pipeline are
a two-dimensional scalar field (height map) and the dimensions of the desired mesh grid.
1. Contour creation - transforming the height map data into surface geometry data via
an atypical implementation of the Marching Triangles algorithm.
2. Post-processing - transformations and additions to the surface data to create the
desired terrain geometry.
3. Mesh creation - stitching all the geometry data together using Unity’s Mesh API.
Marching Triangles
Computes surface geometry
Post-processing
Redistribute topology of the surface
Append a bevel and skirt geometry to the surface mesh
Create mesh
Generate output mesh data for use with the Unity game engine
Surface geometry (vertices, triangles and edges)
Final terrain geometry data
Height map data, terrain parameters
Unity mesh object
Figure 2.2: Script flow for generating the terrain mesh object.
2.2.2
Marching Triangles with Reference Rotation
The central component behind the contour of the terrain mesh is the implementation of
the Marching Triangles algorithm, which opts to use a shifting pivot instead of the more
common case-lookup approach, referred to as Reference Rotation in this thesis. With
Reference Rotation, the lookup table is forgone and replaced with nested loops which dy-
namically build the cell triangle case by rotating a pivot around the cell corners. Triangles
are constructed from the perspective of that corner. The output of this part of the pipeline
is flat surface geometry data in an arbitrary two-dimensional plane.
10
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:19==
Initially, the square grid is transformed into a uniform triangle grid by offsetting vertices
horizontally in opposite directions on odd and even rows. Using triangle grids is beneficial
as ambiguous saddle cases do not exist and the creation of triangles is streamlined. The
four corners are stored in memory and if needed, the references are cycled so that the
pivot (at index zero) starts in the obtuse angle of the parallelogram formed by the two
triangles. If none of the corners of the current cell meet the iso-value threshold criteria, the
cell is skipped and the next cell is considered. A pivot shift is the swapping of references
in a cycle between the four corners of the cell.
(1, 1)
(2, 1)
(3, 1)
(1, 2)
(2, 2)
(3, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 3)
(3, 3)
(0.75, 1)
(1.75, 1)
(2.75, 1)
(1.25, 2)
(2.25, 2)
(3.25, 2)
(0.75, 3)
(1.75, 3)
(2.75, 3)
Figure 2.3: Uniform square to uniform triangle grid transformation by horizontally offsetting ver-
tices. Gray dashed line represents the division of the marching square cell into the two triangles.
Note skew direction for odd and even rows.
1 to 0
2 to 1
0 to 3
3 to 2
Figure 2.4: Example of a pivot shift around the marching cell.
Once the pivot is in the position of first triangle, the pivot will shift around the vertices of
that triangle (reference rotation on three vertices instead of four) until the pivot returns to
the starting point. Then, the pivot is shifted by two positions around the cell, to the oppo-
site corner, to repeat the process for the second triangle of the cell. If all three vertices
of the triangle meet the threshold criteria, the entire triangle is appended to the surface
geometry data. Similarly, if no vertices apply, then the triangle is skipped entirely - a pos-
sible scenario if only the other triangle’s outer most vertex fulfills the threshold condition.
While shifting inside a triangle, the other two possible cases are evaluated. These are
based on the number of vertices inside the triangle which meet the threshold criteria.
1. One vertex - once the pivot shifts to that vertex, a triangle is appended to the surface
geometry data. The triangle is created from that vertex and two interpolated vertices
along the edges from that vertex.
2. Two vertices - once the pivot shifts to the vertex which does not fulfill the threshold
condition, two triangles are appended to the surface geometry data. The triangles
are initially in superposition, formed from the polygon of the two opposite vertices
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
11
==PAGE:20==
and two interpolated vertices along the edges to the pivot vertex. The triangles are
resolved in such a way that maximizes surface distribution amongst them. Triangle
superposition is revisited in Method, where a resolution strategy is proposed.
In both of the cases above, the indices of edge vertices are also recorded to maintain a list
of the actual contour - these are always the edges formed from the interpolated vertices.
Interpolated vertices
⃗𝑣𝑖are created by finding the interpolation factor from the inverse
mapping of the two iso-values ℎ𝑖at the corner vertices, shown below in Equation 2.1.
⃗𝑣𝑎𝑏= 𝑡⃗𝑣𝑎+ (1 −𝑡) ⃗𝑣𝑏,
where 𝑡= theshold −ℎ𝑎
ℎ𝑏−ℎ𝑎
(2.1)
pivot
midpoint 1
midpoint 2
interpolated 1
interpolated 2
Figure 2.5: Example of interpolated vertices
calculation and triangle creation (red) in the
case of the pivot vertex being the only vertex
satisfying the threshold criteria.
The mid-
point vertices are used to look up the indices
for the interpolated vertices via a map.
A standard approach to creating mesh data
with any variant of the Marching Cubes algo-
rithm is to create triangle soup meshes, which
offer convenient implementation in the form of
append-only geometry. In effect, vertices are
duplicated up to six times for inner triangles.
Inter-connected mesh data offers memory lev-
ity, which is often expected by runtime raster-
ization pipelines such as Unity’s graphics en-
gine. This comes at the cost of increased gen-
eration complexity due to book-keeping for ver-
tex index lookup.
In the implementation de-
scribed above this is handled by using a dy-
namic map of a vertex to its index. To avoid
issues with floating point number calculations,
interpolated vertex indices are keyed by mid-
point vertices.
bitmask 0111
Odd row
b0010
b0100
b0001
b1000
Even row
b0010
b0100
b0001
b1000
bitmask 0101
b0010
b0100
b0001
b1000
b0010
b0100
b0001
b1000
Figure 2.6: Examples of generated triangles (red) for specific configurations of threshold condi-
tions (green where satisfied). Note the dashed lines which represent superposition which is then
resolved into two triangles with best distribution of surface area.
12
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.7: Outputs of the topology distribution algorithm (from left to right, no smoothing, one
iteration, and two iterations). Note that most of the visual effect is achieved by the first iteration.
Figure 2.8: In-game example of bevel (highlighted) and skirt (brown material) geometry.
Post-processing
Surface geometry creation with Marching Triangles in the terrain generation pipeline ef-
fectively transforms terrain data into surface mesh representation, whereas the post-
processing of that geometry data further transforms it into the final terrain mesh used
in-game. While not critical for the use case of the thesis, the post-processing steps will
be explained to provide context for the constrains on the proposed methodologies.
The first step after creating the surface geometry data is topology redistribution. The
algorithm moves vertices towards the center of the shapes that they belong to. In order of
precedence these shapes are (1) vertices of edges towards the center of the edges they
are a part of, and (2) vertices of triangles towards the center of triangles they are a part of.
These two operations are exclusive. The result is a smoothing effect on the contour and
better distribution of surface geometry across triangles, creating more uniform topology.
The redistribution is applied twice, the results of which can be seen below in Figure 2.7.
The final step is appending wall cliff geometry around the edges of the terrain in the form of
a bevel and a skirt. These are one-quad outlines extruding from the edges of the surface
geometry, shown in Figure 2.8.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:23==
3
Method
This chapter is separated into two sections. The first describes proposed changes to
the baseline implementation of the Marching Triangles algorithm used in What The Car?,
while the second will discuss the possible alternatives using shader programs to emulate
terrain without the use of complex polygonization and mesh generation techniques.
3.1
Optimizations to CPU-based algorithms
Before generalizing and applying optimizations it is beneficial to refactor the baseline al-
gorithm into the more recognizable variant of Marching Triangles, that is with the use of
lookup tables. The use of lookups replaces pivot shifting with a direct resolution of the
triangle case.
3.1.1
Introducing memory efficiency
A considerable part of the execution run time is automated memory management and
the garbage collection which comes with it, therefore engineers have incentive to intro-
duce lower level data structures and manual memory management in performance-critical
code.
A common pitfall is the overuse of managed hashmap data structures (also known as
dictionaries) which have large overhead on data fetching and memory pointer resolutions.
To make use of data locality, maps should be converted to one-dimensional arrays which
enables data caching blocks of memory. This makes data accessing considerably faster
as parts of the lookup array is available in the processor’s local cache register. In the case
of the Marching Triangles algorithm where mesh inter-connectivity may be of interest, a
map is used to cache the index of a vertex by that keyed by its hash value.
Instead of using costly hash computations, vertex indices can instead be stored in a one-
dimensional array by transforming their two-dimensional grid indices. Marching Triangles
benefits from densely packed data as each iteration of a marched cell uses local data
and looking up existing vertices for neighboring cells entails reading from spatially local
data. This maximizes the chance of copying an entire relevant block of memory into the
processor’s registers. Given width of the grid, the index conversion is defined as
𝑖1D = 𝑥+ 𝑦⋅width
𝑥= mod(𝑖1D, width)
𝑦= ⌊𝑖1D/width⌋
Map
vertex
index
hash([1, 2])
37
hash([2, 2])
42
...
Array
vertex
index
1 + 2 ⋅width
37
2 + 2 ⋅width
42
...
Figure 3.1: Example transformation of a map keyed by vectors to an array of integers.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
15
==PAGE:24==
In Marching Triangles, tracking of the interpolated vertices is crucial to construct intercon-
nected mesh geometry. To fit this into the array paradigm, it is simply enough to double
the resolution of the grid and to store the midpoint vertices on odd grid indices. The lookup
indices must be unscaled and without the addition of row offsetting. The indices take the
form of
𝑖1D-lookup = 𝑥lookup + 2width ∗(𝑦lookup);
𝑥lookup = 2𝑥from + {𝑥to −𝑥from
case index is odd
0
otherwise
𝑦lookup = 2𝑦from + {𝑦to −𝑦from
case index is odd
0
otherwise
(2, 2)
242
(4, 2)
244
(6, 2)
246
(2, 4)
482
(4, 4)
484
(6, 4)
486
(2, 6)
722
(4, 6)
724
(6, 6)
726
(3, 2)
243
(5, 2)
245
(3, 4)
483
(5, 4)
485
(3, 6)
723
(5, 6)
725
(2, 3)
362
(2, 5)
602
(4, 3)
364
(4, 5)
604
(6, 3)
366
(6, 5)
606
(3, 3)
363
(5, 5)
605
(3, 5)
603
(5, 3)
365
(0.75, 1)
(1.75, 1)
(2.75, 1)
(1.25, 2)
(2.25, 2)
(3.25, 2)
(0.75, 3)
(1.75, 3)
(2.75, 3)
Figure 3.2: Example of triangle grid (left) point transformations to lookup index space (right) along
with their 𝑖1D index (width = 60).
Case index refers to the array of possible triangle cases which are stored in a static ar-
ray to also avoid using maps for this implementation. An odd index in the triangle case
represents a midpoint vertex.
Triangle cases
Bitmask index
Triangle indices
b000
null
b001
5, 0, 1
b010
1, 2, 3
b011
5, 0, 2, 3
b100
3, 4, 5
b101
3, 4, 0, 1
b110
1, 2, 4, 5
b111
0, 2, 4
b010
2
b001
0
b100
4
1
3
5
Table 3.1: Possible triangle case indices (left). Illustration of indices distribution (right). Green
indices are normal grid indices, whereas blue indices are midpoint indices.
The cases with four indices are quads with two triangles in superposition. The exact
resolution depends on the topology of the two triangles. Superposition resolutions can
also be stored in a lookup array similarly to the triangles cases, as shown in Figure 3.2.
16
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:25==
Superposition resolution
Condition
Case indices as triangles
Example resolution
No superposition
tri 1
0, 1, 2
0
1
2
Pair of even vertices are closer
tri 1
0, 1, 2,
tri 2
0, 2, 3
1
2
0
3
Pair of odd vertices are closer
tri 1
3, 1, 2,
tri 2
0, 1, 3
1
0
3
2
Table 3.2: Triangle superposition resolution cases.
The final remaining problem to solve, is that the default values of a zero-initialized array
are also valid index values (zero). This can be solved by offsetting indices by one in the
lookup table, and then reverting their value after a retrieval. With this, a value of zero in
the array effectively means empty (no vertex), which is equivalent to a checking if a hash
key is absent in a map.
Capacity heuristics
While the use of dynamically sized collections (such as lists or vectors) is convenient for
the implementation of Marching Triangles where the size of the mesh cannot be checked
beforehand, dynamic resizing of collections can be a costly operation which requires ad-
ditional processing cycles. A resize may entail a full copy of the collection to another
section of memory.
The alternative is to preallocate a block of memory based on assumptions of the size
requirements of the algorithm. Most programming languages support setting the capacity
of these dynamic collections which immediately allocates the expected memory. The
maximum heuristics for the capacities of the collections is the following (for Marching
Triangles):
max(vertices) = 2width ⋅2height
(3.1)
max(triangles) ≤width
2
⋅height
2
⋅(12 + 2) ⋅3
(3.2)
max(edges) ≤2(width
2
⋅height
2
⋅6 + 2width + 2height)
(3.3)
The vertices heuristic max(vertices) is twice the grid resolution as it includes midpoint ver-
tices. The triangles heuristic max(triangles) is derived from a checkerboard of alternating
height values. This creates a geometry with the maximum number of single-vertex gaps
that are surrounded by double triangle case resolutions, as shown in Figure 3.3. In this
case, the exact number of triangles depends on the parity of each of the terrain bound di-
mensions, but is always bounded from above by the product of the gap count and the sum
of gap triangles (12) and the filler padding triangles (2). The edges heuristic max(edges)
is also derived from the maximum-gap configuration, that is the sum of edges per gap (6)
and perimeter edges.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Marching Triangles configuration for the largest output geometry data in terms of tri-
angles and contour edges, generated by a checkerboard height field.
The use of maximum heuristics is excessive in most cases, as height fields will rarely uti-
lize all of the allocated memory in cases other than specific configurations. A reasonable
approach is to set the capacity of the collections to half of the maximum heuristics. In
common implementations of dynamic data structures, the collection’s buffer is doubled
when its capacity is breached. Thus, with when using half of the maximum, reaching the
capacity would results reallocation to the maximum heuristic capacity, at the cost of one
block copy operation. A smarter approach would be to store the count of the specific ge-
ometry property and, on the next execution of the modification algorithm, use a relative
heuristic based on the maximum expected change size, for example
h(triangles) = 𝑛triangles ⋅factor
(3.4)
or
h(triangles) = 𝑛triangles + max increase
(3.5)
3.1.2
Thread parallelization
There are two approaches to thread parallelization for the Marching Cubes family. The
first is to maintain a single terrain mesh, but have the mesh data be generated in threaded
chunks into a common output buffer. The second option is to redesign the pipeline, so
that the chunks become separate objects entirely. This enables rehydration of only the
necessary chunks which are modified in runtime, thus cutting the cost of a holistic mesh
update.
The Marching Triangles algorithm inherently supports chunking without the need for ad-
ditional changes - the difference between contour edges and internal edges is clearly
defined, therefore neighboring chunks will align without the need for additional restructur-
ing, as long as the edges of those chunks are placed at the same positions.
18
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:27==
Generating geometry in parallel
As Marching Triangles is classified as embarrassingly parallel, the algorithm can be easily
parallelized with the use of threads. Using threads, the output can be relaxed to create
triangle soup geometry data with no triangle inter-connectivity. This comes at the cost
of duplicated vertices at every triangle. Batches can be executed for these chunks in
appropriate thread sizes. Batch sizes depend on the hardware available on the device.
In theory, the number of threads should match the number of available cores, both physical
and logical.
Mesh inter-connectivity could be supported internally for a thread’s triangles, but would
require additional processing after the threads have finished to stitch these chunks to-
gether.
Generating separare objects in parallel
Treating chunks as separate objects has large ramifications on the runtime performance
of terrain modification at the cost of a slightly larger execution time during initialization due
to the overhead of creating new logical objects for each separate chunk. During runtime,
only the specific chunks which correspond to the indices of the height field modification
must be rehydrated, thus avoiding unnecessary processing for unmodified parts of the
terrain. This is equivalent to the concepts behind chunked level of detail mesh regener-
ation. An additional benefit to maintaining multiple chunks as separate game objects are
their integration with performance-friendly features provided by game engines such as
occlusion culling.
Given a set of grid indices 𝑥, 𝑦for which the height field had been modified, a chunk (of
size chunksize) index is found by
𝑥chunk = ⌊
𝑥
chunksize⌋
𝑦chunk = ⌊
𝑦
chunksize⌋
𝑖chunk = 𝑥chunk + ⌊𝑦chunk ⋅
width
chunksize⌋
(3.6)
The chunk size should be selected according to the use case of the terrain, and it should
be larger than the maximum possible area size of a modification made by the user. For
simplification chunks are square, but their dimensions could also be scaled to the terrain
bounds aspect ratio.
An array of terrain chunks is created which can be indexed by the one-dimensional chunk
index 𝑖chunk from Equation 3.6. While iterating the set of modified indices, another set
is used to check if the chunk had already been rehydrated. This is presented in Algo-
rithm 3.1.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
19
==PAGE:28==
Algorithm 3.1 Rehydrating chunks.
1: function UPDATECHUNKS(indices)
2:
rehydrated ←{ }
3:
for (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈indices do
4:
𝑥chunk ←⌊
𝑥
chunksize⌋
5:
𝑦chunk ←⌊
𝑦
chunksize⌋
6:
𝑖chunk ←𝑥chunk + ⌊𝑦chunk ⋅
width
chunksize⌋
7:
if 𝑖chunk ∉rehydrated then
8:
rehydrated ←rehydrated ∪{𝑖chunk}
9:
REHYDRATECHUNK(𝑖chunk)
10:
end if
11:
end for
12: end function
3.1.3
Data parallelization
The Marching Triangles algorithm is data-centric. The transformation is from one collec-
tion of data into another of relative size. For each data point (or fixed slice of data points)
in the height field array, the same operation is performed to generate an output. This is
a data parallelization problem particularly well-suited for Single instruction, multiple data
architecture.
The cell marching loops can be vectorized to perform transformations of the height field
data into geometry data in batches without the overhead of managing multiple threads
for parallelization. Additionally, implementations of memory overlapping and overriding
memory aliasing checks for read and writes to memory blocks which are near each other
can provide a substantial increase to data transformation performance as the overhead
of memory bussing is minimized. At the core of this concept is the use of the processor’s
caches to store data locally and to perform data transformations before returning it to
memory.
3.2
Creating terrain with GPU shader programs
The terrain data is provided as a byte array of the two-dimensional height field sampled
at some grid granularity. The same data can be transformed into a height map texture
with the same dimensions as the grid. The added benefit is that the transformation into a
texture also pre-computes the in-between values of the sampled grid points with bilinear
interpolation. The next subsections propose methodologies for rendering terrain from a
height map with stylistic constrains.
The main constraint is that the terrain follows a binary masking rule - at a given position
there either is terrain, or there is no terrain (see Figure 3.4). This introduces difficulties
with the further capabilities of common terrain processing which depend on the use of
surface derivatives, because stepped (discontinuous) surfaces have undefined gradients
at the discontinuity, which limits the ability to generate surface normals. This will be further
discussed in Customization of ray-marched terrains.
3.2.1
Vertex displacement
A simple and highly performant approach to rendering height maps is the use of the vertex
shader program to displace vertices according to a height map. Assume a uniform mesh
grid that lays on a plane with the texture coordinates (uv) uniformly distributed over the
surface of the grid. The transformation of a vertex follows the rule
20
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.4: Comparison of height maps. Left: byte field as a texture. Right: the same texture,
stepped at the threshold value.
⃗𝑣out =
⃗𝑣in + texture(uvin) ⋅⃗𝑛,
where
⃗𝑛is the normal to the plane.
The transformation is executed for every vertex in the rasterization pipeline, therefore the
output is highly dependent on the granularity of the mesh grid used for this operation. In
other words, the height map is only sampled as the positions of the mesh grid vertices.
3.2.2
Parallax mapping
Parallax mapping is more nuanced than vertex displacement. The entire operation occurs
inside of the fragment shader program, thus only a single quad (of two triangles) in a
mesh is enough to create the desired effect. This ray marching technique depends on the
transformation of the camera-fragment direction into tangent space, wherein the marching
takes place. The ray’s plane position (𝑥𝑦) are equivalent to the height map texture space,
therefore the height of the ray’s position can be directly compared to the height map value.
The ray marches until a threshold is encountered. The ray march of a ray ⃗𝑟𝑖is defined by
⃗𝑑tangent = TBN ⋅
⃗𝑑from camera
⃗𝑟0 = [𝑢
1
𝑣]
⃗𝑟𝑖= ⃗𝑟𝑖−1 + step ⋅−⃗𝑑tangent ⋅aspect
(3.7)
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
21
==PAGE:30==
TBN is the tangent-bitangent-normal matrix which can be computed from the matrix prod-
uct of the world view direction and the world tangent
⃗𝑡, normal
⃗𝑛and bitangent
⃗𝑏, like
so
TBN =
⎡⎢⎢
⎣
𝑡𝑥
𝑏𝑥
𝑛𝑥
𝑡𝑦
𝑏𝑦
𝑛𝑦
𝑡𝑧
𝑏𝑧
𝑛𝑧
⎤⎥⎥
⎦
The variables aspect and step control the ray itself. The former is used to scale the step
to match the dimensional scaling of the texture, whereas the latter is used to control the
granularity render. Larger steps will be more performant at the cost of detail at the edges
of the terrain. Both of these can be pre-applied to
⃗𝑑tangent to avoid the computation of two
unnecessary products for every step. The ray is marched up to a given amount of steps
upon which it is treated as having missed the terrain, or the ray is stopped earlier if the
ray’s height passes the terrain’s threshold. Additionally, the ray can be stopped at the
edges of the texture space (0 ≤𝑟𝑥≤1 ∧0 ≤𝑟𝑧≤1).
The effect is dependent on the angle of viewing incident to the quad surface. Rays which
start at a direction almost parallel to the surface of the quad will travel miniscule vertical
distances, which in turn will squash the rendered visual. This can be alleviated by nor-
malizing the direction vector to its vertical component
⃗𝑑−1
𝑦
⋅
⃗𝑑, effectively ensuring that a
single step travels the same vertical distance regardless of the viewing angle.
Since this technique is still embedded inside of the rasterization pipeline, the rays begin
at the surface of the quad. Therefore, the rendered terrain is suspended inside of the
geometry - visible from above the quad, but the illusion is dispersed when viewed from
the side or when entering the geometry.
3.2.3
Polygon-assisted ray marching for terrain rendering
The best of both Vertex displacement and Parallax mapping can be combined in the form
of polygon-assisted ray marching. The vertex shader program is utilized to create the
constraining polygon by displacing vertices to the heights of the terrain and the fragment
shader program utilizes ray marching similar to Parallax mapping, but in world- or model-
space since the bounding polygon contextualizes the start position for each ray. The
rendered terrain is still suspended inside of the geometry, but as the geometry is more
relevant to the actual shape of the terrain, the observer may view the cliff walls from the
side at a minimum distance away from the rendered terrain.
In the vertex program the vertices are offset similarly as before, but must allow more space
between the rendered terrain and the bounding mesh as a tight bound could result in clip-
ping of the rendered terrain. This can be achieved by setting a lower threshold for vertex
displacement condition, but this approach may result in uneven and unpredictable bound
padding due to differences in the gradient of the height map or due to the sample sizing.
Another approach is to generalize the condition of the vertex displacement - instead of
checking only at the position of the vertex, also check the threshold condition at the posi-
tions of its neighbors within a unit texel distance (t𝑢, t𝑣in the two texture space dimensions
respectively). This effectively ensures that the boundary at the terrain’s height will always
be further outwards than the rendered terrain within the distance of one texel. The vertex
transformation is defined by
22
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:31==
C =
⎡⎢⎢
⎣
texture(𝑢−t𝑢, 𝑣−t𝑣)
texture(t𝑢, 𝑣−t𝑣)
texture(𝑢+ t𝑢, 𝑣−t𝑣)
texture(𝑢−t𝑢, t𝑣)
texture(t𝑢, t𝑣)
texture(𝑢+ t𝑢, t𝑣)
texture(𝑢−t𝑢, 𝑣+ t𝑣)
texture(t𝑢, 𝑣+ t𝑣)
texture(𝑢+ t𝑢, 𝑣+ t𝑣)
⎤⎥⎥
⎦
⃗𝑣out =
⃗𝑣in + {
⃗
up
if ∑C𝑖𝑗≥1
⃗0
otherwise
,
where t𝑖is the texel distance in texture dimension 𝑖.
Within the fragment shader program the ray is marched in model space. Other than this,
the algorithm is similar to Equation 3.7 described in Parallax mapping. This space proves
to be the easiest to handle due to the ease of model-to-texture space conversion, that
is uv = [ ⃗𝑟𝑥
⃗𝑟𝑧]
𝑇
⋅[resolution−1
𝑢
resolution−1
𝑣]
𝑇
. The world position and world direction
(from the camera) of the fragment are transformed to model space with the use of a world
to model matrix.
As previously, the ray marches on until it either reaches the maximum number of steps,
the ray position’s vertical component is below the floor or it is above the terrain at that
position. In this method there are two variables, the step size and the step count. The
number of ray steps as well as the step size have a large effect on the output of the
algorithm. Small step sizes provide better details on edges, but require a larger number
of iterations (steps) which incur larger execution costs.
The halting conditions for ray marched terrain are described below, together with that
fragment’s output.
1. Return transparent, if the ray is outside of terrain map (bounding box)
hchorizontal ←¬( ⃗0 < ⃗𝑟< [𝑢max, 𝑦terrain, 𝑣max]).
2. Discard, if the ray has reached the maximum number of steps hcsteps ←𝑖>= steps.
3. Return color, if the ray has intersected with the terrain hcterrain ←texture(uv) > 0.
The difference between a discard and transparency is that when discarding, the shader
program will be repeated for any fragments behind the discarded fragment of the same
mesh. Transparency will result in accepting that the fragment is invisible, and only render
any other mesh’s fragments behind the transparent one.
3.2.4
Optimizations of ray-marched terrain
Two immediate solutions are available for the optimization of ray-marching techniques,
both of which aim to decrease the maximum number of ray steps reached by any given
warp in the GPU execution cycle. These are Bisection and Backface bounding, discussed
in the following sections.
Another facet of ray marching optimization concern is the use of fragment discarding (also
known as clipping). Discarding is a costly operation as the processing unit has to repeat
the program for the previously discarded fragment for fragments which were assumed to
be obstructed. The use of the discard instruction also disables optimizations in shader
compilation based on the assumption that obstructed fragments will never be observed
(for opaque materials). Therefore, performance-friendly implementations using the dis-
card instruction should favour early discards for layered fragments.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
23
==PAGE:32==
Bisection
Bisection refers to applying the principles behind binary search to quickly converge to the
terrain intersection point. This method grants the benefits of both having a large step size
and small step count. There is an upper bound on the step size that is smallest possible
width of terrain which is best set manually for a specific use case.
An additional variable thresholdbisection is included to control the convergence of the rays
and thus the detail of the render. This defines the step size at which the ray is determined
to have intersected adequately. The rays now step over initially large steps and should the
threshold condition change over a step, the ray direction is negated and step size halved.
The ray will converge to the edge of the terrain and the fragment color rendered once
the step size is diminished to a value lower than or equal to the bisection step threshold.
Transforming the linear step ray march from Equation 3.7, the bisection march iterator is
defined in Equation 3.8.
Δ𝑖+1 = ℎ𝑖−ℎ𝑖−1
step𝑖+1 = {−1
2step𝑖
if Δ𝑖+1 ≠0
step𝑖
otherwise
⃗𝑟𝑖+1 = ⃗𝑟𝑖+ step𝑖+1 ⋅
⃗𝑑
(3.8)
halting condition: hcbisection ←step𝑖≤thresholdbisection
The terrain halting condition hcterrain (described in Polygon-assisted ray marching for ter-
rain rendering halting conditions point 3) is replaced by the bisection halting condition
hcbisection.
Backface bounding
Polygon-assisted ray marching not only provides the benefit of constraining a ray’s origin
close to the terrain, but can also provide information about where a ray should be ter-
minated, that are the fragment positions of the back faces of the bounding polygon. A
pre-render can be configured to render the distances of the backface fragments positions
to an intermediate texture, which is then used in the terrain rendering shader program to
establish the terminal points of marched rays. It is sufficient to use the camera-fragment
distance, as this value can be reasonably normalized to a single output channel of the
intermediate texture.
Care should be taken to decide the render order (z-write) of the back faces. While both
the greater than and less than comparison operations are valid, they provide different re-
sults in the optimization process. When the rendering order uses the less than operation
(fragments closer to the viewer) rays will likely be terminated much sooner (locally), but
should any new rays be marched behind the discarded fragment they will no longer be
backface-bounded. On the other hand, using the greater than operation provides glob-
alized bounding where the initial ray will be marched until it is terminated at the final
backface, which may already be near the end of the ray marching bounding box.
An additional halting condition is added, dependent on the backface bounding strategy.
localized:
hclocalized backface ←𝑑⃗𝑟0 < 𝑑backface ∧𝑑⃗𝑟𝑖≥𝑑backface
globalized:
hcglobalized backface ←𝑑⃗𝑟𝑖≥𝑑backface
24
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:33==
3.2.5
Customization of ray-marched terrains
A desirable parameter of the rendered terrain is more detailed control of the generation
of the terrain cliff walls. Instead of simply generating vertical walls, stylistic design could
call for the use of a defined mathematical function over the wall’s height. Ray marching
can be customized to generate interesting structures based on the height and distance to
the wall. The difficulty is finding that distance in a height map, which would otherwise be
trivial in the case of a three-dimensional distance field.
Instead of using a stepped height map (Figure 3.5 (left)), the texture’s values may be
clamped and normalized to the threshold value, thus creating a gradual descent outwards
from the edges of the terrain. Taking the additive inverse of this map provides a substitute
for a distance field in two-dimensional space. Any position in the texture that is not within
that gradual section is considered to be infinitely far away (value of 1), and any position
inside the terrain is considered immediately close (value of 0). Equation 3.9 generates
the field depicted in Figure 3.5 (right).
field(uv) = 1 −max(0, min(texture(uv)
threshold , 1))
(3.9)
Figure 3.5: Stepped height map with threshold
25
255 (left). Substitute distance field with threshold
45
255 (right).
A displacement function 𝑓displace(ℎ) may define the variable wall at height ℎ. This function
computes the distance of the variable wall extrusion from the terrain edge. The previous
halting condition hcterrain is replaced by hcvariable, defined in Equation 3.10. The displace-
ment function may include other variables such as the frame number for the purposes of
animation.
ℎ𝑖=
⃗𝑟𝑖𝑦
ℎterrain
hcvariable ←field(uv) ≤𝑓displace(ℎ𝑖)
(3.10)
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
25
==PAGE:34==
Variable walls are suspended inside of the rendered terrain, just as the terrain is sus-
pended inside the mesh geometry. The magnitude of the variable wall (depth of its ef-
fects) may be controlled by increasing the difference in thresholds used for (1) stepping
the height map and (2) creating the clamped substitute distance field. A larger gap defines
the displacement function over a larger section of the terrain, and thus the constant flat
portion of the terrain is smaller. The variable wall operation is visualized in Figure 3.6.
Bounding polygon
𝑓displace(ℎ) = 0.5(sin ℎ+ 1)
field(uv) = 1
field(uv) = 0
Threshold gap
⃗𝑟
field(uv) ≤𝑓displace(
⃗𝑟𝑖𝑦
ℎterrain)
Figure 3.6: Side view of a ray intersection with a variable wall.
26
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:35==
4
Implementation & results
This chapter is dedicated to implementation and comparison of results within each cate-
gory of terrain generation method.
4.1
Project details
The project is broken down into two phases, these are (1) implementing and testing opti-
mizations in a sandbox environment with focus on depth of the tests, and (2) porting the
best solutions to the What The Car? project and observing the final effect they have in an
industry-scale project setting.
4.1.1
Sandbox
The project sandbox uses the same Unity version as the What The Car? project which is
2022.3.42f1 released on the 13th of August, 2024 [32]. Included in the sandbox installa-
tion of Unity, are modules which are vital to the research process, these are
Jobs The Jobs built-in module provides an interface to the threaded workflow embedded
in the game engine ecosystem.
This module is used to set up thread parallelization for Marching Triangles.
Burst 1.8.18 [18] An alternative compiler based on Single instruction, multiple data con-
cepts for Unity which only compiles a high performance subset of C# code into highly
performant native code by utilizing auto-vectorization and assumptions on memory
aliasing. Source code targeting Burst must be written in the Jobs framework, but
does not necessarily have to be threaded.
This module is used to implement data parallelization for Marching Triangles.
Collections 2.5.3 [33] Introduces a library of wrappers (referred to as Native*) for un-
managed memory data structures which replace common collections used in C#
such as Array with ArrayArray and List with NativeList. Used by the Burst com-
piler, as managed memory collections are not allowed in the high performance C#
subset.
This module is used in conjunction with Burst and Jobs.
Performance Testing API 3.0.3 [34] The performance testing library introduces a toolkit
for the user to measure the performance of a given function with control over iteration
count and warmup.
This module is used to set up a uniform performance testing environment for the
optimization implementations.
The sandbox project focuses on two domains. The first is performance optimizations for
the Marching Triangles step of the What The Car? terrain generation pipeline illustrated in
Figure 2.2. The post-processing of the terrain is a secondary concern, discussed in detail
in phase two of the research process. The second is implementations of GPU-rendered
terrain in Unity’s shader framework. Shader programs are written in High-Level Shader
Language (HLSL) [35] which are wrapped by Unity’s custom ShaderLab [36] programming
language used to configure the behavior of the shader (for example front-face culling
setting).
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.1: Two views from the game engine editor window after executing each implementation,
each of which output a terrain mesh. In the right view, tags are used to display the implementation
identifier along with the execution time for that specific instance.
Algorithms
Each implementation of a variant of the Marching Triangles algorithm or the GPU-rendered
terrain is a standalone class which implements the ITestable interface, which provides
three methods for interfacing with an algorithm, these are
SetupTest() Initializes the implementation. These are any operations that are deemed
outside of the performance critical scope of the algorithm or operations which can
be performed once at program initialization, such as
• Unmanaged memory allocation
• Management of Unity specific logic (GameObjects, Transforms, etc.)
• Setup of chunk management
• Generating a a height map texture from the height field array
Teardown() Used for cleaning up after a test is run. Primarily used to free allocated
unmanaged memory.
RunTest() The method which executes the appropriate algorithm implementation and is
used for execution time calculation. In the case of GPU-rendered terrain, the exe-
cution is in shader programs therefore this method is used to simulate data bussing
between the CPU and the GPU by creating a new texture and transferring it.
The algorithms are either run once and their outputs displayed in the game engine’s editor
window together with their execution time in processor ticks, or they are all run through the
performance testing framework (without visual outputs). An example of the visual output
is shown in Figure 4.1.
A separate workflow is created for measuring render performance of the GPU-based im-
plementations. A single implementation of rendered terrain is selected and instanced 625
times in a 25×25 grid as unique instances (to disable Unity’s automated material instanc-
ing). A camera is then moved around the scene to variate the number of visible instances
of the terrain at once. The use of 625 instances is enough to judge the performance of
the shader programs. An example of this workflow is provided in Figure 4.2.
28
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.2: Example of a rendering performance test.
Test cases
Test cases are a collection of properties which define an environment for the algorithm to
be executed in. The relevant properties are
useBurst A flag for whether relevant code should be compiled with the Burst compiler.
When false, code is compiled by the standard Unity compiler Mono, a Just-In-Time
compiler with limited optimization features.
heightFieldIdentifier An identifier used to look up a struct containing the byte array
of the height field values and the terrain width and depth dimensions.
testIterationCount Number of iterations to run the performance test for.
modifiedIndicesCount If this value is larger than zero, the height field will be modified
with this many random writes. In this case, the computed flag IsPartial is set to
true, which is used to toggle the partial modification workflow for the algorithms
which support it (implementations with chunking), instead of regenerating the entire
terrain across iterations. If an algorithm does not support partial modifications, the
terrain will be regenerated fully.
Two height fields have been extracted from the What The Car? ecosystem to use as
references in the test executions, these are Small Field (grid dimensions 30 × 65) and
Large Field (70 × 220) shown in Figure 4.3. Other manufactured terrains were used such
as Inverted Islets (51 × 51) generated with gaps on odd rows and columns.
A test is referred to by the sum of its properties using the following pattern
burst|no-burst −partial-𝑛|full −field-name −iterations
Performance testing
The performance testing framework allows easier access to quantitative performance
metrics. One of the key differences between visual and performance testing methods
is the use of warmup iterations. The algorithm is run that many times before the perfor-
mance is measured in the following iterations. This is to exclude the costs of memory
bussing between memory and the CPU, as it is likely for the required memory blocks to
have already been loaded in the processor cache. Tests are run sequentially, so that
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: Comparison of commonly used terrains in testing (top row: Inverted Islets, Full Field
50 × 50 (for reference) and Small Field; bottom: Large Field).
parallelized tests are not hindered by other tests and have access to a larger number of
cores. The test runner reports the following metrics of the algorithm execution time in mil-
liseconds: min, max, median, and mean. An example of the test runner output is shown
in Figure 4.4. The test runner script is shown in Listing 4.1, where
instance.RunTest(modifiedIndices) is used in the case of partial modifications to the
height field, for algorithms which support partial updates (chunking).
PartialSetup() A method which is used to reset the object instance properties which
should not carry over between iterations.
.WarmupCount(10) Set the warmup iterations count to ten.
.GC() Configures the test runner to also record the number of garbage collection alloca-
tions.
1
foreach (var instance in ITestable.Algorithms)
2
{
3
if (!instance.IncludeInTests) continue;
4
5
instance.Setup(testCase , setting);
6
7
Measure.Method(() =>
8
{
9
try
10
{
11
if (setting.performanceData.IsPartial)
12
instance.RunTest(modifiedIndices);
13
else
14
instance.RunTest();
15
}
16
catch (Exception e)
17
{
18
Debug.Log($"{instance.GetType().Name} failed.");
19
}
20
})
21
.WarmupCount(10)
22
.MeasurementCount(setting.performanceData.testIterationCount)
30
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:39==
23
.GC()
24
.SampleGroup($"{setting.GeneratePrefix()}|{instance.GetType().FullName
}")
25
.SetUp(() => { instance.PartialSetup(); })
26
.CleanUp(instance.Teardown)
27
.Run();
28
}
Listing 4.1: Test runner for performance testing (C#).
Figure 4.4: Output of the performance testing framework. The results can also be exported to csv
for detailed analysis.
4.1.2
On porting to production
While performance testing does provide a heuristic for the absolute performance differ-
ence between two implementations, often the context in which the implementations are
impacts their performance, especially taking into consideration that production code does
not offer warmup executions or directly sequential iterations of the same code. The What
The Car? project is mature, therefore the addition and refactoring of code comes at the
cost of thorough testing and careful considerations for future use.
To minimize development time spent on overhauling large chunks of the game’s code,
only the most promising performance-wise and least impactful implementation-wise op-
timizations were selected for implementation in the game, based on the results of the
research sandbox. Additionally, limited testing tools are available in the game project
which provides less in-depth analysis. The results are used for reference in the context
of the sandbox project.
4.1.3
Devices
Various devices were used for testing the results. Due to limitations, detailed performance
measurements are not available for the iPhone and can be provided only on a frame-by-
frame sample of run time using Unity’s Performance Markers (equivalent to a stopwatch).
Mid-range blocky Desktop computer with Nvidia Geforce GTX 1080 GPU, 4-core Intel
Core i7-4790k (8-core with Hyper-threading), and 16GB RAM.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
31
==PAGE:40==
High-end proart Desktop computer with Nvidia Geforce RTX 4070 GPU, 16-core AMD
Ryzen 9 9950X CPU, and 64GB RAM.
Low-end iPhone iPhone X with 3-core Apple GPU, 6-core Apple A11 Bionic CPU, and
3GB unified RAM [37]. Released in 2017, this model is currently at the bottom of
Apple’s actively supported devices.
Directly relevant results are presented in this chapter. Results for the other devices (where
available) are appended to the Appendix under section A.1.
4.2
CPU optimizations
A limitation of CPU optimizations implementations is a restriction on changing the inputs
and outputs of the terrain mesh generation pipeline. Graphics-wise there is nothing of
note as the output is considered to be working if it is virtually identical to the baseline,
including maintaining mesh inter-connectivity and generating a list of ordered triangles.
Triangle connectivity is important in the domain of the project, as post-processing done
on the terrain requires a list of triangles to perform surface topology redistribution.
The metrics of interest are specifically execution times of the algorithms measured in
milliseconds or processor ticks. The structure of this section will follow the order of imple-
mentation of optimizations. In the case of implementations with variants based on param-
eters, the best will be selected before a final comparison of all implementations. Appendix
tables A.1 to A.2 present the median run times of all the implementations discussed and
plotted in the following sections.
4.2.1
Refactoring & memory efficiency
The experimentation begins with refactoring the Reference Rotation variant into Lookup
with the use of arrays based on the methodology presented in Introducing memory effi-
ciency. Lookup is split into two versions. Lookup refactors pivot shifting into triangle case
lookups and implements an array instead of a dictionary in all uses (for tracking previously
created vertices and for triangle case lookups). Lookup w/ memory heuristics additionally
implements the use of (maximum) memory heuristics for all dynamic collections. Another
variant is created for the pivot shifting Reference Rotation no map where the vertex index
map is transformed into an array. The execution metrics for these implementations are
presented in Figure 4.5.
The generalized implementations for Reference Rotation and Lookup are presented in
Listing A.1 and Listing A.2 respectively, in the Appendix. The implementation changes
required to transform Reference Rotation to use an array for vertex indices is presented
in Listing A.3.
For the variants where an array is implemented in place of the vertex index dynamic map,
the execution time is significantly decreased for both implementations of the Marching
Triangles algorithm. Lookup performs slightly better than Reference Rotation no map,
which indicates better performance is gained from using static data rather than dynami-
cally building triangle cases.
Increasing the number of test iterations provides a similar mean, but demonstrably intro-
duces larger variation between the minimum and maximum execution times. This occurs
as certain singular executions are outliers which spike up in execution time as evidenced
by the similarity in the mean and the median for that test. This is likely due to an internal
processing stall or higher generation garbage collection call. Most of the test iterations
provide a stable and deterministic execution run time within a small range of variability.
32
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:41==
n-f-sm-10
n-f-lg-10
n-f-ii-10
n-f-lg-100
n-f-sm-100
Test
0
10
20
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-ii-10
no-burst-full-InvertedIslets51X51-iters-10
n-f-lg-100
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-100
n-f-sm-100
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-100
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Reference
Rotation no map
Lookup
Lookup w/
heuristics
Figure 4.5: Comparison of execution time for Reference Rotation (baseline), Reference Rotation
no map, Lookup and Lookup w/ heuristics Marching Triangles implementations (blocky).
Interestingly, the use of memory heuristics is not always a clear boost, which could be due
to the initial large overhead of allocating a large buffer. This case is more clear in Small-
Field, where the actual geometry size is a smaller percentage of the heuristic than in other
fields. In the case of InvertedIslets51X51 the performance appears to be more stable, as
the capacity is almost fully consumed. Otherwise, the result is uniform for the three fields
LargeField, SmallField and InvertedIslets51X51 which indicates the algorithm’s large tol-
erance for scale of the problem domain.
It is also worth considering the actual byte size of preallocated memory to understand
the amount of memory used by Marching Triangles in the worst case (full geometry, In-
vertedIslets 𝑛× 𝑛). Assuming dimensions of 70 × 220, which are the standard large size
bounds of terrain for modification in player-created levels, the geometry data can take up
to 10.8mB of memory. This is broken down into the following
ℬvertex index lookup = 61, 600 ×
4B
uint = 246, 400B = 246.4kB
ℬ
vertices
𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛,𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙,𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟= 200, 200 ×
12+12+4B
TerrainVertex = 5, 605, 600B = 5, 605.6kB
ℬtriangles = 600, 600 ×
4B
int = 2, 402, 400B = 2, 402.4kB
ℬedges = 46, 200 ×
4B
int = 184, 800B = 184.8kB
ℬedge normals = 200, 200 ×
12B
Vector3 = 184, 800B = 184.8kB
ℬmarching triangles = ℬvertex index lookup + ℬvertices + ℬtriangles = 8, 254.4kB
ℬpost processing = ℬedges + ℬedge normals = 2, 587.2kB
Σℬ= ℬmarching triangles + ℬpost processing = 10, 841.6kB ∼10.8mB
ℬpost processing refers to memory allocated for edge data which is later used in post pro-
cessing such as smoothing of the contour and addition of wall structure.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
33
==PAGE:42==
4.2.2
Data parallelization
To make use of Unity’s Burst module, the implementation must be restructured to use Unity
Jobs. Use of Burst does not allow data structures other than static readonly managed data
or manually allocated memory. Uses of Array<T> or List<T> type structures must be
replaced with a memory-allocated alternative, such as Unity’s Native* implementations.
Static readonly data structures are known at compile time, and cannot be modified during
the program’s runtime (C# keywords static readonly).
This condition is already fulfilled for the vertex index map which had been transformed into
an array type and thus requires minimal refactoring (from Dictionary<Vector2, int> →
int[] →NativeArray<int>). The triangle case lookup table and the superposition res-
olution table are implemented as static readonly arrays. The geometry data lists can be
converted to NativeList<T> which replicate the behaviors of the managed class List<T>.
Unity highly recommends setting generous capacity for these memory allocators, as re-
sizing is more costly than a standard List<T> - in this case the maximum heuristics can
be safely used. All memory allocations must be manually disposed after use.
Lookup (Job) and Reference Rotation (Job) are implemented with these principles, for
which the test results are presented in Figure 4.6. Reference Rotation (Job) has been
excluded from the results, as the average execution time for the implementation reaches
up to 300 ms (proart) and 600 ms (blocky) which would not fit comfortably in the chart. An
example for this execution is provided in Figure A.1. The difference in performance comes
from implementation, as in Reference Rotation (Job) Unity’s NativeHashMap<Vector2,
int> is used in place of the original Dictionary<Vector2, int> as a naive replacement.
The use of this data structure is unfit for performance-critical contexts. An alternative
Reference Rotation (Job) no map is implemented for which an array is used instead.
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
5
10
15
20
25
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Reference
Rotation no map
Lookup
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup (Job)
Figure 4.6: Use of Unity Burst for data parallelization for the Reference Rotation and Lookup
implementations (blocky).
As interesting observation is the increased execution time (up to 150%) for the Job imple-
mentations when Burst compilation is not enabled. The added workload for execution in
a Jobified workflow does increase run time, but the use of Burst outweighs that negative
offset, or Burst compiler code is optimized better ( 10% baseline performance) than the
standard Mono compiler ( 150% of baseline performance) for this workflow.
Use of data parallelization for Reference Rotation no map and Lookup significantly in-
creases the performance of these implementations by cutting down execution time to
34
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:43==
around 10% of the baseline implementation. A similar relative decrease in time is ob-
served for both variants. Between the two, Reference Rotation no map produces slightly
better results which may be a consequence of the nature of the algorithm - loop vectoriza-
tion is more effective for operations which do not involve additional memory references
such as the case table references in Lookup.
4.2.3
Threaded mesh creation
Threaded mesh creation, which is thread parallelization of the generation of a single trian-
gle soup mesh, is implemented for both Reference Rotation RR threaded 𝑛(Figure 4.7)
and Lookup Lk threaded 𝑛(Figure 4.8), where 𝑛∈{1, 8, 16, 32, 64} is the batch size. One
batch is handled by one thread. An additional case (RR/Lk threaded fit) is also tested,
where the batch size is determined by the number of available threads. This is the ratio
of cells to the thread count, therefore the execution uses each thread exactly once.
Unity’s Job system is used to schedule threads. A special type of Job is used, based on
the IJobParallelFor interface, which is the parallelization of a for loop. The implemen-
tation must define one iteration of the loop which in the case of Marching Triangles is one
cell, that is the flattened two-dimensional loop over the grid dimensions. This entails trans-
formation from a one-dimensional index into the grid coordinates. Thread parallelization
can be compounded with data parallelization on the same principles as in Data paral-
lelization. Unity’s Jobs will only run on any of the worker threads that are not the main
thread, therefore the available thread count is threads −1.
The implementation changes to Reference Rotation and Lookup for threading support are
displayed in Listing A.4.
A NativeList<Vector3> is shared between all threads to generate the output mesh ver-
tices list. To allow cross-thread writing, a special write-only accessor of the list is used,
that is NativeList<Vector3>.ParallelWriter. This allows appending elements to the
list for parallel threads, but capacity cannot be increased after it had been set and opera-
tions which would append beyond the capacity of the parallel list will fail.
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
5
10
15
20
25
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
RR threaded 1
RR threaded 8
RR threaded 16
RR threaded 32
RR threaded 64
RR threaded fit
Figure 4.7: Threaded triangle soup mesh generation with Reference Rotation (blocky).
Within both classes of threaded implementations, the batch size appears to have little
impact on the variation of the algorithm run time, with a visible hitch for batch sizes derived
from the available thread count. In blocky (seven worker threads, excluding the main
thread), the fit batch size is row cells×column cells
available threads
= 265 for SmallField and 2158 for LargeField.
In general, the batch sizes 32 and 64 display the best stable performance in their classes.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
35
==PAGE:44==
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
10
20
30
40
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Lk threaded 1
Lk threaded 8
Lk threaded 16
Lk threaded 32
Lk threaded 64
Lk threaded fit
Figure 4.8: Threaded triangle soup mesh generation with Lookup (blocky).
The difference is small in the execution time between a batch size of 1 and 64, and further
becomes insignificant when data parallelization (Burst) is enabled, an interesting behavior
as it appears the overhead of scheduling and waiting for available threads is not large.
A batch size of 64 implies the total use of 29 threads for SmallField and 34 threads for
LargeField.
Figure 4.9 presents a comparison in execution time for the previously best implemen-
tations against the threaded implementations with batch size 64. Standard thread par-
allelization without data parallelization implemented with Unity Jobs struggles to perform
compared to the single-threaded implementations. Between Reference Rotation threaded
and Lookup threaded the better performer is Reference Rotation. This may be a conse-
quence of the algorithm’s strength in local single iterations due to (1) no memory reads for
triangle case lookups, which in the case of Lookup is less beneficial as each core has its
own cache, and (2) no dependency on a vertex index lookup data structure, as the target
geometry structure is the use of duplicated vertices instead of ordered triangles.
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
10
20
30
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Lookup
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup (Job)
RR threaded 64
Lk threaded 64
Figure 4.9: Comparison of previously best implementations with best stable threaded implemen-
tations (blocky).
Furthermore, compounding both thread parallelization and data parallelization benefits
the threaded implementations, bringing down their run times to around 1/3 of their stan-
36
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:45==
dard implementations which is particularly beneficial for Reference Rotation, but remains
uncompetitive in the case of Lookup. Implemented with data parallelization on a single
thread, Lookup (Job) and Reference Rotation (Job) no map remain the most performant
implementations showcasing that Marching Triangles is better fit in this design than in a
threaded context.
4.2.4
Terrain chunking
Terrain can be chunked into multiple smaller logical game objects, each of which are
responsible for their own mesh. This can be further parallelized to process each chunk in
parallel, especially at initialization of the entire terrain. The Lookup variant was selected
for the implementation of chunking, as this variant is easier to refactor to support chunks.
The Reference Rotation variant does not support geometry which shares internal edges
with the edges of the grid.
The implementation changes to Lookup for chunking support are displayed in Listing A.5.
The results of this implementation are shown in Figure 4.10 for the two variants Lk chunk
𝑥× 𝑥and Lk (Job) chunk 𝑥× 𝑥, where 𝑥∈{10, 25, 50}. The chunk sizes were selected
to provide distributed samples of scale. The (Job) variants support thread parallelization
and data parallelization, similarly to the previously discussed sections.
n-f-lg-10
n-1-lg-10
b-f-lg-10
b-1-lg-10
Test
0
5
10
15
20
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-1-lg-10
no-burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-1-lg-10
burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Lookup
Lk chunk 10x10
Lk chunk 25x25
Lk chunk 50x50
Lk (Job) chunk
10x10
Lk (Job) chunk
25x25
Lk (Job) chunk
50x50
Figure 4.10: Comparison of chunked terrain creation in runtime (blocky).
The initial execution time for the chunked implementations is slightly larger (in tests with no
partial modification, i.e. -full-), especially for chunk sizes of 10. For the largest terrain, the
initialization of the terrain remains more performant in the single-threaded single-object
Lookup variant. The performance boost comes into play when partial modifications are
enabled, which minimizes the execution time to a miniscule fraction of the baseline run
time. Figure 4.11 compares the execution times of only chunked implementations to better
visualize the difference between implementations when partial modifications are used.
When only a single chunk must be rehydrated (tests with the -partial- tag), the execution
time is better for single-threaded chunks generation logic, with run time increasing sig-
nificantly for a larger number of affected chunks. Chunked implementation compounded
with threading and data parallelization results in a slightly higher run time cost for rehydrat-
ing a single chunk, but the time remains relatively uniform across the number of affected
chunks. The size of the field does not appear to impact the execution times.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
37
==PAGE:46==
n-1-lg-10
b-1-lg-10
b-10-lg-10
b-10-sm-10
Test
0
1
2
3
4
5
Mean execution time [ms]
n-1-lg-10
no-burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
b-1-lg-10
burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
b-10-lg-10
burst-partial-10-LargeField-iters-10
b-10-sm-10
burst-partial-10-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Lk chunk 10x10
Lk chunk 25x25
Lk chunk 50x50
Lk (Job) chunk
10x10
Lk (Job) chunk
25x25
Lk (Job) chunk
50x50
Figure 4.11: Comparison of chunked terrain creation in runtime with only partial modifications
(blocky).
4.2.5
Optimizations overview
Figure 4.12 showcases the most performant implementations across all experiments. By
far the most impactful implementation is data parallelization at the lowest cost of changes
to the holistic mesh pipeline.
n-1-lg-10
b-1-lg-10
n-f-lg-10
b-f-lg-10
Test
0
5
10
15
20
Mean execution time [ms]
n-1-lg-10
no-burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
b-1-lg-10
burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Lookup
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup (Job)
RR threaded 64
Lk (Job) chunk
10x10
Figure 4.12: Comparison of most performant Marching Triangles implementations (blocky).
The use of managed memory and dynamic data structures may be exchanged for lower-
level manually allocated memory in dense blocks which avoids the use of automated
garbage collection and memory reallocation mechanisms. This is especially true for map
data types which additionally incur heavy costs on hashing operations to refer to the ap-
propriate position in memory. The removal and replacement of a lookup dictionary, the
keys of which can be easily numerically computed, produces a median run time decrease
of 25% to 50% of the baseline map-implementation (Lookup and Reference Rotation no
map vs Reference Rotation, across all devices).
The use of memory heuristics for preallocating an appropriately sized block of memory
does not appear to provide tangible improvements in performance for use with dynamically
sized data structures, with a marginal improvement of only 1% difference in specific cases
(Lookup w/ heuristics and Lookup for proart). When used with smaller target geometry
38
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:47==
data, where most of the preallocated memory is not utilized, the net performance change
may even be negative by 2% (Lookup w/ heuristics and Lookup for blocky).
When using low level memory, where use of dynamically resizable convenience mecha-
nisms is not available, maximum heuristics are vital to ensure bounds are never breached
for the created geometry data. It is therefore worth considering using persistently allocated
data for performance critical contexts which sequentially occur over a number of frames,
instead of allocating and freeing those memory blocks every frame. To understand the
weight of allocating persistent memory on the execution of the program, the diligent engi-
neer is motivated to measure the actual memory sizes of the maximally allocated memory
blocks.
In the vein of memory and data-centric optimizations, the use of SIMD principles and creat-
ing data-centric implementations, where assumptions on data formats can be made, may
bring a massive increase in performance metrics for modern hardware. Implementations
built for using Unity’s Burst compiler (and Job system) produce a 70% to 97% decrease
in run time at a relatively low effort cost of converting to low-level memory (Lookup (Job)
and Reference Rotation (Job) no map when tested with Burst, across all devices). While
Unity’s Burst compiler provides this workflow in a handy module which does not require
additional work to implement the data parallelization paradigm, a motivated engineer can
reproduce this behavior by implementing loop vectorization and smarter offloading of data
validation to compilation time (such as memory aliasing).
Thread parallelization on its own may not be the best solution as the overhead cost of
scheduling and managing parallelized data structures can bring a negative net perfor-
mance change. When thread parallelization is compounded together with data paral-
lelization, performance is better, but still not good enough to compete with pure data
parallelization. These are differences of an increase to over 200% of the baseline run
time and a decrease to 26-64%, without and with Burst respectively (Lk threaded and RR
threaded with and without Burst). More importantly, the concept of the use of a dedicated
thread is a crucial consideration for heavy computation in the context of game engines,
as the bulk of the game loop runs on a single main thread.
Moreover, selecting a batch size for a thread’s workload is not the most obvious task,
as this depends on the complexity of a single iteration of the algorithm loop. Heaver
algorithms benefit from smaller batch sizes to make sure a single thread is not stalled
long on a single task. Then the problem is that a large number of jobs must be scheduled
and they wait for the next available thread leading to scheduling overhead.
Chunking is substantially more performant when partial modification is implemented as the
workload is local to at most four chunks at a time. This comes at the cost of a considerable
amount of source code restructuring. The use of chunking in implementations is enough
on its own, decreasing run time to 1-5% of the baseline implementation. Compounded
with data parallelization this is further decreased to a new minimum of less than 1% (Lk
chunk 𝑛× 𝑛and Lk (Job) chunk 𝑛× 𝑛for partial modification tests). Chunking is further
beneficial for upscaling as the cost of updating a single chunk remains constant. This
enables the use of far larger terrains.
Algorithms can be implemented with different approaches such as Marching Triangles
with Lookup or with Reference Rotation no map which have differences in execution, but
more importantly both variants may outperform the other under specific conditions such
as platforms or implementation details. The best example of a shift of championing per-
formance is between Lookup and Reference Rotation no map. Used with a standard JIT
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
39
==PAGE:48==
compiler, Lookup performs faster by around 25% - 30%. When data parallelization is in-
volved, Reference Rotation (Job) no map is the more performant option by 4% (relative
to baseline, devices proart and blocky). This change is driven by the strengths of the par-
ticular design paradigm of SIMD, which is parallelizing simple operations, that are the key
difference in the Reference Rotation implementation. Whereas under a standard com-
piler sequentially computed loops are slower and cannot be locally optimized compared
to the performance boost of directly reading a triangle case from a table, as in the Lookup
implementation.
All of the implementations are generally stable with low variance on execution times as
the averages, medians and minimums are close if not equal to each other. There is the
exception of odd spikes which generate large maximums on execution time. These are
likely due to reasons other than the algorithm itself, such as internal processing stalls.
The tables 4.1 to 4.10 summarize the presented implementations. The median execution
times for all implementations are presented together under the Appendix in tables A.1
and A.2, where they are compared against the baseline. Previous performance compari-
son figures are also provided for the proart device in figs. A.2 to A.10.
Reference Rotation
Description
An implementation of Marching Triangles which uses pivot shifting to
build triangle cases on the fly.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data.
Pitfalls
Uses a costly map structure for looking up vertex indices.
Verdict
Unsuitable for performance-critical contexts due to overhead generated
by use of managed memory, especially the hash map.
Table 4.1: Summary of the Reference Rotation implementation.
Reference Rotation no map
Description
Refactors Reference Rotation to use an array instead of a hash map.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data, uses an array for vertex index
lookup.
Verdict
Acceptable for performance-critical contexts.
Table 4.2: Summary of the Reference Rotation no map implementation.
Lookup
Description
An implementation of Marching Triangles, where static arrays are used
to look up a triangle case and to resolve triangle superpositions.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data, uses an array for vertex index
lookup, simple to understand.
Verdict
Acceptable for performance-critical contexts.
Table 4.3: Summary of the Lookup implementation.
40
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:49==
Lookup w/ heuristics
Description
Extends Lookup by providing capacities to dynamic data structures
based on Marching Triangles size heuristics.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data, uses an array for vertex index
lookup, avoids repeating buffer copies for resizing.
Pitfalls
Preallocates large buffers.
Verdict
Acceptable for performance-critical contexts (close to no difference to
using no heuristics).
Table 4.4: Summary of the Lookup w/ heuristics implementation.
Reference Rotation (Job)
Description
Refactor of Reference Rotation for data parallelization and low level
memory. Naive implementation using a low level hash map instead of
array for vertex indices mapping.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data, uses data parallelization.
Pitfalls
Preallocates large buffers, uses a costly map structure for looking up
vertex indices.
Verdict
Unsuitable for performance-critical contexts due to use of inefficient low
level hash map.
Table 4.5: Summary of the Reference Rotation (Job) implementation.
Reference Rotation (Job) no map
Description
Refactor of Reference Rotation for data parallelization and low level
memory. Uses arrays for index lookups.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data, uses an array for vertex index
lookup, uses data parallelization.
Pitfalls
Preallocates large buffers.
Verdict
Highly effective for performance-critical contexts.
Table 4.6: Summary of the Reference Rotation (Job) no map implementation.
Lookup (Job)
Description
Refactor of Lookup for data parallelization and low level memory.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data, uses an array for vertex index
lookup, uses data parallelization.
Pitfalls
Preallocates large buffers.
Verdict
Highly effective for performance-critical contexts.
Table 4.7: Summary of the Lookup (Job) implementation.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
41
==PAGE:50==
Reference Rotation threaded and Lookup threaded
Description
Refactors of Reference Rotation and Lookup respectively for thread
parallelization. Threaded implementation supports batches of size 𝑛.
Advantages
Spreads the work for geometry computation over available threads
(freeing up game main thread), may be compounded with data paral-
lelization.
Pitfalls
Generates triangle soup mesh output, batch sizes must be fit to use
case and hardware.
Verdict
Effective for performance-critical contexts only when compounded with
data parallelization.
Table 4.8: Summary of the Reference Rotation threaded and Lookup threaded implementations.
Lookup chunked
Description
Extension of Lookup to support creating logical chunks.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data (per chunk), uses an array for
vertex index lookup (per chunk), supports efficient partial modification
for rehydrating only modified chunks.
Pitfalls
Higher initialization cost, requires (logical) bookkeeping, no mesh con-
nectivity between chunks, uses an array for vertex index lookup.
Verdict
Extremely effective for performance-critical contexts where partial mod-
ification is supported and mesh connectivity between chunks is not re-
quired.
Table 4.9: Summary of the Lookup chunked implementation.
Lookup chunked (Job)
Description
Refactor of Lookup chunked for data parallelization and low level mem-
ory.
Advantages
Generates interconnected mesh data (per chunk), uses an array for ver-
tex index lookup (per chunk), supports efficient partial modification for
rehydrating only modified chunks, uses data parallelization for greater
performance effect, uses an array for vertex index lookup.
Pitfalls
Requires (logical) bookkeeping, no mesh connectivity between chunks.
Verdict
Extremely effective for performance-critical contexts where partial mod-
ification is supported and mesh connectivity between chunks is not re-
quired.
Table 4.10: Summary of the Lookup chunked (Job) implementation.
42
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:51==
4.2.6
Porting to production
Selected implementations have been refactored and employed in the What The Car?
project to observe their impact in a production environment. While the sandbox project
provided an isolated environment to directly test the execution of these methods, the
tested execution time is not entirely truthful as to the performance of the implementations.
The testing kit uses warm up iterations which helps with preparing a beneficial testing
space by caching much of the referenced data in the processor’s cache. In production,
such luxuries are not afforded as the implementations are executed once per frame with
ample work done by other systems between executions, which likely results in the cache
registers having long overwritten relevant data.
Based on the advantages and disadvantages discussed in the previous section, the se-
lected implementations are Lookup Job and Reference Rotation Job no map. Threaded
variants are not considered as there is a constraint on the inter-connectivity of the mesh
data. Chunking is not considered as the mesh post-processing phase depends on the
output of the terrain mesh generation, and is implemented with the assumption of single
output mesh. This would be in conflict with the following step of terrain generation that
is topology redistribution (smoothing), as updating a single chunk would require updating
neighboring chunks, and their neighboring chunks in a chain reaction. In the end, this
would result in the rehydration of all chunks equivalent to full mesh generation, but with
additional overhead.
All three devices are used for this test. For blocky and proart, a windows build is generated
(Unity StandaloneWindows64, compiled with Mono), whereas for iPhone, the build is for
iOS (compiled with IL2CPP). A random window of ten frames is selected and the execution
time for each implementation extracted. The samples are presented in Figure 4.13 along
a logarithmic axis to accentuate the performance differences for the data-parallelized im-
plementations. LargeField is used for this test. Table 4.11 presents the median execution
times of these samples.
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
5
10
log( Execution time sample ) [ms]
blocky
proart
iphone
Reference
Rotation
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup
Lookup (Job)
Figure 4.13: Execution time samples for the Lookup/Job nad Reference Rotation/Job implemen-
tations in a production environment. There are 10 samples per implementation per device.
Across all devices, use of data parallelization remains a significant performance booster
with Reference Rotation (Job) as the most performant option, although with higher vari-
ability of execution times. The differences between testing in a sandbox and in production
are made clear by the difference in median execution time, where in production these
timings are higher than their sandbox counterparts for non-parallelized implementations.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
43
==PAGE:52==
Device
blocky
iphone
proart
Implementation
Reference Rotation
13.56ms (100%)
1.64ms (100%)
4.50ms (100%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job) no map
0.41ms (3%)
0.49ms (30%)
0.33ms (7%)
Lookup
6.23ms (46%)
0.99ms (61%)
2.22ms (49%)
Lookup (Job)
0.61ms (5%)
0.67ms (41%)
0.34ms (8%)
Table 4.11: Median execution times for samples extracted in production builds across all devices.
Comparing between the sandbox results (Table A.1) and Table 4.11, it is noted that median
test times are between 1.5 and 2 times longer in production (Reference Rotation 13.56ms
vs 7.88ms, and Lookup 6.23ms vs 4.14ms). On the other hand, data-parallelized imple-
mentations are faster in production with timings Reference Rotation (Job) no map 0.41ms
vs 0.58ms and Lookup (Job) 0.61ms vs 0.88ms (with reference to blocky).
By far, the greatest revelation is the difference in performance across different platform
builds, especially how the iOS build outperforms Windows builds for the non-parallelized
implementations Reference Rotation and Lookup, given that iPhone device has the worst
hardware of the three. Even more so, the non-parallelized Lookup performs almost as
well as the data-parallelized implementations. These results can be summarized with two
observations.
Firstly, the use of a specific compiler has apparent impact on the performance of target
code. There are three compilers at play for these tests. The non-parallelized implementa-
tions are compiled by Mono for Windows and IL2CPP for iOS, whereas data parallelization
goes through the Burst compiler. Mono is a Just-In-Time compiler which does not make
high-level assumptions on the code it compiles and is therefore unable to make major
optimizations. This is further marred by Unity using an older version of the Mono com-
piler, which does not include modern advancements in compilation techniques. IL2CPP is
an Ahead-Of-Time compiler which transpiles C# bytecode (Intermediate Language) into
C++, which is then compiled into native code. While the compiler is allowed to make
high-level assumptions and major optimizations (thanks to the C++ compiler behind the
scenes), the compiler has been configured to produce output native code as similar to the
output of Mono, which impacts the amount of assumptions and decisions the compiler
can make. As Burst uses its own compilation technique (supported by LLVM) geared for
data parallelization and is constrained by stricter assumptions on the features used in the
source code, this compiler is enabled to make major optimizations during the compila-
tion process. As visible, IL2CPP can be almost as good as Burst with the appropriate
implementation (Lookup vs Lookup (Job) for iPhone). Data parallelization for the iPhone
introduces a decrease of 70% in run time (from median 1.64ms to 0.49ms), whereas
for the Windows-based platforms a decrease of 93-97% (from median 4.5ms to 0.33ms,
proart). It is either way a considerable boost in performance, but the optimization result
differs dependent on the platform.
Secondly, observer bias plays a role in the collection of results. For both Windows players,
the device was also the performance observer which impacts data collection as process-
ing is split between both programs. For iPhone, an external device is used to record
performance and therefore the device is able to utilize more processing power for the
implementations.
44
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:53==
4.3
GPU-based alternatives
GPU rendered-terrain steps away from CPU processing of a height field into mesh geome-
try data and instead opts for a render of the terrain inside of provided geometry. Generally,
the terrain can be anything inside geometry, but the limitation is that the render does not
extrude outwards. In other words, the render of a terrain is constrained within the mesh
geometry and modification of the bounding volume would require asking the processor to
regenerate the mesh - precisely what is being avoided by these techniques. This chap-
ter will observe the graphical results of rendering terrain with ray marching techniques,
as well as their performance measured in ray step counts and frame time performance.
Tests are done on the blocky device.
The height field in byte array format, used in CPU optimization implementations, is con-
verted to a height map texture of the same dimensions. The texture is set to clamped
wrap mode and uses bilinear filtering.
The total number of frames to observe time frame for is 4,500. This is an arbitrary number,
derived from the calculation of 150fps × 30s. As the camera moves around the render
performance scene, the number of visible triangles changes. This variability is displayed
in Figure 4.14 for the LargeField test. The camera movement is deterministic, therefore a
clear separation is identified at frame number 2,000 between a period of higher intensity
(frames 1-2,000) and lower intensity (frames 2,000-4,500) which is common between all
render performance tests. This point of separation is provided as context for a break in
the performance trend. The exact number of visible triangles will vary, but they will appear
in the same ratio. Parallax mapped terrain is specifically unique, as a single instance is
comprised of only two triangles. Thus, there are only 1,250 triangles in the scene at once,
a fraction of which are visible for any given frame, yet at a similar ratio as for the mesh-grid
implementations.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
15.0%
17.5%
20.0%
22.5%
25.0%
27.5%
30.0%
Visible geometry
(Percentage of scene tri count)
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Figure 4.14: Magnitude of visible geometry in the render performance scene over frame number
(captured from Vertex shader terrain, total triangle count is 18.9M).
To provide a relevant frame of reference, the same test is performed for the CPU-based
Reference Rotation implementation. In this case, the terrain is generated once during
initialization and duplicated to 625 instances. The frame time for this render performance
test is shown in Figure 4.15. These terrains use Unity’s default Standard material [38] for
rendering. The camera render target dimensions are 960 × 600.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
45
==PAGE:54==
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
337
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.15: Frame rate samples for meshes generated with Reference Rotation at 960 × 600.
4.3.1
Vertex shader & parallax mapped terrain
The process begins with the simplest implementation, that is the use of the vertex shader
program to displace vertices based on the height map. A render of the terrain with this
method is presented in Figure 4.17. The mesh grid is a plane, generated once during
initialization. A uniform triangle grid is selected, as it provides a better distribution of
the surface topology (see comparison in Figure 4.18). A clear problem arises with the
silhouette of the terrain as it is entirely dependent on the granularity of the grid, depicted
in Figure 4.19.
Vertex shader terrain is performant (Figure 4.16) displaying an average frame rate similar
to the standard mesh graphics pipeline.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
336
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.16: Frame rate samples for vertex shader terrain.
46
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.17: Terrain generated by offsetting vertices with a vertex shader program.
Figure 4.18: Comparison of a vertex shader terrain with square grid and triangle grid.
Figure 4.19: Three levels of mesh grid granularity. From left to right, scaled texture dimensions:
2
3, 1, 2.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
47
==PAGE:56==
Parallax mapping provides an answer to clunky silhouettes by rendering the exact shape
of the height map terrain, displayed in Figure 4.20. The two main issues with parallax
mapped terrain is (1) the rendered terrain is suspended inside of the geometry (of only
two triangles) which makes it easy to break the illusion when observing the terrain from its
side, and (2) there always exists a view angle at which the vertical steps of the rendering
rays are visible (Figure 4.21). While the first property is simply the nature of the technique,
the second may be alleviated by decreasing the ray step size.
Performance for 50 steps and 500 steps parallax mapped terrain is displayed in Fig-
ure 4.22 and Figure 4.23. Surprisingly, performance does not suffer after an increase of
the number of steps taken by a ray. Compared to vertex shader terrain parallax mapped
terrain is more performant, part of which is be due to the much smaller triangle count.
Figure 4.20: Views of parallax mapped terrain. The right image depicts the breaking of illusion
when viewing the terrain from an angle without geometry support.
Figure 4.21: Difference in render disturbances at an extreme view angle for 50 steps (left) and
500 steps (right).
48
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:57==
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
332
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.22: Frame rate samples for parallax mapped terrain (50 steps) at 960 × 600.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
335
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.23: Frame rate samples for parallax mapped terrain (500 steps) at 960 × 600.
4.3.2
Polygon-assisted ray marching
Polygon-assisted ray marching (PA terrain) generates the results of parallax mapping
terrain with the additional benefit of allowing the viewer to observe the cliffs of the terrain
from the side. In this technique, runaway rays are problematic as they end up being
discarded at a terminal distance or render terrain further away which would have been
more quickly rendered by a ray originating in covered geometry. Figure 4.24 displays the
output of PA terrain (which is almost identical to Parallax mapped terrain before it), as well
as presents a wireframe view. The polygon constraining volume of Polygon-assisted is
clearly visible, as well as the slice of long-range rays which originate in geometry closed
to the viewer, but render terrain in geometry further from the viewer. Figure 4.25 depicts
the frame rate for linear PA terrain. Linear refers to rays with a fixed step size.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.24: Polygon-assisted ray marching rendered (left). Render with wireframe showcasing
the constraining polygon together with longer distance rays in overlapping geometry (terrain color
by number of steps).
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
306
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.25: Frame rate samples for linear PA terrain (1,000 steps) at 960 × 600.
4.3.3
Optimizations
Setting the correct ray step size and count is highly dependent on the use case and nature
of the terrain. If rays do not travel far enough, they risk terminating before reaching terrain.
If the rays travel too far, they risk creating performance bottlenecks, especially in the case
of rays which would have never intersected with terrain. Therefore, the incentive is to
either minimize the number of steps (bisection) or to more quickly terminate rays (backface
bounding).
Bisection
The ray step count is minimized by rays taking larger steps and should a change in the ter-
rain mask occur, reversing the step direction and decreasing the step size until a threshold
is reached. Compared to linear PA terrain, a step count of 50 is a significant decrease
(Figure 4.26) for an acceptable increase in average frames per second. When testing at
4K resolution, the argument for the use of bisection is far more grounded. While linear PA
terrain dips to an average 62 frames per second, bisection remains stable at above 300,
as shown in figs. 4.28 and 4.29.
50
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.26: Comparison of step count between bisection PA terrain with 50 steps, initial step size
0.5, step size threshold 0.051 (left) and linear PA terrain with 500 steps and step size 0.05 (right).
Darker indicates higher number of steps.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
356
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.27: Frame rate samples for bisection PA terrain (50 steps, initial step size 0.5, step size
threshold 0.051).
Backface bounding
Backface bounding involves the use of two cameras in the scene. The backface camera
first renders the back faces of the geometry that is the output of the vertex shader to a
render texture of the same dimensions as the screen. Since a render texture can only
support normalized color values, the R channel is used to store the distance from the
camera to the fragment scaled by a normalizing factor, the inverse of which is used to later
retrieve the distance value. This camera culls any object that does not have a backface
shader program to avoid unnecessary rendering.
When using the greater ordering operation a quad must be placed in the camera’s near
plane, otherwise Unity’s graphics pipeline will not render any geometry (there must be
geometry in front of the terrain mesh, in order to render the back face terrain behind it
using the greater z-write operation).
The second camera is the actual viewer of the scene. The shader program for Backface
PA terrain is much like normal Linear PA terrain, except an additional check against the
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
51
==PAGE:60==
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
50
60
70
80
90
100
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
65
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.28: Frame rate samples for linear PA terrain (1,000 steps) at 4K resolution.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
322
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.29: Frame rate samples for bisection PA terrain (50 steps, initial step size 0.5, step size
threshold 0.051) at 4K resolution.
render of back face distances is made to potentially discard the ray.
Figure 4.30 and Figure 4.31 showcase the areas of the constraining volume which are
early discards (magenta) due to the back face comparison, for the greater and less oper-
ation respectively.
The performance is substantially negatively impacted for both variants of Backface PA
terrain (Figure 4.32 and Figure 4.33). The overhead of configuring this system in the Unity
engine is the likely culprit, where an entire additional logical Unity camera is required.
Without access to lower level API for the graphics pipeline, this is an unsuitable method
to employ in the Unity game engine environment. Between the two variants there does
not appear to be a difference in performance.
A further consideration when using backface renders ordered by the greater z-write op-
eration is deterioration of effect when multiple unique instances of the shader are used.
Terrain further away will overwrite any back face distances closer to the camera, which
would result in the writing of distances outside of the possible terrain bounds in effect
providing no positive value to the optimization effort.
52
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.30: Backface PA terrain with back faces sorted by greater order of precedence. Magenta
represents the rays which were discarded due to the back face check. Right image is the back
face render.
Figure 4.31: Backface PA terrain with back faces sorted by lesser order of precedence. Magenta
represents the rays which were discarded due to the back face check. Right image is the back
face render.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
253
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.32: Frame rate samples for Backface PA terrain using the greater ordering operation at
960 × 600.
4.3.4
Customizations
Variable walls for terrain are defined as functions on the height of the normalized ray
position. For illustration purposes, four arbitrary functions have been defined based on
visual results. These are
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
53
==PAGE:62==
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
256
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.33: Frame rate samples for Backface PA terrain using the lesser ordering operation at
960 × 600.
𝑓displace =
⎧
{
{
⎨
{
{
⎩
𝑓constant(ℎ) = 0.75
𝑓linear(ℎ) = 0.9ℎ
𝑓sin(ℎ) = 0.2(sin(13.35ℎ) + 1)
𝑓anim cos(ℎ) = 0.5(0.5(cos(60ℎ+ 10𝑡) + 1))2
These are displayed in Figure 4.34. The frame rate averages are charted in figs. 4.35
to 4.38.
An interesting result arises where the Variable PA terrain implementation provides the best
performance (above 320fps) while also fulfilling arbitrary stylistic requirements. Three of
the four displacement functions used for testing perform at a higher average frame rate
than both Linear PA terrain ( 300fps) and the slightly more performant Bisection PA terrain
( 320fps). The slowest of the four is 𝑓anim cos ( 295fps) which involves the use of two costly
operations: squaring and a cos lookup.
The most performant are 𝑓linear and 𝑓const. This phenomenon is a result of earlier ter-
rain intersections from the extruding terrain at the bottom of the terrain walls. The ad-
ditional terrain volume captures many runaway rays which would have been traveling
parallel to terrain walls, thus cutting down on additional computation. Trailing behind is
𝑓sin, which partially extrudes volume at the crests of the sine wave, but also computes a
costly trigonometry function.
This technique has two limitations. Firstly, the input height field must have somewhat good
smoothness, otherwise the displacement function will compute with high variability along
the edges of the terrain. Secondly, the terrain cannot extrude further than the constraining
polygon, which would otherwise break the illusion. These two cases are showcased in
Figure 4.39.
54
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:63==
(a) 𝑓constant(ℎ) = 0.75
(b) 𝑓linear(ℎ) = 0.9ℎ
(c) 𝑓sin(ℎ) = 0.2(sin(13.35ℎ) + 1)
(d) 𝑓anim cos(ℎ) = 0.5(0.5(cos(60ℎ+ 10𝑡) + 1))2
Figure 4.34: Different displacement functions applied to Variable PA terrain.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
55
==PAGE:64==
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
329
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.35: Frame rate samples for Variable PA terrain with 𝑓constant at 960 × 600.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
328
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.36: Frame rate samples for Variable PA terrain with 𝑓linear at 960 × 600.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
324
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.37: Frame rate samples for Variable PA terrain with 𝑓sin at 960 × 600.
56
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:65==
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frame number
100
200
300
400
Frame rate [1
𝑠]
319
more tris (>24%)
less tris (<24%)
Sample
Cumulative average
Average
Figure 4.38: Frame rate samples for Variable PA terrain with 𝑓anim cos at 960 × 600.
(a) 𝑓too much constant(ℎ) = 0.96
(b) 𝑓linear(ℎ) = 0.9ℎ
Figure 4.39: Two cases where Variable PA terrain struggles - terrain extrudes too far out (left),
and uneven distribution in the height map, visible at the edge with orange dotted line (right).
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
57
==PAGE:66==
4.3.5
Overview of GPU methods
Within this section three shader-program methods for rendering terrain have been pre-
sented, along with options for optimizations and customization. These are summarized in
tables 4.12 to 4.17. There are two key issues with render-based implementations, shared
across all the presented techniques, which warrants further explanation. These are (1)
texture interpolation artifacts, and (2) computation of surface normals.
The difficulties with shader program terrains mostly stem from the quality of the height
map texture. Details (or lack thereof) in the height map have massive effect on the render
result. As the texture has a small resolution, bilinear interpolation has greater impact on
the details of the height map. Sharp changes over a short distance in the field will be
misrepresented, as interpolation will merge or smoothen the height map texture, in effect
removing important details. This can be alleviated by scaling the dimensions of the height
map and performing bilinear interpolation manually before writing the color values to the
texture. This is not only a costly preprocessing step in execution, but also requires manual
oversight to ensure all edge cases are handled adequately for the selected parameters.
Examples of this effect can be seen in Figure 4.40. As a result, small gaps in terrain are
often omitted entirely in rendering due to texture filtering overriding details in the height
map. Careful preparation and processing of the height map is crucial, otherwise the ren-
dering output may contain incorrect calculations, which cannot be addressed within the
fragment shader (the input is faulty).
Furthermore, using stepped terrain height maps introduces difficulties with the compu-
tation of surface normals. In the majority of real use cases, surface normals are used
to further customize and apply shading to rendered terrains and are considered crucial
elements in the visual design of computer graphics media. Surface gradients can be de-
rived from central differences if none are available beforehand, but this method requires
that the surface is continuous. In the case of a stepped height map, retrieving normals
is difficult and is a crude approximation which can be used for light customizations, but
otherwise unfit for detailed shading computations.
At its core, this is about finding the normals of the terrain cliffs, as the surfaces are simply
flat. Figure 4.41 presents the use of the vertex shader and fragment shader programs
respectively to compute surface normals to varying effects. Vertex normals are somewhat
interpolated across the surface of the walls, but depend on the shape of bounding volume.
Fragment normals are based on samples from the stepped height map which results in
the normals themselves being snapped to specific constant values. Fragment normals
can be defined over the surface of the wall by manipulating the distance of the samples
used to compute the surface derivative.
58
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.40: Effect of texture filtering on height map (top left), the stepped height map (bottom left)
and the result in rendered terrain (bottom right). Mesh generated for the same field (top right) for
reference. Shown for two cases, standard height map dimensions (left image), and twice scaled
dimensions with manual bilinear interpolation preprocessing (right image).
Figure 4.41: Comparison of rendered terrain surface normals computed in the vertex shader (left
image) and the fragment shader (right image).
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
59
==PAGE:68==
Vertex shader terrain
Description
Use of the shader vertex program and height map to offset the vertices
of a flat uniform mesh grid.
Advantages
Simple and performant solution.
Silhouette visible from any angle.
Works well with LOD mechanisms.
Pitfalls
Output highly depends on the granularity of the mesh grid. Detailed
terrain requires large amount of triangles.
Verdict
Using vertex shader programs for offsetting vertices based on the ter-
rain height map is a tried and true technique, but it is heavily constrained
by the resolution of the grid impacting the amount of detail in the ren-
dered terrain. Suitable for cases where terrain detail is not crucial and
is viewed from a larger distance, or where low-poly style is acceptable.
Table 4.12: Summary of the Vertex shader terrain implementation.
Parallax terrain
Description
Use of the parallax mapping technique to create an illusion of terrain
within flat geometry.
Advantages
Rendered terrain is detailed. Performant, may be implemented in ge-
ometry of just two triangles.
Pitfalls
Terrain silhouette is not visible from side view, as the terrain is sus-
pended inside of flat geometry.
Verdict
Parallax mapping for terrains is a relatively lightweight solution which
can be suspended in very limited geometry. A strong benefit of using
limited geometry is minimizing the memory footprint, but comes at a cost
of constraining the illusion of the parallax relative to a primitive surface.
This makes it unfit for cases where the terrain silhouette must be visible
from various angles including the sides of the terrain. Suitable for cases
where the terrain is only visible from above and viewing the terrain from
the side is not allowed.
Table 4.13: Summary of the Parallax terrain implementation.
60
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:69==
Linear polygon-assisted terrain
Description
Use of the vertex shader program to generate a bounding volume close
to the terrain with subsequent fragment shader ray marching in world
space inside of that volume. Polygon-assisted ray marching is a conve-
nient marriage of vertex shader offsetting and parallax mapping which
produces performant, constrained rendering together with the ability to
maintain terrain silhouettes at any angle.
Advantages
Rendered terrain is detailed. Rendering in world space allows easy
writing to z-buffer for compatibility with the rasterization pipeline.
Pitfalls
At higher resolutions, optimization techniques become necessary as
the performance of linearly stepped rays becomes unmanageable. The
difference in mean frames per second for resolutions 900 × 600 and 4K
is around 280, tested with blocky. Approach uses fragment discarding
for runaway rays which incurs additional processing costs.
Verdict
Suitable for detailed terrain rendering in low resolutions.
Table 4.14: Summary of the Linear polygon-assisted terrain implementation.
Bisection polygon-assisted terrain
Description
Extension to Linear polygon-assisted terrain which uses bisection
(based on binary search) for ray intersections.
Advantages
Rendered terrain is detailed. Rendering in world space allows easy
writing to z-buffer for compatibility with the rasterization pipeline. Per-
formant for higher resolutions (4K).
Pitfalls
Approach uses fragment discarding for runaway rays which incurs ad-
ditional processing costs.
Verdict
Using bisection is highly effective and maintains strong performance
as resolution scales upwards. This is a relatively trivial implementation
which provides effective results and should be utilized in any ray march-
ing context. Suitable for detailed terrain rendering in higher resolutions.
Table 4.15: Summary of the Bisection polygon-assisted terrain implementation.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
61
==PAGE:70==
Backface polygon-assisted terrain
Description
Extension to Linear polygon-assisted terrain which uses backface ren-
ders to establish ray terminal points.
Advantages
Rendered terrain is detailed. Rendering in world space allows easy writ-
ing to z-buffer for compatibility with the rasterization pipeline. Runaway
rays are terminated when exiting the bounding volume.
Pitfalls
Implementation is dependent on the accessibility to low level rendering
in the framework, cost of generating a pre-render may outweigh the
performance boost. Approach uses fragment discarding for runaway
rays which incurs additional processing costs.
Verdict
Suitable for detail terrain rendering given that a pre-render may be gen-
erated at a low level without incurring high processing costs. Use of
this technique in Unity is not recommended, as the logical processing
for additional scene cameras required to generate the pre-render are
high.
Table 4.16: Summary of the Backface polygon-assisted terrain implementation.
Variable polygon-assisted terrain
Description
Extension to Linear polygon-assisted terrain which includes support for
the use of mathematical functions to define the shape of the terrain’s
cliff walls.
Advantages
Rendered terrain is detailed and supports arbitrary stylized cliff wall
shapes. Rendering in world space allows easy writing to z-buffer for
compatibility with the rasterization pipeline. May easily be extended
with bisection for additional performance.
Pitfalls
Approach uses fragment discarding for runaway rays which incurs ad-
ditional processing costs.
Verdict
Suitable for detailed terrain rendering in higher resolutions, with addi-
tional support for structure post-processing options. The customiza-
tion of terrain cliff walls is easier done in ray marching contexts than
mesh geometry manipulation as fragment shader programs are easier
to script for mathematical relations. Each ray is responsible for finding
its own terminal point, displacement functions which are used to cre-
ate variable cliff walls are easy to plug and play for technical artists to
fiddle with. The use of variable wall displacement functions may even
have an optimization effect, as more rays are terminated in the space
between the the static wall and the bounding volume. With the use of
performance extensions of ray marching techniques, rendered terrain
in modern engineering contexts is no longer a concern of performance,
but rather of integration with other game systems and maintainability.
Table 4.17: Summary of the Variable polygon-assisted terrain implementation.
62
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:71==
5
Discussion
This chapter is dedicated to summarizing the results of the CPU optimizations and the
GPU-based implementations as well as a discussion of the comparison, advantages and
use cases of both approaches. Furthermore, future work and ideas for extensions are
proposed which complement the methodology presented in this thesis.
To summarize and compare the two avenues for generating stylized terrains in game de-
velopment contexts, first the question from Origin and goals is revisited: what is the value
of investigating alternative solutions to status quo implementations?, and more specif-
ically, is it worth changing the terrain graphics pipeline strategy?. Value certainly is a
subjective word in the context of software engineering, therefore it may be helpful to un-
derstand what the values of the two approaches are in terms of advantages, pitfalls and
requirements (cost of implementation).
5.1
Summary of the two methodologies
Both the use of the processor and the graphics pipeline to generate terrain are mature
workflows which have been deployed in many successful products and use causes, but
come with vastly different requirements and expectations. Both methodologies are de-
scribed in depth in their respective sections under Implementation & results, Optimizations
overview and Overview of GPU methods, and briefly summarized here.
As the computational powers of modern processors steadily increases and complexity is
a lesser concern, the present-day engineer is compelled to rather optimize for memory
management. Significant performance can be gained from utilizing data locality and other
data-centric design principles which minimize the costs of bussing data from memory to
the processor register. This is evident via the results of the data-parallelized Marching
Triangle variants presented in the project.
It is important to allow the reconsideration of assumptions and constraints in a production
environment. As an example from the context of this project, the use of inter-connected
meshes in lieu of triangle soups is a fair question. The threaded implementations were
not considered for use in production as their output was not aligned with the assumptions
made by the What The Car? project. Their rejection does raise an important question
on whether the additional complexity of generating inter-connected meshes is important
enough to discard other potentially more efficient solutions, such as compute shaders
which are becoming a staple of the game development toolkit. This is not an unreasonable
thought, as the terrain meshes generated in the project domain are not large by modern
standards, and therefore would likely not incur major render performance reductions when
formatted as a triangle soup. A further beneficial design overhaul should include the use
of chunking where possible.
On the processor side, rendered terrains are much easier to handle compared to poly-
gonization techniques, as these are simply uniform mesh grids of a given size, for which
the generation process is trivial and performant. They are insubstantial in the big picture
of the game’s lifecycle as these grids are generated once during initialization. The main
processing cost on the side of the CPU lies in manipulating height map textures and ac-
cepting the costs of transferring their data to the GPU. The bulk of the work is offloaded
to the graphics card which by modern standards is an acceptable approach given the
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
63
==PAGE:72==
accessibility to performant hardware. It is therefore reasonable to use rendering tech-
niques where possible to replace processing done on the processor. These techniques
are mainly based in the domain of ray marching. Terrains rendered with polygon-assisted
ray marching provide highly detailed, performant and customizable terrains which can be
used directly in production environments. The bulk of the cost of their implementation is
rather in the integration of these terrains with other game engine systems.
The two methodologies are compared side-by-side in Figure 5.1, recreated in the What
The Car? project environment.
Figure 5.1: Side by side comparison of baseline graphics style and proof of concept rendered
terrain (shaded with fragment shader normals).
5.2
Considerations on the determining the correct tool for a
given task
At its core, the difference between the two methodologies (CPU algorithms vs GPU ren-
dering) can be simplified and abstracted to a discussion of implementing algorithms for
transformations of data into tangible intermediate products which can be later used in mul-
tiple systems, or otherwise directly rendering the data to screen at end of a single game
frame’s lifecycle.
The use and processing of mesh data objects is a key feature of mature game engines
where many systems are connected via a common mesh interface. At a minimum these
are the graphics and shadows pipeline, the physics system (collision mesh baking) and the
culling/optimization system. Therefore, the advantage is a single entry point to accessing
crucial game systems. Modern game engines are built with the assumption of using this
approach as the standard rendering workflow (for any mesh), and often provide many
conveniences to enhance this workflow. Using and generating meshes comes at the cost
of increased algorithm complexity and memory usage which have to be rationed from the
unified resource pool shared by the remaining logical objects processing.
On the other hand, the use of rendering techniques offloads the mesh work result to
the graphics processor which removes most of the heavy work previously done in the
processor, as well as minimizing the memory footprint of the program. Textures stored
in memory can be removed once transferred to VRAM if they are no longer required in
the processor to further reduce allocation. The use of shader programs also constrains
the workflow to the very end of the frame’s lifecycle which eases the development of
64
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:73==
terrain by removing the necessity to prepare and pass forward the processed terrain data.
There is nothing left to do in a frame, except for rendering objects including the terrain.
The pitfall is the disengagement of this workflow from the other game systems. Most
critically, the impediment of the physics system is a reasonable deal-breaker, especially
for terrain which is often the core of a game world’s collision logic. While replacements
and workarounds can be made for the physics interactions with height map terrain, these
fixtures are dependent on game engine code which is often inaccessible to engineers
for deeper understanding and better integration. Ultimately, these are approximations
which will forever be one step behind implementations embedded in the engine’s designed
workflow. The same applies to other game engine systems.
With regards to the visual differences between the two approaches, it can be said that a
limitation of polygonization methods are in fact polygons. While triangle meshes can be
made to appear smooth with the use of larger mesh grid resolutions or effective use of
normals for shading, the limitation to creating more detailed meshes is a tangible maxi-
mum geometry size supported by the target platform. The benefit of ray rendered terrains
are the granular detail they provide from each singular ray’s output. The terrain cannot
be more detailed as each ray computes the miniscule detail of the point it eventually in-
tersects with.
Stepping away from game engines, it is also prudent to recognize the skillsets of teams
working on the game’s terrain implementation. More often than not, game developer/-
software engineers are more proficient at working with sequentially designed thread code
targeting processors, specializing in algorithms implementation. The knowledge required
for creating and maintaining mathematically oriented and highly parallelized shader pro-
gram code is usually found with technical artists, who are a rather uncommon member
of game development teams. That is to say, in the majority of the industry it is easier
for production strategy to dedicate programming roles to creating algorithmic processor
code, than it is to find technical artists and other engineers with the skillset to work on
shader-heavy rendered terrain implementations.
When working with implementations running on processing units, the well-equipped en-
gineer is not troubled by the inability to locate potential optimizations and trade-offs to
minimize the total run time by a significant margin. Even more so when they are profi-
cient in the programming language at hand. In the process of working in the environment
of What The Car?, other possible enhancements had been identified which further bring
down the total frame time. These are changes which can be quickly identified by the mo-
tivated engineer and often require minimal updates or, more commonly, the removal of
unnecessary processing. Among others, these are skipping mesh physics calculations
(baking) until the final frame of mesh modifications, or skipping an iteration of topology
redistribution in the terrain post-processing pipeline as roughly 80% of the visual effect is
achieved by the first iteration.
Both strategies can also be evaluated for their ease of maintainability. Commonly used
scripting languages for game engines (C#, C++, Python and similar) are modern high-
level interfaces which have matured to the point of providing abundant implementation
conveniences as well as design-centric tools for technical teams to communicate their
intentions. Moreover, these development environments provide debugging tools for en-
gineers to understand the precise behaviors of a given implementation. On the other
hand, the low-level graphics scripting languages (HLSL, GLSL) provide little infrastruc-
ture or direction for creating understandable, maintainable source code for future use by
the unexperienced, with little to none support for debugging.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
65
==PAGE:74==
As it is with all tools, their efficiency depends on the artisan. It is certainly possible for
the hurried engineer to produce illegible source code written in high-level languages, as
much as it is for the diligent engineer to produce clear and concise source code in low-level
languages. The technical personnel of any budding software endeavour, games industry
included, should strive to go beyond creating functional software by also creating legible
code supplemented with documentation where necessary, lest they create the necessity
of leasing a dedicated research project for the means of analysis.
5.3
Final verdict
In a final attempt to answer the posted question, the answer is yes, there is value in inves-
tigating alternative solutions to status quo implementations. The process of investigation
guided by knowledge of a specific team’s skillset and the project constraints, technical
and otherwise, is valuable in that the alternative solution may prove to better fit the stylis-
tic and technical wants and haves of the creation process. Through this process, the team
is able to then answer is it worth changing the terrain graphics pipeline strategy? for their
own benefit. Although, latest trends point to graphics card processing becoming powerful
processing units in their own right (among others: compute shaders, optimizations for ray
tracing), there is no overwhelming reason to disengage from integrated systems designed
for mesh geometry data if that should add friction to the development cycle.
It is the opinion of the author that game development endeavors based in modern game
engines should remain in the recommended workflow for that engine. In the case of Unity
that is fully utilizing the rasterization pipeline based on mesh geometry data, therefore
utilizing the maximal capabilities of CPU implementations such as data parallelization,
threading and chunking. This choice over the use of rendered terrain is not a concern
of performance, but of implementation cost due to inexistent conveniences and integra-
tions with other game systems, that is especially the physics engine. The investment
into custom integrations is better spent on progressing the game project as there are al-
ways options and trade-offs which can be made with regards to optimization when using
CPU-based algorithms.
Conversely, game engine developers should plan for the inclusion of features and inte-
grations which target rendered terrain and other scalar field surface rendering in order to
make this workflow friction-less for their users. Physics engine source code is often inac-
cessible to clients, therefore integrations must be offered from the engine vendor. Current
engines, Unity included, offer terrain modules which are based on vertex shader displace-
ment with chunking and LOD strategies, but these are often archaic systems which still
depend on high-triangle count meshes. Rendered terrain with the use of polygon-assisted
ray marching allows for a performant and customizable workflow which also aligns with
future trends for graphics cards support for ray tracing.
5.4
Future work
Throughout the process of research and experimentation in the domain of this thesis,
multiple options had been identified as interesting directions which did not fit in the scope
of this project.
A large constraint of this project is the immutability of the input data format, which itself is
problematic for the goals of GPU rendered terrain. Ray marching techniques in three-
dimensional space operate much better with three-dimensional signed distance fields
compared to the use of a height map. Therefore, it is of interest to create a process for
generating three-dimensional signed distance fields in runtime with accessible graphical
66
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:75==
user interfaces. Common solutions implement this in the form of a workflow for creating
three-dimensional constructive solid geometry (CSG). Editors provide tools for creating
mathematically defined shapes (cubes, spheres, tori, etc.) which can then be transformed
or blended with other shapes and their unions and intersections. While many detailed ob-
jects can be created in this process, the workflow is often cumbersome and unintuitive,
which requires artists to be meticulous. An alternative based on paintbrush strokes and
sculpting movements would make this process easier for artists to create detailed ter-
rains, which also work well with ray marching techniques. A naive algorithm could involve
flood-filling or parallelized writes to the distance field grid with distance to the newly modi-
fied position (conditionally, compared to the previous distance). Another approach which
would be a compromise between the two systems could be the use of point-to-spline
distances. Approximations to point-spline distances can be found with a combination of
Newton’s Method and Quadratic Minimization [39].
Another limitation of the project domain is the requirement of inter-connectivity in the mesh
geometry data. The reason for this requirement is for the triangle information to be later
used in the terrain post-processing for surface topology redistribution. This effectively
disallows the use of terrain mesh chunking, as each chunk would have to be included in
the surface smoothing process anyway. Instead of using grid-based chunking, another
approach could be to identify separate disjointed islands of the terrain created in the pro-
cess, which would be treated as separate chunks. The basic strategy could be to use an
auxiliary mask on the grid which would be used to categorize chunks as the geometry data
is created. Back propagation by flood-filling would be utilized to merge two chunks should
they collide. At the end of the polygonization process the mask can be queried by graph
traversal to filter vertices and triangles into separate meshes. This process would result
in the creation of separated (chunked) meshes from a single polygonization process. An
additional benefit is the reuse of the mask in the next modification, as it may validate how
many chunks require an update (or to handle merging).
In terrain rendering where the computation of a normal is difficult and the dependence on
input height maps for surface distance information is unreliable, an input-agnostic method
for finding the distance (and direction to the terrain wall) may prove beneficial to further
the independence of the implementation from its inputs and other preprocessing. Two
approaches are considered, the use of blurring to create a uniformly distributed scalar
field around the terrain’s edges which can be used for distance-to-wall or surface normals
computation.
The second approach is the use of a set of branching rays which march in directions
orthogonal to the ray, both of which lay in the terrain’s horizontal plane. The branching
rays are used to poll the height map for terrain, and should they intersect, the distance
information can be used to generate uniform distances to the terrain’s edge. The branch
directions can be computed via the Gram Schmidt procedure, using the camera’s world
right-direction as a seed. This process can be further optimized with bisection to minimize
the cost of additional ray steps.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
Atul Bagga. Emerging Trends In Games-as-a-Service. Gdcvault.com, 2025. URL:
https://www.gdcvault.com/play/1015035/Emerging-Trends-In-Games-as (visited on
05/12/2025).
[2]
Yuyue Liu, Haihan Duan, and Wei Cai. User-Generated Content and Editors in
Games: A Comprehensive Survey. 2024. arXiv: 2412.13743 [cs.MM]. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2412.13743.
[3]
Triband makes comedy games — triband.net. [Accessed 12-05-2025]. URL: https:
//triband.net/.
[4]
WHAT THE CAR? — whatthegames.com. https://whatthegames.com/car. [Ac-
cessed 12-05-2025].
[5]
Edith Tom, Aybüke Aurum, and Richard Vidgen. “An exploration of technical debt”.
In: Journal of Systems and Software 86.6 (2013), pp. 1498–1516. ISSN: 0164-1212.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.12.052. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0164121213000022.
[6]
Unity Real-Time Development Platform | 3D, 2D, VR & AR Engine — unity.com.
[Accessed 13-05-2025]. URL: https://unity.com/.
[7]
William E. Lorensen and Harvey E. Cline. “Marching cubes: A high resolution 3D
surface construction algorithm”. In: SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph. 21.4 (Aug. 1987),
pp. 163–169. ISSN: 0097-8930. DOI: 10.1145/37402.37422. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/37402.37422.
[8]
Ryoshoru. Marching cubes cases. 2023. URL: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:MarchingCubesEdit.svg.
[9]
Paul Bourke. Polygonising a scalar field. 1994. URL: https://paulbourke.net/geometry/
polygonise/.
[10]
Inigo Quilez. rays and polygons - 2010. https://iquilezles.org/articles/raypolys/.
[Accessed 13-05-2025]. 2010.
[11]
Will Usher. GPU compute in the browser at the speed of native: WebGPU Marching
cubes. 2024. URL: https://www.willusher.io/graphics/2024/04/22/webgpu-marching-
cubes/.
[12]
Dan Mahr and Justin Wang. Parallelized generation and smoothing of 2D contour
lines. URL: https://dmahr1.github.io/618-final/report.html.
[13]
The Roslyn .NET compiler provides C# and Visual Basic languages with rich code
analysis APIs. URL: https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn.
[14]
Unity Manual: C# compiler. URL: https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.2/Documentation/
Manual/csharp-compiler.html.
[15]
Anna Pawlukiewicz and Nedko Nedkov. Exploring performance issues and patterns
in C# by analyzing open-source projects. 2024. URL: https://www.diva-portal.org/
smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A1870029&dswid=-8794.
[16]
Luis Henriques and Jorge Bernardino. “Performance of Memory Deallocation in
C++, C# and Java”. In: 2018. URL: https : / / api . semanticscholar . org / CorpusID :
132474050.
[17]
Hakan Akdoğan et al. “Performance Analysis of Span Data Type in C# Programming
Language”. In: Doğa, Türk and Dergisi, Fen 1 (2024), pp. 29–36. DOI: 10.46810/tdfd.
1425662.
[18]
Burst compiler | Burst | 1.8.21. https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.unity.burst@
1.8/manual/index.html. [Accessed 26-05-2025].
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
69
==PAGE:78==
[19]
HPC# overview. URL: https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.unity.burst@1.8/
manual/csharp-hpc-overview.html.
[20]
Sergio Pedri. Introduction to the high performance package - community toolkits for
.NET. 2024. URL: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/communitytoolkit/high-
performance/introduction.
[21]
The LLVM Compiler Infrastructure Project. https://llvm.org/. [Accessed 26-05-
2025].
[22]
David B. Kirk and Wen-mei W. Hwu. Memory and data locality. Cited by: 1. 2017,
pp. 71 –101. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-811986-0.00004-2. URL: https://www.scopus.
com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85083936014&doi=10.1016%2fB978-0-12-811986-
0.00004-2&partnerID=40&md5=27e8c15938e0a8a0b39147084ffd55a1.
[23]
Kristof Beyls and Erik H. D’Hollander. “Refactoring for data locality”. In: Computer
42.2 (2009). Cited by: 51, pp. 62 –71. DOI: 10.1109/MC.2009.57. URL: https://www.
scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-61449142683&doi=10.1109%2fMC.2009.
57&partnerID=40&md5=969cf0ae49d172a8cd840dcec9ac0f9f.
[24]
Kathryn S. McKinley, Steve Carr, and Chau-Wen Tseng. “Improving data locality
with loop transformations”. In: ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 18.4 (July 1996),
pp. 424–453. ISSN: 0164-0925. DOI: 10.1145/233561.233564. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/233561.233564.
[25]
Tomomichi Kaneko et al. “Detailed shape representation with parallax mapping”. In:
In Proceedings of the ICAT 2001 (Jan. 2001).
[26]
Fábio Policarpo, Manuel M. Oliveira, and João L. D. Comba. “Real-time relief map-
ping on arbitrary polygonal surfaces”. In: Proceedings of the 2005 Symposium on
Interactive 3D Graphics and Games. I3D ’05. Washington, District of Columbia: As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, 2005, pp. 155–162. ISBN: 1595930132. DOI:
10.1145/1053427.1053453. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/1053427.1053453.
[27]
Mike Wakid, Can Kirmizibayrak, and James K. Hahn. “Texture mapping volumes
using GPU-based polygon-assisted raycasting”. In: 2011 16th International Confer-
ence on Computer Games (CGAMES). 2011, pp. 162–166. DOI: 10.1109/CGAMES.
2011.6000333.
[28]
Art Tevs, Ivo Ihrke, and Hans-Peter Seidel. “Maximum mipmaps for fast, accurate,
and scalable dynamic height field rendering”. In: Proceedings of the 2008 Sympo-
sium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games. I3D ’08. Redwood City, California:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2008, pp. 183–190. ISBN: 9781595939838.
DOI: 10.1145/1342250.1342279. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/1342250.1342279.
[29]
Michal Drobot. Quadtree Displacement Mapping with Height Blending. https://www.
gamedevs.org/uploads/quadtree- displacement- mapping- with- height- blending.pdf.
[Accessed 17-05-2025].
[30]
Sebastian Macke. Terrain Rendering algorithm in less than 20 lines of code. URL:
https://github.com/s-macke/VoxelSpace.
[31]
Alexander Ameye. Stylized water shader. URL: https://ameye.dev/notes/stylized-
water-shader/.
[32]
Unity 2022.3.42. https://unity.com/releases/editor/whats-new/2022.3.42. [Accessed
26-05-2025].
[33]
Collections package | Collections | 2.5.7. https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.
unity.collections@2.5/manual/index.html. [Accessed 26-05-2025].
[34]
Performance Testing Package for Unity Test Framework | Performance testing API
| 3.0.3. https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.unity.test-framework.performance@
3.0/manual/index.html. [Accessed 26-05-2025].
70
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:79==
[35]
High-level shader language (HLSL) - Win32 apps — learn.microsoft.com. https:
//learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl. [Accessed
26-05-2025].
[36]
Unity - Manual: Writing shaders overview. https : / / docs . unity3d . com / 2022 . 3 /
Documentation/Manual/SL-ShadingLanguage.html. [Accessed 26-05-2025].
[37]
Apple iPhone X - Specifications. https://www.devicespecifications.com/en/model/
36ea45ae. [Accessed 26-05-2025].
[38]
Unity - Manual: Standard Shader Material Inspector window reference for the Built-
In Render Pipeline. https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.1/Documentation/Manual/
StandardShaderMaterialParameters.html. [Accessed 02-06-2025].
[39]
Tom Lyche, Marie-Laurence Mazure, and Larry L Schumaker. Curve and surface
design: Saint-Malo 2002. en. Nashboro PressInc, 2003.
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:81==
A
Appendix
A.1
Results
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
100
200
300
400
500
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Lookup
Reference
Rotation (Job)
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup (Job)
Figure A.1: Comparison of execution time for Reference Rotation (baseline), Lookup, Reference
Rotation (Job), Reference Rotation (Job) no map, and Lookup (Job) (blocky).
n-f-sm-10
n-f-lg-10
n-f-ii-10
n-f-lg-100
n-f-sm-100
Test
0
5
10
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-ii-10
no-burst-full-InvertedIslets51X51-iters-10
n-f-lg-100
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-100
n-f-sm-100
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-100
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Reference
Rotation no map
Lookup
Lookup w/
heuristics
Figure A.2: Comparison of execution time for Reference Rotation (baseline), Reference Rotation
array lookup, Lookup and Lookup w/ heuristics Marching Triangles implementations (proart).
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
73
==PAGE:82==
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
100
200
300
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Lookup
Reference
Rotation (Job)
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup (Job)
Figure A.3: Comparison of execution time for Reference Rotation (baseline), Lookup, Reference
Rotation (Job), Reference Rotation (Job) no map, and Lookup (Job) (proart).
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
2
4
6
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Reference
Rotation no map
Lookup
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup (Job)
Figure A.4: Use of Unity Burst for data parallelization for the Reference Rotation and Lookup
implementations (proart).
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
1
2
3
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
RR threaded 1
RR threaded 8
RR threaded 16
RR threaded 32
RR threaded 64
RR threaded fit
Figure A.5: Threaded triangle soup mesh generation with Reference Rotation (proart).
74
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:83==
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Lk threaded 1
Lk threaded 8
Lk threaded 16
Lk threaded 32
Lk threaded 64
Lk threaded fit
Figure A.6: Threaded triangle soup mesh generation with Lookup (proart).
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Test
0
2
4
6
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-sm-10
no-burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-sm-10
burst-full-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Lookup
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup (Job)
RR threaded 64
Lk threaded 64
Figure A.7: Comparison of previously best implementations with best stable threaded implemen-
tations (proart).
n-f-lg-10
n-1-lg-10
b-f-lg-10
b-1-lg-10
Test
0
2
4
6
8
10
Mean execution time [ms]
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
n-1-lg-10
no-burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-1-lg-10
burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Lookup
Lk chunk 10x10
Lk chunk 25x25
Lk chunk 50x50
Lk (Job) chunk
10x10
Lk (Job) chunk
25x25
Lk (Job) chunk
50x50
Figure A.8: Comparison of chunked terrain creation in runtime (proart).
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
75
==PAGE:84==
n-1-lg-10
b-1-lg-10
b-10-lg-10
b-10-sm-10
Test
0
1
2
3
4
Mean execution time [ms]
n-1-lg-10
no-burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
b-1-lg-10
burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
b-10-lg-10
burst-partial-10-LargeField-iters-10
b-10-sm-10
burst-partial-10-SmallField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Lk chunk 10x10
Lk chunk 25x25
Lk chunk 50x50
Lk (Job) chunk
10x10
Lk (Job) chunk
25x25
Lk (Job) chunk
50x50
Figure A.9: Comparison of chunked terrain creation in runtime with only partial modifications
(proart).
n-1-lg-10
b-1-lg-10
n-f-lg-10
b-f-lg-10
Test
0
2
4
6
Mean execution time [ms]
n-1-lg-10
no-burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
b-1-lg-10
burst-partial-1-LargeField-iters-10
n-f-lg-10
no-burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
b-f-lg-10
burst-full-LargeField-iters-10
Median
Min-Max
Reference
Rotation
Lookup
Reference
Rotation (Job)
no map
Lookup (Job)
RR threaded 64
Lk (Job) chunk
10x10
Figure A.10: Comparison of most performant Marching Triangles implementations (proart).
76
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:85==
A.1.1
Tables
Test
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Algorithm
Reference Rotation
7.77ms (100%)
7.71ms (100%)
7.88ms (100%)
8.07ms (100%)
Reference Rotation no
map
5.66ms (73%)
5.68ms (74%)
5.73ms (73%)
6.17ms (76%)
Lookup
4.48ms (58%)
4.19ms (54%)
4.14ms (53%)
4.21ms (52%)
Lookup w/ heuristics
4.24ms (55%)
4.32ms (56%)
4.15ms (53%)
4.21ms (52%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job)
559.53ms
(7203%)
558.71ms
(7248%)
41.43ms
(526%)
41.53ms
(514%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job) no map
11.55ms
(149%)
11.50ms
(149%)
0.58ms (7%)
0.59ms (7%)
Lookup (Job)
12.12ms
(156%)
12.06ms
(156%)
0.88ms (11%)
0.83ms (10%)
RR threaded 1
17.15ms
(221%)
17.20ms
(223%)
2.21ms (28%)
2.19ms (27%)
RR threaded 8
17.19ms
(221%)
17.32ms
(225%)
2.06ms (26%)
2.07ms (26%)
RR threaded 16
16.76ms
(216%)
17.85ms
(232%)
2.03ms (26%)
2.04ms (25%)
RR threaded 32
16.45ms
(212%)
19.09ms
(248%)
2.06ms (26%)
2.05ms (25%)
RR threaded 64
16.69ms
(215%)
17.40ms
(226%)
2.06ms (26%)
2.07ms (26%)
RR threaded fit
19.83ms
(255%)
19.56ms
(254%)
3.45ms (44%)
3.46ms (43%)
Lk threaded 1
22.13ms
(285%)
22.05ms
(286%)
5.92ms (75%)
5.28ms (65%)
Lk threaded 8
21.47ms
(276%)
21.45ms
(278%)
5.71ms (72%)
5.26ms (65%)
Lk threaded 16
35.04ms
(451%)
21.41ms
(278%)
6.45ms (82%)
5.25ms (65%)
Lk threaded 32
33.59ms
(432%)
21.46ms
(278%)
8.50ms (108%)
5.23ms (65%)
Lk threaded 64
22.54ms
(290%)
21.58ms
(280%)
7.59ms (96%)
5.21ms (64%)
Lk threaded fit
24.89ms
(320%)
27.11ms
(352%)
7.21ms (92%)
6.70ms (83%)
Lk chunk 10x10
7.03ms (90%)
6.97ms (90%)
6.76ms (86%)
6.92ms (86%)
Lk chunk 25x25
4.97ms (64%)
4.89ms (63%)
4.73ms (60%)
4.71ms (58%)
Lk chunk 50x50
4.99ms (64%)
16.90ms
(219%)
4.50ms (57%)
4.42ms (55%)
Lk (Job) chunk 10x10
6.26ms (81%)
5.61ms (73%)
2.17ms (28%)
2.16ms (27%)
Lk (Job) chunk 25x25
4.57ms (59%)
3.92ms (51%)
0.68ms (9%)
0.66ms (8%)
Lk (Job) chunk 50x50
6.22ms (80%)
4.78ms (62%)
0.62ms (8%)
0.64ms (8%)
Table A.1: Median execution time for all implementations, across full execution tests (blocky).
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
77
==PAGE:86==
Test
n-1-lg-10
b-1-lg-10
b-10-lg-10
b-10-sm-10
Algorithm
Reference Rotation
7.60ms (100%)
7.67ms (100%)
8.02ms (100%)
8.20ms (100%)
Reference Rotation no
map
5.70ms (75%)
5.76ms (75%)
5.72ms (71%)
5.62ms (69%)
Lookup
4.16ms (55%)
4.21ms (55%)
4.14ms (52%)
4.27ms (52%)
Lookup w/ heuristics
4.16ms (55%)
4.23ms (55%)
4.30ms (54%)
4.90ms (60%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job)
559.93ms
(7366%)
41.00ms
(535%)
41.67ms
(520%)
41.42ms
(505%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job) no map
11.56ms
(152%)
0.57ms (7%)
0.61ms (8%)
0.58ms (7%)
Lookup (Job)
11.92ms
(157%)
0.84ms (11%)
0.82ms (10%)
0.83ms (10%)
RR threaded 1
19.69ms
(259%)
2.16ms (28%)
2.38ms (30%)
2.85ms (35%)
RR threaded 8
19.25ms
(253%)
2.13ms (28%)
2.08ms (26%)
2.72ms (33%)
RR threaded 16
17.72ms
(233%)
2.05ms (27%)
2.07ms (26%)
2.56ms (31%)
RR threaded 32
18.95ms
(249%)
2.08ms (27%)
2.07ms (26%)
2.58ms (32%)
RR threaded 64
16.58ms
(218%)
2.03ms (26%)
2.06ms (26%)
2.33ms (28%)
RR threaded fit
20.82ms
(274%)
3.48ms (45%)
3.55ms (44%)
3.62ms (44%)
Lk threaded 1
21.98ms
(289%)
6.63ms (86%)
5.31ms (66%)
5.38ms (66%)
Lk threaded 8
21.64ms
(285%)
5.44ms (71%)
5.29ms (66%)
5.30ms (65%)
Lk threaded 16
21.52ms
(283%)
5.63ms (73%)
5.23ms (65%)
16.54ms
(202%)
Lk threaded 32
21.48ms
(283%)
5.40ms (70%)
5.30ms (66%)
5.42ms (66%)
Lk threaded 64
21.77ms
(286%)
5.23ms (68%)
5.26ms (66%)
5.19ms (63%)
Lk threaded fit
27.34ms
(360%)
6.99ms (91%)
6.78ms (85%)
6.86ms (84%)
Lk chunk 10x10
0.05ms (1%)
0.01ms (0%)
0.34ms (4%)
0.49ms (6%)
Lk chunk 25x25
0.10ms (1%)
0.02ms (0%)
1.60ms (20%)
1.82ms (22%)
Lk chunk 50x50
0.21ms (3%)
0.20ms (3%)
3.91ms (49%)
3.94ms (48%)
Lk (Job) chunk 10x10
0.18ms (2%)
0.07ms (1%)
0.23ms (3%)
0.27ms (3%)
Lk (Job) chunk 25x25
0.35ms (5%)
0.09ms (1%)
0.34ms (4%)
0.35ms (4%)
Lk (Job) chunk 50x50
0.73ms (10%)
0.11ms (1%)
0.61ms (8%)
0.69ms (8%)
Table A.2:
Median execution time for all implementations, across partial modification tests
(blocky).
78
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:87==
Test
n-f-lg-10
n-f-sm-10
b-f-lg-10
b-f-sm-10
Algorithm
Reference Rotation
3.61ms (100%)
3.78ms (100%)
3.60ms (100%)
3.59ms (100%)
Reference Rotation no
map
2.98ms (82%)
3.11ms (82%)
2.94ms (82%)
2.96ms (83%)
Lookup
1.85ms (51%)
1.92ms (51%)
1.84ms (51%)
1.84ms (51%)
Lookup w/ heuristics
1.82ms (50%)
1.89ms (50%)
1.81ms (50%)
1.80ms (50%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job)
339.92ms
(9418%)
357.63ms
(9466%)
28.87ms
(801%)
28.73ms
(800%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job) no map
5.03ms (139%)
5.26ms (139%)
0.24ms (7%)
0.24ms (7%)
Lookup (Job)
4.75ms (132%)
4.95ms (131%)
0.37ms (10%)
0.37ms (10%)
RR threaded 1
1.99ms (55%)
1.98ms (52%)
0.51ms (14%)
0.51ms (14%)
RR threaded 8
1.99ms (55%)
1.97ms (52%)
0.49ms (14%)
0.50ms (14%)
RR threaded 16
2.00ms (56%)
1.98ms (52%)
0.50ms (14%)
0.49ms (14%)
RR threaded 32
2.03ms (56%)
2.00ms (53%)
0.51ms (14%)
0.52ms (14%)
RR threaded 64
2.09ms (58%)
1.97ms (52%)
0.51ms (14%)
0.50ms (14%)
RR threaded fit
2.69ms (74%)
2.71ms (72%)
0.85ms (24%)
0.84ms (24%)
Lk threaded 1
3.85ms (107%)
3.94ms (104%)
2.01ms (56%)
1.97ms (55%)
Lk threaded 8
3.81ms (106%)
3.95ms (105%)
1.98ms (55%)
1.94ms (54%)
Lk threaded 16
3.81ms (105%)
3.99ms (106%)
1.92ms (53%)
1.93ms (54%)
Lk threaded 32
3.79ms (105%)
3.98ms (105%)
1.92ms (53%)
1.93ms (54%)
Lk threaded 64
4.02ms (111%)
4.00ms (106%)
1.99ms (55%)
1.94ms (54%)
Lk threaded fit
4.55ms (126%)
5.01ms (132%)
2.33ms (65%)
2.31ms (64%)
Lk chunk 10x10
2.93ms (81%)
3.03ms (80%)
2.86ms (79%)
2.88ms (80%)
Lk chunk 25x25
2.13ms (59%)
2.20ms (58%)
2.11ms (58%)
2.10ms (59%)
Lk chunk 50x50
1.96ms (54%)
2.05ms (54%)
1.98ms (55%)
1.95ms (54%)
Lk (Job) chunk 10x10
1.29ms (36%)
1.58ms (42%)
0.95ms (26%)
1.04ms (29%)
Lk (Job) chunk 25x25
0.81ms (23%)
0.83ms (22%)
0.22ms (6%)
0.24ms (7%)
Lk (Job) chunk 50x50
1.55ms (43%)
1.93ms (51%)
0.24ms (7%)
0.22ms (6%)
Table A.3: Median execution time for all implementations, across full execution tests (proart).
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
79
==PAGE:88==
Test
n-1-lg-10
b-1-lg-10
b-10-lg-10
b-10-sm-10
Algorithm
Reference Rotation
3.79ms (100%)
3.61ms (100%)
3.63ms (100%)
3.62ms (100%)
Reference Rotation no
map
3.11ms (82%)
2.98ms (82%)
2.98ms (82%)
2.97ms (82%)
Lookup
1.92ms (51%)
1.85ms (51%)
1.85ms (51%)
1.85ms (51%)
Lookup w/ heuristics
1.89ms (50%)
1.80ms (50%)
1.81ms (50%)
1.82ms (50%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job)
358.43ms
(9463%)
28.74ms
(796%)
29.07ms
(800%)
29.00ms
(801%)
Reference
Rotation
(Job) no map
5.27ms (139%)
0.24ms (7%)
0.24ms (7%)
0.24ms (7%)
Lookup (Job)
5.00ms (132%)
0.37ms (10%)
0.37ms (10%)
0.37ms (10%)
RR threaded 1
2.00ms (53%)
0.52ms (14%)
0.54ms (15%)
0.51ms (14%)
RR threaded 8
1.98ms (52%)
0.49ms (13%)
0.51ms (14%)
0.49ms (14%)
RR threaded 16
1.99ms (53%)
0.48ms (13%)
0.49ms (13%)
0.49ms (13%)
RR threaded 32
1.99ms (53%)
0.49ms (14%)
0.50ms (14%)
0.49ms (14%)
RR threaded 64
1.97ms (52%)
0.49ms (14%)
0.50ms (14%)
0.50ms (14%)
RR threaded fit
2.95ms (78%)
0.86ms (24%)
0.86ms (24%)
0.95ms (26%)
Lk threaded 1
3.94ms (104%)
1.90ms (52%)
1.91ms (52%)
1.95ms (54%)
Lk threaded 8
3.97ms (105%)
1.88ms (52%)
1.88ms (52%)
1.88ms (52%)
Lk threaded 16
3.96ms (105%)
1.89ms (52%)
1.90ms (52%)
1.90ms (52%)
Lk threaded 32
3.98ms (105%)
1.89ms (52%)
1.87ms (52%)
1.89ms (52%)
Lk threaded 64
3.99ms (105%)
1.91ms (53%)
1.89ms (52%)
1.90ms (53%)
Lk threaded fit
4.98ms (131%)
2.37ms (66%)
2.29ms (63%)
2.28ms (63%)
Lk chunk 10x10
0.01ms (0%)
0.00ms (0%)
0.22ms (6%)
0.19ms (5%)
Lk chunk 25x25
0.05ms (1%)
0.01ms (0%)
1.05ms (29%)
0.71ms (20%)
Lk chunk 50x50
0.09ms (2%)
0.08ms (2%)
1.45ms (40%)
1.11ms (31%)
Lk (Job) chunk 10x10
0.05ms (1%)
0.03ms (1%)
0.10ms (3%)
0.10ms (3%)
Lk (Job) chunk 25x25
0.16ms (4%)
0.04ms (1%)
0.14ms (4%)
0.13ms (4%)
Lk (Job) chunk 50x50
0.26ms (7%)
0.06ms (2%)
0.20ms (6%)
0.18ms (5%)
Table A.4: Median execution time for all implementations, across partial modification tests (proart).
80
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:89==
A.2
Implementations
A.2.1
Marching Triangles (Reference Rotation)
Listing A.1: Marching Triangles (Reference Rotation) implemented in C#.
1
public static void ReferenceRotation (
2
int densityWidth ,
3
int densityHeight
4
byte [ ]
heightFieldData ,
5
/ /
. . .
Geometry data
structures
6
)
7
{
8
var indexByVertexLookup = new Dictionary <Vector2 ,
int >() ;
9
10
for ( var row = 1; row < densityHeight ;
row++)
11
{
12
var
squareStartY = row −1;
13
var squareEndY = row ;
14
var
squareStartYFlatIndex = squareStartY * densityWidth ;
15
var squareEndYFlatIndex = squareEndY * densityWidth ;
16
17
var isEvenRow = ( row & 1) == 0;
18
var
h o r i z o n t a l O f f s e t = ( isEvenRow ? 1 :
−1) * 0.25;
19
for ( var column = 1; column < densityWidth ;
column++)
20
{
21
var
squareStartX = column −1;
22
var squareEndX = column ;
23
24
var
i0 = squareStartX + squareStartYFlatIndex ;
/ /
The pivot
i s
at
reference
index zero
25
var b0 = heightFieldData [ i0 ] ;
26
var
in0 = b0 > HeightThreshold ;
27
var p0 = new Vector2 ( squareStartX −horizontalOffset ,
squareStartY ) ;
28
var
i1 = squareStartX + squareEndYFlatIndex ;
29
var b1 = heightFieldData [ i1 ] ;
30
var
in1 = b1 > HeightThreshold ;
31
var p1 = new Vector2 ( squareStartX + horizontalOffset ,
squareEndY ) ;
32
var
i2 = squareEndX + squareEndYFlatIndex ;
33
var b2 = heightFieldData [ i2 ] ;
34
var
in2 = b2 > HeightThreshold ;
35
var p2 = new Vector2 ( squareEndX + horizontalOffset ,
squareEndY ) ;
36
var
i3 = squareEndX + squareStartYFlatIndex ;
37
var b3 = heightFieldData [ i3 ] ;
38
var
in3 = b3 > HeightThreshold ;
39
var p3 = new Vector2 ( squareEndX −horizontalOffset ,
squareStartY ) ;
40
41
var
allOut =
! ( in0
| |
in1
| |
in2
| |
in3 ) ;
42
if ( allOut )
continue ;
43
44
if ( in2 )
/ /
The corner
opposite
the
pivot
w i l l
be included
in
the
geometry ,
therefore add
i t
to
the
vertex
l i s t
45
{
46
indexByVertexLookup . Add( p2 ,
indexByVertexLookup . Count ) ;
47
/ /
Add vertex v2
48
}
49
50
if ( isEvenRow )
/ /
Rotate the
pivot
to
the obtuse angle
of
the
parallelogram
51
{
/*
. . .
Cycle the
references by one p o s i t i o n
(2−>1, 3−>2, 0−>3, 1−>0)
*/
}
52
53
for ( var
t r i a n g l e = 0;
t r i a n g l e < 2;
t r i a n g l e ++)
/ /
Handle both
t r i a n g l e s
of
the
c e l l
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
81
==PAGE:90==
54
{
55
var
insideCount = 0;
56
57
if ( in0 )
insideCount ++;
58
if ( in1 )
insideCount ++;
59
if ( in2 )
insideCount ++;
60
61
if ( insideCount == 1)
/ /
Equivalent
to
t r i a n g l e
b i t
masks 001 , 010 and
100
62
{
63
for ( var
triangleIndex = 0;
triangleIndex < 3;
triangleIndex ++)
64
{
65
if ( in0 )
66
{
67
var index0 = indexByVertexLookup [ p0 ] ;
68
var midPoint01 = ( p0 + p1 ) * 0.5 f ;
69
70
if
( ! indexByVertexLookup . TryGetValue ( midPoint01 ,
out var index01
) )
71
{
72
index01 = indexByVertexLookup . Count ;
73
/ /
Add i n t e r p o l a t e d
vertex
74
indexByVertexLookup . Add( midPoint01 ,
index01 ) ;
75
}
76
77
var midPoint02 = ( p2 + p0 ) * 0.5 f ;
78
if
( ! indexByVertexLookup . TryGetValue ( midPoint02 ,
out var index02
) )
79
{
80
index02 = indexByVertexLookup . Count ;
81
/ /
Add i n t e r p o l a t e d
vertex
82
indexByVertexLookup . Add( midPoint02 ,
index02 ) ;
83
}
84
85
/ /
Add t r i a n g l e
index0 ,
index01 ,
index02
86
/ /
Add edge index02 ,
index01
87
}
88
89
/ /
Cycle the
t r i a n g l e
references by one p o s i t i o n
(1−>0, 2−>1,
0−>2)
90
}
91
}
92
else if ( insideCount == 2)
/ /
Equivalent
to
t r i a n g l e
b i t
masks 011 ,
110 and 101
93
{
94
for ( var
triangleIndex = 0;
triangleIndex < 3;
triangleIndex ++)
95
{
96
if
( ! in0 )
97
{
98
Vector2
interpolatedVector01 ,
interpolatedVector02 ;
99
var index1 = indexByVertexLookup [ p1 ] ;
100
var index2 = indexByVertexLookup [ p2 ] ;
101
102
var midPoint01 = ( p0 + p1 ) * 0.5 f ;
103
if ( indexByVertexLookup . TryGetValue ( midPoint01 ,
out var index01 )
)
104
interpolatedVector01 = contourVertices [ index01 ] ;
105
else
106
{
107
index01 = indexByVertexLookup . Count ;
108
/ /
Add i n t e r p o l a t e d
vertex
109
indexByVertexLookup . Add( midPoint01 ,
index01 ) ;
82
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:91==
110
}
111
112
var midPoint02 = ( p2 + p0 ) * 0.5 f ;
113
if ( indexByVertexLookup . TryGetValue ( midPoint02 ,
out var index02 )
)
114
interpolatedVector02 = contourVertices [ index02 ] ;
115
else
116
{
117
index02 = indexByVertexLookup . Count ;
118
/ /
Add i n t e r p o l a t e d
vertex
119
indexByVertexLookup . Add( midPoint02 ,
index02 ) ;
120
}
121
122
var
is01DiagonalBetter = ( interpolatedVector01 −p2 ) .
sqrMagnitude <
123
( interpolatedVector02 −p1 ) . sqrMagnitude ;
124
if ( is01DiagonalBetter )
125
{
126
/ /
Add t r i a n g l e
index01 ,
index1 ,
index2
127
/ /
Add t r i a n g l e
index2 ,
index02 ,
index01
128
}
129
else
130
{
131
/ /
Add t r i a n g l e
index1 ,
index2 ,
index02
132
/ /
Add t r i a n g l e
index02 ,
index01 ,
index1
133
}
134
135
/ /
Add edge index01 ,
index02
136
}
137
138
/ /
Cycle the
t r i a n g l e
references by one p o s i t i o n
(1−>0, 2−>1,
0−>2)
139
}
140
}
141
else if ( insideCount == 3)
/ /
Equivalent
to
t r i a n g l e
b i t mask 111
142
{
143
var index0 = indexByVertexLookup [ p0 ] ;
144
var index1 = indexByVertexLookup [ p1 ] ;
145
var index2 = indexByVertexLookup [ p2 ] ;
146
/ /
Add t r i a n g l e
index0 ,
index1 ,
index2
147
}
148
149
/ /
Cycle references by two
positions
to
t h e i r
opposite
corners (2−>0,
3−>1, 0−>2, 1−>3)
150
}
151
}
152
}
153
}
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
83
==PAGE:92==
A.2.2
Marching Triangles (Lookup)
Listing A.2: Marching Triangles (Lookup) implemented in C#.
1
public static void Lookup (
2
int densityWidth ,
3
int densityHeight
4
byte [ ]
heightFieldData ,
5
/ /
. . .
Geometry data
structures
6
)
7
{
8
var
pointToIndexMatrix = int [ densityWidth * 2 * densityHeight *
2 ] ;
9
10
Span<int> triangleX = stackalloc int [ 3 ] ;
11
Span<int> triangleY = stackalloc int [ 3 ] ;
12
Span<int> contourResolver = stackalloc int [ 4 ] ;
13
14
for ( var row = 1; row < densityHeight ;
row++)
15
{
16
var
squareStartY = row −1;
17
var squareEndY = row ;
18
var
squareStartYFlatIndex = squareStartY * densityWidth ;
19
var squareEndYFlatIndex = squareEndY * densityWidth ;
20
21
var isEvenRow = ( row & 1) == 0;
22
for ( var column = 1; column < densityWidth ;
column++)
23
{
24
var
squareStartX = column −1;
25
var squareEndX = column ;
26
27
var squareMask = 0;
28
if ( heightFieldData [ squareStartX + squareStartYFlatIndex ] >
HeightThreshold )
29
squareMask |= 0b0001 ;
30
if ( heightFieldData [ squareStartX + squareEndYFlatIndex ] >
HeightThreshold )
31
squareMask |= 0b0010 ;
32
if ( heightFieldData [ squareEndX + squareEndYFlatIndex ] > HeightThreshold )
33
squareMask |= 0b0100 ;
34
if ( heightFieldData [ squareEndX + squareStartYFlatIndex ] >
HeightThreshold )
35
squareMask |= 0b1000 ;
36
if ( squareMask == 0) continue ;
/ /
The c e l l
i s
e n t i r e l y
empty
37
38
var
doesIncludeLeftTriangle = isEvenRow && squareMask != 0b0100
| |
!
isEvenRow && squareMask != 0b1000 ;
39
if ( doesIncludeLeftTriangle )
40
{
41
triangleX [ 0 ] = squareStartX ;
42
triangleY [ 0 ] = squareStartY ;
43
triangleX [ 1 ] = squareStartX ;
44
triangleY [ 1 ] = squareEndY ;
45
triangleX [ 2 ] = squareEndX ;
46
triangleY [ 2 ] = isEvenRow ? squareStartY
:
squareEndY ;
47
HandleTriangle ( ref triangleX ,
ref triangleY ,
ref contourResolver ) ;
48
}
49
50
var
doesIncludeRightTriangle = isEvenRow && squareMask != 0b0001
| |
!
isEvenRow && squareMask != 0b0010 ;
51
if ( doesIncludeRightTriangle )
52
{
53
triangleX [ 0 ] = squareEndX ;
54
triangleY [ 0 ] = squareEndY ;
84
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:93==
55
triangleX [ 1 ] = squareEndX ;
56
triangleY [ 1 ] = squareStartY ;
57
triangleX [ 2 ] = squareStartX ;
58
triangleY [ 2 ] = isEvenRow ? squareEndY
:
squareStartY ;
59
HandleTriangle ( ref triangleX ,
ref triangleY ,
ref contourResolver ) ;
60
}
61
}
62
}
63
}
64
65
private static void HandleTriangle ( ref Span<int> triangleX ,
ref Span<int>
triangleY ,
ref Span<int> contourResolver )
66
{
67
var
triangleMask = 0;
68
if ( heightFieldData [ triangleX [ 0 ] + triangleY [ 0 ] * densityWidth ] >
HeightThreshold )
69
triangleMask
|= 0b001 ;
70
if ( heightFieldData [ triangleX [ 1 ] + triangleY [ 1 ] * densityWidth ] >
HeightThreshold )
71
triangleMask
|= 0b010 ;
72
if ( heightFieldData [ triangleX [ 2 ] + triangleY [ 2 ] * densityWidth ] >
HeightThreshold )
73
triangleMask
|= 0b100 ;
74
var
triangleCase = TriangleCaseLookup [ triangleMask ] ;
75
76
for ( var caseIndex = 0;
caseIndex < triangleCase . Length ;
caseIndex ++)
77
{
78
var
s p l i t I n d e x = triangleCase [ caseIndex ] ;
/ /
Triangle case indices
are
in
doubled space to
support mid point
v e r t i c e s
79
var
triangleIndex = s p l i t I n d e x
/
2;
80
var
i s S p l i t I n d e x = ( s p l i t I n d e x & 1) == 1;
81
82
var marchSpaceX = triangleX [ triangleIndex ] ;
83
var marchSpaceY = triangleY [ triangleIndex ] ;
84
var
horizontalOffsetApplied = ( marchSpaceY & 1) == 0 ? 0.25
:
−0.25;
85
var worldSpaceX = marchSpaceX + horizontalOffsetApplied ;
86
87
var
vertex = new Vector2 ( worldSpaceX , marchSpaceY ) ;
88
var lookupSpaceX = marchSpaceX * 2;
89
var lookupSpaceY = marchSpaceY * 2;
90
var toMarchSpaceX = triangleX [ ( triangleIndex + 1) % 3 ] ;
91
var toMarchSpaceY = triangleY [ ( triangleIndex + 1) % 3 ] ;
92
93
if ( i s S p l i t I n d e x )
94
{
95
lookupSpaceX += toMarchSpaceX −marchSpaceX ;
96
lookupSpaceY += toMarchSpaceY −marchSpaceY ;
97
}
98
var
flatYIndex = densityWidth * 2 * lookupSpaceY ;
99
var
globalIndex = pointToIndexMatrix [ lookupSpaceX + flatYIndex ] ;
100
if ( globalIndex == 0)
101
{
102
globalIndex =
103
pointToIndexMatrix [ lookupSpaceX + flatYIndex ] =
104
( contourVertices . Count + 1) ;
105
overwrittenIndices . Add( lookupSpaceX + flatYIndex ) ;
106
var
toHorizontalOffsetApplied =
107
( toMarchSpaceY & 1) == 0
108
? 0.25
109
:
−0.25;
110
var toWorldSpaceX = toMarchSpaceX + toHorizontalOffsetApplied ;
111
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
85
==PAGE:94==
112
vertex =
113
i s S p l i t I n d e x
114
? Common. I n t e r p o l a t e P o i n t (
115
vertex . x ,
116
vertex . y ,
117
toWorldSpaceX ,
118
toMarchSpaceY ,
119
heightFieldData [ marchSpaceX + marchSpaceY * densityWidth ] ,
120
heightFieldData [
121
triangleX [ ( triangleIndex + 1) % 3] +
122
triangleY [ ( triangleIndex + 1) % 3] * densityWidth
123
]
124
)
125
:
vertex
126
/ /
Add vertex
. . .
127
}
128
129
contourResolver [ caseIndex ] = globalIndex −1;
130
}
131
132
var
t r i a n g l e S o l u t i o n = TriangleSolutions [ 0 ] ;
133
if ( triangleCase . Length == 4)
134
{
135
var
oddPairDistance =
136
( contourVertices [ contourResolver [ 0 ] ]
−contourVertices [ contourResolver
[ 2 ] ] )
137
. sqrMagnitude ;
138
var
evenPairDistance =
139
( contourVertices [ contourResolver [ 1 ] ]
−contourVertices [ contourResolver
[ 3 ] ] )
140
. sqrMagnitude ;
141
142
t r i a n g l e S o l u t i o n =
143
Common. TriangleSolutions [ oddPairDistance < evenPairDistance ? 1 :
2 ] ;
144
}
145
146
for ( var
index = 0;
index < t r i a n g l e S o l u t i o n . Length ;
index ++)
147
/ /
Add vertex
‘ contourResolver [ t r i a n g l e S o l u t i o n [ index ] ] ‘
148
149
if ( triangleMask == 0b111 ) return ;
/ /
I n t e r n a l
t r i a n g l e s
have no contour
edges
150
/ /
Add edge contourTriangles [ ^ 3 ] ,
contourTriangles [ ^ 1 ]
151
}
86
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:95==
A.2.3
Marching Triangles (Reference Rotation no map)
Listing A.3: Marching Triangles (Lookup) implemented in C#.
1
/ /
. . .
2
var
pointToIndexMatrix = int [ densityWidth * 2 * densityHeight *
2 ] ;
3
4
for ( var row = 1; row < densityHeight ;
row++)
5
{
6
/ /
. . .
7
for ( var column = 1; column < densityWidth ;
column++)
8
{
9
/ /
. . .
10
var
lp0 = new Vector2 ( squareStartX ,
squareStartY ) ;
/ / New property
f o r
each corner which
i s
i t s
grid
index
11
/ /
Also lp1 ,
lp2 ,
lp3
12
13
/ /
. . .
14
15
/ /
Writing
to
the
vertex
index
array
16
pointToIndexMatrix [ lp0 . x * 2 + lp0 . y * 2 * densityWidth * 2] = v e r t i c e s .
Length + 1;
17
18
/ /
Reading from the
vertex
index
array
19
pointToIndexMatrix [ p . x * 2 + p . y * 2 * densityWidth *
] = index + 1;
20
21
/ /
. . .
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
87
==PAGE:96==
A.2.4
Marching Triangles (Lookup/Reference Rotation Threaded)
Listing A.4: Marching Triangles (Lookup) implemented in C#.
1
private struct MarchingTrianglesParallelForJob
:
IJobParallelFor
2
{
3
[ ReadOnly ]
public NativeArray <byte> sdfValues ;
4
[ WriteOnly ]
public NativeList <Vector3 >. P a r a l l e l W r i t e r
t r i a n g l e s ;
5
6
/ /
Implementing the
ParallelFor
interface ,
the parameter
i s
the
loop
i t e r a t i o n
index
7
public void Execute ( int index )
8
{
9
var
squareStartY = index
/
i n f o . DensityWidth ;
10
var squareEndY = squareStartY + 1;
11
12
var
squareStartYFlatIndex = squareStartY *
i n f o . DensityWidth ;
13
var squareEndYFlatIndex = squareEndY *
i n f o . DensityWidth ;
14
15
var
squareStartX = index % i n f o . DensityWidth ;
16
var squareEndX = squareStartX + 1;
17
18
/ /
. . .
88
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
==PAGE:97==
A.2.5
Marching Triangles (Chunked)
Listing A.5: Marching Triangles (Lookup) implemented in C#.
1
public static void RehydrateChunks ( IEnumerable <int> modifiedIndices )
2
{
3
var chunksRegenerated = new HashSet <( int x ,
int y ) >() ;
4
5
foreach ( var
index in modifiedIndices )
6
{
7
var x = index % _testCase . Info . DensityWidth ;
8
var y = index
/
_testCase . Info . DensityWidth ;
9
10
for ( int yOffset = y ;
yOffset <= y + 1;
yOffset ++)
11
{
12
var chunk = ( x :
x
/
ChunkSize ,
y :
yOffset
/
ChunkSize ) ;
13
14
if ( chunksRegenerated . Add( chunk ) )
15
MarchTriangles ( x
/
ChunkSize ,
yOffset
/
ChunkSize ,
/*
. . . */ ) ;
16
}
17
}
18
}
19
20
21
private static void MarchTriangles ( int startX ,
int startY ,
/*
. . . */ )
22
{
23
var chunkExtentY = Math . Min ( startY + ChunkSize + 1 ,
t e s t I n f o . DensityHeight ) ;
24
var chunkExtentX = Math . Min ( startX + ChunkSize + 1 ,
t e s t I n f o . DensityWidth ) ;
25
26
for ( var row = startY + 1; row < chunkExtentY ;
row++)
27
{
28
/ /
. . .
29
30
for ( var column = startX + 1; column < chunkExtentX ;
column++)
31
{
32
/ /
. . .
Stylized Terrain Mesh Generation for Low-End Graphics Hardware
89
==PAGE:98==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
