==PAGE:1==
Parametric Cellular Automata
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Parametric Cellular Automata
Master Thesis
June 27th, 2025
By
Emilie Zunda Primdahl Thaulow
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment of the Master’s
degree in Human-centered Artificial Intelligence.
Emilie Zunda Primdahl Thaulow - s204471
Signature
Date
ii
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The generation of 3D objects can be approached in a multitude of ways, and each ap-
proach tends to be highly specialized to achieve a specific goal. This can be anything from
organic structures like animals or plants to inorganic structures like buildings or objects.
One particularly interesting approach to 3D object generation is the use of cellular au-
tomata (CA). Their use is very widespread, and it has a wide range of applications. The
states of traditional CA are often very simple, only comprising two states, which can be
interpreted as dead or alive. In contrast, the cellular automaton provided in this project
allows cells to belong to different classes, much like in nature, where cells often special-
ize to assume specific roles. Here, the cells grow based on a set of rules, which in this
project, can be thought of as genetic code.
The goal is to explore the possibilities of this type of cellular automaton for the generation
of voxelized 3D objects. With a focus on achieving a solution that isn’t specialized to
generate a specific type of structure. The intention is to see what kind of variation can be
achieved when cells can belong to multiple different classes governed by distinct rules.
The resulting program presented in this project is a cellular automaton, where the updat-
ing of the cells is guided by genetic code. Growth can also be influenced by substance
concentrations that diffuse in the structure, causing cells to grow, split, or die. The results
showcase that it is, in fact, possible to generate multiple different structures, both organic
and inorganic. Furthermore, small changes in the genetic code are reflected in the final
structure, and thus variations of the same structure can be generated with ease. The lim-
itations of this approach will also be discussed, as due to the fact that it is quite a general
solution, it does sacrifice depth in certain areas to accommodate a richer set of tools for
generation. The findings in this project indicate that this approach is viable and has a lot
of potential, especially if time is invested in optimization and refining the rule set.
Parametric Cellular Automata
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would especially like to thank my supervisor, Professor J. Andreas Bærentzen, for his
continual support and feedback throughout the development of this project. I am also
grateful to him for providing the initial framework on which this project is based. Without
it, this project would not have reached its current stage.
iv
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Cellular Automata
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Neural Cellular Automata
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Genetic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
L-Systems and Other Grammar-Based Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Evolutionary and Developmental Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Differential Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.7
Essential Biology Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Diffusion and Reaction Diffusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Method
17
3.1
High Level Model Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Growth Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Diffusion and Reaction Diffusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Neighborhood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Main Simulation Loop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6
Genetic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Implementation
32
4.1
Design Choices and Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2
Visualization and Blender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Results
41
5.1
Animals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Organic structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.3
Architectural Structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.4
Reaction Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.5
Genetic Algorithm Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.6
L-Systems and repeating patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6
Discussion
61
6.1
Pros and Cons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.2
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7
Conclusion
64
Bibliography
65
Parametric Cellular Automata
v
==PAGE:8==
A Title
69
A.1 Appendix: Additional Cell State Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.2 Appendix: Additional Rule Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.3 Appendix: Execution time and memory consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.4 Appendix: Blender Setups for Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.5 Appendix: Python code for Blender Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.6 Appendix: Genome Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
vi
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:9==
Glossary
Apoptosis In biology, a mechanism that allows cells to self-destruct when stimulated by
the appropriate trigger[Bria]. 12
Cellular Automata A grid of cells, which evolve over time according to a set of rules,
based on the state of neighbouring cells. 5
Genetic Algorithms Method for optimization, which mimic natural selection by evolving
a population of individuals. 7
Genotype The genetic constitution of an organism. The genotype determines the hered-
itary potentials and limitations of an individual from embryonic formation through
adulthood[Brib]. 12
Morphogen A morphogen is a substance whose non-uniform distribution governs the
pattern of tissue development in the process of morphogenesis or pattern forma-
tion[Wik24]. 9
Morphology Morphology is the study of the form and structure of organisms and their
specific structural features[Wik25a]. 8
Phenotype All the observable characteristics of an organism that result from the interac-
tion of its genotype (total genetic inheritance) with the environment[Bric]. 12
Parametric Cellular Automata
1
==PAGE:10==
Acronyms
CA Cellular Automaton/Automata. 5
CPPN Compositional Pattern Producing Network. 8
GA Genetic Algorithm/Algorithms. 7
NEAT NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies. 8
2
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In computer graphics, and especially in generative computer graphics, we are interested
in how to create or generate structures and objects.
To generate something means that it isn’t built piece by piece by hand, but rather created
using a set of rules. This allows for flexibility in the results, and oftentimes, a great variation
of objects can be generated.
As expected, this can be done in many different ways, and the method greatly depends
on the goal. Is the goal to create a tree, a terrain, a creature, a building, a road network,
or something else entirely? If the goal is to create one very specific object, it makes sense
to design a system with that very specific goal in mind. However, what if the goal is to be
able to create a multitude of different objects, e.g., a tree and a creature? As expected,
just because a system can generate trees, it doesn’t mean it can also generate creatures
or buildings. To build a system that can create many different kinds of objects, it should be
designed with flexibility in mind. The system needs to be able to generalize the rules that
describe how different things grow or form. Building this type of system is a very difficult
task, as generality often comes at the cost of quality. This raises the question of where to
start. One idea might be to look at how nature does it. After all, nature can shape organic
matter into trees, flowers, jellyfish, dinosaurs, and even you and me. That showcases a
remarkable level of flexibility that is hard to come by anywhere.
It is not trivial to mimic nature. The growth of biological entities is based on complex
processes that depend on both internal rules and external factors. However, it might not
be necessary to copy all of this complexity to achieve a viable solution. Taking inspiration
from one specific idea, how DNA encodes instructions for growth, could be a very good
place to start building a flexible generative system.
Creating such a system, or even a prototype of such a system, would provide a new way
to go about generating 3D objects. This could be useful for artists, game developers,
and even researchers, who might need a way to create a variety of creatures or objects.
Alternatively, it could serve as a foundation for future research on the topic of generative
design. Especially as the approach can be further built upon to explore new possibilities
for how complexity can emerge from a simple set of rules.
1.2
Goal
The goal of this project is twofold. First, it aims to demonstrate that it is possible to use
nature’s way of encoding growth in DNA as an inspiration for a generative system. Sec-
ondly, it explores the kinds of variation that can be generated using this approach. How-
ever, mimicking nature or trying to simulate something that is biologically accurate is not
part of the goal. This project should be seen as something that takes inspiration from
nature, but more often, choices will be made that do not align with biological accuracy.
These decisions are guided by the design possibilities or ease of implementation.
As part of these goals, the project aims to explore the possibilities that come with encoding
growth in this manner and experimenting with what variety of 3D objects that can be
generated, such as animals and plants. Furthermore, it is of interest to try and see if a
Parametric Cellular Automata
3
==PAGE:12==
set of ”toolkit” genes can be defined, where the parameters provided and external factors
lead to vastly different expressions.
It is also important to note that, as a result of this being a relatively new approach to 3D
object generation, high-fidelity models or complicated structures are not the focus. This
project is meant as a way to show that this approach has potential and that more resources
should be put into this to further explore the possibilities.
Deciding how to guide growth is one challenge; another is to determine how to represent
the growth in a digital environment. Objects can be represented using lines, volumes,
points in space, grid-based structures, etc. For this project, cellular automata have been
chosen as they are well-suited and commonly used for these types of problems. Cellular
automata are systems where growth or change is guided by a set of update rules. As a
result, complex configurations and interesting behaviors can emerge from a fairly simple
set of rules. Furthermore, they are flexible and offer the necessary structure to make this
sort of project possible. By constraining growth to a 3D grid, it simplifies the problem
and allows more focus to be placed on the definition of the ”genes” that guide the growth
process. It is important to clarify that this project does not attempt to define a large or
sophisticated set of update rules for the automata, as that could be an entire project on its
own. Lastly, a minor goal is to briefly explore the ability for this approach to be combined
with genetic algorithms. This is a natural extension, as a system inspired by DNA should,
in theory, work well with evolutionary methods. However, this will only be a small part of
the project, as it is a broad topic in itself.
4
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Work
This section will include descriptions of work that relates to the topic of this thesis, while
also explaining the necessary theory for understanding the methods used for the imple-
mentation.
2.1
Cellular Automata
Cellular Automata (CA), lie a the center of this project. The first formal work on cellu-
lar automata is almost exclusively credited to John Von Neumann, who had an interest in
self-replicating machines. His work on the topic was compiled posthumously by Arthur W.
Burks, resulting in the foundational book in the field called ”Theory of self-Reproducing Au-
tomata”[Neu66]. This book highlights Von Neumann’s interest in how the two very different
systems, computers and natural organisms, compare and relate to each other. Through
this interest, he created a theory, which would cover both topics, which he called ”the-
ory of automata”.[Neu66, s. Preface, p. 18]. In the aforementioned book, it is highlighted
that Neumann considered multiple models for self-reproduction, one of which, called the
cellular model[Neu66, Pt. 2, Ch. 1, s. 1.1, p. 94], is the most popular. The general idea
behind this model is, as Arthur W. Brooks puts it, that ”self-reproduction takes place in
an indefinitely large space which is divided into cells, each cell containing the same fi-
nite automaton.”[Neu66, Pt. 2, Ch. 1, s. 1.1, p. 94]. Von Neumann here chose to define
the space as an infinite array of square cells, each containing their own 29-state finite
automaton. The cells only communicate with their direct orthogonal neighbors1, where
the interaction is delayed by at least 1 unit of time. This model was the last he managed
to formalize before the time of his death. Unfortunately, he never finished the cellular
model, and as such, the only formalized writing of this model is what he managed to write
down in a manuscript titled: ”Theory of Automata: Construction, Reproduction, Homo-
geneity”[Neu66, Pt. 2, Ch. 1, s. 1.1, p. 94].
To present the general definition of a cellular automata, the chapter of the book ”Nonlinear
Phenomena in Complex Systems”, written by Hans J. Herrmann[Her89] will be used. As
stated, a CA is a system with many discrete degrees of freedom. Meaning it has both
discrete states, discrete timesteps, and works on a discrete space. The discrete space is
what we refer to as cells. Each cell has a set of inputs and a rule or set of rules, which
determine the state of the cell at the next timestep. For all of the cells in the automata,
the rules are updated simultaneously across the domain. [Her89, p. 152, s. 1.2]
H.J. Hermann [Her89, p. 152, s. 1.2 eq. 1] beautifully describes the automaton as follows:
The variable on cell i, which has r different states, is denoted σi = 0, ..., r −1. Then, a
deterministic cellular automaton can be defined for each cell:
σi(t + 1) = fi(σj(t); j = 1, ..., k)
(2.1)
The function f is the rule that defines how the state should be updated. It has values
between 0, ..., r −1, as it maps the current state of the cell to a new state. Automata can
also be probabilistic, meaning that they have a level of uncertainty associated with each
state change. This introduces a dependency on a random number z, and thus a more
general definition can be created[Her89, p. 152, s. 1.2, eq. 2]:
σi(t + 1) = fi(σj(t), ..., σj(t −τ); j = 1, ..., k; z
(2.2)
1This is also commonly referred to as the Von Neumann neighborhood
Parametric Cellular Automata
5
==PAGE:14==
where τ is a finite integer.
Hermann argues that cellular automata are as general a concept as differential equations
in mathematics. This suggests that a multitude of behaviors can be achieved using cellular
automata, and thus, we can only imagine the great extent to which they can be applied.
Now, despite the fact that Von Neumann’s work was cut short, it planted a seed in the
field of academia, which caused multiple others to take an interest in the field. One of
these people, John Horton Conway, created a system, which popularized cellular au-
tomata, so much so that most University Students in the field of computer science have
encountered this ”game” at least once. This system was formalized in an article by Martin
Gardner called ”MATHEMATICAL GAMES: The fantastic combinations of John Conway’s
new solitaire game of ”life””[Gar70]. The general idea behind this simulation game was
that on a board/grid, the player would start with a configuration of counters(organisms),
at max one per cell. Then, using a set of rules, which Conway had defined, called ”ge-
netic laws”, the state of the board could be updated. These rules defined the death, birth,
and survival of each of the organisms based on their 8 neighboring cells2, and if run for
multiple time steps, would display behavior similar to living organisms.[Gar70] This exact
setup is very often cited in other works, related to cellular automata, as it is intuitive and
simple, but produces inedibly complex behavior and intricate patterns. Thus thus it is an
easy way to introduce the reader to the topic of cellular automata.
As can be expected, the topic of simulating the behavior of living organisms is something
which the field of study called Artificial Life or ALife for short, has a huge interest in.
Because of this, cellular automata have for a while been one of the more predominant
techniques used in the field.
Lenia[Cha19], a system of artificial life, is one of the more notable systems that gener-
alizes Conway’s Game of Life. It can create patterns similar to real-world microscopic
organisms, and it can achieve almost all behaviors attributed to what we define as ”life”,
except for self-replication. The difference between Lenia and GoL, most importantly, is
the fact that Lenia has continuous states and a generalized local rule. The latter means
that the rule used to update the states is a weighted sum, contrary to the totalistic sum
used in GoL. Lastly, the neighborhood, which each cell perceives as now a ball, unlike
the Moore neighborhood used in GoL. This system can create ”lifeforms”, which could
even be classified, and a hierarchical taxonomy covering the organisms is presented in
the paper [Cha19, s. 3.2, p. 16].
2.2
Neural Cellular Automata
A type of cellular automata, which has gained a lot of popularity in recent years, is the
”Neural Cellular Automata”. The article Growing Neural Cellular Automata[Mor+20] from
2020 is one of the more influential papers on the topic. In this paper, they argue that: “The
ability to build their own bodies is probably the most fundamental skill every living creature
possesses.”[Mor+20]. Because of this, they are interested in ”Morphogenesis” as a form
of self-organization, which is how organism develop their shape. This paper focuses on
trying to replicate some of the desired properties necessary for self-repairing systems.
To achieve this, they use a type of cellular automaton called a neural cellular automaton.
This is a CA, where the update rules are learned, rather than explicitly programmed, to
achieve a desired behavior. Similar to Lenia[Cha19], the cell states are defined as vectors
of continuous values, which makes it possible for the rule to be a differentiable function of
the cell’s neighborhood. This allows for the use of gradient-based numerical optimization,
2This is also commonly referred to as the Moore neighborhood
6
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:15==
where a loss function is defined for the cell states to direct the growth towards a target
configuration[Mor+20, s. Model]. Unlike traditional CAs, the meaning behind the values
in a cell’s state vector, which they call the genome, is largely up for interpretation. Only
the first four values, representing RGB and alpha, are predefined. [Mor+20, s. Model/Cell
State] This approach is very interesting, as it enables the system to not only grow into a
stable pattern but also regenerate after being damaged. The main limitation of this method
is that it does not produce entirely novel structures. As the system is trained to reach a
specific target state, it is unable to generate structures that it has not encountered during
its training phase. This is unlike what this thesis aims to achieve, where the number of
possible outcomes should only be limited by the imagination of the user.
2.3
Genetic Algorithms
Another relevant topic in this paper is Genetic Algorithms(GA). As mentioned, this is not
a central part; however, it is included to show the possibilities of using this in conjunction
with the solution provided in this thesis. Furthermore, it is not uncommon to use genetic
algorithms with cellular automata to create the rules that govern the updating of cell states.
In short, genetic algorithms cover a method that helps solve the problem of optimization
when the problem space is complex and contains a considerable level of uncertainty. John
H. Holland formally introduced it in his book [Hol92], as a way to solve a variety of problems
across different fields like genetics, economics, psychology, and artificial intelligence. This
book is highly regarded as the original work on genetic algorithms, and it presents the
theoretical foundations. As explained, the problems which John H. Holland highlights
cover a wide range of fields, however, he argues that they all can be covered by one term:
”adaptation”. More specifically, all the stated problems cover the topic of how the subject
of interest, often called a structure, adapts to the environment and what mechanisms,
called operations, are involved in the adaptation process[Hol92, c. 1, p. 2]. In the field of
genetics, which is of special interest in this thesis, the structures are called chromosomes
and the operators called mutation or recombination. The structure or structures at a set
iteration are judged based on their level of adaptation, meaning how well they fit into the
environment. In the world of genetic problems, this is referred to as the fitness of the
individual[Hol92, c. 1, p. 4-5]. Based on the level of fitness, the structures are filtered to
ensure that only the most relevant ones have an influence. To further explain the theory,
which is used for the later presented implementations, the book [Gol89] will be used as
a reference, as it is often treated as the classic practical textbook on the topic. Note that
this book considers the structures involved in the adaptation process as strings. However,
they will be referred to as individuals for the remainder of this project, as that makes the
most sense when it comes to this approach.
In very simple terms, genetic algorithms, as they will be used in this project, work by
creating a random initial population of N individuals. The algorithm then successively
creates new populations using a set of operations: reproduction, crossover, and mutation.
First, the individuals in the population are judged based on their fitness value, meaning
a function value f, which measures how well an individual is adapted to its environment
according to some predefined criteria. This value directly corresponds to the probability
that the individual will contribute to the creation of the next generation. How this function
value is defined depends greatly on the application, but in biology, it often corresponds
to the ability for an individual to perform a certain task related to its chance of survival.
For the reproduction operator, a subset of the current population is chosen to be part
of the mating pool. As mentioned, the fittest individuals have a higher chance of being
selected. The exact details of the reproduction operator are again very different based on
the implementation and thus will not be discussed in detail here. The individuals in the
Parametric Cellular Automata
7
==PAGE:16==
mating pool are then paired up, and the crossover operator is applied. Again, the details
of this are highly dependent on the use case, however, it often involves randomly selecting
a subset of the individuals’ genetic information and swapping it with their mate’s. Thus,
the resulting individual inherits traits from both parents. Lastly, the mutation operator is
applied to the child to introduce small random changes to the population. This ensures
genetic diversity, and it allows the algorithm to explore new areas of the solution space.
The mutator operator often involves randomly, with a low probability, applying a change
to the child[Gol89, c. 1, p. 10-14]. In biology and in relation to genetics, this refers to a
heritable change in a DNA sequence [Sci].
Now that the basic theory on genetic algorithms has been presented, it’s time to take
a look at one of the most popular applications in relation to the generation of 3D crea-
ture Morphology and locomotion. Karl Sims’ paper [Sim94] is often referenced as one of
the most interesting works on the topic of generating 3D creatures and their locomotive
behavior using genetic algorithms. In this paper, genetic algorithms are used for both
creating the creature’s morphology and its neural system, which controls the muscles of
the generated creature. The morphology is represented as a directional graph, where
each node contains information describing a segment, also called rigid parts, and its di-
mensions. Furthermore, the node also defines the joint-type, which describes the relative
motion between the defined part and its parent. [Sim94, c. 2, p. 2]. The generated neu-
ral system of a creature takes a set of information gathered from its input sensors and
produces forces and torques for the associated joints. The neural system is generated
along with the morphological part, and the morphological and locomotion fitness values
are determined based on the ability of the creature to perform a certain task in a simu-
lated 3D environment, e.g., swimming or walking[Sim94, c. 3–6, p. 2-5]. They found that
the resulting creatures and their behaviors were very different from each-other and that
creatures evolved to perform the same task e.g, swimming, used very distinct methods to
propel themselves e.g some creatures had paddle like appendages and others which were
multi-segmented and used sinusoidal motions, like water snakes, for propulsion[Sim94,
c. 7, p. 6-7]. Thus, the application of genetic algorithms for the generation of creatures is
something which this project will also aim to explore to a limited extent.
In relation to cellular automata, researchers have recently also begun utilizing evolution-
ary algorithms to discover CA rules, which result in predefined patterns. Both [EF11]
and [Nic+18] present methods where genetic algorithms are used to evolve the neural
networks, which express the rules for the state changes of the cells. In [Nic+18], Com-
positional Pattern Producing Networks (CPPNs) are evolved using something called the
NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT) algorithm, which makes it possible to
generate complex patterns like a checkerboard and a Norwegian flag. The researcher
J. Miller in his paper ”Evolving a Self-Repairing, Self-Regulating, French Flag Organism”
[Mil04] has also used evolutionary algorithms for CA rule design. Here, similar to the
paper [Mor+20], he experimented with the ability for a structure to grow and regenerate.
More specifically, evolutionary algorithms are used such that a French flag could be built
and also regenerated if damaged. In this paper, it is highlighted that even if the genome
is the program that controls the general growth of the structure, it is ultimately the inter-
actions between these cells and their environment, meaning the inputs, which determine
the final result [Mil04, s. 1, p. 1]. Despite the fact that this approach for rule discovery in
cellular automata seems to be potent, it will not be dealt with in this project.
8
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:17==
2.4
L-Systems and Other Grammar-Based Systems
Except for methods that rely on CA, there are, of course, other approaches for gener-
ating 3D structures. To highlight the difference between this project’s approach and to
later discuss the advantages and disadvantages, a few of these approaches will be cov-
ered. One approach, which is quite prevalent, is L-systems, or ”Lindenmayer systems”,
which were introduced in the papers [Lin68a] and [Lin68b] by Aristid Lindenmayer. The
ideas presented in those papers were popularized by the book ”The Algorithmic Beauty
of Plants” [PL96]. This is a book that came after the two original 1968 articles on the
topic. It is based on Lindenmayer’s work, but not written by him. In the original works, the
geometry of the plants wasn’t included, as it purely focused on the topology of the plants.
In this book and ”turtle geometry” is used for the geometric interpretation [PL96, c. 1,
p. 1]. Now, the main idea behind L-systems revolves around “rewriting”, meaning parts
of the initial string object are successively rewritten using a set of “productions”. Thus,
L-systems are a type of string rewriting, where the productions are applied in parallel. The
latter is an important part of the system, as it allows for the expression of languages that
traditional context-free Chomsky grammars are unable to produce. Furthermore, this dif-
ference helps capture the parallel nature of cell divisions, and thus reflects the biological
motivation behind L- systems[PL96, c. 1.1, p. 1-3]. As a result of this, L-systems are very
good at producing branching structures, which is why it is such a popular approach for
procedurally generating trees and flowers.
The following article [Mül+06] focused on altering L-Systems so that architectural objects
could be generated. This paper introduces a new shape grammar called “CGA shape”,
which can be used for procedural modeling of computer-generated architecture. The
results provided in the article show that this approach does, in fact, allow for large-scale
city generation, as they recreate the complete city of Pompeii, consisting of 1.4 billion
polygons. Part of the CGA shape notation, especially related to scaling and translation, is
inspired by L-Systems, however were made to support the less organic generation. The
application of the rules is done sequentially, like for traditional Chomsky grammars, which,
according to the article, allows for characterization of structure, as opposed to growth over
time[Mül+06, c. 2, p. 615].
Jones et al.[Jon+20] presented a domain-specific language for 3D modeling, called ”Sha-
peAssembly”. Their goal is to combine the editability of procedural representations of
3D models with the flexibility of deep generative models. This combination would try to
make up for the drawbacks of each separate method: 1 being the limited diversity of tradi-
tional procedural generation, and 2 being the uneditable nature of representations made
by deep generative models. Each program defined in ShapeAssembly produces a shape
when run. Each shape is defined as a composition of 3D cuboids and a definition of their
relations. This allows for the cuboids to be attached hierarchically and symmetrically. As
a result, 3D objects like chairs, cupboards, and drawers can be generated.
2.5
Evolutionary and Developmental Approaches
Returning to the biological inspiration for procedural generation, a number of papers ex-
plored the topic of gene expression and morphology. One lesser-known, but very rele-
vant article on the topic proposed an artificial evolutionary system(AES) to simulate the
evolution of multicellular structures[Egg+97].Each cell in this system contains the same
genome, but the expression of that genome, meaning the cell type and behavior, is de-
termined based on intercellular communication. More specifically, he heavily focuses on
the use of Morphogens to guide cell differentiation and to provide positional information.
Genes in this system are strings of integers, with different sections corresponding to dif-
Parametric Cellular Automata
9
==PAGE:18==
ferent information, e.g., the affinity for a substance (diffusion coefficients). This approach
leads to quite simple 3D structures defined in a grid, however, the design of the system
and the use of genes is quite interesting.
Another paper, which also focuses on using gradients of morphogen concentrations to
determine cell positioning, is [FK98]. In this, they argue that there are three essential
mechanisms needed during the development of multicellular organisms. 1. There should
be an external environment that provides information to the cell and helps guide cell dif-
ferentiation and proliferation. 2. Each cell should be able to detect this environment and
interpret the information, and 3. The internal state of the cells should be affected by the
interpreted information. The way in which this is represented is by having cell states be
defined by a set of substance concentrations. These substances are consumed during
cell division. Cell differentiation occurs when the cell count passes a set threshold, caus-
ing the cell to change. The transition between cell types is defined as a hierarchical set of
transitions, where the distribution of current cell types determines the transition path. This
is how the paper differs from most others in this field, as the rules governing the behavior
of the cells emerge based on cell-cell interaction. This is unlike the works of [MSR91;
FB+94], where the rules governing the growth are a set of deterministic rules. The for-
mer paper provides a model for describing some important processes that occur during
development, with a focus on the regulation during the early stage of development of fruit
flies(Drosophila). Here, the processes affecting the cells are defined by the production
rules of a recursive grammar, while the resulting internal cell states are determined by a
connection model similar to a neural network. The latter article focuses on multicellular
pattern formation, where the cells have a genome defining the behavior of the cell. The
expression of the genome is dependent on the cell’s internal state and the local environ-
ment. More specifically, the genome comprises a set of differential equations, which take
the cell’s current states and the local environment as input variables. This is referred to
as the ”cell state equations”. Based on this, they can show that this approach results in
basic multicellular behaviors like cell differentiation.
Lastly, an article, which takes another approach when it comes to emulating growth, fo-
cuses not on how morphogenesis diffuses to provide the cells with positional information,
but rather how to abstract this using Compositional Pattern Producing Networks[CL11].
This article focuses on using CPPN to abstract the generation of natural phenotypes, to
create 3D structures. A CPPN is a directed graph that takes a 3D coordinate and addi-
tional gradient information. It processes this information and the output determines if a
voxel is considered full or empty based on a threshold. The final 3D object is then created
using the surface-smoothing marching cubes algorithm. Each node in the CPPN is a sin-
gle function, e.g., Gaussian or sine. These functions make it possible to have desirable
properties such as symmetry and repetition. The edges have weights to control how much
the output value of the node is passed to the next node as input. Using NeuroEvolution
of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT) for the evolution of the CPPN, it is possible to create a
variation of generated outputs. This is similar to what was done in[EF11].
These papers are relevant as they showcase the usage and potential of the diffusion of
morphogens to guide growth. Furthermore, it is common in the articles to refer to the
growth rules for each cell as genomes, which is the same choice that has been made in
this project.
2.6
Differential Growth
Another relevant approach to the generation of organic structures is using differential
growth. This approach describes how letting different parts of a structure, often a triangle
10
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:19==
mesh, grow at different rates causes interesting shapes to appear. It is most often used
to create structures like curling leaves, corals, or shells. A key aspect of this technique
is that it allows for the vertices to move during generation, which is unlike the approach
taken in this project. Thus, this section will be very short, however, it is relevant to highlight
other options when it comes to 3D generation.
One notable application of this is Florafrom [Sys], where a 2D triangle mesh is used as
the base and where each vertex is treated as a cell. Cell division is emulated by splitting
vertices and simultaneously computing the forces on each vertex of the mesh to simulate
the deformation as a response to growth. The rate of growth along the edge is determined
by the geodesic distance from a given edge on the surface. This approach allows for the
generation of interesting structures that alike of lettuce leaves and flowers, which they
then used to create jewelry.
Another example is the work by Lomas[Lom14]which focuses on the idea of simulating
how morphogens can guide cell division. This is done using particles, where their inter-
actions are guided by inter-particle forces. The growth rates are controlled in a multitude
of ways, including reaction diffusion, uniformly adding a random amount to each cell, or
using ray tracing to simulate where the light would hit the object to stimulate growth. This
allows for the creation of various surface patterns and 3D shapes.
A more line-based approach is presented in [hof], where the growth is simulated on lines,
which are made up of nodes. The initial configuration is often a simple shape, such as
a circle or a line. Growth is then introduced by allowing random new nodes to appear
between pairs of nodes. The nodes then try to optimize their positions, e.g., staying close
but not too close to neighbors, while also repelling other nodes within a certain distance.
Despite the fact that this setup is quite simple, it does create very interesting and quite
complex coral-like structures.
Now that some of the most important and relevant approaches for procedural generation
of 3D structures have been presented, additional theoretical background necessary to
understand the model introduced later will be reviewed.
2.7
Essential Biology Theory
Even if this thesis is in the field of visual computing, a short section on biology cannot be
avoided. It will be short and very simplified, with the sole purpose of introducing basic
concepts, which will be taken as inspiration from and used later on in the thesis. This
will include: DNA, genotype vs phenotype, cell communication, and cell death. To ex-
plain these terms, the book [Alb+02] will be used together with specific sources defining
biological terms.
2.7.1
Cells and DNA
Living organisms on Earth can be either single-celled or multicellular. Multicellular organ-
isms are comprised of groups of cells, each of which has its specialized functions and
communicates with the other. Despite this fact, all organisms start out as one single cell
and grow larger as a result of cell division. In that single cell, all the genetic information
necessary to grow the organism is contained. For an organism, the entirety of its genetic
information, meaning the complete DNA sequence, is called its ”genome”[AJL+02a]. For
this project, the idea of DNA and genetic information is used as a point of inspiration.
Meaning the interest here lies in how a set of rules, akin to that of a genome, can be
defined and used to grow a 3D structure.
Lastly, two important notions originating from biology, but commonly used when dealing
Parametric Cellular Automata
11
==PAGE:20==
with genetic algorithms (GA) and cellular automata(CA), are the notions of a Genotype
and Phenotype. An organism’s genotype is the complete genetic information, whereas
the phenotype is the expression of this genotype. In GA, these terms are often used
metaphorically to represent the individual genetic encoding, used during crossover and
mutation, and the manifested behavior or structure, on which the fitness function is de-
fined.
2.7.2
Cell communication
As briefly mentioned, cells communicate, which allows them to influence the behavior
of each-other. The processes involved in cell signaling are very complex, and thus, the
following section will be very surface-level and abstract away a lot of information. There
are multiple ways in which cells can communicate, some of which are very relevant to this
project. Common for all of these is that a ”signaling” molecule is used, which is emitted
by the signaling cell and then detected by the target cell. The target cell responds to the
signal through the means of receptor proteins, which allows the signaling molecule to bind
to the receptor and cause the target cell to initiate a response. These signals are what
can alter the behavior of the cell. As mentioned, there are quite a few different ways in
which cells can communicate, but the most important for this project is:
• Paracrine: This is short-range cell-cell communication that acts on neighboring
cells.
• Contact Dependent: This is communication where the cells are in direct contact
with each other.
• Endocrine: This is communication in which hormones are secreted into the blood-
stream. It relies heavily on diffusion.
This excludes synaptic signaling, meaning signaling performed by neurons[AJL+02b], as
this is not of interest in this project. Furthermore, paracrine and contact-dependent sig-
naling will, for the remainder of the project, be considered the same. This is due to the
fact that when dealing with cellular automata, cells are either neighbors, meaning they are
next to each other in the grid, or there is an empty space between them, through which
they cannot interact.
A variety of cell-cell communication, which certain bacteria are capable of, is something
called quorum sensing. This is a niche aspect of biology, where a small feature of the
implementation is based on. Thus, a small introduction to the term will be provided here.
This short section will be based on the article [MB01]. Quorum sensing is an ability that
some bacteria have developed, which allows them to detect the nearby cell population
density and respond to that by regulating the expression of their genes. This ability makes
it possible to coordinate gene expression, and thus it can influence the behavior of a
community of bacteria. The fact that this exists in nature adds an argument as to why this
might be worth exploring further as part of the implementation.
2.7.3
Cell death
Lastly, one very important ability which cells in multicellular organisms posses is that of
programmed cell death, commonly referred to in biology as Apoptosis [AJL+02c]. This
process allows for the control of the number of cells in an organism by having certain cells
self-destruct. Apoptosis can be triggered internally, for example, if a cell is damaged, or
externally via signals from other cells. In both cases, the process involves a complex
mechanism. However, at its core, a ”death signal” is sent, which causes a set of enzymes
to be released inside the cell. This process works like a cascade, amplifying the reaction
as it travels through the cells, finally causing the cell to die.
12
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:21==
Apoptosis occurs throughout the entire lifecycle of an organism, but for this project, the in-
terest lies in the stages of development before the organism has reached maturity. Once
that happens, cell death and cell division balance each other out, which is not something
this project aims to replicate. Where apoptosis becomes relevant in this project is if the
goal is to try an allow for behavior similar to what has been observed during the develop-
ment of mice. When the paws of mice are developed, initially there are cells between the
digits, but as time goes on, these interdigital cells die through the process of apoptosis.
Thus causing the digits to emerge. Such a behavior would add the possibility to create
cavities and interesting shapes, and as such, a form of cell death inspired by apoptosis
will be included in the implementation.
2.8
Diffusion and Reaction Diffusion
Throughout the previous section, multiple articles mention the usage of morphogens to
regulate growth. To implement such a mechanism, the process of diffusion must be cov-
ered, as it governs the diffusion of substances in a medium. Thus, the theory on how
diffusion works and how it can be applied to a grid will be covered. Furthermore, a short
section on reaction diffusion will be presented. However, as will become obvious later,
the implementation of reaction diffusion did unfortunately, not yield the desired results.
2.8.1
The Diffusion Equation
The diffusion equation, also referred to as the heat equation, models how heat or sub-
stance diffuses in a uniform material. Thus, it is very relevant when it comes to modeling
the diffusion of substances throughout a 3D grid, which is exactly what it will be used for.
To model phenomena like the diffusion of morphogens throughout a 3D object, this part is
essential. The heat equation is a partial differential equation, belonging to the parabolic
class, which is defined in two dimensions as:
∂2f
∂x2 + ∂2f
∂y2 = ∂f
∂t
(2.3)
Where f is the heat or substance concentration at a point (x, y), at time t.
The parabolic class is defined as a partial differential equation where the discriminant
∆= B2 −4AC is equal to zero. This is assuming that the equation can be written as:
A∂2f
∂x2 + B ∂2f
∂x∂y + C ∂2f
∂y2 + .... = 0
(2.4)
[Bær+12, c. 4.4, p. 73] Which if 2.3 is rewritten yields this:
1(∂2f
∂x2 + ∂2f
∂y2 ) + 0(∂2f
∂t2 ) −∂f
∂t = 0
(2.5)
The coefficient’s then become A = 1, B = 0, C = 0, thus the resulting discriminant is:
∆= 02 −4 · 1 · 0 = 0
(2.6)
Now, as can be noted, the left side of the equation can also be interpreted as the Laplacian
operator.
∆f = ∂f
∂t
(2.7)
The Laplacian is defined as the divergence of the gradient of a function f, and as such it
is sometimes denoted as ∇2. The gradient of a function ∇f is a vector field, which at each
Parametric Cellular Automata
13
==PAGE:22==
point points in the direction of the steepest ascent. The divergence of a 2D vector function
tells us how much the field diverges from a point. This can be illustrated with an analogy
2.1: Imagine a tub filled with water. If the surface of the water moves slowly around due
to e.g. wind, but no water is entering or leaving, then the divergence is 0 across the entire
surface. However, if the drain is suddenly opened, the surface water flows down, causing
a loss of water at that point. This corresponds to the point having a negative divergence.
Conversely, if a faucet starts pouring water into the tub, that point on the surface will have
a positive divergence, as more molecules are introduced.
Figure 2.1: Simple Divergence Analogy
In mathematical terms the divergence of a 2D vector function is defined as:
div F = ∂Fx
∂x + ∂Fy
∂y
(2.8)
[Sch05, p. 37-41]
Thus this directly corresponds to the left side of the heat equation if:
F = ∇f =
" ∂f
∂x
∂f
∂y
#
(2.9)
Now, 2.7 is an initial value problem and thus to solve such a partial differential equation,
both the initial condition and appropriate boundary conditions must be specified. Further-
more, as this equation needs to be solved on a grid, a finite difference method can be
used to discretize the continuous differential operators[Bær+12]. This works by replacing
the partial derivatives with discrete differences, in this case for a uniform grid with unit
spacing. Let us choose the initial condition f(0, x, y) = h(x, y). The right side of 2.7, can
be discretized by applying the forward difference operator, D+. Applying the operator
results in:
D+
t f = 1
δ (f(t + 1, x, y) −f(t, x, y))
(2.10)
And for unit time steps, this becomes:
D+
t f = f(t + 1, x, y) −f(t, x, y)
(2.11)
For the right side of 2.7, which is the sum of two second-order partial derivatives, the
second-order central difference operator can be applied.
This again intuitively corre-
sponds to using the neighborhood values to a point, to determine the value. First, the
Taylor expansion is applied in the x-direction:
f(t, x + δ, y) = f(t, x, y) + δfx(t, x, y) + δ2
2 fxx + ...
(2.12)
14
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:23==
f(t, x −δ, y) = f(t, x, y) −δfx(t, x, y) + δ2
2 fxx + ...
(2.13)
Adding the two:
f(t, x + δ, y) + f(t, x −δ, y) = 2f(t, x, y) + δ2fxx + ...
(2.14)
Subtracting 2f(t, x, y) and dividing by δ2, to isolate the second-order partial derivative with
respect to x.
f(t, x + δ, y) + f(t, x −δ, y) −2f(t, x, y)
δ2
= fxx + ...
(2.15)
Thus:
∂2f
∂x2 ≈f(t, x + δ, y) + f(t, x −δ, y) −2f(t, x, y)
δ2
(2.16)
The same can be done with respect to y, yielding:
∂2f
∂y2 ≈f(t, x, y + δ) + f(t, x, y −δ) −2f(t, x, y)
δ2
(2.17)
By adding the two, we get the discrete Laplacian in 2D:
∆f(t, x, y) ≈f(t, x + δ, y) + f(t, x −δ, y) + f(t, x, y + δ) + f(t, x, y −δ) −4f(t, x, y)
δ2
(2.18)
[Bær+12, c. 4.1, p. 68] In the case of a unit step size grid, this can be simplified as:
∆f(t, x, y) ≈f(t, x + 1, y) + f(t, x −1, y) + f(t, x, y + 1) + f(t, x, y −1) −4f(t, x, y)
(2.19)
Now, during this, it has been assumed that the diffusion occurs at a unit rate, meaning
the diffusion coefficient was set to be D = 1. This is, of course, not always the case,
and as such, the final equation used later during implementation is the following, where
f(t + 1, x, y) is solved for:
f(t + 1, x, y) = f(t, x, y) + D · (f(t, x + 1, y) + f(t, x −1, y)
+ f(t, x, y + 1) + f(t, x, y −1) −4f(t, x, y))
(2.20)
This allows for the modulation of how quickly a substance diffuses across the grid. The
solution provided here can also be extended to 3-dimensions in a similar fashion, but due
to the length of the resulting equation, that derivation will be omitted.
It should also be noted that this section does not cover the choice of boundary conditions,
meaning the update equation only applies to interior points. Thus, the boundary condition
is handled programmatically in the implementation section. Here, the Neumann boundary
is used, which imposes a constraint on the derivative at the boundary. In this case, it will be
set to zero, meaning the outside will act as a perfect insulator. This roughly corresponds to
the idea that substances diffusion inside an organism cannot diffuse beyond its boundary
[Bær+12, c. 4.3, p. 72].
2.8.2
Reaction Diffusion
In relation to diffusion, it also makes sense to briefly cover the topic of reaction-diffusion.
More specifically Gray-Scott pattern formation.
Parametric Cellular Automata
15
==PAGE:24==
Gray-Scott Pattern Formation
Gray-Scott pattern formation for reaction-diffusion is a simpler version of the more com-
plex Turing pattern formation. It is among the most popular when it comes to pattern
generation as it is quite intuitive and can be implemented fairly easily. This is especially
relevant for this project, as it can potentially be used to generate patterns on the surface
of the generated structures, e.g, stripes on an animal.
Gray-Scott pattern formation was introduced in [GS83] and it focuses on the behavior
of auto-catalytic3 chemical reactions within a continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR). A
CSTR is a tank where the reactants are continually fed in and mixed, while the product
is continually removed. Here, two simple reaction schemes are highlighted: Quadratic
autocatalysis
A + B →2B
and cubic autocatalysis
A + 2B →3B
(2.21)
[GS83, s. 2]. The latter of which is what most people refer to, when discussing pattern
formation, as it, according to the author, allows for a richer set of dynamical behaviors due
to the cubic therm[GS83, p. 15, s. 7]. In this paper, it was also highlighted that for these
complex perturbation patterns to appear, the catalytic product B should not be treated as
completely stable. Meaning it will undergo decay:
B →inert
(2.22)
[GS83, p. 6, s. 4]. Note that inert here means chemically inactive.
Now, the actual reaction-diffusion equations, which are used when dealing with pattern for-
mation, were properly introduced in the paper [Pea93]. Here, a non-equilibrium constraint
is introduced, and represented by a feed term for the reactant A. This term constantly
replenishes the concentration of A: F(1 −A) and removes B: −(F + k)B The resulting
reaction-diffusion equations are:
∂A
∂t = DA∇2A −AB2 + F(1 −A)
(2.23)
∂B
∂t = DB∇2B −AB2 −(F + k)B
(2.24)
here k is the rate constant of the reaction 2.22 and F is the feed rate.These equations
are used to implement reaction diffusion, in an attempt to generate colored patterns on
the surface of structures, and it will be explained later.
3Meaning: causing its own chemical reaction
16
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:25==
3
Method
This chapter will focus on a high-level overview of the system and the largest components
that make it up. Furthermore, it will relate the previously highlighted theory to the chosen
approach. The next chapter will then go into detail regarding the implementation and data
structures.
3.1
High Level Model Overview
As explained, this project uses a cellular automaton as its base. This cellular automaton
is in 3D, and each cell in the grid can either be empty or contain a cell. In practice, the
grid, which holds this information, is a dictionary that maps 3D points to cells. The way in
which growth is governed is using a set of rules also referred to as the ”genome”, which
is defined before the simulation is run. The genome contains information about how each
cell type grows, and each cell has its own copy of a subset of the genome that governs
its own behavior. After the genome has been defined, the actual simulation is run, where
for each timestep, each cell in the grid will be evaluated as well as its genome. This is the
general idea behind the model, and a simple overview can be seen in Figure 3.1. Now,
the individual components of the model will be discussed. The CA implementation is done
in Python, with the extension of using Taichi Lang for performance1. The details of the
implementation and specific choices in terms of data structures will be explained in the
next chapter.
Figure 3.1: Simple diagram showcasing the relationship between the classes and their
parameters.
1https://www.taichi-lang.org/
Parametric Cellular Automata
17
==PAGE:26==
First, an overview of the individual cells is presented, then the rules defining the growth
are highlighted, and lastly, the creation of the genome itself is explained.
3.1.1
Cells
As mentioned, the grid, is a dictionary which maps 3D points to cells. A cell is a class,
and it holds a set of information which is called its ”state”. This information is used in a
multitude of ways, and each time step, this state is updated to reflect the changes caused
by evaluating the genome. Visually, a cell is a colored cube centered at the defined point in
the grid. The cells contain a lot of parameters, and a such only a subset will be discussed
here. The parameters that were used the least throughout the development are moved
to the appendix A.1, to make space and reduce clutter.
These are the following parameters that each cell contains:
• id (int): This is an identifier for the cell type. It is not unique to each cell, but simply
stores which type of cell it is. Cell types are named after body parts often found in
mammals, e.g, torso, leg, shoulder, and so on. The total number of cell types in this
implementation is 24, however, this could of course easily be extended if desired.
• local_transform (int): This is a single number, which is the encoded value of a 3x3
matrix. This matrix describes the frame/local transform of the cell. Such a local
transform is necessary as each cell has its own orientation in 3D space. It is used
when a cell produces a new cell to preserve the correct transformation. This will be
important later.
• index (int): An int which specifies the current index of a cell in relation to its growth
segment. Meaning for a straight line segment of 4 cells, the indices correspond to
a descending line of numbers (3,2,1,0). Once the index of 0 has been reached, the
segment is done growing.
• order (int): This is the reverse of the index, and it is simply stored to keep track of the
order in which the cells were created. Storing this might seem redundant, however,
the cells are not aware of the total number of cells belonging to a segment, and thus,
if an ascending line of numbers is needed for a computation, which it is, this is an
easy way to preserve that information.
• color (tuple): This is a tuple of size 4, which represents the color of the cell. It is
tied to the type of the cell, however, it can also be affected by the neighboring cells
and the concentrations of substances. The alpha value is used to signal whether
the cell is alive or dead.
• genome (Rule[]): Each cell holds a copy of a subset of the original genome. The
subset is simply the list of rules in the dictionary that have the cell’s id as a key. This
allows for individual modification of parts of the genome, without this being reflected
in every cell. Such an approach aligns more with what is the case for real cells in
biology.
• inactive (bool): This simply is a boolean which can be set to indicate that a cell is
inactive or dormant, meaning it is completely done growing and thus can be ignored
during the update of the cellular automaton.
An additional small class, called a ti.dataclass2 is also defined to describe a cell. This
has been created to speed up the neighborhood evaluation using Taichi, and thus the
2https://docs.taichi-lang.org/docs/master/dataclass
18
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:27==
class only stores fundamental information about the cell, like the id, color, and if the cell
is inactive or not. How this is used in detail will be discussed in the next chapter.
3.1.2
Rules
For the rules that govern the growth of the cells, there is a separate class. This defines
the rules, which specify how each cell is updated at each time step. A majority of the
parameters in each rule only define behavior for a single cell based on the current state
of the cell. More specifically, the rules primarily deal with guiding the growth according
to the rule, but except for a few cases, it does not concern themselves with the state of
the neighboring cells. This is left almost exclusively to be handled by a separate Taichi
data structure, which will be discussed in the next chapter. As with the previous section,
lesser-used parameters have been moved to the appendix A.2.
These are the following members of the Rule class and their descriptions:
• new_id (int): This is the cell type which this rule produces.
• direction ([int]): This is a list of length three, which specifies the growth direction. It
is possible for growth to occur in 26 different directions. To get the target position of
a newly created cell, this direction is used. However, in the case of the rule having
a growth function defined, the direction is just a general direction that guides the
growth.
• transform(): This is a function that operates on transforms. Meaning it can define
operations on 3x3 matrices e.g., rotations or a reflection. The option to define a
transform, which does nothing, is also possible, and it is the default unless anything
else is specified.
• growth_function (GrowthFunction): This is a function that describes the growth
function. More specifically, it can make it so that the growth can be directed by a
parametric function like a sine curve or a circle. This is essential as it allows for
more organic growth, as most things in nature rarely come in completely straight
lines. The two types of growth functions are explained in a later section.
• max_count (int): The length of the segment, which this rule produces. This is
decremented each time a new cell belonging to this segment is placed.
• start_substance: This defines the initial concentrations, diffusion coefficients, and
more, which cells of the new_id, should have. These values are read and used to
modify the data structure, which handles the diffusion processes.
• EOS (bool): This is a boolean, which specifies whether or not growth should be
allowed elsewhere than the end of a segment. It is short for ”End Of Segment”.
If it is true, the growth is restricted such that the next growth should wait for the
previous segment to finish growing. However, if it is false, then growth at multiple
starting points along the segment is allowed. This is essential as it allows for the
addition of width to segments.
• condition (bool): This is a value that determines if a rule is activated or not. If the
condition is false, then the rule is deactivated and will not be evaluated.
• time_info(TimeInfo): This is a class that hold information related to periodic and
timed growth. There are a lot of options when it comes to the configuration of this,
and as such, it is easier to explain this later, when showcasing the usage model.
These are some of the available options.
Parametric Cellular Automata
19
==PAGE:28==
– period (int): This defines the period for periodic genes in terms of the number
of cells from the start of the segment.
– is_timed (bool): Indicates whether or not a gene is timed, meaning if its activa-
tion should happen at a certain timestep.
– trigger_time (int): This is the time at which a timed gene should be activated.
• substance_trigger(SubstanceTrigger): This is an additional class, similar to TimeInfo,
which allows for substances to be released at specific intervals or periods. It is quite
simple, but it allows for more flexibility and for the periodic release of substances.
– substance (int): This is the ID of the substance being released.
– period (int): This defines the period for the release in terms of the number of
cells from the start of the segment.
– activation_index(int): This specifies a starting cell index, for a span, in which
the substance will be released.
– span (int): This is the end of the span in terms of number of cells from the start
of the segment.
3.1.3
Gene Types
Lastly, it is of course also important to understand how the genome is created. Genes,
which map cell types to rules, can be defined in the following ways:
• gene: This is the base implementation, which adds a rule to the Genome. This ties
a specific cell type target_id to a rule. Furthermore, it adds an additional rule to
the Genome which allows the new cell type new_id to grow into a cell of the same
kind. This is what allows segments of cells of the same type.
• bilateral: A bilateral gene first calls add_gene, then it takes the transform for this rule
and reflects it about an axis. If no axis is specified, it reflects it along the main axis
of the rule’s direction. The reason behind this is that if diagonal growth is defined,
we need a way to specify the specific reflection axis, which can be done through the
r_axis argument.
• omni: This takes the original rule, and calls add_gene 6 times, one for each major
axis. For each addition to the genome, the rule’s direction is set to one of the major
axes. The transform is left as is, unlike the case for bilateral genes.
• perp: This is similar to the omni gene, however, this, based on a main axis, adds
rules for all the perpendicular axes to the genome. Again, this leaves the transform
as is.
Now to visualize how the rules, cells, and the creation of a genome work, the figure 3.2
has been created. The initial figure shows pseudocode for the creation of the genome.
The next figure then shows the relationship between the keys in the genome and their
rules. Note that calling create_bilateral_genome changes the transform of one of the
rules, such that the direction is reflected. The next figure then shows a simple graph
representation of the relationship between the different cell types, with the rules as edges.
Lastly, the simple resulting structure is shown in 2D. Note that a lot of the variables have
been omitted for clarity.
20
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.2: Genome and resulting 2D grid
Parametric Cellular Automata
21
==PAGE:30==
Especially, the graph representation aligns with the notation that [Sim94] presents in his
paper. However, the other two were included, as the setup used in this project can be
thought of in many different ways.
3.2
Growth Functions
As mentioned, each rule has the possibility to include the definition of a growth function.
In this project, two functions have been added: A sinus curve and a spiral. Thus, there
is a lot of room for expansion should that be desired. Here is a short rundown of the two
options and their usages:
Sine Wave
The secondary axis ⃗s, amplitude A, frequency f and phase shift σ can be defined. When
evaluating the next position in the segment, the cell order is provided as the parameter
t. The resulting value is then clamped to be in the interval [−1; 1] to ensure that the
new position is in the neighborhood of the parent cell. Here, the main growth direction is
preserved, and applying this growth function essentially just shifts the coordinate along
the secondary axis to achieve the curve. The secondary axis is provided as one of the
six cardinal directions, where the index at which the vector equals 1 is used to access the
secondary axis. It should be noted that this, of course, is not compatible with diagonals.
p[argmax(⃗s)] = max(−1, min(1, A · sin(f · t + σ))
(3.1)
Spiral
Here, the secondary axis ⃗s, the center C, radius R and phase shift σ are defined. Again,
the cell order is provided as t. This function is essentially a circle, where the coordinate
of the last perpendicular axis is incremented by one for each step along the circle. To get
the angle needed to figure out the next position on the curve, we know that given the arch
length and the radius, the angle can be defined as:
θ = arc length
R
(3.2)
Now, given a linear parameter t, the normalized fraction of how far along on the arc you
are is :
t
length ∈[0, 1]
(3.3)
The goal is to map the position on a straight line segment to the arc, thus, the angle is
calculated as:
θ = length
R
·
t
length = t
R
(3.4)
The point on the circle centered at C is then calculated as follows:
⃗p = C + ⃗R · (cos(θ + σ) · ⃗
dir + sin(θ + σ) · ⃗s
(3.5)
Where ⃗
dir is the original direction defined for the rule. The difference between this point
and the original point is calculated and clamped between [−1; 1]. This difference is then
added to the primary growth direction axis. As mentioned, the coordinate along the last
perpendicular axis is increased by one each time a new cell belonging to this segment is
placed to turn the circular growth into a spiral.
22
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Diffusion and Reaction Diffusion
As mentioned previously, quite a few papers on the topic of utilizing gene-inspired growth
have quite a large focus on the usage of morphogens. Meaning the diffusion of certain
substances throughout the structure to guide the growth. This is also something which
has been included in this project, as it provides interesting behaviors and allows for the
possibility of introducing cell death and growth based on substance concentrations. Reac-
tion diffusion was also introduced in an earlier section, with the intent of using it to create
interesting patterns. Now, due to the scale at which this project runs, proper patterns
formed using reaction diffusion are very difficult to generate. Because of this, it makes
more sense to focus on using diffusion to affect growth, however, a reaction diffusion
implementation has also been added, and as such, a short explanation will be provided.
To allow for this, each cell type has a predefined sensitivity to each of the substances.
The sensitivity determines how much the cell is affected by the substance. In relation to
biology, this might be viewed as the number of receptors each type of cell has for receiving
a signal of a specific type. The choice of having this sensitivity be predefined allows for
consistency and reduced difficulty when it comes to implementation and use. However,
support for changing the sensitivity of a specific cell type when defining a genome has
been added to allow for flexibility. For the genome itself, it is possible for each of the rules
to define the following for each substance:
• The starting concentration, usually in the interval [0, 1].
• The diffusion coefficient for this type of cell.
• The production rate. Meaning that the cell should produce this substance at a certain
rate. This is also referred to as the source.
• The strength for which the cell propagates the substance. This allows for cells to
either amplify or reduce a signal.
These values are used during the diffusion step to evaluate the strength of the effect on
each cell. To determine the effect on the cell, something called the activation is calcu-
lated. This is defined as follows:
activation = receptor sensitivity · concentration
(3.6)
If this value surpasses a predefined threshold, the behavior of the cell will change. In this
project, three main morphogens have been defined:
• Death: If a cell is exposed to this substance, it will die.
• Growth: If this substance is present, a cell will be allowed to grow. If not, growth is
inhibited.
• Split: If cells are exposed to this substance, their growth will split. The split direction
can either be deterministic or random.
Now, as mentioned, the system also supports reaction diffusion, and therefore the con-
centration of two substances, called A and B has also been included. These, however,
are not evaluated by the functions which handle pure diffusion, but rather the reaction
diffusion functions. Furthermore, their values are only ever used to change the color of
cells.
The former three diffusion substances have been chosen as they make the most sense
both intuitively and when it comes to biology and previous papers on the topic. Imple-
Parametric Cellular Automata
23
==PAGE:32==
menting the resulting behavior on the cells based on these substances can be done in a
variety of ways, and as a result, each choice of implementation will be discussed now.
3.3.1
Death Morphogen
The easiest way to let a cell die is by simply not moving it to the new grid. However, if we
want to keep track of the killed cells, this might not be the best approach. Furthermore
directly not propagating the cell onto the next timestep, makes it so that the death of the
cell should include more logic to ensure that the concentration of the death morphogen is
passed on to the next cell.
If there is a line of three cells 0,1,2, and cell 0 produces the death substance. The con-
centration of the death substance will diffuse into 1 and potentially kill it immediately. This
makes it so that cell 2 won’t be affected, causing the death of cells to only be around the
surrounding area of the source cell. This might not be ideal, and it can be solved in a
multitude of ways. Two of which were considered during the implementation:
• Delayed death: Cells that are supposed to die due to the concentration of the sub-
stance could wait a couple of timesteps before dying. This allows for the substance
to diffuse further.
• Zero Alpha: For this approach, the alpha value of the cell color is used to indicate
if a cell is alive or dead. Thus, even if a cell is invisible and not evaluated in terms
of its genome, it can still participate in diffusion.
For this project, the latter was chosen, however, the former is also partially implemented,
as cells should have a certain maturity/age before they are allowed to die. Now, the latter
approach might not be as biologically accurate, however, in some way, it can be viewed
as how paracrine or close cell-cell signaling works, as even if two cells have space or ”no
cells” between them, substances can still diffuse throughout this space.
One potential big issue, which isn’t considered here, is that through cell death, the struc-
ture might be split and cause disconnected sets of cells. That is, the death of cells might
cause the final structure to be disconnected. This is, of course, not ideal, however, con-
sidering this problem severely limits cell death and it introduces a whole new problem.
The connectivity of structures is not in the area of interest in this project and thus will be
omitted.
3.3.2
Growth Morphogen
Now, for the growth substance, this simply allows for growth to be inhibited in the absence
of this morphogen. This allows for spherical and rounder volumes, which is ideal when
dealing with organic structures. It works in quite a simple fashion, as each cell, when
being evaluated, simply checks if the growth substance activation is higher than a set
threshold, 1.0 in this case. If it is, the cell is allowed to grow, if not, it remains dormant and
will be evaluated the next timestep.
3.3.3
Split Morphogen
Lastly, the split morphogen allows for growth to branch into multiple directions. More
specifically, when calculating the next cell position, it is possible, if a certain threshold
of substance activation is met, that the growth splits. Here, for each cell, two cells will
instead be placed. The placement of the split cells can either be fixed, e.g., cells split
along a fixed axis or random, meaning two random directions are chosen. This splitting
of cells does not, at the moment of writing, affect the transformation of the cell. Meaning
it doesn’t affect the overall growth direction of the affected segment. This is, of course,
something which might be worth adding in a later iteration of the program.
24
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:33==
3.4
Neighborhood
So, quite an important part of a cellular automaton is its neighborhood and the associated
update rules. Without this, the program is essentially just a way to create an initial config-
uration. Thus, we are of course also interested in ways to affect the creation or modify it
after it is complete using neighborhood rules. Now, of course, the diffusion process, which
observes the neighboring cells and updates the substance concentrations, is also a way
to make the update of the cells dependent on their neighborhood. However, it might also
be of interest to use other information gathered from the surrounding area to determine
the state of the cell.
It is important to note that the creation and definition of update rules based on the state
of the neighborhood, akin to what is seen in Conway’s GoL[Gar70], is a very difficult
process in and of itself. Defining these rules and categorizing them can take a lot of
time, and as this project focuses on the growth in relation to the defined genome, this is
not something that is central. As a result, only a few neighborhood update rules will be
explored, however, it is very likely that, given more research into this, update rules based
on the state of the neighborhood might prove to be a great addition.
Anyhow, there are predominantly two ways to go about using the neighborhood for update
rules for this project:
• 1. continuous The neighborhood is evaluated and affects the growth from the be-
ginning of the simulation. This makes it so that whatever rules are defined will have
a huge impact on the final object. The advantage here is that we can achieve some
very interesting structures, but this might be a the cost of losing a lot of desired
expression from the genome.
• 2. timed The neighborhood is evaluated and applied after the creation of the initial
object. This ensures that the structure according to the defined genome will be
finalized and the neighborhood won’t limit the desired expression of the genome.
One downside is that the level of completion of the growth should be tracked, such
that the next ”phase” can be initiated.
Since this project is quite exploitative, both approaches have been included in two different
ways. The former is the default, and when evaluating the neighborhood surrounding a cell,
the following rules exist, which only focus on the number of neighboring cells and their
types:
• Joint Detection: This checks if a cell has x amount of unique neighbors and sets
the diffusion coefficient for the death substance of the evaluated cell to 0.0. The
threshold can be defined before running the simulation. This allows for flexibility, and
this rule is generally used to ensure that cells, which lie at the center of connecting
segments, do not get affected by cell death.
• Edge Detection: This is for lack of a better name, but the general idea is that this
checks if the number of same type neighbors exceeds a certain value. If it doesn’t,
this means that a cell is close to an edge or a boundary between two types of cells,
and as a result, the diffusion coefficient for the death substance of the evaluated cell
is set to 0.0. The threshold greatly affects the resulting behavior, and as it doesn’t
always detect edges, it serves more of a way to allow for the user to limit the death
of cells that lie at the outer boundaries.
Now, in terms of the latter approach to using the neighborhood to determine the behavior
of cells, a simple addition has been made to the rules or genes, which allows for the rule
Parametric Cellular Automata
25
==PAGE:34==
to be dormant until a set number of neighboring cells is reached. There are, of course,
many ways in which this could be implemented. Here are some of the approaches which
were considered:
Gene Activation via Neighbor Influence:
• Simplest: A simple number is used to denote the number of neighbors a cell needs
to trigger the rule.
• Intermediate: In addition to a count, the type of neighboring cells should be con-
sidered as well.
• Advanced: Multiple combinations of neighbors will trigger different types of rules or
maybe variations of a rule. This requires the addition of some sort of matrix to keep
track of the combinations and their outcomes.
The plan was initially to implement the second approach, but due to time constraints, the
first option was chosen. This results in quite a simple implementation, however, as will
be seen later, using this feature can lead to quite interesting results. Furthermore, it is
similar to the theory of Quorum Sensing presented in the previous chapter, where certain
bacteria can change their gene expression based on the neighborhood density. Now, it
would of course be ideal to have implemented the third option, however, as there are
multiple cell types and multiple possible configurations with these cell types, coming up
with the resulting state based on the configuration is unfeasible. To be specific, there are
24 types of cells or 25, if we count a cell being dead or empty, and 26 neighboring cells.
The total number of possible configurations becomes:
2526 ≈2.22 × 1036,
which is an intractable number of combinations to consider. Of course, defining these
update rules could be done for a limited subset of the configurations. However, time also
needs to be allocated to choosing and exploring which of the configurations seem most
interesting and yield the best results. This level of manual tuning is not something that is
in the scope of this project.
26
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:35==
3.5
Main Simulation Loop
Even if the individual parts of the theory behind the system have been discussed, it is still
important to highlight the general simulation loop to further clarify how the program works.
As such, a general overview in the form of pseudo code can be seen below, together with
a figure 3.3, which shows the general execution loop for the main simulation.
Algorithm 1 CA Growth Algorithm
1: Initialize grid and add zygote cell
2: for each time step t = 0 to Tmax do
3:
Pre-compute substance activations in Taichi kernel (if diffusion or reaction dif-
fusion is enabled)
4:
for each cell in the grid do
5:
Check neighbors: Evaluate neighborhood, update joint or edge cells as de-
scribed earlier
6:
for each rule in the cell’s genome do
7:
if rule conditions are satisfied then (e.g, neighborhood density, time or
space constraints)
8:
Calculate new cell position (Can be influenced by split morphogen
concentration or the growth function)
9:
Check if new position is available
10:
Create new cell and activate the substances if any diffusion processes
are run
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
end for
14:
Run diffusion or reaction diffusion
15:
Update grid: flip assignments and check if all cells are done growing
16: end for
17: Return the final grid
Parametric Cellular Automata
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.3: Simple flowchart of main loop. Blue boxes indicate that the computation is
carried out by a Taichi kernel.
The following section will focus on the usage of genetic algorithms in conjunction with the
provided cellular automaton. This part of the project is intended as an initial experiment,
28
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:37==
and as such, not a lot of time was set aside to refine the implementation. Thus, it is
far from perfect, and as will be evident in the results section, it does not achieve the
intended outcomes. After that section, a deeper dive into some of the specifics in terms
of implementation choices will be covered.
3.6
Genetic Algorithms
When talking about genes, generating structures and creatures, it is hard not to talk about
evolutionary methods and genetic algorithms. Therefore, it is of course also relevant to
talk about how this could be integrated with a system like this. It is important to emphasize
that this section is purely experimental and primarily meant to highlight the compatibility
between this framework and genetic algorithms. Thus, it is not the goal to generate new
or aesthetically pleasing results. Therefore, the results presented later, based on the
following section, might appear crude or ”ugly”, however, that is okay, as the intention
here is to illustrate the potential of combining the two.
To integrate these two, a fitness function needs to be defined, which, in this case, is no
trivial problem. This is the case since fitness functions, for e.g., creatures, are often de-
fined based on how good they are at performing a certain task. The structures generated
by this project are, of course, static and very varied, it is impossible to say something
about their ability to, e.g., walk or swim like what Karl Sims did in [Sim94]. However, this
does not mean that it is impossible to define a fitness function for the objects generated
by this program. Instead of focusing on behavioral abilities, it might make sense to define
a fitness function, which uses the geometry of the generated structure, to measure its
fitness. To make it easier, the focus of the following section will be entirely on a subset of
possible models, namely, quadruped mammals.
3.6.1
Defining the fitness function
Even if the subset of objects has been narrowed down to quadruped mammals, it is still not
easy to define a geometric fitness function. However, this webpage by Thayer Watkins
[Wat06]titled ”The Shape of Quadrupeds as a Function of Scale”, provides some inter-
esting geometry relationships between the body segments of quadrupeds. Based on his
work, the fitness function has been defined such that it evaluates the generated structure
based on the following:
• The number of limbs: This should ideally be four, and thus it is heavily rewarded
if this is satisfied. It is calculated by finding the lowest point in the structure, which
should be a limb. Then it is calculated if any other points at this height are not part of
the immediate neighborhood of the chosen cell. What is meant by this is that cells
at the same height, which are in the same neighborhood, should not be counted as
a new limb, but rather as part of the existing limb. The value of this function lies
between [0; 1]
• Symmetry: This is meant as a way to ensure that the structure is symmetrical
across, in this case, the y-axis. The value is calculated simply by going through the
entire structure and ensuring that each point has an existing mirrored point across
the y-axis. The value of this function lies between [0; 1]
• Proportions: This is the part that is the most difficult to define, and also the part
based on the previously mentioned online resource. The current implementation is
very rough and an unsatisfying approximation. In retrospect, the approach taken
here is fundamentally flawed. Three main proportions are evaluated as part of this
function:
Parametric Cellular Automata
29
==PAGE:38==
– Torso thickness vs length: This is meant to encompass the idea that the
stress on the spine of the animal as a result of the thickness of the torso
should not exceed some maximum value. Here, based on the idea presented
in [Wat06], the fitness value is defined as follows:
fitness =
1
1 + |T −c
L|
(3.7)
This ensures inverse proportionality between the thickness T and length L of
the torso. The constant c, is used to scale the tradeoff between the length and
fitness. In this case, it is set to c = 10.
– Neck length vs head size: Here, the idea is that the head should not be too
heavy for the neck to carry. This idea is also presented in [Wat06], where an
ideal neck length can be calculated as:
N = d0λ −d1λ
1
2
(3.8)
In this project, λ is replaced by an estimate of the head diameter, assuming a
roughly spherical head. The constants d0 and d1 control the tradeoff between
the two terms, where d0 is more important if the neck is thin, while d1 is more
important for tick necks and small heads. In this case, a higher d0 value was
chosen to create a preference for longer necks. Thus, the ideal neck length is
calculated and compared to the actual neck length. The fitness function is then
defined as:
fitness =
1
1 + |Lactual −Lideal|
(3.9)
– Neck length vs leg length: This part should enforce the idea that the length
of the neck should be roughly equal to the length of the legs, to ensure that the
animal can reach the ground to feed. Again, it is defined the same way as it is
presented in [Wat06]. Here, the relationship between the neck and leg length
is defined as:
L
λ = e0 −e1
λ
1
2
(3.10)
It is worth noting that λ, which is the height and width of the torso, is assumed
to be proportional to the length of the neck, and thus it is used here. However,
for the implementation, this has been swapped out, so that the actual length
of the neck is used. The constants e0 and e1 are empirical constants, but as
no examples or data are given, they were based on trial and error, defined
as e0 = 1.5 and e1 = 0.5. Similar to the previous function, the ideal ratio
Rideal between the legs and neck is calculated and compared to the actual
ratio Ractual. The final fitness function is then defined as:
fitness =
1
1 + |Ractual −Rideal|
(3.11)
The total fitness value is then a weighted sum between these three functions, in this
case, the final weights were set to: [.50, .10, .40]. While the current fitness function is quite
simplistic and abstract, it is enough to showcase the usage of the program together with
genetic algorithms. Given more time, a better and more refined fitness function could be
developed, as this one was swiftly put together to test the algorithm.
30
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:39==
3.6.2
Crossover and mutation
Now, for the crossover and mutation processes, a base quadruped is initially defined.
Meaning a creature that fits into the goal definition is defined by creating a specific geno-
type. This genome is then mutated heavily, and a new population of 10 individuals is cre-
ated. This population is sorted by its fitness value in descending order. The two ”fittest”
individuals are then mated with the rest of the population so that:
• Individual 1: The fittest individual is mated with 2-7
• Individual 2: The second fittest individual is mated with 3-6
In all of the cases above, the children are mutated with a mutation probability of .1, as
the variation narrows over time. This mutation step introduces additional variety into the
population. This yields a new population of 10 individuals, which is again sorted by their
fitness value, and a new generation is created. The number of generations should di-
rectly relate to the quality of the individuals that are produced by the end of the algorithm.
However, the initial population greatly determines the quality of the final creatures, even
though mutations are introduced throughout the process. Now, as to how this genome is
mutated, it can be done in a simple and not so simple manner. The simple approach is for
each of the rules in the genome, randomly change the maxcount and/or the parameters
in the growth function. This yields the same set of rules, but with new parameters. Thus,
no new genes are introduced, but rather the existing ones are modified. There are, of
course, a lot more parameters related to each gene, which could be modified. However,
if this is done, then the required fitness function to guide the evolution becomes increas-
ingly complex. For example, if it is possible for the time info or directions to be randomly
changed, then the desired growth axis for each segment and its target location should
also be defined. This can be very hard and would probably require a project in and of
itself. Thus, a simple approach will be taken, making it possible to focus on fast genera-
tion and exploration. It is, of course, also possible to completely create random genomes
and mutate the entire genome to remove or add new rules, however, the same argument
applies here, that this would simply introduce too much complexity to handle in the scope
of this project.
Parametric Cellular Automata
31
==PAGE:40==
4
Implementation
Based on the previous section, which highlights the methods, the following chapter will
discuss the details of the implementation. As mentioned, the CA implementation is done
in Python with the additional use of Taichi Lang for performance. For visualization of the
CA, Blender’s geometry node setup is used1.
Sparse Data Structure for Diffusion and Reaction Diffusion
To ensure that diffusion and reaction diffusion can be run efficiently, an additional data
structure has been set up. This data structure is spatially sparse to decrease the amount
of memory necessary to run the simulation. First of all, the generated structure is rarely
a complete cube, meaning having a set 3D array to store the cell substance concentra-
tions would be very inefficient, as a large chunk of the allocated data would be empty.
Furthermore, the substances which will be present in the system, very rarely fill out the
entire structure, and thus it is more efficient to store the concentrations like this. In Taichi,
spatially sparse data structures can be created in a manner of three ways:
• Pointer SNode: The top-level data structure consists of a pointer array, where each
pointer points to a dense block.
• Bitmasked SNode: Similar to the previous approach, but here the pixels in the
dense blocks are blocked together and, thus, only one pointer per dense block is
used. To allow for the individual handling of pixel activity, a bitmask is used to rep-
resent the activity of each pixel in the dense blocks.
• Dynamic SNode: Similar to a list, but does not allow for deletion of individual ele-
ments.
The former, Pointer SNode, is used in this project, as each cell contains a large amount
of information, storing a 64-bit pointer has lower storage costs than the space to store the
value itself.
The root structure is a 30 × 30 × 30 pointer array, where each pointer points to a 4 × 4 × 4
dense block of matrices of size s × 8, where s is the number of substances present in
the system. This is the index at which the aforementioned information is being stored for
each substance:
• (0) Concentration
• (1) Diffusion coefficient D
• (2) Source/production amount
• (3) Strength/propagation amount
The 8 comes from the fact that, as mentioned, for each substance, four values are stored.
However, as the simulation of the diffusion process requires alternating between reading
and writing, a cycling approach is used. Here, each vector is twice as big, so 4 × 2 = 8,
and a phase value is used to keep track of which part to read and write from. This is
opposed to an approach where values are copied over at the end of each timestep.
More specifically, when the phase is 0, the first half of the vector is read, and the second
half is written to. Next iteration, the second half is read from and the first half is written
1https://www.blender.org/
32
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:41==
to, and so on. This speeds up the implementation quite a lot, however, it does come
at the cost of increased memory. This increase, however, is still linear in the number of
cells, and the cyclic approach allows for constant time update O(1), as opposed to linear
O(N), N = number of cells. Note that in Taichi, all fields need to be allocated in the
Python scope, before the usage of any Taichi kernels or functions, thus it is not possible
to create a new field for each timestep. Furthermore field to field assignment of structured
or sparse fields is not allowed. This is due to the fact that those fields have a hierarchical
memory layout, and by assigning one such field to another, it simply assigns the reference.
Thus the to copy the values of a sparse field into another, they need to be copied over
element-wise. This can be done quite fast using the provided copy_from(self,other)
method2, however, this is still linear in the size of the field.
As to how the substance concentrations are calculated, the previously explained theory
on diffusion and reaction diffusion is used. The Laplacian, as it is translated to 3D, uses
a 3D discrete Laplacian operator, also called the 27-point stencil [Wik25b]. This is im-
plemented so that there is a weight associated with each neighboring direction in a 3D
Moore neighborhood. The center weight is then the negated sum of the total weights:
Moore Neighborhood Weights =
6 · 6.0
| {z }
Direct neighbors
+
12 · 3.0
| {z }
Plane diagonals
+
8 · 2.0
| {z }
XYZ diagonals
= 36 + 36 + 16 = 88
Normalized Weights :
wi = w′
i
26
Center Weight :
wc = −
26
X
i=1
wi = −
26
X
i=1
w′
i
26 = −88
26 ≈−3.38
Now, for the chosen boundary condition, which was the Neumann boundary condition,
a check has been added to see if the neighboring cell has been initialized as part of the
structure. If it doesn’t have one, a substitute value should be chosen to ensure the desired
flux at the boundary. However, as the main idea here is that there should be zero flux at
the boundary, the easiest approximation is just to use the center point as a substitute for
the missing neighbor. Now, ideally, the missing neighbor should be mirrored for a better
approximation, however, for structures like this, there is a high chance that the mirrored
points in the neighborhood would be missing as well. Because of this, the simpler, but
less accurate approach will be used. Thus, the diffusion step is calculated as follows:
@ti.kernel
def diffusion(substance: int, phase: int):
for i, j, k in substances:
pos = ti.Vector([i, j, k])
old_concentration = get_concentration(pos, substance, phase)
diffusion_rate = get_diffusion_coef(pos, substance, phase)
new_concentration = old_concentration + diffusion_rate * laplace_neumann(pos,
substance, phase)
,→
new_concentration = ti.max(0.0, ti.min(1.0, new_concentration))
update_substance_concentration(pos, substance, phase,new_concentration)
add_concentration_source(pos, substance, phase)
The 3D Laplacian is calculated as follows. Note that the parameter neighbourStrength is
2https://docs.taichi-lang.org/api/taichi/#taichi.Field.copy_from
Parametric Cellular Automata
33
==PAGE:42==
used as a scaling factor applied to the concentrations of neighboring cells. Conceptually,
it acts as a way to scale how much of the neighboring concentrations are passed on to the
currently evaluated cell. It is similar to altering the weights associated with the Laplacian.
While that is not mathematically correct, it serves a practical role, which makes it easier
to tune the influence of neighboring cells.
@ti.func
def laplace_neumann(p : ti.types.vector(3, ti.i32), substance : int, phase:int) -> float:
centerCon = get_concentration(p, substance,phase)
centerStength = get_strength(p, substance, phase)
sumCon = centerCon * center_weight * centerStength
for n in range(26):
dir = moore_neighborhood_f[n]
neighbour_p = ti.Vector([
int(p[0] + dir[0]),
int(p[1] + dir[1]),
int(p[2] + dir[2])
])
neighbourCon = 0.0
neighbourStrength = 0.0
if is_active_cell(neighbour_p):
neighbourCon = get_concentration(neighbour_p, substance, phase)
neighbourStrength = get_strength(neighbour_p, substance, phase)
else:
neighbourCon = centerCon
neighbourStrength = centerStength
sumCon += neighbourCon * weights_f[n] * neighbourStrength
return sumCon
Whereas the reaction diffusion step is calculated as follows, with the Laplacian being
calculated in 2D instead. The reasoning behind this will be explained in the results section:
34
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:43==
def reaction_diffusion_step():
for _ in range(max_diff_T):
reaction_diffusion((get_counter(B)%2)*4)
inc_counter(A)
inc_counter(B)
@ti.kernel
def reaction_diffusion(phase : int):
for i,j,k in substances:
pos = ti.Vector([i, j, k])
old_A = get_concentration(pos, A , phase)
old_B = get_concentration(pos, B, phase)
diffusion_rateA = get_diffusion_coef(pos, A, phase)
diffusion_rateB = get_diffusion_coef(pos, B, phase)
lap_A = laplace_2d(pos, A, phase)
lap_B = laplace_2d(pos, B, phase)
A_con = old_A + (diffusion_rateA * lap_A - old_A*old_B*old_B
+ feed*(1.0 - old_A))*dt
,→
B_con = old_B + (diffusion_rateB * lap_B + old_A*old_B*old_B
- (kill+feed) * old_B)*dt
,→
A_clipped =
ti.max(0.0, ti.min(1.0, A_con ))
B_clipped =
ti.max(0.0, ti.min(1.0, B_con))
update_substance_concentration(pos, A, phase, A_clipped)
update_substance_concentration(pos, B, phase, B_clipped)
One important thing about the implementation here, which will also be highlighted later
through some graphs, is that running Taichi kernels multiple times during each simulation
step is quite expensive, as there is quite a lot of overhead associated with offloading the
computation to the Taichi runtime. Because of this, an additional Taichi field is allocated,
which stores the activations for each cell at a given timestep. This increases performance
by a lot, however, it comes at the cost of increased memory usage. This will be discussed
in detail later.
Sparse Data Structure for Neighborhood Checks
Similar to how the data structure for the diffusion process is spatially sparse, a similar
approach is used when evaluating the neighborhood of a cell. Here, there are two identical
spatially sparse fields allocated at the beginning of the program. The root structure for
both is the same size as for the diffusion field, which is a 30 × 30 × 30 pointer array.
However, here each pointer points to a dense block of Taichi Dataclass instances called
CellTaichi. This is a simplified version of the original Cell class, which is defined as
follows:
Parametric Cellular Automata
35
==PAGE:44==
@ti.dataclass
class CellTaichi:
id: ti.i32
color: ti.types.vector(4, ti.f32)
inactive: ti.i8
These data structures essentially just mirror the original grid within Taichi. This could have
been avoided and optimized if the entire simulation had been run using Taichi, however, it
is still possible to utilize Taichi kernels to improve performance here. It should, however, be
noted that introducing these two additional sparse fields does, of course, add overhead
in terms of memory consumption, which could have been avoided. Furthermore, this
structure is also used to calculate the previously mentioned substance activation values,
as it contains all the necessary information on the grid needed to support a fast iteration
time over the cells.
Additionally, as opposed to the previous approach to cycling the data in-place, it is simply
copied over in this case. This choice was not made due to performance reasons, but
rather that the refactor was deprioritized due to time constraints.
Based on this and the previous section, a sufficient understanding of how the system
works should have been achieved. The next sections will focus on the performance of
the system as well as details on how the final structures displayed in the result section
have been created.
4.1
Design Choices and Performance
This section will focus on the Taichi and main loop integration and the resulting perfor-
mance of the system. If the following results were known prior to initializing the work,
then ideally, the entire framework should have been written using Taichi. There is, of
course, a lot of performance to be gained, however, as is, it is still quite good compared
to what it would have been without Taichi. However, one challenge that comes with in-
tegrating regular Python code with Taichi is that, as mentioned in a previous section, the
overhead of forwarding a task to Taichi from regular Python code is quite large. Further-
more, when switching context, the CPU and GPU need to synchronize as Taichi, in this
case, runs on the GPU. This can also increase execution time. To showcase this, data
was collected to investigate the performance in terms of speed and memory usage. The
setup is quite simple, which involves defining a very simple genome, using an omni gene,
and then increasing the number of cells to grow in each direction. For example, this is the
base definition and the largest.
def test_small_structure1():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
def test_large_structure3():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 14))
The full tables containing the collected data can be viewed in the appendix A.3. Here it
was discovered that the overhead of including diffusion in the simulation was nontrivial,
however, increasing the number of diffusion steps pr timestep was very cheap in terms
of performance. This can be seen in the first plot of 4.1, where the performance in terms
of execution time in seconds shows that toggling diffusion slows the performance by a
lot, but increasing the number of diffusion steps per timestep barely makes a difference.
The overhead mainly comes from the reading of substance activation values through the
use of Taichi, as these were read multiple times pr rule per cell. To avoid this would have
36
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:45==
been easier if the entire main loop were in Taichi, however, the time limitation caused
this refactoring to be impossible. However, another approach can also be taken, where a
sparse Taichi field that can hold the activation values is pre-allocated. For each timestep,
this is then populated with the activation values and translated to a numpy array. The
results of this can be seen in the second plot of 4.1, where the performance difference
after including diffusion is reduced by an average of 25.2%.
Figure 4.1: The number of cells vs execution time in seconds.
Now the translation to numpy is not ideal, and it increases memory consumption by an
average of 6972.4%, which is quite extreme as can be seen in 4.2. This increase in mem-
ory is, of course, very far from being ideal, and it stems from the fact that when the sparse
data structure containing the activations is converted, it becomes dense as it copies the
entire structure. This could, as mentioned, be avoided if the entire system were created
using Taichi.
Here, it becomes a question of memory usage vs speed. It can be argued that even if
memory consumption is increased by a non trivial amount, it is still fairly low, especially
if tuned properly to only be as big as absolutely necessary, whereas the performance
increase greatly improves the usage of the program and it enables the creation of larger
structures, as well as improves iteration time, which is ideal. However, it is definitely
something to be aware of, as this does not scale well if the dimensions of the sparse
structures are increased.
Parametric Cellular Automata
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.2: The number of cells vs memory consumption in MB.
4.2
Visualization and Blender
As mentioned, Blender is used for the visualization of the CA. For each timestep, the sys-
tem creates a new and updated grid, which is then written to a file format that Blender can
operate on and visualize in the editor. The chosen file format is the .ply format (Polygon
File Format), as it allows for the storage of additional properties like color, which is ideal
in this situation. Thus, when writing a CA configuration to a .ply file, each cell is treated
as a vertex with a color. If an animation showcasing the growth is desired, a flag can
be set, which allows for the creation of a new .ply file for each simulation timestep. In a
separate Python script, the .ply file is read and used to create a new Blender object, using
Blender’s Python API3. Each object has a geometry node modifier applied, which takes
each point and instantiates a cube, with the specified vertex color. The color of the cube,
is set using a shader, which reads the color attribute from the geometry and passes that
to the base color and alpha of a Principled BSDF node4. See the appendix for images of
the geometry node and shader setup: A.1, A.2. If the folder from which the script reads
contains multiple .ply files, it is possible to set an additional flag value, which treats these
files as frames in an animation. This allows for a quick way to create animations of the
growth process. The script can be run through Blender’s text editor, and depending on the
flags set, result in either a single object or multiple objects, which are part of an animation.
An overview of the full setup can be seen in 4.3.
3https://docs.blender.org/api/current/info_quickstart.html
4https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/render/shader_nodes/shader/principled.html
38
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.3: Full Project Setup Overview
Parametric Cellular Automata
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:49==
5
Results
In this chapter a multitude of different generated structures will be presented, together
with an explanation of what features were used to achieve them. The objects presented
in the following section fall into the following categories:
• Organic Objects:
– Animals
– Plants and Trees
• Inorganic Objects
– Structures
– Simple Objects
For part of the structures, their associated genome definition will be included, however, for
the remaining objects, their definition will be included in the appendix, or it can be visible
in the attached codebase.
5.1
Animals
Animals are arguably one of the more relevant and obvious to model using this framework,
as the setup sort of resembles a growth process, which all animals follow to some extent.
As a result, the following animals, in this case mammals, have been created, which can be
seen in 5.1 and 5.2. They are all based on roughly the same set of rules, but with varying
parameters. There are some exceptions, e.g., the tail on the mouse or the squirrel, and
the addition of genes necessary to express the width of the legs. All of them are created
without the use of neighborhood checks or any diffusion processes. Thus, they heavily rely
on the usage of the sine growth function as a way to introduce curves. They were created
before the complete finalization of the framework, and a such, their gene expression could
most definitely be reduced if the usage of diffusion was introduced, to handle the width
of segments. More specifically, using the SubstanceTrigger to govern the release of the
growth morphogen would most likely be a better approach when it comes to handling the
width of segments.
Parametric Cellular Automata
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.1: Generated creatures, which attempt to depict the following animals. From top
left to bottom right: (A) Gazelle, (B) Giraffe, (C) Jaguar, (D) Squirrel, (E) Jerboa/Jumping
Mouse, (F) Cow, (G) Wolf, (H) Gorilla
Figure 5.2: Generated Animals from a three-quarter view.
The following shows the creation of the gazelle, which is the base for the remaining mam-
mals shown. As is obvious, it is quite long, however, as mentioned, it could be reduced in
42
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:51==
size if the diffusion process were included. More specifically, the section that add thick-
ness could be partially removed, since the varying thicknesses could be achieved from
the diffusion of the growth morphogen instead. Furthermore, in cases where the legs are
straight, it is a bit redundant to introduce a new gene for the lower leg, however, it was
done to showcase the differences between the generated animals.
def create_gazelle_genome():
#Body
add_gene(zygote, Rule(back, XM, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.55, frequency=0.4, phase_shift = 1), max_count=11))
,→
add_gene(back, Rule(torso, XM, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.7, phase_shift = 0.5), max_count=1))
,→
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(shoulder, YP+ZM+XP, no_trans, no_growth,
max_count=1),r_axis = 1)
,→
add_bilateral_gene(zygote, Rule(hip, YP, no_trans, no_growth, max_count=2))
#Head
add_gene(torso, Rule(neck, XM, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.8, frequency=0.6, phase_shift = -0.5), max_count=6))
,→
add_gene(neck, Rule(head, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
add_perp_gene(neck, Rule(c7, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
time_info=TimeInfo(is_timed=True, trigger_time=30)))
,→
add_omni_gene(head, Rule(c6, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 1))
# Antlers
add_bilateral_gene(head, Rule(c8, YP+XP,
no_trans,growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave, axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.8,
frequency=0.6, phase_shift = 0.5), max_count=5 ), r_axis=1)
,→
,→
# Limbs
add_gene(hip, Rule(leg, ZM, no_trans,growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.6, phase_shift = -1.2), max_count=6))
,→
add_gene(leg, Rule(foot, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, max_count=6))
add_gene(foot, Rule(c1, XM+ZM, no_trans,no_growth, max_count=0))
add_gene(shoulder, Rule(upper_arm, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, 6))
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(lower_arm, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, 4))
add_gene(lower_arm, Rule(c2, ZM+XM, no_trans,no_growth, 1))
add_gene(leg, Rule(c5, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS=False))
add_gene(shoulder, Rule(c5, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS=False))
#Thickness
add_perp_gene(back, Rule(c3, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0, EOS=False))
add_perp_gene(torso, Rule(c3, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
time_info=TimeInfo(is_timed=True, trigger_time=30)))
,→
add_gene(c3, Rule(c4, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS=False))
#Tail
add_gene(zygote, Rule(appendix, XP+ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 3))
The following figure 5.3 is quite simple and was created in the early stages of the project,
however, it does showcase the ability to change parameters, and thus getting slightly
different results, quite clearly. Despite the fact that it is rudimentary and includes limited
variation, it does show that slight variation can be easily achieved by varying the rule
parameters. The genome that defines this growth is a simplified version of the previous
gazelle example.
Parametric Cellular Automata
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.3: Render of simple dragon variations: (A) Right: Simple quadruped. (B) Bottom
Right: Front legs have been rotated, and rows of cells create wings. (C) Bottom Left: The
sine growth function is used to vary the look of the wings. (D) Top Right: Parameter
change for the wings and the addition of a tail. (E) Top Left: Further changes to the wings
and the addition of spikes on the tail.
Now, it is of course also possible to generate animals that do not have four main limbs.
In figure 5.4 and 5.5, four examples of fish-like objects have been made. The fish look
simpler than the previous animals, however, they are also a bit tricky. This is due to the fact
that they display partial symmetry across the x-axis and not just the y-axis e.g, there are
fins both on the top and bottom of the fish, but with varying placements. To translate this
sort of latitude information to place the fins correctly, a sort of central coordinate system
of cells has been made to control the axis of growth. This is unlike what has been done
for some of the approaches mentioned in the related works section, where morphogens
inform the cells of positional information. To handle the width of the fish, diffusion of the
growth morphogen is used to dictate the thickness. This does allow for a smaller genome
to be defined as the width can be controlled by the available diffusion parameters. The
following renders are quite inspired by the looks of the fish from the game Minecraft1, as
they are also quite simple and are made of cubes.
1https://www.minecraft.net/da-dk/about-minecraft
44
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.4: Fish and one mammal attempting to depict the following: (A) Top Right: Clown
fish, (B) Top Left: Dolphin, (C) Bottom Left: Salmon, (D) Bottom Right: Blue Tang.
Figure 5.5: Generated fish from a three-quarter view.
The following code segment shows the generation of the genome for the top right Clown
fish. Here, the initialization of the substance concentrations is visible, which is what con-
trols the width of the fish.
Parametric Cellular Automata
45
==PAGE:54==
def create_salmon_fish():
add_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, XP,
no_trans, no_growth, 8, start_substance={growth:
[1.0,dG, 1.0, 1.0]}, substance_trigger=SubstanceTrigger(activation_index=2,
span=5)))
,→
,→
# Body
add_bilateral_gene(zygote, Rule(appendix, YP,
no_trans, no_growth, 0))
add_gene(zygote, Rule(lower_arm, ZP,
no_trans, no_growth, 1, start_substance={growth:
[1.0,dG, 1.0, 1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(zygote, Rule(upper_arm, ZM,
no_trans, no_growth, 1, start_substance={growth:
[1.0,dG, 1.0, 1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(appendix, Rule(hip, XP,
no_trans, no_growth,8, EOS=False,
start_substance={growth: [0.0,dG, 0.0, 1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(lower_arm, Rule(c1, XP,
no_trans, no_growth,8, EOS=False,
start_substance={growth: [0.0,dG, 0.0, 1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(c4, XP,
no_trans, no_growth,8, EOS=False,
start_substance={growth: [0.0,dG, 0.0, 1.0]}))
,→
# Fins
add_gene(hip, Rule(c2, YP, no_trans, no_growth, 2,
time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=2, span=2), start_substance={growth: [1.0,dG,
0.1, 1.0]}))
,→
,→
add_gene(c1, Rule(c3, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 1, time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=4,
span=4),
start_substance={growth: [1.0,dG, 0.1, 1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(c4, Rule(c5, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 1, time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=3,
span=2),
start_substance={growth: [1.0,dG, 0.1, 1.0]}))
,→
# Tail fin
add_gene(torso, Rule(back, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
start_substance={growth:
[1.0,dG, 0.1, 1.0]}))
,→
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(leg, ZP+XP, no_trans, no_growth, 1,
start_substance={growth: [1.0,dG, 0.4, 1.0]}), r_axis=2)
,→
add_gene(leg, Rule(foot, XP,
no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS = False,
start_substance={growth: [1.0,dG, 0.4,1.0]}))
,→
#Thickness
add_omni_gene(hip, Rule(shoulder, ZP,
no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS=False,
start_substance={growth: [0.0,dG, 0.0, .1]}))
,→
add_gene(zygote, Rule(neck, XM,
no_trans, no_growth, 0, EOS=False,
start_substance={growth: [1.0,dG, 1.0, 1.0]}))
,→
add_omni_gene(neck, Rule(shoulder, ZP,
no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS=False,
start_substance={growth: [0.0,dG, 0.0, .1]}))
,→
5.2
Organic structures
This section will focus on displaying the ability of the system to generate objects that look
like plants. To achieve these, a heavy usage of the split morphogen is used, as it allows for
cell segments to split into two during growth. This allows for the generation of structures
that display branching. However, as controlling the diffusion process can be quite difficult,
manually introducing branching segments might be a more viable option if a more regular
and predictable behavior is desired. A usage of both approaches can be seen in the figure
5.6. Here, the Cactus is created by manually defining bilateral genes to get the desired
look. The curvature of the arms is achieved by simply using a sine growth function and
then a straight line segment. The Foxglove flower uses the spiral growth function together
with a strong concentration of the split morphogen to create the clusters meant to look
like leaves. Here, the split morphogen causes a random choice of split direction, which
is ideal when a randomized and organic look is desired. For the Crocus flower, a simple
sine curve creates the stem. where the longer leaves are again created using a smaller
concentration of the split morphogen. It can be seen that the leaves are more separated,
which is due to the fact that the strength at which each leaf cell propagates the morphogen
is very low, and as such, the concentration quickly diminishes and loses its effect.
46
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.6: Render of two flowers and a cactus.(A) Cactus, (B) Crocus, (C) Foxglove
This is the genome generation for the Crocus flower, which is quite a lot smaller than any
of the mammal genomes. The reasoning behind this is that flowers are made up of a
smaller number of identifiable segments, whereas animals often contain multiple different
segments.
def create_crocus():
receptor_profiles[torso][split] = 0.0
#Stem
add_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, ZP, no_trans, max_count = 25,
growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave, axis_offset = 1, amplitude = 0.6,
frequency = 0.4), falloff=0.9, start_substance={split:[1.0,0.0,0.0,0.5]}))
,→
,→
#Leaves
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(shoulder, XP, no_trans, growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.7, frequency=0.4, phase_shift
= 1), max_count=10, time_info=TimeInfo(period=6),falloff=1.1,
start_substance={split:[0.0,dS,0.0,0.2]}))
,→
,→
,→
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(hip, YP, no_trans, growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.7, frequency=0.4, phase_shift
= 1), max_count=10, time_info=TimeInfo(period=6,offset=3),falloff=1.1,
start_substance={split:[0.0,dS,0.0,0.2]}))
,→
,→
,→
#Flower
add_gene(torso, Rule(appendix, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
start_substance={split:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_gene(appendix, Rule(back,ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 2, EOS=False, falloff=1.5))
add_perp_gene(back, Rule(foot, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 1,
start_substance={split:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}, EOS=False))
,→
add_gene(back, Rule(neck,ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 7, falloff=0.8))
add_perp_gene(neck, Rule(leg, ZP, no_trans, no_growth,3,
start_substance={split:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}, EOS=False))
,→
Similar to the previous render, the following structures seen in 5.7, showcase the ability to
create structures, using the split morphogen, can create clear branching for the trunks of
the trees as well as very dense branching for the leaves. As the directions are randomly
chosen, it is possible to get very varied results by rerunning the simulation.
Parametric Cellular Automata
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.7: Two flying islands with trees.
The following figure 5.8 further showcases the usage of the split morphogen and, in the
case of the larger Bonsai tree, the usage of the growth morphogen. The former is very
similar to the trees showcased in the previous figure, with the only change being the color
of the top cells. Here chosen to look a bit like a Japanese cherry blossom tree. The other
tree in 5.8, however, is created using a spiral as the main trunk, with manual branching
used for the larger branches. The split morphogen is then used to create the leaf bundles.
The width of the trunk is controlled by a growth morphogen, where the bottom cell of the
trunk emits a small amount of the substance, causing the top part to be thinner as there
is a smaller concentration.
Figure 5.8: (A) Small Cherry Blossom, (B) Larger Bonsai Tree
48
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:57==
Similar to how the crocus flower was made, here is the genome definition for the large
bonsai tree. It is a bit more complex, but it could be reduced in size if the framework
allowed for gene mappings like this (id1, id2)−> (id3). Meaning, if it were possible to
define a set of cells that map to the same rule.
def create_big_tree():
receptor_profiles[lower_arm][split] = 0.0
receptor_profiles[upper_arm][split] = 0.0
#Trunk
add_gene(zygote, Rule(lower_arm, XP, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(spiral,
name = "spiral", axis_offset = 1, radius = 4, phase_shift = 1), max_count=20,
start_substance={growth:[1.0,dG, 1.0, 1.0]},
substance_trigger=SubstanceTrigger(substance = growth, activation_index=0,
span=10)))
,→
,→
,→
,→
add_gene(lower_arm, Rule(upper_arm, XP, no_trans,
growth_function=GrowthFunction(spiral, name = "spiral", axis_offset = 1, radius = 2,
phase_shift = 1), max_count=8,
start_substance={growth:[1.0,dG, .5, .5]}))
,→
,→
#Side branches
add_bilateral_gene(lower_arm, Rule(hip, XP, no_trans,growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.5, phase_shift
= 1), max_count=9, time_info=TimeInfo(period=12, offset=4),
start_substance={split:[1.0,0.0,0.0,1.0],growth:[1.0,0.0, 1.0,
0.0]},substance_trigger= SubstanceTrigger(substance = split, period=5, offset=4)))
,→
,→
,→
,→
add_gene(lower_arm, Rule(neck, YP+XP, no_trans, growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.6,
phase_shift
=1.4) , max_count=5, time_info=TimeInfo(period=11,offset=9),start_substance={split: ⌋
[1.0,0.0,0.0,1.0],growth:[1.0,0.0, 1.0, 0.0]},substance_trigger=
SubstanceTrigger(substance = split, period=5,offset=3)))
,→
,→
,→
,→
add_bilateral_gene(lower_arm, Rule(torso, YP, no_trans, growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.5,
phase_shift
= 1) , max_count=6, time_info=TimeInfo(period=7,offset=6),
start_substance={split:[1.0,0.0,0.0,1.0],growth:[1.0,0.0, 1.0,
0.0]},substance_trigger= SubstanceTrigger(substance = split, period=5, offset=5)))
,→
,→
,→
,→
# Leaves
add_gene(torso, Rule(appendix, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
start_substance={split:[1.0,dS,1.0,1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(hip, Rule(appendix, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
start_substance={split:[1.0,dS,1.0,1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(neck, Rule(appendix, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
start_substance={split:[1.0,dS,1.0,1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(appendix, Rule(shoulder, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 5,
start_substance={split:[1.0,dS,1.0,1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(shoulder, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 5,
start_substance={split:[1.0,dS,1.0,1.0]}))
,→
#trunk width
add_perp_gene(lower_arm, Rule(back, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS =False,
start_substance={growth:[0.0,dG, 0.0, 1.0]}))
,→
add_omni_gene(upper_arm, Rule(back, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 0, EOS =False,
start_substance={growth:[0.0,dG, 0.0, 0.2]}))
,→
5.3
Architectural Structures
Now that the usage of the system to generate organic structures has been completed, it is
of course also of interest to see the capabilities of the system when it comes to inorganic
structures.
Thus, a couple of simple examples will be shown, together with the usage of changing
segments of the genome, to create variations in the structures. The example houses or
huts shown in 5.9 were made by creating two genomes describing the larger huts and
four smaller variations. By letting the smaller huts be defined, having their origin from a
Parametric Cellular Automata
49
==PAGE:58==
cell in the larger hut, it is possible to create combinations of the two.
Figure 5.9: Variations of hut/house-like structures, using two types of larger structures
and four smaller variants.
For the huts, the definitions looked like this, with the exact parameters slightly varying for
each variation. The last call create_small_hut_slim() creates the smaller hut, and can
be exchanged for other variations like the create_small_hut_short() or create_small_hut_long().
def create_hut():
#Roof
add_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 10))
add_gene(zygote, Rule(spinner, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 4))
add_gene(spinner, Rule(head, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
add_bilateral_gene(zygote, Rule(shoulder, YP, no_trans,
growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave, axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.8,
frequency=0.4, phase_shift = 4), max_count=7))
,→
,→
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(shoulder, YP,
no_trans,growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave, axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.8,
frequency=0.4, phase_shift = 4), max_count=7))
,→
,→
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(hip, YP, no_trans, EOS =
False,growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave, axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.8,
frequency=0.4, phase_shift = 4), max_count=6))
,→
,→
#Sides and floor
add_gene(leg, Rule(foot, YM, no_trans, no_growth, 6))
add_gene(hip, Rule(leg, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 6,
time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=5,span=1)))
,→
#Edges
add_gene(shoulder, Rule(upper_arm, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 6,
time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=5,span=1)))
,→
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(lower_arm, YM, no_trans, no_growth, 6))
#Front
add_gene(lower_arm, Rule(neck, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 10, EOS =False))
create_small_hut_slim()
50
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:59==
Now, as diffusion was used together with organic structures, it can of course also be used
for more rigid structures like buildings. Here, the death morphogen is used to create a
hollow space in the center, which creates a dome-like structure. Using a variant of the
smaller hut, where one is rotated about the z-axis, it is possible to create the structure in
5.10, which resembles a simple lighthouse. The second figure 5.11 shows a processed
version, modified in Blender, where the middle pillar is given an emissive material and the
outer dome a glass material, to showcase the hollowness better.
Figure 5.10: Simple setup using the two smaller huts and a middle pillar with a dome at
the top.
Figure 5.11: Stylized render of the previous structure.
Parametric Cellular Automata
51
==PAGE:60==
Additionally, the death morphogen, can be used to carve windows, in a structure as can
be seen in 5.12. Here, small segments of cells emit the death morphogen, which creates
the hollow spaces. To achieve cell death, which looks like windows, the cells surrounding
the emitting segment only propagate a very small amount of the substance.
Figure 5.12: Apartment building
Lastly, a small example of the usage of the system to create chairs has been created.
This is to showcase that it is capable of creating structures, similar to what was presented
in [Jon+20]. It is not to say that these objects are superior in any way, but merely to
showcase the variety of objects this framework can produce.
Figure 5.13: Render of simple chairs.
52
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:61==
To summarize the results, the first section on animals is quite obviously the largest of
the two, which can be attributed to the fact that this framework works better for organic
structures. The reasoning behind this is that, as the framework revolves around having
one zygote, which grows into the target structure, it is better suited for generating objects
that display this sort of behavior in real life. More specifically, objects that grow from
a single point or small area can more easily be modeled with this approach, whereas
objects like large structures most often do not have a single point of origin. However,
it is of course also very probable that it is just easier to imagine the growth of animals
and plants in relation to this framework, whereas buildings and inorganic objects require
the translation of a very man-made structure to be imagined as if it grew according to
principles observed in nature. Given more time, experimenting with multi-zygote setups
to accommodate part of this issue would have been interesting. However, for this to work,
some changes should be made to the setup. The most important being adding the ability
to create multiple genomes, so that each zygote or organism could display different growth
behaviors. It is, of course, already possible to create setups where multiple zygotes, with
the same genetic code, are placed on the grid. However, for more complex structures to
arise, a setup modeling a colony of organisms might be necessary.
Parametric Cellular Automata
53
==PAGE:62==
5.4
Reaction Diffusion
As was mentioned earlier, reaction diffusion was initially meant to be a part of this project
with the purpose of adding patterns to the generated creatures. However, throughout the
development, it became quite evident that the grid sizes used in this project were too
small to properly display the effects of reaction diffusion. This was especially the case
when trying to run it in 3D, as it became too unstable and led to no usable results. On a
2D grid of sizes around 40 × 30, the effect can be seen in 5.14 and 5.15. It is also worth
noting that the number of timesteps used here is significantly larger than for all the other
examples, which usually only use about 20 −60 frames.
Figure 5.14: Start of a coral like diffusion with parameters: DA = 0.16, DB = 0.08, f =
0.0545, k = 0.062. Timestep: 800
54
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.15: Mitosis like reaction diffusion with the parameters: DA = 0.16, DB =
0.08, f = 0.0367, k = 0.0649. Timesteps from top left to bottom right: 2000, 2500,3000,
4000, 4500,5500
5.5
Genetic Algorithm Experiment
As mentioned, this project also briefly explores the use of genetic algorithms together with
the parametric cellular automaton. Using the previously described approach, it is indeed
possible to run a genetic algorithm using this setup. The base genome used to create the
initial population is:
Parametric Cellular Automata
55
==PAGE:64==
def create_simple_quadroped_genome():
add_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, XM, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.7, phase_shift = 0.5), max_count=10))
,→
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(shoulder, YP+ZM+XP, no_trans, no_growth,
max_count=2),r_axis = 1)
,→
add_bilateral_gene(zygote, Rule(hip, YP, no_trans, no_growth, max_count=2))
add_gene(zygote, Rule(appendix, XP+ZM, no_trans,
growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave, axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.55,
frequency=0.4, phase_shift = 1), max_count = 3))
,→
,→
add_gene(torso, Rule(neck, XM, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.8, frequency=0.6, phase_shift = -0.5), max_count=10))
,→
add_gene(hip, Rule(leg, ZM, no_trans,growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.6, phase_shift = -1.2), max_count=6))
,→
add_gene(leg, Rule(foot, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, max_count=6))
add_gene(foot, Rule(c1, XM+ZM, no_trans,no_growth, max_count=0))
add_gene(shoulder, Rule(upper_arm, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, 6))
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(lower_arm, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, 5))
add_gene(lower_arm, Rule(c2, ZM+XM, no_trans,no_growth, 1))
add_gene(neck, Rule(c3, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
add_omni_gene(c3, Rule(head, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS=False))
add_perp_gene(neck, Rule(c9, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
time_info=TimeInfo(is_timed=True, trigger_time=50)))
,→
add_perp_gene(torso, Rule(c5, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
time_info=TimeInfo(is_timed=True, trigger_time=50)))
,→
However, looking at 5.16 it is quite obvious that the results are quite crude, and converge
on very similar outcomes. This is most likely a result of an issue with the fitness function
itself. The function seems to prefer a very specific structural appearance, which might be
a result of overly penalizing the limb count or wrongly tuned parameters. This causes it to
disregard or overlook individuals who might possess other valuable characteristics. This is
especially evident in the figure, since the first generation holds quite a bit of variety, but the
final 10th generation is quite uniform. Looking at the fitness function values themselves,
it is also obvious that maybe the variation in value is too small. Meaning most fitness
values lie in the range [0.70, 1.15], which is just not very broad, considering the results do
vary quite a lot.
56
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.16: Individuals ordered by their fitness value from three different generations,
1, 5, and 10. Fitness values of the best (left side) and worst (right side) individuals are
shown.
Furthermore, it is very difficult to define a fitness function that will encompass all kinds
of desirable looks for quadrupeds. For example, how does one both reward creatures
which resemble tall thin thin-legged animals like gazelles while also not penalize creatures
with short legs and longer bodies like weasels? There is just too much variation to be
considered when defining the fitness function, especially given the time constraint. So this
is not to say that it is impossible, but rather that more time and a project specifically dealing
with this topic would be necessary to get good results. While the creatures generated are
quite simple, this is mostly due to the time constraints, as it prevented further exploration
and fine-tuning of the experiment. However, it does achieve what it set out to do, which is
to showcase that genetic algorithms and this type of cellular automaton can be combined.
Lastly, there are certain features that were developed, which haven’t been showcased
here. This is either due to a lack of time, but it can also be attributed to the fact that
certain implemented features were hard to use in a practical setting. For example, the
neighborhood checks are, of course, important and do have their use case, however,
when combined with the other tools provided, they were rarely needed. In figure 5.17,
a very simple example where the neighborhood check has been used to prevent cells
from dying can be seen. Here, diffusion of the death morphogen caused a majority of the
structure to die off, but by ensuring cells that are joints or edges aren’t affected, they stay
alive, leading to such a result. This is not to say that it can’t be used to create meaningful
results, however, as time was limited and the creativity needed to come up with an idea
was missing, it is unfortunately not fully explored in this thesis.
Parametric Cellular Automata
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.17: Simple structure where edges are white and joints are black.
5.6
L-Systems and repeating patterns
This section is quite short, however, it is meant to showcase the ability of the system
to generate repeating structures. The following examples are quite simple, and the first
is meant to emulate the look of an L-System with the following initial string(axiom) and
rewriting rule:
axiom = F + F + F + F + F
(5.1)
F →F + F −F −FF + F + F −F
(5.2)
It is then the first iteration, which this figure 5.19 is meant to display:
58
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.18: Simple L-System Example
The definition for the genome is quite simple as it just defines each segment and rotates
it 90 degrees about the y-axis:
def create_lsys_replica():
add_gene(zygote, Rule(head, YP, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
add_gene(head, Rule(leg, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 17))
add_gene(leg, Rule(foot, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 5))
add_gene(foot, Rule(shoulder, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 5))
add_gene(shoulder, Rule(hip, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 5))
add_gene(hip, Rule(back, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 5))
add_gene(back, Rule(neck, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 5))
add_gene(neck, Rule(appendix, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 5))
add_gene(appendix, Rule(head,XM,
Transform(rot90cw, 1), no_growth, 0 ))
There were also attempts made to create other L-system like structures, however they
weren’t successful. This is largely due to the fact that there is no way to replace certain
segments to achieve increasing detail with each iteration in the same way that there is for
L-system. However, it is possible to create a variety of repeating patterns by allowing rule
definitions to be cyclic:
Parametric Cellular Automata
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.19: Three different repeating patterns in the XZ-plane.
Alternatively, repeated patterns like 5.20 can also be created by repeatedly having certain
cells emit the split morphogen.
Figure 5.20: Simple growth, where the split morphogen causes a grid-like structure,
60
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:69==
6
Discussion
In the following chapter, the work done as part of this project will be evaluated, and pos-
sible future improvements will be discussed.
6.1
Pros and Cons
To explain the pros and cons of the approach to 3D generation presented in this project,
it makes sense to first try to evaluate if and why this is a viable approach. However, it is
also important to highlight areas in which there is room for improvement or where mistakes
have been made. Now, gauging whether this approach is viable is quite difficult, which is
purely due to the fact that it perhaps lacks quantitative data. As it is a very experimental
project done in a way unlike most others in this field, there is no immediate way to compare
it. However, I’d like to argue that this doesn’t necessarily mean that it is bad or lacking.
Looking at it from a holistic perspective, it is quite obvious that the strength of this approach
is not its performance or even the quality of the output, but rather the diversity. It is unlike
traditional cellular automata, neural cellular automata, and even L-systems in the sense
that it is possible to generate objects from multiple different classes, like animals, trees,
and even architectural structures. Thus, it has the potential to be applied to many different
tasks, which is quite uncommon for most generative methods presented in this project.
This is not to say that it doesn’t have any flaws. It does have drawbacks, which are often
associated with projects that attempt to be as universal as possible. More specifically, it
runs the risk of being a Jack of all trades, but a master of none. This is not necessarily the
case here, however, some sacrifices were made during development, which may have
left certain aspects lacking. More specifically, as the goal of the project was to try and
explore the possibilities of this type of cellular automata approach to 3D generation, a
lot of different tools and methods where introduced to accommodate for different design
goals e.g. the ability to time growth, curved growth, neighborhood checks, diffusion and
much more. This of course, means that the toolkit provided is flexible and different tools
can be combined in a multitude of ways, leading to vastly different results. However,
this may have come at the cost of potential capabilities, particularly in relation to diffu-
sion. As discussed earlier, many of the presented articles on the topic focused heavily
on morphogens and implemented detailed and complex models, which this project simply
doesn’t support. With more time or with a clearer focus on specific behaviors during the
development, these aspects could potentially have been explored in greater depth.
6.2
Comparison
As a lot of different approaches for 3D generation were presented earlier, a short com-
parison to some of them is quite natural. When compared to neural cellular automata
approaches like [Mor+20], it is obvious that it differs in quite a few ways, however, in rela-
tion to the results, the quality for this project is not based on how well a neural network is
trained but on the imagination and creativity of the user. This, of course, might be more
difficult for the user, as they have to come up with the genome definitions themselves,
however, the possibilities are almost unlimited as they aren’t reliant on a dataset of pos-
sible outcomes.
In relation to the work of Karl Sims [Sim94], it is quite different since it doesn’t account for
movement and behavior of the generated creatures, however the forms which the method
Parametric Cellular Automata
61
==PAGE:70==
presented in this project can create is more akin to what we see in real life and they have
a higher level of detail. It is, of course, also very unlikely that this framework would be
able to be extended to include movement, as it is very static.
In terms of the morphogenic approaches presented in [Egg+97; FK98], it doesn’t utilize
the morphogens as much, however, it offers greater customization and the possibility to
generate more targeted outcomes.
Furthermore, it is of course also different from L-systems [PL96; Mül+06] as it cannot
replace segments, however, it can create repeatable structures. Lastly, it is very much
unlike the types of differential growth presented in [Sys; Lom14; hof] since it doesn’t allow
points to move on the grid after they’ve been placed. However, it also possesses the ability
to generate architectural structures, which differential growth isn’t known to possess.
6.3
Future Work
Based on the previous sections, the following contains a discussion of areas in which this
framework could be improved upon.
6.3.1
Diffusion
Future work on this aspect of the project includes further integration and introduction of
additional morphogens. More specifically, it would have been interesting to explore the
possibility of morphogens, which could inform the cells of their location or guide growth
towards high-concentration areas. Furthermore, it might be interesting to include a way
for cells to interact with the substances by allowing them to consume a fraction of the
substance for example, when growing. One downside of using diffusion to control growth
is that it comes a the cost of precision. While it might create interesting shapes and
introduce a degree of randomness to the generation, it also makes it hard to achieve a
specific final result. Tuning the parameters to achieve a particular result can be time-
consuming and cause frustration, which, of course, isn’t ideal.
6.3.2
Performance
This is something which was previously discussed in the implementation chapter, as it
is quite evident that the current implementation isn’t suited for larger structures. If time
were spent optimizing the code base and refactoring such that most of the system could
be run using Taichi, there is a large chance that a significant improvement in performance
could be seen. If anything, it would allow for a lower memory consumption, as the trans-
fer of data between the Taichi GPU kernels to the Python CPU side would be removed.
However, at the moment, refactoring it all to Taichi would take quite a while, as the code
was initially written with a very object-oriented mindset. This is something which should
definitely have been thought of earlier, however, it would still be possible to change it if
desired.
6.3.3
Usability and Aesthetics
Usability is not something which has been touched upon at all in this project, however,
if this were to be used by others, it could benefit from some sort of user interface. This
doesn’t necessarily mean that there is a need for a fully developed interface, but more so
a way to preview certain parameters in the rules. More specifically, the ability to preview
the result curves produced by the growth functions prior to simulation. This is especially
useful if there is a desired curvature of a segment, as it can be hard to achieve quickly at
the moment. Similarly, it would also be useful if a better way of controlling the colors of
the cells were provided. Right now, they are tied to the cell type, which has a predefined
color. This might not be ideal if the goal is also to create aesthetically pleasing objects.
It is of course, possible to change the color and material of the cubes after generation
62
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:71==
directly in Blender. However, the framework could still benefit from more customization
when it comes to cell colors.
6.3.4
Genetic Algorithm
Lastly, there is also a lot of room for improvement when it comes to the usage of genetic
algorithms in conjunction with this approach. A more suitable and improved fitness func-
tion would most definitely improve the quality of the evolved individuals. Altering the way
in which the original population is created, together with a more complex way of mutating
the individuals in the population, might also improve the results. This is something which
could be covered in a project in and of itself.
Parametric Cellular Automata
63
==PAGE:72==
7
Conclusion
This project explores the possibility of generating 3D voxelized objects using a cellular
automaton (CA) as its base and utilizing principles inspired by genetic encoding. It pro-
vides a flexible system where different classes of cells, much like specialized biological
cells, follow distinct rules. This allows for the creation of a sort of digital genome which,
based on the parameters, can lead to very diverse forms like plants, animals, and archi-
tectural structures. The approach is relatively novel when it comes to 3D generation, and
it provides a toolkit that allows for the definition of a multitude of behaviors. Additionally,
it includes the simulation of the diffusion of morphogens throughout the structure to influ-
ence the growth. While it did not yield the best results when using genetic algorithms, it
laid a foundation for future exploration in that area.
Limitations were encountered throughout the development of the project, such as lim-
ited performance when it comes to the generation of larger structures. This is due to
the integration between Python and Taichi, as the overhead associated with data transfer
between the two is quite large. Furthermore, the system is held back by the heavily object-
oriented design that was chosen, adding to the challenge of porting it fully to Taichi. The
current definitions of the genomes are relatively explicit and verbose, which might not be
ideal when it comes to usability and should be revised in the future. Additionally, due to the
rather broad scope and experimental nature of the project, certain areas lack refinement.
The diffusion process could be explored to a greater extent, hopefully increasing the pos-
sible variations and complexity of the objects it can generate. These are aspects which
could be explored in the future, should this approach be applied in a practical setting.
That being said, the work done in this project showcases that cell-based growth guided
by a genetic-like encoding can produce a great variety of generated objects. Because
of this, it is a very promising approach that should be further explored and built upon.
Future work could include improving the performance by porting the code to Taichi and
optimizing the current object-oriented design. Furthermore, it could include extending the
use of diffusion to guide the growth, while also developing a more intuitive interface for
the definition of the genes. With these improvements, this approach has the potential to
become a new and powerful tool in the field of generative design.
64
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[Bria]
Encyclopedia Britannica. apoptosis. Last accessed 2 June 2025. URL: https:
//www.britannica.com/science/apoptosis.
[Brib]
Encyclopedia Britannica. genotype. Last accessed 31 May 2025. URL: https:
//www.britannica.com/science/genotype.
[Wik24]
Wikipedia contributors. Morphogen — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 27-June-2025]. 2024. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Morphogen&oldid=1260200925.
[Wik25a]
Wikipedia contributors. Morphology (biology) — Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. [Online; accessed 27-June-2025]. 2025. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=Morphology_(biology)&oldid=1284396518.
[Bric]
Encyclopedia Britannica. phenotype. Last accessed 31 May 2025. URL: https:
//www.britannica.com/science/phenotype.
[Neu66]
John Von Neumann. Theory of Self-reproducing Automata. Ed. by Arthur
Walter Burks. University of Illinois Press, 1966. ISBN: 0598377980, 9780598377982.
[Her89]
Hans J. Herrmann. “Cellular Automata”. In: Nonlinear Phenomena in Com-
plex Systems. Ed. by A.N. Proto. Grif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France: Elsevier Sci-
ence Publishers B.V. (North-Holland), 1989, pp. 151–199.
[Gar70]
Martin Gardner. “MATHEMATICAL GAMES”. In: Scientific American 223.4
(1970), pp. 120–123. ISSN: 00368733, 19467087. URL: http://www.jstor.
org/stable/24927642 (visited on 04/14/2025).
[Cha19]
Bert Wang-Chak Chan. “Lenia: Biology of Artificial Life”. In: Complex Systems
28.3 (Oct. 2019), pp. 251–286. ISSN: 0891-2513. DOI: 10.25088/complexsystems.
28.3.251. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.25088/ComplexSystems.28.3.251.
[Mor+20]
Alexander Mordvintsev et al. “Growing Neural Cellular Automata”. In: Distill
(2020). https://distill.pub/2020/growing-ca. DOI: 10.23915/distill.00023.
[Hol92]
John H. (John Henry) Holland. Adaptation in natural and artificial systems
: an introductory analysis with applications to biology, control, and artificial
intelligence / John H. Holland. eng. Complex adaptive systems. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT press, 1992. ISBN: 0262581116.
[Gol89]
David E. (David Edward) Goldberg. Genetic algorithms in search, optimiza-
tion, and machine learning / by David E. Goldberg. eng. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1989. ISBN: 0201157675.
[Sci]
ScienceDirect. DNA Mutation. Last accessed 29 May 2025. URL: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/topics/biochemistry-genetics-and-molecular-biology/
dna-mutation#definition.
[Sim94]
Karl Sims. “Evolving virtual creatures”. In: Proceedings of the 21st Annual
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques. SIGGRAPH
’94. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1994, pp. 15–
22. ISBN: 0897916670. DOI: 10.1145/192161.192167. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/192161.192167.
[EF11]
Wilfried Elmenreich and István Fehérvári. “Evolving self-organizing cellular
automata based on neural network genotypes”. In: Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 6557 LNCS (2011). Cited by: 21, pp. 16–25.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-19167-1_2.
Parametric Cellular Automata
65
==PAGE:74==
[Nic+18]
Stefano Nichele et al. “CA-NEAT: Evolved Compositional Pattern Producing
Networks for Cellular Automata Morphogenesis and Replication”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems 10.3 (2018). Cited
by: 28; All Open Access, Green Open Access, pp. 687–700. DOI: 10.1109/
TCDS.2017.2737082. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-
s2.0- 85028466695&doi=10.1109%2fTCDS.2017.2737082&partnerID=40&
md5=4f6cc9e6acb212dec5ad12b16f64900f.
[Mil04]
Julian Francis Miller. “Evolving a Self-Repairing, Self-Regulating, French Flag
Organism”. In: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation – GECCO 2004. Ed.
by Kalyanmoy Deb. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004,
pp. 129–139. ISBN: 978-3-540-24854-5.
[Lin68a]
Aristid Lindenmayer. “Mathematical models for cellular interactions in devel-
opment I. Filaments with one-sided inputs”. In: Journal of Theoretical Biology
18.3 (1968), pp. 280–299. ISSN: 0022-5193. DOI: [https://doi.org/10.1016/
0022-5193(68)90079-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-5193(68)90079-9).
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022519368900799.
[Lin68b]
Aristid Lindenmayer. “Mathematical models for cellular interactions in devel-
opment II. Simple and branching filaments with two-sided inputs”. In: Jour-
nal of Theoretical Biology 18.3 (1968), pp. 300–315. ISSN: 0022-5193. DOI:
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 5193(68 ) 90080 - 5. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022519368900805.
[PL96]
Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz and Aristid Lindenmayer. The algorithmic beauty
of plants. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1996. ISBN: 0387946764.
[Mül+06]
Pascal Müller et al. “Procedural modeling of buildings”. In: vol. 25. 3. Cited
by: 677. 2006, pp. 614–623. DOI: 10.1145/1141911.1141931. URL: https://
www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-33748561619&doi=10.1145%
2F1141911.1141931&partnerID=40&md5=3980ccf0ae715dba39daebd0867c93d2.
[Jon+20]
R. Kenny Jones et al. “ShapeAssembly: learning to generate programs for
3D shape structure synthesis”. eng. In: ACM transactions on graphics 39.6
(2020), pp. 1–20. ISSN: 0730-0301.
[Egg+97]
Peter Eggenberger et al. “Evolving morphologies of simulated 3D organisms
based on differential gene expression”. In: Proceedings of the fourth euro-
pean conference on Artificial Life. Citeseer. 1997, pp. 205–213.
[FK98]
Chikara Furusawa and Kunihiko Kaneko. “Emergence of Multicellular Organ-
isms with Dynamic Differentiation and Spatial Pattern”. eng. In: Artificial life
4.1 (1998), pp. 79–93. ISSN: 1064-5462.
[MSR91]
Eric Mjolsness, David H. Sharp, and John Reinitz. “A connectionist model of
development”. In: Journal of Theoretical Biology 152.4 (1991), pp. 429–453.
ISSN: 0022-5193. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5193(05)80391-1.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022519305803911.
[FB+94]
Kurt Fleischer, Alan H Barr, et al. “A simulation testbed for the study of multi-
cellular development: The multiple mechanisms of morphogenesis”. In: SANTA
FE INSTITUTE STUDIES IN THE SCIENCES OF COMPLEXITY-PROCEEDINGS
VOLUME-. Vol. 17. ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING CO. 1994, pp. 389–
389.
[CL11]
Jeff Clune and Hod Lipson. “Evolving 3D objects with a generative encoding
inspired by developmental biology”. eng. In: SIGEVOlution 5.4 (2011), pp. 2–
12. ISSN: 1931-8499.
[Sys]
Nervous System. Floraform – an exploration of differential growth. URL: %5Curl%
7Bhttps://n-e-r-v-o-u-s.com/blog/?p=6721%7D (visited on 06/20/2025).
66
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:75==
[Lom14]
Andy Lomas. “Cellular forms: An artistic exploration of morphogenesis”. In:
2014. URL: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 -
84905823872 & doi = 10 . 1145 % 2f2619195 . 2656282 & partnerID = 40 & md5 =
b066464023f5e408379e6c709d51b502.
[hof]
Anders hoff. Differential Line. URL: %5Curl%7Bhttps://inconvergent.net/
generative/differential-line/%7D (visited on 06/20/2025).
[Alb+02]
Bruce Alberts et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th. New York: Garland
Science, 2002. ISBN: 0815332181, 0815340729.
[AJL+02a]
Bruce Alberts, Alexander Johnson, Julian Lewis, et al. “The Universal Fea-
tures of Cells on Earth”. In: Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26864/. New York: Garland Sci-
ence, 2002. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26873/.
[AJL+02b]
Bruce Alberts, Alexander Johnson, Julian Lewis, et al. “General Principles of
Cell Communication”. In: Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26813/. New York: Garland Sci-
ence, 2002. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26813/.
[MB01]
M.B. Miller and B.L. Bassler. “Quorum sensing in bacteria”. In: Annual Re-
view of Microbiology 55 (2001). Cited by: 3891, pp. 165–199. DOI: 10.1146/
annurev.micro.55.1.165. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=
2-s2.0-0034770056&doi=10.1146%2fannurev.micro.55.1.165&partnerID=40&
md5=c7a9810a5900294f1356b4665d3e67f3.
[AJL+02c]
Bruce Alberts, Alexander Johnson, Julian Lewis, et al. “Programmed Cell
Death (Apoptosis)”. In: Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26873/. New York: Garland Sci-
ence, 2002. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26873/.
[Bær+12]
Jakob Andreas Bærentzen et al. “Finite Difference Methods for Partial Differ-
ential Equations”. In: Guide to Computational Geometry Processing: Foun-
dations, Algorithms, and Methods. London: Springer London, 2012, pp. 65–
79. ISBN: 978-1-4471-4075-7. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4471-4075-7_4. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-4075-7_4.
[Sch05]
H.M. Schey. Div, Grad, Curl, and All That: An Informal Text on Vector Calcu-
lus. 4th ed. W. W. Norton & Company, 2005. ISBN: 9780393925166.
[GS83]
P. Gray and S. K. Scott. “AUTOCATALYTIC REACTIONS IN THE ISOTHER-
MAL, CONTINUOUS STIRRED TANK REACTOR”. In: Chemical Engineering
Science — 1983, Volume 38, Issue 1 (1983).
[Pea93]
John E. Pearson. “Complex Patterns in a Simple System”. In: Science —
1993, Volume 261, Issue 5118 (1993).
[Wat06]
Thayer Watkins. The Shape of Quadropeds as a Function of Scale. 2006.
URL: %5Curl%7Bhttps://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/watkins/animalshape.htm%7D
(visited on 04/28/2025).
[Wik25b]
Wikipedia contributors. Discrete Laplace operator — Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia. [Online; accessed 24-June-2025]. 2025. URL: https : / / en .
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discrete_Laplace_operator&oldid=1282457894.
Parametric Cellular Automata
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:77==
A
Title
A.1
Appendix: Additional Cell State Parameters
• age (int): This is the number of time steps that the cell has been alive.
• gradient (float): The gradient here is a sort of concentration of a substance. In
this case, it describes a percentage, which dictates how much of the organically
planned growth should take place. This allows for exponential growth and a more
varied result. It was originally planned to be refactored as part of the diffusion im-
plementation, however, this approach allows for more customization from a user’s
perspective.
• split_dirs (list(int)): This is a list, which holds tuples of size 3 representing direc-
tions. It is used in a scenario where an external factor causes a cell to split its growth.
The resulting split growth directions are stored here, as a random choice of the split
direction is allowed. This field ensures that a cell cannot split into more than two
directions.
• center (list(int)): This is a list of 3 integers, which can store a position in the grid. It
allows for cells to refer to a position, which is used to determine the next cell position
in the case where a growth function is defined. This might not make much sense
now, but the details of what a growth function is and how it relates to this parameter
are explained later.
A.2
Appendix: Additional Rule Parameters
• falloff (float): This is a value which, as indicated by its name, defines the fraction of
the max_count which should be propagated to the children of the cell. This allows for
the increase or decrease of the length of child cell segments, as the distance from
the origin of the parent cell segment increases. Part of the usage of this parameter
has been replaced by the usage of a diffusion of a growth substance, which can
alter the length of segments.
• req_density: This is inspired by the section on ”quorum sensing”, as it allows for
the definition of a target neighborhood cell density. Meaning rules with a non-zero
value here will wait for the number of neighboring cells to reach the target value
before triggering the rule.
• random_dir(bool): This is a boolean which indicates if this rule should use random
directions in the case of a split. Whether or not growth should split is determined
based on the concentration of a substance. This will be explained later.
Parametric Cellular Automata
69
==PAGE:78==
A.3
Appendix: Execution time and memory consumption
Number of Cells
Execution Time(s)
Memory Consumption (MB)
0
0.10944
0.08
6
0.113512
0.16
63
0.13001
0.32
231
0.175291
1.16
575
0.293281
2.83
1159
0.406383
5.69
2047
0.632189
10.04
3303
0.963379
16.15
4991
1.420719
24.15
Table A.1: Table base setup
Number of Cells
Execution Time(s)
Memory Consumption (MB)
0
0.424333
0.31
6
0.571897
0.32
63
0.838018
0.55
231
2.090237
1.45
575
4.893640
3.22
1159
10.058285
6.25
2057
18.422822
10.92
3303
30.736942
17.47
4991
49.429570
25.89
Table A.2: Table for diffusion with 1 iteration
Number of Cells
Execution Time(s)
Memory Consumption (MB)
0
0.466537
0.30
6
0.583820
0.33
63
0.861850
0.55
231
2.121952
1.46
575
4.973009
3.23
1159
10.082122
6.27
2057
18.518965
10.90
3303
31.983666
17.47
4991
49.677724
25.95
Table A.3: Table for diffusion with 10 iterations
70
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:79==
Number of Cells
Execution Time(s)
Memory Consumption (MB)
0
0.275940
0.53
6
0.327318
0.56
63
0.372561
0.72
231
0.603048
1.59
575
1.128342
3.29
1159
2.039845
6.13
2057
3.600648
10.46
3303
5.926600
16.61
4991
9.244196
24.77
Table A.4: Table for neighborhood check
Number of Cells
Execution Time(s)
Memory Consumption (MB)
0
0.821275
66.3
6
0.806098
66.31
63
0.889924
66.48
231
1.314114
67.38
575
2.203005
68.99
1159
3.684374
71.77
2057
5.883089
76.16
3303
8.99394
82.24
4991
13.235727
90.21
Table A.5: Table for diffusion with 1 iteration and cached activations
These are the functions used to create the structures, which were profiled.
Parametric Cellular Automata
71
==PAGE:80==
def test_small_structure1():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
def test_small_structure2():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 1))
def test_small_structure3():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 2))
# Case 2: Medium structure
def test_medium_structure1():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 4))
def test_medium_structure2():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 6))
def test_medium_structure3():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 8))
# Case 3: Large structure
def test_large_structure1():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 10))
def test_large_structure2():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 12))
def test_large_structure3():
add_omni_gene(zygote,Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 14))
A.4
Appendix: Blender Setups for Visualization
Figure A.1: Geometry Node Setup for Visualization
72
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.2: Simple Shader Setup for Visualization
A.5
Appendix: Python code for Blender Visualization
def write_ply(file_path, file_name, grid):
if not os.path.exists(file_path):
os.makedirs(file_path)
file_path = file_path + file_name
vertices = []
colors = []
for ijk, cell in grid.items():
vertices.append(tuple(ijk))
# Vertex position
colors.append(cell.color)
# Vertex color
with open(file_path, 'wb') as f:
# PLY Header
with open(file_path, 'w') as f:
f.write("ply\n")
f.write("format ascii 1.0\n")
f.write(f"element vertex {len(vertices)}\n")
f.write("property float x\n")
f.write("property float y\n")
f.write("property float z\n")
f.write("property uchar red\n")
f.write("property uchar green\n")
f.write("property uchar blue\n")
f.write("end_header\n")
for v, c in zip(vertices, colors):
f.write(f"{v[0]} {v[1]} {v[2]} {c[0]} {c[1]} {c[2]} {c[3]}\n")
Parametric Cellular Automata
73
==PAGE:82==
def read_ply(file_path):
vertices = []
colors = []
with open(file_path, 'r') as f:
lines = f.readlines()
start_index = lines.index("end_header\n") + 1
for line in lines[start_index:]:
x, y, z, r, g, b, a = map(float, line.split())
vertices.append((x, y, z))
colors.append((r, g, b, a))
# Normalize color to 0-1
mesh = bpy.data.meshes.new("imported_ply_mesh")
mesh.from_pydata(vertices, [], [])
mesh.update()
# Create new object
obj = bpy.data.objects.new("ImportedPLY", mesh)
obj.data.attributes.new(name="color", type='FLOAT_COLOR', domain='POINT')
# Add vertex color attribute
flat_list = list(sum(colors, ()))
obj.data.attributes["color"].data.foreach_set('color', flat_list)
bpy.data.collections[NewCollection.name].objects.link(obj)
return obj
def create_growth_animation(new_object, time):
new_object.hide_viewport = True
new_object.hide_render = True
# Hide the object and keyframe the visibility
new_object.keyframe_insert("hide_viewport", frame=time)
new_object.keyframe_insert("hide_render", frame=time)
# Make the object visible
new_object.hide_viewport = False
new_object.hide_render = False
new_object.keyframe_insert("hide_viewport", frame=time + 1)
new_object.keyframe_insert("hide_render", frame=time + 1)
# Make it invisible again
new_object.hide_viewport = True
new_object.hide_render = True
new_object.keyframe_insert("hide_viewport", frame=time + 2)
new_object.keyframe_insert("hide_render", frame=time + 2)
A.6
Appendix: Genome Definitions
Additional genome definitions not present here can be seen in the associated codebase.
74
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:83==
A.6.1
Animals
Mouse
def create_mouse_genome():
add_gene(zygote, Rule(back, XM, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.5, phase_shift =1.5), max_count=6))
,→
add_gene(back, Rule(torso, XM, no_trans, no_growth, max_count=0))
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(shoulder, YP+ZM+XM, no_trans, no_growth,
max_count=1),r_axis = 1)
,→
add_bilateral_gene(zygote, Rule(hip, YP, no_trans, no_growth, max_count=2))
add_gene(zygote, Rule(appendix, ZP, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.9, frequency=0.2, phase_shift = 2), max_count = 10))
,→
add_gene(appendix, Rule(c8, ZP, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.9, frequency=0.2, phase_shift =0), max_count = 5,
falloff=1.2))
,→
,→
add_omni_gene(c8, Rule(c10, XP, no_trans, no_growth, max_count = 1,
time_info=TimeInfo(is_timed = True, trigger_time=30)))
,→
add_gene(torso, Rule(neck, XM, no_trans, growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.8, frequency=0.6, phase_shift = -0.5), max_count=1))
,→
add_gene(hip, Rule(leg, ZM, no_trans,growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.7, frequency=0.8, phase_shift = -1.60), max_count=4))
,→
add_gene(leg, Rule(foot, ZM+XM, no_trans,no_growth, max_count=1))
add_gene(foot, Rule(c1, XM, no_trans,no_growth, max_count=1))
add_gene(shoulder, Rule(upper_arm, ZM+XP, no_trans,no_growth,2))
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(lower_arm, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, 0))
add_gene(lower_arm, Rule(c2, ZM+XM, no_trans,no_growth, 1))
add_gene(neck, Rule(c6, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 1))
add_omni_gene(c6, Rule(head, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 1))
add_perp_gene(back, Rule(c3, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 2, EOS=False))
add_omni_gene(torso, Rule(c3, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
time_info=TimeInfo(is_timed=True, trigger_time=30)))
,→
add_perp_gene(neck, Rule(c7, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
time_info=TimeInfo(is_timed=True, trigger_time=30)))
,→
add_gene(c3, Rule(c4, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 2, EOS=False))
add_gene(leg, Rule(c5, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS=False))
add_gene(shoulder, Rule(c5, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 1, EOS=False))
add_bilateral_gene(c6, Rule(c9, ZP+YP, no_trans,no_growth, max_count=1),r_axis=1)
Parametric Cellular Automata
75
==PAGE:84==
A.6.2
Plants
Foxglove
def create_foxglove():
#Stem
add_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, max_count = 20,
growth_function=GrowthFunction(spiral, name = "spiral", axis_offset = 1, radius = 3,
phase_shift = 1)))
,→
,→
#Leaves
add_gene(torso, Rule(shoulder, ZP, no_trans,no_growth, max_count = 1, random_dir=True,
time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index = 0, period=4, span=20)))
,→
#Flower
add_gene(torso, Rule(back, ZP, no_trans,no_growth, 25, falloff=0.9))
add_bilateral_gene(back, Rule(upper_arm, XP, no_trans, growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.7, frequency=0.4, phase_shift
= 4), max_count=6, time_info=TimeInfo(period=4),falloff=1.1))
,→
,→
add_bilateral_gene(back, Rule(lower_arm, YP, no_trans, growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.7, frequency=0.5, phase_shift
= 4), max_count=6, time_info=TimeInfo(period=4,offset=2),falloff=1.1))
,→
,→
add_perp_gene(upper_arm, Rule(foot, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, max_count=1, EOS =False))
add_perp_gene(lower_arm, Rule(leg, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, max_count=1, EOS =False))
Cactus
def create_cactus():
add_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, ZP,no_trans,no_growth,28))
# Arms
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(upper_arm, XP, no_trans,growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.5, phase_shift
= .9), max_count=3, time_info=TimeInfo(period=14, offset=2)))
,→
,→
add_gene(torso, Rule(lower_arm, YP+XP, no_trans, growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.5,
phase_shift
=.9) , max_count=3, time_info=TimeInfo(period=13,offset=7)))
,→
,→
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(leg, YP, no_trans, growth_function=
GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.6, frequency=0.5,
phase_shift
= .9) , max_count=3, time_info=TimeInfo(period=18,offset=6)))
,→
,→
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(foot, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 9))
add_gene(lower_arm, Rule(foot, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 7))
add_gene(leg, Rule(foot, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 5))
# Flowers at tip
add_gene(foot, Rule(c1, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
add_omni_gene(torso, Rule(shoulder, ZP,no_trans,no_growth,0, EOS=False))
add_omni_gene(lower_arm, Rule(shoulder, ZP,no_trans,no_growth,0, EOS=False))
add_omni_gene(leg, Rule(shoulder, ZP,no_trans,no_growth,0, EOS=False))
add_omni_gene(foot, Rule(shoulder, ZP,no_trans,no_growth,0, EOS=False))
add_omni_gene(upper_arm, Rule(shoulder, ZP,no_trans,no_growth,0, EOS=False))
76
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:85==
Small Tree
def create_small_tree():
receptor_profiles[torso][split] = 0.0
add_bilateral_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 1,
start_substance={split:[1.0,0.0,0.0,1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(torso, Rule(hip, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 3,
start_substance={split:[0.0,dS,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_gene(hip, Rule(upper_arm, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 1))
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(neck, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 2,
start_substance={split:[1.0,0.0,0.0,1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(neck, Rule(leg, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 3,
start_substance={split:[0.0,dS,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_omni_gene(leg, Rule(spinner, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 1))
add_gene(torso, Rule(back, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 5, time_info=TimeInfo(period=4)))
add_omni_gene(back, Rule(head, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 1))
A.6.3
Structures
Small Hut
def create_small_hut_slim():
add_gene(head, Rule(c1, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 8))
add_bilateral_gene(head, Rule(c2, YP, no_trans,
growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave, axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.8,
frequency=0.5, phase_shift = 4), max_count=3))
,→
,→
add_bilateral_gene(c1, Rule(c2, YP, no_trans,growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.8, frequency=0.5, phase_shift = 4), max_count=3))
,→
add_bilateral_gene(c1, Rule(c3, YP, no_trans, EOS =
False,growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave, axis_offset=1,
amplitude=.8,
frequency=0.4, phase_shift = 4), max_count=3))
,→
,→
#Sides and floor
add_gene(c4, Rule(c5, YM, no_trans, no_growth, 5))
add_gene(c3, Rule(c4, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 4,
time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=2,span=1)))
,→
#Edges
add_gene(c2, Rule(c6, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 4,
time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=2,span=1)))
,→
add_gene(c6, Rule(c7, YM, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
#Front
add_gene(c7, Rule(c8, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 5, EOS =False))
add_gene(c1, Rule(c9, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 2))
add_gene(c2, Rule(c9, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 2, time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=0,
span=3)))
,→
Parametric Cellular Automata
77
==PAGE:86==
Lighthouse
def create_lighthouse():
receptor_profiles[torso][death] = 0.0
receptor_profiles[leg][death] = 0.0
add_perp_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 4))
add_gene(zygote, Rule(leg, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 5,
start_substance={growth:[1.0,
dG, 1.0,1.0], death:[1.0, dD, 1.0,1.0]}))
,→
add_omni_gene(leg, Rule(hip, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 8, start_substance={growth:[0.0,
dG, 0.0,.6], death:[0.0, dD, 0.0,.8]}))
,→
add_gene(zygote, Rule(spinner, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 3))
add_gene(spinner, Rule(appendix, XM, Transform(rot90, 2), no_growth, 0))
add_gene(spinner, Rule(upper_arm, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 0))
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(head, XM, no_trans, no_growth, 1))
add_gene(appendix, Rule(head, XM,
no_trans,no_growth, 1))
create_small_hut_long()
add_gene(torso, Rule(neck, ZM, no_trans, no_growth, 10,
time_info=TimeInfo(activation_index=3, span=1, trigger_age=30)))
,→
Chair
def create_short_arm_chair():
add_gene(zygote, Rule(torso, XP, no_trans,no_growth, 8,
start_substance={growth:[1.0,dG,1.0,1.0], death:[0.5,dD,0.5,1.0]}))
,→
add_gene(torso, Rule(back, YP, no_trans,no_growth, 8, EOS=False,
start_substance={growth:[1.0,dG,1.0,1.0]}))
,→
# Back
add_gene(torso, Rule(leg, ZP, no_trans,no_growth,8,
start_substance={death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_gene(torso, Rule(head, ZP, no_trans,no_growth, 8, time_info=TimeInfo(period=9),
start_substance={death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_gene(leg, Rule(upper_arm,XM, no_trans, no_growth,8, EOS=False))
# Legs
add_gene(torso, Rule(appendix, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, 6, time_info=TimeInfo(period=8)))
add_gene(torso, Rule(foot, YP, no_trans,no_growth, 8, time_info=TimeInfo(period=8)))
add_gene(foot, Rule(appendix, ZM, no_trans,no_growth, 6))
# Arm rests
add_gene(foot, Rule(lower_arm,ZP, no_trans,max_count=8, EOS=False,
time_info=TimeInfo(period=9, offset=6), growth_function=GrowthFunction(sine_wave,
axis_offset=2,
amplitude=.8, frequency=0.4, phase_shift = pi)))
,→
,→
78
Parametric Cellular Automata
==PAGE:87==
Building
def create_apartment_building():
receptor_profiles[torso][death]= 0.0
receptor_profiles[head][death] = 0.0
add_gene(zygote, Rule(foot, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 24,
start_substance={
death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_gene(foot, Rule(upper_arm, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 24,
start_substance={
death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}, time_info=TimeInfo(period=8, offset=4)))
,→
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(lower_arm, YP, no_trans, no_growth, 11,
start_substance={
death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}, EOS=False, time_info=TimeInfo(period=9, offset=-2)))
,→
add_gene(upper_arm, Rule(neck, YP, no_trans, no_growth, 10,
start_substance={
death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}, EOS=False))
,→
add_bilateral_gene(lower_arm, Rule(appendix, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 2,
start_substance={ death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_gene(appendix, Rule(c1, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 1,
start_substance={
death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}, time_info=TimeInfo(period=2)))
,→
add_bilateral_gene(c1, Rule(c2, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 0,
start_substance={
death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_gene(foot, Rule(torso, XP, no_trans, no_growth, 24,
start_substance={
death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}, time_info=TimeInfo(period=8)))
,→
add_bilateral_gene(torso, Rule(head, ZP, no_trans, no_growth, 2, EOS=False,
start_substance={ death:[0.0,0.0,0.0,0.0]}))
,→
add_gene(torso, Rule(back, YP, no_trans, no_growth, 10, start_substance={
death:[1.0,dD,1.0,1.0]}, time_info=TimeInfo(period=8, offset=4)))
,→
add_gene(torso, Rule(leg, YP, no_trans, no_growth, 10, EOS =False, start_substance={
death:[0.0,dD,0.0,0.1]}))
,→
add_gene(head, Rule(leg, YP, no_trans, no_growth, 10, EOS =False, start_substance={
death:[0.0,dD,0.0,0.1]}))
,→
Parametric Cellular Automata
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
