==PAGE:1==
Extending the Hygge Programming
Language and Compiler for Real-World
RISC-V Embedded Systems
Magnus Meyer
Kongens Lyngby 2025
IMM-M.Sc.-2025
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk IMM-M.Sc.-2025
==PAGE:3==
Extending the Hygge Programming Language and Compiler for Real-
World RISC-V Embedded Systems
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Magnus Meyer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribu-
tion, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
ii
Approval
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter science of the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment for the re-
quirements of a MSc. in Computer Science and Engineering. The thesis was
carried out from the 3. of February 2025 to the 22. of June 2025 under the su-
pervision of Associate Professor Alceste Scalas and PhD Student Jens Kanstrup
Larsen.
Magnus Meyer - s204509
Signature
Date
         22/06/2025
==PAGE:5==
iii
Abstract
Compiler construction and embedded programming are often perceived as inac-
cessible or intimidating fields for developers, despite being fundamental to soft-
ware development and widely used in the industry. This thesis narrows that gap
by extending the didactic programming language Hygge, used in the DTU Com-
piler Construction course, to support real-world RISC-V embedded platforms,
specifically the ESP32-C3 board.
The result is Embedded Hygge, a functional programming language capable of
performing essential embedded operations. The language has new functions and
operators that make it well suited for embedded development. The Hygge com-
piler has been extended to support platform-dependent code generation for dif-
ferent RISC-V ISAs.
This targets a new RISC-V ISA that lacks support for
floating-point registers, which required a complete revision of the register allo-
cation strategy. Additionally, the language enables serial communication with
the ESP32-C3, integrates well with existing C libraries, and supports automated
garbage collection. The Hygge toolchain has been expanded to allow Embedded
Hygge programs to be built, flashed, and emulated for the ESP32-C3 using the
ESP IoT Development Framework and QEMU.
Embedded Hygge has been successfully tested on both physical and emulated
hardware, and the project includes extensive automated test cases. Users work-
ing on Embedded Hygge will experience the compiler development process while
directly observing its impact on real hardware. This thesis aims to inspire fur-
ther exploration of compiler construction and embedded system development by
combining them in an accessible and educational project.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to Associate Professor Alceste Scalas for
making this thesis possible. From my first lecture on Compiler Construction to
the completion of this thesis, he has made the entire experience both enjoyable
and engaging with good discussions along the way.
I am greatly thankful to both of my supervisors, Associate Professor Alceste
Scalas and PhD student Jens Kanstrup Larsen, for their valuable feedback and
ideas throughout the past five months. Their guidance has been essential to the
progress and quality of this work.
I also wish to thank Associate Professor Luca Pezzarossa for mentoring me during
my Honours Programme at DTU. His support has been truly invaluable and has
helped me reach all requirements of the programme.
Finally, I am grateful to my friends, family, and partner for their constant en-
couragement throughout my years as a student. Their support has made this
journey possible, and I could not have done it without them.
==PAGE:7==
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
History of Compilers and Languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Instruction Set Architectures and RISC-V . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Hygge and HyggeC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Embedded Devices and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
The ESP32-C3 and Its Toolchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Memory Management and Garbage Collectors . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
Previous Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Designing Embedded Hygge
21
3.1
Specification of the Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Goal #1: Low-level Embedded Operators
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Goal #3: Including C and Hygge Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Goal #4: Introducing a Garbage Collector . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6
Goal #5: Extending The Embedded Framework . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.7
Embedded Hygge Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Implementation of the Extensions
39
4.1
Goal #1: Low-Level Embedded Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Goal #3: Including External Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.4
Goal #4: Adding the Garbage Collector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.5
Goal #5: Making the Embedded Hygge Framework . . . . . . . .
54
4.6
Other Extensions and Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Results and Evaluation
61
5.1
Overall Results from the Testing Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2
Testing Goal #1: Low-Level Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Testing Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operations . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Testing Goal #3: Including External Code . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.5
Testing Goal #4: The Garbage Collector . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.6
Testing Goal #5: The Embedded Hygge Framework
. . . . . . .
67
5.7
Summarizing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6
Discussion
69
6.1
The Syntax and Typing System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.2
Compiler Infrastructure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.3
Lacking Features of Embedded Hygge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.4
Embedded Hygge as a Didactive Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7
Conclusion
75
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
Bibliography
78
A Appendix
83
A.1 Specification of New Embedded Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.2 Adding Doubles to Hygge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.3 Specifications of the Delay Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.4 Using Semantics and Typing Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.5 Assembly Code to Read From the UART
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.6 Assembly Code to Delay Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.7 Combining Hygge Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.8 C Program for Testing the Boehm Garbage Collector . . . . . . . .
94
A.9 RISC-V Assembler Directives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.10 Embedded Hygge Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A.11 All New Operations and Commands in Embedded Hygge
. . . . . 104
A.12 Including Third-Party C Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.13 Interfacing with the ESP-IDF Toolchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Software development is more accessible than ever. Over the years, program-
ming languages and tools have evolved to hide away low-level complexity. In
many cases, this brings advantages such as reduced implementation time, more
maintainable code, and even improved efficiency. The compiler is a perfect ex-
ample: it has been used for decades to translate and optimize human-readable
code. Yet, despite being such a central part of software development, it is often
regarded as just another background tool.
However, compiler construction remains an active field of research, with some of
the world’s largest tech companies developing and maintaining their own com-
pilers. One example is BOLT, a post-link optimizer developed by Meta for its
large-scale data centers [1]. Built into the LLVM compiler infrastructure, BOLT
has demonstrated significant performance improvements.
Another example is
NVIDIA, which maintains its own family of compilers used across its data center
platforms [2]. These are known as High Performance Computing (HPC) com-
pilers and support Fortran, C++, and C programs for both CPUs and NVIDIA
GPUs. Such projects demonstrate that compilers are not just tools, but active
areas of innovation with relevance in both research and industry.
Although modern compilers offer a wide range of advantages, their primary goal
remains unchanged: to make code run on hardware. This means that compilers
inherently have a close connection to the underlying computer architecture. One
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
of the clearest ways to experience this connection is when targeting embedded
computers. Unlike general-purpose machines, embedded devices typically come
with strict resource constraints and hardware-specific requirements.
In these
environments, the compiler plays a crucial role in allowing high-level code to
function correctly and efficiently on limited hardware.
For students who wish to learn more about compilers and programming lan-
guages, the Technical University of Denmark offers the course Compiler Con-
struction. Here, students work on extending a compiler for the didactic program-
ming language Hygge.
However, the language never reaches a point where it
can be executed directly on hardware. Instead, students can only interpret and
simulate their Hygge programs.
The goal of this thesis is to extend the Hygge language and its compiler for real-
world RISC-V embedded systems. This extended language is called Embedded
Hygge and targets the ESP32-C3 microcontroller. The ESP32-C3 board is a low-
cost, RISC-V-based embedded platform popular with hobbyists, making it an
ideal platform for learning about embedded systems. This thesis therefore aims
to provide a new didactic programming language with an even stronger emphasis
on the underlying hardware that runs the code.
Embedded Hygge is designed to run on the ESP32-C3 board while also pro-
viding essential operations for embedded development.
Some of these opera-
tions include bit manipulation and access to arbitrary memory locations, both of
which are essential in embedded systems, where hardware is often configured via
memory-mapped registers. Embedded Hygge also supports serial communica-
tion via UART, allowing interaction during runtime and enabling simple debug-
ging. Floating-point operations are handled through software routines, since the
ESP32-C3 lacks hardware floating-point support. In addition, programs can now
include external C functions and import other Hygge files, enabling more modu-
lar applications that integrate smoothly with the existing embedded ecosystem.
Finally, automatic memory management is supported through integration of the
Boehm–Demers–Weiser garbage collector, simplifying dynamic memory handling
while covering relevant compiler challenges.
These extensions collectively transform Hygge from a simulated educational lan-
guage into a functional framework capable of running on real embedded hardware.
In addition to introducing essential concepts for embedded systems and devel-
opment, the project also provides deeper insight into language design, compiler
construction, and the interface between software and hardware.
==PAGE:13==
3
The thesis is structured into seven chapters, with this introduction being the
first. The following list gives a brief overview of the chapters and their content:
• Chapter 2 covers the relevant topics to provide the necessary background
for understanding the contributions of the thesis.
• Chapter 3 defines the goals of the thesis and discusses the design choices
made for each goal, presenting the overall solution for each.
• Chapter 4 describes the implementation process, showing how each goal
was built into the Hygge compiler.
• Chapter 5 evaluates the extensions through both automated and manual
testing.
• Chapter 6 discusses the capabilities and limitations of Embedded Hygge,
and how the project can be educational for students in the future.
• Chapter 7 summarizes the thesis, presents the main achievements, and sug-
gests possibilities for future work.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter presents the necessary background information in order to under-
stand the content and purpose of the thesis. It begins by introducing compilers
and related languages, as well the RISC-V assembly. Next, Section 2.3 provides
an overview of the Hygge programming language and its accompanying com-
piler, HyggeC, which the work presented in this thesis builds upon. Following
this, Section 2.4 introduces key concepts in embedded systems programming and
outlines common toolchains used for development on embedded platforms. In
Section 2.5, the ESP32-C3 board, which is the target platform for Embedded
Hygge, is described in detail, along with the ESP-IDF toolchain used to interface
with it. Section 2.6 introduces memory management challenges in embedded sys-
tems and presents garbage collection as a solution. Finally, Section 2.7 additional
background is provided on related programming platforms and paradigms, which
readers might find insightful.
2.1
History of Compilers and Languages
Today, there is a huge variety of programming languages. They allow developers
to instruct computers on what to do and what not to do. Their styles and designs
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
differ wildly, and all have advantages and disadvantages. Even though the lan-
guages are completely different, they all need to be translated into some common
format that the computer can understand. This format is called Machine Code
or Machine Language, whose instructions consist of combinations of bits. This
makes it very impractical to write directly by humans, which led to the creation
of programming languages. However, the way that languages are translated to
machine code can be achieved in various ways.
Languages can either be assembled, compiled, interpreted, or a mix of the three.
The first languages resembled machine code and could be translated using an
assembler, which acts much like a simple look-up table that converts operations
to bits. In this regard, they can be viewed as a human-readable version of machine
language. These so-called assembly languages, while not commonly used, are still
relevant today in certain fields and are central to this thesis.
After assembly languages, the first compiled languages emerged. The first com-
piler resembling modern compilers was for the Autocode language, made in 1952
[3]. Today, popular languages such as C, C++, and FORTRAN are also com-
piled. They are characterized by the fact that code is translated into machine
code before execution. The resulting machine code is then able to be loaded onto
a machine and run directly.
This approach differs from that of interpreted languages, where the code is
executed by an interpreter.
Examples of such languages include Python and
JavaScript. Instead of being translated in advance, programs in these languages
are run using an interpreter that processes operations and expressions on the fly.
Finally, hybrid or mixed languages use a combination of all the previous ap-
proaches. Languages like Java are first compiled to bytecode, and then used by
the Java Virtual Machine to be either interpreted or compiled at runtime, through
a method called Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation.
This thesis focuses on the language Hygge. Hygge is a compiled language, but
also has a build-in interpreter. Hygge and its characteristics will be covered in
section 2.3.
2.2
Instruction Set Architectures and RISC-V
Every CPU operates on an instruction set architecture (ISA) [4]. The ISA defines
the instructions, data types, and registers that are available for the developer to
use. For programmers, the ISA can be considered the most fundamental layer for
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Hygge and HyggeC
7
programming computers. There is a variety of ISAs, but they can be grouped into
reduced instruction set computers (RISC) and complex instruction set computers
(CISC). RISC ISAs focus on having a simple ISA with a low number of instruc-
tions, whereas CISC ISAs provide a large number of instructions. RISC has the
benefit of executing its few instructions very efficiently, while CISC has more
potential to complete complex or large objectives in a single or few instructions
[5].
RISC-V is an open standard instruction set architecture that follows the RISC
principles. As an open standard, it is one of the most popular RISC ISAs and is
used both in academia and industry. This thesis has a strong focus on RISC-V,
as it attempts to port the Hygge language for the ESP32-C3 board, which runs on
a RISC-V architecture. The language and board will be introduced in section 2.3
and section 2.4, respectively.
RISC-V offers several base ISAs and many extensions, depending on the un-
derlying architecture [6]. There are base ISAs for 32-bit and 64-bit computers,
respectively named RV32I and RV64I. Extensions are available to introduce in-
structions or registers that are not present in the base ISA. Examples include
the M extension for multiplication and division, or the F extension for single-
precision floating-point operations. The RISC-V version is defined by the base
name followed by the extensions. For instance, a RISC-V 32-bit base ISA with
support for multiplication, division, and single-precision floating point is called
RV32IMF.
2.3
Hygge and HyggeC
The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) offers the course Compiler Con-
struction, where the main principles of compiler development and language de-
sign are taught [7]. The students work on implementing and extending a didactic
programming language called Hygge.
In order to achieve this, they work on
developing and extending a compiler called the HyggeC compiler.
Hygge is a statically typed high-level programming language defined by a formal
specification, which will be covered shortly in Section 2.3.2. At its core, it is
a functional programming language, but certain versions of Hygge do support
imperative operations like while- and for-loops. The work in this thesis builds
upon the version of Hygge introduced in module 7 of the course, which includes
function calling, while-loops and structures allocated on the heap [8]. Especially,
the heap and structure extensions have a significant role in this thesis, which is
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
explained further in section 2.6.
The course aims to compile Hygge into RISC-V, specifically the RV32IMF RISC-
V ISA. After compilation, third-party tools can be used to assemble and run the
code. In the course, RARS is used to assemble and simulate the compiled RISC-V
code [9]. RARS supports the RV32IMFD RISC-V ISA, meaning it is compatible
with the RISC-V output produced by HyggeC, and actually provides additional
features for doubles through the D-extension. This feature will be important
when introducing the double type in section 3.3.
The compiler, HyggeC, has many stages when compiling Hygge. It includes stages
for lexing, parsing, type checking, and finally generating RISC-V code. The entire
pipeline of the compiler is visualized in Figure 2.1. Additionally, it has a built-in
interpreter for executing Hygge programs. The entire compiler is written in F#
and performs lexing and parsing using the FsLex and FsYacc libraries [10]. These
libraries make it significantly easier to write lexers and parsers extensions which
otherwise require a strong understanding of formal language theory.
Figure 2.1: The compiler phases of HyggeC and the intermediate representa-
tions between each phase. The Analysis phase covers type-checking
of the programs. The figure is provided by the Compiler Construc-
tion course lecture notes [11].
2.3.1
Register Allocation in HyggeC
During compilation, HyggeC uses a naive register allocation strategy. It main-
tains a compilation environment that specifies the current target register. The
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Hygge and HyggeC
9
target register can be either an integer register or a floating point register, and
HyggeC keeps track of both. The target register is the one that should store
the result of the next expression to be compiled. If a sub-expression needs to
be evaluated, the compiler simply moves on to the next register for storing its
result. By doing so, it retains clear control over which registers hold the results
of specific expressions.
Listing 2.1 showcases a code snippet for compiling an addition expression (i.e.
e1 + e2). It illustrates how the sub-expressions (the left-hand side, e1 and right-
hand side e2) are evaluated.
Note how the target register for the right-hand
side (rtarget) is determined by incrementing the register index by one. A similar
strategy is used when evaluating floats; however, instead of using the env.Target
field, it uses the env.FPTarget field.
1 // Generate code for the lhs expression
2 let lAsm = doCodegen env lhs
3 /// Target register for the rhs expression
4 let rtarget = env.Target + 1u
5 /// Generated code for the rhs expression
6 let rAsm = doCodegen {env with Target = rtarget} rhs
7 /// Generated code for the addition operation
8 let opAsm = Asm(RV.ADD(Reg.r(env.Target),
9
Reg.r(env.Target), Reg.r(rtarget)))
10 lAsm ++ rAsm ++ opAsm
Code 2.1: Code snippet showcasing how the compiler allocates and uses
registers for an addition expression which has sub-expressions.
This simple approach makes implementation easier and avoids any risk of over-
writing values in registers currently in use.
However, it also introduces some
limitations. Firstly, the RV32IMF RISC-V ISA only includes 32 integer regis-
ters and 32 floating point registers. With this strategy, the compiler can run
out of registers and crash. Secondly, it assumes that results can be stored in a
single 32-bit register. This is valid for integers and single-precision floating point
values. However, many applications use double-precision floating point values,
which require 64-bit storage. In such cases, two registers are needed. To support
this, changes are required, which will be covered in section 3.3.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
2.3.2
Formal Specification of Hygge
The specification of Hygge is defined through its formal syntax, semantics, and
type-checking rules. These are described in detail in the Lecture Notes on Com-
piler Construction, but are briefly summarized here for clarity [11].
The syntax of Hygge is specified by a context-free grammar, which describes
how a program, represented as a sequence of characters, is translated into a
Hygge expression.
The grammar uses the Backus-Naur Form and consists of
syntactic categories and grammar rules. In Hygge, a syntactic category could be
an expression (e), a value (v), or a pretype (t). A pretype refers to a word that
syntactically resembles a type but has not yet been assigned one. The snippet
below, taken from Definition 1 of the Compiler Construction course, showcases
how the syntax is formally defined alongside some of its operators:
Definition 2.3.1 (Snippet of syntax rules for Hygge expressions and values).
Expression
e
::=
type x = t; e
(Declare x as alias of type t in e)
|
let x = e1; e2
(Declare x as e1 in e2)
|
let x : t = e1; e2
(Declare x of type t as e1 in e2)
|
e1, e2
(Sequencing)
|
e1 or e2
(Logical ”or”)
|
e1 = e2
(Relation: equality)
|
e1 + e2
(Addition)
|
readInt()
(Read integer from console)
|
print(e)
(Print on console)
|
v
(Value)
Value
v
::=
1 | 2 | 3 | . . .
(Integers)
|
true | false
(Booleans)
|
"Hello" | "Hej" | . . .
(Strings)
|
3.14f | 42.0f | . . .
(Single-precision float values)
|
()
(Unit value)
Pretype
t
::=
int | string | unit | foo | . . .
(Any non-reserved identifier)
The behavior of Hygge expressions is defined by its semantics. These are de-
scribed using inference rules, which take the form:
Premise1
Premise2
. . .
Premisen
Conclusion
[Name of the rule]
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Hygge and HyggeC
11
For instance, Definition 4 of the Compiler Construction course provides the fol-
lowing semantic rule:
v1 + v2 = v3
⟨R • v1 + v2⟩→⟨R • v3⟩
[R-Add-Res]
This rule reads: “If the sum of values v1 and v2 is v3, then the expression v1 + v2
can be reduced to v3.” Here, R refers to the runtime environment, which describes
information about the environment during runtime.
Lastly, Hygge has a strong static type system. Its typing rules follow the same
inference rule format, using type-checking judgments of the form:
Γ ⊢e : T
This reads: “In the typing environment Γ, the expression e has type T.” The
typing environment Γ can contain type variables, allowing users to define their
own type aliases. An example rule, also found in Definition 4, is:
T ∈{int, float}
Γ ⊢e1 : T
Γ ⊢e2 : T
Γ ⊢e1 + e2 : T
[T-Add]
This reads: “If both expressions e1 and e2 have type T, where T is either int or
float, then the expression e1 + e2 also has type T.”
This section provided a short introduction to the formal notation used in the
Hygge language specification.
A more detailed description is available in the
Lecture Notes on Compiler Construction [11]. When extending Hygge with new
functionality, these rules must also be extended accordingly. This notation will
be especially relevant in the next chapter (Chapter 3), where the new extensions
of Hygge are formally designed and specified.
2.3.3
The Hygge Framework
In order to use the Hygge compiler, a framework is provided that allows inter-
action through the command-line. In the command-line, the Hygge framework
accepts commands that start with “./hygge” followed by an instruction, such as
“parse”, “compile”, “typecheck”, “interpret” or “RARS”. The “RARS” command
will compile the given program, and run it on the RARS emulator, which is the
only platform supported originally.
When the Hygge framework is used to run programs on the RARS platform, it
will first compile the program to RISC-V code, and run it through the RARS
Emulator. An visualization of this is provided in Figure 2.2. Users only need
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
to provide their Hygge program, invoke the “RARS” and the Hygge framework
will automatically compile the program, and run it on RARS. This framework
will also be extended, in order to build, upload and emulate programs for the
ESP32-C3.
Figure 2.2: Visualization of compiling a Hygge program for the RARS platform
in the original Hygge project. Notice that the framework also sup-
ports other features, such as interpreting the program.
The Hygge language also features an in-built testing framework. Since the com-
piler has many components, it includes tests for lexing, parsing, interpreting,
type checking, and code generation. This reflects each phase of the compiler,
illustrated in Figure 2.1. Each of these components has test cases that are ex-
pected to pass or fail. This setup makes it easier for students to verify their im-
plementations and ensure that new changes do not break existing functionality.
The testing framework supports continuous testing and test-driven development,
which has proven to be very valuable for students. It can easily be run through
the Hygge framework by using the “./hyggec test” command. Whenever Hygge
is extended, the testing framework should be extended accordingly.
Throughout the compiler construction course at DTU, students incrementally add
functionality to the Hygge language. By the end of the course, their extensions
may range from a few additional operations to advanced features such as closures
and optimizations. However, students are only able to interpret and simulate their
language. One way to make it more practical and engaging would be enabling it
to run on embedded devices, which the rest of this thesis will explore.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Embedded Devices and Development
13
2.4
Embedded Devices and Development
2.4.1
Characteristics and Relevance of Embedded Devices
Embedded programming is a field within computer science that focuses on em-
bedded devices. It may be described as operating on the software layer just above
hardware and machine code. Embedded programming is a highly important in-
dustry skill, as embedded computers are present everywhere. What defines an
embedded computer is not strictly agreed upon but can vaguely be described as
computers that are not personal computers, servers, or mobile phones1. They are
generally characterized by limited memory, reduced computing power, and small
physical size. Figure 2.3 showcases a few of such systems, where their small sizes
are characteristic.
Figure 2.3: Top down view of a few embedded platforms, with a 9V battery at
the top for scale. The boards from left to right are the: ESP32-C3,
Arduino Nano, ESP32-WROOM-32, Arudino Uno
Embedded computers are also adopted by many hobbyists, who use products
such as Arduinos or ESP32s for personal projects. These small computers have
enabled people of all ages to create their own projects. They are also excellent
tools for introducing children and teenagers to computer science, as they can be
used in a fun and educational manner. For students, they offer an opportunity
to learn about the hardware modules of a computer, as they can be viewed
as simplified versions of their a personal computer. Given their significance in
1Even though this is also disputed.
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
industry, academia, and personal hobbies, there are many compelling reasons to
introduce embedded programming as part of the Hygge language.
2.4.2
Languages and Toolchains
Embedded computers are typically programmed using either C or C++, although
less common options such as Rust or Python are also available [12]. Functional
programming languages for embedded development are rare. One notable exam-
ple is the Nerves project, which compiles Elixir programs for embedded systems,
with Elixir being a functional programming language [13].
Often, companies producing embedded computers provide their own tools for de-
velopment.
An example is CubeIDE by STMicroelectronics for working with
STM32 microcontrollers.
Another is the Espressif IoT Development Frame-
work (ESP-IDF), which is used for their ESP32 microcontrollers. The ESP-IDF
toolchain will be used extensively in this thesis, as Hygge targets the ESP32-C3
platform. This platform is introduced in section 2.5.
2.4.3
From Code to Embedded Systems
Ideally, programming embedded devices should not differ significantly from pro-
gramming other applications. In the most basic case, developers simply write
their code and launch the application. Similarly, the ideal workflow for embed-
ded development would be writting the code and instantly upload it to a board,
by pressing a button or running a command. The only additional requirements
are the embedded device itself and a cable to connect it to the PC. Figure 2.4
shows a minimal setup where a (small) computer is connected to an embedded
device.
Arduino platforms offer exactly this type of workflow, making them very accessi-
ble to beginners. As mentioned in section 2.4.2, the ESP32-C3 uses the ESP-IDF
toolchain, which can be integrated into Visual Studio Code, enabling a similar
workflow. In this thesis, the Hygge framework is designed to be just as easy to
use as Arduino or the ESP-IDF toolchain. When a developer writes Hygge code,
they should be able to issue a single command in their terminal and run the code
on a connected ESP32-C3. Details on this are covered in section 3.6.
Embedded systems typically have many peripherals, which enables them to com-
municate and interact with the outside world [14]. Peripherals could be an LED,
a button, a display, or similar. The embedded system will access these periph-
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Embedded Devices and Development
15
Figure 2.4: Setup where a computer is connected to an embedded device in
order to upload (flash) program on it. In this case, the computer is
a Raspberry Pi 5 (top-left), and the embedded device is an ESP32-
C3 (bottom-right). Instead of the Raspberry Pi, a more ordinary
choice would be a laptop or desktop.
erals through hardware interfaces, such as the General Purpose Input Output
(GPIO) pins, I2C, SPI or UART. The interfaces typically have their own regis-
ters attached, which are used for configuration or data transfers. Often, these
registers are memory-mapped registers, meaning they are accessible through the
data bus by having individual memory locations [15]. Programmers can access
them by their address, the same way the programmer would access an object by
its address somewhere on the heap. The peripheral interfaces of the ESP32-C3
use memory-mapped registers, and the thesis will frequently make use of them
in Chapter 4.
When compiling programs for embedded systems, understanding the system’s
memory layout is essential. This knowledge ensures that data and instructions
are placed in the correct locations. To describe this layout, linker scripts are
used. These scripts are handled by the linker, a critical stage in the compilation
process of programming languages [16]. The output from the compiler and linker
is typically a binary file that is ready to run on a board. Linker scripts and
the linker itself will be relevant in sections 3.4 and 4.4, where they are used to
integrate external C libraries and identify the memory region of static data.
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
2.5
The ESP32-C3 and Its Toolchain
The overall goal of this thesis is to allow Hygge to run on the ESP32-C3 board,
which is a well-documented readily available, and relatively cheap embedded
device [17]. Using wires and other electronic component, users are able to create
small embedded systems that can interract with the world.
The most basic
example of this is making an LED blink. Figure 2.5 showcases how a simple
ESP32-C3 setup looks like for making an LED blink.
Figure 2.5: The ESP32-C3 attached to a breadboard. A red LED is connected
to the board using wires and a resistor. The board is running a
program making the LED blink. This is an example of a simple
setup that hobbyists could use themselves.
The architecture of the ESP32-C3 implements the RV32IMC RISC-V ISA. As
described in section 2.2, this ISA provides 32 32-bit integer registers, as well
as additional extensions for multiplication and division. It also includes the C-
extension, which introduces compressed instructions. This extension can be found
in Chapter 14 of the RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, but will not be discussed
in this thesis [6].
Notably, the ISA of the ESP32-C3 does not include the floating-point extension
that Hygge was originally designed for. This becomes particularly relevant when
porting Hygge to support the ESP32-C3 platform, as explained in section 3.3.
Since the ESP32-C3 is an Espressif product, the ESP-IDF toolchain will be
==PAGE:27==
2.5 The ESP32-C3 and Its Toolchain
17
used to allow the Hygge framework to interact with the board. The ESP-IDF
toolchain bundles a wide range of functionality, making integration with their
products significantly easier.
Important features include the ability to build,
flash, and simulate code for ESP platforms. ESP-IDF supports both C, C++ and
RISC-V assembly. The framework uses GCC (the GNU Compiler Collection) for
compilation and follows the C17 ISO of C [18]. This ISO provides some convenient
standard libraries, such as the standrd I/O library (stdio.h) described in section
7.21 of the standard [19].
In contrast to the Hygge compiler, ESP-IDF is able to build executable binaries
targeting the ESP32-C3. These are the compiled programs, which can be flashed
and run on the ESP32-C3. Figure 2.6 shows how the ESP-IDF framework is
used, and how to takes an input program and either emulates the code using
QEMU (introduced below), or flashes the code on an ESP32-C3. Like the Hygge
framework, users only need to provide their code, and by issuing a command,
the toolchain will built the binary, and either flash it on the ESP32-C3 device,
or emulate it.
Figure 2.6: Visualization of how ESP-IDF is used to compile programs for the
ESP32-C3. At the end, it can either simulate the program using
QEMU, or run it on an actual ESP32-C3 board.
ESP-IDF supports simulating projects, using the QEMU emulator. QEMU is
an open-source emulator, which can simulate a wide variety of platforms [20].
Espressif maintains their own fork of the project that can be installed and used
to emulate ESP-IDF projects [21]. This makes it easier and more accessible for
users to develop and test code for the ESP platforms. For the same principles,
QEMU is included in parts of this thesis.
Later, this thesis uses the GCC compiler of the ESP-IDF toolchain to assemble
Hygge-compiled RISC-V code into ESP32-C3-compatible machine code.
The
toolchain is accessed via the IDF frontend, which is a Python script named idf.py
[22]. This frontend will be used by the Hygge framework to access the ESP-IDF
toolchain.
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
2.6
Memory Management and Garbage Collec-
tors
As mentioned in Section 2.3, this thesis considers the Hygge version that supports
structures to be allocated on the heap. Introducing the heap implies that the lan-
guage supports dynamic memory allocation. Whenever a programming language
allows dynamic memory allocation, it should specify some memory management
strategy. Unfortunately, Hygge lacks this feature, as it can only allocate memory,
but not de-allocate it.
In C and C++, manual memory management is used. This means that developers
must handle the allocation and deallocation of memory themselves.
In other
words, they must explicitly indicate when allocated objects are no longer in use,
so that the memory can be made free and reused for other allocations.
This strategy shifts the responsibility of memory management to the developer.
While it results in a simple allocation scheme, it also requires more effort and
care. If memory is not managed properly, it can lead to memory leaks. Memory
leaks occur when unused objects are not freed. Such unused objects occupying
memory are referred to as garbage. If the amount of leaked memory increases
over time, it can eventually exhaust the available memory and cause the program
to crash. Even when a memory leak is detected, identifying the root cause and
resolving it can be notoriously difficult.
Some languages support automatic memory management, which relieves the de-
veloper of this responsibility. Instead of having the developer manually free un-
used objects, they are detected and automatically freed using a garbage collector.
Many high-level languages support this approach, including Java, C#, and Go
[23].
On the downside, a garbage collector runs periodically and may take a substantial
amount of time to complete, resulting in worse performance [24]. Furthermore,
automatic memory management typically uses additional memory compared to
manual memory management.
Research has shown that the impact of these
effects varies depending on the program being executed [25]. While opinions may
differ, these effects are generally considered acceptable in most applications. The
fact that Java, one of the most widely used programming languages, relies on
automatic garbage collection supports this claim.
One widely used conservative garbage collector is the Boehm-Demers-Weiser
garbage collector, introduced in the paper “Garbage Collection in an Uncoop-
erative Environment” from 1988 [26].
It is designed to be a general-purpose
==PAGE:29==
2.7 Previous Work
19
garbage collector that can replace the standard malloc function in C [27]. This
makes it relatively easy to integrate into existing C projects.
The Boehm GC works by tracking the heap and maintaining information about
which addresses are in use and which are free. When it performs garbage collec-
tion, it runs a mark-sweep algorithm [28]. This algorithm consists of two phases:
the mark phase and the sweep phase. In the mark phase, the garbage collector
scans three memory regions to find all active pointers [28]. Whenever a pointer
(or a value resembling a pointer) is found, the corresponding object is marked. In
the sweep phase, the collector scans all heap objects and removes those that were
not marked. The memory occupied by these unmarked objects is then returned
to the heap as available space.
The three memory regions scanned during the mark phase are the stack, the
static data region, and the registers. If a program intends to use an object in the
future, its reference must be stored in one of these regions. Therefore, any object
not marked during the mark phase can be safely removed. When porting the
Boehm GC for new platforms, these three memory regions need to be configured.
As an addition to porting Hygge to run on the ESP32-C3, the thesis aims to
introduce the Boehm garbage collector in order to solve the lacking memory
management capabilities of Hygge. The approach and specific requirements will
be discussed further in section 3.5.
2.7
Previous Work
Besides the work mentioned in the previous sections, there is other work that is
relevant to the topics covered in the thesis, but not required to understand.
The design and specification of programming languages is supported by formal
language theory. Language is built upon grammar, which itself can be described
by symbols and production rules, as shown in Section 2.3.2. Parsers used by
compilers utilize these concepts in order to function correctly. For a better insight
into the theoretical details and background of language theory, a recommended
book is “Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation”, by
John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D. Ullman [29].
Besides the ESP32-C3, there are many other embedded platforms that can serve
as a good introduction to embedded development. Espressif alone, the company
behind the ESP32-C3, has many different platforms to choose from.
Though
ESP32 variants are popular, they may not be the most beginner-friendly plat-
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
forms. Alternatively, Arduino is widely popular and is easy to get started with
using their minimalist IDE and beginner-friendly projects. Both Arduino and
ESP32 make it possible to connect hardware components to the board using
wires and breadboards, making it an ideal way to introduce a hardware aspect
(See Figure 2.5). For a more powerful but small platform, one can experiment
with Raspberry Pi computers. These mini computers run Linux and are able to
function as personal computers or servers for various projects. All these platforms
are fun ways to get started with embedded programming.
As the compiler for Hygge is written in F#, and Hygge itself is a functional lan-
guage, it is worthwhile to have a fundamental understanding of this paradigm.
Functional programming has a very unique structure and style, making it stand
out compared to languages such as C and Java. Historically, the first functional
programming language was LISP, which was designed to have a practical math-
ematical notation, making it ideal for math-related applications [30].
Today,
functional programming languages have various strengths, which can manifest in
different domains. One of these is in compiler construction. For these reasons,
it can be valuable and worthwhile to spend time learning the key ideas behind
functional programming, and to learn the basics of a functional language such as
F#.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Designing Embedded Hygge
3.1
Specification of the Goals
The primary objective of this thesis is developing Embedded Hygge, an extended
version of Hygge targeted at embedded development on the ESP32-C3 board. To
properly achieve this, Embedded Hygge should not only be able to run on the
platform but also perform essential tasks that are typical for embedded systems.
This section presents the features that Embedded Hygge must support to be
well-suited for embedded development. These features are split into five goals
that together form the basis of Embedded Hygge.
Goal #1: Embedded Hygge needs low-level operators that are typical for em-
bedded development.
These include new operators for bit manipulation and
access of arbitrary memory locations. Bit manipulation is commonly used when
configuring hardware components, while hardware configuration often occurs by
setting the values of memory-mapped registers. To allow this, Embeddded Hygge
needs the ability to access and modify specific memory locations. In Section 3.2
of this chapter, these operators are introduced, along with the new types that
they operate on.
Goal #2:
Embedded Hygge needs to support essential operations that are
==PAGE:32==
22
Designing Embedded Hygge
platform-dependent.
One of these features is communication to and from the
ESP32-C3, enabling users to interact with the board at runtime. While such fea-
tures already exist in Hygge, they were designed for RARS and are not compatible
with the ESP32-C3. Similarly, the ESP32-C3 handles floating point values differ-
ently than RARS, as discussed in section 2.5. This leads to the requirement that
the Embedded Hygge compiler must be able to compile certain operations dif-
ferently, depending on the target platform Section 3.3 covers the design changes
required in the Hygge compiler to accommodate this.
Goal #3: Embedded Hygge programs should have the ability to include func-
tionality from C libraries and other Embedded Hygge files. C is the dominant
language in embedded development, and most embedded libraries are written in
C. When users are able to integrate functions from C libraries, they gain access
to the broader embedded ecosystem. Additionally, splitting Embedded Hygge
programs into multiple files would enhance readability, maintainability, and al-
lows the files to be reused easily. Section 3.4 presents the requirements of this
goal in more detail.
Goal #4: Embedded Hygge should have a garbage collector to do memory
management. As mentioned in section 2.3, this thesis extends a version of Hygge
that supports structures. These structures are dynamically allocated, meaning
they occupy heap memory. A garbage collector would make it possible to reclaim
the memory of unused structures, which removes the concern of memory-leaks
from Embedded Hygge. Therefore, the Embedded Hygge language introduces
the Boehm-Demers-Weiser garbage collector, which is detailed in Section 3.5.
Goal #5: The framework of Embedded Hygge needs to enable users to easily
build, flash, and emulate their programs for the ESP32-C3. Moreover, if new
features are added to the language or compiler in the future, the framework
should include a testing system to help verify correctness. Section 3.6 describes
the extended Hygge framework and the tools that enables these features.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Goal #1: Low-level Embedded Operators
23
These goals are summarized in Table 3.1, which also provides an overview of the
relevant sections for each goal. The next five sections of this chapter cover the
design of the various features for each of the five goal. The last section (Section
3.7) presents an example program written in Embedded Hygge, based on the
new features that the goals add to Hygge.
This gives a tangible example of
Embedded Hygge, providing insight into the syntax and structure of Embedded
Hygge programs.
Description of the goals
Design
Implementation
Results
Goal #1:
Adding low-level embedded operators
Section 3.2
Section 4.1
Section 5.2
Goal #2:
Adding platform-dependent operators
Section 3.3
Section 4.2
Section 5.3
Goal #3:
Including C functions and Hygge programs
Section 3.4
Section 4.3
Section 5.4
Goal #4:
Integrating a garbage collector
Section 3.5
Section 4.4
Section 5.5
Goal #5:
Making the Embedded Hygge Framework
Section 3.6
Section 4.5
Section 5.6
Table 3.1: Overview and description of the main goals Embedded Hygge, in-
cluding a mapping to their respective design, implementation, and
results sections
3.2
Goal #1: Low-level Embedded Operators
3.2.1
Bit Manipulation and Memory Access
Any good embedded programming language needs to support bit manipulation
and arbitrary memory access. For bit manipulation, Hygge was extended with
binary-and, or, xor, and negation, as well as arithmetic right and left shift op-
erations. For memory access, two operations were added, named readMem and
setMem.
The syntax for the binary operators is inspired by C. For memory access, function-
like operators are introduced.
These additions have been integrated into the
syntax of Hygge and are shown in the grammar defined in Definition 3.2.1.
==PAGE:34==
24
Designing Embedded Hygge
Definition 3.2.1 (Binary Operations).
Expression
e
::=
. . .
|
e1 | e2
(Binary “or”)
|
e1 & e2
(Binary “and”)
|
e1ˆe2
(Binary “xor”)
|
˜e2
(Binary negation)
|
e1 >> e2
(Arithmetic right shift)
|
e1 << e2
(Arithmetic left shift)
|
readMem(e)
(Read memory location)
|
setMem(e1, e2)
(Set memory location)
The semantics, type checking, and substitution rules are similar across all the
new operators. Only the rules for binary-or are shown here in Definition 3.2.2
and 3.2.3, while the remaining rules can be found in Appendix A.1. Through
these rules, the syntax and semantics of the embedded operators are defined.
Definition 3.2.2 (Binary-or semantic rules).
⟨R • e1⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1⟩
⟨R • e1 | e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1 | e2⟩
[R-Bor-L]
⟨R • e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
2⟩
⟨R • v1 | e2⟩→⟨R′ • v1 | e′
2⟩
[R-Bor-R]
v1 | v2 = v3
⟨R • v1 | v2⟩→⟨R′ • v3⟩
[R-Bor-Eval]
Definition 3.2.3 (Binary-or typing rule).
T ∈{byte32}
Γ ⊢e1 : T
Γ ⊢e2 : T
Γ ⊢e1 | e2 : T
[T-Bor]
3.2.2
The Byte32 Type
Notice that the previous section introduced a new type called byte32. This type
indicates that the expression represents or reduces to a generic 32-bit value. From
this and Definition 3.2.3, it follows that binary operators only operate on byte32
values. This type is added to the Hygge specification by including byte32 as
a basic type. The original basic types are defined in Definition 5 of the Hygge
specification and are repeated in Definition 3.2.4 for clarity [11].
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Goal #1: Low-level Embedded Operators
25
Definition 3.2.4 (Updated Hygge types for Embedded Hygge).
Type
t
::=
|
bool | int | float | string | unit
(Original Basic Types)
|
byte32 | pointer | double
(New Basic types)
|
x
(Type variable)
In addition to the updated basic types, Hygge also needs to be able to resolve
the byte32 pretype into the actual byte32 type. This allows users of Hygge to
correctly use the byte32 type in their programs, for instance, to provide type
ascriptions for expressions. The rule for resolving this pretype is shown in Defi-
nition 3.2.5.
Definition 3.2.5 (Resolving byte32 pretypes).
Γ ⊢"byte32"  byte32
[TRes-byte32]
In Hygge, all values that are written explicitly in a program are type-checked as
integers. In other words, if a user declares a variable with the value 17, the type
of 17 is an int. To allow such values to be treated as byte32 and thereby use
the binary operators, a subtyping rule is required. Based on this requirement,
the integer type is considered a subtype of the unsigned 32-bit integer type.
The typing system of Hygge follows the Liskov Substitution Principle, and from
this it follows that integers can be used in all binary operations that expect a
byte32 type. This subtyping rule is added directly to the Hygge specification, as
described in Definition 3.2.6.
Definition 3.2.6 (Byte32 and Integer Subtyping Rule).
Γ ⊢int ⩽byte32
[TSub-int-byte32]
3.2.3
The Pointer Type and New Values
Another characteristic of embedded development is the frequent use of pointers
to access arbitrary memory locations. This is a well-known characteristic of C
and C++, where pointers are used to reference memory directly. This design
is logical, as it clearly indicates which values are intended to represent memory
locations. Embedded Hygge adopts a similar approach by introducing its own
pointer type.
This type is used by the readMem and setMem functions and
==PAGE:36==
26
Designing Embedded Hygge
will only type-check if the given address has a pointer type. This helps prevent
incorrect values from being used as memory locations.
Like the byte32 type, the pointer type has its own rule for resolving its pretype,
following the same structure as Definition 3.2.5. As explained in the previous
section, all values declared by an Embedded Hygge programmer initially have
the int type. To allow these values to be used as pointers, the integer type is de-
fined to be a subtype of the pointer type, similar to Definition 3.2.6. Admittedly,
this design choice is unconventional, and it will be discussed further in Chap-
ter 6, Section 6.1. That being said, in practice, it works well, and an example
demonstrating this typing system is provided in Section 3.7.
Finally, it is also useful for developers to declare values in hexadecimal or binary
form. To support this, the grammar for values in Hygge is extended as shown in
Definition 3.2.7.
Definition 3.2.7 (Hexadecimal and Binary value grammar).
Value
v
::=
. . .
|
0110b | 111b | ...
(Boolean values)
|
0xabc | 0x190BF | 0x...
(Hexadecimal values)
Together, the new operators and types introduced in this section enable Embed-
ded Hygge to perform the first essential tasks commonly encountered in embedded
development. An example demonstrating the use of these operators will be given
at the end of this chapter, in Section 3.7. Their implementation will be covered
in the following chapter in Section 4.1.
3.3
Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operators
Embedded Hygge should work with both RARS and the ESP32-C3, even though
they implement different RISC-V ISAs. As described in Section 3.1, these differ-
ences require the Embedded Hygge compiler to compile programs in a platform-
dependent manner. This section explains how the compiler handles such platform-
dependent operations. In order, it covers floating-point handling, serial commu-
nication, and finally a delay functionality that can stall execution.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operators
27
3.3.1
Floats and Doubles
As mentioned in Section 2.4, the ESP32-C3 does not support floating-point oper-
ations in its ISA. Normally, floats are handled using floating-point registers and
instructions. Instead, when compiling for the ESP32-C3, the compiler must use
regular integer registers and instructions to handle floats.
Fortunately, floating-point values and their operations can still be implemented
using integer registers, as long as the correct format is followed. Since floating-
point values are just collections of 32 bits, their binary representation can be
stored directly in integer registers.
The Embedded Hygge toolchain utilizes GCC to assemble RISC-V code and
perform final linking (see Section 3.6).
Therefore, Embedded Hygge uses the
same floating-point format as GCC, which follows to the IEEE 754 technical
standard [31].
Arithmetic operations on floats, such as addition and multiplication, can be
achieved using well-defined algorithms.
These could be reimplemented from
scratch, but GCC provides its own low-level runtime library [32]. This library
provides functions that can perform floating point computations. Rather than
implementing these algorithms again, Embedded Hygge makes calls to these low-
level functions. By using IEEE 754 representation together with GCC’s floating-
point runtime, Embedded Hygge enables floating-point math on the ESP32-C3.
Until now, only single-precision floating-point operations have been considered.
However, Embedded Hygge also supports doubles, which provide greater preci-
sion using 64-bit representations. Because doubles occupy a double-word size,
32-bit architectures must store their values across two registers. This applies to
ESP32-C3 and any system using the RV32I base ISA. Nonetheless, any 32-bit
system can support doubles using the correct algorithms. As with floats, Embed-
ded Hygge relies on GCC’s low-level runtime functions to perform double arith-
metic. Details on how platform-dependent floats and doubles are implemented
are provided in Chapter 4, Section 4.2.1.
Since doubles are new to the Hygge specification, its syntax and typing rules
must be updated. See Appendix A.2 for grammar extensions and updated type-
checking and semantic rules to support doubles. The full list of Embedded Hygge
types is shown in Definition 3.2.4 in the previous section.
Finally, the register allocation strategy must be revised to support cross-platform
floating-point operations. As described in Section 2.3, during compilation each
result is stored in a single register, and the compiler tracks both floating-point and
==PAGE:38==
28
Designing Embedded Hygge
integer registers. However, on architectures without floating-point registers, all
results must be stored in integer registers. Moreover, the compiler must allocate
one or two registers depending on whether the result is a float or a double. To
accomplish this, the allocation strategy is modified to consider the underlying
architecture and result type, then select the appropriate number of registers.
The implementation of this design is described in Section 4.2.1.
3.3.2
Reading and Writing over the UART
The I/O aspect of any programming language is key, as it enables interaction
between the program and the user. Every platform has its own specification for
performing I/O operations, depending on the underlying architecture.
Hygge
supports the print and println operations, which write values to the console.
Originally, output is achieved by making system calls to RARS via the ECALL
RISC-V instruction. However, for the ESP32-C3 a completely different solution
is required.
The I/O design for ESP32-C3 is much more complex than for the RARS sim-
ulator. On the ESP32-C3, many communication protocols are available, such
as UART, I2C, and SPI. In this thesis, UART is used to communicate between
the user’s PC and the ESP32-C3 board. The ESP32-C3 includes an on-board
USB-to-serial converter that uses UART, which makes it an ideal choice for user
communication.
There are different ways to read from and write to the UART. For most boards,
libraries exist that make it easy to access, configure, and use UART. When using
the ESP-IDF, the printf function of the standard C library is already config-
ured to use UART for printing strings. This is available through the C17 ISO
supported by the ESP-IDF, as described in Section 2.5. Since it is available,
Embedded Hygge will use this function whenever it needs to print to the console.
However, a different approach was needed for input. Originally, it was planned
to call the scanf function of the standard C library to read from the console.
However, scanf does not work without additional configuration [33]. This was
discovered experimentally and may be because the bootloader does not config-
ure it. Instead, another approach was used, which accesses the UART directly
through memory-mapped registers.
This approach requires more insight into the underlying hardware and design of
the ESP32-C3, in order to configure and access the UART. The implementation
of this, as well as the printing functionality will be covered in Section 4.2.2.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Goal #3: Including C and Hygge Code
29
3.3.3
Delay Execution
For developers, it is often convenient to delay execution for a certain amount of
time. This is also true for embedded application, where routines should loop at a
given interval, or simply wait for a given time, before performing the next action.
For instance, with this capability, it becomes possible to make an LED blink at
regular intervals. This may seem simple, but blinking an LED at regular intervals
is a milestone for any embedded project. It can be considered the “Hello World”
equivalent for embedded projects.
The delay function is not part of the original Hygge syntax, and will be intro-
duced as a new grammar rule defined by Definition 3.3.1. The remaining rules
are presented in Appendix A.3. The timeout for the delay function is given in
milliseconds.
Definition 3.3.1 (The new delay function).
Expression
e
::=
. . .
|
delay(e)
(Delay execution)
As with I/O operations, stopping or delaying execution is platform dependent
because it requires a hardware clock to measure time.
Unfortunately, the C
standard library does not provide functions that Hygge can leverage to achieve
this. Instead, the delay function will be implemented by using a hardware clock
that is present on the ESP32-C3.
Many boards provide access to such clocks via memory-mapped registers. This
is also the case for the ESP32-C3, which includes two general-purpose timers,
as specified in chapter 11 of the ESP32-C3 datasheet [34]. Using one of these
timers and its tick frequency, the delay timeout can be implemented accurately.
Embedded Hygge adopts this approach, and its implementation is described in
Section 4.2.3.
3.4
Goal #3: Including C and Hygge Code
3.4.1
C Libraries
As C and C++ are the most widely used embedded languages, many libraries
are already written in these languages.
Therefore, it would be very useful if
==PAGE:40==
30
Designing Embedded Hygge
developers could use these libraries within their Embedded Hygge programs.
C uses header files to expose function prototypes for its libraries. Ideally, Embed-
ded Hygge would support including these header files as well. However, header
files can be complex, and building a parser for them in Embedded Hygge was
deemed overly extensive. Instead, a simpler approach was adopted: developers
include only the specific functions they need, using the new using keyword.
The using keyword declares the type and name of an imported function. With
this declaration, Embedded Hygge can correctly type-check and compile the code.
For example, to import the standard C library’s printf function, the following
Embedded Hygge program can be used:
using printf(string): unit;
printf("Hello World!")
The using keyword extends the Hygge syntax with the rule shown in Defini-
tion 3.4.1.
Definition 3.4.1 (Using Syntax).
Expression
e
::=
. . .
|
using s(t1, ..., tn) : t; e
(Import function)
For the operational semantics, two new rules are added to import and apply these
functions. These are shown in Appendix A.4. The rules specify how users can
include C functions in their program. However, a key question remains of what
happens at compile- and runtime when a program imports and uses an external
function. This is covered in the implementation details in Section 4.3.
3.4.2
Including Hygge Files
In C programs, it is common to include other files via header files. This prac-
tice offers substantial benefits for large applications, enabling modularity and
reusability. Splitting code into multiple files is generally possible in all major
programming languages. For these reasons, Embedded Hygge should also sup-
port including code from other Embedded Hygge files. To enable this, Embedded
Hygge introduces the #include keyword. Its syntax is shown in Definition 3.4.2,
and it mimics C’s approach to including header files.
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Goal #4: Introducing a Garbage Collector
31
Definition 3.4.2 (Include Syntax).
Expression
e
::=
. . .
|
#include s; e
(Include Hygge file)
String
s
::=
"lib.hyg" | "hello" | ...
(Strings)
As shown in the syntax, #include is followed by a string specifying a valid path
to another Embedded Hygge file. The path should be relative to the file that uses
the #include keyword. The include expression must also be followed by another
expression, which will run in the scope of the included file.
Semantically, this is equivalent to copying the contents of the included file into
the location of the #include s term. Initially, it was considered to implement this
by combining file contents before parsing the program. However, doing so would
break correct line-number reporting when errors occur, since the line numbers
would no longer reflect the original files.
Instead, the chosen design adds a preprocessing phase to the compilation pipeline.
When an Embedded Hygge file is parsed and includes another file, the resulting
abstract syntax tree (AST) contains an include-node. Immediately after parsing,
the abstract syntax tree passes through the preprocessor, which scans for any
#include nodes. For each include found, the process is:
1. Parse and preprocess the specified file (file2).
2. Locate the last subexpression in the AST of the original file.
3. Replace that subexpression with a sequence expression containing the orig-
inal subexpression followed by the AST of file2.
4. Replace the include node in the original AST with this combined AST.
If no #include keyword is found, the preprocessor leaves the AST unchanged.
This approach enables Embedded Hygge to include other files while preserving
correct line-number information for error reporting.
3.5
Goal #4: Introducing a Garbage Collector
To support automated garbage collection, Embedded Hygge uses the the Boehm
Garbage Collector (Boehm GC). The Boehm GC is open source and can be easily
included in C and C++ projects [35]. This also applies to ESP-IDF projects,
==PAGE:42==
32
Designing Embedded Hygge
which are part of the Embedded Hygge toolchain (See Section 3.6). However, the
garbage collector supports only a limited selection of platforms and operating
systems [36]. Unfortunately, the ESP32-C3 is not among these platforms. To
support the ESP32-C3, the Boehm GC must be extended before it can be used
by Embedded Hygge.
As mentioned in Section 2.6, the garbage collector requires access to three mem-
ory regions:
1. The stack.
2. Static memory regions.
3. The content of the registers.
The Boehm GC is extended so it knows where to locate and access these regions.
Starting with registers, the Boehm GC already has strategies that are nearly
compatible with the ESP32-C3. When registers need to be read, their contents
are simply pushed to the static memory. Afterwards, the Boehm GC will scan
the static memory that includes the register content.
To allow this, the Boehm GC needs to know where to find the static memory
region of the ESP32-C3. The static memory regions holds data that stay through-
out the execution of a program, such as global variables [37]. Unfortunately, this
region on the ESP32-C3 cannot be determined at compile time. Although the
general data regions are defined in the ESP32-C3 datasheet, the boundaries be-
tween static and dynamic memory are not known beforehand [34]. The ESP32-C3
build system allocates only the minimal static memory required and reserves the
remainder for dynamic allocation. Because it is an embedded system with scarce
memory, this maximizes available space for dynamic use. The static region size
thus varies by program and is only known post-compilation.
As described in Section 2.4.3, linker scripts are used during compilation to define
memory regions for the platform. Fortunately, the ESP32-C3 linker scripts de-
fine global variables data start and data end, which can determine the static
memory span at runtime [38]. With these global variables, the Boehm GC can
identify static memory boundaries during execution.
Finally, the Boehm GC must know where to look when marking the stack. Since
the RISC-V calling convention specifies that the stack grows downward, the GC
only needs the top-of-stack address and the current stack pointer. The Boehm
GC already has built-in methods to obtain the current stack pointer, so this part
requires no modification. In ESP-IDF, FreeRTOS schedules and runs multiple
tasks, including the main application.
Each FreeRTOS task’s execution state
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Goal #5: Extending The Embedded Framework
33
(including its stack) is dynamically allocated [39]. Therefore, the top address of
the main application stack is only computed and known at runtime.
One solution to this is using a global variable that holds the top-of-stack address.
The main application should immediately set this variable to the initial stack
pointer when execution begins. At program start, the stack pointer is guaran-
teed to be at the top of the stack. This is a simple approach, but does require
collaboration between both the Boehm GC and the program that is running.
Once the Boehm GC knows where to find the three memory regions, it is com-
patible with the ESP32-C3 platform. Section 4.4 presents the implementation
that enables this.
3.6
Goal #5: Extending The Embedded Frame-
work
Being able to compile Hygge programs into ESP32-C3 compatible RISC-V code is
not enough. The Embedded Hygge framework also needs to compile the RISC-V
programs into binaries that can be run on the platform. Compiling binaries for
a specific board can often be achieved by using tools provided by the producer
of the board. As explained in Section 2.4, the tool for ESP32-C3 is the Espressif
IoT Development Framework (ESP-IDF).
Because of this, the framework uses the ESP-IDF to compile the RISC-V assembly
code generated by Embedded Hygge into executable binaries. The ESP-IDF will
also be used to flash the programs onto the ESP32-C3 board. Additionally, the
ESP-IDF framework enables simulation of the board by using the QEMU emula-
tor. The Embedded Hygge framework is therefore a combination of the original
Hygge framework and the ESP-IDF. Individually, these were visualized in Figure
2.2 and Figure 2.6. Similarly, their combination, and thus the Embedded Hygge
framework, is visualized in Figure 3.1. The Embedded Hygge framework will
automatically handle the entire process from providing the program to executing
or simulating it, by interfacing with the ESP-IDF.
As described in Section 2.3, Hygge already has a command-line tool to compile
and interpret Hygge programs. The Embedded Hygge command-line tool will
support the same commands, but also additional commands that invoke the ESP-
IDF tools. These commands will be used to automatically configure the ESP-IDF
toolchain for building, flashing, and emulating RISC-V assembly files into binaries
for the ESP32-C3.
This toolchain also makes it possible to include external
==PAGE:44==
34
Designing Embedded Hygge
Figure 3.1: Visualiation of how the Embedded Hygge framework works by ex-
tending the original Hygge framework with the ESP-IDF.
libraries as part of the compilation phase. This enables compiling, linking, and
calling functions defined in libraries written in C, which is essential to enable the
extensions described in Section 3.4.
In Embedded Hygge, the compile command will have an additional option (-t)
for setting the target platform. For instance, generating ESP32-C3 compatible
RISC-V code from a helloworld.hyg file would be done as follows:
./hyggec compile -t ESP32-C3 ./helloworld.hyg
This only outputs the RISC-V assembly code, but will not build the binary for the
ESP32-C3. The command-line tool will have additional commands for building,
flashing, and emulating Embedded Hygge programs for the ESP32-C3. These are
invoked using the commands:
==PAGE:45==
3.7 Embedded Hygge Programs
35
./hyggec esp32c3 build [file]
./hyggec esp32c3 flash [file]
./hyggec esp32c3 emulate [file]
When using these commands, the Embedded Hygge framework automatically
interfaces with the ESP-IDF toolchain to build, flash, or emulate programs for the
ESP32-C3. As illustrated in Figure 3.1, the entire process should be automated
by the framework. The user should only need to provide the program and the
appropriate command.
Everything else, from parsing the file to launching a
QEMU simulation or flashing the program, Embedded Hygge handles behind the
scenes. Section 4.5 covers the making of this framework.
As covered in Section 2.3, the Hygge framework also has a built-in testing frame-
work. The testing framework of Embedded Hygge should cover all the same cases
as the original version, but also include automated tests for the ESP32-C3 plat-
form. This includes a folder specifically for tests that validate the correctness of
programs running on the ESP32-C3. Users can add their own tests to this folder,
but it will also include a set of pre-made tests that test original Hygge function-
ality on the ESP32-C3, as well as new tests for all the extensions developed as
part of this thesis. This extended testing framework and its tests will be covered
in Section 4.5.4.
3.7
Embedded Hygge Programs
In this last section, the design choices made in this chapter will be showcased
through examples of Embedded Hygge programs. These examples provide better
insight into the style of Embedded Hygge and demonstrates how the new fea-
ture can be used. The programs are also part of the source code, found in the
“examples/blink” directory.
The code listed in Listing 3.1 is a simple program that prompts the user for
a timeout and then blinks an LED at regular intervals given by that timeout.
This code uses the keyword #include to utilize functions defined in the file led-
Setup.hyg.
It also verifies that I/O functionality works by reading from and
writing to the terminal. Finally, it serves as a visual example to demonstrate
that Embedded Hygge code can run and access GPIOs on the ESP32-C3 board
by observing the blinking LED. In fact, the images in Figure 2.4 and 2.5 show
an ESP32-C3 running these exact programs.
1 #include "ledSetup.hyg";
==PAGE:46==
36
Designing Embedded Hygge
2
3 let result = LedSetup(7); // Setup GPIO 7 as LED pin
4
5 if(not result) then {
6
println("Failed to setup LED");
7
assert(false)
8 } else {
9
println("Write the amount of delay (ms) you want for the blinking
script!");
10
let delayMs = readInt();
11
12
while true do {
13
LedOn();
14
println("Blink ON!");
15
delay(delayMs);
16
17
LedOff();
18
println("Blink OFF!");
19
delay(delayMs)
20
}
21 }
Code 3.1: Blinking LED Script, “blink.hyg”, written in Embedded Hygge.
The ledSetup.hyg file is shown in Listing 3.2. The code accesses memory-mapped
registers to configure and set the value of a specified GPIO pin, in this case GPIO
pin 7. This file uses the low-level operations introduced in Section 3.2 to simplify
setting register values and individual bits.
1 fun LedSetup(pinId: int): bool = {
2
let GPIO_BASE_ADDR : pointer = 0x60004000;
3
let IO_MUX_BASE_ADDR : pointer = 0x60009000;
4
5
let GPIO_CONFIG = (IO_MUX_BASE_ADDR + 0x20);
6
let y = readMem(GPIO_CONFIG);
7
setMem(GPIO_CONFIG, 6402);
8
9
let GPIO_FUNC_OUT = (GPIO_BASE_ADDR + 0x570);
10
let y = readMem(GPIO_FUNC_OUT);
11
setMem(GPIO_FUNC_OUT, y | 128);
12
13
let GPIO_EN_REG = (GPIO_BASE_ADDR + 0x24);
14
setMem(GPIO_EN_REG, (1 << 7));
15
true
==PAGE:47==
3.7 Embedded Hygge Programs
37
16 };
17
18 fun LedOn(): unit = {
19
let GPIO_BASE_ADDR : pointer = 0x60004000;
20
let GPIO_CLEAR_REG : pointer = (GPIO_BASE_ADDR + 0xC);
21
let GPIO_VALUE_REG : pointer = (GPIO_BASE_ADDR + 0x8);
22
23
setMem(GPIO_CLEAR_REG, (1 << 7));
24
setMem(GPIO_VALUE_REG, (1 << 7));
25
()
26 };
27
28 fun LedOff(): unit = {
29
let GPIO_BASE_ADDR = 0x60004000;
30
let GPIO_CLEAR_REG = (GPIO_BASE_ADDR + 0xC);
31
let GPIO_VALUE_REG = (GPIO_BASE_ADDR + 0x8);
32
33
setMem(GPIO_CLEAR_REG, (1 << 7));
34
()
35 };
36 ()
Code 3.2: Embedded Hygge library “ledSetup.hyg” for setting up and blinking
an LED.
It also uses the readMem and setMem functions to read from and write to memory
addresses of memory-mapped registers. The functionality of the library was de-
veloped by referring to the ESP32-C3 datasheet Section 4.1.3.1 regarding GPIO
pin configuration [34]. The datasheet specifies which memory locations to ac-
cess in order to configure and power GPIO pin 7, which happens to be based
at address 0x60004000 with small offsets depending on the register being used.
Directly accessing memory addresses and modifying values based on the board
datasheet is a typical task for an embedded developer.
This low-level approach is provided to showcase that GPIO configuration and
memory-mapped register access can be done manually. However, libraries also
exist that make this process much easier for developers. Such libraries may not
always be available, in which case the manual approach would still be necessary.
But here, the blink.hyg file could use the using functionality introduced in Sec-
tion 3.4 to invoke functions pre-made for the ESP32-C3 platform. Code Listing
3.3 presents an alternative approach for blinking the LED, which demonstrates
the potential of using functions from C libraries.
==PAGE:48==
38
Designing Embedded Hygge
1 // Functions of the ESP-IDF GPIO driver library
2 using gpio_reset_pin(int): unit;
3 using gpio_set_direction(int, int): bool;
4 using gpio_set_level(int, int): unit;
5
6 let GPIO_NUM = 7;
7 let GPIO_MODE_OUTPUT = 2;
8
9 gpio_reset_pin(GPIO_NUM); // Setup GPIO 7 as LED pin
10
11 let failed = gpio_set_direction(GPIO_NUM, GPIO_MODE_OUTPUT); // Set GPIO
as output
12
13 if(failed) then {
14
println("Failed to setup LED");
15
assert(false)
16 } else {
17
println("Write the amount of delay (ms) you want for the blinking
script!");
18
let delayMs = readInt();
19
20
while true do {
21
gpio_set_level(GPIO_NUM, 1);
22
println("Blink ON!");
23
delay(delayMs);
24
25
gpio_set_level(GPIO_NUM, 0);
26
println("Blink OFF!");
27
delay(delayMs)
28
}
29 }
Code 3.3: Embedded Hygge program to blink an LED using imported C
functions.
By using the commands presented in Section 3.6, the user should be able to
compile and flash the program and observe an LED blinking on GPIO pin 7.
Emulation should also be possible, though it will not be that interesting as it
cannot display the blinking LED.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Implementation of the
Extensions
This chapter presents the implementation of Embedded Hygge, based on the
goals and design choices outlined in Chapter 3. Each of the five goals presented
in Section 3.1 are covered in their own section in the following order:
• Goal #1: Add Low-Level Embedded Operators (Section 4.1).
• Goal #2: Add Platform-Dependent Operations (Section 4.2).
• Goal #3: Include C functions and Hygge programs (Section 4.3).
• Goal #4: Integrate a Garbage Collector (Section 4.4).
• Goal #5: Make the Embedded Hygge Framework (Section 4.5).
Besides the goals, the implementation of some non-goal specific extensions will
also be covered in the last section (Section 4.6). The focus is on the technical and
practical challenges encountered during implementation, as well as the solutions
developed to address them. The extensions are made in the Embedded Hygge
Gitlab repository, which is available here.
==PAGE:50==
40
Implementation of the Extensions
4.1
Goal #1: Low-Level Embedded Operators
This section briefly covers how the new low-level operators introduced in Sec-
tion 3.2 were implemented into the Hygge compiler. Their implementation follows
the example from the Compiler Construction course quite closely, and will there-
fore not be covered in depth. The changes influenced all parts of the compiler
stages illustrated in Figure 2.1.
The tokenizer was extended to recognize all the operators as specific and unique
tokens, following Definition 3.2.1.
Likewise, the parser was changed to parse
the tokens into the corresponding expressions, which would then be part of the
abstract syntax tree representing the program. The new value formats, hexadeci-
mal and binary, were also implemented in the tokenizer and parser, in accordance
with Definition 3.2.7.
The interpreter was also extended to support the new features. Since the inter-
preter is written in F# and F# also supports the binary operators, these new
operators were easily implemented, in accordance with the semantic rules shown
in Definitions 3.2.2 and A.1.1. The setMem and readMem functions are also sup-
ported in the interpreter by using the heap field of the runtime environment type.
The heap is simply a lookup table of locations to values, originally introduced to
support structures. However, it works just as well to represent the entire memory
region.
The type checker was also extended to recognize the new byte32 and pointer
types. As specified in Definition 3.2.6, int was made a subtype of the byte32
and pointer types by adding new cases to the isSubtypeOf function in the Type-
checker.fs file. In the same file, the type-checking rules from Definitions 3.2.3
and A.1.3 were implemented.
Like the interpreter, the code generator was extended to generate RISC-V for
the new operators, following the defined semantics. These operators have corre-
sponding instructions in the RISC-V base ISA. For instance, to perform a binary
negation operation, the not instruction can be used. Here, readMem and setMem
are supported using the lw (load word) and sw (store word) instructions.
With these new features, Hygge can be used to make programs like the one
shown in Listing 3.2. Until now, the new operators could be implemented without
considering the underlying platform. As mentioned, these operators are part of
the RISC-V base ISA, so all platforms that support RISC-V will implement these
operations in the same way. Unfortunately, other extensions of Hygge will not
have this luxury and will require platform-dependent code generation, which is
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operations
41
covered in the following section.
4.2
Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operations
In this section, the implementation of platform-dependent operations will be cov-
ered. As described in section 3.3, there are a few operations in the Embedded
Hygge language that require different implementations depending on the under-
lying hardware RISC-V architecture.
Each of these are covered in their own
section, in the following order:
• Single- and double-precision floating point values (Section 4.2.1).
• Reading and writing over the UART (Section 4.2.2).
• Delaying execution of a program (Section 4.3.1)
Each of them will be handled by the compiler in a way that differs between the
RARS and ESP32-C3 platform. To support this, the architecture of the compiler
source code was changed, which will be discussed later in Chapter 6, Section 6.2.
4.2.1
Floats, Doubles and Register Allocation
This section covers the implementation of cross-platform support for single and
double precision floating-point values and operations. The design has already
been covered, and this implementation reflects the choices described in Section
3.3.1.
Beginning with RARS, Section 2.3 describes that it implements the RV32IMFD
ISA. As defined in Chapter 8 of the RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, the D-
extensions widens the 32 floating point registers from 32 bits to 64 bits [6]. This
allows each floating point registers to store either a single- and double-precision
floating-point value. In turn, the compilation for this platform simply uses the
same allocation strategy as described in Section 2.3 and in the original Hygge
version.
Similarly, Hygge already has support for doing computations on single-precision
floating-point values. These instructions follow a format of F[OPERATION] [SIZE],
where the size is S for single-precision. For instance, the single-precision floating-
point operation for addition is FADD S. To support doubles, instructions are added
following the same names except replacing S with D. Consequently, performing
==PAGE:52==
42
Implementation of the Extensions
addition on doubles is done using the FADD D instruction.
On platforms that don’t support floats and doubles, like the ESP32-C3, another
solution is needed. As covered in Section 3.3.1, the ESP32-C3 has to store the
results of both integers, floats and doubles in regular 32-bit integer registers,
which requires a major change to the register allocation implementation. The
RISC-V calling convention is described in Chapter 2 of the RISC-V ABI [40].
The convention specifies that the lower 32 bits of a double value are stored in the
lower-ordered register, while the upper 32 bits are stored in the higher-ordered
register. In other words, if a double value is to be stored in the register pair
(ri, ri+1), the lower 32 bits go in ri, while the remaining 32 bits go in ri+1.
Embedded Hygge will also follow this convention.
As described in Section 2.3 and shown in Code Listing 2.1, the original Hygge
compiler manually updates the Target and FPTarget registers whenever they are
updated. Instead, Embedded Hygge will introduce two new functions: nextReg
and nextFPReg single, to get the next integer or floating-point register, respec-
tively. These functions will also return an updated code generation environment
that contains the updated target register. The code snippet in Listing 4.1 shows
how the nextReg function is used. The listing mirrors Code Listing 2.1, but is
updated for Embedded Hygge. The example performs addition on integer values,
but if it were done on floating-point values, the nextFPReg single should be used.
The implementation of the two functions is shown later in this section.
1 // Generate code for the lhs expression
2 let lAsm = doCodegen env lhs
3 /// Target register for the rhs expression and its new codegen environment
4 let (rtarget, env_new) = nextReg env
5 /// Generated code for the rhs expression
6 let rAsm = doCodegen env_new rhs
7 /// Generated code for the addition operation
8 let opAsm = Asm(RV.ADD(Reg.r(env.Target),
9
Reg.r(env.Target), Reg.r(rtarget)))
10 lAsm ++ rAsm ++ opAsm
Code 4.1: Code snippet showcasing how the updated compiler for Embedded
Hygge allocates registers using the nextReg function.
This approach works well with values that fit inside a single register. Unfortu-
nately, double-precision floating-point values require 64 bits and therefore need
the aforementioned register pair. Inside the compiler, it simply increment the
target register value by two, which leaves 64 bits available to store the re-
sult.
The compiler makes use of this new allocation strategy by calling the
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operations
43
nextFPReg Double function. The implementation of this, along with the other
functions for allocating registers, can be seen in Listing 4.2. Here, it also shows
how the compiler differentiates between the ESP32-C3 and the default (RARS)
platform.
1 // Code to get the next available register
2 let internal nextReg (env: CodegenEnv) : (uint * CodegenEnv) =
3
if env.TargetSystem = ESP32C3 then
4
(env.Target + 1u, {env with Target
= env.Target + 1u;
5
FPTarget = env.FPTarget + 1u})
6
else
7
(env.Target + 1u, {env with Target = env.Target + 1u})
8
9 // Code to get the next available single precision floating point register
10 let internal nextFPReg_single (env: CodegenEnv) : (uint * CodegenEnv) =
11
if env.TargetSystem = ESP32C3 then
12
nextReg env
13
else
14
(env.FPTarget + 1u, {env with FPTarget = env.FPTarget + 1u})
15
16 // Code to get next available double precision floating point register
17 let internal nextFPReg_double (env: CodegenEnv) : (uint * CodegenEnv) =
18
if env.TargetSystem = ESP32C3 then
19
(env.Target + 2u, {env with Target
= env.Target + 2u;
20
FPTarget = env.FPTarget + 2u})
21
else
22
(env.FPTarget + 1u, {env with FPTarget = env.FPTarget + 1u})
Code 4.2: Code snippet showcasing how the Embedded Hygge compiler
allocates and uses registers. Notice that it uses the env.TargetSystem
field to determine the platform that it compiles to.
Still, storing the values of floats and doubles is not enough. Computation using
these values also needs to be possible. As explained earlier, RARS uses instruc-
tions like FADD D, which the ESP32-C3 does not support. Here, the GCC low-level
runtime library is convenient, which was introduced in Section 3.3.1. This library
is utilized to mimic these instructions by calling functions that perform the same
calculations.
These functions are called in the same manner as regular function calls. This
includes saving and restoring the relevant registers in accordance with the calling
convention, and using the CALL instruction to call the function. To achieve the
same result as using the FADD D instruction, the function
adddf3 can be used,
which takes two doubles as arguments [32]. On the assembly level, the argument
==PAGE:54==
44
Implementation of the Extensions
registers a0 and a1 together hold the 64 bits of the first double, while registers
a2 and a3 hold the 64 bits of the second double. Likewise, the result is returned
in the register pair (a0, a1).
Inside the Hygge compiler, a function named callGCCSoftFPLibrary2 is imple-
mented, which is called whenever a floating-point library function needs to be
invoked. This performs the function call while adhering to the calling convention
and stores the result in the next two target registers.
The ability to call these low-level functions, combined with the new platform-
dependent register allocation strategy, allows Embedded Hygge to compile pro-
grams for both RARS and ESP32-C3, while enabling floats and doubles to work
on both platforms.
4.2.2
Reading and Writing over the UART
An essential part of working with embedded systems is dealing with input and
output. This section will implement the necessary changes to enable Embedded
Hygge to communicate with the user on the ESP32-C3 board. The implementa-
tion follows the designs choices made in Section 3.3.2.
For handling output, the compiler will use the printf function provided by the
ESP-IDF toolchain. This function can be used to write over the UART, which is
connected via the USB connector on the ESP32-C3. Similarly to the computation
of floats and doubles in Section 4.2.1, Embedded Hygge can make calls to the
printf function when compiling for the ESP32-C3 platform.
In Hygge, the print and println operations are supported, and they can only
take a single argument.
This can be converted to a printf call by using the
corresponding format specifier as the string, followed by the value as an argument.
A Hygge instruction like print("Hello World!") would be translated to a call
of printf("%s", "Hello World").
Unfortunately, the C standard complicates the implementation regarding the
printing of floats. Because printf has a variable number of arguments, the ar-
guments undergo default argument promotion, as described in Section 6.5.2.2 of
the C17 ISO [19].
This causes floats to be promoted (converted) to doubles.
Therefore, when Hygge calls printf with floats, the value has to be converted to
a double before being passed as an argument. Fortunately, the low-level runtime
library discussed in Section 4.2.1 also provides functions for converting floats to
doubles. This function is called
extendsfdf2, and should be called before pass-
ing the float value as an argument to printf. By adhering to the default argument
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Operations
45
promotion standard and using the printf function of the standard I/O library,
the Hygge language is able to print messages of strings, integers, floats or doubles
for the user to see.
For receiving input from the user, another approach is used, which is described
in Section 3.3.2. In short, instead of relying on premade functions such as scanf,
reading is achieved at the register level by using the UART of the ESP32-C3
board.
To implement this, the compiler should insert code that reads from UART when-
ever an Embedded Hygge program uses ReadInt, ReadFloat, or ReadDouble. This
functionality relies on accessing the UART’s RX FIFO buffer, which is memory-
mapped at address 0x60000000, as specified in the ESP32-C3 Technical Reference
Manual (TRM) [41]. Before reading input, the buffer should be cleared to avoid
old data. Then, the program should busy-wait until characters are available and
read them directly from the RX FIFO.
Since it is busy-waiting, the watchdog timer needs to be fed in order to avoid
timeout issues.
A similar issue arises when implementing the delay function,
which is covered and solved in Section 4.2.3.
When characters are available in the buffer, they are read and placed in a tem-
porary memory location. This will be a 64-byte buffer called scratchpad mem,
which will be allocated and available for all Embedded Hygge programs running
on the ESP32-C3.
If a newline or carriage return character is found, the read-loop will break. After
this, conversion functions like atoi, strtof, and strtod are used to convert the
characters in the scratchpad mem buffer into actual values. If the user provides
invalid input, such as abcd, a default value of 0 is returned.
This UART reading functionality is implemented as a small assembly function,
the code for which can be found in Appendix A.5. This introduces a new case,
where a Hygge program may need to provide a function that can be called from
multiple parts of the program. However, it should only be included if the function
is actually used. To accommodate this, a new compile feature called routines is
added and will be presented in Section 4.6.
From the implementation described in this section, the Embedded Hygge lan-
guage allows users to communicate with the ESP32-C3 board during runtime.
==PAGE:56==
46
Implementation of the Extensions
4.2.3
Delay
For many applications, a delay function is convenient, as introduced in Sec-
tion 3.3.3. The classic blinking LED example, shown in Listing 3.1, uses this
delay functionality to control timing. This section outlines how such a delay is
implemented in Embedded Hygge.
To achieve accurate delays, the implementation should rely on the ESP32-C3
hardware timers.
Specifically, Timer Group 0 is used, which contains both
general-purpose timers and a watchdog timer (WDT). The delay is based on
reading the hardware timer clock through memory-mapped registers, which are
accessible at address 0x6001F000 [41].
To ensure a predictable and constant timing source, the timer should be con-
figured to use the external 40 MHz crystal clock (XTAL CLK), rather than the
system APB clock, whose frequency can vary. Both clocks are part of the ESP32-
C3 board and are described in Section 6.2 of the ESP32-C3 Technical Reference
Manual [41]. The clock should be divided down to 1 MHz, giving the timer a
resolution of 1 microsecond. Since the delay function specifies the timeout in
milliseconds, the clock counter and timeout can be matched by scaling them by
a factor of 1000.
The delay is then implemented as a simple busy-wait loop that repeatedly reads
the current timer value and exits once the desired timeout has elapsed.
However, one challenge is the watchdog timer, which runs alongside the delay
loop. The watchdog timer is used to prevent deadlocks, as it will issue an excep-
tion if it is not fed (written to) within a given timeout. In normal cases where
liveliness is critical, this is useful as it can reboot the system which otherwise
would be stuck. However, in this case, we want the system to stall for some time,
and thus the WDT should not trigger. To avoid this, the delay implementation
should temporarily allow for manual feeding of the WDT and do so during each
loop iteration. This prevents the watchdog from interrupting execution while
waiting for the timeout to finish. Like the hardware clock, the WDT is accessed
through memory-mapped registers, which is described in the ESP32-C3 Technical
Reference Manual Chapter 12 [41].
With this approach, the delay mechanism becomes accurate and reliable. It is
implemented as a standalone assembly routine (see Section 4.6.3), with its full
code included in Appendix A.6 which also show details of how the memory-
mapped registers are accessed.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Goal #3: Including External Code
47
4.3
Goal #3: Including External Code
As explained in Section 3.4, the ability to include external code has significant
advantages, both in terms of managing code bases and integrating with existing
embedded ecosystems.
Section 4.3.1 will cover how Embedded Hygge is able
to use and include functions from C libraries, making it much better suited for
practical applications. In Section 4.3.2, a similar implementation is described,
which allows Embedded Hygge programs to include functionality defined in other
Embedded Hygge programs.
4.3.1
Using C Functions
As described in Section 3.4, the using operator introduces functions and their
types into Embedded Hygge programs, which can then be called and type-
checked. Introducing this keyword in Hygge follows much of the same approach
as in Section 4.1, except for the changes needed in the code generation.
In code generation, the using keyword will store the function name in a map
called UsingVars. If a function call is issued on an imported function, the function
will be called using the CALL instruction, while adhering to the regular RISC-
V calling convention. As the original Hygge version already supports function
calling, the compiler only needed to recognize names of functions defined in the
UsingVars map.
So which C functions are available, and how does the compiler know about them?
As already covered in Section 4.2.1, the Embedded Hygge compiler produces
RISC-V programs, which are then assembled by the ESP32-C3 toolchain using
GCC. The available function are the ones that the GCC compiler ”knows” about.
Because of this, all functions that are part of the standard C library are available,
as well as functions that are part of the ESP libraries in the ESP-IDF framework.
This includes functions such as gpio set level, as used in the alternative blink
library shown in Code Listing 3.3.
It should also be possible to include C files that are not part of the ESP-IDF
framework to begin with. This is enabled through the Embedded Hygge frame-
work. Section 4.5.3 will cover how non-standard libraries can be included using
the Embedded Hygge framework.
==PAGE:58==
48
Implementation of the Extensions
4.3.2
Merging Hygge Files
Including Embedded Hygge files within other Embedded Hygge files improves
modularity and enables code reuse across projects. As described in Section 3.4.2,
this feature is implemented through a preprocessing phase that runs immediately
after parsing.
The preprocessing phase performs three main steps:
1. It traverses the AST to locate #include expressions.
2. For each include, it loads and parses the referenced Embedded Hygge file,
applying the same preprocessing recursively.
3. The included AST is merged into the main program by replacing the #include
expression with a sequence of expressions combining the included file and
the remaining code.
This ensures that the included file is fully integrated into the program’s structure
and scope.
The merging process preserves both execution order and variable
visibility, allowing included files to define functions, constants, and helper logic
just as if they had been written inline.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the result of mergin two files, using the example files main.hyg
and constants.hyg, which are also included in Appendix A.7. The figure shows
how it is able to reference the original files and their line numbers for each ex-
pression. This makes it easier for users to debug their programs, as it is more
clear where the expressions are written.
Through this extension, Embedded Hygge is able to include other Embedded
Hygge programs, as done in the blinking example shown in Code Listing 3.1. Be-
cause of the recursive approach, it is also able to support nested includes, making
it possible to build layers of functionality upon each other. This can be quite
powerful, however, it does not have any protection against circular inclusions.
As a result, compiling two Embedded Hygge programs which include each other
will result in errors. In C, this is avoided using preprocessor directives such as
#pragma once or similar keywords. In the future, Embedded Hygge could be
extended to support similar preprocessor directives.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Goal #4: Adding the Garbage Collector
49
Figure 4.1: Result of parsing an Embedded Hygge file “main.hyg”, which in-
cludes another Embedded Hygge file “constants.hyg”. Notice that
the output print what files are responsible for different parts of the
AST. This makes it significantly easier for users to keep track of
what files influence their programs. The result has been achieved
by using the “hyggec parse” command.
4.4
Goal #4: Adding the Garbage Collector
The implementation of the Boehm GC solves the challenges presented in section
2.6 following the approach described in section 3.5.
To summarize, the main
challenge lies in location three memory regions of the ESP32-C3:
• The registers (Section 4.4.1).
• The static memory region (Section 4.4.2).
• The stack (Section 4.4.3)
After implementing ways to find these regions, the garbage collector was added to
the ESP32-C3 and tested rigorously. This is covered in the last section (Section
4.4.4).
==PAGE:60==
50
Implementation of the Extensions
4.4.1
Scanning the Registers
The content of the registers is placed in the static memory region of the ESP32-
C3, which can then be scanned. This is done by using a register buffer is defined
as shown in listing 4.3. The “ifdef ESP PLATFORM” directive is used to ensure
that this buffer is only build for ESP systems. The DRAM ATTR attribute is
used to ensures that the content of the regs variable is placed in the static data
memory of the ESP32-C3 [42].
1 #ifdef ESP_PLATFORM
2 DRAM_ATTR jmp_buf regs;
3 #endif
Code 4.3: Defining the register buffer to be placed in the static data memory
region.
In order to put the content of the registers into the buffer, the C function setjmp
is used. This function will store the current execution state, which includes the
register values [43]. This function is typically used to create non-trivial function
jumps, where you can return to an earlier execution state. However, it works
equally well for storing the register content.
The store the execution state of the ESP32-C3, the code listed in 4.4 is added.
As before, preprocessor directives are used to ensure the code is only used for the
ESP32-C3 platform. With this, the registers will be properly stored in the static
memory.
1 // Preceeding code
2 #
elif defined(ESP_PLATFORM)
3
memset(&regs, 0, sizeof(regs));
4
setjmp(regs);
5 #
else
6 // ...
Code 4.4: Extension to the Boehm GC function GC with callee saves pushed,
allowing for register content to be stored correctly.
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Goal #4: Adding the Garbage Collector
51
4.4.2
Finding and Adding The Static Memory Region
Next, is making the changes necessary for the GC to know where the static
memory resides. In order to allow the Boehm GC to search the static memory
regions, the region needs to be added as a root. Roots are simply regions to be
marked by the Boehm GC. These roots are added as part of the GC initialization,
by calling the function named GC register data segments found in the os dep.c
file.
Using the same preprocessor directives as seen in listing 4.3 and 4.4, a
case for ESP platforms is added. This case will call a new function which is
named esp add roots. This function is defined at the top of the same file, and its
implementation is seen in listing 4.5.
1 #ifdef ESP_PLATFORM
2 // esp_add_roots adds static data regions to the GC root set.
3 // These are only known after compilation, so we need to add them here.
4 void esp_add_roots() {
5
// DRAM DATA
6
extern uint32_t _data_start[];
7
extern uint32_t _data_end[];
8
// RTC DATA
9
extern uint32_t _rtc_data_start[];
10
extern uint32_t _rtc_data_end[];
11
// Add the data regions to the GC root set
12
GC_add_roots_inner((void*)_data_start, (void*)_data_end, FALSE);
13
GC_add_roots_inner((void*)_rtc_data_start, (void*)_rtc_data_end, FALSE);
14 }
15 #endif
Code 4.5: Definition of the function esp add roots which is used to register the
static memory region of ESP boards.
As explained in section 3.5, the global variables data start and data end are
defined and made available by the linker script used in the building process. They
refer to the beginning and end addresses for the static memory region. According
to the ESP32-C3 documentation, the board could also use the RTC Fast Memory
interchangeably with the data RAM [42]. This region is also accessible through
the variables rtc data start and rtc data end. This region was also added as
a root, even though it was never observed to be used by the board during testing.
==PAGE:62==
52
Implementation of the Extensions
4.4.3
Locating the Top of the Stack
Lastly, the top address of the stack for the main application needs to be known.
Like the static memory regions, this address is obtained during the initialization
of the garbage collector. The top stack address will be returned from a newly
defined function named “GC esp main stack base”. The definition of this function
is seen in listing 4.6.
1 #ifdef ESP_PLATFORM
2 STATIC ptr_t GC_esp_main_stack_base(void)
3 {
4
extern void* _stack_top; // Defined as part of any Embedded Hygge
program
5
return (ptr_t)(_stack_top);
6 }
7 #endif
Code 4.6: Definition of the function for obtaining the top stack address for
Embedded Hygge programs.
As shown, the method of obtaining the top address of the stack is rather simple.
However, it does require the variable
stack top to be defined by the actual
Embedded Hygge program. This solution is in contrast to the previous solutions,
which do not require anything from the Embedded Hygge program.
For every Embedded Hygge program, a word in the data section will be dedicated
to store the top address of the stack. Therefore, the data section of any Embedded
Hygge compiled assembly file will contain the following:
.data
_stack_top:
.global _stack_top
.word 0x0
# Add _stack_top global variable
// Other data definitions
The “.global” assembler directive is added to specify that it is a global variable.
Before the Boehm GC uses the global variable, its value needs to be set by
the Embedded Hygge program. This is easily achieved by adding two RISC-V
instructions at the beginning of any Embedded Hygge program:
la t0, _stack_top
# Load stack top address
sw sp, 0(t0)
# Store stack pointer in stack top address
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Goal #4: Adding the Garbage Collector
53
This stores the address of the maximum value of the stack pointer, as explained in
Section 3.5. With this, the Boehm GC is able to scan the stack of any Embedded
Hygge program that is running.
4.4.4
Finalizing and Testing the Garbage Collector
With the previous extensions the Boehm GC is able to find all active objects and
remove others from the heap. To finalize, the ESP32-C3 needs to make use of
the Boehm GC when allocating objects.
Fortunately, this is quite straightforward.
In the original Hygge version, the
RARS system call “sbrk” is used to allocate heap memory.
Instead of doing
this, Embedded Hygge will call the GC Malloc function, which is the allocator
provided by the Boehm GC. In Embedded Hygge, this only requires changing
the way the compiler handles structure construction, as these are the only cases
that the language uses dynamic memory allocation. Of course, if the developer
wants to use dynamic allocation themselves, the functionality can be included
using the using keyword.
In addition to implementing the Boehm GC, much effort has been put into testing
its functionality. Specifically, it was important to verify that active object were
not removed by accident and that the garbage collector is was able to collect
unused memory. To verify this, a testing program was developed in C.
The test begins by allocating both global and local variables of varying sizes.
Some will also contain nested pointers, pointing to other dynamically allocated
objects. In the next stage, the test program enters a loop that will allocate a local
variable without freeing it. The loop will also call a function that will allocate
data of varying sizes. As some point, the function will also update the values of
the global variable and add a nested object. When the loop finishes, it will assert
that all the variables allocated outside the loop have kept their expected values.
The test program will also print how much memory has been allocated in the loop.
As seen in the ESP32-C3 Datasheet Chapter 4, The ESP32-C3 only has 400KB
internal SRAM while supporting up the 16MB external flash memory [34]. The
test is found in appendix A.8 and running it results in more than 93MB memory
allocations This means that the garbage collector must reuse some memory. In
this way the testing program can both verify that objects in use are not collected
and make sure that unused objects are collected and reused.
==PAGE:64==
54
Implementation of the Extensions
4.5
Goal #5: Making the Embedded Hygge Frame-
work
The Embedded Hygge framework offers a range of capabilities accessible through
its command-line interface. As outlined in Section 3.6, this CLI has been ex-
tended with new commands specifically targeting the ESP32-C3 platform. When
compiling an Embedded Hygge program for ESP32-C3, the framework automat-
ically interfaces with the ESP-IDF toolchain, which handles building, flashing,
and simulating the program.
Before these operations can be performed, both the toolchain and the program
must be properly configured. This setup process is described in Section 4.5.1.
Section 4.5.2 details the new commands that enable building, flashing, and simu-
lating programs, and how the Embedded Hygge framework invokes the ESP-IDF
tool to carry out these tasks.
From goal #3, Embedded Hygge is able to use functions from C libraries. As a
result, it should be possible to include third-party C libraries during the build
process when targeting the ESP32-C3. This is addressed in Section 4.5.3.
Finally, Section 4.5.4 presents how the Embedded Hygge testing framework was
extended to support automated testing on the ESP32-C3 platform.
4.5.1
Preparing Programs for the ESP32-C3
The ESP-IDF toolchain is designed to work exclusively with ESP-IDF projects.
For this reason, any Embedded Hygge program compiled for the ESP32-C3 must
be integrated into such a project.
To support this, the Embedded Hygge framework automatically creates a ded-
icated ESP-IDF project for each program. It uses the idf.py tool to initialize
the project and configure the target architecture as ESP32-C3. The compiled
RISC-V assembly code is then inserted into the appropriate directory within the
project. Appendix A.13 covers this in more detail.
As briefly mentioned in Section 3.5, ESP-IDF relies on FreeRTOS to schedule
tasks. During the application startup flow, FreeRTOS invokes the app main task,
which serves as the entry point for ESP-IDF applications [44]. To ensure proper
execution, the app main label is added to the start of the generated Hygge as-
sembly code.
Additional assembler directives are also inserted, as detailed in
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Goal #5: Making the Embedded Hygge Framework
55
Appendix A.9, to ensure compatibility with the ESP-IDF build system.
To support automatic memory management, the ESP32-C3–compatible version
of the Boehm garbage collector is also included in the project setup.
Once the project is fully initialized and configured, the Embedded Hygge frame-
work can invoke the ESP-IDF toolchain to build, flash, or emulate the program.
This enables the automated setup of Hygge applications for the ESP32-C3 plat-
form.
4.5.2
Embedded Hygge Commands for Compiling, Flash-
ing and Emulating
As mentioned in Section 3.6, the three new Hygge command-line commands are
“esp32c3 build”, “esp32c3 flash”, and “esp32c3 emulate”. All three begin
by setting up the ESP-IDF project, as described in Section 4.5.1. If Embedded
Hygge has already created this project, this step will be skipped. The build
command then uses idf.py with the build argument. This builds the binary for
the ESP32-C3. Any errors will be reported in the console.
The flash command also uses the idf.py script, but with the flash argument.
This triggers the ESP-IDF to search for any connected ESP32-C3 board and
upload the binary if one is found. If the binary has not already been built, it will
be built automatically.
Finally, the emulate command uses the idf.py script to launch a QEMU session
running the Hygge program.
This emulates the ESP32-C3 board, making it
possible for students and developers to run and test their programs without
needing to purchase a physical board. This command will also build the binary
if it has not been done already.
The original Hygge compiler already supports various CLI commands. To con-
figure these commands, a library simply called commandline is used, which is
compatible with F# [45]. When the compiler is launched, it uses this library to
parse the commands provided by the user. To define the various commands, a
union type called ParseResult is used, which includes the supported commands.
To this, a new type named ESP32CompileOptions is added, which defines its com-
mand string and its options. This is added to the CmdLine.fs file of the Hygge
repository, which implements the three commands mentioned in this section.
==PAGE:66==
56
Implementation of the Extensions
4.5.3
Adding C Code to Projects
As described in Section 3.4, developers can include functions from C libraries
using the using keyword. However, by default, this only works with functions
that are part of the C code included in ESP-IDF projects. If external libraries
need to be used and included, the user would have to manually add the files
to the auto-generated projects, and update its build files. Although this is not
particularly difficult, it is rather tedious.
Instead, an additional option was added to all the Embedded Hygge commands
shown in Section 4.5.2. This is the include option, which can also be specified
using -i. This optional flag can be used with the build, flash, and emulate
commands defined in Section 4.5.2. Using this flag, a sequence of strings can be
specified using the ; character to separate them. If these strings contain paths
to C files, they will be included in the build process and thus made available to
the Embedded Hygge program. For instance, the command below will launch an
emulation of the program calculator.hyg, which can use functions from the C
files math.c and graphics.c:
./hyggec esp32c3 emulate calculator.hyg
-i "math.c;./Clibs/graphics.c"
In the compiler, the files specified using the include option will be copied into the
auto-generated ESP-IDF project. Once a C file has been included in the project,
it remains available, meaning the user does not have to repeatedly use the include
option each time a command is issued. The flag is added as a new option to the
ESP32CompileOptions type, which was introduced in Section 4.5.2.
4.5.4
Extending the Testing Framework
As mentioned in Section 2.3, the original Hygge framework includes a built-in
testing framework. Since Embedded Hygge introduces new features and targets
a new platform, these must also be tested when running ./hyggec test.
The Hygge repository contains a file named Test.fs, which manages automated
testing using the Expecto library for F# [46]. In Test.fs, a list of tests is defined,
covering lexing, parsing, type checking, interpretation, and compilation. Each
test group includes both passing and failing test cases, specifying input directories
and the corresponding function to execute. For example, the tests for the parser
run Util.parseFile and check whether an error is expected.
==PAGE:67==
4.6 Other Extensions and Optimizations
57
To support ESP32-C3, a new test case named esp32c3 is added.
It uses the
function testESP32C3 to evaluate files located in tests/esp32c3/fail and test-
s/esp32c3/pass.
The testESP32C3 function parses, typechecks, and compiles the given file to
ESP32-C3-compatible RISC-V code.
If successful, the compiled code is exe-
cuted using the QEMU emulator. The emulator terminates either when it prints
main task:
Returned from app main() (indicating success), or CPU halted.
(indicating failure, such as an abort caused by an assertion error).
With these additions, Embedded Hygge can now automatically verify compiler
functionality through testing. The first test run takes around 20 minutes on a
MacBook Air M2, due to initial project compilation. Subsequent runs take about
4 minutes, with most time spent launching QEMU. The results of these tests are
discussed in Chapter 5.
4.6
Other Extensions and Optimizations
This chapter has only showed the implementation of main features of Embedded
Hygge. However, during the development of Embedded Hygge, many other things
have been updated and improved.
These have made Embedded Hygge more
efficient, easier to manage or been down-right critical for the overall correctness
of the compiler. In this last section, three of these features will be presented as
they have made a big impact on the compilation of Embedded Hygge programs.
4.6.1
16-byte stack alignment
When running the Boehm garbage collector, Embedded Hygge programs would
continously run out of stack memory, even if a ridiculous amount of stack memory
was made available. By examining the RISC-V IBA description of the calling
convention (Section 2.1), it was found that the stack pointer should always be
kept 16-byte aligned [40]. This was not satisfied in the original Hygge version.
The compiler would only decrement the stack pointer by 4 bytes for each register
that should be stored on the stack. This is memory efficient, but can easily lead
to the stack pointer not being 16-byte aligned. To fix this, Embedded Hygge
will now round the value of the stack pointer to the nearest value divisible by
16. This can be achieved efficiently using addition and bit manipulation. The
following F# code is used by the compiler for computing this value:
==PAGE:68==
58
Implementation of the Extensions
let spSize = (((4 * (rs.Length + fprs.Length)) + 15)
&&& (˜˜˜0xF))
Here, the rs.Length and fprs.Length values reflect the number of regular and
floating point registers to be stored on the stack. By adding 15 to the required
bytes, the values is guaranteed to reach or exceed the next value that is divisible
by 16. Next, the “&&& (˜˜˜ 0xF)” operation will clear the lowest 4 bits. Doing
this will ensure that the resulting value is divisible by 16.
After this modification was made, the Boehm GC did not cause any more issues.
This was most likely not a problem with how the Boehm GC is implemented.
Calling functions from other C libraries would probably also result in errors,
though this was not tested during development.
4.6.2
Improved register handling during function calls
In the original Hygge compiler, all caller- and callee-saved registers were stored
on the stack during function calls, regardless of whether they were used or not.
While this guaranteed correctness, it was inefficient. Embedded Hygge improves
on this by storing only the registers that are actually needed.
For caller-saved temporary registers, this is straightforward: the compiler tracks
register usage via the target register (see Section 2.3), and only saves registers
below this target.
Handling argument registers is more nuanced. Since these are only needed when
calling a function from within another function, a new field called ArgRegsCount
was added to the code generation environment to track how many argument
registers are in use. This ensures that only the relevant argument registers are
saved.
Callee-saved registers are optimized similarly. After compiling a function body,
the compiler scans the code to determine which saved registers are used and
stores only those on the stack. The stack pointer is handled separately and does
not require special treatment.
This optimization reduces stack usage and improves runtime efficiency. Practi-
cally, it also makes it easier for users to debug their assembly programs, as they
are not filled with instructions only used for loading and storing values on the
stack.
==PAGE:69==
4.6 Other Extensions and Optimizations
59
4.6.3
Routines
In section 4.2.2, it was presented how reading and writing over the UART was
enabled. Here, it was mentioned that the instructions to read the UART would
be included as a routine.
This is a new feature inside the Embedded Hygge
compiler, which allows the compiler to include a section of code as a function,
but only if some part of the Hygge program actually uses it. This section covers
how routines were added to the Embedded Hygge compiler.
When the compiler is running, it generates assembly which is defined by the Asm
type, found in the src/RISCV.fs file. To the Asm type, a new field is added called
Routines. This field is a map type, where the keys are strings and the values
are RISC-V instructions. When an operation is compiled that reads from the
UART, the key “ readUartString” is added to the Routines field alongside its
instructions for reading the UART. At the end of the compilation process, all
the routines will be compiled as functions with the key as their label. Reading
from the UART is now done by calling the
readUartString function. Since the
Routines field is a map, it will only add the “ readUartString” function once,
even if the UART is read many times in the same program.
Besides being used for reading the UART, these routines are also used when
using the delay functionality described in section 4.2.3. This makes the code for
the compiler more readable, but it also makes it easier for users to extend the
compiler with more of their own functionality, in the future.
==PAGE:70==
60
Implementation of the Extensions
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Results and Evaluation
In the previous chapters, Embedded Hygge has been designed and implemented,
extending the Hygge programming language for the ESP32-C3 RISC-V platform.
Embedded Hygge introduces many additions to the Hygge language specification,
which have been implemented into its compiler. Furthermore, the Embedded
Hygge framework was extended with new commands and testing features targeted
at the ESP32-C3 platform. However, the correctness of these extensions has not
yet been addressed. This chapter outlines the steps taken to test their correctness.
The first section of this chapter (Section 5.1) presents the results obtained from
the testing framework introduced in Section 4.5.4. This gives an overall assess-
ment of correctness, with a discussion on its completeness.
The following sections provide more details on the testing of each of the five main
goals presented in Section 3.1, and in the following order:
• Goal #1: Testing Low-Level Embedded Operators (Section 5.2).
• Goal #2: Testing Platform-Dependent Operations (Section 5.3).
• Goal #3: Test of including C functions and Hygge programs (Section 5.4).
• Goal #4: Testing the Garbage Collector (Section 5.5).
• Goal #5: Testing the Embedded Hygge Framework (Section 5.6).
The final section (Section 5.7) shortly summarizes the results of all the tests.
==PAGE:72==
62
Results and Evaluation
5.1
Overall Results from the Testing Framework
In total, the Embedded Hygge testing framework includes 224 tests, many of
which originate from the original Hygge framework. The original tests remain
highly relevant, as they ensure that existing Hygge functionality is not compro-
mised by the Embedded Hygge extensions.
The new syntax and type-checking rules introduced in Embedded Hygge affect
the lexer, parser, and type checker, all of which are covered by dedicated tests.
Although these extensions were primarily developed for the ESP32-C3, they are
also supported for RARS and the Hygge interpreter. As a result, new test cases
have been added for each compiler stage, including the interpreter and RARS
code generation.
To test code generation for the ESP32-C3, a new test folder was introduced
in Section 4.5.4. The testing framework has 35 tests for the ESP32-C3, which
verify that the original Hygge features were correctly ported, and that the new
feature of Embedded Hygge also work correctly. It was ensured that the ESP32-
C3 and RARS platforms have overlapping test cases, which makes sure that
the functionality works correctly for both the RV32IMC and RV32IMF RISC-V
ISAs.
In total, 67 new tests have been added to verify the functionality introduced in
this thesis. Appendix A.10 provides a complete overview of these tests. At least
one test validates each new semantic rule, type rule, and syntax rule introduced
in Chapter 3. A summary of all the new operations can be found in Appendix
A.11.
All the automatic tests are run with the ./hyggec test command, and they all
succeed. This is a strong indication that the features added in Embedded Hygge
work correctly. Figure 5.1 showscases the terminal after running a full test of the
Hygge framework, which also shows all 224 succeeding.
However, this was not the case from the start. The automatic tests were crucial
during development, as they exposed bugs and issues that would otherwise have
gone unnoticed. For instance, when doubles were introduced, it was initially for-
gotten that mutable variables also needed to support updating values containing
doubles. This caused test failures, through which the issue was quickly identi-
fied and resolved. This experience was a strong reminder of the importance of
frequent testing and demonstrated the value of the testing framework.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Testing Goal #1: Low-Level Operators
63
Figure 5.1: Result from running the Hygge testing framework. As shown, it
runs 224 tests, of which 224 succeed.
The console messages are
logged as part of the testing framework, to keep track of the
progress. Note that the message last “Emulation Crashed!” indi-
cates that the last simulated program crashed. The last test was
designed to fail, which is why the overall result is still a success.
5.2
Testing Goal #1: Low-Level Operators
The low-level operators refer to the extensions presented and designed in Sec-
tion 3.2. These were characterized by introducing fundamental operations es-
sential to embedded programming that are also supported by both the RARS
and ESP32-C3 platforms. To summarize, this includes binary operators and the
ability to access arbitrary memory locations, as well as new types that match the
values they operate on.
These have all been tested as part of the automatic testing framework. Their
test cases are listed in Appendix A.10, with some of the relevant files being:
• codegen/pass/008-binary-operators.hyg
• codegen/pass/009-memory.hyg
• esp32c3/pass/008-binary-operators.hyg
• esp32c3/pass/009-memory.hyg
• parser/pass/013-binary-operators.hyg
• typechecker/fail/016-byte32.hyg
• interpreter/pass/009-binaryOperators.hyg
==PAGE:74==
64
Results and Evaluation
They have also been shown to work well in practical applications, as demonstrated
in the blinking LED example found in Listing 3.2.
As the tests pass and the LED blinks as expected, there is strong indication that
the extensions are implemented and behave correctly. This shows that Embed-
ded Hygge is capable of performing fundamental operations related to embedded
programming.
5.3
Testing Goal #2: Platform-Dependent Op-
erations
The platform-dependent operators are the extensions that require special han-
dling depending on whether RARS or the ESP32-C3 is targeted. These were
designed in Section 3.3, and include the single- and double-precision floating-
point values, the I/O functions, and the delay function.
The testing framework has been used to verify that these features can all be parsed
and type-checked.
However, only the code generation of single- and double-
precision floating-point values could be verified by the tests. Some of the relevant
tests found in Appendix A.10 include:
• codegen/pass/022-double.hyg
• esp32c3/pass/022-double.hyg
• typechecker/fail/019-delay.hyg
• typechecker/pass/003-print.hyg
• parser/pass/017-double.hyg
• interpreter/pass/025-double.hyg
The delay and I/O operations could not be verified by the testing framework, since
it does not check timeouts and cannot verify whether I/O operations actually
print characters. Instead, these have been tested manually throughout the thesis
by running programs like the one shown in Section 3.7. This has been done on the
ESP32-C3 board as well as using the RARS simulator. Running these programs
shows that the delay function has accurate timeouts, and the I/O functions can
successfully communicate with the user.
==PAGE:75==
5.4 Testing Goal #3: Including External Code
65
5.4
Testing Goal #3: Including External Code
Allowing Embedded Hygge to include C and Embedded Hygge files was covered
in Section 3.4. Here, the using keyword was introduced to include C functions.
Additionally, the #include keyword was introduced to include another Embedded
Hygge file into the program.
As described in Section 4.3, #include is handled as part of the parsing process.
Therefore, tests have been added to the parser to verify that including multiple
and nested Hygge files is possible. These are found in Appendix A.10 and include
the files:
• parser/pass/020-library.hyg
• parser/pass/021-other-lib.hyg
• parser/pass/022-include.hyg
• esp32c3/pass/029-inner-lib.hyg
• esp32c3/pass/030-outer-lib.hyg
• esp32c3/pass/031-include.hyg
These verify that parsing Embedded Hygge files that including multiple other
Embedded Hygge programs is possible.
Regarding the ability to include C functions, the testing framework allows test
programs to use C functions that are part of the standard C library or the ESP-
IDF. The test esp32c3/pass/028-using.hyg verifies that Embedded Hygge can
correctly use such functions.
Still, users should be able to include their own C code, which is not part of the
standard C library or the ESP-IDF. This can be done using the include option in
the Embedded toolchain, as described in Section 4.5.3. This was tested manually
with programs, such as the one presented in Appendix A.12. This program also
showcase how functions from the C standard library can extend the capabilities
of Embedded Hygge. For instance, Hygge does not support string comparison
natively, but by using the strcmp function of the standard C library, it becomes
possible.
Similarly, Code Listing 3.3 shows how functions from the ESP-IDF
framework can make it easier to blink an LED.
From this, it is evident that the ability to include C functions and other Embedded
Hygge files works well.
This enables Embedded Hygge to support larger and
==PAGE:76==
66
Results and Evaluation
more complex programs while integrating better with the embedded systems
ecosystem.
5.5
Testing Goal #4: The Garbage Collector
The garbage collector was introduced in Embedded Hygge in Section 3.5, enabling
unused objects to be automatically recycled. It was implemented as a third-party
library and is only available for programs running on the ESP32-C3 (not RARS).
To verify the garbage collector during development, a detailed C program was
implemented in Section 4.4.4. This script ensured that the library worked cor-
rectly on the ESP32-C3 before it was integrated into Embedded Hygge. The
script verified that the garbage collector allowed the C program to allocate more
than 93 MB of memory, which greatly exceeds the total memory available on the
board. This confirms that the garbage collector can successfully reuse memory
without affecting objects still in use.
Using the C program, the garbage collector was stress-tested and shown to work
in various situations. Further testing with Embedded Hygge programs demon-
strated that it has been integrated properly. The programs were added to the
automatic testing framework and can be found in the files:
• esp32c3/pass/026-GC.hyg
• esp32c3/pass/027-GC.hyg
The first program allocates 1,000,000 structures during execution, which takes
up heap memory, as described in Section 2.3. Each struct has a size of 16 bytes,
meaning the program allocates about 16 MB of memory. This exceeds the built-
in memory of the ESP32-C3. Still, the test succeeds, as the garbage collector is
able to recycle the allocations of unused structs.
The second program uses the garbage collector directly to allocate 12 bytes of
memory. Since the garbage collector is written in C and is part of the build
process, its functions can be included using the using keyword. The test program,
and how it allocates memory through the garbage collector, is shown in Code
Listing 5.1.
1 using GC_malloc(int):pointer;
2 let ptr : pointer = GC_malloc(12);
3 setMem(ptr, 0xDEADBEEF);
4 setMem(ptr + 4, 0xFFFFFFFF);
==PAGE:77==
5.6 Testing Goal #5: The Embedded Hygge Framework
67
5 setMem(ptr + 8, 0x12345678);
6 assert(readMem(ptr) = 0xDEADBEEF);
7 assert(readMem(ptr + 4) = 0xFFFFFFFF);
8 assert(readMem(ptr + 8) = 0x12345678)
Code 5.1: Source
code
of
the
esp32c3/pass/027-GC.hyg
test
program,
showcasing how memory allocation can be achieved in Embedded
Hygge.
The combination of the C and Embedded Hygge programs verifies that the
garbage collector works correctly on the ESP32-C3 platform.
5.6
Testing Goal #5: The Embedded Hygge Frame-
work
Besides all the language extensions, the Embedded Hygge framework has been
extended with new commands and a new testing framework. The testing frame-
work has been used by the original Hygge project, as well as throughout this
chapter, so its functionality will not be discussed further.
The commands have been tested manually throughout the development of this
thesis.
Since their implementation, they have worked consistently and have
greatly simplified the development process.
The Embedded Hygge framework has been tested on three different computers
to verify that it works on common architectures and operating systems. It was
installed and run on the following platforms:
1. MacBook Air, running macOS 15.5
2. Intel i5 CPU desktop, running Windows 10
3. Raspberry Pi 5, running Linux (Raspberry OS, a Debian variant)
All of them successfully ran the tests and were able to build, flash, and emu-
late ESP32-C3 programs.
This compatibility is important, as it ensures that
users of Embedded Hygge are not limited by their choice of operating system or
underlying hardware.
==PAGE:78==
68
Results and Evaluation
5.7
Summarizing the Results
This chapter has demonstrated that the Embedded Hygge framework is both ro-
bust and reliable. Through a comprehensive testing strategy, the correctness of
the new language features has been thoroughly validated. In total, 224 tests en-
sure that Embedded Hygge correctly extends the original Hygge language with-
out compromising existing functionality.
Platform-dependent operations have
also been shown to work on both RARS and the ESP32-C3, through a combina-
tion of automated and manual testing. The ability to include C functions and
other Embedded Hygge programs was confirmed, greatly increasing the modu-
larity and reusability of code between projects. The Boehm Garbage Collector
for ESP32-C3 has been verified in its ability to allocate and reuse memory space.
The tools provided by the Embedded Hygge framework have been shown to work
on common computers with various operating systems and hardware.
The successful execution of all tests indicates that Embedded Hygge is functioning
correctly and ready for practical use on the ESP32-C3 platform. Overall, the
testing results provide strong evidence that the compiler extensions correctly
implement each of the five goals defined in Section 3.1.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Discussion
Throughout this thesis, many design choices were made that influenced both the
language specification and the actual code for the compiler. For the language
specification, these choices affected its syntax, semantics, and type system. Dur-
ing the design phase, alternative solutions were considered but ultimately dis-
carded in favor of the decisions presented in Chapter 3.
The first section of
this chapter is dedicated to discussing some of the noteworthy decisions made in
relation to the Embedded Hygge design.
The design choices were implemented through the compiler, but its infrastructure
followed its own design. It was structured to be easily extensible while support-
ing platform-dependent code generation, as required by the decisions made in
Section 3.3. The final design of the compiler infrastructure will be discussed in
the second section of this chapter.
Even after designing and implementing the extensions, there are still features
missing from Embedded Hygge. Embedded Hygge might feel incomplete without
these features, even though their absence is not necessarily a limitation. The
third section will cover some of these missing features and how they might be
used in the future.
The final section will revisit the Embedded Hygge extensions from a didactic per-
spective. As described in Section 2.3, Hygge is a didactic programming language
==PAGE:80==
70
Discussion
designed to teach students about compiler construction and language design.
Rather than focusing on what Embedded Hygge can do, this section explores
how its features reflect real-world embedded development systems and practices.
It reflects on the educational value of understanding the foundational elements of
languages targeting embedded platforms and highlights what Embedded Hygge
can offer students as a tool for learning embedded programming concepts.
6.1
The Syntax and Typing System
For the syntax of Embedded Hygge, various design choices have been made,
which could have been done differently. In fact, the syntax could be anything.
For instance, the binary-or operator could have used the keyword BINOR instead
of the symbol |. The characters for the binary operators were simply chosen to
reflect the syntax of C.
However, for accessing memory, a different syntax was chosen that does not
match the style used in C. In C, accessing memory locations is achieved through
pointers, and each type has a corresponding pointer type. Here, the operators
& and * are used to get the address of a value and to dereference a pointer,
respectively. This approach has advantages, such as being more explicit about
the types that the pointer refers to.
It is also more powerful, as it can load
variables of multiple words at once. However, its syntax can be confusing for
people who are unfamiliar with it. In contrast, the use of readMem and setMem
is clearer and more straightforward, but can only access one word at a time.
Ultimately, which approach is better comes down to personal preference.
On the topic of pointers, the pointer type follows a peculiar specification in
Embedded Hygge. As stated in Chapter 3, Section 3.2, the int type is defined
as a subtype of both the pointer and byte32 types. Logically, it makes sense
for int to be a subtype of byte32, but not necessarily of pointer. The reason
for this definition is that values written in Embedded Hygge are always initially
type-checked as integers. Therefore, if developers want to declare a pointer or
byte32 value, they must first introduce an integer, which is then type-checked as
the appropriate supertype. This design works well most of the time but becomes
confusing when negative values are considered. What happens if a value such as
−1 is used as a pointer?
In the current version of Embedded Hygge, negative values cannot be declared,
and subtraction is not implemented, so the problem is mitigated1. However, this
1This is one of the first extensions that students implement in the Compiler Construction
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Compiler Infrastructure
71
does not resolve the issue entirely, and negative values and subtraction should
definitely be introduced in a future version of Embedded Hygge. In the current
version, the value −1 is simply treated as its raw bit representation, resulting in
the 32-bit value 0xFFFFFFFF.
To eliminate these confusing subtyping rules, the casting system from C could be
added to Embedded Hygge. In this way, developers would be free to cast between
different types at their discretion. The problem of using a value such as −1 as a
pointer would still exist, but the conversion would become more explicit, making
developers more aware of these potential pitfalls.
6.2
Compiler Infrastructure
The original Hygge compiler was designed to be accessible to students, enabling
them to add their own project ideas with minimal integration challenges. Em-
bedded Hygge has aimed to preserve this manageable and modular structure,
making it easier to implement future extensions. This goal becomes even more
important now that the compiler supports multiple target platforms. To achieve
this, the codebase has been structured to clearly separate platform-dependent
components, improving readability and maintainability. In addition to help un-
derstanding the code, it also makes it easier to extend the compiler for more
platforms, in the future.
In the compiler, this was achieved using a simple match-case expression, where
the target system is matched against either the RARS or ESP32-C3 platform.
Adding a new platform simply requires adding a new case for that platform in
each place where platform-specific handling is required.
One such instance is
shown in Code Listing 6.1, where the ReadDouble operation is handled differently
depending on the platform.
1 let rec internal doCodegen (env: CodegenEnv) (node: TypedAST): Asm =
2
match node.Expr with
3
// ...
4
| ReadDouble ->
5
match env.TargetSystem with
6
| ESP32C3 ->
7
generateReadUartESP32(node) (env) ++
8
(callStringConversion env TDouble env.Target)
course at DTU. As it is a relatively simple addition, it has been left out and could serve as an
exercise for students in the future.
==PAGE:82==
72
Discussion
9
10
| RARS ->
(beforeSysCall [] [FPReg.fa0])
11
.AddText([
12
(RV.LI(Reg.a7, 7), "RARS syscall: ReadDouble")
13
(RV.ECALL, "")
14
(RV.FMV_D(FPReg.r(env.FPTarget), FPReg.fa0), "Move
syscall result")
15
])
16
++ (afterSysCall [] [FPReg.fa0])
Code 6.1: Code snippet showcasing how the Embedded Hygge compiler handles
code generation for different platforms.
Alternatively, the code generation could have been designed around the underly-
ing ISA instead of the target platform. However, the same ISA can still require
different code generation depending on the specific hardware. For instance, read-
ing doubles might differ between two platforms that both use the RV32IMC ISA,
if one uses UART and the other uses I2C. For this reason, the platform-dependent
code generation strategy was chosen.
This approach opens up further possibilities for Embedded Hygge in terms of
its features and supported platforms. In the future, Hygge could potentially be
ported to work on a variety of other embedded systems, such as Arduinos, STM32
boards, or even personal computers running Linux, Windows, or macOS.
6.3
Lacking Features of Embedded Hygge
Embedded Hygge lacks support for some functionality that is commonly present
in other programming languages. Some notable operations that are not supported
include:
• For-loops
• Recursive functions
• Arrays
• Passing floats and doubles as arguments
• Closures
These range from simple constructs, like for-loops, to more advanced concepts
such as closures. However, they are not part of the original Hygge version either,
==PAGE:83==
6.4 Embedded Hygge as a Didactive Language
73
so users are not missing out on functionality by using Embedded Hygge. In fact,
these features have been purposefully left out of Hygge to motivate students to
implement them themselves.
Similarly, this thesis has not aimed to create a feature-rich language, but rather
to provide the foundation for a language and its compiler that can run on an
embedded system.
This leaves room for future students to improve both the
language and the compiler while still introducing the most important concepts
and features. The educational potential of this approach is further discussed in
Section 6.4.
Regarding general code generation, there is a part of the ESP32-C3 ISA that is not
currently utilized. As stated in Chapter 2, Section 2.4, the ESP32-C3 implements
the RV32IMC ISA. However, the C extension for Compressed Instructions is not
used by the compiler. Using this extension could reduce code size by 25% to 30%
[47]. On embedded devices, where memory is limited, taking advantage of this
extension could have a significant impact. It would be interesting to add support
for these instructions and investigate their effect on memory usage.
6.4
Embedded Hygge as a Didactive Language
While Embedded Hygge was not explicitly designed as a teaching tool, it does
build on Hygge which was designed for this purpose. Additionally, the language
and framework expose users to a variety of practical and conceptual challenges
that are highly relevant to embedded systems programming and compiler con-
struction.
This last section will explain the academic potential of Embedded
Hygge and explain why it could be well-suited for didactic purposes.
The language extensions cover five core topics that are often encountered in
embedded development:
• Common embedded operators (e.g., binary and, or, etc.)
• Access to arbitrary memory addresses
• Memory management
• Serial communication via GPIO
• Using build-in hardware (in this case, a clock)
These additions provide exposure to challenges that are rarely encountered in pro-
gramming projects outside embedded systems. As such, Embedded Hygge could
==PAGE:84==
74
Discussion
serve as a useful platform for exploring the fundamentals of low-level systems
programming and language design.
The integration of the ESP-IDF toolchain into the command-line interface allows
programs to be build, flashed, and emulated with minimal setup.
The entire
Embedded Hygge framework was shown in Section 5.6 to run well on both Mac,
Windows and Linux. In addition, support for automated tests for the ESP32-C3
was added to the testing framework, which could help identifying issues quickly
when working on the compiler. All this makes the language more accessible, and
easy for students to work on.
The thesis has also showcased one way of implementing a garbage collector.
Purely from a language perspective, this solves the problem of not being able
to free memory space from the heap. From an academic perspective, it also in-
troduces a very interesting mechanism in computer science that students might
want to explore further in the future. For example, designing and implementing
a conservative garbage collector from scratch could be an interesting pursuit.
Lastly, Embedded Hygge supports including other Hygge programs and linking
to external C libraries. These features enable reuse of existing code and provide
opportunities to explore how compilers handle file inclusion and linking using
external toolchains such as GCC.
In summary, the extensions introduced in Embedded Hygge offer a broad and
practical set of features that reflect real-world embedded development. At the
same time, they present a range of technical challenges that could serve as valu-
able learning experiences for students or anyone interested in programming lan-
guages, compiler design, or embedded systems.
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, the didactic programming language Hygge has been extended to
support embedded development on a real-world RISC-V platform, specifically
targeting the ESP32-C3. The result is Embedded Hygge, which is able run on
the ESP32-C3 board, as well as the RARS platform, while offering several new
functionality for embedded development.
Notably, Embedded Hygge is able to do bit-manipulation and access arbitrary
memory locations, which makes it well-suited to tackle low-level programming
tasks.
It also supports serial communication over the UART, allowing users
to interact with the ESP32-C3 at runtime.
For more accurate computations,
Embedded Hygge supports double-precision floating point values. Beyond these,
several other operators are also supported, which are listed in Appendix A.11.
From a compiler construction perspective, the thesis introduces and addresses
multiple new challenges. Many of the extensions require unique solutions based
on the underlying architecture of the target platform. To support this, the Em-
bedded Hygge compiler is able to generate code in a platform-dependent way,
which targets both the ESP32-C3 and RARS platform.
Furthermore, Embedded Hygge programs can now include code from other Hygge
files and invoke external C functions, enabling reuse of code and good integra-
tion with the existing embedded ecosystem. Lastly, the Boehm–Demers–Weiser
==PAGE:86==
76
Conclusion
garbage collector was integrated for programs running on the ESP32-C3, which
fixes the lack of any memory management mechanism.
To merge these features into a practical tool, the Embedded Hygge framework was
extended with the ESP-IDF toolchain. This is accessible through new commands
in the Hygge command-line tool, allowing users to build, flash, and emulate
Embedded Hygge programs for the ESP32-C3. The ESP32-C3 platform was also
integrated into the automated testing framework, making it easier to verify the
correctness of the new features. Using this system, along with manual testing,
the functionality of the Embedded Hygge extensions and the garbage collector
has been successfully validated.
Through these extensions, Hygge can now be compiled for and executed on a
real embedded device, while supporting essential features common to embedded
development. By combining the practical challenges of embedded programming
with the theoretical topics of compiler construction, Embedded Hygge provides
a concrete use case for exploring the topics of language design and embedded
systems. Its extended functionality makes it well-suited for experimenting with
low-level systems programming, or for educational exploration of compilers and
embedded systems.
7.1
Future Work
For future work, several improvements or research questions could be explored.
The following features might be interesting to pursue in the future:
• Embedded Hygge lacks various features that are found in typical languages,
as discussed in section 6.3.
• Building a garbage collector from scratch and embed it into Hygge, poten-
tially comparing its performance to the performance of the Boehm garbage
collector used in this thesis.
• Optimize the build process, as every Embedded Hygge program builds a
new ESP-IDF project, which requires compiling the entire code base of
the framework. Instead, the compiled code base could be re-used across
programs.
• Make a better typing system for the pointer and byte32 types, as suggested
in section 6.1. Here, other typing approaches could be explored, examining
the C type casting approach and similar.
==PAGE:87==
7.1 Future Work
77
==PAGE:88==
78
Conclusion
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1] Maksim Panchenko, Rafael Auler, Bill Nell, and Guilherme Ottoni. BOLT:
A Practical Binary Optimizer for Data Centers and Beyond, 2018.
[2] NVIDIA.
NVIDIA HPC Fortran, C++ and C Compilers with Ope-
nACC.
https://developer.nvidia.com/hpc-compilers, June 2025.
Accessed
18/06/2025.
[3] Wikipedia. History of Compiler Construction. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
History of compiler construction, June 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[4] Arm Limited. What Is an Instruction Set Architecture? https://www.arm.
com/glossary/isa. Accessed 21/06/2025.
[5] Stanford University.
RISC Architecture:
risc vs. cisc.
https://cs.
stanford.edu/people/eroberts/courses/soco/projects/risc/risccisc/.
Accessed
21/06/2025.
[6] Andrew Waterman, Yunsup Lee, David A. Patterson, and Krste Asanovi´c.
The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, Volume I: User-Level ISA, Version
2.1.
https://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2016/EECS-2016-118.
pdf, May 2016. UCB/EECS-2016-118, Accessed 18/06/2025.
[7] DTU Compute. Compiler Construction. https://lifelonglearning.dtu.dk/en/
compute/single-course/compiler-construction/, 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[8] Alceste Scalas. Compiler Construction Module 7. https://courses.compute.
dtu.dk/02247/f25/structured-types.html, 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
==PAGE:90==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Pete Sanderson and Kenneth Vollmar.
RARS Github Repository.
https:
//github.com/TheThirdOne/rars, 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[10] FSprojects. FsLex, FsYacc – Lexer and parser generators for F#. https:
//fsprojects.github.io/FsLexYacc/, 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[11] Alceste Scalas. DTU Course 02247, Compiler Construction, Lecture Notes.
https://courses.compute.dtu.dk/02247/f25/index.html. Accessed 19/06/2025.
[12] Beningo
Embedded
Group.
The
Best
Embedded
Program-
ming
Languages
for
Engineers
Now.
https://www.beningo.com/
the-best-embedded-programming-languages-for-engineers-now,
October
2024. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[13] Nerves Project. Nervers Project Homepage. https://nerves-project.org/, 2025.
Accessed 18/06/2025.
[14] HWE
Tech
Consulting.
Hardware and
Systems
Engineering De-
sign - Exploring Peripherals. https://www.hwe.design/design-fundamentals/
computer-system-basics/peripherals, 2023. Accessed 20/06/2025.
[15] Patrick Schaumont.
Hardware/Software Codesign:
Lecture 6 - The
Memory-Mapped
Register.
https://schaumont.dyn.wpi.edu/ece4530f19/
lectures/lecture06-notes.html. Accessed 20/06/2025.
[16] Miguel Young de la Sota. Everything You Never Wanted To Know About
Linker Script.
https://mcyoung.xyz/2021/06/01/linker-script/, June 2021.
Accessed 18/06/2025.
[17] Espressif Systems. ESP32-C3 MCU Product Page. https://www.espressif.
com/en/products/socs/esp32-c3, 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[18] Espressif Systems.
C Support of the ESP-IDF.
https://docs.espressif.
com/projects/esp-idf/en/stable/esp32/api-guides/c.html,
2025.
Accessed
18/06/2025.
[19] ISO and IEC. International Standard of C, ISO/IEC 9899:202x (C17). https:
//www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n2310.pdf, November 2018.
Draft of ISO/IEC 9899:2017, Accessed 18/06/2025.
[20] The QEMU Project Developers. QEMU Documentation - Supported Plat-
forms. https://www.qemu.org/docs/master/about/build-platforms.html. Ac-
cessed 18/06/2025.
[21] Espressif Systems.
ESP-IDF QEMU Emulator.
https://docs.espressif.
com/projects/esp-idf/en/stable/esp32/api-guides/tools/qemu.html. Accessed
18/06/2025.
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[22] Espressif Systems.
IDF Frontend - idf.py.
https://docs.espressif.com/
projects/esp-idf/en/stable/esp32/api-guides/tools/idf-py.html, 2025. Accessed
18/06/2025.
[23] Wikipedia. Garbage collection (computer science). https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Garbage collection (computer science), 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[24] Matthew Hertz and Emery D. Berger.
Quantifying the Performance of
Garbage Collection vs. Explicit Memory Management.
https://people.cs.
umass.edu/∼emery/pubs/gcvsmalloc.pdf, 2005.
[25] Benjamin Zorn.
The Measured Cost of Conservative Garbage Collection.
https://www.cs.tufts.edu/∼nr/cs257/archive/ben-zorn/measured.pdf, 1994.
[26] Hans-Juergen Boehm and Mark Weiser. Garbage Collection in an Uncooper-
ative Environment. https://hboehm.info/spe gc paper/preprint.pdf, Septem-
ber 1988.
[27] Hans-Juergen Boehm. A garbage collector for C and C++. https://www.
hboehm.info/gc/, 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[28] Hans-Juergen Boehm.
Conservative GC Algorithmic Overview.
https://
www.hboehm.info/gc/gcdescr.html, 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[29] John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Introduction to
Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation. Pearson Education, 3rd
edition, 2013.
[30] Michael R. Hansen. DTU Course 02157 Homepage - Functional Program-
ming.
https://www.imm.dtu.dk/courses/02157/, August 2024.
Accessed
21/06/2025.
[31] GNU Compiler Collection Wiki. Semantics of Floating Point Math in GCC.
https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/FloatingPointMath, 2021. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[32] GNU Compiler Collection Documentation. Routines for floating point emu-
lation. https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Soft-float-library-routines.html,
2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[33] ESP32 Forum.
Forum Post about Scanf problems.
https://esp32.com/
viewtopic.php?t=22929, 2021. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[34] Espressif Systems. ESP32-C3 Series Datasheet, Version 2.1. https://www.
espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-c3 datasheet en.pdf.
[35] Mainteined by Ivan Maidanski.
Bohem–Demers–Weiser Conservative
Garbage Collector Github Repository.
https://github.com/ivmai/bdwgc,
2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
==PAGE:92==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36] Mainteined by Ivan Maidanski. Supported Platform for Boehm GC. https://
github.com/ivmai/bdwgc/tree/master/docs/platforms. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[37] Celso Junior.
Memory Regions - Static.
https://www.celsojr.com/post/
memory-regions-static, February 2025. Accessed 21/06/2025.
[38] Espressif Systems.
Linker Script Template for ESP32-C3.
https:
//github.com/espressif/esp-idf/blob/master/components/esp system/ld/
esp32c3/sections.ld.in. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[39] FreeRTOS.org.
xTaskCreate() API Reference.
https://www.freertos.
org/Documentation/02-Kernel/04-API-references/01-Task-creation/
01-xTaskCreate, 2025. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[40] Editors Kito Cheng and Jessica Clarke. ‘RISC-V ABIs Specification, Docu-
ment Version March 25, 2025-draft, March 2025.
[41] Espressif Systems.
ESP32-C3 Technical Reference Manual,
Version
1.3.
https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-c3
technical reference manual en.pdf.
[42] Espressif Systems.
ESP32 Memory Types.
https://docs.espressif.com/
projects/esp-idf/en/stable/esp32/api-guides/memory-types.html, 2025.
Ac-
cessed 18/06/2025.
[43] cppreference.com. setjmp Documentation. https://en.cppreference.com/w/
cpp/utility/program/setjmp. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[44] Espressif Systems.
ESP32 Application Startup Flow.
https://docs.
espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/stable/esp32/api-guides/startup.html, 2025.
Accessed 18/06/2025.
[45] Giacomo Stelluti Scala and Contributors. CommandLineParser for FSharp
library. https://github.com/commandlineparser/commandline, 2022. Accessed
22/06/2025.
[46] Created by Henrik Feldt. Expecto Github Repository. https://github.com/
haf/expecto. Accessed 18/06/2025.
[47] Andrew
Waterman,
Yunsup
Lee,
David
A.
Patterson,
and
Krste
Asanovi´c.
The RISC-V Compressed Instruction Set Manual, Version
1.9.
https://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2015/EECS-2015-209.
pdf, November 2015.
==PAGE:93==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Specification of New Embedded Operators
This appendix shows all the new rules added to Hygge in order to support low
level operators. See more in section 3.2.
==PAGE:94==
84
Appendix
Definition A.1.1 (Embedded operators semantic rules).
⟨R • e1⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1⟩
⟨R • e1 & e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1 & e2⟩
[R-Band-L]
⟨R • e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
2⟩
⟨R • v1 & e2⟩→⟨R′ • v1 & e′
2⟩
[R-Band-R]
v1 & v2 = v3
⟨R • v1 & v2⟩→⟨R′ • v3⟩
[R-Band-Eval]
⟨R • e1⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1⟩
⟨R • e1ˆe2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1ˆe2⟩
[R-Bxor-L]
⟨R • e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
2⟩
⟨R • v1ˆe2⟩→⟨R′ • v1ˆe′
2⟩
[R-Bxor-R]
v1ˆv2 = v3
⟨R • v1ˆv2⟩→⟨R′ • v3⟩
[R-Bxor-Eval]
⟨R • e1⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1⟩
⟨R • ˜e1⟩→⟨R′ • ˜e′
1⟩
[R-Bneg-R]
˜v1 = v2
⟨R • ˜v1⟩→⟨R′ • v2⟩
[R-Bneg-Eval]
⟨R • e1⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1⟩
⟨R • e1 >> e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1 >> e2⟩
[R-RShift-L]
⟨R • e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
2⟩
⟨R • v1 >> e2⟩→⟨R′ • v1 >> e′
2⟩
[R-RShift-R]
v1 >> v2 = v3
⟨R • v1 >> v2⟩→⟨R′ • v3⟩
[R-RShift-Eval]
⟨R • e1⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1⟩
⟨R • e1 << e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1 << e2⟩
[R-LShift-L]
⟨R • e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
2⟩
⟨R • v1 << e2⟩→⟨R′ • v1 << e′
2⟩
[R-LShift-R]
v1 << v2 = v3
⟨R • v1 << v2⟩→⟨R′ • v3⟩
[R-LShift-Eval]
⟨R • e⟩→⟨R′ • e′⟩
⟨R • readMem(e)⟩→⟨R′ • readMem(e′)⟩
[R-readMem-R]
v′ is value read at memory address v
⟨R • readMem(v)⟩→⟨R′ • v′⟩
[R-readMem-Eval]
⟨R • e1⟩→⟨R′ • e′
1⟩
⟨R • setMem(e1, e2)⟩→⟨R′ • setMem(e′
1, e2)⟩
[R-setMem-L]
⟨R • e2⟩→⟨R′ • e′
2⟩
⟨R • setMem(v1, e2)⟩→⟨R′ • setMem(v1, e′
2)⟩
[R-setMem-R]
set value at memory address v1 to value of v2
⟨R • setMem(v1, v2)⟩→⟨R′ • v2⟩
[R-setMem-Eval]
==PAGE:95==
A.1 Specification of New Embedded Operators
85
Definition A.1.2 (Binary-or substitution rule).
(e1 | e2)[x 7→e′]
=
e1[x 7→e′] | e2[x 7→e′]
(e1 & e2)[x 7→e′]
=
e1[x 7→e′] & e2[x 7→e′]
(e1 ˆe2)[x 7→e′]
=
e1[x 7→e′] ˆe2[x 7→e′]
( ˜e2)[x 7→e′]
=
˜(e2[x 7→e′])
(e1 >> e2)[x 7→e′]
=
e1[x 7→e′] >> e2[x 7→e′]
(e1 << e2)[x 7→e′]
=
e1[x 7→e′] << e2[x 7→e′]
readMem(e)[x 7→e′]
=
readMem(e[x 7→e′])
setMem(e1, e2)[x 7→e′]
=
setMem(e1[x 7→e′], e2[x 7→e′])
Definition A.1.3 (Embedded operators type checking rules).
Γ ⊢e1 : byte32
Γ ⊢e2 : byte32
Γ ⊢e1 & e2 : byte32
[T-Band]
Γ ⊢e1 : byte32
Γ ⊢e2 : byte32
Γ ⊢e1 ˆe2 : byte32
[T-Bxor]
Γ ⊢e : byte32
Γ ⊢˜e : byte32
[T-Bneg]
Γ ⊢e1 : byte32
Γ ⊢e2 : byte32
Γ ⊢e1 >> e2 : byte32
[T-RShift]
Γ ⊢e1 : byte32
Γ ⊢e2 : byte32
Γ ⊢e1 << e2 : byte32
[T-LShift]
Γ ⊢e : pointer
Γ ⊢pointer(e) : int
[T-readMem]
Γ ⊢e1 : pointer
T2 ∈{int, byte32, pointer}
Γ ⊢e2 : T2
Γ ⊢setMem(e1, e2) : T2
[T-setMem]
==PAGE:96==
86
Appendix
A.2
Adding Doubles to Hygge
This appendix shows all the new rules added to Hygge in order to support double
precision floating point integers. This is discussed in section 3.3.
To definition 1, the following expression and value rules are added.
Definition A.2.1 (Updated expression rules for doubles).
Expression
e
::=
. . .
|
readDouble()
(Read double)
Definition A.2.2 (Double value grammar).
Value
v
::=
. . .
|
12.13 | 0.00987 | ...
(Hexadecimal values)
The grammar for double values is the same as single precision floating point
values, expect it does not have the final “f” character.
For the typing system, a new type double is added.
To utilize this for type
ascription, a new rule for resolving a “double” pretype in a double type is added.
Definition A.2.3 (Resolving double pretypes).
Γ ⊢"double"  double
[TRes-double]
Besides this, all arithmetic operations need to support double types as well. The
semantics operate the same, however, multiple type checking rules need to be
updated. Relevant rules that are defined in definition 8 are T-Add, T-Type and
T-print. For all these, the double type is added to the sets of types that are
already defined in the rules. Furthermore, a new rule is added to type check
double precision floating point values into double types.
Definition A.2.4 (Type checking double values).
v is a double precision floating point value
Γ ⊢v : double
[T-DoubleVal]
==PAGE:97==
A.3 Specifications of the Delay Function
87
A.3
Specifications of the Delay Function
In this section, the semantic, substitution and type-checking are presented relat-
ing to the new Delay function. The Delay function is part of the extension of
Goals #2: platform-dependent operators. Its design can be found in Section
3.3.3, and implementation in Section 4.2.3.
Definition A.3.1 (Delay function semantic rules).
⟨R • e⟩→⟨R′ • e′⟩
⟨R • delay(e)⟩→⟨R′ • delay(e′)⟩
[R-delay-R]
Stall execution for v milliseconds
⟨R • delay(v)⟩→⟨R′ • ())⟩
[R-delay-Eval]
Definition A.3.2 (Delay function substitution rule).
delay(e)[x 7→e′]
=
delay(e[x 7→e′])
Definition A.3.3 (Delay function type checking rule).
Γ ⊢e : int
Γ ⊢delay(e) : unit
[T-delay]
==PAGE:98==
88
Appendix
A.4
Using Semantics and Typing Rules
This section covers the specification of the new semantic and typing rules for the
using operator. It refers to mutable variables, which are part of the original Hygge
language, introduced in Module 5 of the Compiler Construction course [11]. It
also makes use of the runtime environment, R, which was briefly mentioned in
Section 2.3.2.
A new environment field, Using, it added to keep track of imported function
names. The R-Using rule specifies that the function name is removed from the
mutables set to allow shadowing and re-declaration of mutable variables that
may have been previously declared before the import.
Definition A.4.1 (Using Semantic Rules).
u = R.UsingVars ∪{x}
m = R.Mutables \ {x}
R′ = {R with UsingVars = u; Mutables = m}
⟨R • using x(t1, ..., tn) : t; e⟩→⟨R′ • e⟩
[R-Using]
⟨R • ei⟩→⟨R′ • e′
i⟩
⟨R • x(v1, ..., vi−1, ei, ei+1, ..., en)⟩→⟨R • x(v1, ..., vi−1, e′
i, ei+1, ..., en)⟩
[R-Using-Eval]
x ∈R.UsingVars
v′ = result from applying x with the given values
⟨R • x(v1, ..., vn)⟩→⟨R • v′⟩
[R-Using-App]
For type checking, another field called UsingVars is used to keep track of function
signatures. The typing rule for the using operation is defined in Definition A.4.2.
Definition A.4.2 (Using typing rules).
{Γ with UsingVars (x 7→(Ti, ..., Tn) →T);
Vars = Vars \ {x}; Mutables=Mutables \ {x}} ⊢e : T ′
∀i ∈1..n : Γ ⊢ti  Ti
Γ ⊢t  T
Γ ⊢using x(t1, ..., tn) : t; e : T ′
[T-Using]
These new rules define how the using operator works in Embedded Hygge.
==PAGE:99==
A.5 Assembly Code to Read From the UART
89
A.5
Assembly Code to Read From the UART
The code shown in Listing A.1 showcases how UART0 is accessed through its
memory mapped registers, as well as feeding the watch-dog timer and adding
the characters to the “ scratchpad mem“ buffer. Note that the conversion of the
characters described in Section 3.3.2 is done separately, and therefore now shown
in this listing.
1 __readUartString:
2
li t2, 1610739712
# Setting base WDT addr
3
li t3, 1356348065
# Load special value for write enabling WDT
4
sw t3, 100(t2)
# Write enable WDT
5
la t4, _scratchpad_mem
# Load address of buffer
6
li t0, 1610612736
# Load UART0 base addr
7
lw t1, 32(t0)
# Load UART0 Reset reg
8
li t2, 131072
# Set bit 17 to reset RX fifo
9
or t2, t1, t2
10
sw t2, 32(t0)
# Reset RX fifo
11
li t2, -131073
# Set bit 17 to zero to enable RX fifo
12
and t2, t1, t2
13
sw t2, 32(t0)
# Reset RX fifo
14 readLine:
15
li t2, 1610739712
# Setting base WDT addr
16
li t3, -2147483648
# Set bit 31 of WDT feeder
17
sw t3, 96(t2)
18
lw t3, 28(t0)
# Load RX fifo counter
19
andi t3, t3, 1023
# Get number of chars in RX fifo
20
beqz t3, readLine
21
lw t1, 32(t0)
# Load UART0 Reset reg
22
li t2, 131072
# Set bit 17 to reset RX fifo
23
or t2, t1, t2
24
sw t2, 32(t0)
# Reset RX fifo
25
li t2, -131073
# Set bit 17 to zero to enable RX fifo
26
and t2, t1, t2
27
sw t2, 32(t0)
# Reset RX fifo
28 readNextChar:
29
lw t1, 0(t0)
# Read next char
30
addi t2, t1, -10
# Check if char is newline
31
beqz t2, endReading
32
addi t2, t1, -13
# Check if char is carriage return
33
beqz t2, endReading
34
sw t1, 0(t4)
# Store char in the buffer
35
addi t4, t4, 1
# Go to next char in buffer
==PAGE:100==
90
Appendix
36
addi t3, t3, -1
# Decrease counter
37
bnez t3, readNextChar
38
j readLine
# Loop back and read more chars
39 endReading:
# Stop reading
40
sb zero, 0(t4)
# Add null terminator
41
li t2, 1610739712
# Setting base WDT addr
42
sw zero, 100(t2)
# Write Disable WDT
43
jr ra
# End of function, return to caller
Code A.1: RISC-V assembly code used to read characters from UART0
==PAGE:101==
A.6 Assembly Code to Delay Execution
91
A.6
Assembly Code to Delay Execution
The code shown in Listing A.2 shows how programs on the ESP32-C3 are stalled,
whenever the delay operator is used. As part of the implementation described
in Section 4.2.3, the handling of the Watch-Dog timer was explained. This is
reflected in the code below, where the WDT is accessed and fed.
Both the Watch-Dog and the hardware clock are part of Timer Group 0. They are
accessed through memory-mapped registers, which have a base memory address
of 0x6001F000 (which is 1610739712 in base10), as specified in Table 3.3-3 of the
ESP32-C3 Technical Reference Manual [41].
In order to enable manual feeding of the watch-dog timer, the magic number of
0x50D83AA1 (1356348065) is used to disable write-protection, as explained in
Chapter 12.2.2.3 of the ESP32-C3 Technical Reference Manual [41].
1 __delay:
2
# Funtion prologue begins here
3
# Routine body begins
4
mv t5, a0
# Load delay value
5
li t0, 1000
# Value needs to be multiplied by 10.000 as the clock is
in microseconds
6
mul t5, t5, t0
# Multiply delay value by 10.000
7
li t0, 1610739712
# TimerGroup0 base address
8
sw zero, 0(t0)
# Reset timer group config and disable timer
9
li t1, 1074070016
# Select XTAL_CLK as source (Set bit 9) and
Increment clock (bit 30), and set divider to 40.000 (bit 13-28)
10
sw t1, 0(t0)
# Store clock config
11
li t1, 1074074112
# Set the same as before, but this time also set
the clock divider restart bit (bit 12)
12
sw zero, 24(t0)
# Reset the clock value of low bits
13
sw zero, 28(t0)
# Reset the clock value high bits (actually not
needed)
14
sw t1, 32(t0)
# Write any value to the time updater register
15
li t2, 1610739712
# Setting base WDT addr
16
li t3, 1356348065
# Load special value for write enabling WDT
17
sw t3, 100(t2)
# Write enable WDT
18
li t1, 1610612736
# Enable to External clock (bit 30 and 29)
19
sw t1, 252(t0)
# Store clock config
20
li t1, -1073413632
# Load normal config, but also set the clock
enable bit (bit 31)
21
sw t1, 0(t0)
# Store clock config
22 waitForTime:
==PAGE:102==
92
Appendix
23
li t2, 1610739712
# Setting base WDT addr
24
li t3, -2147483648
# Set bit 31 of WDT feeder
25
sw t3, 96(t2)
26
li t1, -2147483648
# Update time (bit 31)
27
sw t1, 12(t0)
# Set bit 31 to update time
28 waitForTimeUpdate:
29
lw t2, 12(t0)
# Load update reg, to see if it is done
30
bnez t2, waitForTimeUpdate
# Wait if it is not cleared
31
lw t2, 4(t0)
# Load clock value of lower bits
32
blt t2, t5, waitForTime
33
li t2, 1610739712
# Setting base WDT addr
34
sw zero, 100(t2)
# Write Disable WDT
35
sw zero, 0(t0)
# Disable clock
36
jr ra
# End of function, return to caller
Code A.2: RISC-V assembly code used to delay / stall execution on the ESP32-
C3.
==PAGE:103==
A.7 Combining Hygge Files
93
A.7
Combining Hygge Files
In this section, the files “main.hyg” and “constants.hyg” are presented in Code
Listing A.3 and A.4, respectively. These are also part of the Embedded Hygge
source and can be found in the “examples/include” folder.
These acts as an
example of how the “#include” keyword is used. Comparing the files with the
abstract syntax tree found in Figure 4.1, the alignment between the line numbers
and files match, showing that the combining of the two files does not obscure the
position details for each expression. This makes it easier for users to debug their
programs, as each expression can be located easily.
1 println("Setting up my own values");
2 let myValue = 0xA;
3 println("Now, Load Constants from Other File");
4 #include "constants.hyg";
5 println("Now Print the Sum of The Values:");
6 let sum = myValue + constantA + constantB;
7 print(sum)
Code A.3: Embedded
Hygge
file
“main.hyg”,
which
includes
the
“constants.hyg” file.
1 // Define constants
2 let constantA = 0xB;
3 let constantB = 0xD;
4 ()
Code A.4: Embedded Hygge file “constants.hyg”, which is included by the
“main.hyg” file.
==PAGE:104==
94
Appendix
A.8
C Program for Testing the Boehm Garbage
Collector
In listing A.5, the C program for testing and verifying the functionality of the
Boehm GC ported for ESP32-C3 is shown. Notice that it also needs to setup
the global pointer stack top, as discussed in section 4.4. The program start by
allocating several object in various sizes and setting their values. These are mostly
local variables, but a global variable is also used.
These objects also contain
nested objects, such that they also include a pointer to some other object. In
a loop, the program will repeatedly call a function that allocates memory for a
local variable without freeing it. In the loop, a large array will also be repeatedly
allocated, without being freed. At some point in the loop, the global variable
will be updated and also include a nested object. When the loop has finished,
the values for all previous allocations will be asserted, in order to make sure that
their values have not changed.
1 #include <stdio.h>
2 #include "gc.h" // Boehm GC header
3 #include "esp_attr.h" // For defining DRAM_ATTR
4
5
6 DRAM_ATTR int *globalPtr;
7 DRAM_ATTR void* _stack_top;
8
9 void checkAssert(int condition) {
10
if (!condition) {
11
printf("Assertion failed!\n");
12
abort();
13
}
14 }
15
16
17 void function_that_allocates_memory(int size, int i)
18 {
19
volatile int *ptr = (int *)GC_malloc(size);
20
if (ptr == NULL) {
21
printf("Failed to allocate memory!!!\n");
22
abort();
23
}
24
*ptr = size; // Set the value of the allocated memory to the size
25
26
==PAGE:105==
A.8 C Program for Testing the Boehm Garbage Collector
95
27
if(i == 1337) { // At some point, update the global pointer
28
// First check that the values have not changed
29
checkAssert(globalPtr[0] == 69);
30
checkAssert(globalPtr[1] == 13);
31
checkAssert(globalPtr[2] == 41);
32
checkAssert(globalPtr[3] == 15);
33
checkAssert(globalPtr[4] == 51);
34
checkAssert(globalPtr[5] == 16);
35
checkAssert(globalPtr[6] == 61);
36
checkAssert(globalPtr[7] == 78);
37
// Now update the global pointer
38
globalPtr = (int *)GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*5);
39
globalPtr[0] = 420;
40
globalPtr[1] = 25;
41
globalPtr[2] = 99;
42
globalPtr[3] = (int)GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*4);
43
globalPtr[4] = 1000;
44
// Inside the global pointer, set a pointer to another allocated
memory
45
((int*)globalPtr[3])[0] = 70;
46
((int*)globalPtr[3])[1] = 71;
47
((int*)globalPtr[3])[2] = 72;
48
((int*)globalPtr[3])[3] = 73;
49
}
50
51
if(*ptr != size) {
52
printf("New value was not set to correct value\n");
53
abort();
54
}
55 }
56
57
58 void app_main(void)
59 {
60
void* sp = (void*)&sp; // Local variable to get the stack pointer
61
_stack_top = (void*)sp; // Store the stack pointer in a global
variable
62
63
// Test that the allocator works with normal values in some small
arrays
64
int* testPtr =GC_malloc(16);
65
testPtr[0] = 42;
66
testPtr[1] = 84;
67
testPtr[2] = 127;
68
==PAGE:106==
96
Appendix
69
int* testPtr2 =GC_malloc(16);
70
testPtr2[0] = 21;
71
testPtr2[1] = 63;
72
testPtr2[2] = 105;
73
74
int *testPtr4 =GC_malloc(20);
75
testPtr4[0] = 7;
76
testPtr4[1] = 14;
77
testPtr4[2] = 28;
78
testPtr4[3] = 35;
79
testPtr4[4] = 49;
80
81
// Assert that the values are set correctly
82
checkAssert(testPtr[0] == 42);
83
checkAssert(testPtr[1] == 84);
84
checkAssert(testPtr[2] == 127);
85
checkAssert(testPtr2[0] == 21);
86
checkAssert(testPtr2[1] == 63);
87
checkAssert(testPtr2[2] == 105);
88
checkAssert(testPtr4[0] == 7);
89
checkAssert(testPtr4[1] == 14);
90
checkAssert(testPtr4[2] == 28);
91
checkAssert(testPtr4[3] == 35);
92
checkAssert(testPtr4[4] == 49);
93
94
95
96
// Setup an object that has normal values and a pointer to another
object
97
int **testPtr3 = GC_malloc(40);
98
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
99
testPtr3[i] = (int*)(i + 10);
100
}
101
102
testPtr3[5] = (int*)GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
103
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
104
((int*)testPtr3[5])[i] = (int)(i + 17);
105
}
106
107
// Test that the allocater works with many many allocations
108
int *test1 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*100);
109
test1[0] = 100;
110
int *test2 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*100);
111
test2[0] = 200;
112
int *test3 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*100);
==PAGE:107==
A.8 C Program for Testing the Boehm Garbage Collector
97
113
test3[0] = 300;
114
int *test4 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*100);
115
test4[0] = 400;
116
int *test5 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*100);
117
test5[0] = 500;
118
int *test6 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*100);
119
test6[0] = 600;
120
int *test7 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
121
test7[0] = 700;
122
int *test8 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
123
test8[0] = 800;
124
int *test9 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
125
test9[0] = 900;
126
int *test10 = GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*10);
127
test10[0] = 1000;
128
129
// Test that the global pointer works
130
globalPtr = (int *)GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*8);
131
globalPtr[0] = 69;
132
globalPtr[1] = 13;
133
globalPtr[2] = 41;
134
globalPtr[3] = 15;
135
globalPtr[4] = 51;
136
globalPtr[5] = 16;
137
globalPtr[6] = 61;
138
globalPtr[7] = 78;
139
140
141
// Loop to allocate a ton of memory
142
int amountToAllocate = 4096*2*2*2*2;
143
int greatestSize = 2048;
144
int totalAllocations = 0;
145
for (int i = 0; i < amountToAllocate; i++) {
146
// Setup a temporary pointer to allocate memory and "forget" about
it
147
int* tempPtr = (int *)GC_malloc(sizeof(int)*100);
148
if (tempPtr == NULL) {
149
printf("Failed to allocate memory!!!\n");
150
abort();
151
}
152
*tempPtr = i % greatestSize + 1; // Set the value of the allocated
memory to the size
153
154
// Call the function that allocates memory locally
155
function_that_allocates_memory(i % greatestSize + 1, i);
==PAGE:108==
98
Appendix
156
157
// Check that the value is set correctly
158
checkAssert(*tempPtr == i % greatestSize + 1);
159
160
// Update the total allocations
161
totalAllocations += (i % greatestSize + 1) + sizeof(int)*100;
162
}
163
164
// Check that all the values are still correct
165
checkAssert(testPtr[0] == 42);
166
checkAssert(testPtr[1] == 84);
167
checkAssert(testPtr[2] == 127);
168
checkAssert(testPtr2[0] == 21);
169
checkAssert(testPtr2[1] == 63);
170
checkAssert(testPtr2[2] == 105);
171
checkAssert(testPtr4[0] == 7);
172
checkAssert(testPtr4[1] == 14);
173
checkAssert(testPtr4[2] == 28);
174
checkAssert(testPtr4[3] == 35);
175
checkAssert(testPtr4[4] == 49);
176
// Check that the values in the testPtr3 are correct as well as the
pointer to the other object
177
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
178
if(i == 5) continue; // Skip the pointer to the object with the
values
179
checkAssert(testPtr3[i] == (int*)(i + 10));
180
}
181
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
182
checkAssert(((int*)testPtr3[5])[i] == (int)(i + 17));
183
}
184
// Check that the global pointer works
185
checkAssert(globalPtr[0] == 420);
186
checkAssert(globalPtr[1] == 25);
187
checkAssert(globalPtr[2] == 99);
188
checkAssert(globalPtr[4] == 1000);
189
// Check the nested pointer values
190
checkAssert(((int*)globalPtr[3])[0] == 70);
191
checkAssert(((int*)globalPtr[3])[1] == 71);
192
checkAssert(((int*)globalPtr[3])[2] == 72);
193
checkAssert(((int*)globalPtr[3])[3] == 73);
194
195
// Check that all the small arrays are still correct
196
checkAssert(test1[0] == 100);
197
checkAssert(test2[0] == 200);
198
checkAssert(test3[0] == 300);
==PAGE:109==
A.8 C Program for Testing the Boehm Garbage Collector
99
199
checkAssert(test4[0] == 400);
200
checkAssert(test5[0] == 500);
201
checkAssert(test6[0] == 600);
202
checkAssert(test7[0] == 700);
203
checkAssert(test8[0] == 800);
204
checkAssert(test9[0] == 900);
205
checkAssert(test10[0] == 1000);
206
// Test is done => Only left is to print the allocations
207
printf("Total Allocations: %d\n", totalAllocations);
208
return;
209 }
Code A.5: Program for testing the functionality of the Boehm GC ported for
ESP32-C3 written in C.
==PAGE:110==
100
Appendix
A.9
RISC-V Assembler Directives
Listing A.6 shows the assembler directives prepended to Hygge-compiled RISC-
V assembly files that are used in ESP-IDF projects.
Importantly, notice the
”.attribute arch” directive, which define the specific architecture that the ESP32-
C3 implements.
1 .file "helloworld.hyg"
2 .option nopic
3 .attribute arch, "rv32i2p1_m2p0_c2p0_zicsr2p0_zifencei2p0"
4 .attribute unaligned_access, 0
5 .attribute stack_align, 16
Code A.6: Assembler directives prepended to Hygge-compiled RISC-V code
Listing A.7 shows the assembler directives added when the .text segment begins.
1 .text
2 .section
.text.app_main,"ax",@progbits
3 .align
1
4 .globl
app_main
5 .type
app_main, @function
6 app_main:
7 [HYGGE CODE GOES HERE]
Code A.7: Assembler directives added to define the main Hygge code
==PAGE:111==
A.10 Embedded Hygge Tests
101
A.10
Embedded Hygge Tests
Table A.1 shows the new and modified tests, which have been used to verify the
correctness of the Embedded Hygge compiler. They are all found in the tests
folder of the Embedded Hygge repository. Note that this list is not a complete
list of all the tests in the Embedded Hygge project. For instance, only 13 out of
35 tests for ESP32-C3 are shown in the table. The remaining 22 tests are copied
of code generation tests from the original Hygge project, in order to verify that
all previous tests also work on the ESP32-C3 board. In total, 67 tests are shown
in the table out of 224 tests.
Table A.1: New and modified test files for Embedded Hygge alongside a short
description
Test file
Short Description
codegen/fail/002-double.hyg
Check wrong math with doubles
is detected
codegen/pass/008-binary-operators.hyg
RARS w.
binary and, or, xor,
etc.
codegen/pass/009-memory.hyg
RARS w. ReadMem & SetMem
codegen/pass/021-using.hyg
RARS w. using keyword
codegen/pass/022-double.hyg
RARS w. doubles
codegen/pass/013-mutable-vars.hyg
Added test of doubles
esp32c3/fail/002-double.hyg
Detect wrong double usage
esp32c3/fail/003-float.hyg
Detect wrong float usage
esp32c3/pass/008-binary-operators.hyg
ESP32-C3 w.
binary and, or,
etc.
esp32c3/pass/009-memory.hyg
ESP32-C3 ReadMem & SetMem
esp32c3/pass/013-mutable.vars.hyg
ESP32-C3 assign floats & dou-
bles
esp32c3/pass/021-using.hyg
ESP32-C3 w. using keyword
esp32c3/pass/022-double.hyg
ESP32-C3 double functionality
esp32c3/pass/026-GC.hyg
Stress test of the Boehm GC
esp32c3/pass/027-GC.hyg
Use the Boehm GC allocator
esp32c3/pass/028-using.hyg
Use functions from std C library
esp32c3/pass/029-inner-lib.hyg
Used in test below
esp32c3/pass/030-outer-lib.hyg
Used in test below
esp32c3/pass/031-include.hyg
Includes the two files above
interpreter/fail/012-using.hyg
Verify faulty using usage
interpreter/fail/013-using2.hyg
Same as above
==PAGE:112==
102
Appendix
Test file
Short Description
interpreter/fail/014-double.hyg
Verify faulty double usage
interpreter/pass/008-hexandbin.hyg
Using Hex and Binary values
interpreter/pass/009-
binaryOperators.hyg
Using binary and, or, etc.
interpreter/pass/010-delay.hyg
Interpreting delay
interpreter/pass/023-using.hyg
Test scope of using keyword
interpreter/pass/024-using2.hyg
Same as above
interpreter/pass/025-double.hyg
Interpreting doubles
lexer/pass/000-reserved.hyg
Lexing of new keywords
lexer/pass/001-identifiers.hyg
Lexing of byte32 pretype
lexer/pass/002-values.hyg
Lexing of hex and binary values
lexer/pass/003-operators.hyg
Lexing of binary operators
lexer/pass/006-using.hyg
Lexing of using expression
lexer/pass/007-double.hyg
Lexing of doubles
lexer/pass/006-using.hyg
Lexing of using keyword
parser/fail/004-memory.hyg
Wrong usage of memory opera-
tions
parser/fail/006-using.hyg
Wrong using syntax
parser/pass/011-byte32.hyg
parsing byte32 pre-type
parser/pass/012-binary.hyg
Parsing binary and hex values
parser/pass/013-binary-operators.hyg
Parsing binary and, or, etc.
parser/pass/014-memory.hyg
Parsing memory operators
parser/pass/015-delay.hyg
Parsing delay keyword
parser/pass/016-using.hyg
Parsing using keyword
parser/pass/017-double.hyg
Parsing doubles
parser/pass/019-constants.hyg
File to be included in other file
parser/pass/020-library.hyg
Same as above
parser/pass/021-other-lib.hyg
Same as above
parser/pass/022-include.hyg
Parse a file including previous
files
typechecker/fail/016-byte32.hyg
Violate byte32 rules
typechecker/fail/017-byte32-
operations.hyg
Violate binary operation rules
typechecker/fail/018-memory.hyg
Violate memory type rules
typechecker/fail/019-delay.hyg
Violate delay type rules
typechecker/fail/020-using.hyg
Violate using type rules
typechecker/fail/021-using.hyg
Same as above
typechecker/fail/022-using.hyg
Same as above
typechecker/fail/023-using.hyg
Same as above
typechecker/fail/024-double.hyg
Violate double type rules
==PAGE:113==
A.10 Embedded Hygge Tests
103
Test file
Short Description
typechecker/fail/025-double.hyg
Same as above
typechecker/fail/026-double.hyg
Same as above
typechecker/fail/027-double.hyg
Same as above
typechecker/pass/003-print.hyg
Correct typecheck for double
printing
typechecker/pass/012-byte32.hyg
Correct byte32 pretype typing
typechecker/pass/013-bytes32-ops.hyg
Correct binary operator typing
typechecker/pass/014-memory.hyg
Correct memory operator typing
typechecker/pass/015-delay.hyg
Correct delay typing
typechecker/pass/021-using.hyg
Correct using typing
typechecker/pass/022-double.hyg
Correct double typing
==PAGE:114==
104
Appendix
A.11
All New Operations and Commands in Em-
bedded Hygge
Here is a summary of all the new or modified operators in Embedded Hygge that
users can use in their programs. These are provided in Table A.2. Each operator
has been implemented as part of one of the five main goals that were introduced
in Section 3.1. See Table 3.1 for an overview of all the goals, and the sections
that design, implement and test the features of the different goals.
Name
Syntax
Goal
Binary-And
e1&e2
Goal #1
Binary-Or
e1 | e2
Goal #1
Binary-Xor
e1ˆe2
Goal #1
Bitwise Negation
∼e1
Goal #1
Arithmetic right shift
e1 ≫e2
Goal #1
Arithmetic left shift
e1 ≪e2
Goal #1
Read Memory Location
readMem(e1)
Goal #1
Set Memory Location
setMem(e1, e2)
Goal #1
Hex Values
0x123ABC, etc.
Goal #1
Binary Values
01110b, etc.
Goal #1
Read integer from user
readInt()
Goal #2
Read float from user
readFloat()
Goal #2
Read double from user
readDouble()
Goal #2
Print value to console
print(e)
Goal #2
Print value to console with newline
println(e)
Goal #2
Include C functions
using e1; escope
Goal #3
Include Hygge File
#include "string"; escope
Goal #3
Table A.2: Overview of all the new or modified operations available in Embed-
ded Hygge and which goals they target.
In addition, the Embedded Hygge framework provides new commands that ex-
pose functionality for the user. The commands are shown in Table A.3. These
have been added as part of achieving Goal #5: Making the Embedded Hygge
Framework. The relevant sections regarding this goal can be found in Table 3.1.
==PAGE:115==
A.12 Including Third-Party C Files
105
Command
Description
./hyggec compile -t ESP32-C3 [file]
Compile the specified Hygge file into
ESP32-C3 compatible RISC-V Assembly.
./hyggec esp32c3 build [file]
Build the specified Hygge file
for the ESP32-C3.
./hyggec esp32c3 flash [file]
Flash the specified Hygge file
onto the ESP32-C3.
./hyggec esp32c3 emulate [file]
Emulate the specified Hygge file for the
ESP32-C3 using QEMU.
Option: -i "[src1];[src2];...;[src]"
The option “-i” is available for the
three esp32c3 commands and can be used to
include external C files.
Table A.3: Overview of all the new commands and their option available in the
Embedded Hygge framework.
A.12
Including Third-Party C Files
In this section, a small Embedded Hygge project is shown that imports a third-
party C file, which is not part of the standard C library or the ESP-IDF. The
C file is found in Code Listing A.8 and is named “lib.c”. The Embedded Hygge
file is found in Code Listing A.9 and is named “main.hyg”. This file uses asserts
in order to test that the functions produce the correct results. The project can
be found in the Embedded Hygge source code in the folder “examples/includeC”
and run with the command:
./hyggec esp32c3 emulate examples/includeC/main.hyg
-i "examples/includeC/lib.c"
Notice that the command uses the include (-i) option to include the third-party
C file. This option was described in detail in Section 4.5.3.
1 #include <stdio.h>
2 #include <string.h>
3
4 int sum(int a, int b) {
5
return a + b;
6 }
7
8 int stringsMatch(const char* str1, const char* str2) {
9
return strcmp(str1, str2) == 0;
==PAGE:116==
106
Appendix
10 }
Code A.8: Content of the “lib.c” file that defines two functions for “main.hyg”
to use.
1 using sum(int, int): int;
2 using stringsMatch(string, string): bool;
3
4 let string1 = "Hello!!";
5 let string2 = "Hi!";
6 let string3 = "Hello!!";
7
8 assert(not stringsMatch(string1, string2));
9 assert(stringsMatch(string1, string3));
10 assert(not stringsMatch(string2, string3));
11
12 let valueA = 12;
13 let valueB = 13;
14 let valueC = 14;
15
16 assert(sum(valueA, valueB) = valueA + valueB);
17 assert(sum(valueA, valueC) = valueA + valueC);
18 assert(sum(valueB, valueC) = valueB + valueC)
Code A.9: Embedded Hygge program that uses functions defined in a third-
part C file. The functions are defined in “lib.c”, shown in Listing
A.8
==PAGE:117==
A.13 Interfacing with the ESP-IDF Toolchain
107
A.13
Interfacing with the ESP-IDF Toolchain
This section covers more details about how the Embedded Hygge framework
interfaces with the ESP-IDF toolchain. This can be done by issuing commands
to the idf.py script, as described in Section 3.6.
To run this script, an F# process is started, which is part of the System.Diagnostics
namespace. This process uses some start information, which includes the filename
(idf.py) as well as the arguments. In this case, the arguments depend on which
command should be issued.
The command create-project -C ./build [name] will create a project called
name in the build folder of the Hygge directory. When compiling a Hygge file,
the project name will match the filename of the compiled Hygge file. Next, the
target should be set to ESP32-C3.
This is also done using the idf.py script
with the command set-target -C ./build/[name] esp32c3.
Both of these
steps will always be performed before attempting to compile, flash, or emulate
an Embedded Hygge program. Once this is done, a default ESP32-C3 project
will be created.
Similar approaches are used to build the project, flash it for the ESP32-C3, or
simulate it using QEMU.
