==PAGE:1==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Laura Kappel Christensen
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
MASTER’S THESIS
32.5 ECTS
BENCHMARKING MOLECULAR DYNAMICS
ENSEMBLES FOR EFFICIENT STABILITY
ASSESSMENT OF PROTEIN VARIANTS
MSC. IN ENGINEERING:
QUANTITATIVE BIOLOGY AND DISEASE MODELLING
LAURA KAPPEL CHRISTENSEN
16th June 2025
==PAGE:2==
Approval
Official thesis title: Integration of biomolecular simulations and free energy calculations to study
changes in protein stability in protein variants
This thesis, corresponding to 32.5 ECTS credits, has been prepared over 5.5 months at the Section of
Bioinformatics, Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in
collaboration with the Danish Cancer Institute (DCI).
Internal supervisor:
Elena Papaleo, Cancer Systems Biology, Section for Bioinformatics, Department of Health Technology,
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark and Danish Cancer Institute, Copenhagen,
Denmark
External supervisors:
Matteo Arnaudi, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark and Danish Cancer Institute,
Copenhagen, Denmark
Matteo Tiberti, Danish Cancer Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark
Student of MSc Quantitative Biology and Disease Modelling:
Laura Kappel Christensen, s204661
==PAGE:3==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Contents
Abstract
iv
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vi
List of figures
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Protein structure, function, and stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Determining protein stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
MAVISp: a structure-based framework for protein variant analysis . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Molecular dynamics simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Ensemble generation: state of the art approaches and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Case study: ABI1 and its role in cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Aim
9
3
Methods
10
3.1
The MAVISp framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Simulation analysis with MAVISp ensemble mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
MAVISp applied to ABI1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Generation of MD trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Design of starting structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Preparation of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.3
Production run of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Selection of proteins for the benchmarking dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.1
Exclusion of proteins with potential cofactors with the alphafill_cofactor_survey
tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
Ensuring structural diversity in the dataset with pfam_scrape . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Benchmark of simulation lengths and ensembles for stability calculations
. . . . . .
17
3.4.1
Benchmarking of simulation lengths and ensembles for FoldX stability calcu-
lations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.2
Benchmarking of simulation lengths and ensembles for consensus classification 19
3.4.3
Performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Results
20
4.1
Results from the case study of ABI1 with MAVISp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.1
Summary results of ABI1 analysis with MAVISp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.2
Comparison of ABI1 variant stability predictions using MAVISp simple and
ensemble modes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Comparison of ABI1 variant long-range predictions using MAVISp simple
and ensemble modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
4.2
Benchmarking results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.1
Dataset of protein ensembles for benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.2
Benchmarking of simulation times for FoldX stability calculations . . . . . .
28
4.2.3
Benchmarking of simulation times for consensus approach with FoldX and
RaSP stability calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Discussion
34
5.1
Discussion of results from the ABI1 case study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Benchmark dataset design and filtering strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Effect of simulation length on classification performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Trade-offs in ensemble generation strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Conclusion
39
Appendices
48
A
ABI1 AlphaFold2 structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
B
List of cofactors used in AlphaFill filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
C
alphafill_cofactor_survey tool for cofactor detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
D
∆∆G Calculations for ABI1 variants with different stability classification in simple
and ensemble mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
E
Visualisation of long-range effects in ABI1 in simple mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
F
Proteins excluded from the dataset due to overlap with RaSP training data . . . . . .
55
G
FoldX stability benchmark study results for all proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
G.1
FoldX stability performances for clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
G.2
FoldX stability performances for 100 ns simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
G.3
FoldX stability performances for 500 ns simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
H
RMSD vs MCC score table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Abstract
Computational methods are increasingly used to predict the effect of missense mutations on protein
structure and function. MAVISp is a modular, structure-based framework developed to support large-
scale protein variant interpretation using protein structures. It enables analysis using either single
structures (simple mode) or structural ensembles that incorporate protein dynamics. This thesis aims
to improve the efficiency of MAVISp’s ensemble-based protocol by benchmarking the effects of
simulation length and ensemble generation strategy on stability predictions.
The structure-based tools FoldX and RaSP were used in combination with molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations. MD simulations were performed at three time scales (100 ns, 500 ns, and 1000 ns) on
a structurally diverse protein dataset derived from the MAVISp database. Ensemble strategies using
evenly spaced frame extraction were compared to clustering approaches, and results were evaluated
against a 1000 ns reference protocol.
The results showed that 500 ns simulations maintained stability classification accuracy comparable
to the reference in FoldX stability predictions. Even 100 ns simulations and cluster-based ensembles
performed well for most proteins, contributing substantial savings in computational time. MAVISp’s
consensus classification approach, combining FoldX and RaSP, achieved a perfect performance for
confidently classified destabilising and neutral variants for all ensemble strategies, although many
variants were excluded due to classification as uncertain.
To demonstrate the added informative value of ensemble-based analysis in a biological context, a case
study was conducted on the Abelson Interactor 1 (ABI1) protein. Analysis with MAVISp simple and
ensemble mode revealed that ensemble mode yielded more conservative, and potentially more robust,
predictions by capturing structural dynamics.
These findings suggest that MD-based structural ensembles can improve the biological relevance of
variant interpretation. Our results indicate that reducing simulation time is feasible without comprom-
ising accuracy, thereby improving computational efficiency. The results pave the way for more scalable
and accurate integration of protein dynamics into variant analysis with MAVISp.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Acknowledgements
In choosing the theme for my Master’s thesis, I aimed to find a research opportunity that would
contribute to real-life science and align with the skills I have acquired in studying Quantitative Biology
and Disease Modelling. I would therefore like to express my gratitude to my internal supervisor,
Elena Papaleo, for making this project possible, and for her continued guidance and high expectations,
which have pushed me to grow both scientifically and professionally. In the course of writing this
thesis, I have had the privilege of working within a research environment that has both challenged and
inspired me. The project has allowed me to refine my technical and biological skills, particularly in
the context of molecular dynamics and computational biology. I am grateful to Matteo Arnaudi for
his dedicated support throughout this project. As my co-supervisor, he has been exceptionally helpful,
always approachable, and genuinely invested in my progress. Thanks are also due to Matteo Tiberti,
whose insightful feedback on my code provided a valuable perspective on maintaining transparency,
integrity, and robustness in scientific computing. Finally, I would like to thank my fellow students
in the DCI office for their camaraderie and peer-support moments that made the working days more
enjoyable and productive.
v
==PAGE:7==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Abbreviations
ABI1
Abelson Interactor 1
ACMG
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
AMP
Association for Molecular Pathology
CSB
Cancer Structural Biology
DCI
Danish Cancer Institute
MAVE
Multiplexed Assays of Variant Effects
MAVISp
Multi-layered Assessment of VarIants by Structure for proteins
MCC Score
Matthew Correlation Coefficient Score
MD
Molecular Dynamics
NGS
Next-Generation Sequencing
PAE
Predicted Aligned Error
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
PDB
Protein Data Bank
pLDDT
Predicted Local Distance Difference Test
PTM
Post Translational Modification
RMSD
Root Mean Square Deviation
RMSIP
Root Mean Square Inner Product
SASA
Solvent Accessible Surface Area
SH3
Src Homology 3
SLiM
Short Linear Motif
VUS
Variants of Uncertain Significance
vi
==PAGE:8==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
List of Figures
1
The impact of mutations on protein folding free energy (∆G) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The modules in the MAVISp framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
ABI1 domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Mutational effects of AlphaMissense annotated pathogenic variants for ABI1
. . . .
20
5
Overview of ABI1 variants from different sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Mutational effects in ABI1 as detected by MAVISp simple mode . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7
Mutational effects in the ABI1 C-terminal domain detected by MAVISp in simple and
ensemble mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
8
RMSF of residues in the ABI1 C-terminal domain for the 1000 ns simulation
. . . .
23
9
Changes in stability classification for ABI1 variants from simple to ensemble mode in
MAVISp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
10
Long-range effects of E449 mutations in ABI1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
11
Confusion matrix for performance benchmark of FoldX stability predictions for 100
ns vs 1000 ns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
12
Confusion matrix for performance benchmark of FoldX stability predictions for 500
ns vs 1000 ns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
13
Confusion matrix for performance benchmark of FoldX stability predictions for the
cluster-based ensemble vs reference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
14
Individual performance scores for all proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
15
RMSD vs performance MCC score for all proteins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
16
Confusion matrices comparing consensus classification of short simulations and
clusters to 1000 ns reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
17
AlphaFold2-predicted structures of ABI1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
18
List of cofactors with annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
19
Example of the output file from the alphafill cofactor survey tool. . . . . . . . . . . .
51
20
Example of the output file from the annotate heteroatoms script.
. . . . . . . . . . .
51
21
FoldX ∆∆G calculations for ABI1 in cases of discrepancies between simple and
ensemble mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
22
RaSP ∆∆G calculations for ABI1 in cases of discrepancies between simple and en-
semble mode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
23
Mutation- and response sites for residues with destabilising long-range effects in ABI1
in MAVISp simple mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
24
List of proteins excluded from analysis due to overlap with the RaSP training dataset.
55
vii
==PAGE:9==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
1
Introduction
The increasing availability of Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) has enabled the identification of
millions of germline variants across the human genome. Among these, missense mutations, where a
nucleotide substitution leads to an amino acid change in the protein, represent a major class of variation
relevant to human disease. Variants can be grouped into five categories according to the American
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP)
[1]. These categories are pathogenic, likely pathogenic, benign, likely benign, and variants of uncertain
significance (VUS). The purpose of this classification system is to support clinical decision-making
and patient stratification for precision medicine. When variants are classified as VUS, it indicates a
lack of evidence to determine the clinical relevance of that variant. Thus, VUS present a significant
challenge to clinical work, especially within patient stratification and therapy [2].
Experimental methods such as Multiplexed Assays of Variant Effects (MAVE) can help reveal how
mutations affect protein function. MAVE has improved our ability to study multiple variants at once.
Nonetheless, such assays are not available for many variants due to limitations in scalability, cost, and
technical feasibility. As a result, computational predictions often remain the only accessible source of
information, even though they are considered weak evidence under ACMG guidelines [2].
A wide range of pathogenicity predictors has been developed. While these tools can prioritise variants
based on evolutionary or statistical features, most only provide a numerical pathogenicity score without
revealing how a given variant alters protein behaviour. This lack of functional insight limits their
worth in clinical settings [2]. Current approaches include supervised and unsupervised learning models
such as REVEL [3] and EVE [4]. Although some predictors incorporate structural features such as
secondary structure, most do not explicitly model how mutations affect molecular mechanisms. Recent
advances in protein structure prediction have enabled new methods, including AlphaMissense [5],
which integrate tertiary structure information. These tools improve classification performance but still
do not capture mechanistic effects such as destabilisation or interference with phosphorylation sites.
Consequently, their output is difficult to interpret in a clinical context [2].
Structure-based methods enable mechanistic interpretation of missense variants by directly assessing
their molecular consequences on protein features such as stability, interactions, or post-translational
modifications (PTMs). In recent years, several computational frameworks have been developed to
integrate such analyses into modular, automated pipelines. Examples of these include Missense3D
[6], which evaluates structural disruptions from homology models, ProtVar, which combines variant
annotations with structural and functional dimensions [7], and MutationExplorer, which utilises Rosetta
for stability and binding affinity predictions [8]. These frameworks recognise that no single method
can capture the full mechanistic impact of missense mutations. Instead, combining multiple analytical
modules provides a practical strategy for understanding variant effects. The Cancer Structural Biology
(CSB) group at the Danish Cancer Institute (DCI) developed the Multi-layered Assessment of VarIants
by Structure for proteins (MAVISp) framework building on this premise. It integrates structural
analyses to predict how missense variants affect multiple functional aspects of proteins, aiming to
1 of 59
==PAGE:10==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
provide mechanistic insight into disease-associated mutations [9]. In this project, we will use MAVISp
as the foundational framework for analysing protein variants, and we will benchmark and refine its
stability module to improve its performance.
1.1
Protein structure, function, and stability
Proteins are a highly diverse class of biomolecules that carry out many biological functions in the cell.
Some participate in cellular signalling, catalysis, or transport, while others provide structural support
to the cell. To understand the functional consequences of a missense variant, it is essential to first
consider how the mutation affects the protein structure. The structure of a protein determines where
functional regions such as binding sites, pockets, and phosphorylation sites are located. To exercise
its function, the protein must expose these domains at the correct place and time. Thus, even small
structural changes can affect biological activity, cause protein aggregation, or lead to faster degradation
[10] [11] [12].
Protein structure is organised hierarchically. The primary structure is defined by the amino acid se-
quence forming the protein backbone through peptide bonds. This chain folds into local secondary
structures such as α-helices and β-sheets. These structures arise primarily from steric and energetic
constraints on the φ and ψ backbone torsion angles, which in turn are influenced by the chemical
properties of the side chains. The secondary structure then folds into a tertiary structure, forming the
three-dimensional conformation of the protein. In some cases, multiple folded subunits associate into a
protein complex, forming a quaternary structure [13].
However, proteins are not static entities. They exist as dynamic systems that fluctuate between multiple
conformational states. These fluctuations range from fast bond vibrations on the femtosecond (fs)
timescale, side-chain rotations on the picosecond (ps) scale and loop motions occurring over nano-
seconds (ns), to large-scale domain movements between distinct conformational states that take place
on the microsecond (µs) to millisecond (ms) timescale [14]. In many cases, conformational flexibility
allows proteins to adapt their structure to different functional states. This can be critical in molecular
recognition, allosteric regulation, or enzymatic function [10]. As a result, a single static structure rarely
represents the dynamic behaviour that underlies protein function. To study these functional properties,
it is more appropriate to consider proteins as ensembles of interconverting conformations [15].
The structural conformations of proteins are governed by the laws of thermodynamics. These laws
describe how energy is distributed and transformed in a system. In thermodynamic terms, the Gibbs
free energy defines whether a process is energetically favourable [16]. It is given by the following
expression:
∆G = ∆H −T∆S
(1)
This equation describes the change in Gibbs free energy (∆G) as a function of the change in enthalpy
(∆H), the change in entropy (∆S), and the absolute temperature (T). A negative ∆G indicates a
spontaneous process. For protein folding, this means that the transition from the unfolded to the folded
2 of 59
==PAGE:11==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
state must be associated with a decrease in free energy, i.e., ∆G < 0 [13]. In terms of enthalpy, protein
folding is generally favourable because it involves formation of stabilising interactions including
hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces, electrostatic interactions, and disulphide bridges. Together,
these physicochemical forces drive the formation of protein structures, and the balance between them
defines the stability of the folded state [16]. The thermodynamic landscape of a protein can be visualised
as an energy surface with multiple local minima, each corresponding to a distinct conformation. The
native conformational state usually coincides with the global minimum, but transitions between
conformations can occur if the energy barriers between them can be overcome. These transitions
illustrate the dynamic nature of proteins and can be essential for their functions [17][16].
1.1.1
Determining protein stability
Protein variants arising from missense mutations can influence protein structure and thermodynamic
stability. Some mutations can cause local unfolding or disrupt intramolecular interactions. Such effects
can alter protein function either directly at the mutation site or through allosteric mechanisms [2].
Protein stability is closely linked to protein abundance. Destabilising mutations often reduce the fraction
of folded, functional protein, or promote degradation, thereby lowering the abundance. In contrast,
stabilising mutations can increase the abundance by increasing proper folding. As a result, protein
abundance can serve as an indicator of thermodynamic stability. Reduced stability and abundance have
both been associated with loss-of-function phenotypes and severe disease outcomes [18].
Figure 1: Illustration of the impact of mutations on protein folding free energy (∆G)
The Gibbs free energy change between the unfolded and folded states quantifies protein stability. A positive ∆∆G means
that a mutation increases the free energy of the folded state relative to the wild type (WT), resulting in destabilisation.
Conversely, a negative ∆∆G corresponds to a stabilising mutation that lowers the energy of the folded state. Mutations that
do not significantly change ∆G are considered neutral [10]. Created with BioRender.com [19].
The impact of a mutation on stability can be assessed by calculating the changes in the protein’s folding
free energy, ∆G. A mutation that increases the ∆G of the folded state relative to the wild type results in
a positive ∆∆G, indicating a destabilising effect. Conversely, mutations that lower the free energy of
the folded state yield a negative ∆∆G, suggesting increased stability. These concepts are illustrated in
Figure 1. Understanding the thermodynamic effects of mutations is fundamental for predicting their
3 of 59
==PAGE:12==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
impact on protein structure and function. Some variants have local effects, and others may influence
long-range communication or alter the conformational landscape of a protein [17]. Subtle changes
can have pronounced effects, as proteins often rely on a carefully regulated balance of stability and
flexibility to perform their biological roles [10].
Calculating ∆∆G provides a quantitative method for predicting whether and how single amino acid
substitutions will influence protein stability and, consequently, function [10]. Several computational
methods have been developed to quickly and precisely estimate ∆∆G for mutations from structural
data. In this project, we will use two methods for stability prediction, FoldX and RaSP. They provide a
practical and scalable way to estimate mutation-induced changes in protein stability.
FoldX is a semi-empirical force field developed to quickly evaluate the effect of mutations on protein
stability, dynamics, and folding. Using an energy function, it calculates the change in free energy of
macromolecules based on their 3D structures. The energy function combines different empirical terms,
including van der Waals interactions, hydrophobic and polar solvation, hydrogen bonds, electrostatic
interactions, and steric clashes [20]. FoldX has been calibrated using a dataset of experimentally de-
termined changes in free energy by mutations, and the results are most accurate when the calculations
are based on two clearly defined structures such as a wild type and a mutant [20]. FoldX performs one
mutation per command and is therefore not intrinsically suited for high-throughput mutational scans.
Wrappers such as MutateX have been developed to automate FoldX runs and allow high-throughput
mutational scanning [10].
RaSP is a deep learning-based model for Rapid Stability Prediction. The model is trained in two steps
where a self-supervised convolutional neural network learns structural representations, which are then
used by a supervised fully connected neural network to predict Rosetta ∆∆G values [21]. Rosetta
is a widely recognised calculation tool that uses an energy function to estimate changes in protein
stability in mutations [22]. One of the strengths of RaSP is the high speed which enables large-scale
analyses. RaSP predicts ∆∆G with an accuracy that is comparable to Rosetta and can be utilised on
computationally modelled protein structures like those from AlphaFold [21].
1.2
MAVISp: a structure-based framework for protein variant analysis
The analysis of protein variants of uncertain significance is a central challenge in understanding
disease mechanisms. Several computational tools have been developed to predict the pathogenicity
of mutations, but most of them fail to explain the underlying mechanism. This insight is important
in the development of therapies. To accommodate this need, the CSB group of the DCI developed
the MAVISp framework. MAVISp is a framework built in modules, and it is designed to streamline
the structural and functional analysis of protein variants. It integrates data from various bioinformatic
tools and databases and provides a comprehensive overview of how missense mutations affect proteins.
MAVISp annotates variants with data from multiple sources including ClinVar [23], COSMIC [24],
and cBioPortal [25], as well as in silico pathogenicity predictors such as EVE [4], REVEL [3], Al-
phaMissense [5], DeMask [26], and GEMME [27].
4 of 59
==PAGE:13==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
The MAVISp framework extends existing methods by explicitly incorporating protein dynamics
into variant effect prediction. In its ensemble mode, it integrates conformational variability through
ensemble-based structural analysis. Rather than focusing on isolated properties such as pathogenicity
or stability, MAVISp integrates structural and functional changes to provide a more comprehensive
view of mutational effects. This approach supports a mechanistic understanding of protein function and
its disruption, which facilitates systematic study of disease pathways and identification of therapeutic
targets [9].
MAVISp supports two modes of operation. The simple mode is used to analyse a single protein structure,
such as X-ray or AlphaFold models. The ensemble mode incorporates conformational diversity by
analysing ensembles of structures, typically generated through all-atom molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations on the microsecond timescale. The ensemble mode significantly improves the accuracy
and biological relevance of the analysis by accounting for the flexible and dynamic nature of proteins
[9]. The modules of the MAVISp framework have been illustrated in Figure 2. Modules coloured blue
are restricted to the ensemble mode, whereas orange modules can be used in both modes.
Figure 2: The modules in the MAVISp framework
The MAVISp framework consists of eight modules. Modules coloured in blue only exist in the MAVISp ensemble mode,
whereas modules coloured in orange can be used for both simple and ensemble mode.
In this study, particular emphasis is placed on the ensemble mode of MAVISp, as it enables the
incorporation of protein dynamics into the prediction of mutation-induced effects. Whereas the
simple mode provides rapid analysis based on static structures, the ensemble mode allows for a more
biologically realistic assessment by considering structural heterogeneity [9]. This thesis builds on the
MAVISp framework to support structure-based interpretation of missense variants. We benchmark
alternative settings within the pipeline and assess their impact on variant classification based on
5 of 59
==PAGE:14==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
predicted stability changes. Additionally, we introduce a generalised protocol for curating minimally
biased datasets to support benchmarking and facilitate reproducible applications of MAVISp in future
studies.
1.3
Molecular dynamics simulations
To support the ensemble mode in MAVISp, multiple protein conformations are required as input. These
can be obtained from MD simulations, which capture the structural flexibility of proteins over time.
MD simulations have become an important method in computational biology to explore the dynamic
behaviour of biomolecular systems at atomistic resolutions. MD enables the study of events that are
often challenging to observe experimentally. These include protein folding, conformational changes,
and dynamics that happen on the femtosecond to microsecond timescale [28].
The principle behind MD is to iteratively integrate Newton’s laws of motion for each time step, t. The
movement of an atom is determined by its position vector, r, mass m, and the force, F, which is derived
from the potential energy function, V:
Fi = mi
∂2ri
∂t2
(2)
Fi = −∂V
∂ri
(3)
With these calculations, MD simulations generate trajectories that represent the positions and velocities
of all atoms over time, reflecting the dynamic behaviour of the system [29]. In MD, a force field is
used to define the mathematical foundation for calculating the potential energy and forces within the
system. Force fields include parameters for both bonded and non-bonded interactions. The force field
influences the accuracy of the simulation in describing molecular behaviour [30]. In this project, we
will use the CHARMM36 all-atom force field, which explicitly models every atom in the system
resulting in a highly detailed view of molecular interactions. CHARMM36 models energies and forces
using parameter sets derived from quantum mechanical calculations and experimental data, and it is
suitable for capturing the complex interactions within proteins [29].
To initiate an MD simulation, a system configuration is required. This includes the protein of interest,
a solvent environment, and ions to mimic physiological conditions. To eliminate edge effects and
imitate an infinite system, periodic boundary conditions are applied by surrounding the simulation box
with translated copies of itself [30]. The system is then subjected to energy minimisation and equi-
libration steps to resolve steric clashes and establish stable temperature and pressure conditions [29].
The production run then generates the trajectory, a series of system states over time. This trajectory
serves as the basis for subsequent analyses. Software like GROMACS facilitates the execution of MD
simulations by efficiently implementing the required algorithms for force calculations and trajectory
generation [28].
In this project, we use MD simulations to generate protein ensembles for MAVISp analysis, providing
a more realistic representation of the average conformation of proteins compared to single structures.
This approach allows us to investigate variant structures and functions with higher accuracy.
6 of 59
==PAGE:15==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
1.4
Ensemble generation: state of the art approaches and limitations
We have now established that proteins exist as dynamic entities that can fluctuate between multiple
conformations, many of which are functionally relevant. Consequently, relying on a single static struc-
ture may limit the accuracy of predictions regarding the effects of mutations. A more useful approach
is to represent the protein as an ensemble of structures. This allows the computational analysis to
incorporate dynamics [15].
MD simulations provide atomistic ensembles based on physical principles and force fields and are
widely used for modelling protein flexibility and conformational diversity [31]. However, generating
long MD simulations is computationally expensive, making it a bottleneck for further analysis. This
challenge becomes especially relevant in frameworks like MAVISp, which aim to combine accuracy
with efficiency [9]. Several strategies have been proposed to reduce computational cost without sacrifi-
cing reliability. These include selecting representative frames from MD trajectories at regular time
intervals or clustering frames based on conformational similarity [9].
In addition to MD, alternative approaches for ensemble generation have emerged. CABSflex, a coarse-
grained simulation method, allows for rapid exploration of conformational space using simplified
models of protein flexibility [32]. Deep learning-based methods are also starting to succeed. A new
tool, MassiveFold, builds on AlphaFold2 to generate structural diversity through dropout and template
variation [33], and the ICoN model uses MD-trained models to sample plausible conformations beyond
those explicitly observed [34]. These methods offer promising trade-offs between computational
efficiency and structural accuracy, but their performance in different downstream tasks remains largely
untested [35]. Despite these developments, there is currently no consensus on the optimal way to
construct ensembles for use in free energy calculations.
In this context, this study aims to systematically evaluate ensemble generation strategies based on
MD simulations, comparing their performance in FoldX-based stability predictions. By addressing
the trade-off between computational cost and predictive accuracy, this work contributes to improving
the scalability and robustness of ensemble-based methods in structural variant analysis with potential
implications for the configuration of MD protocols within MAVISp. If shorter simulations prove
sufficient for reliable predictions, it would significantly improve the efficiency of large-scale variant
analyses.
1.5
Case study: ABI1 and its role in cancer
The biological relevance of MD simulations and ensemble generation ultimately depends on how well
they support mechanistic interpretation of mutations. Assessing the effects of missense mutations on
protein stability and function is an important element in understanding the role of VUS in cancer-
related proteins. To explore this in a biologically meaningful context, we applied MAVISp to a case
study focusing on the Abelson interactor 1 (ABI1).
7 of 59
==PAGE:16==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
ABI1 is a signal-integrating adaptor protein with essential roles in tumour progression and metastasis.
It is best known for its involvement in organising the actin cytoskeleton, which is essential for cell
shape, movement, and intracellular transport. As part of the regulatory protein complex, WAVE, ABI1
contributes to the regulation of actin polymerisation via activation of the Arp2/3 complex [36]. This
process is critical for cellular activities such as adhesion, motility, and membrane dynamics [37].
According to the UniProt database, ABI1 contains proline rich regions and two highly conserved
domains. These are the t-SNARE coiled-coil homology domain, which may be involved in protein-
protein interactions, and the Src Homology 3 (SH3) domain, known to mediate binding to proline-rich
sequences in signalling proteins [38]. According to the Pfam database, ABI1 contains an Abl-interactor
HHR domain [39]. Additionally, several phosphorylatable residues have been identified, some of
which are functionally relevant in regulatory pathways involving cytoskeletal dynamics and signal
transduction [36].
Figure 3: Illustration of ABI1 domains recognised by the UniProt and Pfam databases
The figure illustrates residues 1-508 of ABI1. According to UniProt, ABI1 has two highly conserved domains: the t-snare
domain in the amino acid residues 45-107, and the SH3 domain in residues 446-505. Three proline-rich regions are found
at residues 278-290, 393-403, and 410-419. According to the Pfam database, ABI1 also contains the Abl-interactor HHR
domain. Based on structural information from UniProt [38] and Pfam [39].
ABI1 plays a complex role in cancer, with both downregulation and upregulation of the protein ob-
served across various cancer types. The protein has been reported to function as a tumour suppressor,
as reduced ABI1 expression is frequently associated with increased cellular proliferation, survival,
and invasion, and has been shown to correlate with poor clinical outcomes [40]. For instance, in
prostate cancer, low ABI1 levels are linked to relapse, metastasis, and reduced survival. Disruption of
ABI1 in benign epithelial cells promotes a more invasive phenotype that is characterised by loss of
cell-cell adhesion and activation of two oncogenic signalling pathways. The first is the non-canonical
WNT pathway, which promotes cellular plasticity. The second is the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), a process whereby epithelial cells acquire migratory and invasive properties [41]. In myeloid
neoplasms, ABI1 downregulation is observed in haematopoietic progenitor cells and associated with
enhanced NF-κB signalling, a pathway involved in inflammation and cell survival [36]. Gastric and
colorectal cancers also show reduced ABI1 expression, which is linked to poor differentiation and
prognosis [40]. In colon cancer, reduced levels of ABI1 have been linked to increased tumour growth.
This appears to result from enhanced degradation of the protein, which leads to the activation of
the ERK pathway, promoting cell proliferation and survival [42]. These findings suggest that ABI1
normally acts to inhibit tumour progression.
Paradoxically, increased expression of ABI1 has also been linked to tumour progression, metastasis,
and poor patient outcomes in several other cancer types. In these cases, ABI1 appears to promote a
8 of 59
==PAGE:17==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
more invasive phenotype, potentially through its involvement in actin-regulating protein complexes
that enhance cell motility [36]. High ABI1 expression in breast cancer correlates with increased risk
of metastasis and mortality. Overexpression is associated with aggressive subtypes and linked to
shorter relapse-free survival. ABI1 is essential for assembling and stabilising the WAVE complex,
which facilitates the formation of actin-rich protrusions that invasive tumour cells use to migrate
[37]. In ovarian cancer, elevated ABI1 levels are associated with advanced tumour stage, increased
invasiveness, and worse overall survival. It has been suggested as an independent prognostic factor that
may actively contribute to disease progression [43]. Overexpression of ABI1 has also been observed in
other cancers, including some forms of brain and gastrointestinal malignancies, where it is frequently
linked to enhanced metastatic potential and poor prognosis [36].
Although most research on ABI1 in cancer has focused on changes in expression levels, variants
affecting other functional aspects have been identified in tumour genomes. Some missense mutations
in the SH3 domain are known to disrupt interactions with ABL1 and promote oncogenic signalling
[36]. Missense mutations near known phosphorylation sites may affect ABI1 regulation. For ex-
ample, dephosphorylation of ABI1 at tyrosine 213 and serine 216 by the tumour suppressor PTEN
leads to ABI1 degradation. Mutations in this region could interfere with this regulatory mechanism [44].
Many ABI1 variants are classified as pathogenic by AlphaMissense, and the molecular mechanisms
behind many of them remain unclear, leaving them as VUS [5]. These variants may affect ABI1’s
structural integrity, binding interfaces, or PTM sites, with potentially wide-ranging consequences for
actin regulation and cellular behaviour. In this study, we will investigate variants of ABI1 using the
MAVISp framework in both simple and ensemble mode with a focus on stability predictions to better
understand how variants might affect protein function, and by extension, cancer progression.
2
Aim
This thesis aims to optimise and evaluate ensemble-based protocols for predicting mutation-induced
stability changes in proteins using MD simulations and stability calculations. Our work contributes to
the ongoing benchmarking effort of MAVISp by systematically investigating the trade-offs between
simulation length, ensemble generation strategies, and stability classification performance. The goal is
to define an efficient, scalable protocol for ensemble-based stability predictions. To achieve this, the
main tasks were to:
• Develop an automated protocol for extracting a diverse and minimally biased protein dataset
from the MAVISp database for benchmarking purposes.
• Generate MD simulations of selected proteins at multiple time scales (100 ns, 500 ns, 1000 ns)
and construct structural ensembles using different sampling strategies.
• Benchmark stability predictions from FoldX using these ensembles, and evaluate classification
performance against the 1000 ns reference protocol.
9 of 59
==PAGE:18==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
• Benchmark the consistency of MAVISp’s consensus classification (FoldX and RaSP) across
ensembles derived from different simulation lengths, using the 1000 ns ensemble as reference.
• Apply the MAVISp framework to the ABI1 protein in a case study focused on comparing
simple and ensemble mode to illustrate the added interpretive value of incorporating structural
dynamics.
By developing and applying tools for the benchmark analysis, this project supports the implementation
of robust and scalable mutation analysis pipelines within the MAVISp framework.
3
Methods
3.1
The MAVISp framework
Here, we outline the modules of the MAVISp framework in simple and ensemble mode. The application
of the framework will be described in Section 3.1.2. Variants for analysis in MAVISp are collected
from multiple public variant databases including ClinVar, COSMIC, and cBioPortal. ClinVar variants
are retrieved using the RefSeq identifier corresponding to the main isoform of the protein of interest.
The Cancermuts Python package is used to collect and annotate missense mutations observed in
cancer-related studies. Cancermuts enables the integration of data from the cBioPortal and COSMIC
databases and combines them with annotations from ClinVar and REVEL [3]. In addition, Cancermuts
incorporates structural and functional protein features such as PTM sites, Short Linear Motifs (SLiMs),
and disordered regions [45]. This allows for a more informed prioritisation of variants that are likely to
be pathogenic. We also apply a saturation mutagenesis strategy to systematically assess all possible
single amino acid substitutions to predict the functional impact of variants that have not yet been
observed in the clinic.
Three modules are dedicated to collect and select a proper structure representative of the protein
of interest, either in the free state or in complex with DNA or protein partners, for the subsequent
analysis. The structure selection module is designed to identify and prepare an input structure in the
free state utilising the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [46], AlphaFold [47], and AlphaFill [48]. By default,
the module downloads the AlphaFold2 structure if it is available. Additionally, MAVISp supports
experimental structures by collecting information about all available structures in the PDB for the
target protein aggregating parameters such as resolution, sequence alignment, and confidence scores
using the PDBminer tool [49]. Thereby, PDBminer provides the option to check the quality of the
model before selection.
The interactome module uses the Mentha database [50] to retrieve experimentally validated protein
interactions, scoring interactors based on experimental support. Only interactions with a Mentha score
≥0.4 are considered, and corresponding complex structures are selected from the PDB or modelled
through Alphamultimer or Alphafold3 [51]. To ensure the reliability of the predicted protein complexes,
several structural confidence metrics are employed. Predicted Template Modelling score (pTM) and
interface predicted TM-score (ipTM) are used to evaluate global and interface-specific confidence for
AlphaFold3 models. Only models with pTM > 0.5 and ipTM > 0.6 are retained for further analysis.
10 of 59
==PAGE:19==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Additionally, pDockQ2, a docking-specific metric incorporating the Predicted Aligned Error (PAE) and
predicted Local Distance Difference Test (pLDDT) scores, is used to assess the quality of multimeric
assemblies. Models can be accepted if pDockQ2 > 0.3. Complexes not reaching this threshold are
only kept if they show a low interface Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) (< 1 Å) when compared
to available experimental structures.
The ensemble generation module enables the collection of conformational ensembles representing
the structural flexibility of the protein. Depending on the required structural detail and computa-
tional resources, ensembles can be derived from experimental NMR structures from the PDB, or
from atomistic MD simulations carried out with GROMACS [28]. These ensembles are then used
as input for further analysis and may represent the protein alone or in complex with interaction partners.
The analysis modules of MAVISp comprise five modules in the ensemble mode and four modules in the
simple mode. The stability module is used to assess the effect of variants on local folding and structural
stability. This module uses MutateX, a streamlined workflow for FoldX-based calculations [10] and
RaSP [21] software for free energy calculations. These are used in a consensus approach, combining
RaSP and FoldX (via MutateX) to determine the change in stability upon mutation. Integrating
predictions from both methods increases confidence and improves the identification of potentially
damaging variants [9]. The output consists of ∆∆G values for each variant from both tools, along
with a classification as stabilising, destabilising, neutral, or uncertain. In MAVISp, the classification
scheme is as follows:
• Stabilising: ∆∆G ≤−3 kcal/mol
• Neutral: −2 ≤∆∆G ≤2 kcal/mol
• Destabilising: ∆∆G ≥3 kcal/mol
• Uncertain: Variants with conflicting predictions, −3 < ∆∆G < −2, or 2 < ∆∆G < 3 kcal/mol
The stability classification thresholds applied in MAVISp are based on experimental and computational
evidence showing that mutations with ∆∆G values below 3 kcal/mol typically do not lead to significant
decrease of protein abundance at the cellular level [52][53]. The intermediate range between ±2
and ±3 kcal/mol, where the biological relevance is less certain, is therefore classified as uncertain.
Moreover, mutations for which FoldX and RaSP disagree are also labelled as uncertain. This classific-
ation strategy ensures that only mutations with a high likelihood of having an effect are classified as
(de)stabilising [9].
The local interactions module evaluates the effect of variants on binding free energy at interaction
interfaces with DNA or other protein molecules using protocols adapted from the stability module.
The calculations are based on the structures selected in the interactome module. Variant filtering is
guided by proximity to the interaction interface (≤10 Å).
11 of 59
==PAGE:20==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
The long-range effects module predicts how variants induce allosteric changes within the protein
residues inside functional pockets. The long-range module calculates changes in allosteric free en-
ergy (∆G) using AlloSigMA2 [54] on the structure used in simple mode. AlloSigMA2 represents
the protein structure as an elastic network model, where residues are nodes connected by springs
representing inter-residue interactions. Each residue is systematically mutated to all other amino acids,
and substitutions are classified as up, neutral, or down mutations depending on whether the side-chain
volume increases, remains unchanged, or decreases. For each substitution, AlloSigMA2 calculates the
allosteric free energy change (∆G), and variants are classified as destabilising, stabilising, mixed effects,
or uncertain. For long-range effects, a variant is classified as destabilising if it results in a positive
∆G, indicating increased protein flexibility. Conversely, a negative ∆G indicates stabilising long-range
effects, reflecting reduced flexibility. If a mutation results in a mixture of positive and negative ∆G
values depending on the site, it is classified as mixed effects. Before classification, MAVISp discards
mutations located in coiled-coil regions due to the limited accuracy of AlloSigMA2 in these domains.
A minimum Cα −Cα distance of 15 Å is used to define long-range effects. The analysis is further
restricted to response sites with a solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) above 20%, and only residues
located within predicted pockets or binding sites are considered functionally affected. Pockets are
detected using the Fpocket algorithm [55].
The PTM module is used for investigating the effects of variants on PTMs, and the consequent impact
on stability and regulation. The PTM module currently supports only phosphorylation. It integrates ex-
perimentally validated phosphorylation sites from the PhosphoSitePlus database [56], relative solvent
accessibility calculated with NACCESS [57], and SLiM annotations from the ELM database [58].
Based on this information, the module provides three layers of classification: (i) predicted stability
change upon phosphorylation, based on ∆∆G between mutant and phosphorylated states, (ii) regulatory
effects, where variants removing solvent-accessible phosphorylation sites and not involving S, T, or Y
are classified as damaging, and (iii) functional impact, based on the presence of phosphorylation sites
within SLiMs. If the site is solvent-accessible and belongs to a curated phospho-dependent SLiM, the
variant is classified as possibly damaging.
To complement the functional and structural analyses, MAVISp integrates variant effect predictions
from DeMaSk [26], GEMME [27], and AlphaMissense [5]. These computational predictions provide
additional context on the functional consequences of the mutations included in the analysis.
The MAVISp framework produces a comprehensive CSV file summarising module-specific results,
including free energy changes, stability classifications, interaction scores, structural annotations, and
long-range effect predictions. Additionally, graphical outputs such as dot-plots and lolli-plots are
generated to facilitate interpretation. Dot-plots visualise all mutational effects and annotations, while
lolli-plots focus on selected variant sets, such as AlphaMissense pathogenic variants, and display their
predicted impact. Summary plots showing variant counts and their sources are also provided. For the
long-range effects module, PyMOL sessions with colour-coded residues can be provided to allow for
visual inspection of mutational effects.
12 of 59
==PAGE:21==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
3.1.1
Simulation analysis with MAVISp ensemble mode
Analysis with MAVISp ensemble mode requires an ensemble of structures. When experimental struc-
tures are available, such as those obtained from NMR, the ensemble is provided directly in the PDB
file. In contrast, when using predicted structures, the ensemble must be generated from MD simulation
trajectories. Trajectory files obtained from MD simulations are analysed using the internal Mol Ana-
lysis script [59] [60], which depends on GROMACS. First, proteins are recentred in the simulation box
to ensure proper alignment and continuity throughout the trajectory. Then, the RMSD of Cα atoms
are computed to assess structural resemblance relative to the starting structure and Root Mean Square
Fluctuation (RMSF) of Cα atoms is used to find the flexibility of each residue relative to its mean
position across the simulation. The radius of gyration (Rg) metric is used to analyse the compactness
of the protein structure over time, while the minimum distance to the edge is evaluated to confirm
absence of periodic artefacts. A threshold of 0.9 nm is used for the minimum distance to verify that the
protein has not interacted with its own image. Additionally, a trajectory movie is created by converting
the trajectory into a multi-frame PDB file. This representation allows for visual inspection of the
simulation to identify any unusual behaviour not captured by numerical metrics. This quality control
step verifies that the simulation has run as expected.
The simulated MD trajectory is then analysed using the MAVISp protocol for simulation analysis.
The eight-step protocol ensures consistent analysis across simulations and facilitates the generation of
ensembles from the trajectory. First, two index files are generated. One indexes the Cα atoms and the
other indexes all residues classified as protein. These files are required for downstream filtering and
analysis with GROMACS. Then, filtered topology files are generated by applying the index files to the
original topologies. This enables compatibility with subsequent GROMACS analyses and reduces the
computational cost of subsequent steps by restricting calculations to the protein, excluding simulation
components such as water and ions. Thirdly, the trajectory files are similarly filtered using the same
index files. The fourth step supports subsequent ensemble generation by splitting the PDB movie
created during Mol Analysis into individual PDB files for each frame.
Then, the ensembles that are used in later analyses are generated. In step five of the simulation analysis,
ensembles consisting of 25 and 50 frames are sampled from the trajectory. The frames are selected
at evenly spaced time intervals across the simulation, ensuring that each ensemble is representative
of the full simulation time scale. Step six is performed in parallel with step five. Here, clustering is
performed based on RMSD to generate alternative ensembles. Nine clusters are found and sorted by
population, and the three most populated clusters are selected for analyses as they capture the majority
of conformations sampled during the simulation. For each of these clusters, the centroid structure
representing the average conformation is identified and used as input for the RaSP stability predictions.
Steps seven and eight include additional MAVISp analyses on the generated structural ensembles.
Solvent accessibility is assessed using the NACCESS software for calculating solvent-accessible
surface area (SASA) [57]. The analysis is applied to all frames across the simulation, providing an
overview of changes in solvent exposure over time for each residue.
13 of 59
==PAGE:22==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Finally, long-range interaction analysis in ensemble mode is conducted using the functional dynamics
module in MAVISp. This module constructs atomic-contact Protein Structure Networks (acPSNs)
using PyInteraph2 [61], where residues are represented as nodes and persistent side-chain atomic
contacts form weighted edges. Edges are retained if interactions are present in at least 50% of the
frames. Shortest-path analysis is then performed to identify efficient communication routes of four
or more residues, with a minimum Cα −Cα distance of 15 Å, focusing on long-range, functionally
relevant effects. The analysis is restricted to contact paths connecting the mutation site to residues
located within predicted functional pockets, identified using the Fpocket algorithm [55]. Variants are
then annotated as damaging if they affect residues connected to functional pocket sites.
3.1.2
MAVISp applied to ABI1
We used the MAVISp structure selection module to identify and prepare the input structure of ABI1. A
predicted structure generated by AlphaFold2 for the UniProt accession (AC) Q8IZP0 was selected, as it
included more residues and was not part of a complex, as opposed to available experimental structures.
The structure selection module provided an overview of regions containing residues with low pLDDT
scores in the AlphaFold2 structure. We used this information to decide on trimming the structure to
include only domains with relatively high certainty. ABI1 has two domains with consistently high
pLDDT scores, separated by unstructured loop regions. We therefore decided to treat these domains
separately, resulting in the following selected structures:
Gene Name
Pfam domain
Trimming Strategy (residues)
ABI1
Abl-interactor HHR (PF07815)
1–155
ABI1
SH3 domain (PF00018)
436-508
Table 1: ABI1 structures selected for analysis with MAVISp
Due to extraordinary computational demand from the MD simulation of residues 1-155, we were not
able to proceed with this domain in the ensemble mode. Thus, the ensemble mode analysis of ABI1 is
limited to the residues 436-508. The ABI1 AlphaFold2 structure can be seen in Appendix A.
To ensure a comprehensive dataset and allow for systematic analyses, we included variants from
the clinical databases queried by MAVISp as well as all possible amino acid substitutions generated
through saturation mutagenesis, covering positions and substitutions not yet reported in databases. To
assess the effect of variants on protein folding and structural stability, we used the MAVISp protocol
for stability classification with the stability module using the consensus approach. For the simple mode,
this was done on the static AlphaFold2 structure for both structural domains. In the MAVISp ensemble
mode, the stability module was applied to the ensemble generated from the MD simulation of 1000 ns
with 25 frames. We used the long-range effects and functional dynamics modules as described in the
previous sections to predict how variants influence allosteric communication between functional sites
or pockets. The PTM module was used to investigate the effects of variants on phosphorylation and the
consequent influence on stability and regulation.
14 of 59
==PAGE:23==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
3.2
Generation of MD trajectory
In the case study of ABI1 as well as the benchmarking study, all ensembles were generated from MD
simulation trajectories.
3.2.1
Design of starting structure
To obtain the simulation trajectories, the first step was to prepare the starting structures for the
simulations. Structures were primarily retrieved from the AlphaFold2 database. In cases where the
AlphaFold2 model exhibited high structural uncertainty, indicated by low pLDDT scores, structures
were instead generated using AlphaFold3. The structures then underwent manual trimming to include
only regions without low pLDDT scores. The trimming of all structures used for the benchmarking
study can be seen in Table 3.
3.2.2
Preparation of the system
After manual trimming of each protein entry, termini were capped according to whether they represen-
ted internal or native chain ends. Trimmed ends were neutralised by adding NH2 and COOH caps to
the N- and C-termini, respectively. This mimics the natural neutralisation that would normally occur
through a peptide bond to the adjacent amino acids, which were removed during the trimming step of
the simulation protocol. For trimmed proteins that kept their native termini after trimming, we used
NH+
3 and COO−for capping to reflect physiological terminal charges.
For proteins containing histidine residues, the correct protonation state was verified using a three-step
procedure involving H++ software [62], GROMACS [28] tools, and visual inspection in PyMOL.
Discrepancies between prediction methods were resolved by selecting the ε-protonated form of his-
tidine, which predominates at physiological pH [63]. The protonation of histidines can be influential
for simulations and stability calculations, as the electrostatic properties can change dramatically with
different protonations [62]. For ABI1, all three methods agreed on ε-protonation of the single histidine
residue.
To prepare each of the protein structures for simulation under biologically relevant conditions, we
followed a standard setup in GROMACS [28] using the CHARMM36 force field [64] and the TIP3P
water model. The structure was placed in a dodecahedral simulation box with at least 1.2 nm spacing to
the box edge and solvated. To mimic physiological conditions, counterions (Na+ and Cl−) were added
to neutralise the charge and achieve a 150 mM salt concentration. We then performed a minimisation
step using the steepest descent algorithm for 10000 steps. This ensured that any bad contacts in the
solvated structure were resolved.
Next, the system was gradually equilibrated through a series of simulations. Initially, temperature
equilibration was performed under NVT conditions with position restraints applied to the heavy atoms
of the protein. This was followed by pressure equilibration in the NPT ensemble in two steps: first
with restraints on the protein backbone, and then without any restraints. In all simulations, temperature
was kept constant at 298 K using the velocity-rescale thermostat, and pressure was coupled to 1 bar
15 of 59
==PAGE:24==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
using either the Berendsen [65] or Parrinello-Rahman [66] barostat. Bond lengths involving hydrogen
atoms were constrained using the Linear Constraint Solver (LINCS) algorithm [67]. Non-bonded
interactions were handled using a 0.9 nm cut-off for both van der Waals and electrostatics. Long-range
electrostatics were treated using the particle-mesh Ewald (PME) method [68].
To evaluate the setup before long simulations, a short test simulation with a wall time of 6 minutes
was run. During this phase, the system’s integrity was assessed using the Mol Analysis script [59] as
described in Section 3.1.1. Together, the trajectory movie, RMSD, RMSF, Rg, and minimum distance
metrics provided assurance that all systems were well-suited for production runs.
3.2.3
Production run of the system
Production simulations were performed using GROMACS 2024 [28] together with the CHARMM36
force field [64] with a time step of 2 fs. Each protein system was simulated in the NPT ensemble
for all three simulation lengths (100 ns, 500 ns and 1000 ns). Simulation parameters, such as cut-
offs, constraints and thermostats, were kept consistent with the equilibration protocol as described
above. The Mol Analysis script was utilised for monitoring the simulation at checkpoints during the
simulation.
3.3
Selection of proteins for the benchmarking dataset
The dataset used in the benchmarking study was compiled from the MAVISp simple mode database
retrieved on May 15th, 2025 (available at https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/
MAVISp-1.0/) and curated specifically for benchmarking purposes. The full database comprised 665
proteins. To avoid bias in the evaluation of RaSP predictions, we excluded all proteins that were used
in the training of the RaSP predictor. To enable reliable MD simulations, we focused exclusively on
trimmed structural regions that do not require coordination of cofactors or metal ions for their structural
integrity or function. Additionally, Pfam domain annotations were used to ensure structural diversity
of the final dataset. For each protein in the final dataset, MD simulations of 100 ns, 500 ns, and 1000
ns were collected. From each trajectory, ensembles of 25 frames were extracted evenly across the
trajectory. In addition, for each protein three representative conformations were extracted from the
1000 ns simulation using RMSD-based clustering. The 25-frame ensemble derived from the 1000 ns
simulation serves as the reference in this study, as it reflects the protocol currently implemented in
MAVISp.
3.3.1
Exclusion of proteins with potential cofactors with the alphafill_cofactor_survey tool
To avoid common limitations associated with inaccurate or missing force field parameters for cofactors,
we excluded proteins if the trimmed structures contained regions potentially requiring cofactors
or metal ions for structural stability or function. This ensures that resulting simulations are ro-
bust for stability analysis. We identified such proteins using the AlphaFill annotation system [48],
which detects potential cofactors by transferring ions and small molecules from homologous ex-
perimental structures. To automate and standardise this process, we developed the Python-based
tool alphafill_cofactor_survey, which is available on GitHub (https://github.com/ELELAB/
16 of 59
==PAGE:25==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
mavisp_accessory_tools) [69]. The tool accepts as input a single UniProt AC or an index file from
MAVISp in CSV format containing a column with UniProt AC’s. It then returns all heteroatoms
associated with AlphaFill-annotated PDB entries with ≥30% sequence identity to the UniProt AC(’s)
provided. Non-functional additives such as glycerol or buffer ions are excluded via post-processing,
using a curated list of biologically relevant cofactors and the PDBe cofactor dictionary [70]. The
annotated list of cofactors can be found in Appendix B. With this filtering step, we ensure that the
final dataset is limited to domains that can be simulated in the absence of cofactors, consistent with
the benchmark study design. A detailed description of the alphafill_cofactor_survey tool can be
found in Appendix C.
3.3.2
Ensuring structural diversity in the dataset with pfam_scrape
To reduce structural redundancy, we applied a final filtering step based on protein domain annotations.
Using the pfam_scrape tool from the MAVISp toolkit (https://github.com/ELELAB/mavisp_
accessory_tools) [71], we selected one representative protein for each unique Pfam domain or
combination of domains. Pfam is a database of protein families, where each family represents a
conserved functional domain [39]. By keeping only one representative structure per Pfam domain, we
ensured that each protein in the final dataset reflected a structurally distinct unit. The pfam_scrape
tool selects representative domains using a stochastic ranking method. To maximise the number of
informative proteins retained during the main filtering steps, and to avoid prematurely excluding
proteins that could otherwise have been retained, this step was applied last.
3.4
Benchmark of simulation lengths and ensembles for stability calculations
To evaluate whether stability classifications remain consistent across ensembles obtained from different
approaches and simulation times, we conducted two benchmarking analyses. One focused on FoldX
calculations, and another on consensus classifications combining FoldX (via MutateX) and RaSP, as
implemented in MAVISp. In both cases, we varied only the ensembles used by MutateX, while the
RaSP predictions were kept constant using the default clustering-based ensemble of three centroid
structures from the 1000 ns simulation. Specifically, we compared four ensemble types: i) 25 evenly
spaced frames from a 1000 ns simulation (the current default protocol for MutateX in MAVISp), ii–iii)
25 frames from 100 ns and 500 ns simulations, and iv) a cluster-based ensemble consisting of three
centroid structures extracted from RMSD-based conformational clustering of the 1000 ns simulation.
For this benchmarking, we focused on mutations classified as destabilising and neutral according to
the MAVISp threshold.
Stability predictions were assessed from free energy calculations using both FoldX via the MutateX
pipeline and RaSP. In these scans, every residue in the protein sequence was systematically mutated to
all 19 alternative amino acids, resulting in a comprehensive set of ∆∆G predictions. FoldX was used to
calculate ∆∆G values for each ensemble structure, while RaSP predictions were performed only on
three representative cluster centroids, selected based on structural similarity. MutateX calculations for
25-frame ensembles were executed on the DTU Health Tech computing cluster using 26 CPU cores by
default. The MutateX calculations on cluster-based ensembles were performed locally. Results were
17 of 59
==PAGE:26==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
extracted in CSV format.
Before running RaSP, additional pre-processing for each cluster representative was required. This
included removal of solvent and hydrogen atoms, correction of residue naming schemes, and adjust-
ment of PDB formatting to match input requirements. Each cluster directory contained a cleaned PDB
structure that was analysed separately.
To interpret the predicted stability changes, we used the MAVISp classification scheme based
on ∆∆G thresholds and consensus approach as described in Section 3.1. The Python scripts de-
veloped for benchmarking the different ensemble strategies, including classification comparison,
metric calculation, and output generation, are available on GitHub at https://github.com/ELELAB/
mavisp_accessory_tools. The script used for the FoldX benchmark is located in the folder tools/
stability_benchmark_sim_length [72], and the script for the consensus benchmark can be found
in tools/consensus_benchmark_sim_length [73].
3.4.1
Benchmarking of simulation lengths and ensembles for FoldX stability calculations
The first aim was to investigate how simulation length and ensemble sampling affected stability
calculations with the FoldX energy function. For this, we developed a Python script to compare outputs
across different ensemble types. The script allows selection of a custom reference simulation time and
optional output directory via command line flags. Here, we compared 500 ns and 100 ns simulations
with 25 frames as well as 1000 ns simulations with three clusters based on RMSD against the reference
of 1000 ns simulations with 25 frames. Performance was evaluated globally and separately for each
protein to identify cases of inconsistency or outlier behaviour. Input files for the script consisted of the
energies.csv files from each ensemble type, which is the MutateX output file. Each mutation was
classified into one of four categories based on the MAVISp ∆∆G thresholds: stabilising, destabilising,
neutral, or uncertain. For each variant, a confusion matrix was computed for each comparison between
the reference and an alternative ensemble (e.g., a shorter simulation or a cluster-based ensemble). The
matrix captured:
• True Positives (TP): variants destabilising in both alternative and reference,
• True Negatives (TN): variants neutral in both,
• False Positives (FP): variants predicted as destabilising in alternative, but neutral in reference,
• False Negatives (FN): variants predicted as neutral in alternative, but destabilising in reference.
Based on this, we calculated six commonly used classification metrics: sensitivity, specificity, precision,
accuracy, F1 score, and Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC). These measures quantify different
aspects of classification performance and will be described in Section 3.4.3. The results of the
benchmark analysis were stored in structured output folders with per-gene and full-dataset summaries,
confusion matrix plots, and performance tables.
18 of 59
==PAGE:27==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
3.4.2
Benchmarking of simulation lengths and ensembles for consensus classification
In the second benchmark, we evaluated how the final consensus classification was affected by simula-
tion length and ensemble sampling. Here, we compared the consensus classification from FoldX in
combination with RaSP for the ensembles in our dataset. This reflects the current MAVISp protocol,
where predictions are based on the combination of two tools to increase robustness. We used a Python
script to compare stability classifications derived from the consensus column in the MAVISp output
CSV file. The file contains the stability classification of each variant based on the combined predictions
from FoldX and RaSP. The reference ensemble (1000 ns simulation with 25 frames) was compared to
the 500 ns and 100 ns simulations with 25 frames, as well as the cluster-based ensembles. For each
comparison, a confusion matrix was generated using the same scheme as described above, and the
same performance metrics were computed. The results were stored in structured output folders with
per-gene and full-dataset summaries, confusion matrix plots, and performance tables.
3.4.3
Performance metrics
Here, we describe the performance metrics used in the benchmark study. We included six different
metrics to be able to distinguish between different aspects of performance. For example, sensitivity
measures detection power, precision measures reliability, and MCC accounts for overall balance in
classification accuracy.
Sensitivity (Recall):
Sensitivity =
TP
TP+FN
(4)
Sensitivity is the rate of true positives [74] and it measures the ability to correctly identify destabilising
variants. A higher value indicates better detection of true positives.
Specificity:
Specificity =
TN
TN +FP
(5)
Specificity is the rate of true negatives [74] and is therefore a measure of the ability to correctly identify
neutral variants and avoid falsely classifying them as destabilising.
Accuracy:
Accuracy =
TP+TN
TP+TN +FP+FN
(6)
Accuracy reflects the overall proportion of correctly classified variants [74].
Precision:
Precision =
TP
TP+FP
(7)
Precision is a measure of how often a positive prediction is correct [74]. High precision reduces the
risk of falsely labelling neutral variants as destabilising.
F1 Score:
F1 Score =
2·TP
2·TP+FP+FN = 2· Precision·Recall
Precision+Recall
(8)
19 of 59
==PAGE:28==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
The F1 score is calculated as the harmonic mean of precision and recall [74]. It balances the trade-off
between the ability to detect destabilising variants and the risk of falsely labelling neutral variants as
destabilising.
Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC):
MCC =
TP·TN −FP·FN
p
(TP+FP)(TP+FN)(TN +FP)(TN +FN)
(9)
The MCC score is often used in the context of imbalanced data, as it accounts for all four components
of the confusion matrix (true and false positives and negatives). It is a balanced measure of a binary
classification performance. The result is a correlation coefficient between predicted class labels from
the compared methods, ranging from -1 (total disagreement) to 1 (perfect prediction), with 0 indicating
random performance [74].
4
Results
4.1
Results from the case study of ABI1 with MAVISp
We conducted an analysis of ABI1 using both simple and ensemble modes of MAVISp. The MAVISp
output files in CSV format are included in a separate appendix. In this section, we present the most
important results and compare the outputs delivered by the two modes. Particular focus is placed on
the stability and long-range modules, as these are more sensitive to mode-specific differences.
4.1.1
Summary results of ABI1 analysis with MAVISp
With MAVISp simple mode, a total of 4236 variants were analysed. Of these, 77 variants were reported
in at least one of the databases ClinVar, cBioPortal, and COSMIC. AlphaMissense predicted 3664 of
the variants to be pathogenic, and of these, 650 showed a module-specific effect according to MAVISp
simple mode. Figure 4 shows the distribution of MAVISp-annotated mutational effects among the
variants that were classified as pathogenic by AlphaMissense.
Figure 4: Mutational effects of AlphaMissense annotated pathogenic variants for ABI1 in MAVISp simple mode
The diagram illustrates how the MAVISp effects were distributed across PTM, stability, and long-range effects. Only
variants classified as pathogenic by AlphaMissense and with at least one MAVISp-annotated effect are shown. 650 of the
AlphaMissense pathogenic variants showed long-range, PTM, or stability effects according to MAVISp simple mode.
20 of 59
==PAGE:29==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Figure 5 provides an overview of ABI1 variants from external databases (cBioPortal, COSMIC, and
ClinVar) and variants found by the saturation analysis with MAVISp.
Figure 5: Overview of ABI1 variants from different sources
Saturation analysis of ABI1 using MAVISp simple mode included all possible missense variants in the N-terminal (residues
1–155) and C-terminal (residues 436–508) domains, resulting in 4236 variants. Of these, 77 were previously observed in at
least one of the public databases cBioPortal, COSMIC, or ClinVar. This plot was automatically created by MAVISp.
MAVISp simple mode identified mutational effects related to stability, PTMs, and long-range structural
communication. Long-range effects were located in the C-terminal domain (residues 436-508), as
the coiled-coil structure of the N-terminal domain was filtered out in the long-range module (see
Section 3.1). PTM- and stability-related effects were found in both structural domains. The spatial
distribution of mutational effects is shown in Figure 6. Across the entire saturation analysis of ABI1,
3664 variants were classified as pathogenic by AlphaMissense. Of these, 286 variants were predicted
to be destabilising using the MAVISp stability module consensus approach, 620 variants had uncertain
stability predictions, 54 variants showed destabilising long-range effects (AlloSigma), 291 variants
showed mixed long-range effects, and 94 were classified as uncertain with respect to long-range impact.
Regarding PTM-related effects 134 variants had damaging effects in regulatory regions, 41 affected
PTM site stability, and 98 variants were predicted to interfere with PTM function.
21 of 59
==PAGE:30==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
(a) Simple mode mutational effects detected by MAVISp in the
N-terminal domain (residues 1-155) of ABI1
(b) Simple mode mutational effects detected by MAVISp in the
C-terminal domain (residues 436-508) of ABI1
Figure 6: Mutational effects in ABI1 as detected by MAVISp simple mode
(a) The N-terminal domain (residues 1-155) shows predominantly local stability-related effects (purple), with few PTM-
related variants and no long-range effects. (b) The C-terminal domain (residues 436-508) displays a more diverse mutational
landscape, with widespread long-range effects (yellow) and several residues affected by multiple functional categories
including PTM-effects (red, blue, green). Each residue is coloured by mutational effect: yellow = long-range effects; purple
= stability effects; orange = PTM effects; red = stability and PTM; green = stability and long-range; blue = long-range and
PTM.
The MAVISp ensemble mode confirmed many of the simple mode annotations in the C-terminal
domain. In Figure 7, the structural distribution of the identified mutational effects can be compared.
(a) Mutational effects in the ABI1 C-terminal domain (residues
436-508) detected by MAVISp ensemble mode
(b) Mutational effects in the ABI1 C-terminal domain (residues
436-508) detected by MAVISp simple mode
Figure 7: Mutational effects in the ABI1 C-terminal domain detected by MAVISp simple and ensemble mode
(a) In MAVISp ensemble mode, a total of 226 variants were found pathogenic with AlphaMissense and had a mutational
effect according to MAVISp. (b) In MAVISp simple mode, a total of 498 variants were found pathogenic with AlphaMissense
and had a mutational effect according to MAVISp. Each residue is coloured by mutational effect: yellow = long-range effects;
purple = stability effects; orange = PTM effects; red = stability and PTM; green = stability and long-range; blue = long-range
and PTM.
In MAVISp simple mode, 498 variants in the C-terminal domain were both classified as pathogenic
by AlphaMissense and associated with a mutational effect by MAVISp, whereas only 226 such
variants were detected using ensemble mode. This suggests that the simple mode may overestimate the
functional consequences of mutations in ABI1. Stability-related mutations within the structured core
of the C-terminal domain were largely consistent between the two MAVISp modes. These residues
also showed low RMSF values, indicating that the local structural context remained stable across the
simulation trajectory. In contrast, loop and unstructured regions diverged more between simple and
22 of 59
==PAGE:31==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
ensemble mode, which is expected given their higher flexibility in the ensemble mode. Figure 8 shows
per-residue RMSF accross the 1000 ns simulation of the ABI1 C-terminal domain.
Figure 8: RMSF of residues in the ABI1 C-terminal domain for the 1000 ns simulation
The Root Mean Square Fluctuation (RMSF) of each residue in the ABI1 C-terminal domain is shown as an average over the
1000 ns simulation. RMSF reflects the positional deviation of each residue relative to its mean position. Notably, increased
flexibility is observed at both termini, as well as in loops connecting β-strands at residues 459-463 and 479-482.
In the following sections, we will explore the differences in stability and long-range effects in the
C-terminal domain of ABI1 between the simple and ensemble modes in more detail.
4.1.2
Comparison of ABI1 variant stability predictions using MAVISp simple and ensemble
modes
Stability predictions in MAVISp simple mode
In MAVISp simple mode, 286 variants were classified as destabilising. 202 of the destabilising variants
were located in the C-terminal domain and 84 were located in the N-terminal domain. A total of 654
variants were classified as uncertain, either due to disagreement between FoldX and RaSP, or because
the predicted |∆∆G| fell within the range of 2–3 kcal/mol. 341 of these uncertain variants were situated
in the C-terminal domain. No variants were classified as stabilising.
Stability predictions in MAVISp ensemble mode
In ensemble mode, only the C-terminal domain was analysed. Using the consensus approach, 139
variants were classified as destabilising, 928 as neutral, and 320 as uncertain. Thus, 21 variants
previously marked as uncertain in simple mode received a definitive classification in ensemble mode.
Further investigation showed that variants were reclassified in both directions between modes. Figure
9 illustrates these changes in variant classification between the simple and ensemble modes. In total,
138 variants previously labelled as uncertain in simple mode received a definitive classification in
ensemble mode, with 125 assigned as neutral and 13 as destabilising. Conversely, 117 variants
that were definitively classified in simple mode became uncertain in ensemble mode. Among these
uncertain variants, 72 were originally classified as destabilising and 45 as neutral in simple mode. This
23 of 59
==PAGE:32==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
bidirectional shift suggests that MAVISp simple mode may have overestimated the destabilising effects.
As ensemble mode incorporates conformational heterogeneity, this mode might buffer or diminish
destabilising predictions for flexible regions.
Figure 9: Changes in stability classification of ABI1 variants from simple to ensemble mode in MAVISp
The figure illustrates classifications and reclassifications of variants between simple and ensemble modes for all ABI1
variants in the C-terminal domain. Thickness of the flow reflects the number of variants. 138 variants labelled as uncertain in
simple mode were assigned definitive classifications in ensemble mode (125 as neutral, 13 as destabilising). 117 variants lost
a definitive classification when switching to ensemble mode (72 from destabilising, 45 from neutral to uncertain).
In conclusion, simple mode appears to have overestimated the destabilising effects of mutations.
Predicted ∆∆G values from both RaSP and FoldX for reclassified variants have been illustrated as
column charts in Appendix D. These illustrate that variants classified differently in the two modes
often exhibited higher ∆∆G values in simple mode compared to ensemble mode. This suggests that the
ensemble mode provides more conservative predictions by accounting for structural flexibility across
multiple conformations.
4.1.3
Comparison of ABI1 variant long-range predictions using MAVISp simple and ensemble
modes
The long-range and functional dynamics modules of MAVISp were used to investigate allosteric effects
in simple and ensemble mode, respectively. In simple mode, 345 of the AlphaMissense pathogenic
variants had mixed- or destabilising effects on long-range interactions, while only 18 AlphaMissense
pathogenic variants had damaging long-range effects according to MAVISp ensemble mode. These
differences may be due to the protein dynamics, which are better captured by the ensemble mode, or
they may arise from the methodological differences in how long-range interactions are computed in
the two modes.
MAVISp simple mode long-range prediction of ABI1
In MAVISp simple mode, all 54 AlphaMissense pathogenic variants with long-range destabilising
effects were a result of up-mutations. These substitutions introduced larger amino acids with destabil-
ising effects on the ABI1 C-terminal domain. This local destabilisation comes together with increased
protein flexibility in allosteric sites. Down-mutations introducing smaller amino acids at the mutation
24 of 59
==PAGE:33==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
site were classified as mixed effects, meaning that both stabilising (negative ∆G) and destabilising
(positive ∆G) effects occurred in allosteric sites. The 54 variants with destabilising long-range effects
were located at residues D439, P440, E449, K450, I503, H505, T507, and D508. Visualisations of
long-range effects for these mutation sites are available in Appendix E. Several of these mutations
affected the same regions. For instance, up-mutations at residues D439 and P440 triggered responses
in the loop around residues 459-463. Mutations at residues K450, I503, H505, T507, and D508
affected the same loop region (458-463 and 481-484), suggesting that this segment is an important
long-range responsive region. For residue T507, only the tryptophan substitution (T507W) induced a
long-range effect. This might be due to the introduction of a much larger side chain which can cause
structural displacement. Mutations at residue E449 had the broadest impact, influencing multiple allos-
teric sites. Residues 459-463 responded to both up- and down-mutations. This is illustrated in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Long-range effects of E449 mutations in ABI1
The mutation site (residue E449) is coloured red, and the response regions are illustrated in yellow if affected by down-
mutations (residues 442, 458, 481, 482, 489, 491), and green if they respond to both up- and down-mutations (residues 459,
461, 462, 463). This PyMOL visualisation was created automatically as part of the MAVISp pipeline.
MAVISp ensemble mode long-range prediction of ABI1
In ensemble mode, only mutations at residue E449 were predicted to cause damaging long-range
effects. This highlights how incorporating structural flexibility can help prioritise robust long-range
predictions. All possible variants of residue E449 were classified as damaging except E449V, which
was labelled as uncertain. A long-range communication path to residue 463 was detected by the
functional dynamics module, confirming this response site identified by the simple mode. This sup-
ports the interpretation that residue E449 is structurally sensitive and central in mediating long-range
communication in ABI1. Together, the results from simple and ensemble mode reveal a recurring
pattern of allosteric site perturbation centred around the 459-463 loop. This suggests that specific
up-mutations may destabilise functionally important regions in ABI1 through long-range structural
communication. Remarkably, the simple mode predicted multiple responsive sites across a wider range
of mutations than ensemble mode, potentially overestimating the extent of long-range coupling due to
25 of 59
==PAGE:34==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
its reliance on a single static structure.
The ABI1 case study illustrates how simple and ensemble modes in MAVISp can yield markedly
different predictions, particularly for stability effects. MAVISp simple mode provided a broad initial
screen, and the ensemble mode increased the specificity by incorporating the dynamics of the protein
structure. In the following section, we explore how simulation length and sampling strategy influence
the stability module of MAVISp.
4.2
Benchmarking results
The purpose of the benchmarking study was to investigate whether shorter simulation times or
alternative sampling of ensembles would give the same stability results as the reference of 1000 ns
simulation with 25 evenly extracted frames. If alternative simulation times or ensemble methods
yield comparable results, this will improve the scalability of the MAVISp ensemble mode pipeline
considerably. In this section, we present the results of the benchmarking study.
4.2.1
Dataset of protein ensembles for benchmarking
The dataset filtering pipeline described in Section 3.3 aimed to generate a structurally diverse set of
protein domains suitable for MD simulations to support benchmarking. Here, we report the outcome
of each filtering step. The final dataset includes only proteins for which simulation data were available
for all specified time conditions.
To avoid bias in the evaluation of RaSP predictions, we first excluded proteins that were part
of the RaSP training data. A total of 43 proteins were removed based on this criterion. The list
of excluded structures is provided in Appendix F. Following this, we developed and applied the
alphafill_cofactor_survey tool to identify and exclude proteins likely to require cofactors or
metal ions for structural stability or function. After this automated filtering step, 203 proteins remained
eligible for inclusion. Among these, 29 structures were simulated across all time scales (100 ns, 500
ns, and 1000 ns), making them suitable for stability comparison. 25 of these structures were initially
discarded in the AlphaFill filtering step due to potential interaction with cofactors. These were then
manually assessed using the AlphaFill web interface [48] to determine whether annotated cofactors
interacted with the trimmed structural regions or whether they were likely crystallisation artefacts (e.g.,
surface-bound ions). This manual curation step aimed to avoid excluding proteins unnecessarily. As a
result, 11 structures were re-included. The remaining structures were excluded based on confirmed
cofactor interactions within the trimmed region. A summary of these decisions is provided in Table 2.
After this step, the dataset consisted of 214 protein structures.
26 of 59
==PAGE:35==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Protein
Residues
UniProt ID
Cofactors
Assessment and decision
ACVR1B
29–110
P36896
ATP, CA, MG
Included: Cofactor(s) not interacting with the trimmed region.
ARHGEF12
67–151
Q9NZN5
CA
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
ARID1A
1005–1110
O14497
ZN
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
ARID1A
1953–2285
O14497
ZN
Included: Cofactor(s) not interacting with the trimmed region.
BARD1
33–160
Q99728
CA, COA, MG, NA
Included: Cofactor(s) not interacting with the trimmed region.
BARD1
422–777
Q99728
CA, COA, MG, NA
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
B2M
21–119
P61769
CA, CO, MG, NA
Included: Cofactor(s) likely crystallisation artefacts.
BRIP1
4–69
Q9BX63
ATP, MG
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
BRIP1
241–892
Q9BX63
ATP, MG
Included: Cofactor(s) not interacting with the trimmed region.
CDKN2C
1–168
P42773
CA, COA, MG, NA
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
FOXA1
170–247
P55317
K, MG
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
MAP1LC3B
1–120
Q9GZQ8
ATP, CA, MG, NA, NI, ZN
Included: Cofactor(s) likely crystallisation artefacts.
MLH1
501–756
P40692
ATP, K, MG, NA, ZN
Included: Cofactor(s) not interacting with the trimmed region.
MSH6
89–124
P52701
ATP, MG, NA
Included: Cofactor(s) not interacting with the trimmed region.
PMS2
607–862
P54278
ATP, K, MG, NA, ZN
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
PPIA
2–164
P62937
K, MG, NA, ZN
Included: Cofactor(s) likely crystallisation artefacts.
PPARG
136–505
P37231
CA, GSH, NA, ZN
Included: Cofactor(s) likely crystallisation artefacts.
RAD51B
1–350
O15315
CA, GTP, MG, NA
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
ULK1
7–279 & 837–1046
O75385
AMP, ATP, COA, MG, NA
Excluded: Cofactor(s) interact with the trimmed region.
VHL
58–213
P40337
CA, K, NA
Included: Cofactor(s) likely crystallisation artefacts.
Table 2: Manual inspection of 25 structures with potential cofactors. Only proteins where cofactors did not interact with the
trimmed region, or were likely crystallisation artefacts, were retained.
Using the pfam_scrape tool, 17 proteins were excluded among the 215 proteins that did not have
cofactors, leaving 198 structures for the dataset. To facilitate benchmarking, it was essential to select
protein structures for which ensembles corresponding to all simulation lengths were available. Due
to time constraints and limitations in computational resources, only a subset of the filtered MAVISp
simple mode dataset could be selected for this purpose. The final dataset, summarised in Table 3,
comprises 15 proteins that were simulated under consistent conditions as described in Section 3.2.
Protein
Trimming strategy
Structural length
UniProt AC
Pfam domain
ABI1
436–508
73
Q8IZP0
PF00018
ACVR1B
29–110
82
P36896
PF01064
APOC1
1–83
83
P02654
PF04691
ARID1A
1953–2285
333
O14497
PF12031
ATG12
44–140
97
O94817
PF04110
BARD1
33–160
128
Q99728
PF14835
B2M
21–119
99
P61769
PF07654
BCL10
10–117
108
O95999
PF00619
BRIP1
241-892
652
Q9BX63
PF06733,PF13307
MAP1LC3B
1-120
120
Q9GZQ8
PF02991
MLH1
501-756
256
P40692
PF16413
MSH6
89-124
36
P52701
PF00855
PPIA
2–164
163
P62937
PF00160
PPARG
136-505
370
P37231
PF00105,PF00104
VHL
58–213
156
P40337
PF01847,PF17211
Table 3: Summary of the final dataset with protein trimming strategy, UniProt AC, and Pfam domain(s).
27 of 59
==PAGE:36==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
4.2.2
Benchmarking of simulation times for FoldX stability calculations
In the benchmarking including only FoldX via MutateX, we compared the stability classifications
derived from the FoldX calculations for the 500 ns and 100 ns simulations with 25 frames, as well as
the clustered ensembles, with those from the 1000 ns simulation (25 frames), which was considered the
reference. The analysis revealed that 500 ns simulations with 25 frames generally computed the same
stability classifications with MAVISp as the reference, as the average of all proteins performance scores
was > 0.990. The 100 ns simulations with 25 frames and the clustered ensembles largely achieved
the same classifications as the reference, but with slightly lower performance scores compared to the
500 ns simulation. The summarised data in Table 4 show that the average accuracy of the 100 ns
simulations was 0.988 compared to 0.998 for the 500 ns simulations and 0.990 for the clusters. When
looking at the more balanced MCC score, it can be seen that the 100 ns performance decreased slightly
compared to the more consistent 500 ns simulations.
Comparison
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
Precision
F1 score
MCC score
100 ns vs 1000 ns
0.973
0.992
0.988
0.976
0.975
0.967
500 ns vs 1000 ns
0.996
0.999
0.998
0.997
0.996
0.995
Clusters vs 1000 ns
0.977
0.994
0.990
0.980
0.979
0.972
Table 4: Summary of performance metrics for stability classification with FoldX via MutateX across different ensemble
strategies compared to the 1000 ns simulation with 25 frames reference. The bars indicate relative performance rescaled
within the range [0.94, 1.0].
Across all proteins, a total of 796 variants were incorrectly classified using the 100 ns simulations,
compared to 129 misclassified variants with the 500 ns simulations and 658 using cluster-based
ensembles (see Figures 11, 12, and 13 for corresponding confusion matrices). This indicates that the
500 ns ensembles provide relatively robust classification performances.
28 of 59
==PAGE:37==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Figure 11: Confusion matrix for performance benchmark of FoldX stability predictions for 100 ns vs 1000 ns
The 100 ns simulation with 25 frames extracted for FoldX stability calculations have been classified into destabil-
ising/neutral/stabilising/uncertain. Here, we see the destabilising and neutral classifications compared to the reference
of 1000 ns simulation with 25 frames extracted for FoldX calculations. The confusion matrix is a summary of variant
classifications across all proteins in the dataset.
29 of 59
==PAGE:38==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Figure 12: Confusion matrix for performance benchmark of FoldX stability predictions for 500 ns vs 1000 ns
The 500 ns simulation with 25 frames extracted for FoldX stability calculations have been classified into destabil-
ising/neutral/stabilising/uncertain. Here, we see the destabilising and neutral classifications compared to the reference
of 1000 ns simulation with 25 frames extracted for FoldX calculations. The confusion matrix is a summary of variant
classifications across all proteins in the dataset.
30 of 59
==PAGE:39==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Figure 13: Confusion matrix for performance benchmark of FoldX stability predictions for the cluster-based
ensemble vs reference
The
cluster-based
ensembles
for
FoldX
stability
calculations
have
been
classified
into
destabil-
ising/neutral/stabilising/uncertain. Here, we see the cluster-based ensemble’s destabilising and neutral classifications
compared to the reference of 1000 ns simulation with 25 frames extracted for FoldX calculations. The confusion matrix is a
summary of variant classifications across all proteins in the dataset.
The performance scores for each individual protein can be found in Tables 5, 6, and 7 in Appendix G,
and are illustrated in Figure 14.
31 of 59
==PAGE:40==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
(a) Performance scores for 100 ns simulations
(b) Performance scores for 500 ns simulations
(c) Performance scores for clustered ensembles
Figure 14: Individual performance scores for all proteins for the FoldX stability predictions
Performance metrics (sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, precision, F1 score, and MCC score) for each protein, shown for three
different ensemble strategies: 100 ns simulation with 25 frames extracted, 500 ns simulation with 25 frames extracted, and
cluster-based ensembles from the 1000 ns simulations. Each bar represents the performance of FoldX stability prediction for
one protein. The full numeric results are provided in Tables 5, 6, and 7 in Appendix G.
32 of 59
==PAGE:41==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
For the 500 ns simulation, protein-specific performances were evaluated. Two proteins, APOC1 and
BARD1, showed consistently lower classification performance compared with the reference, while
five proteins (ABI1, MSH6, B2M, BCL10, and ACVR1B) achieved perfect agreement, with all
classifications matching the reference. For the remaining proteins, misclassified variants appeared
to be more or less evenly distributed across the dataset. To investigate whether structural flexibility
influenced performance, we compared the average RMSD from the 1000 ns simulations with the
prediction MCC scores across all simulations. The results can be seen in Figure 15. We focus our
analysis on the MCC metric due to class imbalance in the dataset, with a predominance of neutral
classifications compared to destabilising.
Figure 15: RMSD vs performance MCC score for all proteins and ensemble strategies
The scatter plot shows the relation between the average main chain RMSD over the 1000 ns simulation trajectory for each
protein and the corresponding FoldX stability prediction performance (MCC score). Performances are shown for 100 ns and
500 ns simulations and cluster-based ensembles. Protein labels are shown at least once for each protein. For visual clarity,
only a single label is shown per protein when multiple data points are close.
This analysis did not reveal any consistent relationship between RMSD and MCC score. However, the
BARD1 protein, which exhibited the highest average RMSD (≈0.8), had a slightly lower MCC score
compared to other proteins at 500 ns (0.957), 100 ns (0.881), and in the cluster-based ensemble (0.942).
In contrast, PPARG and ARID1A had similarly high average RMSD (≈0.6−0.8) and performed just
as well as proteins with lower RMSD. APOC1 performed very poorly for the 100 ns simulations and
clusters, and had a low RMSD. The 500 ns simulations were consistently accurate across all proteins,
with MCC scores ranging from 0.917 to 1.0. This level of consistency was not observed for the 100 ns
or cluster-based simulations, which displayed greater variability depending on the protein (MCC scores
between 0.624 and 0.999 for the 100 ns simulations and between 0.768 and 0.994 for clusters). These
findings suggest that 500 ns simulations provide sufficient sampling for reliable stability classification
with FoldX, while improving computational efficiency.
33 of 59
==PAGE:42==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
4.2.3
Benchmarking of simulation times for consensus approach with FoldX and RaSP stability
calculations
In benchmarking the consensus approach, we evaluated the accuracy of stability classifications obtained
from different protein ensembles using the MAVISp stability module consensus protocol. When
applying this method and excluding variants classified as stabilising or uncertain, no misclassifications
were observed. That is, for variants classified as either neutral or destabilising, short simulations
and cluster-based ensembles produced results fully consistent with the 1000 ns reference ensemble.
As a result, the performance scores for these comparisons were uniformly 1.0 across all evaluated
conditions. The confusion matrices computed for this benchmark are presented in Figure 16.
(a) Confusion matrix for 100 ns simulation
vs 1000 ns simulation for all proteins
(b) Confusion matrix for 500 ns simulation
vs 1000 ns simulation for all proteins
(c) Confusion matrix for clustered ensembles
vs 1000 ns simulation for all proteins
Figure 16: Confusion matrices comparing consensus classification of short simulations and clusters to 1000 ns
reference
Each variant has been classified as destabilising, neutral, stabilising, or uncertain using the consensus approach based on
RaSP and FoldX/MutateX. The confusion matrices show how classifications from all proteins and all ensemble strategies
(100 ns, 500 ns, and clustered ensembles) align with the reference results from 1000 ns simulations with 25 extracted frames.
The results show that there were no false positive and no false negative classifications.
This high accuracy comes at the cost of reduced coverage. The number of variants retained in the
consensus benchmarking is approximately 55-60% of those included in the FoldX-only benchmark.
This indicates that a substantial number of variants were classified as uncertain due to disagreement
between RaSP and FoldX predictions.
Since the consensus approach is used in the current MAVISp protocol, these findings suggest that
shorter simulations or cluster-based ensembles may be sufficient for accurate classification where
consensus exists. Nevertheless, the increased number of uncertain variants observed with shorter
trajectories represents a limitation, as such variants are often discarded in subsequent applications.
5
Discussion
5.1
Discussion of results from the ABI1 case study
In this study, ABI1 was analysed using both the simple and ensemble modes of MAVISp. ABI1 is a
particularly interesting case due to its complex role in cancer biology, where it can act as both a tumour
34 of 59
==PAGE:43==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
suppressor and an oncogene, depending on the context. This duality makes variant interpretation
challenging.
Focusing on the stability module, many missense mutations were predicted to be destabilising. Al-
though protein stability alone cannot fully explain functional outcomes, reduced stability is associated
with lower protein abundance, thereby weakening the tumour suppressor function of ABI1. For in-
stance, in colorectal cancer, decreased ABI1 levels have been linked to ERK pathway activation,
promoting cell proliferation and survival [42]. These findings suggest that certain mutations could
impair the tumour-suppressive activity of ABI1 through destabilising mutations.
The long-range and functional dynamics modules revealed noticeable differences between the simple
and ensemble-based classifications for ABI1. In simple mode, many pathogenic variants from Al-
phaMissense were classified as having long-range destabilising or mixed effects, while the ensemble
mode identified damaging long-range effects for only a single residue, E449. The long-range effects are
identified using different methodologies in simple and ensemble mode. Therefore, these discrepancies
reflect differences in both the input structure itself and how long-range effects are detected. Without
dynamic sampling, the simple mode might overestimate structural coupling between distant residues.
Both modules identified variants on residue E449 as mediators of long-range structural communica-
tion. In the ensemble mode, all variants of E449, except E449V, were predicted to induce damaging
long-range effects, emphasising its potential role as a structurally sensitive hotspot. The simple mode
also predicted E449 to have widespread influence, triggering responses in multiple allosteric regions,
e.g., the loop regions at residues 458-463 and 481-484. These consistent findings across modes support
the relevance of this region and suggest it could play a role in the allosteric regulation of ABI1. The
loops identified as long-range responsive may correspond to surface-exposed loop regions within
canonical SH3 domains. A critical characteristic of these loops is their general variability in sequence
and flexibility in structure. These features are essential in modulating the domain’s specificity for both
canonical and atypical ligand binding as well as broader protein-protein interactions. They contribute
directly to forming the domain’s specificity pocket by interacting with ligands and can also facilitate
larger surface-to-surface interactions with other protein domains [75]. Although further analysis is
needed to confirm this correspondence in ABI1, it raises the possibility that the identified long-range
responses are linked to these functionally relevant sites.
We also observed predicted effects on PTM sites. Although these were not located at known phos-
phorylation regulated functional sites, they may still represent functionally relevant positions worth
further investigation. In the current setup, these effects were not experimentally validated, but they
could be investigated in future work.
Importantly, this study did not address the role of ABI1 within larger protein complexes, such as the
WAVE regulatory complex, despite its known involvement in actin remodelling and cell motility which
are highly relevant functions in the context of cancer. For example, missense mutations in the SH3
domain have previously been shown to disrupt interactions with ABL1 leading to unchecked cell
division [36]. As our focus was on structural stability and the benefits of using the ensemble mode of
35 of 59
==PAGE:44==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
MAVISp, we did not explore these aspects. Future work could expand the analysis with MAVISp to
include predictions of mutational effects on these interactions.
In conclusion, the ABI1 case study highlighted how ensemble-based predictions can help prioritise
potentially pathogenic variants based on predicted change in stability. Stability is one important aspect,
but the broader analysis also identified long-range and PTM effects that may contribute to functional
disruption. Given the biological complexity of ABI1’s roles and interactions, structural features should
be interpreted as part of a broader functional landscape. Experimental validation of the identified
mutations would be essential for clarifying their functional and clinical relevance.
5.2
Benchmark dataset design and filtering strategy
A main objective of this study was to develop an automated and generalisable strategy for selecting
structurally diverse proteins from the MAVISp database. This selection should support benchmarking,
specifically for evaluating ensemble-based predictions. To ensure reliable benchmarking, we focused
on proteins that do not depend on cofactors, as force fields used in MD simulations can be less accurate
in modelling non-protein groups [76]. It is possible to analyse proteins with cofactors in ensemble
mode, but excluding them reduces the risk of introducing artefacts due to parameterisation issues or
incorrect modelling of cofactor interactions.
We established a three-step protocol to construct the benchmarking dataset. First, proteins included in
the RaSP training set were excluded to avoid bias when evaluating the consensus method, which incor-
porates RaSP predictions. Second, we developed a custom script, alphafill_cofactor_survey, to
identify proteins with potential cofactor interactions based on AlphaFill annotations. Third, structural
diversity was ensured using the existing pfam_scrape tool from MAVISp, which selects non-redundant
representatives across Pfam domains. By developing this protocol, we provided a reproducible and
automated way of curating benchmarking datasets. However, we identified several limitations and
paths for future improvement, most of these concerning the cofactor filtering step.
Currently, the alphafill_cofactor_survey tool uses UniProt AC’s as input. Consequently, Al-
phaFill identifies potential cofactors based on all PDB structures with ≥30% sequence identity to the
full-length protein. This can result in identification of cofactors not relevant to the trimmed domain
used in MAVISp. In this study, we mitigated this by manually inspecting the structures using PyMOL
and the AlphaFill web server to assess the proximity of a cofactor to the trimmed region. In future
versions of the script, this step could be automated by comparing the trimmed structure to full-length
structures found by AlphaFill. Moreover, the script could be extended to use structural information
and thereby compute the distances between cofactor atoms and the trimmed region to exclude distant
interactions. Furthermore, many of the detected cofactors are likely crystallisation artefacts, a common
issue in X-ray crystallography-derived structures. To address this, we implemented a post-processing
filter using a curated list of biologically relevant cofactors. This list was compiled using the PDBe
cofactor dictionary [70], supplemented with manual curation, since the database does not provide full
coverage of known cofactors. We also manually inspected ion cofactors (e.g., Na+, K+). These are
often buffer components and are not always structurally and functionally relevant. Their relevance was
36 of 59
==PAGE:45==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
evaluated based on whether they were located on the protein surface. Future versions of the workflow
could exclude surface exposed ions, which may be crystallisation artefacts. This would improve the
reproducibility of the study and reduce the reliance on visual inspection. We also suggest to extend the
alphafill_cofactor_survey tool to automatically collect the final list of proteins for the dataset
into a dedicated CSV file and output folder. This would further streamline the process for dataset
construction.
Although our final curated dataset was relatively small, we developed a protocol that provided a
scalable and reproducible approach to dataset selection. Since we had a limited number of suitable
proteins for this specific benchmark, a manual selection might have been more practical. Nevertheless,
the automated workflow is highly advantageous in terms of reproducibility, and it can be applied in
future, larger-scale studies.
Finally, the use of pfam_scrape for domain selection could be improved. Currently, it applies a
stochastic strategy to a larger dataset and retains only one representative per Pfam domain. Therefore,
we risk discarding useful proteins. In future applications, it would be advantageous to introduce
user-defined constraints, e.g., based on simulation length availability or structural confidence scores,
into the domain selection process.
5.3
Effect of simulation length on classification performance
The benchmarking results on simulation length showed that FoldX alone produced near-perfect pre-
dictions when using ensembles from 500 ns simulations, and fairly accurate classifications for most
proteins even at 100 ns, relative to the 1000 ns reference. Notably, when using the consensus approach
combining RaSP and FoldX, both 100 ns and 500 ns ensembles, as well as the method using three
cluster representatives, yielded perfect predictions, with no false positives or false negatives in the
subset of neutral and destabilising variants.
These findings could significantly improve future use of MAVISp, given that the current default
protocol involves 1000 ns simulations and subsequent mutation scanning of 25 frames with FoldX.
Both steps are computationally expensive. For the proteins in our dataset, MD simulations were run
locally, typically using 8 CPU threads and a dedicated GPU. Simulation speeds ranged from 72 to 416
ns/day depending on system size. Running 1000 ns took between 2 and 12 days of wall time per protein.
Reducing the simulation length to 100 ns would cut both runtime and computational resource usage
by roughly 90%, bringing wall time down to a few hours to one day per protein. Moreover, MutateX
stability calculations were performed on the DTU HPC cluster for the 25-frame ensembles due to the
high computational load of processing each mutation across all extracted structures. The three-cluster
ensemble calculations could feasibly be executed locally using 10 CPU threads per job. This illustrates
the amount of time and computing resources that can be saved by reducing the simulation lengths used
for the ensembles as well as decreasing the number of structures used for MutateX scans.
It should be noted that our benchmarking excluded variants classified as stabilising or uncertain, and
our conclusions cannot be generalised to these categories. The decision to focus on destabilising
37 of 59
==PAGE:46==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
variants was based on their association with disease phenotypes. Stabilising variants are more difficult
to interpret as they are not necessarily beneficial. In some cases, increased stability may increase
protein resilience. However, stability of a protein can also enhance pathogenicity, for example by
stabilising oncogenic conformations or promoting sustained signalling. In the context of ABI1, a
mutation that increases stability within a domain involved in proliferative signalling could potentially
promote oncogenic behaviour, rather than prevent it.
We observed that the number of variants receiving a final consensus classification as destabilising
or neutral dropped in shorter simulations, possibly due to more variants being labelled as uncertain.
For example, in the consensus-based analysis, the number of variants classified as destabilising or
neutral dropped from 40144 (500 ns) to 39590 (100 ns), and further down to 35555 in the cluster-based
ensembles. A similar trend was observed for the FoldX-only predictions. This indicates that the short
simulations and the cluster-based ensembles result in more uncertain classifications. If this is the
case, it could be problematic in a clinical context where clear interpretation is essential. Quantifying
this systematically will be critical for evaluating the trade-off in reduced simulation lengths. It is
important to note that RaSP predictions were not re-generated using shorter simulations in this study.
The consensus scores were computed using 1000 ns cluster-based structures for the RaSP input in all
cases, and only the ensembles used for MutateX varied. This means that the observed robustness of the
consensus predictions across shorter simulations reflects changes in MutateX input only. Future work
should evaluate whether RaSP-based predictions are similarly stable across shorter simulations.
Another limitation of the current study is that it includes only proteins without cofactors, due to the
filtering applied during dataset selection. Thus, our conclusions cannot necessarily be transferred
to systems depending on cofactors. Additionally, the dataset size was relatively limited. Expanding
the number of proteins in future analyses would allow for more robust statistical comparisons. Most
proteins in our dataset showed low RMSD over 1000 ns simulations, which limits our ability to explore
the impact of structural flexibility on prediction accuracy.
It would be especially interesting to perform residue-level analyses of false predictions in future work.
By mapping false classifications to residue-level RMSF values, we could determine whether local
flexibility contributes to misclassification. Similarly, a variant-specific analysis could identify regions
of the protein where prediction performance is more sensitive to simulation length.
In this study, we used the MCC score as our primary performance metric. MCC is well suited to
address imbalances in datasets like ours, where neutral variants were more common than destabil-
ising ones. Unlike the F1 score, the MCC score accounts for all values in the confusion matrix
and provides a balanced summary of predictive performance. Using the accuracy score alone can be
misleading when classes are imbalanced, which further supports the choice of MCC in this context [74].
To assess whether differences in conformational sampling between simulations are linked to differ-
ences in prediction outcomes, methods such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Root Mean
Square Inner Product (RMSIP) could be applied. PCA can be used to describe the dominant motions
38 of 59
==PAGE:47==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
within a structural ensemble, and RMSIP provides a quantitative measure of similarity between these
motions across ensembles generated from different simulation lengths. If poor-performing ensembles
consistently show low RMSIP overlap with a reference, this could indicate that insufficient sampling
contributes to reduced predictive reliability.
Finally, our cluster-based approach outperformed the 100 ns simulations, but still required 1000 ns of
simulation time. It may therefore not represent a significant computational optimisation. A possible
compromise could be to increase the number of clusters but generate them from a 500 ns trajectory
instead. Exploring such trade-offs between simulation length, structural diversity, and classification
accuracy would be a valuable next step for future studies.
5.4
Trade-offs in ensemble generation strategies
MD simulation is the preferred method for generating atomistic ensembles in MAVISp. However, our
results suggest that alternative strategies may be better suited for proteins with flexible or challenging
structural features.
In the ABI1 case study, we encountered significant difficulties in simulating the N-terminal domain
(residues 1–155), which is characterised by an extended helical region. The combination of slow
equilibration, high aspect ratio, and resulting box size made it computationally demanding to pro-
duce a stable trajectory. We attempted to resolve this by modifying the box geometry and reducing
the minimum image distance, but neither approach fully mitigated the problem. For such systems,
MD may not be the best option. This highlights a broader point that the use of ensemble generation
methods could benefit from being adaptable depending on the structural and dynamic properties of the
protein in question. Emerging sampling methods such as MassiveFold or generative ensemble models
based on deep learning may offer computationally efficient alternatives. These could be particularly
useful for intrinsically disordered regions, highly flexible domains, or proteins with unusual geometries.
In future versions of MAVISp or similar frameworks, it may be worth exploring whether novel
ensemble generation strategies, selected based on structural criteria or user-defined constraints, could
yield advantages in specific cases.
6
Conclusion
In this study, we aimed to optimise and evaluate ensemble-based protocols for predicting mutation-
induced stability changes in proteins using MD simulations and structure-based energy calculations.
We systematically explored the effects of simulation length and ensemble sampling strategies. We
developed a protocol for selecting benchmarking datasets based on a structurally diverse set of proteins.
The benchmarking analysis showed that ensembles derived from 500 ns MD simulations with 25
evenly spaced frames produced classification results comparable to those obtained using the current
1000 ns reference protocol in the context of FoldX-based stability predictions with MutateX. Even 100
ns simulations performed well for most proteins, with only a few outliers that could not be explained
39 of 59
==PAGE:48==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
by structural variation. This suggests that for many cases, significant reductions in computational cost
and simulation time are achievable without a significant loss in classification accuracy. Cluster-based
ensemble strategies also showed acceptable performance, but in our implementation, they still required
1000 ns simulations and exhibited a small loss in classification consistency.
The MAVISp consensus classification strategy, which combines predictions from FoldX and RaSP,
was also benchmarked. The strategy achieved perfect performance in distinguishing destabilising
from neutral variants, but a large proportion of variants were labelled as uncertain and therefore
excluded from the benchmark analysis. Depending on the goals of a given application, which could
focus on broad coverage, high precision, or computational efficiency, it may be advisable to use shorter
simulations. 100 ns simulations were sufficient for robust neutral vs destabilising classifications and
provided considerable gains in speed and resource usage.
To illustrate the biological relevance of ensemble-based analysis, we applied the standard MAVISp
protocol to the ABI1 protein in a case study. Here, we compared the results from the simple and
ensemble mode analyses. We could observe that the variant effects identified by the simple mode were
frequently confirmed by the ensemble mode. However, the ensemble approach tended to be more
conservative in its predictions. This suggests greater robustness, emphasising the advantage of using
an ensemble of structures to account for conformational variability. The simple mode occasionally
predicted effects that were not confirmed by the dynamic representation of the protein in ensemble
mode.
Together, these findings support the use of protein structural ensembles to represent conformational dy-
namics in variant analysis. We have demonstrated that the current MAVISp ensemble mode protocol is
needlessly conservative, and that shorter simulation times can help increase scalability while preserving
accuracy and biological relevance. The insights gained from this study provide concrete initiatives
for improving the efficiency and applicability of ensemble-based protein variant analysis with MAVISp.
This study opens up several opportunities for future work. Firstly, refining the cofactor filtering
procedure used in the dataset curation could improve reproducibility. Secondly, future work should
explore additional ensemble generation strategies, including benchmarking the impact of simulation
length on RaSP predictions, to ensure a more comprehensive evaluation of the consensus approach.
Finally, alternative approaches to MD simulations may be considered for proteins with atypical or
highly flexible structures. These steps could contribute to further optimising the use of the MAVISp
framework.
40 of 59
==PAGE:49==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Declaration of use of generative AI
During the preparation of this thesis, the author used OpenAI ChatGPT 4o to improve some formu-
lations and to support programming tasks such as writing selected functions and debugging. At no
point was the model used to generate full scripts or perform analyses independently. All content was
reviewed, edited, and integrated by the author, who takes full responsibility for the submitted thesis
and code.
References
[1] S. Richards, N. Aziz, S. Bale, D. Bick, S. Das, J. Gastier-Foster, W. W. Grody, M. Hegde,
E. Lyon, E. Spector et al., “Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a
joint consensus recommendation of the american college of medical genetics and genomics and
the association for molecular pathology,” Genetics in medicine, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 405–423, 2015.
[2] M. Arnaudi, M. Utichi, M. Tiberti, and E. Papaleo, “Predicting the structure-altering mechanisms
of disease variants,” Current Opinion in Structural Biology, vol. 91, p. 102994, 2025.
[3] N. M. Ioannidis, J. H. Rothstein, V. Pejaver, S. Middha, S. K. McDonnell, S. Baheti, A. Musolf,
Q. Li, E. Holzinger, D. Karyadi et al., “Revel: an ensemble method for predicting the
pathogenicity of rare missense variants,” The American Journal of Human Genetics, vol. 99,
no. 4, pp. 877–885, 2016.
[4] J. Frazer, P. Notin, M. Dias, A. Gomez, J. K. Min, K. Brock, Y. Gal, and D. S. Marks, “Disease
variant prediction with deep generative models of evolutionary data,” Nature, vol. 599, no. 7883,
pp. 91–95, 2021.
[5] J. Cheng, G. Novati, J. Pan, C. Bycroft, A. Žemgulyt˙e, T. Applebaum, A. Pritzel, L. H. Wong,
M. Zielinski, T. Sargeant et al., “Accurate proteome-wide missense variant effect prediction with
alphamissense,” Science, vol. 381, no. 6664, p. eadg7492, 2023.
[6] S. Ittisoponpisan, S. A. Islam, T. Khanna, E. Alhuzimi, A. David, and M. J. Sternberg, “Can
predicted protein 3d structures provide reliable insights into whether missense variants are
disease associated?” Journal of molecular biology, vol. 431, no. 11, pp. 2197–2212, 2019.
[7] J. D. Stephenson, P. Totoo, D. F. Burke, J. Jänes, P. Beltrao, and M. J. Martin, “Protvar: mapping
and contextualizing human missense variation,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 52, no. W1, pp.
W140–W147, 2024.
[8] M. Philipp, C. W. Moth, N. Ristic, J. K. S. Tiemann, F. Seufert, A. Panfilova, J. Meiler, P. W.
Hildebrand, A. Stein, D. Wiegreffe et al., “Mutationexplorer: a webserver for mutation of
proteins and 3d visualization of energetic impacts,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 52, no. W1, pp.
W132–W139, 2024.
[9] M. Arnaudi, L. Beltrame, K. Degn, M. Uitichi, S. Scrima, P. Sánchez-Izquierdo Besora,
K. Krzesi´nska, A. Heering Estad, F. Maselli, T. Dorˇcáková, J. Safer, K. Meldgård, P. Becker,
41 of 59
==PAGE:50==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
V. Sora, A. Pettenella, J. Vinhas, P. W. Sackett, C. Cava, A. Rohlin, M. Nilbert, S. Iqbal,
M. Lambrughi, M. Tiberi, and E. Papaleo, “MAVISp: A Modular Structure-Based Framework
for Genomic Variant Interpretation,” 11 2023, preprint posted to bioRxiv. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.10.22.513328
[10] M. Tiberti, T. Terkelsen, K. Degn, L. Beltrame, T. C. Cremers, I. da Piedade, M. Di Marco,
E. Maiani, and E. Papaleo, “MutateX: an automated pipeline for in silico saturation mutagenesis
of protein structures and structural ensembles,” Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 3, p.
bbac074, 03 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbac074
[11] M. I. Khan, F. Hasan, K. A. H. Al Mahmud, and A. Adnan, “Domain focused and residue
focused phosphorylation effect on tau protein: A molecular dynamics simulation study,” journal
of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials, vol. 113, p. 104149, 2021.
[12] R. Morris, K. A. Black, and E. J. Stollar, “Uncovering protein function: from classification to
complexes,” Essays in Biochemistry, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 255–285, 2022.
[13] R. L. Miesfeld and M. M. McEvoy, Biochemistry.
Norton & Company, Inc., 2017.
[14] L.-Q. Yang, P. Sang, Y. Tao, Y.-X. Fu, K.-Q. Zhang, Y.-H. Xie, and S.-Q. Liu, “Protein dynamics
and motions in relation to their functions: several case studies and the underlying mechanisms,”
Journal of Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 372–393, 2014.
[15] A. Conev, M. M. Rigo, D. Devaurs, A. F. Fonseca, H. Kalavadwala, M. V. de Freitas,
C. Clementi, G. Zanatta, D. A. Antunes, and L. E. Kavraki, “Engens: a computational framework
for generation and analysis of representative protein conformational ensembles,” Briefings in
Bioinformatics, vol. 24, no. 4, p. bbad242, 2023.
[16] R. L. Baldwin, “Energetics of protein folding,” Journal of molecular biology, vol. 371, no. 2, pp.
283–301, 2007.
[17] M. S. Cheung, L. L. Chavez, and J. N. Onuchic, “The energy landscape for protein folding and
possible connections to function,” Polymer, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 547–555, 2004.
[18] Q. Fang, K. Kani, V. M. Faca, W. Zhang, Q. Zhang, A. Jain, S. Hanash, D. B. Agus, M. W.
McIntosh, and P. Mallick, “Impact of protein stability, cellular localization, and abundance on
proteomic detection of tumor-derived proteins in plasma,” PloS one, vol. 6, no. 7, p. e23090,
2011.
[19] “Biorender,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.biorender.com
[20] J. Delgado, L. G. Radusky, D. Cianferoni, and L. Serrano, “Foldx 5.0: working with rna, small
molecules and a new graphical interface,” Bioinformatics, vol. 35, no. 20, pp. 4168–4169, 2019.
[21] L. M. Blaabjerg, M. M. Kassem, L. L. Good, N. Jonsson, M. Cagiada, K. E. Johansson,
W. Boomsma, A. Stein, and K. Lindorff-Larsen, “Rapid protein stability prediction using deep
learning representations,” Elife, vol. 12, p. e82593, 2023.
42 of 59
==PAGE:51==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
[22] V. Sora, A. O. Laspiur, K. Degn, M. Arnaudi, M. Utichi, L. Beltrame, D. De Menezes,
M. Orlandi, U. K. Stoltze, O. Rigina et al., “Rosettaddgprediction for high-throughput
mutational scans: From stability to binding,” Protein Science, vol. 32, no. 1, p. e4527, 2023.
[23] M. J. Landrum, S. Chitipiralla, G. R. Brown, C. Chen, B. Gu, J. Hart, D. Hoffman, W. Jang,
K. Kaur, C. Liu et al., “Clinvar: improvements to accessing data,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 48,
no. D1, pp. D835–D844, 2020.
[24] J. Tate, “Cosmic: the catalogue of somatic mutations in cancer,” Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 38, p.
164, 2010.
[25] J. Gao, B. A. Aksoy, U. Dogrusoz, G. Dresdner, B. Gross, S. O. Sumer, Y. Sun, A. Jacobsen,
R. Sinha, E. Larsson et al., “Integrative analysis of complex cancer genomics and clinical
profiles using the cbioportal,” Science signaling, vol. 6, no. 269, pp. pl1–pl1, 2013.
[26] D. Munro and M. Singh, “Demask: a deep mutational scanning substitution matrix and its use for
variant impact prediction,” Bioinformatics, vol. 36, no. 22-23, pp. 5322–5329, 2020.
[27] E. Laine, Y. Karami, and A. Carbone, “Gemme: a simple and fast global epistatic model
predicting mutational effects,” Molecular biology and evolution, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 2604–2619,
2019.
[28] M. J. Abraham, T. Murtola, R. Schulz, S. Páll, J. C. Smith, B. Hess, and E. Lindahl, “Gromacs:
High performance molecular simulations through multi-level parallelism from laptops to
supercomputers,” SoftwareX, vol. 1, pp. 19–25, 2015.
[29] B. R. Brooks, C. L. Brooks III, A. D. Mackerell Jr, L. Nilsson, R. J. Petrella, B. Roux, Y. Won,
G. Archontis, C. Bartels, S. Boresch et al., “Charmm: the biomolecular simulation program,”
Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1545–1614, 2009.
[30] G. Wieczorek and D. Niedzialek, “Molecular dynamics,” eLS, pp. 1–18, 2020.
[31] B. R.B., Atomistic Force Fields for Proteins.
Springer New York, 2019, pp. 3–19.
[32] A. Kuriata, A. M. Gierut, T. Oleniecki, M. P. Ciemny, A. Kolinski, M. Kurcinski, and
S. Kmiecik, “Cabs-flex 2.0: a web server for fast simulations of flexibility of protein structures,”
Nucleic acids research, vol. 46, no. W1, pp. W338–W343, 2018.
[33] N. Raouraoua, C. Mirabello, T. Véry, C. Blanchet, B. Wallner, M. F. Lensink, and G. Brysbaert,
“Massivefold: unveiling alphafold’s hidden potential with optimized and parallelized massive
sampling,” Nature Computational Science, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[34] T. Ruzmetov, T. I. Hung, S. P. Jonnalagedda, S.-h. Chen, P. Fasihianifard, Z. Guo, B. Bhanu, and
C.-e. A. Chang, “Sampling conformational ensembles of highly dynamic proteins via generative
deep learning,” Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 2487–2502,
2025.
[35] A. Aranganathan, X. Gu, D. Wang, B. Vani, and P. Tiwary, “Modeling boltzmann weighted
structural ensembles of proteins using ai based methods,” 2025.
43 of 59
==PAGE:52==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
[36] M. Petersen and P. Dubielecka, “Adaptor protein abelson interactor 1 in homeostasis and disease,”
Cell Communication and Signaling, vol. 22, no. 1, p. 468, 2024.
[37] A. Regua, C. Papp, A. Grageda, B. A. Porter, T. Caza, I. Bichindaritz, M. Krendel,
A. Sivapiragasam, G. Bratslavsky, V. A. Kuznetsov et al., “Abi1-based expression signature
predicts breast cancer metastasis and survival,” Molecular Oncology, vol. 16, no. 14, pp.
2632–2657, 2022.
[38] UniProt Consortium, “UniProt: Q8IZP0 - ABI1 Homo sapiens (Human),”
https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/Q8IZP0/entry, 2024, accessed: 2025-04-24.
[39] J. Mistry, S. Chuguransky, L. Williams, M. Qureshi, G. A. Salazar, E. L. Sonnhammer, S. C.
Tosatto, L. Paladin, S. Raj, L. J. Richardson et al., “Pfam: The protein families database in 2021,”
Nucleic acids research, vol. 49, no. D1, pp. D412–D419, 2021.
[40] M. Cui, W. Yu, J. Dong, J. Chen, X. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Downregulation of abi1 expression
affects the progression and prognosis of human gastric carcinoma,” Medical Oncology, vol. 27,
pp. 632–639, 2010.
[41] D. Nath, X. Li, C. Mondragon, D. Post, M. Chen, J. R. White, A. Hryniewicz-Jankowska,
T. Caza, V. A. Kuznetsov, H. Hehnly et al., “Abi1 loss drives prostate tumorigenesis through
activation of emt and non-canonical wnt signaling,” Cell Communication and Signaling, vol. 17,
pp. 1–19, 2019.
[42] Z. Li, G. Yan, M. Yang, X. Liu, Y. Lian, M. Sun, and W. Pan, “Cblc promotes the development
of colorectal cancer by promoting abi1 degradation to activate the erk signaling pathway,”
Translational Oncology, vol. 45, p. 101992, 2024.
[43] J. Zhang, L. Tang, Y. Chen, Z. Duan, L. Xiao, W. Li, X. Liu, and L. Shen, “Upregulation of
abelson interactor protein 1 predicts tumor progression and poor outcome in epithelial ovarian
cancer,” Human pathology, vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 1331–1340, 2015.
[44] Y. Qi, J. Liu, J. Chao, M. P. Scheuerman, S. A. Rahimi, L. Y. Lee, and S. Li, “Pten suppresses
epithelial–mesenchymal transition and cancer stem cell activity by downregulating abi1,”
Scientific reports, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 12685, 2020.
[45] Website for cancermuts. (Accessed: April 24th, 2024). [Online]. Available:
https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/Cancermuts-1.0/
[46] H. M. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T. N. Bhat, H. Weissig, I. N. Shindyalov, and
P. E. Bourne, “The protein data bank,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 235–242, 2000.
[47] J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool,
R. Bates, A. Žídek, A. Potapenko et al., “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with
alphafold,” nature, vol. 596, no. 7873, pp. 583–589, 2021.
[48] M. L. Hekkelman, I. de Vries, R. P. Joosten, and A. Perrakis, “Alphafill: enriching alphafold
models with ligands and cofactors,” Nature Methods, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 205–213, 2023.
44 of 59
==PAGE:53==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
[49] K. Degn, L. Beltrame, M. Tiberti, and E. Papaleo, “Pdbminer to find and annotate protein
structures for computational analysis,” Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, vol. 63,
no. 23, pp. 7274–7281, 2023.
[50] A. Calderone, L. Castagnoli, and G. Cesareni, “Mentha: a resource for browsing integrated
protein-interaction networks,” Nature methods, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 690–691, 2013.
[51] J. Abramson, J. Adler, J. Dunger, R. Evans, T. Green, A. Pritzel, O. Ronneberger, L. Willmore,
A. J. Ballard, J. Bambrick et al., “Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with
alphafold 3,” Nature, vol. 630, no. 8016, pp. 493–500, 2024.
[52] S. V. Nielsen, A. Stein, A. B. Dinitzen, E. Papaleo, M. H. Tatham, E. G. Poulsen, M. M. Kassem,
L. J. Rasmussen, K. Lindorff-Larsen, and R. Hartmann-Petersen, “Predicting the impact of lynch
syndrome-causing missense mutations from structural calculations,” PLoS genetics, vol. 13,
no. 4, p. e1006739, 2017.
[53] A. B. Abildgaard, A. Stein, S. V. Nielsen, K. Schultz-Knudsen, E. Papaleo, A. Shrikhande, E. R.
Hoffmann, I. Bernstein, A.-M. Gerdes, M. Takahashi et al., “Computational and cellular studies
reveal structural destabilization and degradation of mlh1 variants in lynch syndrome,” Elife,
vol. 8, p. e49138, 2019.
[54] Z. W. Tan, E. Guarnera, W.-V. Tee, and I. N. Berezovsky, “Allosigma 2: paving the way to
designing allosteric effectors and to exploring allosteric effects of mutations,” Nucleic acids
research, vol. 48, no. W1, pp. W116–W124, 2020.
[55] V. Le Guilloux, P. Schmidtke, and P. Tuffery, “Fpocket: an open source platform for ligand
pocket detection,” BMC bioinformatics, vol. 10, pp. 1–11, 2009.
[56] P. V. Hornbeck, B. Zhang, B. Murray, J. M. Kornhauser, V. Latham, and E. Skrzypek,
“Phosphositeplus, 2014: mutations, ptms and recalibrations,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 43,
no. D1, pp. D512–D520, 2015.
[57] S. J. Hubbard, “naccess,” Dept Biohem Mol Biol UCL, 1993.
[58] M. Kumar, S. Michael, J. Alvarado-Valverde, B. Mészáros, H. Sámano-Sánchez, A. Zeke,
L. Dobson, T. Lazar, M. Örd, A. Nagpal et al., “The eukaryotic linear motif resource: 2022
release,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 50, no. D1, pp. D497–D508, 2022.
[59] ELELAB, “Mol-analysis,” https://github.com/ELELAB/Mol-Analysis, 2023, accessed:
2025-04-12.
[60] M. Lambrughi, M. Tiberti, M. F. Allega, V. Sora, M. Nygaard, A. Toth, J. Salamanca Viloria,
E. Bignon, and E. Papaleo, “Analyzing biomolecular ensembles,” Biomolecular Simulations:
Methods and Protocols, pp. 415–451, 2019.
[61] M. Tiberti, G. Invernizzi, M. Lambrughi, Y. Inbar, G. Schreiber, and E. Papaleo, “Pyinteraph: a
framework for the analysis of interaction networks in structural ensembles of proteins,” Journal
of chemical information and modeling, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1537–1551, 2014.
45 of 59
==PAGE:54==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
[62] J. C. Gordon, J. B. Myers, T. Folta, V. Shoja, L. S. Heath, and A. Onufriev, “H++: a server for
estimating p k as and adding missing hydrogens to macromolecules,” Nucleic acids research,
vol. 33, no. suppl_2, pp. W368–W371, 2005.
[63] N. W. Moriarty, J. Moussa, and P. D. Adams, “Protonation of histidine rings using
quantum-mechanical methods,” Biological Crystallography, vol. 80, no. 8, 2024.
[64] R. B. Best, X. Zhu, J. Shim, P. E. Lopes, J. Mittal, M. Feig, and A. D. MacKerell Jr,
“Optimization of the additive charmm all-atom protein force field targeting improved sampling of
the backbone φ, ψ and side-chain χ1 and χ2 dihedral angles,” Journal of chemical theory and
computation, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 3257–3273, 2012.
[65] H. J. Berendsen, J. v. Postma, W. F. Van Gunsteren, A. DiNola, and J. R. Haak, “Molecular
dynamics with coupling to an external bath,” The Journal of chemical physics, vol. 81, no. 8, pp.
3684–3690, 1984.
[66] S. Nosé and M. L. Klein, “Constant pressure molecular dynamics for molecular systems,”
Molecular Physics, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1055–1076, 1983.
[67] B. Hess, H. Bekker, H. J. Berendsen, and J. G. Fraaije, “Lincs: A linear constraint solver for
molecular simulations,” Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 1463–1472,
1997.
[68] T. Darden, D. York, L. Pedersen et al., “Particle mesh ewald: An n log (n) method for ewald
sums in large systems,” Journal of chemical physics, vol. 98, pp. 10 089–10 089, 1993.
[69] ELELAB, “alphafill_cofactor_survey script in mavisp accessory tools,” https:
//github.com/ELELAB/mavisp_accessory_tools/tree/main/tools/alphafill_cofactor_survey,
2025, accessed: 2025-05-14.
[70] A. Mukhopadhyay, N. Borkakoti, L. Pravda, J. D. Tyzack, J. M. Thornton, and S. Velankar,
“Finding enzyme cofactors in protein data bank,” Bioinformatics, vol. 35, no. 18, pp. 3510–3511,
2019.
[71] ELELAB, “pfam_scrape script in mavisp accessory tools,”
https://github.com/ELELAB/mavisp_accessory_tools/tree/main/tools/pfam_scrape, 2025,
accessed: 2025-05-14.
[72] ELELAB, “stability_benchmark_sim_length script in mavisp accessory tools,” https://github.
com/ELELAB/mavisp_accessory_tools/tree/main/tools/stability_benchmark_sim_length, 2025,
accessed: 2025-06-06.
[73] ELELAB, “consensus_benchmark_sim_length script in MAVISp accessory tools,” https://github.
com/ELELAB/mavisp_accessory_tools/tree/main/tools/consensus_benchmark_sim_length,
2025, accessed: 2025-06-06.
[74] D. Chicco and G. Jurman, “The advantages of the matthews correlation coefficient (mcc) over f1
score and accuracy in binary classification evaluation,” BMC genomics, vol. 21, pp. 1–13, 2020.
46 of 59
==PAGE:55==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
[75] S. S.-C. Li, “Specificity and versatility of sh3 and other proline-recognition domains: structural
basis and implications for cellular signal transduction,” Biochemical Journal, vol. 390, no. 3, pp.
641–653, 2005.
[76] T. Musyoka, Ö. T. Bishop, K. Lobb, and V. Moses, “The determination of charmm force field
parameters for the mg2+ containing hiv-1 integrase,” Chemical Physics Letters, vol. 711, pp. 1–7,
2018.
[77] Y. Rose, J. M. Duarte, R. Lowe, J. Segura, C. Bi, C. Bhikadiya, L. Chen, A. S. Rose, S. Bittrich,
S. K. Burley et al., “Rcsb protein data bank: architectural advances towards integrated searching
and efficient access to macromolecular structure data from the pdb archive,” Journal of
molecular biology, vol. 433, no. 11, p. 166704, 2021.
47 of 59
==PAGE:56==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Appendices
A
ABI1 AlphaFold2 structure
(a) Full-length AlphaFold2 structure of ABI1.
(b) Trimmed N-terminal domain (residues 1–155).
(c) Trimmed C-terminal domain (residues 436–508).
Figure 17: AlphaFold2-predicted structures of ABI1 [47].
The first panel shows the full-length structure, while the second and third panels show the two trimmed domains used for the
simulations and analyses presented in this thesis. The colouring reflects per-residue pLDDT scores, with blue indicating high
confidence and orange/red indicating lower confidence, in accordance with the AlphaFold2 colour scheme.
48 of 59
==PAGE:57==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
B
List of cofactors used in AlphaFill filtering
This appendix lists all cofactors along with their corresponding PDB compound identifiers that were
used to exclude structures containing cofactors during the AlphaFill-based filtering of our dataset. The
annotation is based on the PDBe cofactor dictionary [70], with manual additions to extend and refine
the list.
Figure 18: List of cofactors with annotations
Cofactors with PDB compound IDs used in the AlphaFill filtering step. Annotation is based on the PDBe cofactor dictionary
[70], with manual additions.
49 of 59
==PAGE:58==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
C
alphafill_cofactor_survey tool for cofactor detection
To systematically identify and exclude proteins with potential cofactors, we developed a Python-
based tool, alphafill_cofactor_survey. The tool interfaces with the AlphaFill web server [48]
to retrieve ligand information for a given UniProt AC or list of AC’s. The tool is available at
https://github.com/ELELAB/mavisp_accessory_tools [69].
Tool components
The tool consists of two scripts:
• find_cofactor.py: Queries AlphaFill and extracts heteroatom annotations for UniProt AC’s.
Only entries with sequence identity ≥30% are retained. The user may provide an optional filter
list to restrict the output to specific cofactors.
• annotate_heteroatoms.py: Annotates heteroatoms using the PDBe cofactor dictionary [70],
available at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/api/pdb/compound/cofactors. This script
outputs both a list of cofactors in TXT format and a complete annotation table for all compounds
found by find_cofactor.py. The annotation table includes metadata where available from
https://data.rcsb.org [77].
Usage
The tool is executed from the command line and supports both single accession and batch processing.
The script uses 4 flags. It is mandatory to use either -u or -i.
-u: input UniProt AC
-i: input file (CSV) containing a column "UniProt AC"
-o: output file prefix (optional). If not provided, default is summary_output
-f: Filtering file in TXT format. Optional - to use if only specific cofactors/heteroatoms should be
included in the output.
To query a single UniProt AC:
python find_cofactor.py -u P00533
To query multiple Uniprot AC’s with optional filtering:
python find_cofactor.py -i index.csv -f cofactors.txt -o summary_output
To annotate retrieved heteroatoms:
python annotate_heteroatoms.py -d cofactors_dict.json -c output_unique_heteroatoms.txt
Output files
• summary_output.csv: Table of UniProt ACs and associated heteroatoms.
• summary_output_filtered.csv: Table of UniProt ACs and filtered cofactors.
50 of 59
==PAGE:59==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
• summary_output_unique_heteroatoms.txt: List of unique heteroatoms detected.
• all_heteroatoms_annotated.csv: CSV with cofactor status of each compound and metadata
where available.
• all_cofactors.txt: List of all cofactors from the json dictionary.
The following figures show examples of the output file structures.
Figure 19: Example of the output file from alphafill cofactor survey tool.
An example of the summary_output_filtered.csv file from the alphafill cofactor survey tool.
Figure 20: Example of the output file from the annotate heteroatoms script.
An example of the all_heteroatoms_annotated.csv file from the annotate heteroatoms script.
This tool enabled systematic removal of proteins with ambiguous or unwanted ligands, ensuring
that the final dataset comprised only ligand-free structures suitable for unbiased molecular dynamics
simulation.
51 of 59
==PAGE:60==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
D
∆∆G Calculations for ABI1 variants with different stability classification in simple
and ensemble mode
Figure 21: FoldX ∆∆G calculations for ABI1 in cases of discrepancies between simple and ensemble mode.
The six plots show bar plots of ∆∆G values from both simple and ensemble modes for subsets of mutations where the
stability classification changed. Light blue bars show ∆∆G values from the simple mode, and daark blue bars show ∆∆G
values from the ensemble mode.
52 of 59
==PAGE:61==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Figure 22: RaSP ∆∆G calculations for ABI1 in cases of discrepancies between simple and ensemble mode.
The six plots show column charts of ∆∆G values from RaSP calculations in both simple and ensemble modes for subsets of
mutations where the stability classification changed. Light blue bars show ∆∆G values from the simple mode, and daark blue
bars show ∆∆G values from the ensemble mode.
53 of 59
==PAGE:62==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
E
Visualisation of long-range effects in ABI1 in simple mode
(a) Mutation at residue 439
(b) Mutation at residue 440
(c) Mutation at residue 449
(d) Mutation at residue 450
(e) Mutation at residue 503
(f) Mutation at residue 505
(g) Mutation at residue 507
(h) Mutation at residue 508
Figure 23: Mutation- and response sites for residues with destabilising long-range effects in ABI1 in MAVISp simple
mode
Mutation site in red; blue = up-mutation response site, yellow = down-mutation response site, green = residues responding
to both up- and down-mutation. These figures are snapshots from PyMOL sessions created automatically by the MAVISp
long-range module.
54 of 59
==PAGE:63==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
F
Proteins excluded from the dataset due to overlap with RaSP training data
The following proteins were excluded from our dataset because they were part of the RaSP training
dataset. Each entry includes the UniProt AC for reference.
Figure 24: List of proteins excluded from analysis due to overlap with the RaSP training dataset.
Proteins are listed with their gene name and UniProt AC.
55 of 59
==PAGE:64==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
G
FoldX stability benchmark study results for all proteins
G.1
FoldX stability performances for clusters
Protein
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
Precision
F1 score
MCC score
VHL
0.977
0.996
0.992
0.979
0.978
0.973
ATG12
0.99
0.987
0.988
0.954
0.972
0.964
APOC1
0.684
0.991
0.954
0.914
0.783
0.768
BCL10
0.995
0.999
0.998
0.995
0.995
0.994
ABI1
0.945
0.996
0.986
0.981
0.963
0.954
ARID1A
0.977
0.994
0.991
0.976
0.977
0.971
MSH6
0.99
0.987
0.988
0.964
0.977
0.969
PPIA
0.991
0.994
0.993
0.99
0.99
0.985
PPARG
0.973
0.993
0.989
0.973
0.973
0.966
MLH1
0.98
0.989
0.987
0.968
0.974
0.965
ACVR1B
0.978
0.998
0.994
0.994
0.986
0.982
BARD1
0.931
0.996
0.989
0.966
0.948
0.942
B2M
0.99
0.995
0.994
0.98
0.985
0.981
MAP1LC3B
0.998
0.995
0.995
0.983
0.99
0.987
BRIP1
0.972
0.995
0.989
0.983
0.977
0.97
Table 5: FoldX predictive performance for proteins with cluster-based ensembles.
56 of 59
==PAGE:65==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
G.2
FoldX stability performances for 100 ns simulations
Protein
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
Precision
F1 score
MCC score
ABI1
0.974
0.975
0.975
0.902
0.937
0.922
BCL10
0.995
0.999
0.998
0.995
0.995
0.994
APOC1
0.5
0.988
0.918
0.877
0.637
0.624
ACVR1B
0.986
1.0
0.997
1.0
0.993
0.991
ARID1A
0.97
0.996
0.991
0.982
0.976
0.97
MLH1
0.983
0.993
0.99
0.979
0.981
0.974
VHL
0.967
0.998
0.992
0.988
0.978
0.973
BARD1
0.919
0.983
0.976
0.87
0.894
0.881
PPIA
0.981
0.985
0.984
0.974
0.977
0.965
PPARG
0.961
0.993
0.986
0.973
0.967
0.959
MSH6
1.0
0.994
0.995
0.981
0.99
0.987
ATG12
0.998
0.995
0.995
0.981
0.989
0.986
BRIP1
0.987
0.995
0.993
0.986
0.986
0.981
B2M
0.998
0.994
0.995
0.978
0.988
0.985
MAP1LC3B
0.998
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.999
0.999
Table 6: FoldX predictive performance for proteins with 100 ns simulation time.
G.3
FoldX stability performances for 500 ns simulations
Protein
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
Precision
F1 score
MCC score
MAP1LC3B
1.0
0.999
1.0
0.998
0.999
0.999
ABI1
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
MSH6
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
MLH1
0.998
0.999
0.999
0.999
0.998
0.997
B2M
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
BARD1
0.954
0.996
0.991
0.97
0.962
0.957
BRIP1
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.999
0.999
0.999
ARID1A
0.996
0.999
0.999
0.996
0.996
0.995
APOC1
0.871
0.999
0.979
0.991
0.927
0.917
BCL10
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
ATG12
0.998
0.999
0.998
0.995
0.996
0.995
VHL
0.998
0.998
0.998
0.993
0.996
0.995
PPIA
0.998
0.998
0.998
0.997
0.997
0.996
ACVR1B
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
PPARG
0.996
0.999
0.998
0.997
0.996
0.995
Table 7: FoldX predictive performance for proteins with 500 ns simulation time.
57 of 59
==PAGE:66==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
H
RMSD vs MCC score table
The table shows the RMSD vs MCC score from the FoldX-only benchmark.
Protein
Ensemble type
Avg RMSD
MCC score
ABI1
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.3517
0.922
ACVR1B
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.0119
0.991
APOC1
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.0476
0.624
ARID1A
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.7283
0.970
ATG12
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.4566
0.986
B2M
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.2360
0.985
BARD1
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.7911
0.881
BCL10
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.1985
0.994
BRIP1
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.3868
0.981
MAP1LC3B
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.2199
0.999
MLH1
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.2630
0.974
MSH6
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.1428
0.987
PPIA
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.1523
0.965
PPARG
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.6289
0.959
VHL
100 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.3373
0.973
ABI1
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.3517
1.000
ACVR1B
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.0119
1.000
APOC1
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.0476
0.917
ARID1A
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.7283
0.995
ATG12
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.4566
0.995
B2M
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.2360
1.000
BARD1
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.7911
0.957
BCL10
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.1985
1.000
BRIP1
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.3868
0.999
MAP1LC3B
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.2199
0.999
MLH1
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.2630
0.997
MSH6
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.1428
1.000
PPIA
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.1523
0.996
PPARG
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.6289
0.995
VHL
500 ns simulation, 25 frames
0.3373
0.995
Table continues on next page.
58 of 59
==PAGE:67==
Master’s Thesis in Quantitative Biology & Disease Modelling
Laura Kappel Christensen
Protein
Ensemble type
Avg RMSD
MCC score
ABI1
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.3517
0.954
ACVR1B
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.0119
0.982
APOC1
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.0476
0.768
ARID1A
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.7283
0.971
ATG12
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.4566
0.964
B2M
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.2360
0.981
BARD1
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.7911
0.942
BCL10
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.1985
0.994
BRIP1
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.3868
0.970
MAP1LC3B
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.2199
0.987
MLH1
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.2630
0.965
MSH6
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.1428
0.969
PPIA
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.1523
0.985
PPARG
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.6289
0.966
VHL
3 clusters from 1000 ns simulation
0.3373
0.973
Table 8: Overview of Avg RMSD across 1000 ns cluster ensemble and MCC scores across proteins
59 of 59
