==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
MASTER THESIS
Variations in the Plant Physiological Constant Vcmax in
Response to Elevated Ozone Levels and Light Spectrum
Gradient
HJALTE MATEO JENSEN - S151779
SUPERVISOR: TEIS NØRGAARD MIKKELSEN
EXTERNAL SUPERVISOR: DAN BRUHN
TECHNICAL SUPERVISOR: FLEMMING MØLLER
DTU Sustain
DTU - Kongens Lyngby (Denmark)
3rd of July 2025
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Abstract
Ozone (O3) pollution poses a growing threat to plant productivity, particularly through
its impact on photosynthesis. This study investigates how elevated O3 levels and a
light gradient influence the maximum carboxylation rate of Rubisco (Vcmax) in three
crop species: potato, soybean, and tomato. Using the LI-6800 gas exchange system
and a custom Python-based implementation of the Farquhar–von Caemmerer–Berry
(FvCB) model, A/Ci curves were generated and analyzed under both control and O3-
treated conditions. Despite challenges such as measurement noise, water stress, and
limited Rd estimation, the results revealed a significant reduction in dry fruit yield for
potato under O3 exposure, while soybean and tomato showed no statistically signif-
icant yield loss. Vcmax values varied widely, with only one significant difference ob-
served between treatments (soybean on 05-07). The study highlights the complexity
of modeling photosynthetic parameters under environmental stress and underscores
the importance of accounting for experimental variability. These findings contribute
to a better understanding of how O3 and light interact to affect crop physiology and
productivity.
i
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Ozone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
O3 uptake in plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Vcmax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Rubisco-Limited Photosynthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Rubisco-Regeneration-Limited Photosynthesis . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Parameter Estimation Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
From Ambient CO2 to the Chloroplast: The Diffusion Pathway . . . . . .
7
2.4
Mesophyll Conductance and Estimating Cc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
CO2 compensation point Γ∗. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Day respiration Rd
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.1
Role of Rd in the FvCB Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.2
Rubisco-limited photosynthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6.3
Rubisco-regeneration-limited photosynthesis . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Importance of Rd
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Method
12
3.1
Collaborative plant experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Full overview of experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
Watering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
Sampling considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.3
Leaf level sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.4
Light measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Harvest and post-harvest phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
The half-way harvest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Post harvest phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Vcmax calculations and constants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
The coding approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
The LI-6800 instrument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6.1
DAT method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.7
How the script works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.8
The output logs from LI-6800 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
4
Results and discussion
33
4.1
Effects of O3 on dry fruit yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
General errors and mistakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.1
Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Unintended variation in the experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Parameter independence problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
Plant stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
Variations in Γ∗
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.7
Problems with high Γ∗. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.8
Problems with low Γ∗. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.9
Noise in data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.10 Lack of Rd measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.11 Overestimation of Vcmax and Jmax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.12 Effects of O3 on Vcmax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Conclusion
46
6
Appendix
55
6.1
Manual watering the first weeks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
All Vcmax graphs and comparisons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
My model Vcmax estimates vs typical FvCB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.4
Ozone level in the ozone treatment chamber
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.5
A temperature fluctuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.5.1
All the A/Ci plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
6.6
All the Vcmax values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
1
Introduction
Ozone pollution is a growing concern for both human health and plant productivity.
While its effects on respiratory health are well documented (McDonald-Buller et al.,
2011; Zhang et al., 2019a), ozone also poses a significant threat to vegetation, especially
crops. Once inside the leaf through the stomata, ozone reacts to form reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which can damage membranes, proteins, and DNA (Iriti and Faoro,
2007). This oxidative stress often leads to reduced photosynthetic efficiency and lower
yields (Ainsworth, 2016; Feng et al., 2022).
One of the key plant physiological processes affected by ozone is photosynthesis, par-
ticularly the activity of Rubisco—the enzyme responsible for CO2 fixation. The max-
imum carboxylation rate of Rubisco (Vcmax) is a central parameter in photosynthesis
models and is often used as a proxy for photosynthetic capacity. However, Vcmax is
not a fixed trait; it can vary depending on environmental conditions such as light,
temperature, and stress exposure (Walker et al., 2014; Rogers, 2014). This variability
is especially relevant in the context of ozone exposure, where both biochemical and
structural changes in the leaf can influence gas exchange dynamics.
In this study, the author attempts to explore how Vcmax responds to elevated ozone
levels and a gradient of light intensities—two factors that frequently co-occur in both
natural and controlled environments. By combining gas exchange measurements with
a custom modeling approach, the aim is to better understand how these environmental
stressors interact to shape photosynthetic performance at the leaf level.
1
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2
Background
2.1
Ozone
Ground level ozone is an air pollutant that can be harmful to both humans and plants.
It is produced mainly when the sun is shining by reacting photochemically with pre-
cursors such as nitrogen oxides (NOx) or volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and
thus Ozone is classified as a secondary pollutant. Prolonged exposure to ozone has
been linked to various health issues such as respiratory illnesses Talapatra et al. (2014)
Zhang et al. (2021) McDonald-Buller et al. (2011). The WHO emphasizes that high
levels of ozone can exacerbate these conditions, especially the most vulnerable popu-
lation groups like children and elderly McDonald-Buller et al. (2011) Lin et al. (2012).
Ozone is also harmful to plants, where it can hinder growth by reducing photosyn-
thetic assimilation and reducing crop yield McDonald-Buller et al. (2011) Nagashima
et al. (2010) Ainsworth (2016). Anthropogenic sources of precursors like NOx and
VOC are typically found in industrial and urban areas, however these species react
with the photochemically produced ozone and convert it back into NOx for example:
O3 + NO ⇌NO2 + O2
(1)
Higher concentrations of ground level ozone can typically be found in suburbs due
to transport of the precursors like NOx by wind to areas where non-anthropogenic
emissions from plants like VOCs are sufficient to generate photochemical ozone, but
the concentration of NOx is not high enough to then convert the ozone back Zhang
et al. (2019b).
Ozone levels of over 70 parts per billion over an 8-hour period (ppb) has been estab-
lished as a harmful concentration by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
and is linked to to scientific evidence for increased risk of respiratory illnesses and
premature death Dharmayasa et al. (2024) Zhang et al. (2019a). At levels of around
100 ppb acute effects such as eye and throat irritation can occur, and a longer term
exposure can be correlated with chronic respiratory issues and cardiovascular effects
Zhang et al. (2019a) Kobza et al. (2021).
2
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Elevated ozone levels can negatively affect both agricultural productivity and broader
ecosystems. When plants are chronically exposed to ozone concentrations above the
AOT40 (40ppb · h) threshold, they may show visible leaf damage, reduced photosyn-
thetic efficiency, and ultimately lower yields McGrath et al. (2015). Sensitive species
are particularly vulnerable, with injury often becoming critical once ozone levels ex-
ceed this threshold KHALED (2019). These impacts are especially concerning in re-
gions where surface ozone continues to rise due to industrial emissions and climate
interactions Tai et al. (2014); Feng et al. (2022).
The lifespan of ground level ozone is relatively short due to the reactivity of the ozone
species.
Although ozone formation heavily depends on precursors such as NOx,
VOCs, high temperatures, and sunlight, it is also rapidly broken down by these same
factors Bloomer et al. (2009). Ground-level ozone tends to follow a clear daily cycle,
usually peaking in the early afternoon when sunlight and temperatures are at their
highest, and dropping off at night as photochemical production slows and other re-
moval processes take over Zhao et al. (2018). Likewise, the ozone concentration also
varies by time of the year, since less sunlight during the winter halts the ozone forma-
tion. This varies by latitude and altitude.
ˇSakalys and Girgˇzdien˙e (2010) highlight how the lifetime of ground-level ozone is
shaped by local environmental conditions, which can vary depending on geography
and the degree of urbanization. Their study shows that in rural areas, ozone tends
to stick around longer, partly due to reduced deposition rates compared to what’s
typically seen in urban environments.
2.1.1
O3 uptake in plants
Ozone enters primarily through the stomata, which means a key factor for ozone up-
take is the stomatal conductance in plants (gm). As gm varies depending on light,
humidity and CO2concentration, these are crucial parameters.
While stomatal uptake is the dominant pathway, non-stomatal ozone deposition can
also contribute significantly under certain conditions. This includes direct deposition
onto leaf surfaces (cuticular uptake), soil surfaces, or other plant parts. Non-stomatal
pathways become particularly relevant in species with low stomatal conductance, dur-
3
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
ing nighttime when stomata are closed, or in ecosystems with sparse vegetation or low
leaf area index (LAI) Horv´ath et al. (2017). In some cases, non-stomatal fluxes can rival
or even exceed stomatal uptake, especially in short vegetation or under dry conditions
Horv´ath et al. (2017).
When ozone enters a leaf through the stomata, it dissolves into the apoplastic fluid and
reacts to form reactive oxygen species (ROS). These include superoxide anion (O−
2 ),
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radicals (•OH). These ROS are highly reac-
tive and can cause damage to several key cellular components Iriti and Faoro (2007):
Lipids: ROS can trigger lipid peroxidation, which compromises membrane integrity
and fluidity.
Proteins: Enzymes and structural proteins may be oxidized, affecting their function
and stability.
Nucleic acids: DNA and RNA can be damaged, potentially disrupting gene expres-
sion and replication.
Tomatoes, potatoes and soy beans are all considered sensitive to ozone, however soy-
bean has been studies extensively due the high production rates as livestock feed, and
is deemed especially sensitive Osborne et al. (2016); Abraitien˙e and Girgˇzdien˙e (2013);
Karlsson et al. (2005).
2.1.2
Vcmax
Vcmax represents the maximum carboxylation rate of the measured leaf, expressed in
units of [µmol CO2 m−2 s−1]. It is a key parameter in terrestrial biosphere models
(TBMs), where it is commonly applied as a fixed value at 25◦C, denoted as Vcmax25
Walker et al. (2014); Rogers (2014). TBMs are highly sensitive to Vcmax, which plays a
central role in their photosynthetic submodels Zaehle et al. (2005); Bonan et al. (2011);
Verheijen et al. (2013).
Both theoretical and empirical studies have demonstrated a strong link between pho-
tosynthetic capacity and leaf nitrogen content (N), primarily due to the substantial al-
location of nitrogen to the enzyme ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(RuBisCO) Loreau and Holt (2004). Additionally, phosphorus (P) availability is crucial
4
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
for regulating several physiological processes essential to photosynthesis, including
membrane fluidity and the synthesis of ATP and NADPH Loreau and Holt (2004); Utz
et al. (2010).
The Farquhar, von Caemmerer, and Berry (FvCB) model is commonly used to derive
photosynthetic parameters from A/Ci response curves. It characterizes net CO2 as-
similation (A) as being limited by one of three biochemical processes: the activity of
Rubisco, the regeneration of RuBP, or the utilization of triose phosphates (TPU) (for
high CO2 concentrations, not explored in this study). Each of these limitations is de-
scribed by a separate equation, and the dominant limitation at any given point de-
pends on the internal CO2 concentration and surrounding environmental conditions.
2.1.3
Rubisco-Limited Photosynthesis
At low intercellular CO2 concentrations (Ci), photosynthesis is limited by the carboxy-
lation capacity of Rubisco. The rate of CO2 assimilation (A) under this limitation is
given by:
Ac =
Vcmax(Cc −Γ∗)
Cc + KC

1 + O
KO
 −Rd
(2)
Where:
• Vcmax is the maximum rate of Rubisco carboxylation,
• Cc is the CO2 partial pressure at the site of carboxylation (often approximated by
intercellular CO2, Ci, if mesophyll conductance is not considered),
• Γ∗is the CO2 compensation point in the absence of mitochondrial respiration,
• KC and KO are the Michaelis–Menten constants for CO2 and O2, respectively,
• O is the oxygen partial pressure,
• Rd is the rate of non-photorespiratory (day) respiration.
This equation can be linearized to estimate Vc max and Rd using regression methods
Long and Bernacchi (2003), although non-linear fitting is more commonly applied
when mesophyll conductance (gm) is unknown or variable Ethier and Livingston (2004).
5
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2.1.4
Rubisco-Regeneration-Limited Photosynthesis
At moderate to high CO2 concentrations, photosynthesis becomes limited by the re-
generation of RuBP, which depends on the rate of electron transport. The rate of CO2
assimilation under this limitation is given by:
Aj =
J(Cc −Γ∗)
4.5Cc + 10.5Γ∗−Rd
(3)
Where:
• J is the rate of electron transport supporting NADPH production,
• The constants 4.5 and 10.5 reflect the number of electrons required per carboxy-
lation and oxygenation event, respectively
• The ratio of 4.5 to 10.5 assumes a 3:1 ATP:NADPH ratio and accounts for pho-
torespiration
The value of J can be estimated from chlorophyll fluorescence or modeled as a func-
tion of light intensity, with Jmax representing the maximum electron transport rate
under saturating light. While the stoichiometry of electron transport to ATP synthesis
remains a topic of debate, the values used here are conservative and widely accepted
Sharkey et al. (2007).
2.2
Parameter Estimation Approach
The two equations described above can be implemented in a spreadsheet or curve-
fitting software to estimate key photosynthetic parameters. In this study the parame-
ters are estimated using custom made code in Python using the FvCB equations and
using initial guesses for unknown parameters such as Vc max, Jmax, Rd and Γ∗. Pa-
rameters such as Vc max and J are adjusted to fit the measured A/Ci response data.
Accurate estimation typically requires prior knowledge or assumptions about Rd and
mesophyll conductance (gm).
While linear methods can provide initial estimates Long and Bernacchi (2003), non-
linear curve fitting is generally more robust, particularly when estimating multiple
6
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
parameters simultaneously. Ethier and Livingston (2004) developed methods to esti-
mate gm directly from Rubisco-limited data, and these approaches have since been ex-
tended to the RuBP-regeneration-limited region as well Ethier and Livingston (2004).
2.3
From Ambient CO2 to the Chloroplast: The Diffusion Pathway
As described by Sharkey et al. (2007), photosynthetic CO2 fixation occurs in the stroma
of the chloroplast, where Rubisco catalyzes the carboxylation of RuBP. As CO2 dif-
fuses from the atmosphere into the chloroplast, it encounters several boundary layers,
resulting in a gradient of partial pressures:
Ca →Ci →Cc
Where:
• Ca is the ambient CO2 partial pressure,
• Ci is the intercellular CO2 partial pressure,
• Cc is the CO2 partial pressure at the site of carboxylation in the chloroplast.
Because of these diffusion steps, the actual CO2 concentration available to Rubisco (Cc)
is lower than Ci. While Ci is routinely estimated from gas exchange data, estimating
Cc is more complex and requires knowledge of mesophyll conductance (gm) Sharkey
et al. (2007).
2.4
Mesophyll Conductance and Estimating Cc
Mesophyll conductance gm quantifies the ease with which CO2 diffuses from the in-
tercellular airspaces to the chloroplasts. It is typically expressed in units of mmol m−2
s−1 Pa−1 and is primarily governed by liquid-phase diffusion resistances Sharkey et al.
(2007). It is the inverse of the biophysical diffusion resistance encountered by CO2 as
it moves from the intercellular spaces to the sites of carboxylation.
Although gm has been measured independently using stable carbon isotope discrim-
ination Evans et al. (1986), this method is labor-intensive and requires specialized
7
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
equipment. Fortunately, a reasonable estimate of gm can be obtained directly from
A/Ci response curves Sharkey et al. (2007). Mesophyll conductance influences the ef-
fective CO2 concentration inside the chloroplast, and a low gm reduces the curvature
of the A/Ci curve Sharkey et al. (2007).
The relationship between intercellular CO2 concentration Ci, net assimilation rate A,
and gm is given by:
Cc = Ci −A
gm
This equation allows for the estimation of Cc when A and Ci are known, provided that
gm is either measured or estimated. Non-linear curve fitting, which minimizes the sum
of squared deviations between model predictions and observed data, can be used to
estimate gm by substituting Cc with (Ci −A/gm) in the FvCB equations. Notably, the
estimate of Vcmax is particularly sensitive to the value of gm Sharkey et al. (2007).
Although early applications of the FvCB model often substituted Ci for Cc, modern
approaches increasingly emphasize the importance of using Cc to better align gas ex-
change data with the biochemical processes occurring in the chloroplast . This align-
ment enables more accurate comparisons between leaf-level measurements and bio-
chemical parameters such as Rubisco kinetics and electron transport stoichiometry .
Mesophyll conductance is given as gm and is a term that describes the diffusion of
CO2 into the chloroplast in accordance to Fick’s law of diffusion, Sun et al. (2014).
It is expressed as the ratio of the net photosynthetic rate A to the difference in the
concentration of intercellular CO2, Ci, and the concentration of CO2 in the chloroplast,
Cc:
gm =
A
(Ci−Cc).
2.5
CO2 compensation point Γ∗
The CO2 compensation point (Γ∗) can be understood as the point where the A/Ci
curve intersects the x-axis. At this point, net assimilation A is zero, meaning that
the rate of photosynthesis is exactly balanced by respiration. Since photosynthesis
cannot produce negative values of A, any negative values must result from respiration
8
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
alone. Therefore, Γ∗represents the CO2 concentration at which photosynthesis and
respiration are equal in the absence of Rd.
This value depends on temperature and, as shown in Bernacchi et al. (2001b), the re-
lationship is not linear. However, because the measurements in this study were made
close to 25°C, a linear approximation of Γ∗is used for simplicity, following the ap-
proach described in Brooks and Farquhar (1985) and Laisk (1977).
2.6
Day respiration Rd
Rd stands for day respiration and is understood as the mitochondrial respiration dur-
ing the day (in the light). It represents the CO2 released from the metabolism of the
leaf that is not related to photosynthesis. Thus, such a value must be positive. In the
A/Ci curves the assimilation A is understood as the net assimilation, which means Rd
is already accounted for as:
A = Agross −Rd
This means the value Rd is not directly visible on the A/Ci curves but it is rather a
slight shift in the vertical direction.
2.6.1
Role of Rd in the FvCB Model
In the Farquhar, von Caemmerer, and Berry (FvCB) model of photosynthesis, the net
CO2 assimilation rate A is calculated as:
A = min(Ac, Aj) −Rd
where:
• Ac is the Rubisco-limited assimilation rate,
• Aj is the Rubisco-regeneration-limited assimilation rate,
• Rd is the day respiration (mitochondrial respiration in the light).
9
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2.6.2
Rubisco-limited photosynthesis
The initial part of the A/Ci curve with low Ci values are responsible for the Rubisco-
limited assimilation and it’s expressed as:
Ac = Vc max ·
Ci −Γ∗
Ci + Kc

1 + O
Ko

A = Ac −Rd
Where:
• A is the assimilation accounting for the day respiration
2.6.3
Rubisco-regeneration-limited photosynthesis
The flat part of the A/Ci curve is due to the effect of Rubisco-regeneration, meaning
the light and CO2 saturated part of the A/Ci curve. Here Rd is also the correcting term
to get A:
Aj = J ·
Ci −Γ∗
4.5Ci + 10.5Γ∗
A = Aj −Rd
Where again:
• A is the assimilation accounting for the day respiration
2.7
Importance of Rd
• Corrects for non-photorespiratory CO2 release: Rd accounts for mitochondrial
respiration that continues in the light, reducing net photosynthesis A.
• Essential for accurate parameter estimation: Misestimating Rd biases the esti-
mation of Vc max, Jmax, and Γ∗.
• Species- and condition-dependent: Rd varies with species, light acclimation,
temperature, and stress (e.g., ozone), and must be estimated for each context.
10
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
• Critical for modeling carbon balance: Accurate Rd values are needed in ecosys-
tem and crop models to predict net primary productivity.
11
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
3
Method
3.1
Collaborative plant experiment
The Ecotron was the name of the facility used for the experiment. Due to the remote-
ness of this Ecotron, and the support for large scale experiments, a collaboration was
made between a few groups of students to take care of the plants, take measurements
and coordinate transport to and from the facility. In total four groups of students had
access to the Ecotron and the plants in the chambers. Two groups on the bachelor level
doing a course project, one group doing a bachelor thesis and one group (the author)
doing a master thesis. Many hands were needed for the work that had to be put in, to
do an experiment with plants; which includes:
• Deciding on the plant and species to
use,
• Weighing and preparing the soil in
the pots,
• Moving the pots, trays and carts to
the chambers,
• Planting the seeds,
• Watering the seeds thoroughly but
gently,
• Watering the first four weeks,
• Preparing nutrient shots to enhance
growth,
• Taking measurements with different
instruments,
• Harvesting the plants and counting
the leaves and fruits,
• Weighing the leaves,
stems and
fruits,
• Drying the leaves, stems and fruits,
• Weighing the dry leaves, stems and
fruits.
Work was divided depending on who was present at the Ecotron the given day, how-
ever each group had their own focus during the experiment and the measuring instru-
ments were mostly shared. Scheduling to avoid instrument use conflict was done to
ensure time was optimized. Many data were taken in collaboration such as the weigh-
ing of the plants, however the A/Ci data was of little interest to the other groups so
they had to be measured by the author of this study. The data taken was shared in a
Microsoft Teams group, accessible for all of the participants.
12
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
3.2
Full overview of experiment
The experiment took place on DTU Risø, 4000 Roskilde in building 325 where the
Ecotron was. Two chambers were used for the experiment: Chamber CO3 and CO4.
One chamber was used for O3 treatment of the plants, and one was used for con-
trol. Both chambers had LEDs to light up the room, and their flux was measured
to be roughly 1400µmol m−2 s−1 in the most light intense end, and down to about
50µmol m−2 s−1 in the low light intense end. On each side, four fans were installed
roughly half a meter above the floor and they were put on low speed to secure a well
mixed air inside the chamber. They were pointed downwards however, to avoid the
winds caused by them to interfere with the plants since the plants would be affected
differently due to position.
The plant pots were placed in the middle of the chamber on 6 trays that were placed
on 3 carts up against the end wall as to make space to pass by near the entrance. An
illustration of the setup is seen on 1.
Figure 1: The setup for the plants. There were in total 18 plants for each species per chamber,
and both chambers were identical in setup. The P, S and T stand for potato, soy bean and
tomato respectively, and each species was placed in it’s own row parallel to the light gradient.
The marked pots indicate the plants used for measurements in this study. The plant IDs are
a combination of species, number and treatment. In this case the upper left pot is K1M which
translates to Potato Position 1 With O3 treatment. Illustration is a modified version of Ander-
sen and Kistrup (2025).
3.2.1
Watering
The automatic watering system was not implemented at the start of the experiment
due to technical difficulties. Manual watering was used for the first 4 weeks, and
13
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
afterwards a daily watering system was set up to dispense water once a day, exactly at
the time of daybreak in the chambers at 7 A.M. Water was lead through a narrow hose
and into the trays below the pots. Three hoses were used, and a splitter was added to
the end of the hoses to divide the water evenly between two trays. When moving the
carts with the plants from one chamber to another during the experiment, the splitters
were in some few cases damaged (pinched), and in most cases replaced immediately
with a similar one, see figure 2. At one point there were no more splitters, so a bigger
version that fit the hose just as well was used. Since the splitters were only used to
distribute the water evenly between the two trays, the size of the splitter is assumed
to be irrelevant.
Figure 2: A pinched splitter, ready to be replaced!
The watering amount was approximately 1L per pot, and the amount decided upon
was guesstimated to be the amount of water needed for ’well watered’. The plants
would ideally not be water stressed, which means enough water to not be water lim-
ited while also not over watering the plants to the point where the roots start to rot.
This amount of water for ’well watered’ varied from week to week and even day to
day during the week in the initial period of the experiment with manual watering. It
14
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
(a) The splitters (blue plastic parts) were attached
to the main tube leading the water in between the
carts and the two additional pieces of tubing were
then used to lead the water down in the middle of
the trays.
(b) Each set of two trays shared one tube with a
splitter, giving a total of 3 tubes per chamber. The
tubes were placed in in the middle of the carts be-
tween two trays to minimize the amount of water-
ing tubes needed.
Figure 3: The minimum watering tube approach made it easier to water the local group of
plants with the same amount of water, expecting that the sets of two trays needed approximately
the same amount of water. This turned out to be a major flaw in the watering, but it was simple
and effective.
15
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
is assumed that the watering during the seedling phase of the plants should be plenty,
since the root network was yet to be developed. The very first watering was executed
manually by watering from the top, exactly 3 liters, careful to not wash the seed out of
the initial placement. Since then the watering has been through the bottom of the pots
by watering the trays and letting the matrix potential absorb the water upwards. The
decision to not water from the top is to not wash the leaves and make the watering
uneven and eliminate as many as possible outside confounding factors. The amount
of water varied between 7L and 9L per tray, and was increased during the growing
phase of the plants as to accommodate their water needs up to 12L per day. Later in
the experiment the watering was down adjusted since the plants were growing less,
indicating the fruit production had started. Four weeks before the experiment ended
half of the plants were harvested, meaning the amount of water was halved down to
approximately 4L-6L per day. Unfortunately the plants selected for harvesting were
not equally distributed among the trays, so some trays ended up having more plants
left than others, which proved problematic for the watering system since it would pro-
vide equal amounts of water to two trays with a different number of plants. Watering
was adjusted a few more time based on the needs of the plants, however at this late
stage of the experiment it was seen as less important to micromanage the watering
amount, as long as the plants were not drowning the roots or completely dry in the
soil matrix.
3.2.2
Sampling considerations
Of the total 108 pots for both chambers combined (some with multiple plants in each)
only about 2/3 were directly available for the LI-6800. Due to each cart containing two
3x3 trays, only the out ones were available for the LI-6800, since it could not reach the
innermost pots with plants. Additionally the 3 carts used were all placed in the middle
of the chamber in a series from the end wall to half a meter from the entrance. This
meant that the available space to move the LI-6800 around on was limited, as seen on
4.
16
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 4: A mostly top down view of the plant set-up.
In total the 3x18 plants were only available from the perimeter, and thus it was de-
cided to systematically pick the easiest to access plants for measurement. Due to early
consideration of time restraints when measuring with the LI-6800, only 6 of each plant
species was selected for measurements, while the rest were used as backup and for
other students doing experiments in the chamber at the time. From the entrance, the
plant # 1, 6, 7, 12, 13 and 18 were picked for measurements. Since the light gradient
inside the chamber was parallel with these plant placements, every species used these
6 numbers for measurements. The non-periodic distance between plants was due to
ease of access between the carts where, if pushed away from each other, two more
plants were made available for measurements. See 5a and 5b
Although the LI-6800 is technically handheld, a tripod was used to stabilize the In-
frared Gas Analyzers (IRGAs) during measurements, as the instrument is heavy and
requires stability for accurate measurements. Because every measurement took over
10 minutes, it was not reasonable to hold the LI-6800 by hand to reach the innermost
plants, even though this was technically possible.
17
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
(a) The carts were positioned next to each other,
but were possible to move out to take measurements
between them.
(b) The pots in the trays in the carts are shown
here. Pot number 1 and 6 were at the edges of the
cart, making them accessible when the carts were
move apart. The same goes for pot number 7 and
12 and finally for 13 and 18.
Figure 5: On the right, the setup is shown before the two series of three carts were moved each
to their own chamber, making space in the perimeter for measurements with the LI-6800.
18
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
3.2.3
Leaf level sampling
Another important aspect of the sampling is the decision to sample on leaf level. Since
the measurements were lengthy, only one leaf was selected for each plant during that
day of measurements. The leaf selected was decided to be the healthiest one avail-
able for the LI-6800. The reason behind this, was that out of the handful of leaves
available for measurements, the ones that would most likely survive being clamped
by the LI-6800 for 15 minutes would be the best leaves for measurement. Multiple
times during the experiment, branches and leaves were broken off. These accidents
happened when moving the carts from one chamber to the other which was done to
reduce chamber bias. As previously mentioned other students also had access to the
plants in both chambers, so the risk of breaking leaves and branches increased on days
others accessed the chambers.
The leaf health was evaluated by looks, however they were selected by one person to
reduce bias. Initially in the experiment the leaves were labeled with colored strips.
This was mainly due to necessity to identify new leaf groups in the growth stage.
However, by the time the good measurements used in this study were taken, the plants
were already ’adults’ and producing fruits. The leaves selected were then used as a
representative for the entire plant which introduces uncertainty.
3.2.4
Light measurements
For each leaf A and Ci measurement an additional light measurement was done. The
LI-6800 was able to measure and control the ingoing light into the leaf chamber (the
part of the LI-6800 where the leaf in inserted and clamped), but it was not able to
measure the incoming radiation or the irradiance on the leaf. Instead a manual light
reading was done with a LI-210SA Photometric Sensor on a LI-250 Light meter, as
seen on 6b.
When taking light measurements, the unit selected was µmol · m2 · s,
and the light sensor was carefully angled 90◦straight up in the air pointing towards
the ceiling from where the LEDs were sending their light. It was decided that the
straight up angle was preferable to the towards the middle of the room approach,
as this was easier to control. Measurements outside can also be done by pointing
the sensor towards the sun, however this is unreliable when under a canopy. In the
19
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
(a) Picture of the LI-210SA Photometric Sensor,
used in connection with the LI-250A.
(b) Picture of the LI-250A used for light measure-
ments. Connecting to the LI-210SA with a cable.
Figure 6: Measurement instruments used for light measurements. Pictures from Licor web-
page Licor.com
Ecotron the middle of the room had more intense light than the outskirts, since this
was the only way to control the LEDs to have a light gradient. This in term means that
the light measurements were at times taken on leaves, that were shaded. Since shaded
leaves are typically thinner and have a higher chlorophyll content due to acclimation
to the conditions Lichtenthaler et al. (2013), they can some times look greener and
healthier, and would more likely be picked for measurements of A and Ci. This bias
is difficult to account for, as these shaded leaves on the side of the plants were often
times the most accessible. Readings were done once the photon concentration was
stable for a few seconds, while holding the sensor still.
3.3
Harvest and post-harvest phase
3.3.1
The half-way harvest
Half of the plants were harvested on the 15th of May. Equally many potato, soy and
tomato plants were selected and in collaboration between all groups the plants dedi-
cated into five groups and placed in small paper bags. The five categories were: Fruits,
stem, green leaves, yellow leaves and brown leaves. After separation into paper bags,
the bags were weighed and put into a drying oven at 80◦C for drying multiple days.
20
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
While the leaves and the stems were almost dry after two full days in the drying oven,
the fruits in particular were still very wet and had soaked through the paper bags
causing a mess. Only a small fraction of the green leaves were also still moist. The
fruits were put back into the oven for a longer drying process, but the bags had to
be changed due to the soaking. It turned out that one of the drying oven was clearly
superior to the other ones due to a rotor at the back of the oven for air mixing. Since
the ovens were very densely packed, the fruits took another 4 days before they were
properly dry, at which point they were weighed together with the remaining leaves.
The most problematic species were the tomatoes and potatoes while the soy beans
had completely dried during the first two days. Some soy beans were nearly dry at
the point of harvest. After gathering the dry weight data, the plant parts were all
discarded. Harvesting process can be seen on 7.
Figure 7: Soy bean plant being harvested. The soy been is nearly dead, however this was a rare
case of having one alive stem with leaves.
21
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 8: A tomato plant that has reached the fully ripe development stage. The tomatoes in the
high intensity light region of the chamber had visibly more red fruits than the shadier regions.
3.3.2
Post harvest phase
After the first harvest no other group than the author’s continued taking measure-
ments. During this phase of the experiment, most of the plants were very far in their
cycle reaching senescence. However, the fruits were very big and plenty. The plants
with the quickest life cycle in this study were the soy beans, then the potatoes and
finally the tomatoes whom where still in the ripe to fully ripe development stage, as
seen on 8.
3.4
Vcmax calculations and constants
Initially the A/Ci curves used for calculating the Vcmax values were made using the
Excel tool by Landflux.org for curve fitting (downloadable from: Here). However, after
testing the tool and reading through the math used to calculate the constants used in
the Vcmax calculation, it was decided to go directly to the source of the Vcmax model
using the FvCB (Farquhar, von Caemmerer, and Berry) method Farquhar et al. (1980).
22
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
In short Vcmax is described by a couple of constants, Kc, Ko, Γ∗, A and Ci, where A and
Ci were directly measured by the Licor-6800. Thus, the Vcmax for each leaf is calculated
from the A and Ci measurements, while Kc, Ko can be calculated based on temperature
of the leaf, which is also measured by the Licor-6800. Vcmax is given as:
Vcmax = A ∗(Ci + Kc ∗(1 + O/Ko))
(Ci −Γ∗)
(4)
Where O is the oxygen concentration and is assumed to be 210 mmol/mol.
However, Vcmax can also be calculated by inspecting the initial slope of an A/Ci curve,
which was why the Excel tool was used at first. However, due to large uncertainty
caused by noise in the initial part of each measurement, the initial slope often failed
to indicate a reasonable value for Vcmax. Thus, the Excel tool with curve fitting was
discarded and the mathematical method was used to estimate Vcmax from the A, Ci
and leaf temperature values measured by the Licor-6800. In Bernacchi et al. (2001b)
the full calculation is shown, and Γ∗is determined in Brooks and Farquhar (1985) by
experiments. In this experiment, Γ∗is estimated by the A/Ci curve where:
Γ∗= −intercept
slope
(5)
Because of this approach, the initial part of the A/Ci curves are expected to be linear,
which indicates that at low-Ci values (< 50 −100mol · mol−1), the limiting factor is the
Rubisco activity (Ac). As expressed in Farquhar et al. (1980) the Ac limited part of the
slope can be expressed as:
Ac = Vc max(Ci −Γ∗)
Ci + Kc

1 + O
Ko

(6)
While the high-Ci (> 100 −200mol · mol−1) values part of the curve after the initial
slope is due to the regeneration of Rubisco, also known as the Rubisco regeneration
limited assimilation (Aj). In this flat part of the curve the assimilation is described by:
Aj =
J(Ci −Γ∗)
4.5Ci + 10.5Γ∗
(7)
Because the A/Ci curve has two distinct phases, it makes sense to approach FvCB
modeling in two steps: estimating Vcmax from the initial, steep part of the curve, and
23
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Jmax from the flatter, Rubisco regeneration limited region.
Initially Vcmax was estimated from the original FvCB approach, however, many of the
A/Ci curves showed banana like curvature being much more steep in the beginning
than at the end. This lead to the step-wise modeling of Vcmax instead, as this resulted
in better estimates for Γ∗and Vcmax.
To demonstrate, two plots are shown below to visualize the different approaches, see
9.
(a) Step-wise FvCB parameter estimation
(b) Original FvCB parameter estimation
Figure 9: Step-wise vs original approach. On the left the red line is broken into two parts;
one with a steeper slope at low-Ci values, while the flat part of the curve is modeled with the
high-Ci values resulting in an apparent break on the curve. On the right the original FvCB
model is used to estimate Γ∗and Vcmax.
Due to apparent improvement in Γ∗and Vcmax values that align better with previous
literature, the step-wise approach was used in this study. Additionally, many more at-
tempts to implement important parameters into the FvCB modeling were made. After
a lot of trial and error, the parameter Γ∗was added as a parameter to fit in the low-Ci
part of the curve, and the parameter gm was also added, but using the entire Ci series.
3.5
The coding approach
As explained earlier, the simple approach of the Excel-sheet modeling was abandoned
due to incompatible data. The Excel file expected a few readings of A and Ci, likely
expecting outputs from a steady state method of measuring A and Ci. However, this
method is extremely time consuming, and thus it was quickly cast aside for this study.
Since a total of 108 plants were available for measurement, it was essential to adopt a
more time-efficient approach. The LI-6800 is a modern gas exchange system equipped
24
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
with several advanced features, including the Dynamic Assimilation Technique (DAT),
which enables rapid acquisition of A/Ci curves. By utilizing the DAT method, it was
possible to generate large datasets in Excel format for both chambers on a daily basis,
significantly increasing the throughput of measurements.
In contrast, the traditional steady-state method for collecting A and Ci data requires
several minutes per measurement, as leaves must acclimate to each new CO2 con-
centration. Ambient CO2 levels in the chamber were typically around 420 ppm, but
human presence could cause noticeable fluctuations. To reach steady-state conditions,
leaves often had to acclimate to concentrations as low as 0–5 ppm, which further ex-
tended the measurement time. Additionally, the act of measurement itself can disturb
the leaf microenvironment by altering light exposure, temperature, and gas exchange
dynamics, potentially affecting the accuracy of the data.
Given the physical demands of operating the relatively heavy LI-6800 and the need
to minimize measurement-induced artifacts, the DAT method offered a practical and
efficient alternative. Most importantly, it enabled a higher number of measurements
within the limited time available, thereby improving the statistical robustness of the
dataset despite logistical constraints. As it turns out, the amount of data was rather
limited in this study due to a multiple of reasons:
• The Ecotron was located in a remote research facility (Risø) nearly 40km from
DTU main campus in Lyngby.
• Each optimized measurement took (by en of the experiment) approximately 15
minutes due to CO2 ramp speed and LI-6800 lag.
• Most of the leaves from the plants were in unavailable spots for the LI-6800, even
though it had a tripod to extend it’s range.
• The initial part of the experiment included planting the seeds and taking care of
the seedlings, so no leaves were developed to take measurements on.
25
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 10: The measuring device LI-6800. The two clamps are open and the sensor is visible.
Screenshot from Licor.com
3.6
The LI-6800 instrument
The main instrument used for this study is the LI-6800 Portable Photosynthesis System
made by LI-COR ENVIRONMENTAL. The LI-6800 is an advanced gas and chloro-
phyll fluorescence measurement instrument for plants. It can measure real time and
has configurable data logging that can log straight to an Excel sheet, which proved
to be very helpful for this study. With the measuring device comes an touch screen
interface, and it has internal sensors that can detect CO2 H2O, temperature, pressure
and light, all which are used in this study. it works by inserting a leaf in between two
clamps with gaskets to seal the leaf completely and do measurements in a controlled
and closed environment, see 10.
The LI-6800 uses an internal fan to blow air through the gasket chamber containing
the leaf and then analyzes the gas in the Infrared Gas Analyzers (IRGAs), see figure
11.
The LI-6800 has two IRGAs making it possible to measure the sample and reference air
flows simultaneously, which gives a high quality fast response time. The IRGAs can
be used to measure gas exchanges, but also chlorophyll fluorescence. This function
was used in the beginning of the experiment, but was later decided to be omitted due
to time constraints. The LI-6800 also uses high intensity LEDs to reach light intensities
of up to 3000 µmol/m2/s1. For more specifications on the LI-6800, see LI-COR (2024).
To gather A and Ci data with the LI-6800, the instrument first had to be set up prop-
26
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 11: The dual IRGAs. Figure from Busch et al. (2024).
erly. In a combination of video guides and written guides made by LI-COR, the setup
was done correctly after a lot of trial and error. One greatly helpful resource for best
practices in using the LI-6800 DAT method came from Busch et al. (2024). From start
up to shut down, the procedure was:
• Switch out the CO2 cartridge,
• Check if there was enough H2O
• Check if the H2O scrub was unsaturated (the orange Sorbeads® Orange CHAMELEON®
would turn white when they were saturated),
• Check if the CO2 scrub was exhausted (the white soda lime pellets would turn
purple when exhausted),
• Run warm-up tests (typically 20 minutes),
• Correct any environmental conditions* that were changed by mistake or by the
warm up test,
• Run the H2O range matching test,
• Run the CO2 range matching test (this had to be done every few hours at least),
• Run the dynamic CO2 tuning,
• Open a new log file and name it,
• Transport the LI-6800 and the box with the touch screen interface to the cham-
bers,
• Clamp onto a leaf for measurement,
• Start the measurement DAT,
• Repeat for all leaves that should be measured (15-20 minute per measurement),
• Close log file (one log files was used for each chamber),
• Export the log file as Excel sheet to USB (or other),
27
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 12: Example view of the LI-6800 interface. Each blue button to the left opened a detailed
menu where the values could be selected. In this case light is selected.
• Move LI-6800 to a safe location,
• Power off the instrument.
*= the environmental conditions were agreed upon by the groups that used the LI-
6800, as these could determine data quality and measurement speed. These settings
could be directly controlled by the touch screen interface, see 12
The agreed upon settings for the LI-6800 were: Flow: 700 µmol/s1 & valve 0.1 kPa,
H2O: (this was the humidity) 50% relative humidity, CO2: 420ppm, Fan: 10,000rpm
(rounds per minute), Temperature: 22◦C, Light: 1500µmol/m2/s1 (set as Qin).
Tejera-Nieves (2024) has a step by step tutorial on how to set up the LI-6800 to perform
an A/Ci DAT measurement.
The LI-6800 control module can be seen on figure 13.
The most important part of the setup was seemingly the selection of parameters for
the DAT.
3.6.1
DAT method
The Dynamic Assimilation Technique (DAT) allows for gas exchange measurements
to be conducted under non-steady-state conditions in the leaf chamber. Unlike tra-
ditional steady-state methods, which require the leaf and environmental parameters
to stabilize before each measurement, DAT is based on first principles and enables
measurements that are otherwise difficult or impractical to obtain Saathoff and Welles
(2021).
28
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 13: The back side of the LI-6800 control module with touch screen. From left to right:
CO2cartridge, H2Oscrubber, H2O injector, CO2scrubber.
In the context of A/Ci curves, DAT makes it possible to apply a continuously ramp-
ing CO2 concentration rather than a series of discrete steps. This approach allows gas
exchange data to be logged continuously, resulting in a much higher density of data
points compared to steady-state measurements. The total number of points depends
on the logging frequency, the rate of CO2 ramping, and the range of CO2 concentra-
tions used. In this study the ramping rate was set to 100ppm/min and the range was
set to 5-605 ppm. These were picked due to previous tests that showed a larger range
would not provide better data, since the high end of the range would all be well into
the Jmax (the Rubisco-regeneration-limiting) part of the A/Ci curve. The lower range
of 5 ppm was due to instructions from LI-COR that adviced to keep the CO2 concen-
tration above 0 to avoid turning off and cooling down the CO2 system. The ramping
rate was selected by previous test showing a low density of data in the low Ci value
part of the A/Ci curve giving the FvCB model a hard time fitting the Vcmax values
correctly. Although the ramping rate was slowed down from 200 ppm/minute to just
100 ppm/minute, the reward was a much better quality of data. The tradeoff was that
the range had to be reduced from 1200 ppm to 600 ppm, which in turn turned out to
be plenty of range for the curve to reach the Jmax part of the A/Ci curve. Typically,
DAT-generated curves contain between 5 and 50 times more data than those produced
29
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
using steady-state protocols LI-COR (2024).
While this increase in data resolution provides a more detailed representation of pho-
tosynthetic responses, it also presents challenges for data analysis. Many curve-fitting
tools are designed for the relatively sparse datasets typical of steady-state measure-
ments and are not well suited for the high-density output produced by DAT. This is
particularly relevant when fitting Farquhar-von Caemmerer-Berry (FvCB) models of
photosynthesis von Caemmerer (2013), which require tools capable of handling large,
continuous datasets. Such tools can be a common known R-script called plantecophys
package in R. However, for this study a custom made script was made, based on the
FvCB model, while attempting to fit Vcmax and Jmax in two steps, to accommodate for
the data being very banana shaped.
3.7
How the script works
To estimate parameters such as Vcmax, Γ∗, and mesophyll conductance (gm) from mea-
sured values of net assimilation A and intercellular CO2 concentration Ci, a non-
linear modeling approach was applied. This method is commonly referred to as the
Farquhar–von Caemmerer–Berry (FvCB) model of photosynthesis, originally devel-
oped by Farquhar, von Caemmerer, and Berry Farquhar et al. (1980). A simplified
approach to modeling the FvCB curve would involve fitting all available A and Ci
data simultaneously and estimating Vcmax by evaluating the initial slope at low Ci val-
ues. However, due to the variable quality of the measurements, this method proved
insufficient. As a result, a more robust and flexible fitting strategy was developed
to ensure that the model could accommodate as much of the available data as possi-
ble, especially given the limited dataset, as previously described. In the end a Python
script was developed in cooperation with Copilot (Chat-GPT-4), which is free to use
for DTU students under their license.
This is how the script works, From Copilot:
1. Import libraries: The script loads Python libraries for numerical operations,
plotting, and curve fitting.
2. Define temperature-dependent constants: Functions calculate the Michaelis-
Menten constants for CO2 (Kc) and O2 (Ko) based on leaf temperature.
30
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
3. Define photosynthesis models:
• fvcb model: Rubisco-limited photosynthesis (Farquhar model).
• jmax model continuous: Light-limited photosynthesis (Jmax), constrained
to match the Rubisco model at the Ci threshold.
• gm model: A linear model to estimate mesophyll conductance (gm).
4. Clean and prepare data: Removes missing values (NaNs) from the input Ci and
A datasets.
5. Sweep Ci thresholds (50–100µmol · mol−1): The script tests different thresholds
to split the data into low-Ci (Rubisco-limited) and high-Ci (Rubisco-regeneration-
limited) regions.
6. Estimate Γ∗(Gamma star): For each threshold, Γ∗is estimated from a linear
regression of A vs. Ci in the low-Ci region.
7. Fit Vcmax: The FvCB model is fitted to the low-Ci data to estimate the maximum
carboxylation rate (Vcmax).
8. Ensure continuity at the threshold: The Jmax model is constrained so that its
output at the threshold Ci equals the output of the Vcmax model at the same
point.
9. Fit Jmax: The constrained Jmax model is fitted to the high-Ci data to estimate the
maximum electron transport rate (Jmax).
10. Fit gm: A linear model is fitted to the full dataset to estimate mesophyll conduc-
tance (gm).
11. Evaluate model fit: The script calculates the R² value of the combined model
(low + high Ci) to assess fit quality.
12. Plot the A/Ci curve: The script plots observed A values (blue dots) and the com-
bined model fit (red line), with a title showing Vcmax, Jmax, Γ∗, gm, and R².
Author’s note: The script took well over 100 hours of work due to inexperience with modeling,
coding, use of AI and computing time.
31
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
3.8
The output logs from LI-6800
In total 15 LI-6800 output sheets with A and Ci values were gathered that had use-
ful A and Ci measurements. In total more than 30 measurements for both chambers
were taken, however, due to a steep learning curve and difficulties with the LI-6800
just about half of the measurements were unusable due to the way the sampling was
conducted. Each output log from the LI-6800 contains 216 columns and the data ex-
tends from row 17 to row 1300 (in some cases more). The 1300 or so data points were
due to the sampling frequency of roughly ∼1 per second. With 6 leaves for each
chamber that would mean roughly 25 minutes of measurements, but in reality these
measurements took a couple of hours, and the total time from the point of turning on
the LI-6800 to shutting it off, was typically 4 hours. Most of this time discrepancy is
due to lag from the LI-6800. While the measurements typically took roughly 10 min-
utes, the interface of the LI-6800 was often times locked out for up to 5 minutes. The
cause was not determined, however the large log files could party explain this. Most
of these files were metadata and junk data that was never used, which is unfortunate
since it took a lot of time to measure. For this study the most important measure-
ments in the output logs were A and Ci, however other parameters like gsw, E and
the time were also used to check for faulty data as well as keeping record of which
measurement belonged to which leaf. Individual leaf measurements were possible to
save individually and label, however this would have been very slow due to the lag
from the interface screen. The most optimal way to measure quickly was decided to
be taking all 6 leaf measurements and save the data on one log. This was done for both
the O3 treated plants and the control, and only one plant species was measured on the
same day to make the data more comparable between chambers.
32
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
4
Results and discussion
4.1
Effects of O3 on dry fruit yield
One of the main factors that lead to the selection of the three species; tomato, potato
and soybean was the fact that they were crops with a measurable yield. By the end of
the experiment the second harvest took place, and the fruits and leaves were weighted.
The fruit were dried and the dry weight was used as a parameter for how much impact
the O3 treatment had on the yield.
As seen on figure 14, the yield clearly trended downwards down gradient of the light.
However, the effect of O3 was not significant for tomato or soy. Using a Wilcoxon
singed-rank test, p-values were found to be: 0.5625 for soy, 0.03125 for potato and
0.09375 for tomato. This indicates that O3 in the light gradient had a significant effect
on the yield of potato, but not not for soy and tomato. The tomato dry weight yield was
not significantly different in the control compared to the O3 treated chamber, however
a trend does seems to emerge, as seen on figure 15. Even if the trend is not significant,
tomato plants typically require high light levels to have a large yield. Seemingly the
tomatoes in the darker regions of the O3 treated chamber did not produce a large fruit
mass. The only crop that yielded a significant difference in dry weight fruit yield was
the potato. On average the dry weight of the fruits was 225% larger. This significant
decrease in yield from control to the O3 treated chamber indicates that the potatoes
are sensitive to O3 confirming the worrying trend seen in literature. The potatoes in
this experiment were placed in the same light gradient as the two other crops, and the
expected result was that the potatoes would have better conditions in the darker area,
which is confirmed by a 430% increase in dry weight fruit yield by the potato in the
lowest light intensity. The soybeans in the control chamber reacted negatively to the
decreasing light gradient, while the tomatoes did not seemingly have any preference
in terms of light. The expected effect was that the tomatoes and soybeans would have
a sweet spot of light, in which they would thrive the best. However, due to many
unpredictable factors, these preferences were not suggested by the results in terms of
total dry weight fruit yield.
33
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 14: Seemingly no difference between the O3 treatment and control group in terms of
yield (dry weight). The downwards trend indicates that the yield decreases with the downward
light gradient.
Figure 15: The Wilcoxon p-values for tomato was 0.94, but a trend can still be seen in the
yield. The downwards trend of the tomato indicates that there could be a negative impact of O3
on the tomato yield down the light gradient, however it is not significant.
34
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 16: The potatoes in the control chamber had a significantly higher yield than the pota-
toes in the O3 treated chamber, indicating that potatoes are sensitive towards ozone in terms of
yield. The upwards trend of the potatoes in the control chamber also indicates that the potato
plant had better yield in the darker parts of the chamber.
4.2
General errors and mistakes
The experiment lasted a bit over 3 months, spanning from late February to early June
in total. One of the main conditions for the experiment to go well, was that the plants
had to not only survive but thrive well. Many attempts to correct for mistakes were
made, however, not all the plants ended up having the best of conditions. These mis-
takes were mainly due to watering being inconsistent and done in a multiple ways that
all introduced uncertainty. First of all the plants we determined to be well watered if
the soil was wet throughout and the water level was not above the root zone. While
this might have been true for a large portion of the plants, a couple of different factors
meant that some of the plants had better conditions than others. This includes compe-
tition for water trough the tray watering system, meaning plants that were naturally
adapted or extra fit could out compete others. No all plants wants the same amount
of water, however, with the setup used in this experiment the plants had a shared
pool of water, meaning some might have gotten too much, while others too little. It is
hard to determine if this effect has had big implications on the results from the mea-
surements, but it is important to keep in mind, when assessing the data where some
measurements show unexplainable data and in most cases are treated as outliers.
35
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 17: The average ozone concentration during the experiment. measurements were taken
using different equipment and were not very accurate in the beginning. It was estimated that
the measured concentration was 10 ppb above the actual concentration due to bias in the mea-
surement equipment.
Another error comes from the carts the plants were placed on. The carts were more
or less in level when they were put into the chamber, however, at some point one cart
ended up having an incline, which meant that some plants in the two trays that were
in that cart did not get any water what so ever, while others got too much. Luckily the
plants that got extra water were tomatoes that typically use a lot of water anyway. The
potatoes that didn’t receive water for a whole weekend ended up hanging quite a bit
out over the edge, which meant they nearly uprooted the potatoes due to the size of
the plant above the soil. For this specific case, these potatoes received extended ’first
aid’ for some time.
The ozone level in the ozone treatment chamber fluctuated a lot, but the average ended
up at 98.5 ppb, just a bit above the 90 ppb desired for this experiment, as seen on 17
Andersen and Kistrup (2025).
4.2.1
Temperature
The instrument used for the experiment was a LI-6800 that can perform high frequency
temporal readings, which were used to measure A and Ci of the leaves for Vcmax es-
timations. As Garen et al. (2022) found, the data measurements can be skewed due
to temperature fluctuation and deviation from the ambient temperature. The ambient
temperature in the Ecotron was set to 22 deg C, however when inspecting the output
files from the LI-6800, the mean temperature is around 25 deg C which is quite a higher.
Outside experiments would not expect constant temperature, but since the LI-6800 op-
36
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
erates at the assumption that the temperature should be 22 deg C, this among many
other factors helps to explain why the data has high variance. One positive point about
the temperature, is that is more or less constantly around 25 deg C for every measure-
ment of A and Ci, so the error introduced should be the same and would only hurt the
accuracy not the precision. The LI-6800 takes up to an hour to ’warm up’ before use,
and since the instrument is quite advanced it has good ventilation cooling. However,
when the chamber is closed the temperature might rise due to heat transport being
limited during measurements.
Another temperature discrepancy is was found to be the ambient temperature in the
chamber. One of the days when taking measurements it was noticed that the temper-
ature had increased substantially, enough for the team to notice directly. It turned out
the automatic temperature thermostat had malfunctioned, and the temperature had
rose well above the 22◦C. An overview over the short temperature anomaly can be
seen in the appendix 6.5.
4.3
Unintended variation in the experiment
There were multiple factors that have affected the experiment unintentionally. How-
ever, these were the conditions for the experiment to take place in the Ecotron. Work-
ing with living organisms always introduces a biological variation, but the data is also
affected by the unintentional factors of manual watering by different people, watering
the plants as needed due to drought, lack of nutrients across all three species of plants
(not necessarily just one but when all three plants looked like they needed a nutrient
boost), moving of plants from one chamber to another and thereby accidentally break-
ing small stems and leaves off and many more. These are just some of the unintended
variations that are due to human activity in the Ecotron lab, which would normally
not be found in outdoor nature experiments.
Furthermore, there is also a category of non-human unintended variation factors such
as: Power failure for a short amount of time, different types of watering throughout
the experiment (not completely consistent between hand watering and automatic wa-
tering), ozone variations due to use of ozone generator inside the chamber for most
of the experiment and later on automatic ozone addition through the Ecotron system,
37
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
at one point one of the tables the trays are stood on tilted down a few centimeters in
one end causing a slight sloping that made the automatic watering uneven and many
more smaller factors.
As previously mentioned, these unintended variations are to be expected when using
the Ecotron in the start up-phase, with many thing needing to be adjusted on the go.
4.4
Parameter independence problem
When modeling Vcmax, an initial guess of Rd is used, and then the A/Ci curves are
fitted using variable Vcmax, Jmax and Rd. That is unless any of these three are given
as fixed values. In some cases the Rd value was evaluated to 0 for the best fit of the
residuals, meaning the Vcmax was within the expected value range, while Rd is set to
0. A value of 0 Rd seems unfeasible unless the plant is severely stressed, and even
then it is more likely due to uncertainty than a biological acclimation. Although fitting
the FvCB model to A–Ci curves yielded an Rd of 0, an independent (using the Vcmax
estimated as a constant) estimate based on light-saturated A and modeled Ac gave an
Rd of 5.08 ± 0.52 µmol m−2 · s−1 (95% CI: 4.04–6.00). This discrepancy suggests that
model fitting may underestimate Rd due to parameter interactions or limited or poor
low-Ci data, and that Rd is naturally biologically non-zero and detectable under light-
saturated conditions. Although the FvCB model can be used to estimate Rd by fitting
A-Ci curves, this process requires an initial guess for Vc max, which introduces depen-
dency between the parameters. Similarly, when estimating Rd from light-saturated
assimilation A and modeled Ac, a value for Vc max must also be assumed. This means
the two approaches are not entirely independent, as both rely on assumptions or es-
timates of Vc max. This interdependence is a known limitation of the FvCB modeling
framework and is often addressed by using alternative methods to estimate Rd, such as
light response curves or chlorophyll fluorescence techniques Rogers (2013). Another
problem is that these measurements are not always possible to be taken simultane-
ously introducing an aging factor. In this study the light saturated assimilation mea-
surements were taken halfway through the start and end of the A/Ci measurements
used to find Vcmax values.
38
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
4.5
Plant stress
Although best attempts were made at ensuring well-watered plants, the plants were
undeniably water stressed in some of the trays. As explained earlier, this is due to
multiple different malfunctions, and not all plants were affected. However, since the
watering in the tray promotes competition, it is not unthinkable that some species
or especially fit plants would benefit more from this watering approach. The result
is that some plants were under water stress, which was clearly visible in the data
when sampling A and Ci values for the Vcmax calculations. Values for A, Ci, gsw and
other directly measured parameters were clearly impacted in some plants and in a few
cases the A/Ci measurements were discarded entirely due to nonsensical data (such as
negative or 0 gsw values for all CO2 concentrations in the DAT measurements). Water
stress can influence several physiological processes that affect the estimation of the
CO2 compensation point in the absence of mitochondrial respiration Γ∗. First, it can
reduce mesophyll conductance gm, which alters the relationship between intercellular
CO2 concentration Ci and the actual CO2 concentration at the site of carboxylation.
This can lead to inaccurate estimates of Γ∗if gm is not properly accounted for Killi
and Haworth (2017). This is especially problematic when modeling Vcmax depending
on Γ∗estimates. Second, water stress often increases photorespiration, which may
cause Γ∗to appear higher than it actually is if not corrected for Guan and Gu (2009).
Additionally, ozone O3 stress may impact Rubisco activity or gm, indirectly influencing
Γ∗estimates through similar mechanisms Galm´es et al. (2013).
If Ci is overestimated (e.g., due to stomatal patchiness or low gm), Γ∗can appear lower
than it is. If A is underestimated (e.g., due to stress), Γ∗can appear higher.
4.6
Variations in Γ∗
4.7
Problems with high Γ∗
In the Farquhar model of photosynthesis, the Rubisco-limited portion of the curve is
described by:
A =
Ci + Kc ·

1 + O
Ko

Vc max · (Ci −Γ∗) −Rd
(8)
39
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
If Vcmax ¡ Γ∗, then for any reasonable intercellular CO2 concentration Ci, the numerator
(Ci - Γ∗) becomes negative or very small, leading to negative or near-zero assimilation
rates, which is not physiologically realistic.
4.8
Problems with low Γ∗
The model may compensate by adjusting Vcmax and Rd in unrealistic ways. This leads
to non-identifiability: multiple parameter sets fit the data equally well but mean dif-
ferent things biologically.
Bernacchi et al. (2001a) provided improved temperature response functions for Rubisco-
limited photosynthesis, including empirical estimates of Γ∗across a range of temper-
atures. Their study is widely cited for values such as ∼42–45 mol · mol−1 at 25◦C
and the broader range from ∼30 mol · mol−1 at 15◦C to ∼70 mol · mol−1 at 35◦C.
However, Γ∗is also highly dependent on species, so values outside the range are not
completely unexpected.
Galm´es et al. (2014) reviewed the variability in Rubisco kinetic parameters across
species and environmental conditions, highlighting how Rubisco traits can vary due
to local adaptation and phenotypic plasticity.
4.9
Noise in data
The measurements taken with the LI-6800 were used to make A/Ci curves, and were
tailored to include many low Ci data points due to how the Vcmax estimates are made
with the FvCB model. However, the data indicate that there is a low signal to noise
ratio (SNR). For example the SNR was ˜-1.26 for potatoes (2025-05-05 potato without
O3) for Ci data ¿ 50 µmol /mol suggesting that the mean of A is only slightly larger
than the residual variation. It is negative due to A being negative at low Ci naturally
and the Ci values under 50 µmol /mol are the ones typically used to estimate Vcmax
from the slope Greer (2019).
Data had to be analyzed visually for outliers, as many A/Ci data were either biologi-
cally impossible to explain or simply too low to accurately use for the model, examples
of data purged can be seen on figure18.
40
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
(a) The shape of the data and the negative val-
ues makes no biological sense, and the data is
treated as an outlier.
(b) The leaf was not dead, however it seemingly
had no photosynthetical activity.
Figure 18: Some data was too noisy, and some data was inexplicably bad.
4.10
Lack of Rd measurements
While Rd is a crucial part of understanding the FvCB model, especially in the more
sensitive low Ci part of the A/Ci curves made in this study, there was no low light
intensity measurements to accurately estimate Rd. Some of the most shaded leaves
were attempted to use for the Laisk method of finding the intercept of three lines,
however at the low Ci part of the A/Ci curves a lot of noise was causing accuracy
to drop below what was useful for this method, see 19. The Laisk method requires
leaves to be adapted and measured at low light intensities of ∼50 −100µmol · m2 · s1
Gong et al. (2018), which was well below the darkest parts of the Ecotron which had
intensities from ∼200 −300µmol · m2 · s1 even in the shade.
Because the data didn’t include enough points at low intercellular CO2, it wasn’t possi-
ble to reliably estimate Rd. So, Rd was set to zero in the model, with the understanding
that this slightly underestimates net photosynthesis. If more time was had for addi-
tional measurements, a dark respiration would have been used to estimate Rd, even
though this method is critiqued. Ideally a light response curve could be used, how-
ever this is more time demanding and unfortunately did not end up being done for
this study. A light measurement across all plants was conducted at one point, however
the light intensities were constant at the saturated light intensity of 1500µmol/m2/s1,
which does not prove useful.
Rd is experimentally difficult to estimate simply because it is very small compared to
41
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 19: The three lines represent three different A vs Ci linear regressions based on the low
Ci part of the A/Ci curve (¡50µmol/m2/s1. In principle these intersect closely to one point,
which is the Rd, however as seen, two of the lines have a negative slope, which is due to noise
in the sensitive low Ci part of the A/Ci curve. This attempt at using the Laisk method was
rejected as a solution for Rd
the other fluxes of CO2 Tcherkez et al. (2017). Rd is central in understanding the carbon
and nitrogen balance, and better more innovative techniques for estimating Rd are of
high importance Tcherkez et al. (2017). Typical values for Rd depends on a multiple
of factors such as plant species, temperature, light acclimation and many more but
are generally in the range of 0.5 −2.5µmol/m2/s1 Bernacchi et al. (2001b). In testing
the model inserting values of Rd over 0 resulted in a steep increase of Vcmax, which is
counterintuitive. Thus it was decided that even though the model technically could fit
Rd as a parameter, it would not improve the result of the model. Instead it was noted
that the Vcmax estimated from the model were slightly overestimated, as theory would
imply since Rd is a negative term in the FvCB model.
While Rd is never 0, it can not explain the oddities in the results of the fitting for
Vcmax. There are simply too many variables to account for, to indicate that Rd is directly
proportional to the error in estimations.
4.11
Overestimation of Vcmax and Jmax
When the model attempts to fit for Vcmax and Jmax there is always a risk of over and
underestimation due to settling in a incorrect local minima. However, the lack of Rd is
a more or less systematic error that should in theory lead to an overestimation of Vcmax
and Jmax. This is because Rd is a negative term in the FvCB model, and should be sub-
42
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
tracted from A. This makes sense since Rd is the day respiration, and is a flux going the
opposite way of the assimilation of CO2. Thus, a systematic overestimation of Vcmax
and Jmax is to be expected. However, the values of Vc max and Jmax vary substantially
across species and plant functional types Walker et al. (2017). These parameters are
also known to acclimate to environmental conditions such as light availability Par-
elle et al. (2006), temperature Yamori et al. (2014), and atmospheric CO2 concentration
Leakey et al. (2009). Since the leaves selected for measurement were supposed to rep-
resent the entire plant, the leaf selection matters a lot. Access to lower hanging leaves,
made the measurements possible mostly for shaded leaves, which introduces a bias.
Since these leaves are not always well-lit, this could in turn lead to an underestimation
of Vcmax and Jmax due to acclimation to low light availability. To which degree these
over and underestimations are present in the results is unknown.
4.12
Effects of O3 on Vcmax
While ozone might have an effect on the value of Vcmax, another way of seeing the ef-
fect of ozone is on the many psychophysiological parameters that are used to explain
the many biological processes in a plant. Thus, Vcmax is not the only important param-
eter to investigate. In this study however, the main parameter investigated is Vcmax,
and of the total 108 plants, only 18 plants per chamber were measured for A and Ci
values.
As seen on 20 the Vcmax curves not always easy to interpret. The shape specifically
is difficult to understand in some cases. Most of the data is nicely represented as A
and Ci values that can be fitted nicely to the A/Ci curve and with a predictable and
sensible value of Vcmax, however, some of the curves are shaped more like a banana or
a shrimp with values of A going up when Ci goes down (the leftwards trend), which
is not probable biologically. However, this is likely due to measurement errors by
having a too fast CO2 ramp. Additionally, some plant are fitted to have a Vcmax value
of 0, which is also not biologically feasible. There were many more examples of bad
data, however, most of it has been deemed outliers and were removed. The ones left
are visible also outliers in terms of the model fit, however, they are edge cases and can
be understood visually, even if the model fails to predict a reasonable value for Vcmax
43
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
(a) The A/Ci curve for K6U.
(b) The A/Ci curve for K7U.
(c) The A/Ci curve for K12U.
(d) The A/Ci curve for S1M
(e) The A/Ci curve for S6M
(f) The A/Ci curve for S7M
(g) The A/Ci curve for S12M
(h) The A/Ci curve for S13M
(i) The A/Ci curve for S18M
Figure 20: A showcase of the first 9 A/Ci curves. The A/Ci curves are all behaving nicely
and reasonable guesses for Vcmax are made at the top of the figures. As seen on (h) and (i), the
curves are in some cases bending a bit backwards.
44
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
and the other parameters.
The Vcmax values were tested for significant difference between the O3treated chamber
and the control chamber. The results can be seen below:
Figure 21: Vcmax comparison between O3 treated and control plants. Wilcoxon signed-rank
test p = 0.031 for 05-07 Soy is the only one where Vcmax was significantly different in the
control to the O3 treated.
As seen on 21 the ozone treatment did not significantly impact the Vcmax values us-
ing the custom made script for sitting Vc max, Jmax and gm. Only in one out of seven
pairwise measurements across the two chambers did a significant difference occur.
This implies that either the fitting script, noise or the physical conditions the plants
were exposed to like drought and possible lack of nutrients is greater than the impact
O3 has on the two chambers. The remaining plots can be found in 6.5.1, and a table
summarizing the results can be found in 6.2.
45
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
5
Conclusion
This study explored how elevated ozone levels and a gradient of light intensities influ-
ence the photosynthetic parameter Vcmax across three crop species: potato, soybean,
and tomato in the Ecotron. The Ecotron as a research facility show great strengths in
micro adjustments of environmental factors such as CO2, O3, temperature and most
importantly the high intensity LED light spectrum. While the experimental setup
introduced several sources of variability—including inconsistent watering, chamber
fluctuations, and measurement noise—the results still revealed meaningful trends.
Notably, potato plants exhibited a significant reduction in dry fruit yield under O3
exposure, confirming their sensitivity to oxidative stress. In contrast, soy and tomato
did not show statistically significant yield reductions, though trends suggested poten-
tial light–ozone interactions, particularly in shaded regions.
Vcmax estimations, derived using a custom Python-based FvCB modeling approach,
showed high variability. Only one out of seven paired comparisons (05–07 Soy) re-
vealed a significant O3 effect on Vcmax, suggesting that either the physiological impact
of O3 was subtle or masked by experimental noise and stress factors. Additionally,
the lack of reliable Rd measurements likely led to systematic overestimations of Vcmax.
Despite these limitations, the study demonstrates the feasibility of high-throughput
gas exchange modeling using DAT and highlights the importance of accounting for
environmental and methodological variability in physiological parameter estimation.
46
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Referencer
Asta Abraitien˙e and Rasel˙e Girgˇzdien˙e.
Impact of the short-term mild and severe
ozone treatments on the potato spindle tuber viroid-infected tomato (lycopersicon
esculentum mill.). Zemdirbyste, 100(3):277–282, September 2013.
E. Ainsworth. Understanding and improving global crop response to ozone pollution.
The Plant Journal, 90:886–897, 2016. doi: 10.1111/tpj.13298.
C J Bernacchi, E L Singsaas, C Pimentel, A R Portis, Jr, and S P Long.
Improved
temperature response functions for models of rubisco-limited photosynthesis. Plant
Cell Environ., 24(2):253–259, February 2001a.
C J Bernacchi, E L Singsaas, C Pimentel, A R Portis, Jr, and S P Long.
Improved
temperature response functions for models of rubisco-limited photosynthesis. Plant
Cell Environ., 24(2):253–259, February 2001b.
B. Bloomer, J. Stehr, C. Piety, R. Salawitch, and R. Dickerson. Observed relationships
of ozone air pollution with temperature and emissions. Geophysical Research Letters,
36, 2009. doi: 10.1029/2009gl037308.
Gordon B Bonan, Peter J Lawrence, Keith W Oleson, Samuel Levis, Martin Jung,
Markus Reichstein, David M Lawrence, and Sean C Swenson. Improving canopy
processes in the community land model version 4 (CLM4) using global flux fields
empirically inferred from FLUXNET data. J. Geophys. Res., 116(G2), May 2011.
A Brooks and G D Farquhar.
Effect of temperature on the CO2/O 2 specificity of
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase and the rate of respiration in the
light : Estimates from gas-exchange measurements on spinach. Planta, 165(3):397–
406, August 1985.
Florian A Busch, Elizabeth A Ainsworth, Anna Amtmann, Amanda P Cavanagh,
Steven M Driever, John N Ferguson, Johannes Kromdijk, Tracy Lawson, Andrew
D B Leakey, Jack S A Matthews, Katherine Meacham-Hensold, Richard L Vath, Sil-
vere Vialet-Chabrand, Berkley J Walker, and Maria Papanatsiou. A guide to pho-
tosynthetic gas exchange measurements: Fundamental principles, best practice and
potential pitfalls. Plant Cell Environ., 47(9):3344–3364, September 2024.
47
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
I. Dharmayasa, Z. Oo, H. Mon, P. Mankong, D. Wedagama, and K. Darmaastawan.
An investigation of time-dependent ozone (o3) concentration using geographic in-
formation system: a case study in central of bangkok, thailand. Iop Conference Series
Earth and Environmental Science, 1395:012043, 2024. doi: 10.1088/1755-1315/1395/1
/012043.
G J Ethier and N J Livingston. On the need to incorporate sensitivity to CO2 trans-
fer conductance into the farquhar-von Caemmerer-Berry leaf photosynthesis model.
Plant Cell Environ., 27(2):137–153, February 2004.
J R Evans, T D Sharkey, J A Berry, and G D Farquhar. Carbon isotope discrimination
measured concurrently with gas exchange to investigate CO2 diffusion in leaves of
higher plants. Funct. Plant Biol., 13(2):281, 1986.
G D Farquhar, S von Caemmerer, and J A Berry. A biochemical model of photosyn-
thetic CO2 assimilation in leaves of C 3 species. Planta, 149(1):78–90, June 1980.
Zhaozhong Feng, Yansen Xu, Kazuhiko Kobayashi, Lulu Dai, Tianyi Zhang, Evgenios
Agathokleous, Vicent Calatayud, Elena Paoletti, Arideep Mukherjee, Madhoolika
Agrawal, Rokjin J Park, Yujin J Oak, and Xu Yue. Ozone pollution threatens the
production of major staple crops in east asia. Nat. Food, 3(1):47–56, January 2022.
Jeroni Galm´es, Iker Aranjuelo, Hip´olito Medrano, and Jaume Flexas. Variation in ru-
bisco content and activity under variable climatic factors. Photosynth. Res., 117(1-3):
73–90, November 2013.
Jeroni Galm´es, Maxim V Kapralov, P John Andralojc, Miquel `A Conesa, Alfred J Keys,
Martin A J Parry, and Jaume Flexas. Expanding knowledge of the rubisco kinet-
ics variability in plant species: environmental and evolutionary trends. Plant Cell
Environ., 37(9):1989–2001, September 2014.
J. C. Garen, H. A. Branch, I. Borrego, B. Blonder, J. R. Stinziano, and S. T. Michaletz.
Gas exchange analysers exhibit large measurement error driven by internal thermal
gradients. New Phytologist, 236:369–384, 2022. doi: 10.1111/nph.18347.
Xiao Ying Gong, Guillaume Tcherkez, Johannes Wenig, Rudi Sch¨aufele, and Hans
Schnyder. Determination of leaf respiration in the light: comparison between an iso-
48
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
topic disequilibrium method and the laisk method. New Phytol., 218(4):1371–1382,
June 2018.
D. Greer. Limitations to photosynthesis of leaves of apple (malus domestica) trees
across the growing season prior to and after harvest. Photosynthetica, 57:483–490,
2019. doi: 10.32615/ps.2019.063.
X. Guan and S. Gu. Photorespiration and photoprotection of grapevine (vitis vinifera
l. cv. cabernet sauvignon) under water stress. Photosynthetica, 47, 2009. doi: 10.100
7/s11099-009-0067-7.
L Horv´ath, P Koncz, A M´oring, Z Nagy, K Pint´er, and T Weidinger. An attempt to
partition stomatal and non-stomatal ozone deposition parts on a short grassland.
Boundary Layer Meteorol., October 2017.
Marcello Iriti and Franco Faoro. Oxidative stress, the paradigm of ozone toxicity in
plants and animals. Water Air Soil Pollut., 187(1-4):285–301, November 2007.
Per Erik Karlsson, H˚akan Pleijel, Mohammed Belhaj, Helena Danielsson, Bo Dahlin,
Mikael Andersson, Max Hansson, John Munthe, and Peringe Grennfelt. Economic
assessment of the negative impacts of ozone on crop yields and forest production.
a case study of the estate ostads s¨ateri in southwestern sweden. Ambio, 34(1):32–40,
February 2005.
B. KHALED. Impacts of elevated ozone concentration on some physiological and mor-
phological characteristics of two wheat plant varieties. The Journal of the University
of Duhok, 22:193–203, 2019. doi: 10.26682/avuod.2019.22.1.19.
D. Killi and M. Haworth. Diffusive and metabolic constraints to photosynthesis in
quinoa during drought and salt stress. Plants, 6:49, 2017. doi: 10.3390/plants604004
9.
J. Kobza, M. Geremek, and L. Dul.
Ozone concentration levels in urban environ-
ments—upper silesia region case study. International Journal of Environmental Re-
search and Public Health, 18:1473, 2021. doi: 10.3390/ijerph18041473.
A Kh Laisk. Kinetics of photosynthesis and photorespiration in c3 plants. Nauka,
Moscow, 198:243–251, 1977.
49
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Andrew D B Leakey, Elizabeth A Ainsworth, Carl J Bernacchi, Alistair Rogers,
Stephen P Long, and Donald R Ort. Elevated CO2 effects on plant carbon, nitrogen,
and water relations: six important lessons from FACE. J. Exp. Bot., 60(10):2859–2876,
April 2009.
LI-COR. Support: Li-6800 portable photosynthesis system, dynamic assimilation™
and curve-fitting: Considerations for fitting dat co2 response curves, 2024. URL
https://www.licor.com/support/LI-6800/topics/dynamic-assimilation-and-c
urve-fitting.html?Highlight=LI-6800%20DAT#DynamicAssimilationandcurvef
ittingConsiderationsforfittingDATCO2responsecurves.
Hartmut K Lichtenthaler, Fatbardha Babani, Martin Navr´atil, and Claus Buschmann.
Chlorophyll fluorescence kinetics, photosynthetic activity, and pigment composi-
tion of blue-shade and half-shade leaves as compared to sun and shade leaves of
different trees. Photosynth. Res., 117(1-3):355–366, November 2013.
M. Lin, A. Fiore, O. Cooper, L. Horowitz, A. Langford, H. Levy, B. Johnson, V. Na¨ık,
S. Oltmans, and C. Senff. Springtime high surface ozone events over the western
united states: quantifying the role of stratospheric intrusions. Journal of Geophysical
Research Atmospheres, 117, 2012. doi: 10.1029/2012jd018151.
S P Long and C J Bernacchi. Gas exchange measurements, what can they tell us about
the underlying limitations to photosynthesis? procedures and sources of error. J.
Exp. Bot., 54(392):2393–2401, November 2003.
Michel Loreau and Robert D Holt. Spatial flows and the regulation of ecosystems. Am.
Nat., 163(4):606–615, April 2004.
E. McDonald-Buller, D. Allen, N. Brown, D. Jacob, D. Jaffe, C. Kolb, A. Lefohn, S. Olt-
mans, D. Parrish, G. Yarwood, and L. Zhang. Establishing policy relevant back-
ground (prb) ozone concentrations in the united states.
Environmental Science &
Technology, 45:9484–9497, 2011. doi: 10.1021/es2022818.
J. McGrath, A. Betzelberger, S. Wang, E. Shook, X. Zhu, S. Long, and E. Ainsworth.
An analysis of ozone damage to historical maize and soybean yields in the united
states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112:14390–14395, 2015. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1509777112.
50
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
T. Nagashima, T. Ohara, K. Sudo, and H. Akimoto. The relative importance of various
source regions on east asian surface ozone. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 10:
11305–11322, 2010. doi: 10.5194/acp-10-11305-2010.
Stephanie A Osborne, Gina Mills, Felicity Hayes, Elizabeth A Ainsworth, Patrick
B¨uker, and Lisa Emberson. Has the sensitivity of soybean cultivars to ozone pollu-
tion increased with time? an analysis of published dose-response data. Glob. Chang.
Biol., 22(9):3097–3111, September 2016.
Julien Parelle, Jean-Philippe Roudaut, and Michel Ducrey. Light acclimation and pho-
tosynthetic response of beech (fagus sylvatical.) saplings under artificial shading or
natural mediterranean conditions. Ann. For. Sci., 63(3):257–266, April 2006.
Alistair Rogers. The use and misuse of vc,max in earth system models. Photosynthesis
Research, 117(1-3):15–29, 2013. doi: 10.1007/s11120-013-9818-1.
Alistair Rogers. The use and misuse of v(c,max) in earth system models. Photosynth.
Res., 119(1-2):15–29, February 2014.
Aaron J Saathoff and Jon Welles. Gas exchange measurements in the unsteady state.
Plant Cell Environ., 44(11):3509–3523, November 2021.
Thomas D Sharkey, Carl J Bernacchi, Graham D Farquhar, and Eric L Singsaas. Fitting
photosynthetic carbon dioxide response curves for c(3) leaves. Plant Cell Environ.,
30(9):1035–1040, September 2007.
Ying Sun, Lianhong Gu, Robert E Dickinson, Stephen G Pallardy, John Baker, Yonghui
Cao, F´abio Murilo DaMatta, Xuejun Dong, David Ellsworth, Davina Van Goethem,
Anna M Jensen, Beverly E Law, Rodolfo Loos, Samuel C Vitor Martins, Richard J
Norby, Jeffrey Warren, David Weston, and Klaus Winter. Asymmetrical effects of
mesophyll conductance on fundamental photosynthetic parameters and their rela-
tionships estimated from leaf gas exchange measurements. Plant Cell Environ., 37(4):
978–994, April 2014.
Amos P K Tai, Maria Val Martin, and Colette L Heald. Threat to future global food
security from climate change and ozone air pollution. Nat. Clim. Chang., 4(9):817–
821, September 2014.
51
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
A. Talapatra, D. Majumdar, and A. Srivastava.
Distribution of ozone over urban
kolkata: observed vs. uam-v prediction. Ozone Science and Engineering, 36:181–190,
2014. doi: 10.1080/01919512.2013.827096.
Guillaume Tcherkez, Paul Gauthier, Thomas N Buckley, Florian A Busch, Margaret M
Barbour, Dan Bruhn, Mary A Heskel, Xiao Ying Gong, Kristine Y Crous, Kevin Grif-
fin, Danielle Way, Matthew Turnbull, Mark A Adams, Owen K Atkin, Graham D
Farquhar, and Gabriel Cornic. Leaf day respiration: low CO2 flux but high signifi-
cance for metabolism and carbon balance. New Phytol., 216(4):986–1001, December
2017.
Mauricio Tejera-Nieves. A/Ci method using dynamic assimilation technique v1. un-
published, January 2024.
Laura R P Utz, Taiz L L Sim˜ao, L´ucia S L Safi, and Eduardo Eizirik. Expanded phyloge-
netic representation of genera opercularia and epistylis sheds light on the evolution
and higher-level taxonomy of peritrich ciliates (ciliophora: Peritrichia). J. Eukaryot.
Microbiol., 57(5):415–420, September 2010.
L M Verheijen, V Brovkin, R Aerts, G B¨onisch, J H C Cornelissen, J Kattge, P B Reich,
I J Wright, and P M van Bodegom.
Impacts of trait variation through observed
trait–climate relationships on performance of an earth system model: a conceptual
analysis. Biogeosciences, 10(8):5497–5515, August 2013.
Susanne von Caemmerer. Steady-state models of photosynthesis. Plant Cell Environ.,
36(9):1617–1630, September 2013.
Anthony P Walker, Andrew P Beckerman, Lianhong Gu, Jens Kattge, Lucas A Cer-
nusak, Tomas F Domingues, Joanna C Scales, Georg Wohlfahrt, Stan D Wullschleger,
and F Ian Woodward. The relationship of leaf photosynthetic traits - V cmax and J
max - to leaf nitrogen, leaf phosphorus, and specific leaf area: a meta-analysis and
modeling study. Ecol. Evol., 4(16):3218–3235, August 2014.
Anthony P Walker, Tristan Quaife, Peter M van Bodegom, Martin G De Kauwe,
Trevor F Keenan, Joanna Joiner, Mark R Lomas, Natasha MacBean, Chongang Xu,
52
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Xiaojuan Yang, and F Ian Woodward. The impact of alternative trait-scaling hy-
potheses for the maximum photosynthetic carboxylation rate (vcmax) on global gross
primary production. New Phytol., 215(4):1370–1386, September 2017.
Wataru Yamori, Kouki Hikosaka, and Danielle A Way. Temperature response of pho-
tosynthesis in c3, c4, and CAM plants: temperature acclimation and temperature
adaptation. Photosynth. Res., 119(1-2):101–117, February 2014.
S Zaehle, S Sitch, B Smith, and F Hatterman. Effects of parameter uncertainties on the
modeling of terrestrial biosphere dynamics. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 19(3), Septem-
ber 2005.
A. Zhang, J. Lin, W. Chen, M. Lin, and C. Lei. Spatial–temporal distribution variation
of ground-level ozone in china’s pearl river delta metropolitan region. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18:872, 2021. doi: 10.3390/ijerph
18030872.
J. Zhang, Y. Wei, and Z. Fang. Ozone pollution: a major health hazard worldwide.
Frontiers in Immunology, 10, 2019a. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02518.
Junfeng Jim Zhang, Yongjie Wei, and Zhangfu Fang. Ozone pollution: A major health
hazard worldwide. Front. Immunol., 10:2518, October 2019b.
H. Zhao, Y. Zheng, T. Li, W. Li, and Q. Guan. Temporal and spatial variation in, and
population exposure to, summertime ground-level ozone in beijing. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15:628, 2018. doi: 10.3390/ijerph
15040628.
J. ˇSakalys and R. Girgˇzdien˙e. Estimation of the ground-level ozone lifetime under
rural conditions. Lithuanian Journal of Physics, 50:247–254, 2010. doi: 10.3952/lithjp
hys.50211.
53
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
54
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
6
Appendix
6.1
Manual watering the first weeks
Manual watering the first four weeks
Unit: Liters
Date
Tray 1&2
Tray  3&4
Tray 5&6
Tray 1&2
Tray  3&4
Tray 5&6
note
26/02
3L
3L
3L
3L
3L
3L
From the top
28/2
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
Into the tray
3/3
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
Into the tray
5/3
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
Into the tray
7/3
9L
8L
7L
9L
8L
7L
Into the tray
12/3
7L
3L&4L
7L&2L
4L&2L
3L&4L
4L
Into the tray
17/3
9L
7L
7L&6L
9L&7L
7L
7L
Into the tray
24/3
9L
8L
7L
9L
8L
7L
Into the tray
26/3
9L
8L
7L
9L
8L
7L
Into the tray
28/3
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
Into the tray
2/4
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
9L
Into the tray
4/4
10L
9L
8L
10L
9L
8L
Into the tray
7/4
AUTO
AUTO
AUTO
AUTO
AUTO
AUTO
Into the tray
CO3
CO4
55
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
6.2
All Vcmax graphs and comparisons
See Excel ”Den her MAKKER” file for more details, and less chopped up graphs.
56
==PAGE:61==
Date
O3
Temp
Vcmax1
Vcmax2
Vcmax3
Vcmax4
Vcmax5
Vcmax6
05-05 Potato
no
25.67
127.23
113.19
126.33
05-07 Soy
yes
25.94
105.91
99.57
79.08
99.51
67.59
49.73
05-07 Soy
no
25.86
72.00
70.04
65.34
94.33
87.75
114.25
05-09 Tomato
yes
25.64
90.82
96.42
43.92
80.64
05-09 Tomato
no
25.20
88.23
60.56
106.06
76.81
87.61
87.96
05-14 Soy
yes
25.91
25.47
59.55
59.14
74.78
55.56
05-14 Soy
no
25.98
4.28
30.18
5.15
37.07
59.94
50.39
05-20 Potato
yes
25.80
94.85
46.37
68.68
38.48
62.65
05-20 Potato
no
25.94
31.76
22.27
88.40
80.57
69.37
05-21 Tomato
yes
25.41
61.76
59.66
56.20
35.78
05-21 Tomato
no
25.95
49.85
41.07
72.86
76.26
48.59
58.35
05-23 Tomato
yes
25.80
60.32
64.13
55.95
05-23 Tomato
no
25.10
59.44
46.25
36.00
80.70
35.35
52.12
05-30 Tomato
yes
25.93
59.13
44.54
59.71
20.53
05-30 Tomato
no
25.96
37.53
49.57
15.25
54.70
16.44
41.65
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
A
Ci
05-05 Potato Control
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
A
Ci
05-07 Soy O3
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
Leaf 6
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
A
Ci
05-07 Soy Control
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
Leaf 6
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
0
100
200
300
400
500
A
Ci
05-09 Tomato O3
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 5
Leaf 6
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
A
Ci
05-09 Tomato Control
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
Leaf 6
==PAGE:62==
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
A
Ci
05-14 Soy O3
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
A
Ci
05-14 Soy Control
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
Leaf 6
-5
0
5
10
15
20
0
100
200
300
400
500
A
Ci
05-20 Potato O3
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 6
-5
0
5
10
15
0
100
200
300
400
500
A
Ci
05-20 Potato Control
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
Leaf 6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
A
05-21 Tomato O3
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
Leaf 6
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
100
200
300
400
500
A
05-21 Tomato Control
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
==PAGE:63==
-4
-2
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Ci
-6
-4
-2 0
100
200
300
400
500
Ci
Leaf 6
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
A
Ci
05-23 Tomato O3
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
A
Ci
05-23 Tomato Control
Leaf 6
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
0
100
200
300
400
500
A
Ci
05-30 Tomato O3
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
A
Ci
05-30 Tomato Control
Leaf 1
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
Leaf 6
==PAGE:64==
light
Vcmax
SE
05-05 Potato
1080
Control
920 127.2275
2.26
860 113.1861
2.53
550 126.3296
2.26
410
260
05-05 Soy
1180
105.91
13.54
O3
960
99.57
8.54
830
79.08
8.93
490
99.51
5.21
380
67.59
14.20
250
49.73
9.12
05-05 Soy
1110
72.00
6.66
Control
910
70.04
12.76
850
65.34
8.47
490
94.33
12.42
330
87.75
11.03
240
114.25
7.69
05-09 Tomato
1080
O3
800
90.82
2.35
800
96.42
4.16
480
22.75
2.06
430
43.92
1.76
240
80.64
1.83
05-09 Tomato
1010
88.23
2.05
Control
850
60.56
1.83
680
106.06
2.66
460
76.81
2.28
360
87.61
3.87
240
87.96
3.00
05-14 Soy
1070
25.47
6.09
O3
900
59.55
2.62
860
59.14
1.95
440
74.78
370
55.56
13.86
260
05-14 Soy
1100
4.28
2.60
Control
830
30.18
2.36
840
5.15
3.96
470
37.07
3.48
440
59.94
1.77
240
50.39
13.83
05-20 Potato
1100
94.85
3.46
O3
890
46.37
5.19
Vcmax vs. Light gradient
y = -0.0123x + 131.77
R² = 0.0959
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-05 Potato Control
Vcmax vs Light Gradient
Lineær (Vcmax vs Light Gradient)
Lineær (Vcmax vs Light Gradient)
y = 0.0473x + 51.339
R² = 0.6089
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
140.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-07 Soy O3
Vcmax vs Light Gradient
Lineær (Vcmax vs Light Gradient)
y = -0.0457x + 113.91
R² = 0.7469
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
140.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-07 Soy Control
Vcmax vs Light Gradient
Lineær (Vcmax vs Light Gradient)
y = 0.0622x + 32.71
R² = 0.2262
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-09 Tomato O3
y = -0.0082x + 89.47
R² = 0.0264
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-09 Tomato Control
==PAGE:65==
740
68.68
4.04
500
38.48
2.50
380
280
62.65
2.06
05-20 Potato
1000
Control
850
31.76
9.93
740
22.27
3.53
350
88.40
3.19
400
80.57
9.34
260
69.37
4.86
05-21 Tomato
1020
O3
790
540
61.76
2.07
400
59.66
3.10
360
56.20
4.76
210
35.78
10.75
05-21 Tomato
950
49.85
3.51
Control
680
41.07
2.53
650
72.86
8.57
480
76.26
3.83
360
48.59
7.87
250
58.35
2.97
05-23 Tomato
1050
O3
880
550
60.32
1.93
400
64.13
10.37
400
55.95
2.21
220
0.00
13.42
05-23 Tomato
980
59.44
6.38
Control
800
46.25
7.62
730
36.00
15.30
500
80.70
5.20
270
35.35
10.22
250
52.12
17.79
05-30 Tomato
940
1.51
1.65
O3
780
59.13
3.11
720
44.54
3.04
440
59.71
5.99
400
20.53
1.80
190
0.00
12.00
05-30 Tomato
850
37.53
5.79
Control
630
49.57
5.40
650
15.25
1.53
410
54.70
2.49
150
16.44
1.86
240
41.65
9.19
Vcmax vs Light Gradient
Lineær (Vcmax vs Light Gradient)
Vcmax vs Light Gradient
Lineær (Vcmax vs Light Gradient)
y = -0.0391x + 83.367
R² = 0.4407
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-14 Soy O3
Serie1
Lineær (Serie1)
y = -0.0625x + 71.987
R² = 0.7641
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-14 Soy Control
Serie1
Lineær (Serie1)
y = 0.0359x + 37
R² = 0.2778
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-20 Potato O3
Serie1
Lineær (Serie1)
y = -0.102x + 111.51
R² = 0.791
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
90.00
100.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-20 Potato Control
Serie1
Lineær (Serie1)
y = 0.0796x + 23.294
R² = 0.8201
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
Vcmax
05-21 Tomato O3
y = -0.0112x + 64.134
R² = 0.0401
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
90.00
100.00
Vcmax
05-21 Tomato Control
==PAGE:66==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
Serie2
Lineær (Serie2)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
Serie2
Lineær (Serie2)
y = 0.1902x - 29.563
R² = 0.7206
-50.00
0.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-23 Tomato O3
Serie2
Lineær (Serie2)
y = 0.0049x + 48.772
R² = 0.0073
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
90.00
100.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-23 Tomato Control
Serie2
Lineær (Serie2)
y = 0.0174x + 20.815
R² = 0.032
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-30 Tomato O3
Serie2
Lineær (Serie2)
y = 0.008x + 31.954
R² = 0.0166
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
05-30 Tomato Control
Serie2
Lineær (Serie2)
==PAGE:67==
Multi-Vcmax vs. Light gradient
R² = 0.0959
R² = 0.791
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
Potato Control
Potato 05-05 Control
Potato 05-20 Control
Lineær (Potato 05-20 Control)
Lineær (Potato 05-20 Control)
R² = 0.7469
R² = 0.7641
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
140.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
Soy Control
R² = 0.6089
R² = 0.4407
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
140.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Vcmax
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
Soy O3
==PAGE:68==
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m 2/s 1]
05-05 Soy Control
05-14 Soy Control
Lineær (05-05 Soy Control)
Lineær (05-14 Soy Control)
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
Vcmax vs Light Gradient
Serie1
Lineær (Vcmax vs Light Gradient)
Lineær (Serie1)
-50.00
0.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax [µmol CO2/m^2/s^1]
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
Tomato O3
05-09 Tomato
05-23 Tomato
05-21 Tomato
05-30 Tomato
Lineær (05-09 Tomato)
Lineær (05-23 Tomato)
Lineær (05-21 Tomato)
Lineær (05-30 Tomato)
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Vcmax [µmol CO2/m^2/s^1]
Light intesnsity: [µmol/m^2/s^1]
Tomato Control
05-09 Tomato
05-21 Tomato
05-23 Tomato
05-30 Tomato
Lineær (05-21 Tomato)
Lineær (05-23 Tomato)
Lineær (05-30 Tomato)
Lineær (05-30 Tomato)
==PAGE:69==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
6.3
My model Vcmax estimates vs typical FvCB
65
==PAGE:70==
Sheet
Group
Custom Vcmax fit
Custom Vcmax SE
Vcmax Standard FcVB model
05-05 Potato Control
group4
127.23
2.26
120.77
05-05 Potato Control
group5
113.19
2.53
107.43
05-05 Potato Control
group6
126.33
2.26
119.91
05-07 Soy O3
group1
105.91
13.54
98.00
05-07 Soy O3
group2
99.57
8.54
92.30
05-07 Soy O3
group3
79.08
8.93
73.20
05-07 Soy O3
group4
99.51
5.21
92.10
05-07 Soy O3
group5
67.59
14.20
62.53
05-07 Soy O3
group6
49.73
9.12
47.64
05-07 Soy Control
group1
72.00
6.66
67.05
05-07 Soy Control
group2
70.04
12.76
65.18
05-07 Soy Control
group3
65.34
8.47
60.87
05-07 Soy Control
group4
94.33
12.42
87.83
05-07 Soy Control
group5
87.75
11.03
81.77
05-07 Soy Control
group6
114.25
7.69
106.49
05-09 Tomato O3
group2
90.82
2.35
86.27
05-09 Tomato O3
group3
96.42
4.16
91.72
05-09 Tomato O3
group4
22.75
2.06
21.58
05-09 Tomato O3
group5
43.92
1.76
41.62
05-09 Tomato O3
group6
80.64
1.83
76.72
05-09 Tomato Control
group1
88.23
2.05
86.85
05-09 Tomato Control
group2
60.56
1.83
59.62
05-09 Tomato Control
group3
106.06
2.66
104.43
05-09 Tomato Control
group4
76.81
2.28
75.64
05-09 Tomato Control
group5
87.61
3.87
86.26
05-09 Tomato Control
group6
87.96
3.00
86.59
05-14 Soy O3
group1
25.47
6.09
23.59
05-14 Soy O3
group2
59.55
2.62
55.43
05-14 Soy O3
group3
59.14
1.95
55.08
05-14 Soy O3
group4
74.78
N/A
69.45
05-14 Soy O3
group5
55.56
13.86
51.51
05-14 Soy Control
group1
4.28
2.60
3.95
05-14 Soy Control
group2
30.18
2.36
27.85
05-14 Soy Control
group3
5.15
3.96
4.73
05-14 Soy Control
group4
37.07
3.48
34.20
05-14 Soy Control
group5
59.94
1.77
55.27
05-14 Soy Control
group6
50.39
13.83
46.48
05-20 Potato O3
group1
94.85
3.46
89.15
05-20 Potato O3
group2
46.37
5.19
43.38
05-20 Potato O3
group3
68.68
4.04
64.26
05-20 Potato O3
group4
38.48
2.50
36.14
05-20 Potato O3
group5
1.50
05-20 Potato O3
group6
62.65
2.06
58.87
05-20 Potato Control
group1
4.87
05-20 Potato Control
group2
31.76
9.93
29.45
05-20 Potato Control
group3
22.27
3.53
20.65
05-20 Potato Control
group4
88.40
3.19
81.81
05-20 Potato Control
group5
80.57
9.34
74.71
05-20 Potato Control
group6
69.37
4.86
64.22
==PAGE:71==
05-21 Tomato O3
group3
61.76
2.07
57.36
05-21 Tomato O3
group4
59.66
3.10
55.35
05-21 Tomato O3
group5
56.20
4.76
51.93
05-21 Tomato O3
group6
35.78
10.75
33.07
05-21 Tomato Control
group1
49.85
3.51
48.18
05-21 Tomato Control
group2
41.07
2.53
39.70
05-21 Tomato Control
group3
72.86
8.57
70.43
05-21 Tomato Control
group4
76.26
3.83
73.74
05-21 Tomato Control
group5
48.59
7.87
46.99
05-21 Tomato Control
group6
58.35
2.97
56.39
05-23 Tomato O3
group1
40.27
05-23 Tomato O3
group2
53.81
05-23 Tomato O3
group3
60.32
1.93
56.62
05-23 Tomato O3
group4
64.13
10.37
59.98
05-23 Tomato O3
group5
55.95
2.21
52.46
05-23 Tomato O3
group6
0.00
13.42
0.00
05-23 Tomato Control
group1
59.44
6.38
59.44
05-23 Tomato Control
group2
46.25
7.62
46.25
05-23 Tomato Control
group3
36.00
15.30
36.00
05-23 Tomato Control
group4
80.70
5.20
80.70
05-23 Tomato Control
group5
35.35
10.22
35.35
05-23 Tomato Control
group6
52.12
17.79
52.12
05-30 Tomato O3
group1
1.51
1.65
1.40
05-30 Tomato O3
group2
59.13
3.11
55.36
05-30 Tomato O3
group3
44.54
3.04
41.67
05-30 Tomato O3
group4
59.71
5.99
55.92
05-30 Tomato O3
group5
20.53
1.80
19.22
05-30 Tomato O3
group6
0.00
12.00
0.00
05-30 Tomato Control
group1
37.53
5.79
34.62
05-30 Tomato Control
group2
49.57
5.40
45.76
05-30 Tomato Control
group3
15.25
1.53
14.13
05-30 Tomato Control
group4
54.70
2.49
50.72
05-30 Tomato Control
group5
16.44
1.86
15.19
05-30 Tomato Control
group6
41.65
9.19
38.50
==PAGE:72==
Standard FvCB SE Diff in Vcmax Diff in SE
2.13
6.46
0.13
2.39
5.75
0.14
2.13
6.42
0.13
12.53
7.90
1.01
7.91
7.28
0.63
8.27
5.88
0.66
4.83
7.41
0.38
13.14
5.06
1.06
7.85
2.09
1.27
6.21
4.95
0.45
11.88
4.86
0.88
7.89
4.48
0.58
11.57
6.50
0.85
10.28
5.99
0.75
7.17
7.76
0.52
2.23
4.55
0.12
3.96
4.70
0.20
1.96
1.17
0.10
1.67
2.30
0.09
1.74
3.92
0.09
2.02
1.38
0.03
1.80
0.93
0.03
2.62
1.63
0.04
2.24
1.18
0.04
3.81
1.36
0.06
2.95
1.37
0.05
5.66
1.88
0.43
2.43
4.12
0.19
1.81
4.06
0.14
12.88
5.32
N/A
8.58
4.05
5.28
2.41
0.32
0.19
2.18
2.33
0.18
3.66
0.41
0.30
3.21
2.87
0.27
1.63
4.68
0.14
12.77
3.91
1.06
3.24
5.70
0.22
4.86
2.98
0.33
3.78
4.42
0.26
2.34
2.34
0.16
0.08
-1.50
-0.08
1.93
3.78
0.13
0.37
-4.87
-0.37
9.21
2.31
0.72
3.27
1.62
0.26
2.95
6.59
0.24
8.66
5.86
0.68
4.50
5.15
0.36
==PAGE:73==
2.00
4.40
0.07
3.00
4.31
0.10
4.60
4.27
0.16
10.39
2.71
0.36
3.24
1.67
0.27
2.34
1.37
0.19
7.92
2.43
0.65
3.55
2.52
0.28
7.28
1.60
0.59
2.74
1.95
0.23
1.54
-40.27
-1.54
1.81
-53.81
-1.81
1.81
3.70
0.12
9.70
4.16
0.67
2.07
3.49
0.14
12.55
0.00
0.87
6.32
0.00
0.06
7.56
0.00
0.06
15.17
0.00
0.13
5.16
0.00
0.04
10.14
0.00
0.08
17.65
0.00
0.14
1.53
0.11
0.12
2.88
3.76
0.23
2.82
2.87
0.22
5.55
3.79
0.44
1.67
1.31
0.13
11.11
0.00
0.89
5.35
2.91
0.44
4.99
3.81
0.41
1.42
1.13
0.11
2.30
3.97
0.19
1.72
1.25
0.14
8.50
3.15
0.69
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
6.4
Ozone level in the ozone treatment chamber
70
==PAGE:75==
Ecotron eksperiment. Ozon data fra lysgradient eksperiment feb- maj 2025
Teis Mikkelsen
Der har været forskellige setups gennem forsøget. Først manuel ozon doserin og flytbar ozon måler (1). De
Det ser ud til at kontrol planterne har fået en smule ozon i en uges tid. Det gør ikke så meget for forsøget, d
Ozonkoncentrationen i kontrolkammer har hele tiden været mellem 4 og 8 ppb, på nær en periode (19/3 - 2
Ozon behandling
Dato 
Måned
Gennemsnitlig O3 koncentration  (ppb)
Setup
15 Februar
89
1
16 Februar
89
1
17 Februar
89
1
18 Februar
89
1
19 Februar
89
1
20 Februar
89
1
21 Februar
89
1
22 Februar
89
1
23 Februar
95
1
24 Februar
95
1
25 Februar
95
1
26 Februar
95
1
27 Februar
95
1
28 Februar
95
1
1 Marts
95
1
2 Marts
98
1
3 Marts
98
1
4 Marts
98
1
5 Marts
98
1
6 Marts
98
1
7 Marts
98
1
8 Marts
98
1
9 Marts
92
1
10 Marts
92
1
11 Marts
92
1
12 Marts
92
1
13 Marts
92
1
14 Marts
48
2
15 Marts
48
2
16 Marts
48
2
17 Marts
48
2
18 Marts
48
2
19 Marts
50
2
20 Marts
50
2
21 Marts
50
2
22 Marts
65
2
23 Marts
65
2
24 Marts
65
2
25 Marts
65
2
26 Marts
65
2
==PAGE:76==
27 Marts
65
2
28 Marts
65
2
29 Marts
110
3
30 Marts
110
3
31 Marts
110
3
1 April
110
3
2 April
110
3
3 April
110
3
4 April
128
3
5 April
128
3
6 April
128
3
7 April
128
3
8 April
128
3
9 April
128
3
10 April
128
3
11 April
128
3
12 April
125
3
13 April
125
3
14 April
125
3
15 April
125
3
16 April
125
3
17 April
125
3
18 April
125
3
19 April
125
3
20 April
125
3
21 April
125
3
22 April
125
3
23 April
125
3
24 April
125
3
25 April
125
3
26 April
95
3
27 April
95
3
28 April
95
3
29 April
95
3
30 April
95
3
1 Maj
95
3
2 Maj
95
3
3 Maj
95
3
4 Maj
95
3
5 Maj
95
3
6 Maj
95
3
7 Maj
95
3
8 Maj
95
3
9 Maj
95
3
10 Maj
108
3
11 Maj
108
3
12 Maj
108
3
13 Maj
108
3
==PAGE:77==
14 Maj
108
3
15 Maj
108
3
16 Maj
108
3
17 Maj
108
3
18 Maj
108
3
19 Maj
108
3
20 Maj
108
3
21 Maj
108
3
22 Maj
108
3
==PAGE:78==
erefter ozon måling og ozon dosering via kælderssystem (2) og til sidst manuel ozondosering og måling via
==PAGE:79==
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
a kældersystem (3).    
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
6.5
A temperature fluctuation
The elevated temperature lasted only 19 hours, and we mimicked in the other chamber
as well to balance the effect.
78
==PAGE:83==
Time
ms
Temperatursensor-Temperatur
Temperatursensor-Temp_SP
26-03-2025 14:18
870
219,784,527
22
26-03-2025 14:52
870
220,278,548
22
26-03-2025 15:25
870
21,937,338
22
26-03-2025 15:59
870
219,850,598
22
26-03-2025 16:33
870
220,933,354
22
26-03-2025 17:06
870
219,136,114
22
26-03-2025 17:40
870
221,148,856
22
26-03-2025 18:13
870
219,110,662
22
26-03-2025 18:47
870
220,661,567
22
26-03-2025 19:21
870
219,395,348
22
26-03-2025 19:54
870
219,807,947
22
26-03-2025 20:28
870
220,412,894
22
26-03-2025 21:01
870
219,355,695
22
26-03-2025 21:35
870
22,010,157
22
26-03-2025 22:09
870
201,069,171
197,990,345
26-03-2025 22:42
870
184,547,178
190,116,409
26-03-2025 23:16
870
189,183,446
19
26-03-2025 23:49
870
189,594,783
19
27-03-2025 00:23
870
190,410,033
19
27-03-2025 00:57
870
189,206,416
19
27-03-2025 01:30
870
190,405,244
19
27-03-2025 02:04
870
190,055,827
19
27-03-2025 02:37
870
189,149,609
19
27-03-2025 03:11
870
190,185,056
19
27-03-2025 03:45
870
190,407,672
19
27-03-2025 04:18
870
189,239,351
19
27-03-2025 04:52
870
189,848,624
19
27-03-2025 05:25
870
190,394,809
19
27-03-2025 05:59
870
198,170,675
203,492,457
27-03-2025 06:33
870
225,735,355
219,764,318
27-03-2025 07:06
870
219,911,333
22
27-03-2025 07:40
870
221,091,257
22
27-03-2025 08:13
870
219,329,702
22
27-03-2025 08:47
870
220,599,649
22
27-03-2025 09:21
870
220,328,089
22
27-03-2025 09:54
870
219,579,541
22
27-03-2025 10:28
870
219,410,978
22
27-03-2025 11:01
870
220,852,279
22
27-03-2025 11:35
870
22,113,305
22
27-03-2025 12:09
870
219,481,109
22
27-03-2025 12:42
870
21,940,476
22
27-03-2025 13:16
870
220,477,655
22
27-03-2025 13:49
870
220,486,481
22
27-03-2025 14:23
870
219,528,432
22
27-03-2025 14:57
870
220,088,345
22
27-03-2025 15:30
870
220,388,078
22
27-03-2025 16:04
870
219,449,501
22
==PAGE:84==
27-03-2025 16:37
870
220,457,146
22
27-03-2025 17:11
870
220,457,064
22
27-03-2025 17:45
870
219,154,581
22
27-03-2025 18:18
870
220,301,087
22
27-03-2025 18:52
870
220,376,485
22
27-03-2025 19:25
870
219,192,778
22
27-03-2025 19:59
870
220,381,422
22
27-03-2025 20:33
870
220,164,977
22
27-03-2025 21:06
870
219,576,587
22
27-03-2025 21:40
870
220,110,809
22
27-03-2025 22:13
870
195,058,015
193,834,889
27-03-2025 22:47
870
185,686,656
190,051,203
27-03-2025 23:21
870
190,653,673
19
27-03-2025 23:54
870
188,376,356
19
28-03-2025 00:28
870
189,170,188
19
28-03-2025 01:01
870
191,305,168
19
28-03-2025 01:35
870
189,041,072
19
28-03-2025 02:09
870
189,781,181
19
28-03-2025 02:42
870
19,031,472
19
28-03-2025 03:16
870
188,984,707
19
28-03-2025 03:49
870
191,102,531
19
28-03-2025 04:23
870
188,783,338
19
28-03-2025 04:57
870
191,169,435
19
28-03-2025 05:30
870
188,527,655
19
28-03-2025 06:04
870
201,928,363
207,727,989
28-03-2025 06:37
870
225,762,908
21,981,484
28-03-2025 07:11
870
220,917,387
22
28-03-2025 07:45
870
219,746,774
22
28-03-2025 08:18
870
219,354,559
22
28-03-2025 08:52
870
221,269,896
22
28-03-2025 09:25
870
218,897,022
22
28-03-2025 09:59
870
221,087,267
22
28-03-2025 10:33
870
220,591,633
22
28-03-2025 11:06
870
220,050,058
22
28-03-2025 11:40
870
219,276,646
22
28-03-2025 12:13
870
220,852,739
22
28-03-2025 12:47
870
222,497,003
22
28-03-2025 13:21
870
217,294,535
22
28-03-2025 13:54
870
2,200,343
22
28-03-2025 14:28
870
21,977,121
22
28-03-2025 15:01
870
222,136,257
22
28-03-2025 15:35
870
2,180,866
22
28-03-2025 16:09
870
221,201,776
22
28-03-2025 16:42
870
219,406,851
22
28-03-2025 17:16
870
220,042,597
22
28-03-2025 17:49
870
219,294,777
22
28-03-2025 18:23
870
220,590,077
22
28-03-2025 18:57
870
219,028,406
22
==PAGE:85==
28-03-2025 19:30
870
221,091,593
22
28-03-2025 20:04
870
219,199,865
22
28-03-2025 20:37
870
220,135,446
22
28-03-2025 21:11
870
220,400,177
22
28-03-2025 21:45
870
219,402,282
219,266,345
28-03-2025 22:18
870
190,549,519
190,444,163
28-03-2025 22:52
870
185,128,911
19
28-03-2025 23:25
870
191,194,863
19
28-03-2025 23:59
870
188,607,729
19
29-03-2025 00:33
870
190,691,415
19
29-03-2025 01:06
870
189,204,341
19
29-03-2025 01:40
870
189,871,206
19
29-03-2025 02:13
870
190,420,334
19
29-03-2025 02:47
870 n/a
n/a
29-03-2025 03:21
870 n/a
n/a
29-03-2025 03:54
870
190,088,009
19
29-03-2025 04:28
870
191,044,562
19
29-03-2025 05:01
870
188,881,328
19
29-03-2025 05:35
870
190,849,012
19
29-03-2025 06:09
870
206,840,556
211,862,924
29-03-2025 06:42
870
224,969,423
219,881,331
29-03-2025 07:16
870
219,804,179
22
29-03-2025 07:49
870
220,429,007
22
29-03-2025 08:23
870
220,051,798
22
29-03-2025 08:57
870
219,931,695
22
29-03-2025 09:30
870
220,597,624
22
29-03-2025 10:04
870
219,202,638
22
29-03-2025 10:37
870
220,471,539
22
29-03-2025 11:11
870
220,426,544
22
29-03-2025 11:45
870
219,912,485
22
29-03-2025 12:18
870
219,532,474
22
29-03-2025 12:52
870
219,893,807
22
29-03-2025 13:25
870
220,526,388
22
29-03-2025 13:59
870
221,139,717
22
29-03-2025 14:33
870
218,826,128
22
29-03-2025 15:06
870
221,054,718
22
29-03-2025 15:40
870
219,649,358
22
29-03-2025 16:13
870
21,971,669
22
29-03-2025 16:47
870
220,659,404
22
29-03-2025 17:21
870
219,113,454
22
29-03-2025 17:54
870
220,972,957
22
29-03-2025 18:28
870
219,558,347
22
29-03-2025 19:01
870
220,186,058
22
29-03-2025 19:35
870
220,245,404
22
29-03-2025 20:09
870
218,971,791
22
29-03-2025 20:42
870
220,900,664
22
29-03-2025 21:16
870
219,023,418
22
29-03-2025 21:49
870
219,185,796
215,089,461
==PAGE:86==
29-03-2025 22:23
870
186,228,368
190,374,007
29-03-2025 22:57
870
186,452,154
19
29-03-2025 23:30
870
191,009,848
19
30-03-2025 00:04
870
188,623,373
19
30-03-2025 00:37
870
190,404,422
19
30-03-2025 01:11
870
190,440,082
19
30-03-2025 01:45
870
190,419,892
19
30-03-2025 03:18
870
189,224,609
19
30-03-2025 03:52
870
188,513,196
19
30-03-2025 04:25
870
191,495,674
19
30-03-2025 04:59
870
188,948,485
19
30-03-2025 05:33
870
190,717,656
19
30-03-2025 06:06
870
195,219,371
19
30-03-2025 06:40
870
19,265,331
19
30-03-2025 07:13
870
207,939,366
216,018,528
30-03-2025 07:47
870
224,054,798
21,994,657
30-03-2025 08:21
870
219,438,491
22
30-03-2025 08:54
870
220,300,705
22
30-03-2025 09:28
870
220,736,597
22
30-03-2025 10:01
870
219,407,559
22
30-03-2025 10:35
870
220,209,587
22
30-03-2025 11:09
870
219,614,127
22
30-03-2025 11:42
870
219,432,123
22
30-03-2025 12:16
870
221,304,147
22
30-03-2025 12:49
870
219,534,692
22
30-03-2025 13:23
870
220,068,879
22
30-03-2025 13:57
870
220,550,377
22
30-03-2025 14:30
870
219,540,672
22
30-03-2025 15:04
870
219,260,362
22
30-03-2025 15:37
870
219,905,196
22
30-03-2025 16:11
870
22,157,285
22
30-03-2025 16:45
870
220,340,769
22
30-03-2025 17:18
870
219,136,105
22
30-03-2025 17:52
870
220,760,508
22
30-03-2025 18:25
870
219,756,123
22
30-03-2025 18:59
870
219,369,882
22
30-03-2025 19:33
870
220,785,353
22
30-03-2025 20:06
870
21,926,997
22
30-03-2025 20:40
870
220,527,403
22
30-03-2025 21:13
870
219,990,385
22
30-03-2025 21:47
870
218,886,351
22
30-03-2025 22:21
870
213,930,756
22
30-03-2025 22:54
870
218,667,441
210,858,745
30-03-2025 23:28
870
188,155,284
190,329,945
31-03-2025 00:01
870
187,054,661
19
31-03-2025 00:35
870
18,945,889
19
31-03-2025 01:09
870
190,983,627
19
31-03-2025 01:42
870
189,260,559
19
==PAGE:87==
31-03-2025 02:16
870
189,974,116
19
31-03-2025 02:49
870
189,659,701
19
31-03-2025 03:23
870
189,438,178
19
31-03-2025 03:57
870
191,093,454
19
31-03-2025 04:30
870
188,495,389
19
31-03-2025 05:04
870
19,101,758
19
31-03-2025 05:37
870
188,841,981
19
31-03-2025 06:11
870
196,831,538
19
31-03-2025 06:45
870
191,516,717
19,066,029
31-03-2025 07:18
870
212,810,107
219,554,707
31-03-2025 07:52
870
224,568,634
22
31-03-2025 08:25
870
218,942,791
22
31-03-2025 08:59
870
220,743,239
22
31-03-2025 09:33
870
21,943,328
22
31-03-2025 10:06
870
220,764,321
22
31-03-2025 10:40
870
22,006,744
22
31-03-2025 11:13
870
219,367,376
22
31-03-2025 11:47
870
220,567,226
22
31-03-2025 12:21
870
219,252,307
22
31-03-2025 12:54
870
220,544,136
22
31-03-2025 13:28
870
219,477,877
22
31-03-2025 14:01
870
22,094,567
22
31-03-2025 14:35
870
219,509,498
22
31-03-2025 15:09
870
220,321,752
22
31-03-2025 15:42
870
219,790,552
22
31-03-2025 16:16
870
219,594,109
22
31-03-2025 16:49
870
22,031,885
22
31-03-2025 17:23
870
220,472,282
22
31-03-2025 17:57
870
219,178,317
22
31-03-2025 18:30
870
22,108,467
22
31-03-2025 19:04
870
219,726,185
22
31-03-2025 19:37
870
21,920,656
22
31-03-2025 20:11
870
221,080,855
22
31-03-2025 20:45
870
219,821,617
22
31-03-2025 21:18
870
219,034,369
22
31-03-2025 21:52
870
219,440,136
22
31-03-2025 22:25
870
213,533,238
22
31-03-2025 22:59
870
216,805,976
2,066,542
31-03-2025 23:33
870
185,789,219
190,237,834
01-04-2025 00:06
870
187,831,289
19
01-04-2025 00:40
870
19,078,825
19
01-04-2025 01:13
870
200,283,747
242,037,056
1
01-04-2025 01:47
870
223,954,589
249,893,141
2
01-04-2025 02:21
870
245,324,274
25
3
01-04-2025 02:54
870
251,139,325
25
4
01-04-2025 03:28
870
252,433,443
25
5
01-04-2025 04:01
870
25,170,453
25
6
01-04-2025 04:35
870
250,723,394
25
7
==PAGE:88==
01-04-2025 05:09
870
250,135,207
25
8
01-04-2025 05:42
870
250,164,269
25
9
01-04-2025 06:16
870
264,740,782
25
10
01-04-2025 06:49
870
258,718,542
254,910,539
11
01-04-2025 07:23
870
272,512,196
279,625,993
12
01-04-2025 07:57
870
281,595,407
28
13
01-04-2025 08:30
870
280,061,783
28
14
01-04-2025 09:04
870
279,174,484
28
15
01-04-2025 09:37
870
281,211,483
28
16
01-04-2025 10:11
870
278,802,803
28
17
01-04-2025 10:45
870
281,313,735
28
18
01-04-2025 11:18
870
280,197,726
28
19
01-04-2025 11:52
870
27,972,009
28
20
01-04-2025 12:25
870
280,716,012
28
21
01-04-2025 12:59
870
257,001,653
2,276,434
01-04-2025 13:33
870
216,284,044
220,099,008
01-04-2025 14:06
870
219,613,309
22
01-04-2025 14:40
870
219,430,973
22
01-04-2025 15:13
870
21,926,849
22
01-04-2025 15:47
870
220,410,172
22
01-04-2025 16:21
870
219,197,688
22
01-04-2025 16:54
870
220,540,648
22
01-04-2025 17:28
870
21,961,067
22
01-04-2025 18:01
870
219,994,477
22
01-04-2025 18:35
870
220,410,157
22
01-04-2025 19:09
870
219,325,184
22
01-04-2025 19:42
870
219,949,775
22
01-04-2025 20:16
870
220,605,669
22
01-04-2025 20:49
870
21,958,491
22
01-04-2025 21:23
870
219,829,779
22
01-04-2025 21:57
870
217,371,107
22
01-04-2025 22:30
870
215,451,557
22
01-04-2025 23:04
870
211,640,359
202,491,779
01-04-2025 23:37
870
18,504,392
19,018,861
02-04-2025 00:11
870
188,958,325
19
02-04-2025 00:45
870
18,974,647
191,173,848
02-04-2025 01:18
870
204,099,192
249,107,153
02-04-2025 01:52
870
227,702,974
25
1
02-04-2025 02:25
870
247,005,283
25
2
02-04-2025 02:59
870
252,641,537
25
3
02-04-2025 03:33
870
251,970,549
25
4
02-04-2025 04:06
870
250,757,632
25
5
02-04-2025 04:40
870
250,612,956
25
6
02-04-2025 05:13
870
250,400,078
25
7
02-04-2025 05:47
870
250,031,593
25
8
02-04-2025 06:21
870
267,372,348
25
9
02-04-2025 06:54
870
254,318,279
259,068,125
10
02-04-2025 07:28
870
276,046,527
279,668,873
11
==PAGE:89==
02-04-2025 08:01
870
280,841,002
28
12
02-04-2025 08:35
870
280,921,419
28
13
02-04-2025 09:09
870
27,921,192
28
14
02-04-2025 09:42
870
2,803,728
28
15
02-04-2025 10:16
870
276,507,265
254,360,346
16
02-04-2025 10:49
870
226,365,465
220,524,427
02-04-2025 11:23
870
215,660,981
22
02-04-2025 11:57
870
221,155,406
22
02-04-2025 12:30
870
219,015,695
22
02-04-2025 13:04
870
220,725,125
22
02-04-2025 13:37
870
220,024,826
22
02-04-2025 14:11
870
221,281,491
22
02-04-2025 14:45
870
218,291,044
22
02-04-2025 15:18
870
220,485,196
22
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
==PAGE:94==
########
==PAGE:95==
########
########
==PAGE:96==
########
==PAGE:97==
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
6.5.1
All the A/Ci plots
All the plots are available: Here
6.6
All the Vcmax values
Date
Species
O3
Temp
Vcmax1
Vcmax2
Vcmax3
Vcmax4
Vcmax5
Vcmax6
05-05
Potato
no
25.67
127.23
113.19
126.33
05-07
Soy
yes
25.94
105.91
99.57
79.08
99.51
67.59
49.73
05-07
Soy
no
25.86
72.00
70.04
65.34
94.33
87.75
114.25
05-09
Tomato
yes
25.64
90.82
96.42
43.92
80.64
05-09
Tomato
no
25.20
88.23
60.56
106.06
76.81
87.61
87.96
05-14
Soy
yes
25.91
25.47
59.55
59.14
74.78
55.56
05-14
Soy
no
25.98
4.28
30.18
5.15
37.07
59.94
50.39
05-20
Potato
yes
25.80
94.85
46.37
68.68
38.48
62.65
05-20
Potato
no
25.94
31.76
22.27
88.40
80.57
69.37
05-21
Tomato
yes
25.41
61.76
59.66
56.20
35.78
05-21
Tomato
no
25.95
49.85
41.07
72.86
76.26
48.59
58.35
05-23
Tomato
yes
25.80
60.32
64.13
55.95
05-23
Tomato
no
25.10
59.44
46.25
36.00
80.70
35.35
52.12
05-30
Tomato
yes
25.93
59.13
44.54
59.71
20.53
05-30
Tomato
no
25.96
37.53
49.57
15.25
54.70
16.44
41.65
93
