==PAGE:1==
Interactive Shape Modeling Using
Virtual Reality
Ulrik Enn´e Lykkegaard
Kongens Lyngby 2025
IMM-M.Sc-2025
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk IMM-M.Sc-2025
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of this project is to create a Virtual Reality application for 3D modeling
of simple objects. Using Unity and its built-in ProBuilder API, the application
provides intuitive manipulation options for simple meshes, supported by care-
fully designed signifiers and affordances that guide users through the modeling
process. The program places a strong emphasis on simplicity and intuitiveness,
removing the need for menu-based explanations of the available tools.
This
approach enables even novices in 3D modeling to create new shapes with rela-
tive ease. The resulting application offers the most essential 3D modeling tools,
allowing users to create a wide range of models.
To ensure robustness and smooth performance at runtime, quantitative perfor-
mance tests were conducted. In addition, extensive qualitative user tests were
performed to verify that the program is as intuitive and user-friendly as possible.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (Danish)
M˚alet med dette projekt er at skabe en Virtual Reality-applikation til 3D-
modellering af simple objekter. Ved brug af Unity og dets indbyggede ProBuilder
pakke tilbyder applikationen intuitive muligheder for simple mesh manipula-
tioner, understøttet af nøje designede s˚akaldte ”signifiers” og ”affordances”, der
guider brugerne gennem modelleringsprocessen. Programmet lægger stor vægt
p˚a enkelhed og intuitivitet og fjerner behovet for menubaserede forklaringer af
de tilgængelige værktøjer. Denne tilgang gør det muligt, selv for begyndere in-
den for 3D-modellering, at skabe nye former relativt let. Applikationen tilbyder
de mest nødvendige 3D-modelleringsværktøjer, hvilket giver brugerne mulighed
for at skabe et bredt udvalg af modeller.
For at sikre en robust og glidende ydeevne, n˚ar programmet kører, blev der
udført kvantitative tests.
Derudover blev der udført omfattende kvalitative
brugertests for at verificere, at programmet er s˚a intuitivt og brugervenligt som
muligt.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science of the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for an M.Sc. in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence. The thesis
was carried out from the 6th of January 2025, to the 20th of June 2025, under
the supervision of Professor J. Andreas Bærentzen.
Kongens Lyngby, 20-June-2025
Ulrik Enn´e Lykkegaard
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Glossary List
• 3D - Stands for Three Dimensional. When objects use all three axes of
direction (X, Y, Z) to represent size and depth.
• 6DoF - Stands for Six Degrees of Freedom. Refers to an object’s ability to
move freely in 3D space with six independent motions: translation along
the X, Y, and Z axes, and rotation around these axes.
• API - Stands for Application Programming Interface. This is a software
intermediary that allows two different applications to communicate with
one another.
• AR - Stands for Augmented Reality. This is a set of digital enhancements
overlaid on the real world, typically through a camera and monitor or
special head-mount.
• FPS - Stands for Frames Per Second. The number of images (frames) a
display or rendering system can show per second.
• LoD - Stands for Level of Detail. The amount of detail that is visible on
a 3D model.
• SDK - Stands for Software Development Kit.
This is a series of tools
and programs that can be used to build software targeted at a particular
platform.
• UI - Stands for User Interface. The graphical elements visible to, and
interactable for, the user in a software program.
==PAGE:10==
viii
• VCS - Stands for Version Control System. A storage system for software
development where code and other elements can be saved, and a history
of code changes can be viewed.
• VR - Stands for Virtual Reality. This is a computer-generated virtual
environment with scenes and objects that a user can see in 3D with depth
perception.
• XR - Stands for Extended Reality. This is the general term for AR and
VR as a group.
==PAGE:11==
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Abstract (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Glossary List
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Works
5
2.1
3D Modeling Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
ShapeLab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
PolySketch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Signifier-Based Immersive and Interactive 3D Modeling
.
7
3
Background
9
3.1
Virtual Reality Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
History of VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Common VR Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Existing VR Development Software . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Unity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Unity Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Scripting in Unity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.3
Version Control System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Virtual Reality in Unity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
VR Packages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.2
VR Headset Code Builds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Unity ProBuilder API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
3.4.1
Object Manipulations in ProBuilder . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.2
ProBuilder at Runtime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Design
21
4.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Affordances & Signifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Chosen Signifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
3D Modeling Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Implementation
31
5.1
Software and Hardware Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.1
Hardware Platform: Meta Quest 3S
. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.2
Game Engine: Unity 6000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.3
3D Modeling Toolkit: ProBuilder 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.4
VR SDK: Unity Meta SDK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.5
Version Control: GitHub
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Modeling Implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.1
Extrusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.2
Dragging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.3
Persistent Multi-Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.4
Loop-Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.5
Merging and Snapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.6
Updating Signifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Controllers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Mesh Manipulation Controls
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.2
Mesh Selection and Moving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.3
Undo/Redo Buttons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Evaluation
51
6.1
Code Coverage and Performance Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
User Test Case Session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2.1
Testing Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2.2
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2.3
Validation Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.3
Demo Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Conclusion
69
7.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Bibliography
73
Appendix
77
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years, virtual reality (VR) has shown great potential as a tool for
interactive 3D environments, with applications extending beyond its typical use
case in gaming and entertainment. Its potential for 3D modeling has attracted
increasing attention, showing it can facilitate content creation and lower the
barrier to entry for novice users. Traditional 3D modeling tools, such as Blender
or Maya, though extremely capable, often pose a steep learning curve due to
their complex interfaces and abstract input methods. By contrast, VR-based
modeling tools can offer an opportunity to create and manipulate objects in
a more natural and intuitive way, utilizing VR headsets’ capability for spatial
awareness and direct interaction.
This project explores the viability of using VR for 3D modeling by developing
a prototype application that enables users to build and edit simple 3D meshes.
The application focuses on incorporating clear signifiers and affordances to guide
user actions and make the experience as intuitive as possible, particularly for
novice users. The primary aim is to investigate whether immersive VR interac-
tions can lower the entry barrier for 3D modeling and provide a more engaging
creative experience.
1.1 Objectives: The overarching goal of this thesis is to assess whether VR
can be a viable alternative to traditional computer-based 3D modeling tools,
with a particular emphasis on novice users. The specific objectives include:
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
• Developing a functional VR 3D modeling application that includes essen-
tial modeling operations such as mesh extrusion, face manipulation, loop
cuts, and duplication.
• Designing and implementing signifiers and affordances within the applica-
tion to guide user interactions and enhance the intuitive use of modeling
tools.
• Evaluating the application’s performance and usability through a com-
bination of quantitative (code coverage, performance benchmarks) and
qualitative (user testing, feedback analysis) methods.
• Exploring the potential for future enhancements based on identified limi-
tations and user suggestions.
These objectives align with the broader ambition of creating a more inclusive
and accessible 3D modeling environment, enabling more people to engage with
digital content creation in a hands-on, immersive way.
1.2 Related Works and Existing Tools: The development of VR modeling
tools builds on several strands of existing work. Programs like ShapeLab and
Polysketch have demonstrated the potential for direct 3D sketching in immersive
environments. ShapeLab, for example, emphasizes the use of hand-tracked input
for manipulating shapes in space, while Polysketch explores how gestural input
can replace traditional point-and-click interactions. Similarly, a prior academic
paper has investigated the combination of VR and 3D modeling, highlighting
challenges such as the difficulty of translating traditional desktop commands to
VR contexts. This project builds upon that paper to further refine the process
of VR 3D modeling.
Some of these tools do often cater to expert users or assume familiarity with
3D concepts. Few explicitly address how to make the experience intuitive and
accessible for users without prior modeling experience. This project builds on
this body of work, aiming to push the focus towards novice usability, clarity
of interaction, and reducing user frustration through the thoughtful design of
signifiers and affordances.
1.3 Technological implementations: To develop the VR application, Unity
was chosen as the primary development platform due to its flexibility and exten-
sive support for VR headsets. The Meta SDK was integrated to handle headset
tracking and controller input, ensuring accurate mapping of real-world hand
motions into the virtual environment. ProBuilder, a mesh-building tool within
Unity, provided the foundational API for mesh manipulation, offering essential
features such as face extrusion and vertex editing.
==PAGE:17==
3
The combination of these technologies allowed for quick prototyping of core
modeling functions while ensuring compatibility with modern standalone VR
headsets, namely the Meta Quest 3S. However, leveraging these tools also intro-
duced specific challenges, such as ensuring low-latency interactions, managing
mesh data efficiently, and providing real-time feedback to the user during mod-
eling operations.
1.4 Structure of the Report: This report is structured as follows:
• Chapter 2 – Related Works: Provides a detailed overview of previous
VR modeling tools and academic studies, situating the project within the
broader research landscape.
• Chapter 3 – Background: Discusses the history of VR, its common ap-
plications, and an introduction to Unity and its relevant packages (Meta
SDK and ProBuilder).
• Chapter 4 – Design: Covers the requirements for the modeling system.
Describes the design of the modeling application, focusing on the devel-
opment of signifiers and affordances that guide user interactions.
• Chapter 5 – Implementation: Provides a technical description of how the
core features were developed and integrated into Unity, including chal-
lenges and solutions encountered during development.
• Chapter 6 – Evaluation: Details the testing procedures used to assess both
the code and the user experience, including quantitative performance tests
and qualitative user testing.
• Chapter 7 – Conclusion: Summarizes the findings of the project, reflects
on its limitations, and suggests areas for future exploration.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Related Works
3D modeling in Virtual Reality has been explored several times before, with
various areas of focus. Some are intended to be close to fully-fledged applica-
tions, aiming to replicate many of the advanced tools found in conventional 3D
modeling software. Other programs, on the other hand, aim to be lightweight,
engaging experiences designed to spark interest in 3D modeling. This chapter
will highlight some of these related works and examine how this project aims to
differentiate itself from existing programs.
2.1
3D Modeling Applications
The following are three examples of 3D modeling software developed for use in
virtual reality, each offering a distinct approach to the concept of 3D content
creation. These applications span a broad spectrum of complexity and target
audiences. On one end are advanced modeling tools that closely replicate the
functionality of traditional desktop software such as Blender [1], including sup-
port for precision modeling, mesh manipulation, and object hierarchies. On the
other end are lightweight, playful experiences designed to make 3D modeling
more approachable and intuitive, often targeting beginners or users interested
in casual exploration rather than professional output.
==PAGE:20==
6
Related Works
2.1.1
ShapeLab
Perhaps one of the most advanced 3D modeling tools available on the VR mar-
ket today is ShapeLab [2]. Its primary goal is to offer a fully-featured sculpting
environment, emphasizing high-detail, organic modeling. The software is de-
signed with professional 3D artists and dedicated hobbyists in mind [3], and as
such, it comes with a relatively steep learning curve. This complexity may pose
a challenge for beginners or users unfamiliar with 3D workflows and VR.
ShapeLab focuses primarily on sculpting tools rather than hard-surface model-
ing, making it well-suited for the creation of natural forms such as characters,
animals, and vegetation. VR as a medium enhances the modeling experience by
allowing users to perceive depth, scale, and spatial relationships more directly
than through a 2D monitor. This immersion can contribute to a more intuitive
modeling process, which is especially valuable in sculpting workflows.
VR modelling in ShapeLab has been recognized as a useful tool in specific, niche
applications. For instance, it has been used in tasks such as tree shape modeling,
where the 3D structure is critical [4], and in virtual pottery sculpting, which
benefits from the software’s sculpting tools and the perception VR provides [5].
These examples illustrate how VR can provide practical usage in the modeling
of 3D stuctures.
Figure 2.1: Models created in ShapeLab. Pictures taken from the ShapeLab
webpage [2].
2.1.2
PolySketch
Another VR 3D modeling tool is PolySketch [6], which takes a markedly dif-
ferent approach compared to high-end sculpting applications like ShapeLab.
Rather than focusing on detailed sculpting, PolySketch emphasizes quick and
intuitive creation of low-polygon models through gesture-based interactions and
==PAGE:21==
2.1 3D Modeling Applications
7
sketch-like inputs. This makes it particularly suitable for low-detail models, and
prototyping. The system interprets user-drawn strokes in 3D space and converts
them into structured geometry, enabling users to construct models without re-
lying on traditional polygonal editing tools. By lowering the barrier of entry,
PolySketch makes 3D modeling more accessible to users with little to no prior
experience, while still offering a novel and engaging design environment for more
experienced creators. This lightweight, sketch-driven paradigm highlights how
VR can support alternative modeling workflows that differ from conventional
desktop-based tools.
By focusing on user-drawn strokes to make geometry, Polysketch loses some
of the traditional modeling features found in other programs such as Blender.
As a result, the modeling experience diverges from that of the more feature-
rich applications. While this limits the level of control and detail achievable in
PolySketch, it also simplifies the creative process, allowing users to prioritize
form and concept over technical construction.
Figure 2.2: Models created in PolySketch. Pictures taken from the PolySketch
webpage [6].
2.1.3
Signifier-Based Immersive and Interactive 3D Mod-
eling
A program that has been a big source of inspiration for the development of this
modeling tool is the signifier-based VR modeling system proposed by Bærentzen,
Frisvad, and Singh in 2019 [7]. Their system presents an intuitive approach to
3D modeling in virtual reality by utilizing affordances, a concept introduced
by the American psychologist James J. Gibson [8] [9], and signifiers, a concept
introduced by the American professor Don Norman [10]. Affordances refer to
how an object can be used, while signifiers are visual cues that guide the user
on how to operate an object. Rather than relying on traditional tool palettes
and mode switching, the system emphasizes modeless, direct interaction, where
all modeling functionalities are represented as signifiers directly placed onto the
3D model.
==PAGE:22==
8
Related Works
In their approach, elements such as faces, edges, and vertices are augmented
with intuitive signifiers that convey their interactive affordances. For example,
face handles allow users to perform extrusions or rotations on selected faces,
while edge latches can be used to group faces into a collective selection. This
design gives a more immediate and discoverable interaction style, where users
can manipulate geometry by grabbing, pulling, or rotating parts of the mesh as
if it were a physical object.
Their system includes several other features, such as symmetry tools, snapping
mechanisms for precise alignment, and a dynamic worktable that provides global
controls like model scaling and transformation, as well as options to undo and
redo actions.
An aspect where this solution differs from the program presented in this thesis,
is in what 3D modeling API is used. Their program utilizes a specialized C++
library called GEL [11], to support their 3D modeling. This new program uses
ProBuilder as it is better integrated into Unity.
The focus on implementing interaction cues directly on the geometry itself cre-
ates a more immersive modeling experience than traditional 3D modeling soft-
ware. This concept aligns closely with the goals of the system presented in this
thesis, which also seeks to minimize tool-based interfaces in favor of hands-on
manipulation of mesh structures within VR. Many core ideas, such as using
handles to directly signify possible actions, facilitating face extrusion through
direct manipulation, and leveraging affordance-based interaction, are reinter-
preted and extended in the development of the tool presented in this thesis.
Figure 2.3: Models created in the interactive 3D modeling system [7].
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Background
A diverse range of background knowledge is essential for the development of
Virtual Reality applications, including an understanding of VR’s definition, po-
tential uses, and available software development tools. This chapter explores
various VR applications and outlines the selected approach for further research
and development.
3.1
Virtual Reality Applications
This section covers the origins of VR, its historical use and applications, and
popular software tools available for VR development.
3.1.1
History of VR
While VR may seem like it is a relatively recent innovation, its origins can be
traced all the way back to the mid-19th century. One of the earliest conceptual-
izations of VR was introduced by David Brewster, inventor of the kaleidoscope,
who developed a handheld stereoscope. This device presented separate images
==PAGE:24==
10
Background
to the left and right eyes, creating depth perception similar to modern VR
headsets (Figure 3.1). The invention gained significant popularity, selling an
estimated 500,000 units, and even received recognition from Queen Victoria of
England [12].
Brewster’s stereoscope also served as an early inspiration for cardboard-based
VR devices, such as Google Cardboard, which utilizes a smartphone to create
a stereoscopic experience [13].
VR technology advanced further in 1895 with the debut of the Haunting Swing
at the Midwinter Fair in San Francisco. This 360-degree immersive attraction
featured a large swing capable of seating up to 40 people, oscillating in a way
that created a compelling illusion of motion [14].
(a) A Brewster Stereoscope design from
1856.
(b) An illustration of how a Brewster
stereoscope worked.
Figure 3.1: One of David Brewsters Stereoscopes (a) and an illustration of
how it works (b) [12].
Throughout the mid to late 20th century, VR experienced renewed interest from
institutions aiming to develop safe simulators for dangerous training scenarios.
Applications included military vehicle operation, flight training, and manage-
ment of large power plants [15].
Additionally, VR saw its first commercial video game attempt in the late 20th
century with the release of Nintendo’s “Virtual Boy” headset. [16]
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Virtual Reality Applications
11
3.1.2
Common VR Use Cases
Today, VR has a broad spectrum of applications, ranging from entertainment
and video consumption to professional and industrial use.
However, gaming
remains the most common use case. According to a 2022 report by NewZoo
[17], a games market data analysis company, 72% of VR headset users engage
at least partially in gaming (Figure 3.2).
The dominance of gaming in VR is understandable, as VR represents a signif-
icant advancement in immersive entertainment, offering unprecedented engage-
ment and interactivity.
Beyond gaming, VR is increasingly recognized as valuable for educational and
professional purposes [18], with 21% of headset users employing VR for training
and work-related activities (Figure 3.2).
The NewZoo report further estimated that by the end of 2024, 46 million VR
headsets would have been sold. As more headsets become available and develop-
ment tools improve accessibility, VR has strong potential for corporate training
applications. Companies can use VR to create realistic training simulations for
new employees, facilitating safe practice in environments such as factories or
laboratories without exposure to hazardous conditions.
Figure 3.2: VR use-case report from the NewZoo 2022 VR Games Market
Report [17].
VR as a simulation tool offers extensive applications, including driver training,
allowing new drivers to safely learn vehicle operation in a controlled virtual
environment before actual road experience [19]. Similarly, medical students can
perform surgical procedures in virtual simulations, significantly reducing the
risk of critical errors during real operations [20].
Furthermore, VR supports health and fitness through VR exergaming, creating
engaging virtual environments for physical activities such as running.
This
==PAGE:26==
12
Background
gamification approach, including setting achievable goals, effectively motivates
users to maintain regular physical activity [21].
3.1.3
Existing VR Development Software
While VR as a concept is a very old technology, the VR experiences of today are
still seen as a rather new form of entertainment. Recent increases in VR-specific
content and accessibility have driven growth in software solutions dedicated
to VR development.
The expanding accessibility of VR headsets has given
rise to competition among game engine developers, resulting in expansive VR
development environments. Prominent engines like Unreal Engine and Unity
Engine have developed specialized tools tailored to VR.
Each platform offers unique advantages and disadvantages.
Unreal Engine,
known for its high-quality graphics and detailed environments, is suitable for
advanced game development, but has a steep learning curve. Unity provides
a more approachable interface, making it ideal for rapid development, though
potentially less visually sophisticated compared to Unreal Engine [22].
Given the project’s goal of demonstrating VR as an accessible, entry-level plat-
form for 3D modeling, Unity was selected as the development platform for the
program.
3.2
Unity
Unity was selected as the preferred engine for VR application development due
to its extensive VR development add-ons and comprehensive documentation.
Before exploring how Unity is utilized for VR development, it is essential to
establish a foundational understanding of the engine itself and its workflow.
Additionally, version control plays a crucial role in development. Since setting
up version control in Unity has historically been more complex, this aspect
warrants a more in-depth explanation.
3.2.1
Unity Engine
Unity is primarily a game engine designed for developing 2D and 3D games on
computers, mobile devices, and gaming consoles such as the SONY PlayStation
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Unity
13
and Microsoft Xbox. However, due to its extensive library of plugins, the engine
is capable of much more. Over the past decade, Unity has introduced numerous
plugins that support the development of Extended Reality (XR) applications,
the broader category under which VR falls, along with Augmented Reality (AR).
These advancements have significantly streamlined VR development. A more
detailed explanation of working with VR in Unity will be provided in Section
3.3.
The Unity Engine’s UI is made up of multiple panels, each responsible for specific
aspects of the development process. While the engine includes a wide range of
panels, this section will highlight some of the most essential ones. An example
of how the Unity UI layout can look is represented in Figure 3.3, where colored
boxes have been overlaid to show the separation of the various panels.
Figure 3.3: Color-coded outlines for the most important panels in Unity
1. Scene View: The Scene View panel serves as the primary area for displaying
and managing elements within the project. It provides a visual representation of
objects such as shapes, lights, and menus, allowing them to be seen and selected.
In this project, default assets will be placed in the Scene View before the program
runs on the VR headset. Mesh manipulation assets will be dynamically added
during runtime.
2.
Hierarchy: The Hierarchy panel lists every element present in the scene,
functioning as a structured overview of all objects within the Scene View. Es-
sentially, it acts as a folder structure for organizing scene elements, making it
easier to manage and select objects.
==PAGE:28==
14
Background
3. Inspector: The Inspector panel is used to modify and extend the properties of
specific elements in the scene. When an object is selected from the Hierarchy, the
Inspector displays its properties, such as world position, rotation, and scale. The
available properties depend on the selected object type. For instance, selecting
a 3D cube allows modifications to its Mesh Renderer, which controls how the
cube is displayed at runtime. If a light object is selected, properties such as
color and intensity can be adjusted. The Inspector allows for the addition of
new components to an object, such as materials, scripts, and physics properties.
4. Project Folder: The Project Folder displays all files and directories stored
within the project. This includes custom-made assets as well as system-generated
files like the Packages folder, which contains dependencies and imported li-
braries. Unity automatically generates various files necessary for running the
engine which are stored here.
5. Console: The Console panel is primarily used for debugging. It displays
warnings and errors encountered in the program, helping developers identify
and resolve issues. Through scripting, developers can use debugging commands
to print outputs to the Console, making it useful for verifying code execution
and debugging logic errors. Additionally, the Console displays general warnings,
such as notifications about outdated packages or deprecated code usage.
6.
Game View: Lastly, Unity includes the Game View panel, which allows
developers to preview and test their program at runtime. This window simulates
how the application would behave as a standalone build, making it useful for
debugging. However, for VR development, the Game View is less effective, as
seamless testing requires a connected VR headset. Due to these limitations, the
Game View was used sparingly during this project, with direct builds to the
headset being the preferred approach.
3.2.2
Scripting in Unity
Unity says: “Unity uses the open-source .NET platform to ensure that appli-
cations you make with Unity can run on a wide variety of different hardware
configurations. The .NET platform supports a range of languages and API li-
braries, which Unity supports to different extents in different platform contexts.”
[23]. For this reason, Unity primarily relies on C# coding, and therefore, the
project will primarily be programmed in this programming language.
When a C# script is created in Unity, it is automatically initialized with two
methods: Start() and Update(), as seen in Listing 3.1. The Start() method is
called once when the program initializes, while the Update() method is executed
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Unity
15
once per frame. Both of these methods inherit from the MonoBehaviour class,
which serves as the foundation for Unity scripts.
To enable communication between C# scripts and the Unity Engine, the script
must be attached to an object in the Scene Hierarchy (see Section 3.2.1). This
attachment allows the script to interact with the GameObject and its compo-
nents, making it an essential step in Unity development.
Listing 3.1: Default Unity MonoBehaviour Script
1 using System.Collections;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using UnityEngine;
4
5 public class ClassName : MonoBehaviour
6 {
7
void Start(){
8
9
}
10
11
void Update (){
12
13
}
14 }
Every object in a Unity project includes a Transform component. This com-
ponent defines the object’s position, rotation, and scale along the X, Y, and
Z axes. Each of these values can be modified independently to adjust the ob-
ject’s appearance and placement within the scene. Figure 3.4 illustrates how a
Transform component is represented in Unity.
Figure 3.4: A Transform component of a Unity GameObject, viewed in the
Inspector panel.
These values can be accessed and modified through scripts, allowing real-time
alterations to objects. In C#, a public GameObject ObjectName variable can
be declared to reference a specific GameObject in the scene for manipulation
within the script.
==PAGE:30==
16
Background
For example, to shift an object’s position by 3 units along the X-axis and 1 unit
along the Z-axis, while rotating it 90° clockwise on the Y-axis, the code can be
implemented as shown in Listing 3.2.
Listing 3.2: Transform Manipulation Script
1 using System.Collections;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using UnityEngine;
4
5 public class ChangeTransform : MonoBehaviour
6 {
7
public GameObject testObj;
8
9
void Start(){
10
// Move the object by 3 on the x-axis
11
// and by 1 on the z-axis
12
testObj.transform.position = new Vector3(
13
testObj.transform.position.x + 3,
14
testObj.transform.position.y,
15
testObj.transform.position.z + 1
16
);
17
18
// Rotate the object by 09 degree on the y-axis
19
testObj.transform.rotation = Quaternion.Euler(
20
testObj.transform.Rotation.x,
21
testObj.transform.Rotation.y + 90,
22
testObj.transform.Rotation.z
23
);
24
}
25 }
3.2.3
Version Control System
When deciding on a Version Control System (VCS) for a Unity project, several
viable options exist [24], notably Plastic SCM, Perforce, and GitHub. Plastic
SCM and Perforce are particularly geared towards game development, offering
integrations specifically beneficial for game engines [25]. Plastic SCM is closely
integrated into the Unity engine, given Unity Technologies’ ownership of Plas-
tic SCM, therefore providing easy usability within Unity workflows. Perforce,
known for its robustness and scalability, can handle large files more efficiently,
a common requirement in larger game projects. Moreover, Perforce offers excel-
lent compatibility across various game engines, making it highly versatile and
widely adopted within the industry.
GitHub was ultimately selected for this project due to its ease of use, robust com-
mit functionalities, and greater accessibility, making the repository easily avail-
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Virtual Reality in Unity
17
able for others to clone and collaborate on the codebase. GitHub is user-friendly,
supports efficient branching strategies, and promotes collaborative workflows,
simplifying project management and contributions from multiple developers.
Regarding large file handling, Plastic SCM and Perforce have built-in opti-
mizations that cater specifically to managing large binary files commonly found
in game development.
GitHub, conversely, addresses large file management
through Git Large File Storage (Git LFS [26]), which efficiently tracks large
files separately from regular Git commits, thereby enhancing performance and
reducing repository size overhead. Large file management was not a significant
factor for this project. Most often, the large files in game engines come from
detailed 3D models with high poly-count. Since the program doesn’t have any
of these, most assets and files stored within the repository were relatively small
in size, therefore mitigating potential storage and performance concerns.
3.3
Virtual Reality in Unity
This section outlines the software packages and build configuration used for
developing and deploying VR applications in Unity, with a focus on the Meta
Quest 3S platform. It begins by describing the relevant VR packages and SDKs,
followed by an overview of the procedures and constraints involved in building
and testing the application on target hardware.
3.3.1
VR Packages
A variety of Unity packages are available to facilitate the development of VR
applications. The XR Interaction Toolkit provided by Unity [27] offers a gen-
eral framework for managing interactions within VR environments, supporting
fundamental capabilities such as locomotion, object manipulation, and user in-
terface interactions.
For projects specifically targeting the Meta Quest platform, the Meta SDK [28]
offers deeper integration and optimization for Meta’s hardware. The Meta Quest
Integration SDK provides a suite of features such as hand tracking, passthrough
support, controller button mapping, and direct access to Quest-specific APIs,
making it particularly well-suited for developing applications on the Quest plat-
form.
Consequently, this project adopts the Meta SDK due to its seamless
compatibility and extended feature set tailored for the Meta ecosystem.
==PAGE:32==
18
Background
In addition to platform-specific SDKs, Unity supports the OpenXR [29] stan-
dard through its dedicated plugin. OpenXR, developed by the Khronos Group,
provides a unified application programming interface (API) that enables cross-
platform VR development. This allows developers to target multiple VR hard-
ware systems with minimal code changes, improving portability and reducing
development overhead.
3.3.2
VR Headset Code Builds
Since the program was developed with the Meta Quest 3S in mind, Unity must
be configured to deploy the application to a Meta headset. Fortunately, loading
applications onto the Quest platform, referred to as building the program, is
a relatively straightforward process [30] since Unity comes with the necessary
packages for building out of the box. The Meta Quest 3S, along with other
Quest headsets, runs on an Android-based platform, meaning that building for
these devices is similar to deploying to any other Android-operated device.
To enable Meta’s VR features via the Meta SDK, OpenXR support should be
enabled in the project’s settings [31]. This allows access to the Meta API, which
is required for functionality such as headset tracking and controller tracking.
During development, building to a Quest headset each time a new feature needs
testing can be very time-consuming, as Unity must compile the entire project
for every build.
To mitigate this, Meta recommends using their proprietary
connection software, Quest Link, which connects the headset directly to the
Unity Editor, either via a USB cable or over-the-air through an internet con-
nection, allowing for in-editor testing. However, this was not a viable option
for this project, as Quest Link requires a newer NVIDIA graphics card, which
the development machine lacked. Consequently, all testing was conducted via
full builds to the headset. This approach proved beneficial, as it ensured that
new implementations functioned correctly in a built environment, and not just
within the Unity Editor.
3.4
Unity ProBuilder API
This section outlines how ProBuilder can be used to facilitate the development
of the 3D modeling tool. It goes over what ProBuilder can be used for and what
features it contains. It also highlights how ProBuilder can be used at runtime,
allowing for advanced mesh manipulation while the program is running.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Unity ProBuilder API
19
3.4.1
Object Manipulations in ProBuilder
ProBuilder is a plugin developed specifically for the Unity game engine, provid-
ing a set of basic 3D model manipulation tools directly within the Unity editor
[32].
The plugin offers simple tools for 3D mesh manipulation, such as face
extrusion, dragging of individual faces or vertices, loop-cutting, insetting, and
more. It is primarily used for rough level layout and design in 3D games devel-
oped in Unity, but can also serve as the foundation for a custom 3D modeling
tool.
ProBuilder was not the only tool considered for this project.
For instance,
the C++ library GEL [11] focuses on polygonal mesh data and supports 3D
mesh manipulation. Section 2.1.3 discusses the use of GEL as the foundation
for another modeling tool. ProBuilder was ultimately chosen for this project
because it integrates directly into the Unity engine and, thanks to its Runtime
API, provides access to most tools at runtime.
3.4.2
ProBuilder at Runtime
ProBuilder is not only a useful tool within the Unity Editor for 3D modeling,
but it also supports runtime functionality through its Runtime API [33]. This
feature enables developers to manipulate mesh data in the program itself, and
thus outside the Unity Editor. This opens up possibilities for a range of inter-
active applications. With the Runtime API, developers can access and modify
mesh components such as vertices, edges, and faces programmatically, allowing
for real-time construction, deformation, or destruction of 3D models in a live
environment.
The Runtime API supports operations such as mesh generation, face selection,
element translation, and geometry merging.
These capabilities are exposed
through functions such as ProBuilderMesh, Face, and Vertex, which can be
used to construct high-level modeling features. ProBuilder meshes can be up-
dated and rebuilt dynamically during runtime ensuring that changes made to
the mesh are instantly reflected in the scene.
ProBuilder’s tight integration with Unity and ease of use make it a solid choice
for projects that require real-time mesh editing. In this project, the Runtime
API served as the basis for building an interactive mesh manipulation system
within Unity, enabling operations such as extrusion, vertex dragging, and face
merging to be executed seamlessly at runtime.
==PAGE:34==
20
Background
Combining ProBuilder’s mesh modeling tools with VR can greatly enhance the
user experience of 3D modeling [34]. Traditional 3D modeling tools rely on in-
teracting with models through a 2D screen, which can make spatial reasoning
and depth perception more difficult. In contrast, VR allows users to view and
manipulate models in a fully three-dimensional context as they are being cre-
ated. This direct spatial interaction facilitates a more intuitive understanding
of shape, scale, and proportion, and can lead to faster and more accurate model-
ing. When paired with ProBuilder’s Runtime API, this immersive environment
enables real-time feedback and direct manipulation of geometry, supporting a
more interactive and intuitive modeling process.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Design
This chapter will highlight the goals that were set out before the development
of the program began, and how they helped steer the program forward. The
chapter will also go over some of the more important design decisions for how
the 3D modeling should be handled in a VR environment, and how the controls
for the program should function.
4.1
Objectives
To determine whether the program would be a success or not, a set of design
requirements was set early in the development, which would make sure the
program was being developed properly and with the desired features in mind.
Since the program heavily relies on the principle of being intuitive and easy
for most users to use, it was vital that these concepts were at the core of the
program.
This included both the right 3D modeling tools, well-thought-out
constraints, and that the program was simple to operate by a user. Below is a
list of the original goals:
• Intuitive and easy-to-understand mesh signifiers: It was impor-
tant that is was clear what action the chosen mesh signifiers conveyed.
==PAGE:36==
22
Design
Since this would be the main interaction method for the user, they should
instantly identify what operation a signifier refers to.
• Descriptive and simple controls: The user should instantly be able
to decipher what the buttons on their VR controllers are capable of. This
should be done with clear icons on the controllers to convey their features.
• Useful mesh manipulation tools: The chosen available tools for mesh
manipulation should be obvious, and how they modify the mesh should
be clear for the user.
• Design tools where the user can do more with less: Only a very
small set of tools should be implemented to the program, both to keep the
amount of signifiers low, but also to constraint the user to a small pallet
of tools. The few developed tools should therefore be able to as many
actions as possible.
• Steady tracking to avoid jitter and subsequently motion-sickness:
To prevent motion sickness, and keep the experience fluid for the user, the
digital objects should stay in place while wearing the headset.
• Well-Optimized code, to prevent a lack in performance: To allow
for as large models as possible, well optimized code would be important.
Since all parts of the meshes would require signifiers on them, an opti-
mized way to represent these signifiers would result in a more performant
program.
Along with the goals mentioned above, a few extra features were thought of
later in development that proved rather useful to the overall experience of the
program. These were not necessarily a need-to-have for making the program
function, but certainly nice-to-have. The list below goes over these nice-to-have
features and why they were implemented.
• Saving and Copying of models: Saving and copying models was not
one of the initial goals set to deem the program satisfactory, but it proved
to be a very good feature for the project. This allows the user to have
peace of mind when manipulating a model, knowing that at any time they
can save their progress and make a copy to experiment on before applying
their changes to the final model.
• Undo and Redo operations: This turned out to be a bigger plus to
have than expected. Adding a way to undo or redo changes made to the
model made it much easier to experiment with the tools available, knowing
that at any time, if a mistake was made, it could be undone.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Affordances & Signifiers
23
• Delete Unwanted Models: This simple implementation made it easier
to keep the VR environment tidy when using the program, ensuring a way
for the user to discard unwanted models so they wouldn’t linger in the
scene.
• Merge and Snap: To allow for more diverse models, some slightly more
complex modeling tools were developed. These are snapping, allowing for
better alignment of part of a model, and merging of faces, allowing for the
combination of two faces into one.
4.2
Affordances & Signifiers
Intuitive affordances and signifiers are at the foundation of this project. The
signifiers, and what they afford are what guides the user towards understanding
the various features the program offers. An introduction to where these terms
originated from was discussed in section 2.1.3.
Affordances refer to how an object can be used. For instance a door affords
opening, and a stove affords heating up pots and pans. Signifiers on the other
hand are visual cues that guide the user on how to operate an object.
For
instance a door handle signifies that you can grab the handle to open the door,
or a knob on the stove signifies that it can be turned to turn on the stove.
Figure 4.1: Illustration on how Affordances and Signifiers can be used [35].
==PAGE:38==
24
Design
These concepts can be used to great effect in a VR modeling system in order to
move away from traditional menu-based controls and instead intuitively show
possible operations directly on the 3D models the user is making. This can
make it easier for novices in 3D modeling to get a better understanding of 3D
modeling terms and operations.
4.2.1
Chosen Signifiers
Since the program relied on the use of intuitive signifiers for model manipulation,
careful consideration went into defining distinct signifiers for each operation.
When designing a signifier for a specific task, multiple prototypes were developed
and evaluated through informal user testing, where participants were asked to
select the signifier that best communicated the intended interaction. The chosen
signifiers can be seen in figure 4.2.
Face handle signifier (a): The first signifier implemented was the face handle,
designed to indicate that individual mesh faces could be grabbed and manip-
ulated. A handle-like shape was chosen due to its resemblance to the handles
found on drawers, which is a signifier for pulling or pushing the drawer, thereby
implying the possibility of pulling or pushing the face and extruding it out.
Vertex point signifier (b): A simple red sphere was placed at the center of
each vertex, like a knob, which shows that they could be grabbed and moved
around. This made it easy for users to see which points they could grab when
adjusting the shape of a mesh.
Selection of multiple vertices signifier (c): A small sphere with a plus
symbol was positioned near each vertex to represent grouping functionality.
When activated or selected, each vertex associated with its multi-selector could
be moved together as a group, aiding in symmetrical and structural edits.
Selection of multiple faces signifier (d): To support collective manipulation
of faces, a small square with a plus symbol was placed next to each face handle.
When two or more faces were selected together via these signifiers, dragging one
handle would result in the simultaneous extrusion or transformation of all other
multi-selected faces. The square with a plus symbol gives a similar feeling to
the sphere with a plus, tying the two signifiers together.
Loop-cut signifier (e): A cylindrical icon, resembling an edge with a cut
through its middle and encircled by a ring, was chosen to denote the loop-
cut functionality. This visual metaphor aims to clearly suggest the division of
geometry along a continuous edge loop.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 3D Modeling Features
25
Figure 4.2: All the signifiers placed on the model.
These signifiers, as seen in Figure 4.2, were designed to be both functional
and immediately identifiable, leveraging real-world analogies where possible.
Through their consistent visual language, they enhanced the discoverability and
intuitiveness of the modeling interface, in line with principles outlined by Don
Norman and further demonstrated in the signifier-based modeling systems from
Section 2.1.3. A key distinction lies in the approach to multi-selection: whereas
the signifier-based system from Section 2.1.3 restricts locking to adjacent faces
through edge latches, the present implementation supports flexible grouping by
allowing any combination of vertices or faces to be selected together, regard-
less of adjacency. This offers users a more versatile and expressive modeling
workflow.
In addition to the signifiers integrated into the model to indicate available oper-
ations, several signifiers were placed on the VR controllers to provide visual cues
regarding button functionality. These included forward- and backward-pointing
arrows to denote the buttons assigned to undo and redo actions, respectively.
Furthermore, a grouped signifier combining the multi-selectors and loop-cut
symbols was added to indicate which button should be used to interact with
those selection-based operations (Explained in section 4.4).
4.3
3D Modeling Features
In the early stages of developing the 3D modeling program, it was important
to carefully consider which modeling operations to include. While ProBuilder
offers many standard tools for mesh manipulation, not all of them could be
implemented directly. Since each operation needed to be represented by a visual
signifier on the mesh, adding too many would quickly lead to visual clutter and
confusion. Instead, the focus when deciding on operations was to be able to do
more with less.
Typical operations found in traditional 3D modeling software include extru-
sion, vertex/edge/face dragging, loop cuts, bevels, insets, and subdivision. Im-
plementing all of these would have made the program unnecessarily complex,
defeating the purpose of creating a simple and intuitive modeling workflow.
==PAGE:40==
26
Design
Fortunately, many of these operations can be recreated by combining simpler,
more essential ones. Extrusion, vertex dragging, and loop cuts were identified as
core tools and implemented directly. Other operations could be mimicked using
combinations of these. For example, bevels can be approximated by making
loop cuts and then adjusting the position of the new vertices. Subdivision can
be performed in a similar way. Insets can be simulated by performing a small
extrusion and pulling the new vertices inward toward the face center.
Face
dragging could theoretically be done by selecting the four vertices that make up
a face and moving them together, but since the extrusion handle signifier already
existed, it was decided to assign one controller to extrusion (right controller)
and the other to dragging (left controller). Edge dragging is similarly possible
by selecting two neighboring vertices and moving them together (Figure 4.3).
Figure 4.3: Implemented operations and their signifiers.
The 80-20 rule, often applied in complex software like Photoshop, Blender, and
Unity, suggests that 20% of features are used 80% of the time. This principle
was considered during development.
Only the most essential and frequently
used modeling features were chosen for implementation to keep the program
focused and efficient.
The modeling features chosen for the program were selected not just for their
utility but also for how they could be visualized through signifiers. Since every
interaction had to be discoverable through visual cues on the mesh itself, opera-
tions that could be intuitively represented were mostly considered. This ensured
that users could understand and access the available functionality without re-
lying on external menus or complex instructions, reinforcing the signifier-based
design philosophy at the core of the tool.
Another common feature in 3D modeling is Boolean operations, where two in-
tersecting meshes are combined or subtracted from one another. Supporting
interactions between multiple meshes was, however, not a priority for this pro-
==PAGE:41==
4.3 3D Modeling Features
27
gram, as this program focuses on modeling on a single mesh at a time, to keep it
simple for users. Only letting the user manipulate one mesh at a time, removes
the complexities that come with operation on multiple meshes at the same time.
Boolean operations were therfore intentionally left out (Figure 4.4).
Figure 4.4: Different Boolean operations on two meshes [36].
In addition to the core modeling operations, two more advanced features were
added for expert users: face merging and face snapping. When two faces are ex-
truded or dragged close enough together and their vertex positions align within
a small threshold, the faces will merge into a continuous surface if the user
presses a merge button. If one controller is held near a face, effectively selecting
it as a reference, and another face is dragged or extruded close to a plane that
intersects the first face’s vertices, the moving face will snap into alignment with
that plane. These features support precision modeling while remaining unob-
trusive to the simpler features, allowing novice users to ignore them and expert
users to take advantage of them when needed (Figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5: Advanced snapping and merging operation.
==PAGE:42==
28
Design
4.4
Controls
When it comes to navigating and interacting within a VR program, there are
generally three primary ways in which input can be registered: traditional game
controllers (such as SONY PlayStation or Microsoft Xbox controllers), dedicated
VR controllers (one for each hand), and controller-free hand-tracking based on
gesture recognition. While hand-tracking is an emerging technology with great
potential, it currently lacks the precision and stability required for complex
operations in a 3D modeling program. VR-dedicated controllers typically come
with a preset of programmable buttons, which can be assigned different actions
for the program. Examples of these controller forms can be seen in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: The three typical forms of controllers for VR development.
In the early stages of the design process for this project, it was decided that
dedicated VR controllers would be the chosen input system. This decision was
based on several advantages that VR controllers provide over the alternatives.
Compared to traditional game controllers, VR controllers offer a significantly
higher degree of spatial freedom and intuitiveness, enabling users to interact
more naturally with 3D content.
Moreover, they support more precise ma-
nipulation, making operations such as selecting and activating signifiers, and
manipulating the model itself, more accurate than what can be achieved with
hand gestures.
The availability of physical buttons on VR controllers adds a further layer of
interaction possibilities. These buttons were utilized to support operations such
as undo/redo, face merging, and activation of specific modeling features, pro-
viding a richer and more efficient user experience. With hand gestures, these
features couldn’t be implemented in the same way.
Two different controller input systems were tested during development. In the
first, a set of virtual hands was visualized in place of the controllers, with inter-
actions relying solely on the index and middle finger triggers on the controllers.
When performing operations such as grabbing a handle or selecting multiple
vertices, the hand models would change to reflect that action. So when the user
tried to grab the handle, the hand model would change to a grabbing position,
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Controls
29
and when selecting icons such as the multi-select vertex, it would change to a
pointing finger. In the second version, the physical controllers were fully visible
in the VR environment, allowing the user to interact with all accessible buttons
on the device. The process of deciding which input system was best can be read
in more detail in Section 6.2. Ultimately, the latter approach was chosen due
to its expanded interaction surface and clearer affordances and signifiers, which
aligned well with the signifier-based design principles of the system.
To make the controllers more intuitive and add a layer of discoverability to the
VR interface, visual icons were added to the buttons on each controller. These
icons act as signifiers that tell the user what each button does without the need
for text-based labels or instructions.
Figure 4.7: The different icons placed on the controllers, to signify their fea-
tures.
On the right-hand controller, two buttons were assigned to undo (a) and redo (b)
operations, allowing users to revert or reapply previous actions in the modeling
workflow. These buttons were marked with arrow icons: one pointing backward
to indicate “undo” and one pointing forward to indicate “redo.”
The left-hand controller features additional functionality related to selection.
One button was assigned to select either loop cuts or the two multi-selection
locks (c). This button was labeled with an icon that is a combination of the
three signifiers used in the system for loop cuts and multi-selection. Another
button on the left controller was dedicated to face merging (d). For this, an
icon depicting two sides being moved together was used.
Together, these button icons serve to bridge the gap between physical controller
inputs and virtual functionality, reinforcing the program’s goal of maintaining
a direct and intuitive user interface throughout the VR experience. The various
icons can be seen in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:44==
30
Design
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Implementation
This chapter will highlight the implementation approaches taken in the devel-
opment of the VR Modeling Program. First, it will cover the hardware and
software decisions made and what the tools helped achieve. Then, it will cover
all the mesh manipulation features and how they were designed. Lastly, it will
cover how the connection between button input and mesh manipulation was
handled.
5.1
Software and Hardware Decisions
In the development of the VR-based 3D modeling program, a select set of soft-
ware tools and hardware components were used to enable the design, imple-
mentation, and testing of all features within a virtual reality environment. This
section outlines and justifies the specific software packages and hardware plat-
form chosen, and explains how they were integrated into the implementation
workflow.
==PAGE:46==
32
Implementation
5.1.1
Hardware Platform: Meta Quest 3S
All VR-based interactions and user testing were carried out using the Meta
Quest 3S headset. The Quest 3S is a standalone virtual reality headset with
built-in tracking capabilities and dedicated VR controllers. The Quest 3S is a
relatively cheap and readily available headset, making it easier to come by than
other, more expensive options on the market. This made it an ideal candidate
for the development of a self-contained modeling environment, where external
sensors or high-end PCs were not a requirement for the core experience. The
ability to deploy builds directly to the headset accelerated the development,
enabling fast integration and quick testing of user interactions.
The device supports high-resolution displays and a stable 6DoF (six degrees
of freedom) tracking system, which was essential for both steady controller-
based tracking and spatial awareness within the confines of the room the user is
in. The built-in hand controllers provides multiple buttons and analog inputs,
which allowed a range of functionalities, including selection and dragging of
parts of the model, loop-cut activation, and undo/redo—to be mapped directly
to physical inputs. These physical buttons were later supplemented with visual
icons (see Section 4.4) to increase user affordance. Lastly, the Quest 3S has full-
color pass-through, which allows the user to see their real-world environment in
color while wearing the headset. This lets the user see everything around them
while using the program and thus removes the fear of bumping into things while
wearing the headset.
5.1.2
Game Engine: Unity 6000
Unity was chosen as the primary development platform for the implementation
of the program. Specifically, version 6000 of the engine was used, as it provided
long-term support and maintained compatibility with the newest Meta SDKs.
Unity is widely used for VR development due to its cross-platform capabilities,
active community, and robust support for both prototyping and production-level
deployment, making development and debugging of features easy.
Unity’s component-based architecture allowed for a modular design approach,
where different features of the modeling program, such as signifier logic, mesh
editing operations, and controller interaction, could be implemented in separate
scripts while still interacting through shared references and events. The flexibil-
ity of Unity’s runtime scripting made it possible to build and modify 3D meshes
on the fly, which is an important aspect of the modeling workflow.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Software and Hardware Decisions
33
Since Unity has a built-in Android building API, deploying versions of the pro-
gram to the headset was made easy.
Meta does provide a piece of software
called Oculus Link [37], which allows for testing VR programs in-editor, but
this requires a powerful dedicated graphics card, which the development ma-
chine lacked. Building to the headset turned out to be quick enough and thus
provided fast feedback cycles during development.
5.1.3
3D Modeling Toolkit: ProBuilder 6
ProBuilder version 6 was used as the foundation for all mesh manipulation
operations within the program. ProBuilder is a mesh editing package developed
specifically for the Unity engine. While typically used for gray boxing and level
design, it provides a powerful and feature-rich API that can enable runtime
manipulation of mesh elements such as faces, vertices, and edges.
This functionality within ProBuilder was essential for implementing core mod-
eling operations such as:
• Face extrusion along individual normals.
• Face and vertex dragging.
• Face and vertex merging when geometries intersect.
• Loop-cutting through selected geometry.
• Vertex snapping based on user-defined planes.
Because ProBuilder stores mesh data in a structured format accessible at run-
time, it allowed direct access to geometric elements and topological relationships
(e.g., shared vertices, quad faces, or edges), which was key in implementing the
various features that can be read in more detail in Section 5.2.
5.1.4
VR SDK: Unity Meta SDK
To enable direct deployment and hardware interaction with the Meta Quest
3S, the Unity Meta SDK package was incorporated into the project. This SDK
provides a high-level abstraction over the Quest’s hardware features and includes
support for features such as passthrough camera feed, head tracking and VR
camera, controller tracking, and button mapping.
==PAGE:48==
34
Implementation
The SDK was primarily used to:
• Detect and process controller inputs. (button presses and trigger presses)
• Retrieve 3D positional data of the headset and controllers.
• Manage application lifecycle and system permissions on the headset.
5.1.5
Version Control: GitHub
Version control for the development of the program was managed using GitHub.
The use of GitHub enabled a stable backup of all project stages and provided
the flexibility to experiment with new features (e.g., extrusion rulers, snapping
logic, and loop cut implementation) without jeopardizing the integrity of the
main build. If some feature broke in the process of developing new features,
easy roll-back was available.
GitHub allowed remote syncing and backup of the project files, including Unity
scene files, C# scripts, and custom ProBuilder assets. Through proper use of Git
commits, the development process maintained both structure and adaptability,
with regular merge points used to incorporate fully tested features into the main
version of the program.
5.2
Modeling Implementations
With all software environments set up and ready for development, the process of
implementing mesh manipulation features could begin. The various manipula-
tion tools provided in the program were built using a modular approach, where
each feature could be developed in isolation and added one after the other. The
different tools developed will, in this section, be described in detail.
5.2.1
Extrusion
The first feature that was developed for the modeling tool was the extrusion
system. This operation was not only important due to its central role in 3D
modeling, but it also served as a technical proof of concept, demonstrating that
Unity’s ProBuilder could be used to create runtime-editable geometry within the
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Modeling Implementations
35
VR environment. Ensuring that ProBuilder’s mesh manipulation APIs could
be invoked dynamically at runtime was important for validating the broader
feasibility of the toolset.
In traditional modeling tools, an extrusion is often invoked and then adjusted
by dragging the new geometry outwards dynamically. However, in ProBuilder,
an extrusion is created immediately by a predefined value.
For instance, if
an extrusion of 1 meter was desired, you would input 1 into a text box, and
ProBuilder would instantly extrude by 1 meter. The extrusion feature in the
program should mimic the more natural interactive approach for extrusion from
other modeling software, while still utilizing ProBuilder’s Extrusion API call. To
achieve the desired interactive effect, the system works around this limitation by
first performing a minimal extrusion and then procedurally dragging the newly
extruded faces outward in real time, depending on how far out the controller is
moved. All functionality for performing extrusions is handled in the program’s
script ExtrudeFeature.cs.
When the right index trigger is pressed down and the closest signifier is identi-
fied as a handle, the extrusion is initiated through the method CallExtrusion().
This function first identifies the face closest to the right controller and checks for
any additional multi-selected faces to include in the extrusion (as described fur-
ther in Section 5.2.3). All identified faces are then extruded very slightly, by just
0.001 units (about 1 mm), using ProBuilder’s Extrude method in FaceNormal
mode. Before this, the state of the mesh is saved to an undo stack. This tiny ini-
tial extrusion creates new geometry that can then be manipulated incrementally.
Pseudo-code for the initial extrusion can be seen in Listing 5.1.
Listing 5.1: ExtrudeFeature: CallExtrusion()
1 function CallExtrusion ():
2
3
closestFace = getClosestFace ()
4
multiSelectedFaces = getMultiSelectedFaces ()
5
facesToExtrude = closestFace + multiSelectedFaces
6
7
saveMeshStateToUndoStack ()
8
9
performExtrusion(facesToExtrude , distance = 0.001)
10
edges = storeSidewallEdges ()
11
12
StartDraggingFace ()
To enable the user to extrude however far out they want, the script transitions
to the dragging phase via StartDraggingFace(). This function stores necessary
initial values, such as the world-space position of each vertex involved in the ex-
trusion, as well as the controller’s position at the start of the drag. It constructs
==PAGE:50==
36
Implementation
a union of vertex indices from the primary face and any additional selected faces,
including all other vertices in the mesh that share the same world position. This
ensures that vertices shared across adjacent faces move cohesively. Pseudo-code
for the dragging setup can be seen in Listing 5.2.
Listing 5.2: ExtrudeFeature: StartDraggingFace()
1 function StartDraggingFace ():
2
3
initControllerPos = initialControllerPosition ()
4
vertexIndices = getAllVerticesFromExtrudedFaces ()
5
6
for each vertex in vertexIndices:
7
recordWorldPosition(vertex)
8
9
isDragging = true
With the setup stages complete, the script enters a continuous update loop phase
where the method DragFace() is called every frame while dragging the faces.
Here, the position of the controller is tracked and its delta movement is projected
along the normal vector of the extruded face. This projection ensures that the
extrusion is constrained to occur only along the face’s normal vector direction,
since extrusions only run along the normal. Pseudo-code for the dragging can
be seen in Listing 5.3.
As part of the extrusion drag, the system includes support for snapping the
dragged geometry to nearby surfaces. If the left controller is close to another
face and their normals are sufficiently aligned, the extrusion can snap to the
target face’s plane. The implementation of this snapping behavior is discussed
in detail in Section 5.2.5.
As the face is dragged outward, the system visualizes the current extrusion
distance using a ruler mechanism. Sidewall edges generated by the extrusion
were stored right after the initial extrusion, and tick marks are instantiated at
regular intervals (every centimeter) on the edges. This visual feedback gives
users a sense of precision and control over their modeling actions, similar to
measurement tools in professional modeling software.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Modeling Implementations
37
Listing 5.3: ExtrudeFeature: DragFace()
1 function DragFace ():
2
3
controllerDelta = currentControllerPos - initControllerPos
4
faceNormal = getFaceNormal(facesToExtrude [0..n])
5
movement = project(controllerDelta onto faceNormal)
6
7
if shouldSnapToLeftControllerPlane ():
8
movement = applySnappingCorrection(movement)
9
10
for each vertex:
11
updatePosition(vertex , initialPosition + movement)
12
13
refreshMeshVisuals ()
14
15
updateRulerTicks(edges)
When the user releases the controller trigger, the StopDraggingFace() method
is invoked. If the total dragged distance is below a defined threshold (0.01 units),
the extrusion is considered negligible and automatically reverted using the cus-
tom undo system (Section 5.3.3). Otherwise, the drag operation is finalized and
internal variables are reset in preparation for future extrusions.
This staged and modular approach to extrusion enables a more fluid modeling
experience while working within the constraints of the ProBuilder API. The de-
sign sets the foundation for other transformation features in the system, many of
which reuse core patterns established in this implementation, such as controller-
constrained movement, dynamic controller-based dragging, and live update of
geometry.
5.2.2
Dragging
In addition to extrusion, the modeling tool allows users to drag individual ver-
tices and faces. These operations allow for greater control and detail work in the
3D modeling program. Much like the extrusion implementation (Section 5.2.1),
both face and vertex dragging follow a staged workflow: an initialization step
triggered by controller input, a continuous update loop for real-time transfor-
mation, and a final step to clean up when the user releases the controller.
Face Dragging:
The face dragging feature allows the user to select a face
and move it either along its normal vector or freely around in space, optionally
constrained by snapping to planes of nearby surfaces (Section 5.2.5). The pro-
cess begins when the left index trigger is pressed near a handle signifier. The
==PAGE:52==
38
Implementation
method StartDraggingFace() in the DragFace.cs script identifies the closest
face to the controller, collects all relevant vertex indices (including those from
multi-selected faces), and stores their world-space positions.
The initial step is similar to the setup logic used for extrusion dragging, such
as identifying vertices that share the same world-space position across different
faces and recording the initial state. Additionally, it visualizes the line that
the face normal cuts through using a LineRenderer to help guide directional
movement along the face normal.
Listing 5.4: DragFace: StartDraggingFace()
1 function StartDraggingFace ():
2
3
closestFace = getClosestFace ()
4
multiSelectedFaces = getMultiSelectedFaces ()
5
facesToDrag = closestFace + multiSelectedFaces
6
7
saveMeshStateToUndoStack ()
8
selectedVertices = getVerticesFrom(facesToDrag)
9
10
for each selectedVertices:
11
storeWorldPosition(vertex)
12
13
drawNormalLine(closestFace)
14
15
isDragging = true
While dragging, the controller’s movement is projected onto the selected face’s
normal vector.
If the deviation from the normal vector is small while dragging the face, move-
ment is constrained along that axis; otherwise, free 3D movement is allowed.
The method DragFaceUpdater() computes the new vertex positions every frame
and applies them to the mesh. It also checks for optional snapping to nearby
face planes, following the same angle-based tolerance mechanism as extrusion.
Whether the face should snap to the normal vector or not is calculated by, every
frame, finding the angle between the initial normal vector of the face and the
current position of the controller. If this angle is below a predetermined angle
of 5◦, movement logic similar to that of the extrusion mechanism is applied,
where movement is locked to the normal vector. The program then switches to
free dragging if that angle becomes greater than the 5◦threshold.
After the code calculates how the movement should apply, the vertices of the
face are moved to the correct position, and the visuals of the mesh are updated
to reflect the changes.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Modeling Implementations
39
Listing 5.5: DragFace: DragFaceUpdater()
1 function DragFaceUpdater ():
2
controllerDelta = currentControllerPos - initControllerPos
3
4
faceNormal = getFaceNormal(facesToDrag [0..n])
5
6
constrained = project(controllerDelta onto faceNormal)
7
8
if deviation from normal < threshold:
9
movement = constrained
10
else:
11
movement = controllerDelta
12
13
if nearSnappingPlane ():
14
movement = snapToPlane(movement)
15
16
for each vertex:
17
moveVertexTo(initialPos + movement)
18
19
refreshMeshVisuals ()
Once the user releases the left index trigger, the code resets the drag state via
StopDraggingFace() and clears all temporary data, again similar to the logic
of the extrusion feature. It also disables the LineRenderer that was used to
visualize the normal vector.
Vertex Dragging: The logic for dragging vertices works similarly to that of
face dragging, but focuses on individual vertex control. When the user presses
the trigger near a vertex sphere signifier, StartDraggingVertex() in the script
DragVertex.cs is called. This function finds the nearest vertex to the controller,
identifies all shared vertices (via ProBuilder’s sharedVertices mapping), and
collects multi-selected vertices.
All selected vertex indices are stored alongside their world positions. As with
face dragging, movement is calculated every frame in DragVertexMove() by ap-
plying the controller delta to each vertex.
Unlike face dragging, there is no
direction constraint; vertices are aalways moved freely in 3D space based on the
controller motion.
When the trigger is released, StopDraggingVertex() is then called to reset the
values and prepare for new operations.
==PAGE:54==
40
Implementation
5.2.3
Persistent Multi-Selection
Multi-selection is a feature implemented for both vertex and face manipula-
tion, enabling the user to select multiple elements simultaneously and apply
transformations—such as dragging or extrusion—to all selected components in
a unified manner. When a transformation is applied to one selected signifier,
the movement is mirrored across the entire selection set.
A key characteristic of the multi-selection system is its persistence. Selections
remain active even after other operations are performed, allowing users to re-
turn to and reuse previous selections without re-selecting the components. For
example, a user might toggle several vertices to make a multi-vertex selection
and then extrude a face as a separate operation.
Despite this interruption,
the previously selected vertices remain locked together and can subsequently
be moved as a group. This contrasts with traditional 3D modeling workflows,
where switching operations will typically clear the current selection state.
Vertex and face multi-selections work independently of each other and allow
the user to have simultaneous selection across both element types. This paral-
lel selection structure helps with flexibility in their workflow while preventing
unintended interference between vertex-based and face-based manipulations.
Persistent Vertex Multi-Selection: When a vertex selector is toggled on,
its visual model is updated to indicate the locked state, signaling that the cor-
responding vertex has been selected for persistent multi-selection. Internally,
this action updates a list of active locked vertex indices to reflect the current
selection state. When the user makes a vertex dragging operation, it is this
list that the dragging logic, described in Section 5.2.2, refers to. If the selector
is toggled off, the associated vertex is removed from the list, thus excluding it
from future collective transformations.
Persistent Face Multi-Selection: Face locks operate in a similar manner to
vertices. Each time a face lock is toggled, a corresponding list of actively selected
faces is updated. This list is referenced during both dragging and extrusion
operations to determine which faces should be included in the transformation.
It serves as the basis for multi-face operations and allows for manipulation of
grouped faces.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Modeling Implementations
41
5.2.4
Loop-Cuts
While ProBuilder does support loop cuts in the Unity Editor (typically triggered
via the Alt+U shortcut), it does not expose a public API for performing this
operation at runtime. This limitation was a significant challenge during imple-
mentation, as loop-cuts are a very versatile and useful modeling feature. They
allow users to introduce edge loops across a mesh, enabling more control over
mesh topology and can be used to perform multiple operations in 3D modeling,
such as beveling and subdivision.
To work around this, a custom runtime interaction system was developed. In
this system, users can activate a loop-cut by selecting a signifier in the VR
environment called LoopCutMarker. Each of these signifiers is associated with
a unique edge on the mesh. When a user selects one, the edge is passed into
the LoopCuts.cs script, which acts as a wrapper around an internal ProBuilder
method that can calculate edge rings around the mesh.
Although ProBuilder lacks a direct public method for generating edge loop-cuts,
it privately contains a method called ElementSelection.GetEdgeRing(), which,
when given a single seed edge, returns a list of connected edges forming a loop
around the mesh. Since this methods call is private, it could not directly be
access at runtime. Listing 5.6 shows how the method was accessed at runtime.
Listing 5.6: LoopCuts: s GetEdgeRing
1 static readonly MethodInfo s_GetEdgeRing = typeof(ElementSelection)
2
.GetMethod("GetEdgeRing",
3
BindingFlags.NonPublic | BindingFlags.Static ,
4
null ,
5
new Type[] { typeof(ProBuilderMesh), typeof(IEnumerable <
Edge >) },
6
null);
How the code in listing 5.6 works:
• 1: “static readonly MethodInfo s GetEdgeRing” Stores the resulting
MethodInfo in a static readonly field at startup, so subsequent calls can
invoke the hidden API quickly without repeated lookups
• 2: “typeof(ElementSelection)” Obtains the Type object for ProBuilder’s
internal ElementSelection class, so the program can reflect over its mem-
bers.
• 3: “.GetMethod( "GetEdgeRing", ...” Specifies that the program takes
the NonPublic and static method named “GetEdgeRing”.
==PAGE:56==
42
Implementation
• 4: “typeof(ProBuilderMesh), typeof(IEnumerable <Edge>)” Supplies
the exact parameter types needed, first the ProBuilder mesh, then the list
of edges looping around the mesh.
Once the edge ring is calculated, the following steps are executed in the Selec-
tionManager script to facilitate the loop-cutting:
• First, the current state of the mesh is saved for undo purposes later.
• The full ring of edges is passed to ProBuilder’s Connect() method, which
cuts a new edge between all edge pairs now found in the edge loop.
• The mesh is updated to reflect the new cuts.
• Visuals, including edge signifiers, are rebuilt to match the modified topol-
ogy, namely adding vertex markers, and loop-cut markers to the newly
created edges/vertices.
Listing 5.7: SelectionManager: Loopcut
1 on LoopCutMarker selected:
2
seedEdge = getEdgeFromSignifier(selectedMarker)
3
ringEdges = GetRing(Mesh , seedEdge)
4
5
saveMeshStateForUndo(Mesh)
6
7
Mesh.Connect(ringEdges)
8
9
refreshMeshVisuals ()
10
rebuildEdgeSignifiers ()
By combining the internal edge ring computation with the Connect() method,
which joins each pair of opposing edges by cutting through their centers, the
effect of a loop cut is recreated at runtime. This approach not only bypasses the
lack of direct support but also integrates cleanly with the existing mesh update
and undo systems already developed for the tool.
The result is a simple and performant loop-cut system available entirely at
runtime, and one that mirrors the behavior of loop cuts in normal desktop
modeling programs.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Modeling Implementations
43
5.2.5
Merging and Snapping
Merging:
One of the more expert-oriented features included in the program is face merg-
ing. This feature ensures that if two faces are dragged or extruded in such a way
that their vertices are sufficiently close to each other, they are merged together.
This allows for more advanced modeling options and is particularly useful if
geometry with holes is desired.
The merging process is initiated through the MergeCloseFaces() method in
the MergeFaces.cs script. This method is called whenever the user clicks the
associated button on their left controller. It checks all possible face pairs on the
currently selected mesh and determines whether any two faces are close enough
to be merged.
Vertex Proximity Check: The logic for deciding if two faces can be merged
resides in the method FacesCanBeMerged(Face a, Face b). This method com-
pares the world positions of the vertices from both faces. The algorithm proceeds
as follows:
• It first checks if both faces have the same number of distinct vertices (in
this implementation, it assumes merging is only valid between quads).
• Then, for each vertex on face a, it checks whether there exists at least one
vertex on face b within a fixed distance threshold (defined by vertexMer-
geThreshold, which is set to 0.01 units).
• If all vertices from face a can be matched to close vertices on face b, the
faces are considered mergeable.
By using this proximity-based approach with a preset threshold, it avoids requir-
ing precise overlap between vertices, allowing for some user imprecision during
the merging process.
Merging Execution: When the code finds two faces that satisfy the merge
criteria, the merging process is triggered. The merging process welds the vertices
of the merging faces together and cleans up overlapping faces. More precisely,
the algorithm for the merging works as follows:
• First, the current mesh state is stored using the UndoTracker (before any
changes are applied to the mesh), allowing the operation to be undone
later if needed.
==PAGE:58==
44
Implementation
• All signifier elements are cleared by calling methods from HandleUpdater,
VertexVisualizer, and EdgeVisualizer.
• ProBuilder’s VertexEditing.WeldVertices() method is used to weld all
distinct vertices from both faces into single shared vertices, eliminating
duplicates and collapsing overlapping geometry.
• The original face objects a and b are explicitly removed from the face list,
as the welded geometry no longer depends on them. This is to prevent
the faces from lingering inside the mesh after merging.
• After the modification, ToMesh() and Refresh() are called to apply the
changes and update the visual representation of the mesh.
• Lastly, all signifiers are regenerated to reflect the updated mesh.
To reduce computational overhead, the merge operation only checks each face
pair once (by using nested for loops where j > i) and works directly with face
indices. Despite the brute-force nature of the pairwise check, the typical face
count in this tool is low enough for the operation to remain responsive while
running on the headset.
Snapping:
Another, more subtle but very useful feature added to the program is the ability
to snap a face to a plane aligning with another face during dragging or extrusion.
This feature improves modeling precision by allowing the user to align geometry
with other mesh surfaces in a more natural and intuitive way.
The snapping system is designed to be used with two VR controllers. While
the user drags or extrudes a face with one controller, they can hold the other
controller close to a different face on the mesh. If the currently manipulated
face moves near a virtual plane defined by the other nearby face, the program
automatically snaps the dragged or extruded geometry onto this plane. This
allows for simple alignment between surfaces, enabling more controlled modeling
without the need for explicit input or manual positioning.
The algorithm operates as follows:
• The system first determines whether the off-hand controller (the one not
dragging or extruding) is positioned close enough to any face on the mesh,
which is not the extruded/dragged face. If so, that face is used to define
a candidate snapping plane.
• A mathematical plane is constructed using the detected face’s center point
and its normal vector. These values are computed in the GetFaceCenter()
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Modeling Implementations
45
and Math.Normal() functions and are transformed into world space using
the mesh’s transform matrix.
• To avoid snapping to arbitrary or too misaligned surfaces, the angle be-
tween the normal vector of the dragged/extruded face and the candidate
snapping plane’s normal is calculated.
If this angle is smaller than a
threshold value (defined by the variable angledSnapTolerance, set to 20◦),
the system proceeds to evaluate proximity.
• The algorithm computes how far the moved face center is from the snap-
ping plane. If the distance is below a small snapping threshold (set to 0.01
units, or 1 cm), a corrective translation is computed and applied along the
face’s normal direction to align the face with the plane.
This process is applied in both the extrusion and face-dragging code, with code
snippets residing inside the DragFaceUpdater() and DragFace() methods of
their respective scripts.
The logic is nearly identical across both implemen-
tations, which ensures consistency in the snapping behavior.
Below is a simplified pseudocode version of the snapping logic:
Listing 5.8: DragFace / ExtrudeFace: DragFace(Updater)()
1 cFace = GetClosestFace(offHandController)
2
3 if cFace is valid and not the same as the dragged Face:
4
sPlane = Plane(cFace.center , cFace.normal)
5
movedFaceCenter = initialCenter + movementDelta
6
angleBetweenNormals = Angle(cFace.normal , draggedFace.normal)
7
8
if angleBetweenNormals < snapThreshold:
9
distance = sPlane.GetDistance(movedFaceCenter)
10
11
if abs(distance) < planeSnapDistanceThreshold:
12
correction = -sPlane.normal * distanceToPlane
13
movementDelta += Project(correction , draggedFace.normal)
This snapping mechanism offers the benefits of precision modeling without re-
quiring the user to perform extra steps, aligning well with the broader design
goal of providing intuitive and efficient mesh manipulation in VR. The imple-
mentation is more subtle than most other features, as it does not provide any
visual cues and solely relies on the user’s input. Thus, this is considered a more
advanced feature, since the user has to know this feature exists without it being
hinted at directly.
==PAGE:60==
46
Implementation
5.2.6
Updating Signifiers
Since signifiers are at the core of the feature set and interactions in the program,
they are important to visualize correctly. Each mesh can end up containing
many signifiers that each need to be updated and generated whenever appropri-
ate to ensure they are always positioned correctly. Updating the position of each
signifier every frame would be too costly on performance, resulting in very slow
performance at runtime. Therefore, a system was devised where signifiers are
only updated when their positions change (through, e.g., an extrusion or drag-
ging) or when they are generated (e.g., new signifiers need to be added when
making a loop-cut). This design significantly improves performance and ensures
that signifiers always reflect the true state of the geometry without performing
constant recalculation.
The system includes a set of dedicated scripts, each responsible for managing a
specific type of signifier. Their update logic is event-driven or change-sensitive,
meaning that updates are performed only when relevant parts of the mesh have
changed or have been generated.
HandleUpdater:
This script is responsible for managing the face handles, which are used for
selecting and interacting with faces. It checks if either the center position or
rotation of any face has changed since the last update. Only those faces whose
geometry or orientation has changed, or newly created faces, are included in
the update list. This selective update prevents redundant recalculations and
ensures responsiveness during mesh edits.
VertexVisualizer:
The VertexVisualizer script manages the creation and positioning of vertex
spheres and their associated multi-selectors.
It tracks shared vertex groups
and only updates signifiers for groups whose representative vertex has moved.
This minimizes unnecessary updates and allows for real-time vertex visualization
during transformations like dragging or extrusion.
The script calculates the
most optimal location for multi-selectors based on the normal vector of all faces
attached to the vertex. It uses this to place the multi-selectors in the position
that is furthest away from all neighboring faces, ensuring that each multi-selector
is clearly visible and does not spawn on the inside of the mesh.
EdgeVisualizer:
The EdgeVisualizer tracks midpoints between unique edges in the mesh and
displays loop-cut signifiers. Updates are performed only if a shared vertex group
has changed position. This mechanism is particularly important after operations
like loop cuts or vertex dragging, where edge topologies will shift.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Controllers
47
ProximityScaler:
This script dynamically adjusts the scale of all signifiers based on the controller’s
distance to them. This is the one script that has to run every frame, as there
is no direct input determining when to run this code.
If the controllers are
sufficiently far away, the signifiers are scaled to their smallest size, and as the
controllers come closer to the signifiers, they dynamically scale up until they
reach their largest scale. This helps provide a clearer look at the mesh being
modeled, as most signifiers are barely visible when not being used.
WireframeRenderer:
The wireframe renderer draws GL lines for visualizing quad-based wireframes. It
updates its edge list only when the number of vertices in the mesh has changed,
which typically indicates a mesh operation like an extrusion or merge. This
allows the user to see each edge on the mesh and gives a clearer overview of how
the topology of the model looks.
Together, these scripts form a complete and performance-conscious signifier up-
date system.
By avoiding constant per-frame checks and instead relying on
change detection and manual triggers (e.g., RebuildHandles(), ReBuildEdges(),
etc.), the system ensures that mesh signifiers remain accurate while limiting
workload on runtime performance.
5.3
Controllers
Since all of the input available to the user happens through the controllers, they
were a key part of the implementation of the program. When determining how
the controls should be implemented, two versions of controls were tested on a
group of test users: one with virtual hands visible, and one with the controllers
visible. The majority preferred the controllers, and thus this was the chosen
design path. More on the testing process can be seen in Chapter 6.
5.3.1
Mesh Manipulation Controls
In the initial stages of development, the input logic for mesh manipulation op-
erations such as extrusion and dragging was handled independently within each
script responsible for that operation. For example, input detection for extrusion
was handled in ExtrudeFeature.cs, vertex dragging in DragVertex.cs, and so
on. While this decentralized structure worked initially, it quickly became diffi-
cult to manage and scale as more operations were added.
==PAGE:62==
48
Implementation
To address this, a centralized input manager was created in the script Selection-
Manager.cs. This script listens for input events from the VR controllers and
determines which manipulation operation should be triggered based on what
type of signifier (e.g., face handle, vertex marker, etc.) the user is interacting
with.
All button inputs are initially registered using the Meta SDK’s ButtonMapper,
which matches controller button presses to corresponding functions inside the
SelectionManager. For instance, when the user presses the index trigger on the
right controller, the function RightIndexTriggerDown() is called, which initiates
a selection process via proximity-based detection to signifiers.
The SelectionManager then determines the closest mesh signifier and routes
control to the appropriate manipulation script. If a face handle is selected with
the right hand, an extrusion is initiated. If the same handle is selected with the
left hand, a face dragging operation begins. Similarly, selecting a vertex marker
starts vertex dragging.
The StopSelection() function is called when the trigger is released. This func-
tion terminates the current manipulation and resets internal states.
By combining input logic in a single manager, the system remains extensible and
consistent across all manipulation operations while maintaining clear control
over which input causes which behavior. This approach also simplifies testing
and debugging, since all controller interactions funnel through one place.
5.3.2
Mesh Selection and Moving
Displaying signifiers on every mesh in the scene simultaneously would introduce
significant visual clutter and reduce the clarity of the interface.
This would
make it difficult for users to focus on editing a specific mesh and would increase
the computational cost of interaction checks, since every signifier would need to
be considered during input detection. To address this, a selection system was
implemented to ensure that only one mesh at a time can be actively edited.
When a mesh is selected, it becomes the only mesh whose signifiers, such as han-
dles, vertices, and loop-cut indicators, are visible. All other meshes are immedi-
ately deselected, meaning their signifiers are hidden. This state is visually indi-
cated by changing the material of the selected mesh to green, while deselected
meshes appear gray. The selection logic is implemented in the ObjSelector.cs
script, which performs a spherical overlap check near the controller to find the
nearest mesh and toggles visibility and materials accordingly. Once selected, the
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Controllers
49
mesh is registered in the program as the active object for subsequent operations
like extrusion or dragging.
In addition to selecting a mesh, the user can also move or scale it using the
VR controllers. This is handled by the GrapInteractor.cs script. Grabbing a
mesh with a single controller allows the user to freely move the mesh around by
tracking the controller’s position and rotation. The mesh is parented virtually
through position and rotation offset calculations, enabling smooth motion that
feels physically connected to the user’s hand.
If the user grabs the mesh using both controllers simultaneously, a scaling inter-
action is triggered. By moving the controllers closer together or further apart,
the mesh is scaled proportionally. This allows for practical use cases such as
enlarging the mesh to make fine-grained adjustments, then scaling it back down
to its original size. Internally, the script calculates a scaling factor based on
the ratio between the initial and current distance between the two controllers
and adjusts the local scale of the mesh accordingly. The geometry is rescaled
relative to the mesh’s center to preserve proportionality.
5.3.3
Undo/Redo Buttons
To ensure that users can freely experiment with mesh manipulation operations
without the fear of making irreversible changes, an Undo/Redo system was
implemented.
This system allows the user to revert the mesh to a previous
state or reapply an undone action using simple controller inputs.
Each time the user performs a mesh operation, such as dragging a vertex, ex-
truding a face, or merging geometry, the current state of the mesh is captured
and saved to an internal undo stack. This snapshot stores the vertex positions
and face configuration of the mesh just before the operation is applied. If the
user decides to undo the action, the mesh is restored to this stored state.
The program includes dedicated controller buttons for performing undo and
redo. The detection of button presses is handled in the MakeUndoCall.cs script.
When the user presses the undo button, a call is made to the UndoTracker.cs
component attached to the selected ProBuilder object, which restores the mesh
to its most recent state in the undo stack.
To support redo functionality, the system maintains a separate redo stack.
Whenever an undo operation is performed, the current (pre-undo) mesh state
is pushed onto this redo stack. If the user then chooses to redo the action, this
saved state is reapplied. However, if a new operation is performed after an undo
==PAGE:64==
50
Implementation
(i.e., diverging from the previous history), the redo stack is cleared to avoid
applying states that no longer match the current mesh context.
All mesh modification scripts (e.g., ExtrudeFeature.cs, DragVertex.cs, Drag-
Face.cs, and MergeFaces.cs) call SaveState() via the UndoTracker component
before they make changes to the mesh. This ensures that any user action can
be undone.
To keep memory usage manageable, only the essential data (vertex positions and
faces) are stored per state. Additional performance optimizations include avoid-
ing redundant state saving when no actual changes are applied and updating
the visual signifiers after an undoing/redoing is applied.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Evaluation
This chapter evaluates the overall success of the program using two complemen-
tary methods. First, a code coverage test and performance test were performed
to ensure that all parts of the code were executed during development and de-
bugging. This approach helps verify that no section of the code base remains
untested, reducing the risk of runtime errors or unforeseen bugs, and assesses
how well the program ran under heavy workloads. Second, a series of qualita-
tive user tests was conducted across a diverse group of participants. Users were
presented with two different versions of the program and asked to compare their
respective strengths and weaknesses. The collected feedback was analyzed and
used to make improvements to the final version of the program. A validation
test was subsequently performed on a small subset of the test users to confirm
the effectiveness of the changes.
6.1
Code Coverage and Performance Test
To ensure the stability and reliability of the program, a code coverage analy-
sis was conducted as part of the software testing process. Code coverage is a
technique used in software development to determine how much of a program’s
source code is executed during runtime. By measuring this, it can be identified
if parts of the code are not run during testing and may be prone to errors.
==PAGE:66==
52
Evaluation
In practical terms, code coverage works by checking the program so that it tracks
which lines of code are being executed when the program runs. The resulting
coverage report highlights which sections of the codebase are being run by the
test cases. If any part of the code is never executed during testing, this indicates
a blind spot where bugs or runtime errors could go undetected.
By aiming for high coverage, the development process ensures that all major
parts of the program are activated and validated during testing.
For exam-
ple, coverage tools can verify that both successful and failed selections of mesh
elements are handled properly, that undo operations trigger the correct state
updates, and that mesh manipulation operations trigger correctly.
Although code coverage alone cannot prove the absence of bugs, it is a powerful
method for increasing confidence in the robustness of the code. In this project,
it served as a safeguard to confirm that no part of the program logic remained
untested.
In Figure 6.1, an overview of the code coverage for each script can be seen.
Figure 6.1: An overview of the code coverage report performed for code exe-
cution validation.
The code coverage test confirmed that all essential parts of the code were ex-
ecuted during runtime.
The analysis showed a codebase coverage of 97.9%.
The remaining 2.1% of uncovered lines can be attributed to failsafe checks,
such as conditions that prevent execution if a mesh is missing or data retrieval
fails. These lines are intentionally designed to be inactive under normal cir-
cumstances, serving only as protective measures to prevent the program from
crashing in case of unforeseen errors.
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Code Coverage and Performance Test
53
An example of such uncovered code can be found in the CopySaveMesh script,
where a try-catch block ensures that the program does not crash if file data
cannot be accessed:
Listing 6.1: CopySaveMesh
1 try
2
{
3
File.WriteAllText(_fullPath , _json);
4
}
5 catch (IOException e)
6
{
7
Debug.LogError($"Failed to write mesh data to file: {e.
Message}");
8
}
In addition to the code coverage analysis, a performance test was conducted to
evaluate how well the program handles varying mesh complexities and Levels
of Detail (LOD). The goal was to determine whether the application remains
responsive and maintains stable frames per second (FPS) during prolonged use,
especially when interacting with large or complex models.
The test focused on measuring the program’s FPS on the VR headset under
different mesh conditions. Specifically, it examined how the number of signifiers
and mesh faces impacted performance. Since the signifiers are dynamically up-
dated during interaction, their quantity and update frequency could be potential
bottlenecks, especially with large meshes.
A range of mesh sizes was tested, from simple objects with only a few vertices to
dense models with many faces and associated signifiers. The FPS was recorded
in each case, with particular attention to drops in performance when selecting
and editing large meshes.
(a) FPS plotted against the number of
Signifiers on the tested mesh.
(b) FPS plotted against the number of
Faces on the tested mesh.
Figure 6.2: Performance test comparing active Signifiers and mesh faces, to
the FPS.
==PAGE:68==
54
Evaluation
The results, summarized in Figure 6.2, indicate that while the program performs
smoothly with small to moderately sized models, performance degradation be-
comes noticeable when a high number of signifiers are rendered and updated
simultaneously (larger scale graphs are available in Appendix A (7.2) along
with the Python code used to generate the plots). This is especially relevant
during manipulation tasks such as dragging and extrusion, where signifiers need
to update every frame to match the movement applied to the mesh. Frame
rates above 20 are deemed manageable, and so this would be the minimum tar-
get FPS. From the data, it can be concluded that models with a signifier count
below roughly 2800 are easily achievable. Anything above that and performance
will start to suffer. Section 6.3 shows examples of detailed models under this
limit.
6.2
User Test Case Session
To assess the usability, intuitiveness, and overall user experience of the VR
3D modeling program, a series of qualitative user tests were conducted. The
primary aim of these tests was to evaluate two different controller interaction
schemes, referred to as Controller-Based Input and Hand-Based Input, while
keeping the modeling features (e.g., extrusion, dragging, loop cuts) identical
between them.
6.2.1
Testing Process
A total of 18 participants were used for the test sessions. Participants were of
varied backgrounds, and their experience levels in both virtual reality and 3D
modeling ranged from beginner to experienced. This diversity was intentional to
ensure that feedback reflected a broad range of perspectives, from casual users
to those with prior technical experience.
The following is a more detailed description of the two versions tested (Figure
6.3).
• Control Version 1 – Controller-Based Input: This version used a virtual
representation of the VR controllers. Icons were displayed next to each
button, indicating their functions. All available buttons on the VR con-
troller were used for different modeling operations. This design empha-
sized maximizing the use of physical input options and providing clear
on-controller visual cues.
==PAGE:69==
6.2 User Test Case Session
55
• Control Version 2 – Hand-Based Input: In contrast, this version repre-
sented the user’s hands digitally. Only the index and middle finger but-
tons on the controllers were used for interaction, and no icons were used
to visualize available controls. The interface aimed for a more seamless,
hand-based experience with minimal reliance on button memorization.
Physical buttons on the table were added for undo/redo functionality.
Figure 6.3: The two designs for the control forms from the testing phase
Both versions included the same core modeling functionalities such as vertex
and face dragging, extrusion, and loop cuts, ensuring that differences in user
feedback would stem primarily from the interaction scheme rather than available
features. (Control diagrams for the controller versions and implemented features
can be seen in Appendix B (7.2)).
Each test session was structured to be consistent and unbiased. To mitigate bias
towards one scheme, participants were randomly divided such that half began
with Control Version 1 and the other half with Control Version 2.
The testing process followed these steps:
• Initial Trial: Each participant used the first randomly assigned version for
five minutes. During this time, they were encouraged to freely explore the
modeling tools and become familiar with the interaction mechanics.
• Second Trial: Participants then switched to the second control version and
were again given five minutes to interact with the system.
• Chair Modeling Challenge: After experiencing both versions, participants
were asked which version they preferred and were then given ten minutes
to model a simple chair using that version. This step provided insight into
how well users could apply their preferred control method to a creative
task under time constraints.
==PAGE:70==
56
Evaluation
• Survey and Feedback Collection: Following the modeling task, partici-
pants completed a survey designed to gather both quantitative ratings
and qualitative feedback. The survey began by asking users to self-assess
their experience level in both VR and 3D modeling. This was followed by
a series of open- and closed-ended questions focused on:
– What aspects of each control version they liked or disliked.
– Whether any features or interactions were confusing or unintuitive
(e.g., mesh signifiers, manipulation tools, undo/redo buttons).
– Which version they ultimately preferred.
– Whether they felt the VR modeling tool would be easier to get started
with than traditional 3D modeling software.
The structured nature of the testing allowed for consistent evaluation across par-
ticipants. The decision to alternate the starting control version was important
in reducing potential bias. Participants might otherwise have been influenced
by whichever version they encountered first.
Qualitative feedback was valuable in identifying pain points and user expecta-
tions. Some users found the hands more intuitive due to their minimalism and
focus on natural gestures. Others preferred the explicit button mapping of the
virtual controllers, which allowed quicker access to multiple tools but sometimes
felt overwhelming to beginners. The chair modeling challenge provided a con-
crete task for participants to apply what they had learned, giving insight into
how quickly users could adapt to the system and produce functional designs.
The testing process provided the necessary data to evaluate the usability of each
control scheme. With all user feedback collected through the post-session survey,
the following section presents a detailed analysis of the results, highlighting user
preferences, identifying key usability trends, and uncovering areas where the
interface design succeeded or fell short.
6.2.2
Test Results
The results from the post-test survey provided clear insights into user prefer-
ences and perceptions of each control version. (A full listing of the results is
available in Appendix C (7.2).) When asked which version they liked most, par-
ticipants overwhelmingly favored the controller-based input system, with 14 of
the participants slightly preferring or mostly preferring this version. Only 3 par-
ticipants responded with preferring the hand-based system. The final responses
==PAGE:71==
6.2 User Test Case Session
57
for which version they favored are shown in Figure 6.4 Where 1 is strongly
preferred Hand-Based, and 5 is strongly preferred Controller based:
Figure 6.4: Bar chart over test-users preferred version.
While the majority preferred the controller-based version of the program, that
is not to say they didn’t have constructive criticism about this version. Some
of the most notable feedback provided from the two versions is listed below:
What Users Liked About the Controller-Based Version Participants
who favored the controller-based version often cited clear button labeling, greater
tool access, and reliable undo/redo functionality at their fingertips as primary
advantages. Notable positive comments included:
• “I liked that the controllers had buttons with functionality and that the
functionality was explained visually on them.”
• “Once you get the hang of the buttons, modeling becomes very fluid.”
• “That there ware more buttons to do different action and that the controller
point was smaller. The undo redo was nice.”
These users generally appreciated the precision that came with having dedicated
physical buttons for different tools. They also felt that the visual indicators next
to each controller button made it easier to learn and remember functionalities.
The small controller interaction points (an indicator showing where to position
the controllers) were another commonly mentioned benefit, as they allowed for
more precise manipulation of faces and vertices.
What Users Liked About the Hand-Based Version
The hand-based system, while less popular overall, received strong praise for its
==PAGE:72==
58
Evaluation
natural feel, minimalist design, and gesture-based intuitiveness. Several partic-
ipants noted:
• “Hand gestures were intuitive to understand by how the hand moved.”
• “When using the hands, especially scaling and moving the object works
very well and intuitively - more so than with the controllers.”
• “Hand gestures were intuitive to understand by how the hand moved. less
clutter overall”
These comments suggest that the hand-based interface was particularly well
received by users who valued a more immersive and less tool-heavy experience.
The ability to perform actions using finger movements (such as grabbing and
scaling) was seen as both tactile and enjoyable.
Common Criticisms and Areas of Confusion
Both versions had their pain points, which were identified through the user
test sessions. For the controller-based version, users commonly reported the
following issues:
• “The more buttons made it more confusing, and harder to learn.”
• “Selecting with one hand to then move with the other”
• “The controller overlay made it hard to see what buttons to press”
Meanwhile, the hand-based version was occasionally criticized for a lack of feed-
back, precision difficulties, and unintuitive finger tracking:
• “It was a bit more difficult to get the hand based input to do what I wanted”
• “The hands are angled wrong, so they don’t feel natural.”
• “I didn’t like how hard it was to figure out what you where actually clicking
on.”
Some users suggested that instructional guidance or onboarding would help
clarify available features and reduce initial confusion in both versions.
From the feedback provided, features from both tested systems were taken into
account for the final iteration. Controller-based input had a dedicated button
==PAGE:73==
6.2 User Test Case Session
59
for the selection of a new mesh and another button for grabbing, while hand-
based input combined these into one.
Users strongly favored the combined
button input. This additionally freed up a button on the controllers that could
be used for something else. During testing, it was noted that users sometimes
accidentally merged close faces together, as that feature was originally done au-
tomatically, leaving them confused about why their mesh changed. The merging
could therefore be modified to only trigger when this button was pressed, mean-
ing that merging of faces would only occur when intended.
Overall, the testing results indicate a strong preference for the controller-based
input system. Specifically, 78% of participants (14 out of 18) stated that they
preferred or strongly preferred this control version. In addition, when asked
whether they found this VR modeling program easier to understand compared to
traditional 3D modeling software, 11 participants (61%) answered yes. Another
6 participants (33%) responded with “don’t know,” and only 1 participant (6%)
believed that conventional 3D tools would be easier to use.
These responses are rather noteworthy when considered alongside the partic-
ipants’ self-reported experience levels. On average, test users rated their ex-
perience with VR programs at 3.4/10 and with 3D modeling tools at 3.0/10,
suggesting that the majority were relatively inexperienced. Given this, the fact
that over 60% found the program more approachable than traditional software
is a strong indication of its accessibility and user-friendliness. Several of those
who selected “don’t know” stated during testing that they had little or no prior
experience with standard 3D modeling tools and therefore felt unqualified to
make a direct comparison.
Beyond overall preferences, the survey included targeted questions addressing
specific features of the application, such as manipulation tools, mesh interaction,
in-scene elements (e.g., platforms and trash cans), and signifiers. These insights
were important for forming the final version of the program. By identifying
exactly which elements were praised or found confusing in each control version,
it was possible to make more informed decisions about which features to retain,
improve, merge, or remove. Pie charts for the targeted questions can be seen in
Figure 6.5.
These focused responses provided insights into specific areas of the program that
required refinement. In particular, two of the most critical components—the sig-
nifiers and editing tools—received a lot of constructive feedback. This input was
important for improving these features in the final version of the program. One
issue that stood out was the mechanism for locking vertices or faces together,
which many users found unintuitive or confusing. Based on this feedback, a re-
designed system with clearer visual indicators could be implemented to improve
usability and reduce confusion. Originally, padlock and chain-lock symbols were
==PAGE:74==
60
Evaluation
Figure 6.5: Pie chart over test-users response to different aspects of the pro-
gram. (“Yes” means if the feature was confusing or un-intuitive)
used to signify these features, but many users found them confusing, and thus
the signifiers in Section 4.2.1 were designed instead.
Some users never picked up on the fact that grabbing a handle with the right
or left controller resulted in different operations, and thus didn’t notice that
one performed extrusion and the other performed dragging. Color coding of
handles was therefore added after the tests, where the handles are displayed in
different colors depending on which controller is used on them. The same was
done for vertices, where the grabbed vertex would turn green, showing the user
that they have grabbed it. The signifiers would then turn back to their original
colors when released.
Each test participant’s VR session ended with a chair modeling challenge, where
they were asked to create a chair design using the tools they had explored during
the testing phase. This task served as a practical demonstration of how well
users understood the interface and the interactable elements of the program.
A small selection of these chairs is shown in Figure 6.6, with the full set of
user-created designs available in Appendix D (see 7.2).
This final test effectively demonstrated the diverse ways participants approached
the same design challenge, resulting in a wide range of outcomes. Some users
chose to create traditional-looking dining chairs, while others used the tools to
create more specialized designs, such as office chairs or specially architecturally
==PAGE:75==
6.2 User Test Case Session
61
Figure 6.6: A small sub-set selection of the chairs modeled by test users.
inspired chairs. These variations not only reflected individual creativity but also
highlighted how different users used the tools to facilitate their personal style
or design strategy.
Their modeling approaches also differed from each other. Some participants
focused on manipulating a single mesh, reshaping it through extrusion, scaling,
and cutting.
In contrast, others preferred a modular, constructive method,
assembling their models from multiple distinct meshes, reminiscent of building
with LEGO bricks. These different approaches showed how users could use the
program in various ways to complete their modeling tasks.
6.2.3
Validation Test
To evaluate the impact of the implemented changes, a small subset of the orig-
inal test users participated in a secondary validation session. These users were
already familiar with the basics of the program, allowing the test to focus specif-
ically on workflow improvements and usability enhancements introduced since
the initial test.
In this validation round, five previous participants were each given five minutes
to model a new chair, similar to the original test but under a stricter time
constraint.
This setup aimed to assess whether users could now work more
efficiently and produce higher-quality models with the updated version of the
program. The newly created models were then compared with the participants’
original chair designs to evaluate the differences between their two models.
Figure 6.7 showcases the chair models produced by the participants during the
validation session, alongside their original chair models.
As evident from the figure, the new models demonstrate a noticeable improve-
ment in both detail and structure, despite the shorter time constraint. These
==PAGE:76==
62
Evaluation
Figure 6.7: Validation test users’ new chair models compared to their original
models.
results suggest that the changes have positively influenced user workflow, mak-
ing it easier and faster to construct complex models. Additionally, the program
crashed and the model was lost for one user during the initial test, while the
validation test for that user was significantly improved and could be completed
without issue.
The improvements to the program also led to a performance gain. By fixing inef-
ficiencies found in the initial testing phase, the system now runs more smoothly
with reduced lag, especially during complex operations. These improvements
have decreased the likelihood of runtime crashes, resulting in a more stable and
reliable user experience overall.
6.3
Demo Example
To showcase the capabilities of the final program, after user test feedback had
been implemented, a small series of demo examples was carried out by a program
expert. Namely, a series of models with varying levels of detail and complexity
was made over multiple modeling sessions, spanning from a few minutes for the
simple models to around 30–45 minutes for the more complex models. This
demonstrates the capabilities of the program when in the hands of someone
with greater experience in the modeling tool. The different figures can be seen
in Figure 6.8 and 6.9.
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Demo Example
63
Figure 6.8: 5 different models constructed by an expert user over multiple
modeling sessions.
The smaller models contained approximately 350 signifiers and 85 faces, while
the larger models had around 1500 signifiers and 350 faces.
Since the per-
formance tests showed that the program would first begin to struggle when
exceeding roughly 2800 signifiers (6.1), it remains capable of handling detailed
models effectively, as can be seen in the demo example.
Figure 6.9: The 5 models seen from behind.
In addition to the models seen in Figure 6.8 and Figure 6.9 showcasing the
capabilities of the program, a short video was made showing the program in
action, with the various mesh manipulation tools being used. The video can be
accessed [HERE] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ejO7cRMX 8g)
==PAGE:78==
64
Evaluation
A Step-By-Step Guide of the Operations in the Video: The following
visual five-step guide illustrates the process shown in the demo video for creating
the chair model, highlighting the various features used throughout the modeling
workflow.
Step 1:
The first step in the modeling process consisted of creating the seating for the
chair. To later add legs and backrests, the seating was made by taking a cube
(Step 1.1) and extruding it four times to one side, creating a rectangle with five
faces on each side (Step 1.2). Then one side was extruded an additional four
times (Step 1.3). The ruler mechanic was used to ensure each extrusion was
of the correct length, and multi-selection of faces was used to extrude multiple
faces at once.
Step 2:
The second step in the process was to make the four legs for the chair. The first
leg was initially extruded outwards to a desired length (Step 2.1). To ensure
the other legs would be the same length as the first, the left controller was held
near the foot of the first leg while the others were extruded out (Steps 2.2, 2.3,
2.4). As they neared the length of the first leg, they would automatically snap
to its length.
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Demo Example
65
Step 3:
The third step revolved around making the backrest of the chair. Two corner
faces of the seating were selected together and extruded upwards, first by a
small amount and then by a larger amount. This was to prepare for making the
middle of the backrest (Step 3.1). Then, one side of the upper face was extruded
close to the other side, moving them close together. Finally, the two faces near
each other were merged together (Step 3.2).
==PAGE:80==
66
Evaluation
Step 4:
The last modeling step was to add some details to the chair. Firstly, some knobs
were added to the top of the backrest by dragging those faces backwards a bit
(Step 4.1). Then, the vertices making up the middle of the seating area were
selected together and moved upwards to mimic a pillow on the seat (Step 4.2).
With this modeling sequence, a simple chair can be made in just a few minutes.
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Demo Example
67
Step 5:
The last step included moving the newly created model onto a Copy/Save plat-
form to ensure the model was saved to a file and could be retrieved even after
the program was turned off and on again.
These steps combined showcase a typical workflow in the modeling program and
show how some of the various tools can be used to model an illustration of some
object. The provided tools can be used to model a large variety of things, as
was shown in Figure 6.8.
==PAGE:82==
68
Evaluation
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis by summarizing the program’s current capa-
bilities and exploring opportunities for its further development.
7.1
Summary
The primary aim of this project was to investigate whether virtual reality could
serve as a viable alternative to traditional computer-based 3D modeling tools.
To achieve this, an application was developed for stand-alone VR headsets, fo-
cusing on integrating some of the most commonly used and essential modeling
features available in conventional 3D software. A key goal was to design the
application in a way that prioritized intuitiveness and required minimal prior
knowledge or training for novice users, using signifiers to indicate possible ac-
tions.
The thesis addressed the main requirements (as introduced in section 4.1):
• 1. Intuitive and easy to understand mesh signifiers.
• 2. Descriptive and simple control.
==PAGE:84==
70
Conclusion
• 3. Useful Mesh manipulation tools.
• 4. Design tools where the user can do more with less.
• 5. Steady tracking to avoid jitter, and subsequently, motion-sickness.
• 6. Well-Optimized code, to prevent a lack in performance.
These objectives were evaluated through various methods. Goals 1, 2, 3, and 4
were tested in a series of qualitative user studies involving 18 participants with
no prior experience using the application. Participants were presented with two
different controller schemes and asked to highlight the pros and cons of each.
This feedback was used to make the final controller selection. Additional feed-
back on all the other features was collected to identify areas for improvement.
Each participant also completed a concrete modeling challenge to see how well
the application’s tools worked in practice.
Goal 5 proved to be less challenging than anticipated, as the Meta Quest 3S
headset comes with robust and reliable tracking out of the box, minimizing
motion sickness concerns.
Goal 6 was addressed by performing total code coverage tests to ensure that
the entire codebase functioned as intended and avoided crashes or unintended
behavior. A performance test revealed that the application could handle meshes
with up to approximately 2800 signifiers and 700 faces before significant frame
drops occurred. To demonstrate these capabilities, a series of example models
were created, showcasing the level of detail achievable within these performance
boundaries.
To establish a reliable connection between the VR headset and the program ap-
plication, the Meta SDK package for Unity was integrated. This SDK provided
a robust framework for mapping the various controller buttons to in-application
actions, allowing pass-through to see the real world environment and ensuring
seamless communication with the VR device. In parallel, the Unity ProBuilder
Runtime API was leveraged to supply essential commands for mesh creation,
manipulation, and duplication, enabling real-time editing and a smooth model-
ing experience within the VR environment.
In conclusion, this project successfully demonstrates that a signifier-based VR
modeling program can offer an intuitive and accessible workflow for creating
simple 3D models. While professional 3D modelers may continue to prefer es-
tablished software with extensive feature sets and shortcuts, this VR-based ap-
proach is particularly well suited for individuals with little to no prior experience
in 3D modeling.
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Future Works
71
Ultimately, this project highlights the potential of VR as a valuable tool for
introducing users to 3D modeling. It offers a fresh, immersive, and user-friendly
alternative that can serve as a gateway to more advanced 3D modeling tech-
niques in the future.
7.2
Future Works
While the program covers many essential features required to create a functional
3D modeling tool, there is still potential for improvement, provided additional
time and resources were available. Below are some features that could be con-
sidered for future development:
Several test users requested the ability to merge multiple meshes, enabling them
to combine different shapes and effectively “melt” them together into a single
unified object. Although the current implementation allows merging different
faces within a mesh, it does not yet support merging separate meshes. This
feature would enhance the flexibility and creativity of the tool, reducing the
need for users to “plan ahead” when making modifications.
Another frequently requested feature was the ability to delete individual faces
of a mesh, allowing users to remove unwanted sections. Unfortunately, imple-
menting this with the ProBuilder API proved challenging, and it could easily
lead to unintended removals and the creation of unwanted holes in the meshes.
While a proper and robust solution to enable face deletion could potentially
be developed, it was ultimately considered non-essential for the scope of this
project.
Finally, supporting other modern VR headsets would significantly broaden the
scope and usability of the program. However, achieving this would require access
to those headsets to ensure proper compatibility and performance. As only a
Meta Quest 3S headset was available for this project, adding support for other
devices was not feasible at this time.
==PAGE:86==
72
Conclusion
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1] Blender Found. Blender. https://www.blender.org/.
[2] ShapeLab. Sculpting like never before. https://shapelabvr.com/, 2025.
Accessed 8th of May 2025.
[3] Dorottya Esztergalos, Daniel Andrassy, Marcell Pal, and Zoltan Karpati.
Virtual reality: the gateway for non-professionals to solve complex design
problems. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Educator’s Forum, pages 1–2, 2023.
[4] Fanxing Zhang, Zhihao Liu, Zhanglin Cheng, Oliver Deussen, Baoquan
Chen, and Yunhai Wang. Mid-air finger sketching for tree modeling. In
2021 IEEE Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pages 826–834.
IEEE, 2021.
[5] Sarah Dashti, Edmond Prakash, Andres Adolfo Navarro-Newball, Fiaz Hus-
sain, and Fiona Carroll. Potteryvr: virtual reality pottery. The Visual
Computer, 38(12):4035–4055, 2022.
[6] PolySketch. A uniquely fun and intuitive app for creating 3d art. https:
//www.polysketchvr.com/, 2025. Accessed 8th of May 2025.
[7] Andreas Bærentzen, Jeppe Revall Frisvad, and Karan Singh.
Signifier-
based immersive and interactive 3d modeling. In Proceedings of the 25th
ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, pages 1–5,
2019.
[8] James J Gibson. The ecological approach to visual perception: classic edi-
tion. Psychology press, 2014.
==PAGE:88==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Axel Roesler. Designing affordances for direct interaction. The Interna-
tional Journal of Designed Objects, 10(2):1, 2016.
[10] Don Norman. The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books, 2013.
[11] J Andreas Bærentzen. Introduction to gel. Technical University of Den-
mark, 2008.
[12] David Brewster.
The stereoscope: Its history, theory, and construction.
John Murray, 1856.
[13] Veronica I Ent. Twentieth century virtual reality education reprise: Stere-
ographs to google cardboard. VR, 2018.
[14] Ph.D Jason Jerald. The VR Book - Human-Centered Design for Virtual
Reality. ACM, 2016.
[15] Robert Stone. Virtual reality for interactive training: an industrial prac-
titioner’s viewpoint. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
55(4):699–711, 2001.
[16] Steven Boyer. A virtual failure: Evaluating the success of nintendo’s virtual
boy. The Velvet Light Trap, 64(1):23–33, 2009.
[17] Newzoo Trend Report 2022. Vr games market report. Technical report,
NewZoo, 2022.
[18] Yoana Slavova and Mu Mu. A comparative study of the learning outcomes
and experience of vr in education.
In 2018 IEEE conference on virtual
reality and 3D user interfaces (VR), pages 685–686. IEEE, 2018.
[19] Yang Ding, Xiaohua Zhao, Ying Yao, Chenxi He, Pengcheng Yu, and Shuo
Liu. How to improve drivers’ hazard perception ability?
an interactive
training method based on vr technology and the unity 3d platform. Inter-
active Learning Environments, pages 1–18, 2025.
[20] Shiva Pedram, Grace Kennedy, and Sal Sanzone. Assessing the validity of
vr as a training tool for medical students. Virtual Reality, 28(1):15, 2024.
[21] Ayah Hamad and Bochen Jia. How virtual reality technology has changed
our lives: An overview of the current and potential applications and lim-
itations. Technical report, College of Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Michigan-Dearborn, Dearborn, MI 48128, USA, 2022.
[22] Jiaxiao Liu. Virtual reality: Challenges of vr game development for emerg-
ing game studios. Technical report, College of Letters and Science, Uni-
versity of California, Davis 1 Shields Ave, Davis, CA 95616, United States,
2024.
==PAGE:89==
75
[23] Unity.
Overview of .net in unity.
https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/
overview-of-dot-net-in-unity.html, 2021. Accessed 13th of March 2025.
[24] Unity Discussion. Version control for unity. https://forum.unity.com/
threads/best-version-control-for-unity.656572/, 2019. Accessed 6th
of May 2025.
[25] Perforce. Unity version control vs. perforce. https://www.perforce.com/
blog/vcs/plastic-scm-vs-perforce, 2023. Accessed 6th of May 2025.
[26] GitHub.
About
large
files
on
github.
https://docs.github.
com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-large-files/
about-large-files-on-github, 2025. Accessed 6th of May 2025.
[27] Unity. Xr interaction toolkit. https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.
unity.xr.interaction.toolkit@3.2/manual/index.html, 2025. Accessed
7th of May 2025.
[28] Meta.
Building with unity.
https://developers.meta.com/horizon/
develop/unity, 2025. Accessed 7th of May 2025.
[29] Khronos. Openxr overview. https://www.khronos.org/openxr/, 2025. Ac-
cessed 7th of May 2025.
[30] Meta.
Build configuration.
https://developers.meta.com/horizon/
documentation/unity/unity-build/, 2025. Accessed 7th of May 2025.
[31] Meta.
Setup.
https://developers.meta.com/horizon/documentation/
unity/unity-project-setup, 2025. Accessed 7th of May 2025.
[32] Unity.
Probuilder.
https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.unity.
probuilder@6.0/manual/index.html, 2025. Accessed 7th of May 2025.
[33] Unity. Probuilder runtime api. https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.
unity.probuilder@6.0/api/UnityEngine.ProBuilder.MeshOperations.
html, 2025. Accessed 7th of May 2025.
[34] Shakti Banerjee et. al. User experience evaluation of a virtual reality tool
used for 3d modelling in industrial design education.
Technical report,
Department of Immersive Media Design, MIT Institute of Design, MIT
ADT University, Pune 412201, India, 2023.
[35] sketchplanations.
Affordance illustration.
https://sketchplanations.
com/affordance, 2023. Accessed 16th of June 2025.
[36] pymesh.
Mesh boolean.
https://pymesh.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
mesh boolean.html, 2018. Accessed 16th of June 2025.
[37] Meta. Meta quest link setup. https://www.meta.com/en-gb/help/quest/
1517439565442928/, 2025. Accessed 13th of May 2025.
==PAGE:90==
76
==PAGE:91==
Appendix
==PAGE:92==
78
Appendix
Appendix A: Performance Tests Large Images and Data
Analysis Code
==PAGE:93==
79
Listing 7.1: Data Analysis Script
1 import pandas as pd
2 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3 import numpy as np
4 from tkinter import Tk, filedialog
5
6 # Open file dialog
7 root = Tk()
8 root.withdraw ()
9 csv_file = filedialog.askopenfilename(title="Select CSV file",
filetypes =[("CSV files", "*.csv")])
10
11 # Load CSV data
12 df = pd.read_csv(csv_file)
13
14 def plot_grouped_avg(x_col , title , degree =2):
15
# Group by x_col and average FPS
16
grouped = df.groupby(x_col)[’FPS’].mean().reset_index ()
17
18
x = grouped[x_col]
19
y = grouped[’FPS’]
20
21
plt.figure ()
22
plt.scatter(x, y, alpha =0.7, label=’Averaged FPS’)
23
24
# Polynomial regression
25
coeffs = np.polyfit(x, y, degree)
26
poly = np.poly1d(coeffs)
27
28
x_smooth = np.linspace(min(x), max(x), 300)
29
y_smooth = poly(x_smooth)
30
plt.plot(x_smooth , y_smooth , ’r--’, label=f’Poly Trend (deg={
degree })’)
31
32
# Horizontal FPS=20 line
33
plt.axhline(y=20, color=’orange ’, linestyle=’:’, linewidth =2,
label=’FPS = 20’)
34
35
plt.title(f’{title} (Grouped Avg FPS)’)
36
plt.xlabel(x_col)
37
plt.ylabel(’Average FPS’)
38
plt.grid(True)
39
plt.legend ()
40
plt.tight_layout ()
41
plt.show()
42
43 # Plot 1: Grouped by SignifierCount
44 plot_grouped_avg(’SignifierCount ’, ’FPS vs Signifier Count ’)
45
46 # Plot 2: Grouped by FaceCount
47 plot_grouped_avg(’FaceCount ’, ’FPS vs Face Count ’)
==PAGE:94==
80
Appendix
Appendix B: Development Plan and Controller Diagram
==PAGE:95==
81
==PAGE:96==
82
Appendix
Appendix C: User-Test Survey Results
==PAGE:97==
83
==PAGE:98==
84
Appendix
Controller Based Input:
What worked well:
• ”The visualization of what figure you were using. The physics of the func-
tionality by moving and pullling the figure. The indicators (red dots) of
the points that you can move/stretch were.”
• ”I liked being able to use the buttons on the controllers. The icons made
it easy to understand their functions. Being able to see my hands and a
virtual representation of the controllers was nice.”
• ”There is a pointer which gives better selection accuracy.
The go back
button and go forward button is nearer”
• ”The controller based input worked fine but you just need to get into the
controls. It still seems quite easy to learn if you spend a little time on it.
I think most people would be able to figure out the controls quite fast.”
• ”It is easy to pull in selected corners and handles in the model”
• ”That there ware more buttons to do differne action and that the controllre
point was smaller. The undo redo was nice.”
• ”The responsiveness of the program. What I wanted to do, was also what
the program responded with.”
• ”I liked, that I could see which buttons I had to click on”
• ”Assignment was easily understood”
• ”Undo at hand (not in physical space), different hands/controllers did dif-
ferent things, locking was a button (not grabbing)”
• ”The controls were quite easy, when looking at the buttons. It helped that
there were visual indicators on each button, which meant the precision was
quite high. The more i worked with it the easier the controls became. It is
nice to have a button for going back and forward, makes it a lot quicker
to iterate through the process.”
• ”That you are able to see the world around you. I liked how easily it was
to redo and undo with the controller.”
• ”It was very intuitiv and easy to grasp that basic functions and get started”
• ”The interface works really well, once you understand the controllers (or
hands) the response from the program is smooth and ”feels” real. Once
you get a hang of the buttons modeling becomes very fluid. It is really
fun to use and you quickly get into the modeling. I can clearly see for
==PAGE:99==
85
me how cool it would be if you introduced iso spheres, cylinders, spheres
and merging of shapes digital modeling and sculpting could become very
”tactile”.”
• ”It is very intuitive to use controllers”
• ”easy to pull the corners”
• ”I liked that the controllers had buttons with functionality and that the
functionality was explained visually on them.”
• ”It was easy to lock verticies and extrude faces. It was easy to see what
would be selected by using the pointing cones cursor. It was fun to extrude
and manipulate the mesh by using the controllers. You had a good sense
of scale and depth.”
What didn’t work well:
• ”A bit of the precision. Some of the signifiers were a bit to close to each
other, which made me press the wrong signifiers (Mostly when the figure
was a small). Some of the signifiers blended with each other (the handles
for example). Some of the controls took at bit longer to understand, but
they were easier to find (This might be just the case of it was the first thing
I tried)”
• ”There was a lack of visual feedback when pressing the buttons/performing
actions. This made it easy to accidentally click the wrong button without
noticing.”
• ”Not as immersive as hands. Sometimes can’t select what I aim for either.”
• ”I think the round buttons are not as intuitive as the other buttons and
are a little bit futher from reality.”
• ”It is difficult to select and deselect multiple parts of the model”
• ”The more buttons made it more confusing, and harder to lean. The con-
troler overlay med it hard to see what buttons to press, and was a bit
unnecessary”
• ”Only a small issue where some operations could cause the program lack.
Otherwise everything worked very well”
• ”That it was blurry :(”
• ”When I had done too much, it doesn’t work anymore besides moving
around and turning.”
==PAGE:100==
86
Appendix
• ”Selecting with one hand to then move with the other, unsure what the
difference between the padlock and chain lock was”
• ”The first minute was quite difficult, especially since i did not look at
the buttons and instead i just clicked on all the buttons untill something
worked. So it is quite difficult to know what to do without having to look
at each button and their icons.”
• ”It was a bit hard to select the cubes at the beginning, and also the faces
are very sensitive.”
• ”More complicated functions were not as easy to understand from the be-
ginning like chaining and the advantages of using locks”
• ”The margens are a bit finicky and it is sometime a struggle to pick the
right ”tool”. Some of it is helped when working with the controllers as you
have the buttons to work with. While you do figure out what the visual
cues mean when playing with it, I think a little introduction session would
be beneficial if you were to further develop the program.”
• ”It was hard to find all functions from first time”
• ”turning the item and move it”
• ”It was not clear that the two index trigger buttons had different function-
ality from the start.”
• ”Locking of faces and verticies were a bit anoying. It was not easy to get
a overall sense of which were selected. There were multiple times where i
accidently manipluated a face of vertice that i previously selected because
i could not easilly see which were selected”
Hand Based Input:
What worked well:
• ”The hands showing what command you are doing (pointer finger, fist).
It felt more realistic when modelling the figure. The buttons on the table
was very clear that it depicted undo and redo.”
• ”I really liked that there was visual feedback when performing actions e.g.
grabbing and selecting things.”
• ”I like the feeling It’s like I’m using my own hands.”
==PAGE:101==
87
• ”The hand based input is very intuitive. The way you pick up things and
are able to strech and rotate them works super well. It is also nice once
you figure out the controls that each hand have some different abilities.
This makes it more easy to separate the controls and not mixing them up.
This input worked the best for me but it was also my second test. Might
be that I just got better because I had never tried VR before these test.”
• ”Selecting with finger”
• ”There visable hands to show that you were grapping or pointing worked
well”
• ”I was in very dought of whether I wanted to use hand based or controller
based. So what worked well for the controller was also what worked well
here.”
• ”Nothing i just liked it. Because my favorite color is blue :)”
• ”Trashcan worked every time”
• ”Very intuative that you ”pull” with your hands”
• ”There were great fluidity and it was quite easy to move the object around
and doing stuff to it.”
• ”It was very intuitive to pickup the boxes, and scale them.”
• ”It was easier to remember controls with the fewer controls accessible”
• ”The interface works really well, once you understand the hands the re-
sponse from the program is smooth and ”feels” real. When using the hands,
especially scaling and moving the object works very well and intuitvely -
more so than with the controllers. It is really fun to use and you quickly
get into the modeling. I can clearly see for me how cool it would be if you
introduced iso spheres, cylinders, spheres and merging of shapes digital
modeling and sculpting could become very ”tactile”.”
• ”It looks more natural to see hands”
• ”pulling the corners and sides”
• ”Hand gestures were intuitive to understand by how the hand moved. less
clutter overall”
• ”It was more intuitive to use initially.”
What didn’t work well:
==PAGE:102==
88
Appendix
• ”Didn’t notice the buttons at first, since I had already the experience of
the control based input (design/interior) table. It was a bit more difficult
to get the hand based input to do what I wanted at first.”
• ”The rotations of the hands were slightly off, which reduces the immersion.
Furthermore, having to press a physical button to undo and redo, was a
bit annoying.”
• ”The go back and go forward button is very far away I have to bend to
touch it. Hard to select what I aim for.”
• ”Can be a little difficult to select small things using your pointing finger
when the objects gets small. On the other hand I think you will be more
precise if you use the device in a longer period of time.”
• ”That the hands is angeled wrong so they don’t feel natural”
• ”The fact the the fingers ware big, comperet to what you ware trying to
grap, made it defficalt to do precise motions”
• ”Same as with the controller based input”
• ”That it was ALWAYS pointing at stuff and it was annoying. A bit con-
fusing which buttons I should click on”
• ”Sometimes it felt like the controls were not working”
• ”Very difficult to hit the correct icons, would be a hassle to walk to the
table to undo/redo if you moved around a bit”
• ”It was hard to know exactly how to move the box in finer details, with
only two buttons. Even though those two buttons could do everything, I
didn’t know how to lock it and do certain functions. Since there were no
icons telling me what exactly to do with the two buttons.”
• ”I didn’t like how hard it was to figure out what you where actually clicking
on.”
• ”The hands were in the wrong orientation of my reals hands and some
controls were moved to the digital table”
• ”The margens are a bit finicky and it is sometime a struggle to pick the
right ”tool”. Maybe different hand positions other than pointing would help.
While you do figure out what the visual cues mean when playing with it, I
think a little introduction session would be beneficial if you were to further
develop the program. When using the undo button it would have been nice
with some feedback like a movement to indicate that you have pushed the
button.”
==PAGE:103==
89
• ”Not all functions were understandable with hand movements”
• ”moving and turning the object”
• ”Very little info on how to do things. Had to try things out, in order to
understand what the functionality was”
• ”I kept accidentially mix locking and subdividing it had to redo often”
Were any of the following confusing or unintuitive?
If ”Yes” what can be improved
• ”One way would be to give them either different colors/shades, so they
blend to much with each other.
Mostly when the figure gets to small.
Would be nice to give a different color to show what you are holding on to
(e.g the handle)”
• ”I think the face selection icon was confusing. Usually in 3D modelling
tools you can switch between vertex and face selection. This makes it easier
to understand what geometry you are interacting with.”
• ”The blue ”chain” symbol is not intuitive together with lock symbol”
• ”The locking system”
• ”The chain lock was difficult to understand. Mistook it for the ”subdivide”
(loop cut)”
• ”You could very quickly split the shape into different regions and add many
symbols”
==PAGE:104==
90
Appendix
• ”Chain to pick more faces. The locks to pick more than one and to lock
the relative position. I thought it locked the node in place. Took me a while
to understand what the handle was for.”
• ”Some hints showing their functions or a function demonstration just in
the beginning of the session.”
• ”I still don’t understand what the locks do, even after trying out the pro-
gram for a bit.”
• ”Initially I thought the handles subdivided the faces because i at first acci-
dentally hit the subdivide, which made me confused later on.”
If ”Yes” what can be improved
• ”I understood most of them. The only confusing thing is that depending
on which hand you use, you either grab or extrude. There is no way to
visually know this, which makes it easy to mess up. Having the hands be
different colours might help.”
• ”I didn’t notice I could merge.”
• ”Maybe the selected part of the model affected by the operation could be
more visually clear”
• ”There were some locks that I never really got to understand. Maybe it
was possible to lock a figure, but I didnt quite get to understand how to
use it.”
• ”idk / i dont know”
==PAGE:105==
91
• ”Some was sometimes hard to grab”
• ”I sometimes extruded when I meant to drag a face (maybe include a color
for each operation)”
• ”I never got to use merging, i didn’t understand how to merge”
• ”Maybe add some labels to be able to easierly identify what the different
buttons do.”
• ”A tutorial explaining merging for example”
• ”Figuring out extrution was a happy accident.
I don’t think you need
visual cues but maybe an introduction session to all the tools. like you see
in games.”
• ”but if there is many handels on the object it can be difficult to select the
correct one”
If ”Yes” what can be improved
• ”Not really, but I did sometimes click more than once before it picked a
different model. (This might be the case of me being a bit to far away from
the figure)”
• ”More accurate selection. I sometimes touch the lock instead of the han-
dle.”
• ”Needed basic instruction first. Maybe it could be visually clear that hole
model is selected”
==PAGE:106==
92
Appendix
• ”It was a little weird that I had to select with one hand and move with the
other.”
• ”Auto grabbing models in controller oriented mode instead of having to
click A/B”
• ”the button for selection of the object is not intuitive for me”
If ”Yes” what can be improved
• ”The buttons on the table is quite unintuitive. Maybe having them be part
of some overlay ui might be better, since it allows for easier access.”
• ”The two back/forward buttons are quite intuitive”
• ”You forget they exist when they are on the table”
• ”some visual feedback that the program registered your input.”
• ”I think this only applies to the controller based interface in my opinion”
==PAGE:107==
93
If ”Yes” what can be improved
• ”Only for hand based input it was a bit confusing.”
• ”Basic instruction is needed.”
• ”maybe u could put two extra buttons that makes it bigger and smaller.”
• ”need to train using controller”
If ”Yes” what can be improved
• ”I didn’t really get to use this feature.”
==PAGE:108==
94
Appendix
• ”Basic instructions are needed. Mayby copy symbols on the table platforms
would be helpful”
• ”I was wondering if there was a option for this, but didnt know where to
find it?”
• ”I never got to use the copy / save plateform”
• ”The copies were smaller than the original”
• ”I didn’t realise the copy platform would copy from the incons that was
just a happy accident.”
• ”There was no info about this option”
• ”did not found out that is was possible to copy an object”
If ”Yes” what can be improved
• ”The trashcan is quite intuitive”
• ”I didnt know it needed to go all the way down.”
• ”It was hard to put model all the way down before it was deleted”
• ”More indication that this is a trash can.
Explanation that the object
should be placed deeper into the trash can to be deleted.”
==PAGE:109==
95
Any other comments?
• ”Blender have ”description” of the different actions, which can make it
easier to know what that action. While in this it is harder to understand
at first, but easier to ”master”.”
• ”Just to elaborate on the previous question. I am saying yes since it is
easier to interact with the object. However if the person has experience
with blender or other 3D software, there might be certain assumptions and
actions which don’t convert to this format.”
• ”Very impresssive and fun, I will make a lot of interesting things if I had
more time”
==PAGE:110==
96
Appendix
• ”I wiould like to get some basic illustrative information about the basic 3D
modelling features and handling actions before start.”
• ”i liked the game it was pretty good, also confusing but that was fine. Its
also little bit hard but idc it was still fun and i really liked it! :)”
• ”Give me more basic shapes :)”
• ”Very nice”
• ”It was very cool, good job!”
• ”I think wokring with your hands (controller or hand controls both) is a
much more intitve way to work with 3d modeling. While this verison lacks
the finish to do finer details I think it could be super popular amongst kids,
or as part of an exhibition at DAC or similar.”
• ”Really good program with a wide range of usage and with a lot of options
and potential for development.”
==PAGE:111==
97
Appendix D: User-Test Chair Results
