==PAGE:1==
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading
Interfaces for Improved User Experience
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Expe­
rience
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Madis Otenurm
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Sector of DTU Compute, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering in Human­
Centered Artificial Intelligence.
This thesis used ChatGPT generative AI tools to improve text phrasing and formatting,
and in the creation of scripts used for the experiments and analysis. All written content
is either referred by the author with appropriate citations or written as the author’s own
creation.
The author declares no conflicts of interest.
Madis Otenurm ­ s233012
Signature
Date
ii
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Reading effectiveness is shaped by varying environmental and ergonomic factors ­ light­
ing, screen glare, font size, and device type ­ that alter eye­tracking ease, fatigue, and
comprehension. This study quantifies how text­formatting styles (line spacing, font size,
text width) interact with users’ eye and reading conditions, such as myopia, astigma­
tism and dyslexia, by measuring participants’ eye­movement metrics and then comparing
these results with participants’ preferences.
Among the 21 participants, font sizes of 12 to 16, line height 1.0­1.5 and text width normal
to widescreen were tested across 3 experiments. Results indicate that the participants
prefer a minimum font size of 16 and line height of 1.5 points, with the text width pref­
erence varying. 86% of participants matched their style preference with actual reading
speed. Reading conditions of the participants were not found to significantly affect the
style preference.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Madis Otenurm, MSc Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Technical University of Denmark
For good overall supervision.
Chaudhary Muhammad Aqdus Ilyas, Postdoc, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
For help with thesis structuring aspects, as a co­supervisor.
Ashkan Tashk, Postdoc, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark
For help with research aspects, as a co­supervisor.
Other students working on Reading the Reader project
On advice and knowledge about their research about the project.
iv
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Initial Problem Statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Initial Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and Related Work
3
2.1
Eye Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Eye Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Eye Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Typography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Digital Reader Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Assistive Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.8
Final Problem Statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.9
Final Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Methodology
14
3.1
Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Ethics and Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Iterations
18
4.1
First experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Second experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Third experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Results and discussion
21
5.1
Demographics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Table and graph guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3
First experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4
Second experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.5
Third experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.6
Experiments overall
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.7
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Conclusion
48
Bibliography
49
A Information letter and consent form
55
A.1 Impact of text formatting on reading performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
v
==PAGE:7==
B List of eye conditions
57
B.1 Dyslexia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
B.2 Myopia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
B.3 Astigmatism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
B.4 Presbyopia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
B.5 Hypermetropia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
B.6 Photophobia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
B.7 ADHD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
C Experiment texts
60
C.1 Frankenstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
C.2 Pride and Prejudice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
C.3 Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
C.4 Adventures of Sherlock Holmes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Reading is an important form of communication that the majority of people do daily to
get new information and understand the world around them. The ability to read can be
affected by various conditions, such as bad eyesight, poorly readable font, poor reading
skills and learning differences, such as dyslexia.
For people with reading and learning differences, the primary help so far has been to
adjust the font and text size. However, even that is not sustainable for all scenarios, such
as fatigue or external distractions.
Reading the Reader is a project that investigates adaptive text presentation based on indi­
vidual reading behaviors. It aims to use machine learning techniques to analyze real­time
measurements, such as eye movements, pupil dilation, and posture to identify distinct
reading patterns. By integrating approaches from data science, vision research, typo­
graphic design, and software engineering, the project focuses on tailoring typographic
settings to the needs of each reader, thereby improving comprehension and accessibility,
particularly for individuals with reading difficulties.[1]
The project is managed by an associate professor and head of study at Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, Per Bækgaard, together with professor Sofie Beier who specializes in
Management, Strategy, and Organization (MSO) and is the head of the Centre for Visibility
in Royal Danish Academy. Collaborators include the aforementioned school researchers
and master’s students, and Novo Nordisk Fonden for funding. [1, 2, 3, 4]
1.2
Initial Problem Statement
Dyslexia is a common learning difference that affects reading comprehension, often due
to difficulties with text processing, eye movement control, and sustained focus. For indi­
viduals with dyslexia, traditional text presentation formats amplify these challenges. While
adaptive technologies have shown promise in mitigating these difficulties, there remains
a gap in understanding how real­time adjustments to text layout, font, and spacing can
enhance the reading experience.
This thesis aims to contribute to Reading the Reader project by designing, prototyping,
and evaluating multiple reading interfaces that adapt to different reading patterns using
eye tracking. The thesis aims to leverage existing research on typography and user ex­
perience (UX). By exploring various interface designs and conducting usability tests, this
work will provide actionable insights to improve the ”Reading the Reader” project and
create a foundation for adaptive text systems.[5]
1.3
Initial Research Questions
The initial research questions were based on the assumptions of the author of what is
feasible to achieve within this thesis, without detailed research about the specifics. The
questions are listed below.
• Do any reading interventions help people with learning differences?
• When and how should learning interventions be applied?
• Which learning intervention or interface design is found to be the best?
2
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:9==
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Eye Terminology
A side profile of a human eye with some terms can be seen on Figure 2.1a [6]. Only terms
relevant to this thesis are described in this paragraph.
(a) A visualization of the eye from the side, with some
terms marked. [6]
(b) A visualization of the eye from
the top, with an emphasized mark­
ing on the limbus. [7]
Blinking ­ a fast, semi­automatic closing and opening of the eyelids. It occurs for protect­
ing the eye in case of dust and moisturizing the eye to keep clear vision [8, 9].
Cornea ­ the transparent outmost shell of the eye, covers the iris [10].
Fixation ­ focusing eyes on a specific spot, to identify an object and its location in space [11].
Iris ­ the colored sphere around the pupil, which expands or contracts accordingly to
control the amount of light that gets into the eye.
Limbus, or corneal limbus ­ the border between the cornea and the sclera [12].
Post­saccadic oscillation ­ small, rapid eye movements that occur immediately after a
saccade. The motion occurs in the pupil and the lens without rotating the eyeball [13].
Pupil ­ the round, dark central sphere in the eye, the first entry of the outer light to the
eye [10]. It is also the aspect of the eye that is most visible to eye trackers and therefore
most methods use its position for tracking [14].
Retina ­ a thin layer of nerves that senses light and forwards signals to the brain to visu­
alize images [10].
Saccade ­ a fast, sudden eye movement that changes the point of fixation. May be done
consciously or unconsciously [15].
Sclera ­ the white layer between retina and cornea that is visible as the white part outside
iris and pupil [10].
Smooth pursuit ­ a slow, controlled movement for tracking a specific object with the
eye [15].
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
3
==PAGE:10==
2.2
Eye Tracking
Eye tracking is a technology that uses specialized cameras or sensors to monitor and
record the movement and focus of a person’s eyes. It allows for tracking where an indi­
vidual’s gaze is directed, the patterns of visual attention, and potentially how the content
was perceived. This information can be used in a variety of applications, such as user
interface design, market research, psychology studies, and assistive technologies for in­
dividuals with disabilities.[14]
For the brain, visual attention helps individuals direct mental resources to sensory inputs
so that the mind can effectively process the surrounding environment.
The book by Duchowski [14] describes four types of eye tracking methods: electro­oculography
(EOG), scleral contact lens search coil, photo­oculography (POG), video­oculography
(VOG), and video­based combined pupil and corneal reflection.
Electro­oculography (EOG) tracks eye movements by measuring the voltage difference
between the cornea (positive) and the retina (negative). Small electrodes around the eyes
pick up the signal, which typically remains linear for moderate gaze angles. Although fac­
tors such as head motion, muscle interference, and skin­electrode contact can add noise,
careful setup and signal processing can reduce errors. EOG supports identifying sac­
cades, fixations, blinks, and other movements, making it useful for different applications.
Researchers often apply classification methods (such as support vector machines or Hid­
den Markov Models) to interpret EOG signals more accurately. [16]
Figure 2.2: A visualization of the electro­oculography method by attaching electrodes on
the face. [17]
The scleral contact lens search coil method records eye movements by embedding wire
coils in a scleral contact lens covering both the cornea and sclera. The lens connects to the
eye using suction, and the lens moves with the eye. When placed in a magnetic field, the
coils generate a voltage due to electromagnetic induction, enabling precise tracking of eye
movements in horizontal, vertical, and rotational directions around the line of sight. This
method provides high accuracy and a wide range of motion tracking, making it ideal for
physiological and neurological research. However, it requires anesthesia, head fixation,
and specialized equipment. Extended use may lead to blurred vision, discomfort, pain,
4
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:11==
or visual distortions. Despite these limitations, the scleral search coil remains one of the
most precise methods for eye movement recording [18].
Photo­oculography (POG) is a method of tracking eye movements by capturing photos or
videos of corneal reflections, pupil position, or limbus tracking. It relies on images taken
at regular intervals to analyze eye movement patterns. The technique can be applied us­
ing high­speed cameras or specialized optical devices to record eye fixations, saccades,
and smooth pursuit movements. While it provides detailed movement analysis, it often
requires head stabilization or correction methods to separate head movements from eye
movements [18].
Video­oculography (VOG) uses infrared or visible light cameras to track eye movements
by detecting the position of the pupil, corneal reflections, or both. It allows for contact­
free measurement of gaze direction and eye motion, making it more comfortable than
methods that require contact lenses. VOG can operate with a free head or include head­
tracking mechanisms for improved accuracy. It has been widely used in vision research,
vestibular testing, and human­computer interaction due to its ease of use and ability to
provide real­time tracking data [18].
Video­based combined pupil and corneal reflection (PCCR) is a subset of VOG. This
method combines tracking of the pupil center and corneal reflections to determine the
point of gaze. A light source creates a reflection on the cornea while a camera captures
both the pupil and reflection. The difference in position between the pupil and the corneal
reflection is used to calculate the direction of gaze, allowing for accurate eye tracking
even with minor head movements. This approach is commonly used in commercial eye­
tracking systems for applications such as cognitive research, visual attention studies, and
user interface control [18].
This thesis uses Tobii Eye Tracker 4C (IS4 Large Peripheral), a PCCR­type eye tracker.
It is a portable device that can be mounted to different screens using adhesive pads.
Once mounted, it is connected to a computer via USB 2.0 and is able to track eyes and
head (including position and recognition) [19, 20]. In this thesis, only the eye­tracking
capabilities are used via Tobii’s API.
Figure 2.3: A computer user using Tobii Eye Tracker 4C for text input. Note the attached
device on the bottom bezel of the computer monitor. [21]
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
5
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Eye Feature Extraction
When deciding which algorithms to use for data analysis, previous work by the author was
considered [22]. In that research, it is noted that I2MC and NSLR­HMM were perceived
to be the best for eye movement analysis due to their amount of detail and accuracy to
the data. On the other hand, Andersson et al. [23] concluded I­HMM and I­VT to be the
best algorithms. It was noted that when one algorithm ranks the best, the others tend to
perform poorly, depending on the evaluation method, suggesting that different algorithms
are best for different datasets and evaluations [23, 22].
The Identification by Two­Means Clustering (I2MC) algorithm is designed to detect fixa­
tions in eye movement data, even when recordings contain high levels of noise or inter­
ruptions. It first fills in brief gaps in the recorded eye positions, then analyzes segments
of the data to separate fixations from saccades. By comparing changes in eye position
across small time windows, it determines which parts represent stable fixations. Finally,
it combines fixations that occur very close together and removes very short events that
are unlikely to represent true fixations. This makes the algorithm effective for accurately
identifying fixations in challenging eye­tracking scenarios, such as research with infants
or patients, while also working for simpler use cases like this thesis [24].
NSLR­HMM is a method for classifying eye movements that combines Naive Segmented
Linear Regression (NSLR) — a technique for simultaneous denoising and segmentation
of gaze signals — with Hidden Markov Models (HMM)[25] for event classification. The
algorithm segments gaze data into linear (straight­line) segments, fitting these directly
to the raw data without prior filtering and dynamically adjusting to measurement noise.
Each segment, defined by the gaze data itself, is then classified into specific eye move­
ment types (fixations, saccades, smooth pursuits, post­saccadic oscillations) based on
statistical properties such as velocity and direction. By integrating denoising into the seg­
mentation step, the method enables robust classification across both controlled laboratory
conditions and real­world settings with higher noise levels [26]
When analysing experiment data in paragraph 5, the author found that aforementioned
algorithms were not sufficiently suitable for this kind of data ­ multiple readings of texts by
multiple people, as opposed to 10­second segments or single reading of an article, which
was done in the author’s personal course.[22]
Therefore the author instead used the I­DT algorithm, which is also mentioned in the
research paper.[27]
Dispersion­Threshold Identification (I­DT) is a method of discerning fixations when, within
a sliding time window, the gaze points are grouped together in a certain location. It slides
a moving window across the raw eye­tracking sequence, starting with enough samples
to cover a minimum duration (typically 100–200 ms). For each frame, it measures how
far the gaze dots spread by adding the horizontal width and vertical height. If this spread
is below a set limit, it keeps adding the next point to the frame. When the spread finally
goes over the limit, it records the frame’s center as a fixation, throws out those points,
and keeps scanning. If the very first check is already over the limit, it just shifts the frame
forward by one point.[23, 27]
The method has two adjustable parameters ­ the dispersion threshold (how wide the points
may spread, often between 0.5­1 degrees of vision) and the duration threshold (how long
the first set of points must stay in the same area). I­DT runs quickly enough for real­
time use, and its explicit time check helps it ignore fleeting noise spikes that fool purely
speed­based methods. The produced fixation maps are said to be almost identical to
6
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:13==
the Hidden­Markov (I­HMM) approach, while being simpler to code. The main caution
is careful parameter tuning: because dispersion and duration thresholds are dependent
on each other, poor choices may create too large or small segments of fixations. When
thoughtfully configured, however, I­DT offers a robust balance between efficiency and
accuracy.[27]
2.4
Typography
Reading is defined by Cambridge Dictionary as ”the activity or skill of getting information
from books, newspapers, etc” by ”looking at words and understand what they mean” [28,
29].
The ease of reading is determined by two key factors: legibility and readability. Legibil­
ity focuses on the clarity of individual letters. It is influenced by the font type, whether
the typeface is serif or sans­serif, weight (e.g. bolding), size, consistent height, and the
context of use (such as titles and captions versus paragraphs). See figure 2.4 for an
example.
Readability describes how easily entire words, sentences, and paragraphs can be com­
prehended. It is affected by line height, paragraph spacing, the measure (width) of a text
block, letter spacing (tracking), color contrast, typographic hierarchy and color [30].
Typography is the technique of making written language both legible and readable while
creating an aesthetically pleasing design [31].
Figure 2.4: A legibility comparison between fonts Gill Sans and Prosto One on the left,
Raleway and Noto Sans on the right. This graphic highlights the importance of choosing
the right font type and size for the right context [32].
Good typography is especially useful for dyslexic users. As Vision Australia points out in
figures 2.5a and 2.5b, similar­looking characters and combinations can be confusing [33]
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
7
==PAGE:14==
(a) A list of examples where font type can
confuse the meaning of a word or a set of
characters [33].
(b) Another list of confusing combinations,
here specifically focused on users with low
vision, age over 45 and dyslexia [33].
Figure 2.5: Two examples of confusing letter combinations.
More suggestions can be found in the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines[34] and
British Dyslexia Association’s style guide[35].
2.5
Digital Reader Design
User experience, in the context of reading texts, can take inspiration from the physical
e­book readers.
Kostick [36] article about the digital reading experience elaborates on some of the aspects
that are ”wrong” about eBook readers compared to physical books. Kostick starts by
describing that the experience of reading an e­book should be equivalent to a physical
one in terms of physical and digital properties. UX experts Steve Portigal and Whitney
Quesenbery note that digital reading is inherently not equivalent to physical papers, and
hence should aim to stay distraction­free while offering novel technological features [36].
Mod [37], a writer and designer, claims that the problem is purely in the software, high­
lighting problems with over­used real­life imitation (such as book shape in the interface),
too many visible interface elements, lack of hyphenation and alignment options, rigid mar­
gins [37, 36].
Research by Huang, Chen, and Ho [38] investigates how tablet reading systems differ
in user behavior and context of use compared to other digital platforms, and it seeks to
redesign their interactive interfaces to enhance usability and user acceptance [38].
Huang, Chen, and Ho [38] used the technology acceptance model (TAM) [39] ­ an online
survey, followed by in­person observation and interview. The data was collected and
8
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:15==
analyzed using affinity diagrams[40], and brainstorming was conducted to evaluate the
required adjustments. Interface prototypes were created using iterative design [41].
The design phase resulted in an improved reading interface for tablets that incorporated
new functions ­ enhanced page navigation, text­to­speech capabilities, and personalized
reading history to better align with users’ established reading habits. Tests demonstrated
that the improved interface significantly outperformed the original version in terms of per­
ceived usefulness, ease of use, user attitude, and behavioral intention. One context­
relevant improvement was to use eye tracking to record how far the user has read on a
page [38].
Ultimately, it is notable that while e­readers improve over time with the advances of tech­
nology, many of these aspects cannot directly be applied to a computer with an eye tracker
using current technology. This is because advanced eye trackers require a fixed position
relative to the screen.[42] Therefore, this thesis aims to experiment with the approaches
to see which ones are applicable for such cases.
2.6
Assistive Tools
Besides the educational methods described in appendix paragraph B.1, users with read­
ing conditions can be helped with the use of digital tools. This research was done in the
perspective of assisting with dyslexia, per initial problem statement in paragraph 1.2, but
the tools are applicable to many other reading and cognition conditions, including people
with only temporary conditions (accident, surgery, tiredness etc.).
The research was done by looking up relevant keywords in DuckDuckGo, with the key­
word ”dyslexia”, followed by ”digital tool” or topic­specific ”reading tool”, ”writing tool” and
so on. Scientific papers weren’t consulted for this section because tool availability evolves
over time, and a general search engine provides more current insights.
2.6.1
Audiobooks and text­to­speech
As described in paragraph B.1, the most obvious way dyslexia affects daily activities is
the difficulty in understanding written text. One way to mitigate that is to avoid having to
read altogether, or reducing the amount of text one has to read. This can be done with
text­to­speech tools and audiobook players.
Rachel Melegrito describes how to enable the built­in text­to­speech option in Windows,
macOS, iOS, Android, Amazon Kindle and Microsoft Word platforms [43].
Other popular tools include Learning Ally ­ audiobooks for the learning impaired [44] and
Natural Reader [45] ­ a natural­sounding speech­to­text engine [46, 47, 48].
2.6.2
Writing, grammar and spelling
For individuals with dyslexia, writing can be a challenging task due to difficulties with
spelling, grammar, and sentence structure. Assistive tools, such as spell checkers, gram­
mar correctors, and rephrasing software, help users construct well­formed sentences with
greater ease.
Many browsers have a spell­checker built­in [49]. Text editing software like Microsoft Word
and LibreOffice additionally have a grammar checker [50, 51].
Ginger [52] and Grammarly [53] have browser extensions, online and downloadable tools
that provide spell and grammar checks, and rephrasing options [46, 48].
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
9
==PAGE:16==
2.6.3
Customized fonts and styling
As it is not always practical or possible to use text­to­speech tools, there are also ways to
adjust the text itself to improve its readability. Dyslexia­friendly fonts improve readability by
enhancing letter distinction, while features like adjustable spacing and size further support
comprehension.
It is recommended to use sans­serif fonts, no italic or underlining. Common sans­serif
fonts are Arial, Verdana, Tahoma, Trebuchet, Calibri and Helvetica, notably also Comic
Sans [54, 55, 35].
More targeted fonts include OpenDyslexic [56] and Dyslexie [57]. These fonts are specifi­
cally designed to look distinct and be thicker at the bottom of the character to avoid getting
inverted by the reader.
Additional suggestions include a font size minimum of 12 points, large line­spacing, align­
ing text left instead of justification, high color contrast with a simple background [55, 35].
2.6.4
Mind mapping
Mind mapping tools provide a visual approach to note­taking, helping users break down
complex ideas into clear, interconnected concepts, while at the same time requiring less
text input than conventional text forms.
MindMeister [58] and Ayoa [59] are popular examples of online visual mind mapping
tools [47, 46, 60, 61]. Ayoa also promotes itself as ”neuro­inclusive,” [59] suggesting
that it is designed to be accessible for individuals with neurodivergent conditions, such as
dyslexia.
2.7
Related Work
Here is a summary of academic papers that are related to the work done in this thesis
and Reading the Reader project.
The research was done by looking up relevant keywords in Google Scholar[62] and scite.ai[63].
Keywords that were included and sometimes combined: ”typography”, ”readability”, ”bio­
metric sensors”, ”reading”, ”eye tracker”, ”dyslexia”.
Reading the Reader­relevant papers were found on the homepage of the main super­
visor Per Bækgaard[64] and shared in a private repository by a co­supervisor Ashkan
Tashk[65].
10
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:17==
Work done
Methods
Key Findings
Limitations
Ref
Text style (font color,
background
color,
line
spacing,
font
type) effect on pupil
size and blinking be­
havior (blink count,
duration, frequency)
in
dyslexic
and
non­dyslexic adults.
Eye­tracking
measurements
comparing
pupil
diameter
and
blink
patterns
across
various
text styles.
Blink
count,
dura­
tion, and frequency
significantly differed
between
dyslexic
and
non­dyslexic
readers for specific
typographic
set­
tings, especially line
spacing and back­
ground color. These
settings
increased
the reading difficulty
for dyslexic readers.
Small
participant
group
(16
partic­
ipants,
of
which
2
dyslexic)
limits
findings;
no signif­
icant
differences
observed
for
pupil
diameter
across
settings.
[66]
Effects
of
line
lengths
in
fictional
texts
on
reading
efficiency and moti­
vation in adults with
dyslexia.
Reading
tests,
eye­tracking,
and
interviews
conducted
on
20
adults
with
dyslexia,
com­
paring
four
line­length condi­
tions (40, 60, 80
characters,
and
variable short line
lengths).
Longer line lengths
(60­80
characters)
were
preferred
by
participants
due
to
better
reading
fluency
and
moti­
vation;
however,
line lengths did not
significantly
impact
reading
speed
or
comprehension.
Limited conclusions
due to small sam­
ple size;
only ex­
cerpts of texts were
read rather than full
books, results may
not be applicable for
other texts.
[67]
Development
of
a
flexible reading app
and data collection
platform
that
uses
eye­tracking
for
analyzing
reading
behavior of central
vision loss readers
(for
Reading
the
Reader).
Designed
and
implemented
a
reading
inter­
face
with
text
styling
options;
conducted
ex­
perimental study
involving
23
participants
to
gather
gaze
data
and
eval­
uate
interaction
patterns.
Demonstrated
that
gaze
data
can
be
used
to
guide
personalized typog­
raphy settings and
pointed out impor­
tant
accessibility
needs
and
design
considerations
for
people with central
vision loss.
Platform
currently
supports only man­
ual text adjustments;
has
challenges
with
accuracy
and
synchronization
of
eye­tracking
data;
has
limited
automation capabil­
ities based on eye
tracking data.
[68]
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
11
==PAGE:18==
Work done
Methods
Key Findings
Limitations
Ref
Designed and eval­
uated
an
adaptive
e­reader for central
vision
loss
using
eye­tracking
data
(for
Reading
the
Reader)
Double Diamond
design
process,
literature
re­
view, stakeholder
consultation,
iterative prototyp­
ing, A/B testing,
eye­tracking
ex­
periment with 23
participants
Adaptive
typogra­
phy
interventions
improved
reading
speed and comfort;
notification was least
intrusive, undo was
most disruptive
Limited by a small,
non­target
sample
and lab­based con­
ditions,
therefore
harder to draw con­
clusions
for
other
environments
[69]
Developed
a
real­
time adaptive read­
ing system integrat­
ing live eye­tracking
data for dynamic text
adaptation and com­
parative
evaluation
of front­end frame­
works. (for Reading
the Reader)
Conducted
experiments
measuring
initial
load times, time­
to­interactive,
and
text
edit­
ing
efficiency;
implemented
a
proof­of­concept
with an intuitive
interface
(login,
username
entry,
main
reading
screen with inter­
active feedback)
to
adjust
text
properties based
on gaze data.
Demonstrated
low­
latency
real­time
text adaptation that
enhances
accessi­
bility and readability;
comparative
ex­
periments
revealed
performance
trade­
offs among front­end
frameworks.
Incomplete
integra­
tion of a full­scale
machine
learning
model
and
lim­
ited user feedback
mechanisms.
[70]
Designed
and
evaluated
content­
preserving function­
ality for an adaptive
reading
applica­
tion that integrates
four
intervention
designs
(Popup,
Undo,
Notification,
Gradual) to improve
reading
experience
(for
Reading
the
Reader).
Literature review,
iterative
design
with Figma mock­
ups,
and
an
experiment
with
22 participants.
Context
preserva­
tion made it easier
and faster for users
to resume reading
with the Gradual in­
tervention, while the
interventions
that
interrupted
reading
(Popup, Undo, Noti­
fication) didn’t show
a noticeable benefit.
Limited sample size,
use of manual test
cases,
evaluation
restricted to sephia
color palette, results
may
not
apply
to
other test cases.
[71]
Table 2.1: Comparison of Related Research Works
2.8
Final Problem Statement
Reading is rarely performed under ideal circumstances; factors such as ambient lighting,
screen glare, font size, and device type constantly vary, creating different conditions that
12
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:19==
can either hinder or help comprehension. These environmental and ergonomic variables
shape how easily the eyes track lines of text, how quickly fatigue sets in, and ultimately
how well information is understood and retained.
The goal of this study is to investigate how different text formatting styles influence reading
performance and user preference depending on the presence or lack of reading condi­
tions. By analyzing participants’ reading speed and accuracy across various styles, the
research measures the impact of formatting on comprehension. The study also examines
whether people’s personal preferences match the eye tracking data, essentially asking if
readers can naturally tell which text format works best for them.
The findings contribute to the development of adaptive reading systems in the Reading
the Reader project.
2.9
Final Research Questions
The final research questions are based on the research done in paragraph 2.7 and the
specifics of the experiment as explained in paragraph 3. The questions are listed below.
• Within the selected amount of formatting styles, which text formatting style was pre­
ferred by the participants?
• How impactful were the differences of text styles on the reading speed?
• What is the correlation between user preference, reading speed and eye tracking
data?
• Do eye/reading conditions affect the preference?
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
13
==PAGE:20==
3
Methodology
3.1
Research
The beginning of the work started with describing the general motivation of the Reading
the Reader project (section 1). Initial problem statement and research questions were
conducted, based on assumptions of how the author could contribute to the overall project.
Next, the background topics were researched, to better understand the relevant problems
and terminology (section 2). The aspects of dyslexia, the eye and eye tracking were
described. Eye tracking result algorithms were described as ”feature extraction”.
For the experiment presentation side, aspects of typography and digital reader design
were introduced.
Assistive tools for dyslexic users, in different categories were described, alongside their
most prominent examples. These include reading, writing and mind mapping tools.
Finally, projects that are similar to the one described in this paper were researched and
compared.
Once the initial research was done, it was possible to start prototyping according to the
updated problem statement (section 2.8) and research questions.
3.2
Prototyping
For the sake of simplicity and fast iteration speed, chosen prototypes are simplified screen­
shots of LibreOffice Writer documents, displayed in full screen using a browser­based
image viewer. Document texts are one­page excerpts of old known stories that are now
freely usable, sourced from Project Gutenberg ­ a library of public domain digital books.
[72]
• Frankenstein; Or, The Modern Prometheus by Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley [73]
• Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen [74]
• Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll [75]
• The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle [76]
Each participant receives all four texts ­ three predefined and fourth with chosen style.
The text styling order for the first three is chosen from the predefined list using the Latin
Square design[77].
Text style iterations are described on paragraph 4 and the texts themselves are quoted
on paragraph C.
3.3
Testing
Testing was conducted on Technical University of Denmark master’s students that the
author of the thesis knew or had contact with (convenience sampling [78]). As the native
language, ages, study programs and other variables vary widely in the selection, it is
believed to be an objective set of participants.
Each participant was asked to book a time to participate in the experiment. On partici­
pation day, the author led the participant into the secured eye tracker room in Technical
University of Denmark.
14
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:21==
In the lab, the process started with reading and signing a printed consent form.
Next, the computer and eye tracker was introduced, and the participants were asked to
fill out a Microsoft Office form:
• What is your age?
• What is your academic level?
– PhD or higher
– MSc or MEng
– BSc or BEng
– High school, gymnasium or lower
• What is your English language proficiency level according to the CEFR?
– Native speaker
– C1 or C2 (Proficient)
– B1 or B2 (Independent)
– A1 or A2 (Basic)
• How often do you read fictional literature?
– Multiple times a week
– Once a week
– Once or twice a month
– Less than once a month or never
• Have you been diagnosed with a disease that affects your sight or reading abilities?
Check all that apply.
– Myopia (near­sightedness)
– Hypermetropia (far­sightedness)1
– Amblyopia (lazy eye)
– Dyslexia
– Other
Next, the test system was introduced and eyes were calibrated using Tobii Pro Eye Tracker
Manager.[79] As each participant only participated once, a guest profile was used that
resets after each use.
The author asked if the participant was ready, then ran the eye tracking script and switched
to a different view where the text was displayed. After reading the text, the participant
had to look away from the screen or close their eyes to indicate that. The process was
repeated with the next two documents.
After reading the three texts, the participant was asked to pick the formatting style they
found the most convenient to read, ignoring the contents of the text. In that text style, a
fourth document was presented and the process repeated.
1Was removed after the 5th participant of the first iteration. See paragraph 4.1 for more information.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
15
==PAGE:22==
In the end, the user was thanked, given a gift and led away from the tracker room. The
author now began to recruit and prepare for the next participant and organize the data of
the current one.
3.4
Analysis
The goal of the analysis is to determine the best text formatting style out of the three
for most users, and to determine whether the users actually preferred the most suitable
formatting for their reading style.
The data collection method and scripts are based on the author’s previous work in a
special course with Reading the Reader project[22] and Eye Movement Classification
repository by Axel Roques, which is licensed under GPLv3[80].
The eye tracker data was collected with a Python program running in the background,
while the participant read the text.[81] That script was initially made by Per Bækgaard
[82] and Aamir Farooq [83] using the official SDK[84], and now includes additions from
the author of this thesis.
For analysis, the contents of the eye tracker data are placed into a Jupyter notebook
[85]. In the special course, different algorithms were tested and the gaze was mapped as
colored ovals and connecting lines on a screenshot of the article, indicated on figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: A screenshot of an article inside a Python plot. Eye gaze clusters are indicated
with colored ovals and connected by lines according to the reading sequence.[22]
This thesis focuses more on the bigger picture ­ summary of different readings, rather
than specifics of a single reading, therefore the details are still analysed from the script
output files using Python, but presented as tables and graphs that encompass the whole
experiment. Algorithm details are described in paragraph 2.3.
3.5
Ethics and Privacy
Each participant had to sign a consent form describing how the obtained data is used.
The form is based on one used in a Master’s thesis by Salam [86]. The full form can be
viewed in Appendix A. All filled consent forms were given to the supervisor after the data
collection, to ensure their safekeeping in the university.
16
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:23==
The non­identifying additional details based on the form in Microsoft Office were collected
with a Technical University of Denmark­based student Microsoft account and are there­
fore handled in the under the same privacy policy as the students’ other data, including
documents and emails.
These questions were designed to maintain user anonymity and avoid collecting irrelevant
data, such as gender or ethnicity, to reduce bias in the study. It was also considered to
keep the age as a range instead of specific number, but that was decided against due to
the already expected similarity in participants’ ages.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
17
==PAGE:24==
4
Iterations
4.1
First experiment
In the first experiment, the following text stylings were used:
1. Font Times New Roman, font size 12, line height 1, normal width (A4 paper)
2. Font Times New Roman, font size 12, line height 1.5, normal width (A4 paper)
3. Font Times New Roman, font size 14, line height 1, normal width (A4 paper)
First two participants had no eye conditions.
Third participant had astigmatism and myopia.
Fourth participant had no eye conditions.
Fifth participant had presbyopia. The participant commented that they liked the increased
font size (style 3) but also the increased line height (style 2).
Presbyopia was the option that was originally intended to be included as an option in the
survey, with hypermetropia option being added instead by mistake. The confusion came
up with hypermetropia being known as ”farsightedness”, however the author later found
that presbyopia usually develops by age, while hypermetropia is obtained on birth or by
trauma. Additional details are explained in paragraphs B.4 and B.5.
Starting with 6th participant, the form no longer has the ”hypermetropia” option by default,
to reduce terminology confusion. Participants can add it to ”other” field when relevant.
6th participant said they preferred style 1 as the text ”seemed shorter and hence was
easier to read”. The participant had astigmatism and slight myopia.
7th participant said to have myopia (corrected by contact lenses) and ADHD, which they
said ”may slightly affect my reading abilities” (later confirmed in paragraph B.7). Partici­
pant preferred style 3, but mentioned the preference for the text to be wider on the screen,
instead of being constrained to 1/3 of the screen width, to make it easier to maintain focus
on reading.
Starting with the 8th participant, new participants were specifically asked on why they
chose what they preferred.
8th participant had myopia and preferred the third text style because ”its bigger”, but noted
that they liked the line spacing of 2, suggesting that the best would be large text with
sufficient line spacing. The participant read all texts of the first iteration the fastest overall,
despite stating they read fiction ”once or twice a month”.
9th had myopia and dyslexia, and they preferred the second text style because of the line
spacing, which ”prevented re­reading lines over and over”.
4.2
Second experiment
Based on feedback obtained from the first experiment, the second experiment tested the
following:
1. Font Times New Roman, font size 14, line height 1.5, normal width (A4 paper)
18
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:25==
2. Font Times New Roman, font size 14, line height 1.5, extended width (option ”web
view”)
3. Font Times New Roman, font size 16, line height 1.5, extended width (option ”web
view”)
The texts were obtained from the same books as in the first experiment, but the second
text now obtained from different section. This was done to ensure the full text fits into the
full screen with increased font size and sufficient margins.
First participant had no eye conditions and preferred the first style because ”the normal
width was easier to read” and ”there seemed to be less text compared to expanded width”.
The participant liked the font size of the third style and second style the least overall.
Second participant also had no eye conditions and preferred the first style because of the
normal text width.
Third participant preferred the third style, because it was easy to read, biggest font size;
first style was too tight. The participant had light sensitivity and hypermetropia.
Fourth participant, with no eye conditions, preferred the third style ”because of the spac­
ing, width and font size”.
Fifth participant, with myopia, preferred the third text style because ”it is easier to read
and there is a good distance for each word”.
Sixth participant, with myopia, preferred the first text style because of ”shorter line length,
there are less words per line”.
4.3
Third experiment
For the third experiment, the following formats were tested:
1. Font Times New Roman, font size 16, line height 1.5, normal width (A4 paper)
2. Font Times New Roman, font size 16, line height 1.5, in­between width (⅔of the
screen)
3. Font Times New Roman, font size 16, line height 1.5, extended width (option ”web
view”)
As there was a split between the preference of large font size or increased width, the third
experiment focuses on testing different widths with a consistent font size. The texts were
again obtained from same books but from different sections, to ensure they fit in one page
entirely.
The first participant preferred the second text style, ”because the first was too narrow and
the third was too wide”. The participant initially liked the third style the best, but thought
that the second ”was more balanced”. They also considered the spacing of the second text
to be better, though that was not intentional (all texts had a spacing of 1.5, but the amount
of paragraphs/newlines may have varied). The participant had myopia and dyslexia.
Second participant, without eye conditions, liked the first style, because ”it was more nar­
row and centered, so it was easier to change lines and more convenient for the eyesight”.
Other styles were said to ”require more eye movement across the screen”.
Third participant, without eye conditions, preferred the first style as the ”eyes slid down
more intuitively and it forces the brain to read faster”.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
19
==PAGE:26==
Fourth participant, without eye conditions, preferred the second because ”it was narrow
enough, third would’ve required moving the head back and forth”. Note: the participant
had to re­read the last text because the author initially showed them the wrong text. Only
the correct data was kept.
Fifth participant used to wear glasses for myopia but had now received laser treatment and
as such had no current reported conditions. The participant preferred first style ”because
the text was centered and less eye movement was required to fully read it”. Note: the
participant had to re­read the first text because of technical issues.
Sixth participant, with astigmatism, preferred second style because the text felt ”suitable
for this screen” and noted that their ”opinion might have differed if the experiment had
been conducted on a physical book”.
20
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:27==
5
Results and discussion
5.1
Demographics
Figure 5.1: Histogram of the participant age range in 5­year bins.
The ages of the participants ranged 20 to 62. Average 29.4 years; median 28; standard
deviation 9.3. 3 participants (14%) were aged 24 and 28, 2 participants (10%) 23 and 31,
other ages were unique.
Figure 5.2: Pie chart of the academic level distribution
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
21
==PAGE:28==
5 participants (24%) had completed or were pursuing a Bachelor of Science degree, 5
participants (24%) had completed or were pursuing a Doctor of Philosophy degree, and
11 participants (52%) had completed or were pursuing a Master of Science degree. No
participants had gymnasium­level or lower education.
Figure 5.3: Bar chart of self­rated English proficiency level distribution
2 participants (10%) were native English speakers, 15 participants (71%) rated them­
selves as C1 or C2 and 4 participants (19%) rated themselves as B1 or B2 on the CEFR
scale[87]. No participants rated themselves as A1 or A2, which matches the Technical
University of Denmark’s academic level expectations.
Figure 5.4: Bar chart of self­rated rates of reading literature
22
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:29==
For literature reading in any language, 2 participants (10%) claimed to read ”multiple times
a week”, 2 participants (10%) ”once a week”, 8 participants (38%) ”once or twice a month”
and 8 (43%) ”less than once a month or never”.
Figure 5.5: Bar chart of self­reported conditions that affect eyesight or reading capabilities
10 participants (48%) had no sight or reading differences. 8 participants (38%) had my­
opia; 3 participants (14%) had astigmatism; 2 participants (10%) had dyslexia. One par­
ticipant (5%) had presbyopia; one had ADHD (and myopia); one had photophobia (light
sensitivity) and hypermetropia (far­sightedness). No participants had amblyopia (”lazy
eye”).
The demographics are discussed in paragraph 5.6.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
23
==PAGE:30==
5.2
Table and graph guide
The following tables and graphs describe each experiment in detail and are placed after
the discussion of the results.
Iteration fixation metric tables 5.1a, 5.3a, 5.5a indicate the following:
• Number of the person doing the experiment
• The experiment set ­ order of experiment­specific styles applied to 3 texts
• The number of the style preferred by the participant (in bold), which is used for the
fourth text
• Mean fixation duration (milliseconds) for text styles 1­3 (preferred is in bold)
• Mean fixation duration (milliseconds) for the fourth text that uses the preferred style
(in bold)
• Mean fixation duration (milliseconds) for the two non­preferred and two preferred
text styles (preferred is in bold)
• Mean fixation count for text styles 1­3 (preferred is in bold)
• Mean fixation count for the fourth text that uses the preferred style (in bold)
• Mean fixation count for the two non­preferred and two preferred text styles (preferred
is in bold)
• Fixation rates (fixations per second) for the text styles 1­3 (fixations per second,
preferred is in bold)
• Fixation rates (fixations per second) for the the fourth text that uses the preferred
style (fixations per second, in bold)
• Mean fixation rate (fixations per second) for the two non­preferred and two preferred
text styles (preferred is in bold)
Iteration pupil and saccade tables 5.1b, 5.3b, 5.5b indicate the following:
• Number of the person doing the experiment
• The experiment set ­ order of experiment­specific styles applied to 3 texts
• The number of the style preferred by the participant (in bold), which is used for the
fourth text
• Pupil sizes (millimeters) for each individual eye for text styles 1­3 (preferred is in
bold)
• Pupil sizes (millimeters) for each individual eye for the fourth text that uses the pre­
ferred style (in bold)
• Mean pupil sizes (millimeters) the two non­preferred and two preferred text styles
(preferred is in bold)
• Saccadic length (degrees) for text styles 1­3 (preferred is in bold)
• Saccadic length (degrees) for the fourth text that uses the preferred style (in bold)
• Mean saccadic lengths (degrees) the two non­preferred and two preferred text styles
(preferred is in bold)
24
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:31==
Reading time, saccade duration, condition tables 5.2, 5.4, 5.6 indicate the following:
• Number of the person doing the experiment
• The experiment set – order of experiment­specific styles applied to 3 texts
• The number of the style preferred by the participant (in bold), which is used for the
fourth text
• Reading time (minutes and seconds) for text styles 1­3 (preferred is in bold)
• Reading time (minutes and seconds) for the fourth text for the fourth text that uses
the preferred style (in bold)
• Mean reading time (minutes and seconds) for the two non­preferred and two pre­
ferred text styles (preferred is in bold)
• Mean saccade duration (milliseconds) for text styles 1­3 (preferred is in bold)
• Mean saccade duration (milliseconds) for the fourth text (in bold)
• Mean saccade duration (milliseconds) for the two non­preferred and two preferred
text styles (preferred is in bold)
• List of reading and eye conditions for the participant
Figures 5.6a, 5.9a, 5.12a indicate the following:
• Fixation durations for each of the three experiment­specific text styles
• Fixation durations for the mean of two non­preferred texts
• Fixation durations for the mean of two preferred texts
• Preferred initial text (from 1­3 depending on what the user chose)
• Preferred fourth text (new text displayed with user­preferred style)
Figures 5.6b, 5.9b, 5.12b indicate the following:
• Fixation counts for each of the three experiment­specific text styles
• Fixation counts for the mean of two non­preferred texts
• Fixation counts for the mean of two preferred texts
• Preferred initial text (from 1­3 depending on what the user chose)
• Preferred fourth text (new text displayed with user­preferred style)
Figures 5.6c, 5.9c, 5.12c indicate the following:
• Fixation rates for each of the three experiment­specific text styles
• Fixation rates for the mean of two non­preferred texts
• Fixation rates for the mean of two preferred texts
• Preferred initial text (from 1­3 depending on what the user chose)
• Preferred fourth text (new text displayed with user­preferred style)
Figures 5.7a, 5.10a, 5.13a indicate the following per eye:
• Pupil sizes for each of the three experiment­specific text styles
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
25
==PAGE:32==
• Pupil sizes for the mean of two non­preferred texts
• Pupil sizes for the mean of two preferred texts
• Preferred initial text (from 1­3 depending on what the user chose)
• Preferred fourth text (new text displayed with user­preferred style)
Figures 5.7b, 5.10b, 5.13b indicate the following:
• Saccadic lengths for each of the three experiment­specific text styles
• Saccadic lengths for the mean of two non­preferred texts
• Saccadic lengths for the mean of two preferred texts
• Preferred initial text (from 1­3 depending on what the user chose)
• Preferred fourth text (new text displayed with user­preferred style)
Figures 5.7c, 5.10c, 5.13c indicate the following:
• Saccadic durations for each of the three experiment­specific text styles
• Saccadic durations for the mean of two non­preferred texts
• Saccadic durations for the mean of two preferred texts
• Preferred initial text (from 1­3 depending on what the user chose)
• Preferred fourth text (new text displayed with user­preferred style)
Figures 5.8, 5.11, 5.14 indicate the following:
• Reading times for each of the three experiment­specific text styles
• Reading times for the mean of two non­preferred texts
• Reading times for the mean of two preferred texts
• Preferred initial text (from 1­3 depending on what the user chose)
• Preferred fourth text (new text displayed with user­preferred style)
26
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:33==
5.3
First experiment
• The majority preferred style 3 (6 persons). 1 person preferred style 1, 2 persons
preferred style 2. The argument for preferring style 1 was that the ”text is shorter”,
the argument for preferring style 2 and 3 was that they are ”easier to read”. (All
quotes are paraphrased.)
• 6 out of 9 people had an eye or reading condition in this experiment. Two without
eye conditions chose style 3, one chose style 2. Style 1 was chosen by participants
who had myopia and astigmatism; myopia and dyslexia. Therefore, the conditions
do not seem to correlate with style preferences directly.
• The preference for style 3 is clear by it having shortest average fixation durations
and an inter­quartile range (IQR, around 150­170ms), shortest IQR of fixation counts
(approx. 480­600), shortest IQR of saccadic lengths (approx. 1.7­2.4 degrees),
shortest IQR of reading durations (approx. 2m 10s to 3m 30s). Therefore, partici­
pants who preferred style 1 or 2 have longer IQR lengths for all mentioned criteria,
even while only considering the preferred text styles (e.g. 1 and 4).
• Fixation durations are generally longer for non­preferred texts, with the lower end of
the IQR around 160ms and a median of about 190ms, compared to preferred texts,
which have an IQR lower end of approximately 150ms and a median of around
165ms. The higher end of IQR looks similar for both.
• Fixation count IQR is the longest and median is the highest for style 2. Style 1 and
2 had font size 12 and normal width, with the difference being that line height was
1 for style 1 and 1.5 for style 2. Since line height 1.5 was generally preferred on
this and following experiments (based on participant comments), it is unclear why
fixation count varies as much on this style. As the opposite, fixation rate IQR for
style 2 has the lowest variance of approx 2.8 to 3.7 fixations per second.
• Pupil sizes vary for the left and right eye, with the left one being in the IQR range
2.2 to 3.0mm, and right one 2.3 to 3.2. There is a bigger variance in the right eye
higher end of IQR range.
• For reading durations, style 1 has the highest total variety, with the whiskers ranging
from 1m 1s to 4m 44s. The shortest time participant (8th) had myopia and read
all text styles the fastest, while the longest time participant (9th) had myopia and
dyslexia and only read this style the slowest. The slowest times of 4 minutes and
up can also be observed on 4th participant, who had no reading conditions.
• Participants 3 and 8 have a low count of fixations and high degree of saccades for
the preferred styles. This may be an error in the data, it differs from other participants
significantly.
• Shorter fixations for the fourth experiment mean that the participant chose the best
style for them. This is the case for the majority of participants except 4 and 7, though
9 is negligible. This may be explained by common sentiment that bigger text and
increased line spacing is preferred, while the participants could only choose one of
them in this experiment.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
27
==PAGE:34==
Table 5.1: Metrics for the first experiment
(a) Fixation duration, count and rate by text
Part. Exp. Pref. 1 dur.
(ms)
2 dur.
(ms)
3 dur.
(ms)
4 dur.
(ms)
dur.
non­pref.
dur.
pref.
1 fix.
count
2 fix.
count
3 fix.
count
4 fix.
count
fix.
non­pref.
fix.
pref.
1 rate
(fix/s)
2 rate
(fix/s)
3 rate
(fix/s)
4 rate
(fix/s)
rate
non­pref.
rate
pref.
1
1 2 3
2
198.7 186.5 172.6 169.8
185.6
178.2
579
557
471
405
525.0
481.0
4.0
4.0
4.1
4.0
4.0
4.0
2
2 3 1
3
189.8 178.2 166.9 139.5
184.0
153.2
585
664
556
564
624.5
560.0
3.8
4.1
3.9
3.3
3.9
3.6
3
3 1 2
3
129.5 123.3 127.2 120.5
126.4
123.8
297
127
297
27
212.0
162.0
1.2
0.6
1.3
0.1
0.9
0.7
4
1 2 3
3
170.0 202.0 170.3 197.1
186.0
183.7
533
699
756
838
616.0
797.0
2.0
2.6
3.4
3.4
2.3
3.4
5
2 3 1
3
199.2 212.7 203.7 194.6
205.9
199.1
580
552
605
500
566.0
552.5
3.9
3.6
3.8
3.9
3.8
3.8
6
3 1 2
1
150.7 144.9 155.4 140.6
150.2
145.6
440
314
515
344
414.5
392.0
3.4
2.9
3.8
3.1
3.3
3.2
7
1 2 3
3
155.3 159.3 156.8 165.4
157.3
161.1
528
725
477
470
626.5
473.5
3.1
3.4
2.9
2.8
3.2
2.8
8
2 3 1
3
149.9 180.0 142.4 142.8
164.9
142.6
181
307
197
146
244.0
171.5
2.6
3.1
2.0
2.0
2.9
2.0
9
3 1 2
2
261.1 258.5 227.3 248.3
244.2
253.4
873
400
676
515
774.5
457.5
3.0
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.1
3.2
(b) Pupil diameters and saccade amplitudes by text
Part. Exp. Pref.
1 pupil
(mm)
2 pupil
(mm)
3 pupil
(mm)
4 pupil
(mm)
pupil
non­pref.
pupil
pref.
1 sacc.
(°)
2 sacc.
(°)
3 sacc.
(°)
4 sacc.
(°)
sacc.
non­pref.
sacc.
pref.
1
1 2 3
2
2.47 / 2.55 2.45 / 2.51 2.44 / 2.51 2.45 / 2.52 2.46 / 2.53 2.45 / 2.51
1.5
1.9
1.5
2.0
1.5
1.9
2
2 3 1
3
2.25 / 2.34 2.28 / 2.36 2.25 / 2.36 2.25 / 2.35 2.26 / 2.35 2.25 / 2.35
1.1
1.1
1.7
1.8
1.1
1.8
3
3 1 2
3
2.23 / 1.98 2.25 / 2.07 2.28 / 1.99 2.21 / 2.02 2.24 / 2.02 2.25 / 2.00
2.4
3.4
2.9
6.2
2.9
4.5
4
1 2 3
3
2.68 / 2.83 2.67 / 2.81 2.75 / 2.87 2.72 / 2.84 2.67 / 2.82 2.74 / 2.85
2.8
3.2
2.3
2.5
3.0
2.4
5
2 3 1
3
2.16 / 2.05 2.20 / 2.12 2.17 / 2.08 2.14 / 2.03 2.18 / 2.08 2.16 / 2.05
1.7
1.6
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.6
6
3 1 2
1
3.00 / 2.89 2.98 / 2.87 2.99 / 2.94 2.96 / 2.85 2.99 / 2.91 2.98 / 2.87
1.8
2.2
1.9
2.1
2.0
2.0
7
1 2 3
3
3.22 / 3.21 3.07 / 3.05 3.04 / 3.03 3.01 / 2.97 3.15 / 3.13 3.02 / 3.00
1.9
1.7
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.9
8
2 3 1
3
3.23 / 3.40 3.28 / 3.43 3.24 / 3.41 3.22 / 3.40 3.25 / 3.42 3.23 / 3.41
2.8
2.3
3.2
3.7
2.5
3.5
9
3 1 2
2
2.82 / 3.20 2.93 / 3.33 3.01 / 3.36 2.82 / 3.13 2.92 / 3.28 2.88 / 3.23
2.2
2.6
2.3
1.9
2.2
2.2
28
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:35==
Table 5.2: Reading time, saccade duration by text, condition, first experiment
Part. Exp. Pref.
1 dur.
(m, s)
2 dur.
(m, s)
3 dur.
(m, s)
4 dur.
(m, s)
dur.
non­pref.
dur.
pref.
1 sacc.
(ms)
2 sacc.
(ms)
3 sacc.
(ms)
4 sacc.
(ms)
sacc.
non­pref.
sacc.
pref.
Conditions
1
1 2 3
2
2m 21s 2m 11s 1m 48s 1m 37s
2m 5s
1m 54s
49
55
57
53
53
54
­
2
2 3 1
3
2m 26s 2m 35s 2m 18s 2m 47s
2m 30s
2m 32s
55
52
59
57
53
58
­
3
3 1 2
3
3m 56s 3m 43s 3m 37s 3m 46s
3m 49s
3m 41s
53
60
58
100
56
79
myop, astig
4
1 2 3
3
4m 23s 4m 24s 3m 38s
4m 5s
4m 24s
3m 52s
54
46
52
49
50
51
­
5
2 3 1
3
2m 21s 2m 21s 2m 31s
2m 3s
2m 21s
2m 17s
48
54
47
55
51
51
presb
6
3 1 2
1
2m 3s 1m 43s
2m 6s
1m 47s
1m 55s
1m 55s
57
54
58
58
56
57
myop, astig
7
1 2 3
3
2m 45s 3m 33s 2m 39s 2m 42s
3m 9s
2m 41s
57
54
56
51
56
53
myop, ADHD
8
2 3 1
3
1m 1s
1m 32s 1m 30s
1m 6s
1m 17s
1m 18s
57
54
57
59
55
58
myop
9
3 1 2
2
4m 44s 2m 0s
3m 25s 2m 29s
4m 5s
2m 14s
52
55
54
56
53
56
myop, dysl
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
29
==PAGE:36==
(a) Analysis of fixation durations for the first experiment
(b) Analysis of fixation counts for the first experiment
(c) Analysis of fixation rates for the first experiment
Figure 5.6: Analysis of fixation durations, counts and rates for the first experiment
30
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:37==
(a) Analysis of pupil sizes for the first experiment
(b) Analysis of saccadic lengths for the first experiment
(c) Analysis of saccadic durations for the first experiment
Figure 5.7: Analysis of pupil sizes, saccadic lengths and saccadic durations for the first
experiment
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.8: Analysis of reading durations for the first experiment
32
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:39==
5.4
Second experiment
• Equal amount of people (3) preferred style 1 and 3; style 2 was not preferred. Style 1
preference was described as ”seemed like less text”, ”shorter line length”, ”shorter
width”. Style 3 preference was described as ”easy to read”, ”good spacing and
width”, ”good distance for each word”. (All quotes are paraphrased.)
• Style 1 was preferred by two participants without a reading condition and one with
myopia. Style 3 was preferred by participants with photophobia and hypermetropia;
no conditions; myopia. Therefore, style 3 is likely more effective for people with a
reading condition.
• Fixation durations indicate that the IQR lower end is higher in style 2 compared to
1 and 3.
• Fixation counts, fixation rate, pupil sizes, saccadic length and reading duration IQRs
being lower (for saccadic length, higher) indicate that style 3 is more effective than
style 1. This may be explained by the fact that style 3 had a bigger font size (16 vs
14), which is repeated in the next experiment.
• 2 persons who preferred style 3 had an increased fixation duration with it, one had
near­identical. However, fixation count was decreased in all of them.
• All 3 persons who preferred style 1 had a decreased fixation duration with it. Two of
them also had decreased fixation count, one had an increased one.
• Participant with photophobia and hypermetropia had the longest reading times for
each text.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
33
==PAGE:40==
Table 5.3: Metrics for the second experiment
(a) Fixation duration, count and rate by text
Part. Exp. Pref. 1 dur.
(ms)
2 dur.
(ms)
3 dur.
(ms)
4 dur.
(ms)
dur.
non­pref.
dur.
pref.
1 fix.
count
2 fix.
count
3 fix.
count
4 fix.
count
fix.
non­pref.
fix.
pref.
1 rate
(fix/s)
2 rate
(fix/s)
3 rate
(fix/s)
4 rate
(fix/s)
rate
non­pref.
rate
pref.
1
1 2 3
1
163.8 174.5 156.3 150.5
165.4
157.2
463
466
378
346
422.0
404.5
3.7
3.9
3.5
3.2
3.7
3.5
2
2 3 1
1
199.7 207.1 194.1 174.9
200.6
187.3
324
415
342
240
378.5
282.0
3.6
3.2
3.4
3.5
3.3
3.5
3
3 1 2
3
210.9 193.4 186.4 205.4
202.2
195.9
576
582
702
521
579.0
611.5
3.2
3.5
3.6
3.6
3.4
3.6
4
1 2 3
3
227.2 224.1 219.7 223.5
225.6
221.6
575
403
340
253
489.0
296.5
3.4
2.9
2.5
2.6
3.1
2.5
5
2 3 1
3
167.5 196.8 180.4 183.5
182.2
181.9
518
514
462
442
516.0
452.0
4.1
3.8
3.8
3.7
3.9
3.8
6
3 1 2
1
225.2 242.0 252.3 198.7
247.2
211.9
475
426
482
493
454.0
484.0
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.9
3.3
3.7
(b) Pupil diameters and saccade amplitudes by text
Part. Exp. Pref.
1 pupil
(mm)
2 pupil
(mm)
3 pupil
(mm)
4 pupil
(mm)
pupil
non­pref.
pupil
pref.
1 sacc.
(°)
2 sacc.
(°)
3 sacc.
(°)
4 sacc.
(°)
sacc.
non­pref.
sacc.
pref.
1
1 2 3
1
2.44 / 2.56 2.46 / 2.59 2.45 / 2.57 2.41 / 2.55 2.46 / 2.58 2.42 / 2.55
1.4
2.0
2.2
1.8
2.1
1.6
2
2 3 1
1
3.18 / 3.06 3.22 / 3.18 3.18 / 3.09 3.10 / 2.98 3.20 / 3.13 3.14 / 3.02
2.5
3.6
3.2
2.7
3.4
2.6
3
3 1 2
3
2.72 / 2.81 2.76 / 2.84 2.89 / 2.99 2.75 / 2.85 2.74 / 2.83 2.82 / 2.92
2.8
2.4
2.8
3.5
2.6
3.1
4
1 2 3
3
2.66 / 2.66 2.65 / 2.69 2.58 / 2.66 2.69 / 2.70 2.66 / 2.67 2.63 / 2.68
1.7
3.1
3.5
3.8
2.4
3.6
5
2 3 1
3
2.87 / 2.90 2.90 / 2.94 2.87 / 2.91 2.92 / 2.95 2.88 / 2.92 2.90 / 2.93
1.6
2.0
2.3
2.4
1.8
2.3
6
3 1 2
1
2.84 / 2.89 2.83 / 2.87 2.84 / 2.93 2.84 / 2.88 2.83 / 2.90 2.84 / 2.88
1.8
3.1
4.2
1.5
3.7
1.6
34
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:41==
Table 5.4: Reading time, saccade duration by text, condition, second experiment
Part. Exp. Pref.
1 dur.
(m, s)
2 dur.
(m, s)
3 dur.
(m, s)
4 dur.
(m, s)
dur.
non­pref.
dur.
pref.
1 sacc.
(ms)
2 sacc.
(ms)
3 sacc.
(ms)
4 sacc.
(ms)
sacc.
non­pref.
sacc.
pref.
Conditions
1
1 2 3
1
2m 1s
1m 54s 1m 41s 1m 43s
1m 48s
1m 52s
53
55
53
56
54
54
­
2
2 3 1
1
1m 25s
2m 2s
1m 36s
1m 1s
1m 49s
1m 13s
59
52
63
46
58
53
­
3
3 1 2
3
2m 56s 2m 45s 3m 11s 2m 22s
2m 51s
2m 46s
51
52
55
49
51
52
photo, hyper
4
1 2 3
3
2m 43s 2m 14s 2m 11s 1m 32s
2m 29s
1m 51s
44
51
51
54
47
52
­
5
2 3 1
3
2m 2s
2m 10s 1m 54s 1m 57s
2m 6s
1m 55s
54
52
57
54
53
55
myop
6
3 1 2
1
2m 5s
1m 58s 2m 26s
2m 1s
2m 12s
2m 3s
52
49
52
52
50
52
myop
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
35
==PAGE:42==
(a) Analysis of fixation durations for the second experiment
(b) Analysis of fixation counts for the second experiment
(c) Analysis of fixation rates for the second experiment
Figure 5.9: Analysis of fixation durations, counts and rates for the second experiment
36
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:43==
(a) Analysis of pupil sizes for the second experiment
(b) Analysis of saccadic lengths for the second experiment
(c) Analysis of saccadic durations for the second experiment
Figure 5.10: Analysis of pupil sizes, saccadic lengths and saccadic durations for the first
experiment
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.11: Analysis of reading durations for the second experiment
38
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:45==
5.5
Third experiment
• Equal amount of people (3) preferred style 1 and style 2; style 3 was not preferred.
Style 1 preference was described as ”easier to change lines”, ”requires less eye
movement”, ”eyes slid across the text more intuitively”, ”text was centered”. Style 2
preference was described as ”most balanced out of the three”, ”was narrow enough
to prevent moving head too much”, ”suitable for the experiment screen”. (All quotes
are paraphrased.)
• All participants who preferred style 1 had no reading conditions, people who pre­
ferred of style 2 had myopia and dyslexia; no conditions; astigmatism.
• The median for style 1 and style 3 fixation duration is similar, but the overall IQR
range is different ­ style 1 has higher high and lower low range boundary.
• Style 1 and 2 had mostly overlapping IQR ranges in fixation durations, fixation
counts, saccadic lengths, saccading durations. As the fixation rate and duration
were lower for style 1, it may have been better for people without reading conditions
and style 2 better for people with reading conditions.
• Pupil size range for the left eye in styles 2 and 3 was smaller compared to the right
eye.
• Saccadic lengths had significant outliers in styles 2 and 3 and the mean of two non­
preferred texts.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
39
==PAGE:46==
Table 5.5: Metrics for the third experiment
(a) Fixation duration, count and rate by text
Part. Exp. Pref. 1 dur.
(ms)
2 dur.
(ms)
3 dur.
(ms)
4 dur.
(ms)
dur.
non­pref.
dur.
pref.
1 fix.
count
2 fix.
count
3 fix.
count
4 fix.
count
fix.
non­pref.
fix.
pref.
1 rate
(fix/s)
2 rate
(fix/s)
3 rate
(fix/s)
4 rate
(fix/s)
rate
non­pref.
rate
pref.
1
1 2 3
2
142.6 151.4 168.9 154.6
155.8
153.0
362
365
402
366
382.0
365.5
3.1
3.4
3.5
3.3
3.3
3.3
2
2 3 1
1
176.0 183.5 167.6 149.2
175.6
162.6
481
564
526
467
545.0
474.0
4.2
4.1
4.4
4.1
4.2
4.2
3
3 1 2
1
207.3 237.0 250.4 163.5
243.7
185.4
291
260
273
281
266.5
286.0
3.6
3.1
3.3
3.8
3.2
3.7
4
1 2 3
2
181.3 190.1 186.8 146.5
184.1
168.3
369
292
278
245
323.5
268.5
3.3
3.7
3.9
3.2
3.6
3.5
5
2 3 1
1
243.5 224.8 185.2 223.3
205.0
233.4
335
425
139
271
282.0
303.0
3.2
3.4
1.5
3.1
2.5
3.2
6
3 1 2
2
161.9 158.4 165.7 168.7
163.8
163.6
206
240
277
228
241.5
234.0
2.8
3.6
3.1
3.7
3.0
3.7
(b) Pupil diameters and saccade amplitudes by text
Part. Exp. Pref.
1 pupil
(mm)
2 pupil
(mm)
3 pupil
(mm)
4 pupil
(mm)
pupil
non­pref.
pupil
pref.
1 sacc.
(°)
2 sacc.
(°)
3 sacc.
(°)
4 sacc.
(°)
sacc.
non­pref.
sacc.
pref.
1
1 2 3
2
2.77 / 2.85 2.62 / 2.74 2.54 / 2.69 2.60 / 2.71 2.66 / 2.77 2.61 / 2.73
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
2
2 3 1
1
2.52 / 2.50 2.60 / 2.56 2.57 / 2.52 2.49 / 2.47 2.58 / 2.54 2.50 / 2.49
1.2
1.7
1.1
1.5
1.4
1.4
3
3 1 2
1
2.44 / 2.44 2.44 / 2.46 2.53 / 2.49 2.38 / 2.42 2.48 / 2.48 2.41 / 2.43
2.0
3.8
5.7
2.5
4.8
2.2
4
1 2 3
2
2.47 / 2.50 2.49 / 2.55 2.46 / 2.55 2.45 / 2.55 2.46 / 2.52 2.47 / 2.55
2.3
2.1
3.0
2.5
2.6
2.3
5
2 3 1
1
2.62 / 2.68 2.66 / 2.73 2.64 / 2.73 2.49 / 2.53 2.65 / 2.73 2.56 / 2.60
2.1
2.1
2.7
1.7
2.4
1.9
6
3 1 2
2
2.69 / 2.70 2.74 / 2.76 2.80 / 2.81 2.71 / 2.74 2.75 / 2.75 2.73 / 2.75
2.6
2.2
2.8
2.1
2.7
2.2
40
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:47==
Table 5.6: Reading time, saccade duration by text, condition, third experiment
Part. Exp. Pref.
1 dur.
(m, s)
2 dur.
(m, s)
3 dur.
(m, s)
4 dur.
(m, s)
dur.
non­pref.
dur.
pref.
1 sacc.
(ms)
2 sacc.
(ms)
3 sacc.
(ms)
4 sacc.
(ms)
sacc.
non­pref.
sacc.
pref. Conditions
1
1 2 3
2
1m 55s 1m 41s 1m 48s 1m 46s
1m 51s
1m 43s
56
57
50
58
53
57
myop, dysl
2
2 3 1
1
1m 49s
2m 8s
1m 54s 1m 49s
2m 1s
1m 49s
51
48
50
53
49
52
­
3
3 1 2
1
1m 14s 1m 22s 1m 19s 1m 11s
1m 21s
1m 12s
61
50
54
53
52
57
­
4
2 3 1
2
1m 6s
1m 45s 1m 13s 1m 10s
1m 9s
1m 27s
54
54
51
61
52
57
­
5
2 3 1
1
1m 42s
2m 5s
1m 33s 1m 26s
1m 49s
1m 34s
43
52
57
49
55
46
­
6
3 1 2
2
1m 11s
1m 2s
1m 24s 0m 58s
1m 17s
1m 0s
54
57
58
58
56
58
astig
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
41
==PAGE:48==
(a) Analysis of fixation durations for the third experiment
(b) Analysis of fixation counts for the third experiment
(c) Analysis of fixation rates for the third experiment
Figure 5.12: Analysis of fixation durations, counts and rates for the second experiment
42
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:49==
(a) Analysis of pupil sizes for the third experiment
(b) Analysis of saccadic lengths for the third experiment
(c) Analysis of saccadic durations for the third experiment
Figure 5.13: Analysis of pupil sizes, saccadic lengths and saccadic durations for the first
experiment
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.14: Analysis of reading durations for the third experiment
5.6
Experiments overall
• The participant division matches the expectations of the Latin Square [77] ­ each
iteration has the amount of participants (9 and 6) that is divisible by the amount
of tested text styles per iteration (3). Therefore the results are balanced across
conditions, ensuring that each text style is tested equally by different participants,
reducing potential bias from individual differences.
• The experiments showed a trend towards bigger font size (from 12 to 16), increased
line height and text width. Therefore subsequent experiments focused on these
changes.
• 76% of participants (16 people) read literature ”twice a month or less”.
• 71% of participants (15 people) had an English proficiency of C1 or higher.
• 52% of participants (11 people) had some kind of eye condition, with the majority in
them (38%, 8 people) having at least myopia.
• 67% of participants (14 people) were in the age range 20 to 30.
• The first experiment had a clear ”winning” style by preference and eye reading data
(third ­ font size 14, line height 1, normal width).
• The second experiment had a tie by preference but a winning style by eye reading
data (third ­ font size 16, line height 1.5, extended width)
• The third experiment had a tie by preference and eye reading data, but leaned to­
wards having a winner based on the presence of reading conditions (font size 16,
line height 1.5, either normal width or ⅔of the screen with reading conditioned par­
ticipants preferring the latter).
44
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.15: Preference distribution across experiments. Note that styles were different
across experiments, but numbered the same.
Figure 5.15 indicates the preference distribution across the experiments.
The experiments were conducted as follows:
1. Experiment 1
1. Font size 12, line height 1, normal width (A4 paper)
2. Font size 12, line height 1.5, normal width (A4 paper)
3. Font size 14, line height 1, normal width (A4 paper)
2. Experiment 2
1. Font size 14, line height 1.5, normal width (A4 paper)
2. Font size 14, line height 1.5, extended width (option ”web view”)
3. Font size 16, line height 1.5, extended width (option ”web view”)
3. Experiment 3
1. Font size 16, line height 1.5, normal width (A4 paper)
2. Font size 16, line height 1.5, in­between width (⅔of the screen)
3. Font size 16, line height 1.5, extended width (option ”web view”)
All experiments shared the font type Times New Roman.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
45
==PAGE:52==
5.6.1
Research Question Answers
Within the selected amount of formatting styles, which text formatting style was
preferred by the participants?
Answer is inconclusive.
On Figure 5.15, it can be seen that the majority of experiment 1 participants preferred the
largest font size. On experiment 2, there was a split between font size 14 and 16 points,
normal and extended width. On experiment 3, only font size 16 was tested and the user
preference was split between normal and slightly wider width. The second experiment
had a reading data­based difference towards increased font size and width, in the third
experiment the width preference was equal by participant choice and almost equal by
reading data.
Therefore, it is known that the participants preferred a minimum font size of 16 and line
height of 1.5 points, but the specific text width preference varies.
How impactful were the differences of text styles on the reading speed?
Generally significant.
86% of participants (18 people) had a lower mean fixation duration on the two preferred
text styles. There were 3 outliers in experiments 1 and 3 who had higher mean fixation du­
ration on their preferred text styles. The difference between preferred and non­preferred
style durations varied significantly person by person ­ for some the difference was as high
as 58.3 ms (experiment 3 participant 3), for others it was as low as 0.3ms (experiment 3
participant 6).
It must be noted that each new experiment used shorter texts than the previous, to ensure
that it fits on screen entirely within the increased font size and adjusted style. Therefore
experiment 1 has naturally the longest total reading durations (maximum 4m 24s) and
experiment 3 the shortest (maximum 1m 51s).
What is the correlation between user preference, reading speed and eye tracking
data?
For the most part, user preference does match user’s reading speed and eye tracking
data.
As noted in previous two questions, there was a case of a tie in preferences for exper­
iment 2 and 3, with the eye tracking data uncovering a significant (2) and insignificant
(3) differences in participants’ reading efficiency. Reading speed was faster for preferred
style for 86% of participants.
Do eye/reading conditions affect the preference?
No, the analysis could not find differences in preference based on eye conditions, except
for minor differences in fixation rate and duration for the third experiment, which require
more research to verify.
5.7
Limitations
In the survey, participants were the most unsure about their proficiency level, especially
because some of them were born in Denmark and therefore not subjected to the same
English language tests (such as IELTS[88] or TOEFL[89]) to join the university. That
said, the university does expect a language level between B2 and C2 (average C1) for
all Danish and non­Danish citizens, bachelor’s and master’s programmes.[90, 91, 92, 93]
Therefore it is believed that all participants entered their level accurately.
46
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:53==
The experiment was designed for screens with 1920x1080 resolution, also known as ”Full
HD”, because that is the most common resolution on desktop computers, including lap­
tops[94]. However, the test screen had a higher resolution of 2560x1440[95]. This means
that while the scale, width and line spacing was accurate, the participants saw more
whitespace around the text than is typically expected. If the experiment had changed the
screen resolution to the former, the interface would show larger and blurrier text, which
would hinder the effectiveness of the experiment.
As the experiment texts were taken from same books but not same sections of the book,
some participants may have gotten more or less paragraphs in certain texts when testing
the same text style. This might have introduced a slight bias towards one text style over
the other. All texts can be viewed in appendix C.
All participants with myopia either worn prescribed glasses, contact lenses or had laser
surgery. Therefore the data collection on myopia may have been irrelevant or less signif­
icant.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
47
==PAGE:54==
6
Conclusion
This study set out to clarify how simple typographic differences influence what readers like
and how efficiently they read. Across three sequential experiments a pattern occurred:
most participants did not prefer font sizes smaller than 16 pt or line heights smaller than
1.5 lines. The best column width, though, was not the same for all readers; some liked
the usual width, while others liked a bit wider text. The difference may have been affected
by eye or reading conditions.
Eye tracking confirmed that text style preference usually implies their reading perfor­
mance. In 86% of cases the style a participant chose also produced shorter mean fixation
durations, with time savings that ranged from negligible (0.3 ms) to substantial (58 ms).
Only three outliers read more slowly in their chosen text format.
Eye and reading conditions such as myopia, astigmatism and dyslexia did not directly
influence text style preferences, though a slight variation in reading performance was
discovered in experiment 3. Because each successive experiment used shorter texts
to accommodate larger fonts, total reading times are not directly comparable across all
experiments; nevertheless, the consistent pattern of faster fixations on preferred styles
supports the conclusion that increasing font size and line spacing can measurably improve
on­screen reading for most users, while column width should remain selectable by the
user.
The analyzed data and experiment format can be used by the next researchers working
on the Reading the Reader project.
48
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Per Bækgaard. “Reading the Reader”. In: DTU/Per Bækgaard (2025). URL: https:
//people.compute.dtu.dk/pgba/research/reading-the-reader.
[2]
Per Bækgaard. DTU/Per Bækgaard. Jan. 2025. URL: https://people.compute.dtu.
dk/pgba.
[3]
Per Bækgaard and Sofie Beier. Reading the Reader. Jan. 2022. URL: https://
datascience.novonordiskfonden.dk/projects/reading-the-reader/.
[4]
Det Kongelige Akademi. Bevilling skal skabe bedre læseoplevelser for folk med
dårligt syn | Det Kongelige Akademi. Feb. 2025. URL: https://kglakademi.dk/da/
nyheder/ny-bevilling-skal-hjaelpe-millioner-af-mennesker-til-bedre-laeseoplevelse.
[5]
Madis Otenurm. Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Im­
proved User Experience. https://campusnet.dtu.dk/cnnet/ProjectInfo/?elementId=
776811. Description available in DTU’s CN Inside system. 2025.
[6]
East Valley Ophthalmology Eye Doctors. Glossary of Eye Care Terms. Feb. 2025.
URL: https : / / doctor - hill . com / mesa - eye - doctors / patient - resources / glossary -
ophthalmology-terms.
[7]
Mikael Häggström. “Medical gallery of Mikael Häggström 2014”. In: WikiJournal of
Medicine 1.2 (2014). ISSN: 2002­4436. DOI: 10.15347/wjm/2014.008.
[8]
Marcus Nyström et al. “What is a blink? Classifying and characterizing blinks in
eye openness signals”. In: Behavior Research Methods 56.4 (2024), pp. 3280–
3299. DOI: 10.3758/s13428-023-02333-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-
023-02333-9.
[9]
Cleveland Clinic. Blinking. 2023. URL: https : / / my . clevelandclinic . org / health /
articles/blinking.
[10]
WebMD Editorial Contributors. Glossary of Eye Terms. Feb. 2024. URL: https:
//www.webmd.com/eye-health/eye-glossary.
[11]
Vivid Vision, Inc. What is Visual Fixation? 2023. URL: https://www.seevividly.com/
tag/visual_fixation.
[12]
Murat Dogru et al. “Chapter 4 ­ Corneal epithelium and stem cells”. In: Corneal
Surgery (Fourth Edition). Ed. by Frederick S. Brightbill et al. Retrieved 2021­09­
27. Edinburgh: Mosby, Jan. 2009, pp. 25–31. ISBN: 978­0­323­04835­4.
[13]
Leslie Guadron et al. “Post­Saccadic Oscillations of the Pupil and Lens Reduce
Fixation Stability in Retinitis Pigmentosa and Age­Related Macular Degeneration”.
In: Investigative ophthalmology visual science 65 (May 2024), p. 39. DOI: 10.1167/
iovs.65.5.39.
[14]
Andrew T. Duchowski. Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and Practice. 3rd ed.
Springer Cham, 2017. ISBN: 978­3­319­57881­1. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-57883-
5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57883-5.
[15]
Dale Purves, George J. Augustine, David Fitzpatrick, et al., eds. Neuroscience.
2nd. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 2001. Chap. Types of Eye Movements
and Their Functions. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK10991/.
[16]
B. Estrany and Pilar Fuster­Parra. “Human Eye Tracking Through Electro­Oculography
(EOG): A Review”. In: Cooperative Design, Visualization, and Engineering. Ed. by
Yuhua Luo. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 75–85. ISBN: 978­
3­031­16538­2.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
49
==PAGE:56==
[17]
Tibor Ujbányi et al. Pilot Application of Eye­Tracking to Analyze a Computer Exam
Test. Chapter; figure on ResearchGate. Aug. 2018. URL: https://www.researchgate.
net/figure/Electro-oculography-EOG_fig1_327234488.
[18]
Laurence R Young and David Sheena. “Survey of eye movement recording meth­
ods”. In: Behavior research methods & instrumentation 7.5 (1975), pp. 397–429.
[19]
Tobii. Specifications for the Tobii Eye Tracker 4C. Sept. 2024. URL: https://help.
tobii.com/hc/en-us/articles/213414285-Specifications-for-the-Tobii-Eye-Tracker-4C.
[20]
Tobii. Tobii IS4 Platform. 2017. URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20170628192311/
https://www.tobii.com/tech/products/platforms/.
[21]
Tobii AB. Tobii and Microsoft Collaborate to Bring Eye Tracking Support in Win­
dows 10. Press release. Aug. 2017. URL: https://news.cision.com/tobii-ab/r/tobii-
and-microsoft-collaborate-to-bring-eye-tracking-support-in-windows-10,c2318283.
[22]
Madis Otenurm. Adaptive Eye Tracking For Enhanced Reading. Personal Course
with Prof. Per Bækgaard. Kongens Lyngby, May 2024.
[23]
Richard Andersson et al. “One algorithm to rule them all? An evaluation and dis­
cussion of ten eye movement event­detection algorithms”. In: Behavior Research
Methods 49.2 (2017), pp. 616–637. ISSN: 1554­3528. DOI: 10.3758/s13428-016-
0738-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-016-0738-9.
[24]
Roy S. Hessels et al. “Noise­robust fixation detection in eye movement data: Iden­
tification by two­means clustering (I2MC)”. In: Behavior Research Methods 49
(2017), pp. 1802–1823. DOI: 10.3758/s13428- 016- 0822- 1. URL: https://doi.
org/10.3758/s13428-016-0822-1.
[25]
Sean R Eddy. “What is a hidden Markov model?” In: Nature Biotechnology 22.10
(2004), pp. 1315–1316. DOI: 10.1038/nbt1004-1315. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1038/nbt1004-1315.
[26]
J. Pekkanen and O. Lappi. “A new and general approach to signal denoising and
eye movement classification based on segmented linear regression”. In: Scientific
Reports 7 (2017), p. 17726. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-17983-x. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-017-17983-x.
[27]
Dario D. Salvucci and Joseph H. Goldberg. “Identifying fixations and saccades in
eye­tracking protocols”. In: Proceedings of the 2000 Symposium on Eye Track­
ing Research & Applications. ETRA ’00. Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, USA: As­
sociation for Computing Machinery, 2000, pp. 71–78. ISBN: 1581132808. DOI:
10.1145/355017.355028. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/355017.355028.
[28]
Cambridge University Press & Assessment. Meaning of reading in Essential En­
glish Dictionary. 2025. URL: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/essential-
british-english/reading.
[29]
Cambridge University Press & Assessment. Meaning of read in Essential English
Dictionary. 2025. URL: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/essential-british-
english/read.
[30]
Daisy E. “Typographic Readability and Legibility”. In: (Dec. 2023). URL: https://
design.tutsplus.com/articles/typographic-readability-and-legibility--webdesign-12211.
[31]
Susanna Zaraysky. Introducing Accessibility in Typography. Reviewed by Bon­
nie Shaver­Troup, Hilary Palmen, and Rain Michaels. Google. Nov. 2022. URL:
https://fonts.google.com/knowledge/readability_and_accessibility/introducing_
accessibility_in_typography.
[32]
Hilary Palmen. How Type Influences Readability. Reviewed by Ben D. Sawyer,
Bonnie Shaver­Troup, and Susanna Zaraysky. 2022. URL: https://fonts.google.
com/knowledge/readability_and_accessibility/how_type_influences_readability.
50
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:57==
[33]
Vision Australia. Typography in Inclusive Design Part 1: 8 Key Tips for Accessible
Typography. 2025. URL: https : / / www . visionaustralia . org / business - consulting /
digital-access/blog/typography-in-inclusive-design-part-1.
[34]
World Wide Web Consortium. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.2.
Dec. 2024. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG22/.
[35]
British Dyslexia Association. Dyslexia Friendly Style Guide. Apr. 2023. URL: https:
//www.bdadyslexia.org.uk/advice/employers/creating-a-dyslexia-friendly-workplace/
dyslexia-friendly-style-guide.
[36]
Anne Kostick. “The Digital Reading Experience: Learning from Interaction De­
sign and UX­Usability Experts”. In: Publishing Research Quarterly 27 (Mar. 2011),
pp. 135–140. DOI: 10.1007/s12109-011-9206-7.
[37]
Craig Mod. “Embracing the Digital Book”. In: (Apr. 2010). URL: https://craigmod.
com/journal/ebooks/.
[38]
Kuo­Liang Huang, Kuo­Hsiang Chen, and Chun­Heng Ho. “Enhancement of read­
ing experience: Users’ behavior patterns and the interactive interface design of
tablet readers”. In: Library Hi Tech 32.3 (2014), pp. 509–528. ISSN: 0737­8831.
DOI: 10.1108/LHT-01-2014-0002.
[39]
D. Marikyan and S. Papagiannidis. “Technology Acceptance Model: A Review”. In:
TheoryHub Book. Ed. by S. Papagiannidis. Open.NCL, 2024. ISBN: 9781739604400.
URL: https://open.ncl.ac.uk.
[40]
Rikke Friis Dam and Teo Yu Siang. “Affinity Diagrams: How to Cluster Your Ideas
and Reveal Insights”. In: (2023). URL: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/
article/affinity-diagrams-learn-how-to-cluster-and-bundle-ideas-and-facts.
[41]
Jakob Nielsen. “Iterative User Interface Design”. In: (Nov. 1993). URL: https://
www.nngroup.com/articles/iterative-design/.
[42]
Tobii Help Center. Mounting Guide. Aug. 2016. URL: https://help.tobii.com/hc/en-
us/articles/210252245-Mounting-guide.
[43]
Rachel Melegrito. How to Use Text­to­Speech on Your Devices. Aug. 2023. URL:
https://www.makeuseof.com/use-text-to-speech-devices/.
[44]
Learning Ally. Listening is Learning: Close the Learning Gap for Struggling Read­
ers. 2024. URL: https://learningally.org.
[45]
NaturalReader. AI Text to Speech. 2025. URL: https://www.naturalreaders.com.
[46]
Matthew Lynch. 11 Must­Have Apps and Tools for Dyslexic Students. 2017. URL:
https://www.thetechedvocate.org/11-must-apps-tools-dyslexic-students/.
[47]
Diana Benner. Digital Tools for Dyslexic Students. Aug. 2023. URL: https://blog.
tcea.org/digital-tools-dyslexic-students/.
[48]
Suzie Glassman. “The Best Assistive Technology for Dyslexics”. In: WIRED (Oct.
2021). URL: https://www.wired.com/story/the-best-assistive-technology-dyslexia/.
[49]
Tamina. How do I enable spell­check in my browser? 2024. URL: https://help.
soomolearning.com/en/articles/3614032-how-do-i-enable-spell-check-in-my-browser.
[50]
Microsoft. Check grammar, spelling, and more in Word. 2025. URL: https : / /
support.microsoft.com/en-us/office/check-grammar-spelling-and-more-in-word-
0f43bf32-ccde-40c5-b16a-c6a282c0d251.
[51]
Checking Spelling and Grammar. 2025. URL: https://help.libreoffice.org/latest/en-
US/text/swriter/guide/spellcheck_dialog.html.
[52]
Ginger Software. AI Text to Speech. 2025. URL: https://www.gingersoftware.com.
[53]
Grammarly Inc. Responsible AI that ensures your writing and reputation shine.
2025. URL: https://www.grammarly.com.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
51
==PAGE:58==
[54]
April Slocombe. Dyslexia Friendly Fonts: The Top 10 Fonts for Dyslexia. Nov. 2020.
URL: https://exceptionalindividuals.com/about-us/blog/our-top-10-dyslexia-friendly-
fonts/.
[55]
Sojin Rank. 10 Best Fonts for Dyslexia. Jan. 2023. URL: https://www.audioeye.
com/post/10-best-fonts-for-dyslexia/.
[56]
Abelardo Gonzalez. OpenDyslexic: A Typeface for Dyslexia. 2011. URL: https:
//opendyslexic.org.
[57]
Christian Boer. Dyslexie Font: A Typeface for Dyslexia. 2008. URL: https://dyslexiefont.
com/en/typeface/.
[58]
MeisterLabs. Collaborative Mind Mapping. 2025. URL: https://www.mindmeister.
com.
[59]
Ayoa. Neuro­inclusive Organic Mind Maps & Much More. 2025. URL: https://www.
ayoa.com.
[60]
Christian Cawley. Best mind map software of 2024. Oct. 2024. URL: https://www.
techradar.com/best/best-mind-map-software.
[61]
Norlyn Opinaldo. Top 10 Online Mind Mapping Tools for 2025. Dec. 2024. URL:
https://gitmind.com/online-mind-map-tools.html.
[62]
Google. Google Scholar. Apr. 2025. URL: https://scholar.google.com.
[63]
scite LLC. AI for Research | Scite. Apr. 2025. URL: https://scite.ai/home.
[64]
Per Bækgaard. List of Supervised or Co­supervised Projects. Apr. 2025. URL:
https : / / people . compute . dtu . dk / pgba / supervision / #list - of - supervised - or - co -
supervised-projects.
[65]
Ashkan Tashk. Literature Review Guideline_Files. Mar. 2025. URL: https://lab.
compute.dtu.dk/rtr/resources/- /tree/main/Literature%20Review%20Guideline_
Files?ref_type=heads.
[66]
L. Tooze. “The Effect of Typographic Modifications on Pupil and Blink Behavior in
Dyslexic and Non­Dyslexic Readers”. In: Open Access Library Journal 9 (2022),
e9238. DOI: 10.4236/oalib.1109238.
[67]
G. Berget and S. Fagernes. “Reading experiences and reading efficiency among
adults with dyslexia: an accessibility study”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(2021), pp. 221–240. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-78095-1_17.
[68]
Aamir Ahmad Farooq and Lars Kristian Burchard Refsgaard. “Reading the Reader:
An intelligent system for optimizing typography for central vision loss readers”. MA
thesis. Technical University of Denmark, Feb. 2024.
[69]
Luz Emma Pereira and Mihai­Valentin Andrei. “Designing a Typography­Adaptive
Reading Interface for Individuals with Central Vision Loss”. Master Thesis. MA
thesis. Technical University of Denmark, June 2024.
[70]
Marko Palinec. “Reactive Reading: Crafting an Adaptive Frontend Interface for
Dynamic Machine Learning”. Master’s Thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
July 2021.
[71]
Helena Eschricht Jensen. “Intervening Without Interrupting: A Study On Context
Preservation For Reading Applications With Adaptive User Interfaces”. Master
Thesis. MA thesis. Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: DTU Compute, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, Jan. 2025.
[72]
Project Gutenberg. https://www.gutenberg.org. Access to over 75,000 free eBooks
in the public domain. Apr. 2025.
[73]
Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. Frankenstein; Or, The Modern Prometheus. Project
Gutenberg, Mar. 2013. URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/42324.
[74]
Jane Austen. Pride and Prejudice. Ed. by R. W. Chapman. Project Gutenberg,
May 2013. URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/42671.
52
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:59==
[75]
Lewis Carroll. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Project Gutenberg, June 2008.
URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/11.
[76]
Arthur Conan Doyle. Adventures of Sherlock Holmes. Project Gutenberg, Feb.
2015. URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/48320.
[77]
Pennsylvania State University. 4.3 ­ The Latin Square Design. Apr. 2025. URL:
https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat503/lesson/4/4.3.
[78]
Kassiani Nikolopoulou. “What Is Convenience Sampling? | Definition & Examples”.
In: Scribbr (Aug. 2022). URL: https://www.scribbr.com/methodology/convenience-
sampling/.
[79]
Tobii. Tobii Pro Eye Tracker Manager. Apr. 2025. URL: https://www.tobii.com/
products/software/applications-and-developer-kits/tobii-pro-eye-tracker-manager.
[80]
Axel Roques. Implementation of eye movement classification algorithm. 2025.
URL: https://github.com/axelroques/Eye_Movement_Classification.
[81]
Madis Otenurm. Lab Streaming Layer Tobii Pro SDK acquisition/stream outlet.
GitHub repository. 2024. URL: https://github.com/madioten/tobiilsl.
[82]
Per Bækgaard. Lab Streaming Layer Tobii Pro SDK acquisition/stream outlet. GitHub
repository. 2018. URL: https://github.com/baekgaard/tobiilsl.
[83]
Aamir Farooq. Lab Streaming Layer Tobii Pro SDK acquisition/stream outlet. GitHub
repository. 2023. URL: https://github.com/SlimShadyIAm/tobiilsl.
[84]
Tobii AB. Tobii Pro SDK documentation. 2024. URL: https://developer.tobiipro.com.
[85]
Project Jupyter. Jupyter Notebook: The Classic Notebook Interface. 2024. URL:
https://jupyter.org.
[86]
Sahira Salam. “Visual Comfort and Reading Performance: Investigating the Impact
of Text Spacing”. Thesis. May 2025.
[87]
Council of Europe. Global scale – Table 1 (CEFR 3.3): Common Reference levels.
May 2025. URL: https://www.coe.int/en/web/common- european- framework-
reference-languages/table-1-cefr-3.3-common-reference-levels-global-scale.
[88]
British Council and IDP IELTS and Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
About IELTS. Apr. 2025. URL: https://ielts.org/about-ielts.
[89]
ETS. TOEFL iBT® Frequently Asked Questions. Apr. 2025. URL: https://www.
ets.org/toefl/test-takers/ibt/faq/about-toefl-ibt.html.
[90]
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet. Specifikke adgangskrav. Apr. 2025. URL: https:
//www.dtu.dk/uddannelse/ansoegning- og- optagelse/diplomingenioer- bachelor-
optagelse/adgangskrav/specifikke-adgangskrav#sprogkrav.
[91]
Technical University of Denmark. Admission requirements for the BSc in General
Engineering. Apr. 2025. URL: https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/undergraduate/
general-engineering/admission-and-deadlines/admission-requirements.
[92]
Technical University of Denmark. Language test requirements for MSc programmes
at DTU. Apr. 2025. URL: https : / / www . dtu . dk / english / education / graduate /
admission-and-deadlines/application_procedure_dk/language-test-requirements.
[93]
Technical University of Denmark. Applying for an MSc at DTU ­ Language test
requirements. Apr. 2025. URL: https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/graduate/
admission-and-deadlines/application_procedure/apply/language-test-requirements.
[94]
StatCounter Global Stats. Desktop Screen Resolution Stats Worldwide. Apr. 2025.
URL: https://gs.statcounter.com/screen-resolution-stats/desktop/worldwide.
[95]
ASUSTeK Computer Inc. ASUS MG279Q Gaming Monitor. May 2015. URL: https:
//www.asus.com/us/displays-desktops/monitors/gaming/mg279q/.
[96]
Sally E. Shaywitz. “Dyslexia”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 338.5 (1998),
pp. 307–312. DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199801293380507. eprint: https://www.nejm.org/
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
53
==PAGE:60==
doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJM199801293380507. URL: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.
1056/NEJM199801293380507.
[97]
Aydın Kızılaslan and Muhammed Tunagür. “Dyslexia and Working Memory: Un­
derstanding Reading Comprehension and High Level Language Skills in Students
with Dyslexia”. In: Kastamonu Education Journal 29.5 (2021), pp. 941–952. DOI:
10.24106/kefdergi.741028.
[98]
Seang­Mei Saw et al. “Epidemiology of myopia”. In: Epidemiologic reviews 18.2
(1996), pp. 175–187.
[99]
Ian G Morgan, Kyoko Ohno­Matsui, and Seang­Mei Saw. “Myopia”. In: The Lancet
379.9827 (2012), pp. 1739–1748.
[100]
Scott A Read, Michael J Collins, and Leo G Carney. “A review of astigmatism and
its possible genesis”. In: Clinical and Experimental Optometry 90.1 (2007), pp. 5–
19.
[101]
Mayo Clinic. Astigmatism – Symptoms Causes. May 2025. URL: https://www.
mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/astigmatism/symptoms-causes/syc-20353835.
[102]
Thurmon E Lockhart and W Shi. “Effects of age on dynamic accommodation”. In:
Ergonomics 53.7 (2010), pp. 892–903. DOI: 10.1080/00140139.2010.489968. URL:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2908311/.
[103]
Erica Hersh. Comparing Hypermetropia and Presbyopia. Medically reviewed by
Katherine E. Duncan, MD. Nov. 2023. URL: https://www.healthline.com/health/
eye-health/difference-between-hypermetropia-and-presbyopia.
[104]
Cleveland Clinic. Photophobia. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/symptoms/
photophobia. Accessed June 9, 2025.
[105]
Valerie A Harpin. “The effect of ADHD on the life of an individual, their family,
and community from preschool to adult life”. In: Archives of disease in childhood
90.suppl 1 (2005), pp. i2–i7.
[106]
Pnina Stern et al. “Unique Patterns of Eye Movements Characterizing Inatten­
tive Reading in ADHD”. In: Journal of Attention Disorders 28.6 (2024). PMID:
38327026, pp. 1008–1016. DOI: 10.1177/10870547231223728. eprint: https://doi.
org/10.1177/10870547231223728. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/10870547231223728.
[107]
Ana Miranda et al. “Reading Performance of Young Adults With ADHD Diagnosed
in Childhood: Relations With Executive Functioning”. In: Journal of Attention Disor­
ders 21.4 (2017). PMID: 24149941, pp. 294–304. DOI: 10.1177/1087054713507977.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054713507977. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/
1087054713507977.
54
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:61==
A
Information letter and consent form
A.1
Impact of text formatting on reading performance
Dear participant,
My name is Madis Otenurm, and I am a master’s student at DTU conducting an exper­
iment as part of my master’s thesis. You are invited to participate in a research study
that explores how different text formatting styles influence reading performance and user
preference. It is important that you read this information letter carefully and understand
the terms before agreeing to participate. If you have any questions or concerns regarding
the experiment, please feel free to contact me ­ s233012@dtu.dk.
A.1.1
Your rights as a participant
Your participation in this study is completely voluntary. You have the right to:
• Decline to participate without facing any consequences.
• Withdraw from the study at any time, even if you have already given your consent.
You will be asked to give your consent to participate after you have been informed about
the experiment.
A.1.2
Purpose of the study
The goal of this study is to investigate how different text formatting styles influence reading
performance and user preference. By analyzing participants’ reading speed and accuracy
across various styles, the research examines the measurable impact of formatting on
comprehension. The study also examines whether people’s personal preferences match
the eye tracking data, essentially asking if readers can naturally tell which text format
works best for them.
The findings contribute to the development of adaptive reading systems in the Reading
the Reader project.
A.1.3
Data Privacy
All data collected during this study will be fully anonymized. No personal information will
be recorded. The only information collected will be age, academic level, English profi­
ciency, reading frequency and any reading­related conditions. This data will be used only
for research purposes and will not be shared outside the research team.
A.1.4
Your Task
During the experiment, you’ll read three one­page story excerpts, each with a slightly
different text formatting style. After finishing each excerpt, look away from the screen, and
the experiment manager will display the next text for you. Once you’ve read all three, you’ll
choose the format you preferred. Then, you’ll read a fourth excerpt using your chosen
format. Throughout the readings, a Tobii Eye Tracker will monitor your eye movements
to study how you read. The whole process should take about 10–15 minutes.
A.1.5
Consent Form
I hereby confirm that:
• I am an adult of at least 18 years of age.
• I have received clear and comprehensive information about the purpose, proce­
dures, and objectives of this study, both verbally and in writing.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
55
==PAGE:62==
• I have had the opportunity to ask questions, and all my questions have been an­
swered to my satisfaction.
• I have carefully considered my decision to participate in this experiment.
• I am participating voluntarily, without any external pressure or obligation.
I fully understand that:
• My participation is entirely voluntary, and I have the right to withdraw from the study
at any time without providing a reason.
• My privacy will be protected in accordance with Danish law and European data pro­
tection guidelines (GDPR; EU 2016/679).
• My consent will be requested again if I am invited to participate in any future exper­
iments related to this study.
I hereby give my consent to participate in this experiment:
Full name:
Date:
.
.2025
Place:
Signature:
56
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:63==
B
List of eye conditions
Here is a description of eye conditions that were present in some of the participants,
explaining the influence on participants’ reading abilities.
B.1
Dyslexia
The New England Journal of Medicine (1998) describes dyslexia as a ”familial and her­
itable learning difference”. The main aspect that makes it a ”difference” is the concept
of not understanding that a word is a combination of sounds. Therefore, the reader ex­
periences difficulty in first recognizing the word and then understanding its meaning. To
better comprehend different sentences, the readers often assume the meaning of words
that they cannot recognize in a sentence. [96] In addition to difficulties with word recog­
nition, dyslexia is marked by significant working memory deficits, which means that even
content that was just read can be hard to recall afterwards. [97]
It is controversial to diagnose and measure dyslexia with an intelligence (IQ) test. Despite
the symptoms of a dyslexic individual being similar to those of low intelligence, dyslexia
will present as not understanding the writing form of words, not the meaning of those
words. Due to this, some children may be placed in special schools that misunderstand
the learning difference and instead consider it an ability difference. The journal describes
clues and tests that are more useful in diagnosing the aspect and notes that the diag­
nosis should not be made by a single test alone but rather a combination of tests and
observations.[96]
It is also notable that dyslexia persists throughout life. With practice and time, the reader
can learn to predict words faster, but any form of reading will still require more effort
compared to those without the learning difference.[96]
Managing dyslexia is done for children in the form of training exercises to draw the con­
clusion of a word and its sounds and rhythms. For teenagers and young adults, learning
accommodation is done instead in the form of allowing computers with spellcheckers,
giving lecture content as audiobooks, allowing the usage of lecture notes in exams, con­
ducting exams in a separate quiet room, and more. [96]
B.2
Myopia
Myopia, also known as short­sightedness or near­sightedness, occurs when the eye grows
too long or its optical power is too strong. In this case the incoming light is brought to a
focus in front of the retina, leaving distant objects blurred. Epidemiological studies usually
label an eye as myopic when the error exceeds –0.50 dioptres, and they distinguish ordi­
nary (“physiologic”) myopia from the more severe pathological form that stretches the eye
wall and raises the risk of sight­threatening problems such as macular damage, cataract,
glaucoma and retinal detachment.[98] ”High myopia” is defined when the error exceeds ­5
D or the eye has grown several millimeters longer than average, stretching the back wall
of the eye. This stretch makes the eye bulge and its layers thin, so tears, detachments
and new, fragile blood vessels under the retina appear much more often, and they can
scar and significantly affect the vision. [99]
Both heredity and lifestyle play a part, but prolonged “near work” such as reading, writ­
ing and screen use is found to be the the strongest environmental influence. Numerous
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
57
==PAGE:64==
cross­sectional and cohort studies show that children who spend more hours on close­up
tasks develop myopia earlier and progress faster. Despite many trials ­ ranging from bi­
focal glasses and rigid contact lenses to eyedrops that relax focusing effort ­ no method
has yet shown consistent, long­term success in preventing onset or slowing progression,
largely because past studies were small, non­randomised or biased by participants know­
ing which exact treatment they received.[99]
Myopia can be managed by contact lenses, glasses, eye drops and surgery.
Stan­
dard spectacles and soft contact lenses restore clear vision but do not slow eye growth,
while new lens designs that shift peripheral focus forward, can slow down yearly wors­
ening. Nightly low­dose (0.01–0.05 %) atropine eye drops add further control to the eye
growth.[99]
B.3
Astigmatism
Astigmatism is a common eye­focusing problem—about one case in eight—that was first
noted by Thomas Young in the early 1800s. It happens when the eye bends light unevenly
in its two main directions, so the image is not sharp. The uneven bending usually comes
from the clear front surface of the eye (the cornea), but the lens inside the eye can add
or subtract a small amount. In children, large uncorrected amounts may interfere with
visual development and trigger amblyopia, and the constant blur has been linked to faster
growth of the eye and later myopia. Altogether, untreated astigmatism makes vision hazy,
orientation­dependent and tiring.[100][101]
At birth, the cornea is very curved and shaped more like a sideways­lying rugby ball,
so light is bent too strongly in the left­to­right direction; this “horizontal­steep” bending
makes the image blurry and is the most common kind until about 4 years age. As the
eye grows through childhood and young adulthood the cornea flattens, and only a small
“vertical­steep” blur remains for most people between roughly 4 and 40 years. After about
40 years the horizontal curve starts to grow steeper again, so the blur often shifts back
to the horizontal­steep type; these age changes come from the cornea itself, not the
eye’s internal lens. Right and left eyes usually show mirror­image patterns, and some
populations—such as many Native American, East Asian and Indigenous South Amer­
ican groups—have higher rates of these focusing problems, which points to underlying
anatomical influences.[100]
Astigmatism can be treated by adding a custom “cylinder” to a spectacle lens, which re­
stores a single sharp image. If the cornea is distorted by outside pressure, treating the
cause lets vision recover: removing a chalazion (a bulge in the eyelid) or other eyelid
mass reverses the induced blur, and removing a pterygium (a triangular membrane that
grows onto the cornea) smooths the corneal curve and reduces the astigmatism it cre­
ated. With these optical and, when needed, surgical tools, most people read, drive and
work without noticing their astigmatism.[100]
B.4
Presbyopia
Presbyopia is known as ”age­related loss of accommodation”. It is usually obtained at the
age of 40 or higher and the main symptom is seeing distant objects as sharper than close
by ones.[102]
Accommodation ­ the eye’s power to refocus from far to near depends on a soft crystalline
lens, tightly stretched Zonular fibres and strong ciliary muscles. With age the lens hard­
ens, the fibres lose tension and the ciliary muscle weakens, so the lens can no longer
bulge enough for close work. Therefore, the nearest distance you can bring into clear
58
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:65==
focus moves from about 10–20 cm when you’re young to roughly 1 m by middle age.
This age­related focusing decline, called presbyopia, narrows the eye’s overall focusing
range.[102]
Age also slows the dynamics of refocusing. Older eyes take longer to initiate accommo­
dation, change focus more slowly and rarely reach the same optical power; studies report
longer reaction times and highest focusing speed than in younger adults. At the same
time, eye’s cone photoreceptors (light­sensitive cells in the retina) lose sensitivity, so less
light information reaches the accommodative system, making bright light increasingly im­
portant for older readers. [102]
B.5
Hypermetropia
Hypermetropia, alternative names being ”hyperopia” and ”far­sightedness”, is a condition
that causes distant objects to look blurry. Unlike presbyopia, hypermetropia can present
more symptoms, including eye crossing, dimmed vision, inflammation or redness. While
presbyopia is caused by aging, hypermetropia is obtained at birth or via a trauma.[103]
B.6
Photophobia
Photophobia, also known as ”light sensitivity”, is a condition that causes eye sensitivity
to light, especially bright light, and its exposure can cause discomfort or pain. There are
two kinds of photophobia ­ direct photophobia causes pain in the same eye, consensual
photophobia causes pain in the opposite eye.
Photophobia can be caused by dry eye disease, astigmatism, migraines, allergies, de­
pression, eye surgeries and more.
Treatments include tinted glasses, medications and eye surgery.[104]
B.7
ADHD
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a chronic, debilitating disorder which
may impact upon many aspects of an individual’s life, including academic difficulties, so­
cial skills problems, and strained parent­child relationships.[105]
Adults with ADHD show a slow and fragmented reading pattern. In the study by Stern
et al. [106], participants with ADHD spent more time reading the text; their mean viewing
time per word was about 20% higher than that of control readers. They also reread words
three or more times in 14.5% of instances, compared with 8.2% among controls.
Eye­tracking data show that on the first fixation, readers with ADHD process a word less
thoroughly: the time does not significantly change with word length, which is normally a
key signal for deciding when to shift the eyes forward. Although they ultimately match con­
trol readers in comprehension, they do so through a start­and­stop pattern that requires
extra cognitive effort and shows attention drifting. [107, 106]
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
59
==PAGE:66==
C
Experiment texts
Here is a list of text excerpts used in the experiment, showcased in consistent formatting,
in the order of display in the experiment.
• Frankenstein; Or, The Modern Prometheus by Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley [73]
• Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen [74]
• Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll [75]
• The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle [76]
C.1
Frankenstein
C.1.1
Chapter I (experiment 1)
I am by birth a Genevese; and my family is one of the most distinguished of that republic.
My ancestors had been for many years counsellors and syndics; and my father had filled
several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew
him, for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public business. He passed his younger
days perpetually occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of circumstances had
prevented his marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he became a husband
and the father of a family.
As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I cannot refrain from relating
them. One of his most intimate friends was a merchant, who, from a flourishing state, fell,
through numerous mischances, into poverty. This man, whose name was Beaufort, was of
a proud and unbending disposition, and could not bear to live in poverty and oblivion in the
same country where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence.
Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his
daughter to the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My father
loved Beaufort with the truest friendship, and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these
unfortunate circumstances. He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a
conduct so little worthy of the affection that united them. He lost no time in endeavouring
to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his
credit and assistance.
Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself; and it was ten months before
my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house,
which was situated in a mean street, near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and
despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the
wreck of his fortunes; but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months,
and in the mean time he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant’s
house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more
deep and rankling, when he had leisure for reflection; and at length it took so fast hold of
his mind, that at the end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any
exertion.
His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness; but she saw with despair that
their little fund was rapidly decreasing, and that there was no other prospect of support.
But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould; and her courage rose
60
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:67==
to support her in her adversity. She procured plain work; she plaited straw; and by various
means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life.
C.1.2
Chapter II (experiment 2)
We were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in our ages. I need not
say that we were strangers to any species of disunion or dispute. Harmony was the soul of
our companionship, and the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us
nearer together. Elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all
my ardour, I was capable of a more intense application, and was more deeply smitten with
the thirst for knowledge. She busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets;
and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our Swiss home—the sublime
shapes of the mountains; the changes of the seasons; tempest and calm; the silence of
winter, and the life and turbulence of our Alpine summers,—she found ample scope for
admiration and delight. While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied
spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their causes. The
world was to me a secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the
hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among
the earliest sensations I can remember.
On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their
wandering life, and fixed themselves in their native country. We possessed a house in
Geneva, and a campagne on Belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of
rather more than a league from the city. We resided principally in the latter, and the lives
of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. It was my temper to avoid a crowd,
and to attach myself fervently to a few. I was indifferent, therefore, to my schoolfellows
in general; but I united myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them.
Henry Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva. He was a boy of singular talent
and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger, for its own sake. He was
deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. He composed heroic songs, and began to
write many a tale of enchantment and knightly adventure. He tried to make us act plays,
and to enter into masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of
Roncesvalles, of the Round Table of King Arthur, and the chivalrous train who shed their
blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands of the infidels.
C.1.3
Letter III (experiment 3)
I write a few lines in haste, to say that I am safe, and well advanced on my voyage. This
letter will reach England by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from Archangel;
more fortunate than I, who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many years. I am,
however, in good spirits: my men are bold, and apparently firm of purpose; nor do the
floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers of the region towards
which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already reached a very high
latitude; but it is the height of summer, and although not so warm as in England, the
southern gales, which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so ardently desire
to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which I had not expected.
No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter. One or two stiff
gales, and the springing of a leak, are accidents which experienced navigators scarcely
remember to record; and I shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our
voyage.
Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured, that for my own sake, as well as yours, I will not
rashly encounter danger. I will be cool, persevering, and prudent.
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
61
==PAGE:68==
But success shall crown my endeavours. Wherefore not? Thus far I have gone, tracing
a secure way over the pathless seas: the very stars themselves being witnesses and
testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element?
What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man?
My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. But I must finish. Heaven bless my
beloved sister!
C.2
Pride and Prejudice
C.2.1
Chapter XII (experiment 1)
In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the next morning
to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for them in the course of the day.
But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the
following Tuesday, which would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to re­
ceive them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not
to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs. Bennet sent them word
that they could not possibly have the carriage before Tuesday; and in her postscript it
was added, that if Mr. Bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare
them very well.—Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively resolved—nor
did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, as being considered
as intruding themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley’s carriage
immediately, and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was said of wishing
them to stay at least till the following day to work on Jane; and till the morrow, their going
was deferred. Miss Bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her
jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.
The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and repeat­
edly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for her—that she was not
enough recovered; but Jane was firm where she felt herself to be right.
To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence—Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough.
She attracted him more than he liked—and Miss Bingley was uncivil to her, and more
teazing than usual to himself. He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign
of admiration should now escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope of
influencing his felicity; sensible that if such an idea had been suggested, his behaviour
during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his
purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though
they were at one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most conscientiously
to his book, and would not even look at her.
On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place.
Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection
for Jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always
give her to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly,
she even shook hands with the former.—Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the
liveliest spirits.
C.2.2
Chapter VIII (experiment 2)
At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half past six Elizabeth was summoned
to dinner. To the civil enquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the
62
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:69==
pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley’s, she could not
make a very favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to
have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves; and then thought
no more of the matter: and their indifference towards Jane when not immediately before
them, restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike.
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any
complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleas­
ing, and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was
considered by the others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom Eliz­
abeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at cards, who
when he found her prefer a plain dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing
her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were pronounced to be very bad
indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence; she had no conversation, no style, no taste,
no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the same, and added,
”She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent walker. I shall never
forget her appearance this morning. She really looked almost wild.”
”She did indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very nonsensical to come
at all! Why must she be scampering about the country, because her sister had a cold?
Her hair so untidy, so blowsy!”
”Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep in mud, I am abso­
lutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to hide it, not doing its office.”
C.2.3
Chapter III (experiment 3)
Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room;
he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so
early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak
for themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced only once
with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced to any other lady,
and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one
of his own party. His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable
man in the world, and every body hoped that he would never come there again. Amongst
the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of his general behaviour,
was sharpened into particular resentment, by his having slighted one of her daughters.
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two
dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been standing near enough for her
to overhear a conversation between him and Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for
a few minutes, to press his friend to join it.
”Come, Darcy,” said he, ”I must have you dance. I hate to see you standing about by
yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better dance.”
”I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am particularly acquainted with my
partner. At such an assembly as this, it would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged,
and there is not another woman in the room, whom it would not be a punishment to me
to stand up with.”
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
63
==PAGE:70==
C.3
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
C.3.1
Chapter I / Down the Rabbit­Hole (experiment 1)
“What a curious feeling!” said Alice; “I must be shutting up like a telescope.”
And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at
the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely
garden. First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink
any further: she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you know,” said Alice to
herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should be like then?”
And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for
she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.
After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden
at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten
the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not
possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best
to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired
herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.
“Come, there’s no use in crying like that!” said Alice to herself, rather sharply; “I advise
you to leave off this minute!” She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she
very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears
into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated
herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was
very fond of pretending to be two people. “But it’s no use now,” thought poor Alice, “to
pretend to be two people! Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make one respectable
person!”
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and
found in it a very small cake, on which the words “EAT ME” were beautifully marked in
currants. “Well, I’ll eat it,” said Alice, “and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key;
and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I’ll get into the
garden, and I don’t care which happens!”
She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, “Which way? Which way?”, holding her
hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised
to find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally happens when one
eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out­of­the­way
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way.
So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.
C.3.2
Chapter I / Down the Rabbit­Hole (experiment 2)
“What a curious feeling!” said Alice; “I must be shutting up like a telescope.”
And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at
the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely
garden. First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink
any further: she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you know,” said Alice to
herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should be like then?”
And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for
she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.
After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden
64
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:71==
at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten
the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not
possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best
to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired
herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.
“Come, there’s no use in crying like that!” said Alice to herself, rather sharply; “I advise
you to leave off this minute!” She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she
very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears
into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated
herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was
very fond of pretending to be two people. “But it’s no use now,” thought poor Alice, “to
pretend to be two people! Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make one respectable
person!”
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and
found in it a very small cake, on which the words “EAT ME” were beautifully marked in
currants. “Well, I’ll eat it,” said Alice, “and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key;
and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I’ll get into the
garden, and I don’t care which happens!”
C.3.3
Chapter I / Down the Rabbit­Hole (experiment 3)
Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having
nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but
it had no pictures or conversations in it, “and what is the use of a book,” thought Alice
“without pictures or conversations?”
So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the hot day made her
feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of making a daisy­chain would be worth
the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink
eyes ran close by her.
There was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so very much out of
the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, “Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be late!” (when she
thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but
at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually took a watch out of
its waistcoat­pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it
flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat­
pocket, or a watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after
it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit­hole under the hedge.
In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how in the world she
was to get out again.
The rabbit­hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly
down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she
found herself falling down a very deep well.
C.4
Adventures of Sherlock Holmes
C.4.1
Adventure III / A Case of Identity (experiment 1)
My dear fellow,” said Sherlock Holmes, as we sat on either side of the fire in his lodg­
ings at Baker Street, “life is infinitely stranger than anything which the mind of man could
invent. We would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
65
==PAGE:72==
of existence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover over this great city,
gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer things which are going on, the strange
coincidences, the plannings, the cross­purposes, the wonderful chains of events, working
through generations, and leading to the most outré results, it would make all fiction with
its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale and unprofitable.”
“And yet I am not convinced of it,” I answered. “The cases which come to light in the
papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough. We have in our police reports
realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither
fascinating nor artistic.”
“A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic effect,” remarked
Holmes. “This is wanting in the police report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon
the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain the
vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it there is nothing so unnatural as the
commonplace.”
I smiled and shook my head. “I can quite understand you thinking so,” I said. “Of course,
in your position of unofficial adviser and helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled,
throughout three continents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre.
But here”—I picked up the morning paper from the ground—“let us put it to a practical test.
Here is the first heading upon which I come. ‘A husband’s cruelty to his wife.’ There is half
a column of print, but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. There
is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic
sister or landlady. The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude.”
“Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument,” said Holmes, taking
the paper and glancing his eye down it. “This is the Dundas separation case, and, as
it happens, I was engaged in clearing up some small points in connection with it. The
husband was a teetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained of
was that he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by taking out his false
teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, you will allow, is not an action likely to occur to
the imagination of the average story­teller. Take a pinch of snuff, doctor, and acknowledge
that I have scored over you in your example.”
C.4.2
Adventure III / A Case of Identity (experiment 2)
My dear fellow,” said Sherlock Holmes, as we sat on either side of the fire in his lodg­
ings at Baker Street, “life is infinitely stranger than anything which the mind of man could
invent. We would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces
of existence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover over this great city,
gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer things which are going on, the strange
coincidences, the plannings, the cross­purposes, the wonderful chains of events, working
through generations, and leading to the most outré results, it would make all fiction with
its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale and unprofitable.”
“And yet I am not convinced of it,” I answered. “The cases which come to light in the
papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough. We have in our police reports
realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither
fascinating nor artistic.”
“A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic effect,” remarked
Holmes. “This is wanting in the police report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon
the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain the
66
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
==PAGE:73==
vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it there is nothing so unnatural as the
commonplace.”
I smiled and shook my head. “I can quite understand you thinking so,” I said. “Of course,
in your position of unofficial adviser and helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled,
throughout three continents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre.
But here”—I picked up the morning paper from the ground—“let us put it to a practical test.
Here is the first heading upon which I come. ‘A husband’s cruelty to his wife.’ There is half
a column of print, but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. There
is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic
sister or landlady. The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude.”
C.4.3
Adventure III / A Case of Identity (experiment 3)
“I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understand that as long as I
live at home I don’t wish to be a burden to them, and so they have the use of the money
just while I am staying with them. Of course, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank
draws my interest every quarter, and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can do pretty
well with what I earn at type­writing. It brings me twopence a sheet, and I can often do
from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day.”
“You have made your position very clear to me,” said Holmes. “This is my friend, Dr.
Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before myself. Kindly tell us now all
about your connection with Mr. Hosmer Angel.”
A flush stole over Miss Sutherland’s face, and she picked nervously at the fringe of her
jacket. “I met him first at the gasfitters’ ball,” she said. “They used to send father tickets
when he was alive, and then afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother.
Mr. Windibank did not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere. He would get
quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday­school treat. But this time I was set on
going, and I would go; for what right had he to prevent? He said the folk were not fit for
us to know, when all father’s friends were to be there. And he said that I had nothing fit
to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as taken out of the drawer.
At last, when nothing else would do, he went off to France upon the business of the firm,
but we went, mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was there
I met Mr. Hosmer Angel.”
“I suppose,” said Holmes, “that when Mr. Windibank came back from France he was very
annoyed at your having gone to the ball.”
Prototyping and Evaluating Adaptive Reading Interfaces for Improved User Experience
67
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
