==PAGE:1==
Reinforcement Learning for Structure
Discovery of Compositionally Complex
Materials
A M.Sc. Thesis in conclusion of the DTU Honours Programme
Author
s194062
Emma Christine Lei Hovmand
Supervisors
Arghya Bhowmik
Jonas Thusgaard Elsborg
DTU Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Denmark
12.06.2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
As the need for sustainable energy solutions grows, the search for advanced materials
has become a central focus in materials science. In recent years, compositionally complex
materials (CCMs) – often referred to as high-entropy alloys (HEAs) – have attracted sig-
nificant attention due to their promise of tunable and superior properties. However, the
vast chemical design space that signifies HEAs’ potential also poses their greatest hur-
dle, namely the resulting atomic complexity, which makes predictive modelling especially
challenging.
This thesis explores the development of a reinforcement learning-based generative ap-
proach to predict stable atomic configurations in HEAs, especially focusing on moving
beyond the limitations of fixed lattice structures and toward more physically meaningful
geometries. To this aim, atomistic distortion techniques are introduced and evaluated.
In particular, atomwise distortion is implemented using vector features from the MACE
message-passing neural network, and two custom multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) are de-
signed for autoregressive sampling of said distortions. The aim of this approach is to allow
the model to generate atomic configurations that deviate from the ideal lattice positions
in a controlled and meaningful manner.
In parallel, the integration of atomic switching with Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno
(BFGS) optimization is explored in two distinct arrangements. In this manner, the methods
are enabled to work synergistically, to achieve more effective exploration of the energy
landscape whilst guiding structure generation and refinement.
The entire framework is implemented in PyTorch Lightning to improve training speed,
enable greater modularity, and support easy extension by other researchers – supporting
broader adoption in the field.
This work aims not only to improve the search for stable atomistic configurations in
compositionally complex materials, but also to contribute to a broader foundation for AI-
driven materials design. While the original objective was to develop a fully functional
model capable of applying both atomic switching and distortion to any given HEA in
order to achieve a stable atomic structure by systematically lowering the system energy,
this work cannot present a final model suitable for large-scale deployment. Nonetheless,
this work presents novel techniques – including controlled atomic distortion and the custom
integration of optimisation methods – thus highlighting regions of promise and identifying
unproductive pathways, thereby narrowing the design space for future development. In
doing so, this work hopes to contribute to the advancement of modeling physically realistic
HEA structures and to establishing an approach applicable to a wider range of AI-driven
materials discovery frameworks.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface & Acknowledgments
This thesis marks the completion of the Master of Science Engineering Honours Pro-
gramme degree in Electrical Engineering from the Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
by this author, Emma Christine Lei Hovmand. This thesis, completed at the Department
of Energy at DTU under the supervision of my Honours supervisor Arghya Bhowmik and
Jonas Elsborg, amounts to 32.5 ECTS points.
This work has relied on the guidance and help of my supervisors Arghya Bhowmik and
Jonas Elsborg, to whom I’m very thankful.
Emma Hovmand, acknowledges support from the Novo Nordisk Foundation Data Sci-
ence Research Infrastructure 2022 Grant: A high-performance computing infrastructure
for data-driven research on sustainable energy materials, Grant no. NNF22OC0078009.
ii
==PAGE:4==
List of Acronyms
◦AI: Artificial Inteligence
◦ML: Machine Learning
◦NN: Neural Network
◦RL: Reinforcement Learning
◦GNN: Graph Neural Networks
◦MLP: Multi-Layer Perceptron
◦MPNN: Message Passing Neural Network
◦MACE: Multi Atomic Cluster Expansion
◦BFGS: Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno
◦TRPO: Trust-Region Policy Optimization
◦PPO: Proximal Policy Optimization
◦SAR: State-Action-Reward
◦EMT: Effective Medium Theory
◦DFT: Density Functional Theory
◦HEA: High Entropy Alloy
◦MC: Monte Carlo
◦PTL: PyTorch Lightning
◦CPU: Central Processing Unit
◦GPU: Graphics Processing Unit
◦CCM: Compositionally Complex Material
◦HEA: High-Entropy Alloy
◦MPEA: Multi-Principal-Element Alloy
◦FCC: Face-Centered Cubic
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Accelerated Materials Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
High-Entropy Alloys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Reinforcement Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
Graph-Based Representation of Materials & Graph Neural Networks . . . .
7
3.1.1
Lattice Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Geometric GNNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
MACE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Reinforcement Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
The ArtiSAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Proximal Policy Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
The Distortion Mechanism using MACE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.1
Model Structure - Distortion & Switching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.2
MLPscale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.3
MLPlogit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.4
Model Structure - Distortion alone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Pairwise atomic switching with standard structure optimization algorithms .
23
3.4.1
BFGS Optimization Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4.2
Configuration 1: Energy prediction on optimized structure without
model awareness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.3
Configuration 2: Energy prediction on optimized structure with model
awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
PyTorch Lightning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Training Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1
Training Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Generating Rollout Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Pairwise switching with BFGS optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Au2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.3
Au13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.4
NiCu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Training Loss Curves & Hyperparameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results & Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1
The MACE Distortion Mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
MLPscale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.2
MLPlogit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
BFGS Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
iv
==PAGE:6==
6
Conclusion & Outlook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Code Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Bibliography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
For millennia, the combination of elements – known as alloying – has been used to im-
prove the durability of metals. Traditionally, alloying typically involves a primary element
modified by small additions of a secondary element to enhance desired characteristics. A
significant historical example is the Bronze Age, named after the widespread adoption of
bronze. This alloy, which is primarily composed of copper with a smaller percentage of
tin, represents a significant technological advancement in human history. Bronze’s supe-
rior durability, compared to copper alone, made it a preferable choice for crafting tools,
weaponry and coins [1].
In recent years, a new alloying approach has emerged, challenging this convention, as
it seeks to feature multiple primary elements in more equal quantities, rendering their
compositional space essentially limitless. These materials are often dubbed high-entropy
alloys (HEAs) but are also referred to as compositionally complex materials (CCMs) or
multi-principal-element alloys (MPEA) [2].
As such, CCMs offer a more inclusive and
chemically diverse design space, along with the promised capacity of materials design to
provide desirable properties for application-specific settings.
Especially, the concept of
designing materials with a specific set of properties encourages systematic exploration of
material compositions and atomic configurations to provide such tailored materials [3].
The term high-entropy alloy was first introduced by Yeh et al. in 2004 [4], who proposed
that the high configurational entropy resulting from multiple principal elements stabilizes
simple solid state solution phases over complex intermetallic compounds. Concurrently,
Cantor et al. [5] independently developed a multicomponent alloy system, notably the
equiatomic CrMnFeCoNi alloy, now coined the Cantor alloy, which also exhibited a single-
phase solid solution structure.
Efforts by researchers have demonstrated promising results utilising this new alloying
approach for materials design and synthesis. Zhang et al. developed a NiCoCrAlTi HEA
that exhibits exceptional high-temperature performance combining a high yield stress of
∼1060MPa with 25% ductility at 600◦C – properties that surpass most reported Co- and
Ni-based superalloys to date [6]. In another study, Peng et al. presented a tungsten carbide
(WC) particle-reinforced CoCrFeMnNi HEA. By incorporating 2.5wt.% WC particles via
laser melting deposition, they significantly enhanced the alloy’s corrosion resistance, which
they attributed to the formation of a protective passive film.
Electrochemical testing
showed a substantial reduction in corrosion current density compared to the unreinforced
CoCrFeMnNi, indicating improved stability in corrosive environments [7].
The unusual mechanical properties of CCMs demonstrate their potential. Such CCMs,
or in this work used interchangeably with HEAs, may decompose into multiple phases
such that their superior properties vanish. The challenge therefore lies in exploring the
phase stability of CCMs. This exploration of their vast combinatorial design space should
preferably happen in an accelerated manner avoiding existing typically strenuous trial-
and-error approaches, oftentimes lasting months or even years [8].
Understanding the
novel physical mechanisms that govern the properties – and, perhaps more importantly,
the stability – of CCMs, remains a major challenge because of their inherent chemical
complexity. Leveraging recent advances in machine learning enables a more structured
exploration of complex compositional and structural spaces, due to its ability to learn high-
dimensional non-linear patterns [9]. Applying ML for HEA discovery is not new – ML has
been used for both phase prediction [10, 11] and property prediction, such as exploring
HEAs with high hardness [12] and rapidly evaluating elastic properties [13]. However, at
present there exists no method that can determine the stable atomic configuration of an
arbitrary HEA combining arbitrary elements.
Emma Hovmand
Page 1 of 56
==PAGE:8==
This work aims to combine pairwise atomic switching, inspired by the ArtiSAN [14],
with precise lattice distortion, to create a novel algorithm, able to drastically accelerate the
rate of discovery of compositionally complex materials. Trained on an array of elements,
the model could aid in the process of selecting promising candidates for synthesis and
property evaluation without human bias. The promising candidates could also be used
in a network for property prediction, further limiting the amount of synthesis lab work
needed to drive the process [9].
In summary, this work addresses a key bottleneck in materials discovery by exploring
and implementing structure optimization strategies capable of both global and local atomic
movement. Although a large undertaking, it sets out to develop a universal model capable
of accurately predicting low-energy stable atomic configurations across complex, multi-
element disordered materials – thereby accelerating the discovery of novel high-entropy
alloys and compositionally complex materials.
Emma Hovmand
Page 2 of 56
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
2.1
Accelerated Materials Discovery
The practice of interdisciplinary research by adopting artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) techniques is rapidly becoming popular within the scientific com-
munity. With the extensive advancements in AI, ML and data science, ML is proving a
capable ally across scientific fields from gaming to healthcare [15]. In the field of materials
science and discovery, these recent advances are assisting in facilitating on-demand mate-
rials design, including property and synthesis prediction [16, 17] along with inverse design
[18].
Modern state-of-the-art chemical-simulation toolkits provide powerful assistance, mak-
ing the field of computational chemistry increasingly predictive. These methods enable
prediction of material properties before laboratory synthesis, dramatically compressing
the rate of discovery. In this manner, thousands of potential material compositions and
variations can be investigated with high-throughput computational screening, providing
promising candidates for synthesis and thus drastically reducing the cost [17]. Principally,
density functional theory (DFT) [19, 20] grants impressive estimations of the behaviour,
energy, and structure of solids, facilitating the emergence of large-scale databases such as
the Materials Project [21]; providing open web-based access to computed information on
known and predicted materials, and the Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD) [22,
23]; a database of DFT calculated thermodynamic and structural properties of 1,226,781
materials.
To navigate chemical spaces of interest, an energy evaluation model is often utilised
to provide energy or structure predictions for proposed materials. Fusing the energy eval-
uator of choice with a search algorithm, enables mapping of the envisioned search space.
DFT, now a mature technique for calculating the structure and behaviour of solids [17],
provide high-accuracy predictions. It is, however, a computationally very expensive energy
evaluation method – scaling roughly with the cube of the system size [24].
O(N3)
(1)
Conversely to ab initio methods such as DFT, methods such as effective medium theory
(EMT) [25] are computationally inexpensive and provide moderate accuracy in predic-
tions. Likewise of relevance to this work is the MACE-MP-0 model [26] by Batatia et al.,
which is a new interatomic potential, built on the state-of-the-art message passing neural
network (MACE) [27] architecture. MACE-MP-0 is a general-purpose ML model, trained
on a dataset of 150, 000 inorganic crystal structures, enabling stable molecular dynamics
simulations across a diverse range of materials and chemical environments without the
need for system-specific retraining [26].
Genetic algorithms (GA), such as the machine learning-accelerated genetic algorithm
(MLaGA) [28] framework for discovery of stable nanoparticle alloys, have been applied
for rapid exploration of the potential energy surface (PES). Combining initial benchmark-
ing with EMT potential and subsequent use of DFT potential, this work demonstrates
a 50-fold reduction in the number of required DFT calculations compared to traditional
genetic algorithm methods. An example of utilising ML for HEA discovery is the work by
Rao et al. [29], who developed an active learning framework integrating ML with density
functional theory (DFT) and targeted experiments. This closed-loop approach enabled the
rapid discovery of novel HEAs with targeted properties by iteratively refining predictions
based on experimental feedback. This work incorporated a two-stage ensemble regression
model comprising a MLP and a gradient boosting decision tree. Recently, Kamnis and
Emma Hovmand
Page 3 of 56
==PAGE:10==
Delibasis [30] proposed a language transformer-based ML model for HEA property predic-
tion. By pre-training the model on large-scale synthetic materials data and fine-tuning it
on targeted HEA datasets, they addressed the inherent challenges posed by HEAs’ com-
plex, multi-principal element compositions and the limited availability of experimental
data. Leveraging transfer learning, their method effectively mitigated data scarcity and
outperformed traditional regression models such as random forest and gradient boosting
in predicting properties like ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and elongation. Similarly,
Wang et al. [31] developed a special hybrid neural network model combining a deep neural
network (DNN), a convolutional neural network (CNN) and thermodynamic descriptors
to predict mechanical properties of HEAs. They attribute the model’s performance to
its ability to understand the characteristics of HEAs - an ability they argue comes from
the special network structure. The model outperforms baseline approaches in predicting
properties such as hardness and elastic modulus.
In the case of computer-assisted drug design and discovery, recent investment by the
Novo Nordisk Foundation and the Export and Investment Fund of Denmark (EIFO) in
Denmark’s first AI ready supercomputer Gefion [32], demonstrate a growing trend in ded-
icating compute resources for scientific ML.
2.2
High-Entropy Alloys
In a multicomponent alloy the competition between the enthalpy ∆Hmix and entropy
∆Smix of mixing gives the Gibbs free energy
∆Gmix = ∆Hmix −T∆Smix
(2)
The phases present in the alloy at thermodynamic equilibrium depend on the Gibbs free
energy of mixing. Moreover, the number of phases that can coexist in an alloy is constrained
by the Gibbs phase rule
F = C −P + 2
(3)
Even in simple two-element (A-B) alloys, complete miscibility across the full composition
range is rare, with solid solutions appearing only near the pure-A or pure-B ends and an
array of intermetallic compounds in between. This tendency is worse for multi-element
alloys, because the increased amount of elements that can attract each other also increase
the number of potentially brittle intermetallics [2].
Figure 2.1 depicts varying scenarios that can occur when mixing three alloying elements
in equal amounts.
Depending on the balance of ∆Hmix and T∆Smix, one can obtain:
a single disordered solid solution, spinodal decomposition, multiple solid solutions and
ordered intermetallic compound coexisting with a solid solution [2].
The properties of
a HEA depend sensitively on the atomic ordering of the elements it is comprised of [8].
Therefore, structure prediction of local and long-range order in compositionally complex
alloys could significantly speed up the rate of discovery of novel high-performance HEAs.
2.3
Reinforcement Learning
Humans and animals learn through repeated interaction with their environment and
to guide their decision-making processes the reward and so-called punishment from said
interactions are subconsciously used. Reinforcement Learning (RL) is inspired by these
principles of learning by consequence and in the same way deploy an agent to learn how
to optimise long-term cumulative reward through exploration and feedback from its envi-
ronment. [33]
Emma Hovmand
Page 4 of 56
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Possible occurring reactions when three elements in equal proportion are mixed.
The different elements are depicted as green, blue and red spheres. The figure depicts the
formation of single and multiple solid solutions, spinodal decomposition and precipitation
of an intermetallic compound in a solid solution. Figure adapted from George et al. [2]
Emma Hovmand
Page 5 of 56
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Figure illustrating the iterative flow of the RL model this work set out to
achieve. The figure is created by the author for the purpose of this report.
Recent advances that has drawn widespread attention to reinforcement learning is the
success of Google Deepmind with AlphaGo [34], that made headlines after defeating the
world champion Lee Sedol in a five-game Go match. Later the same model was defeated by
a new version AlphaGoZero [35]. Two months after the paper presenting AlphaGoZero was
published in Nature, Deepmind released a preprint paper introducing AlphaZero [36], a
generalised algorithm that achieved superhuman performance in the games of chess, shogi
(japanese chess) as well as Go, having learnt entirely on tabula rasa self-play.
RL has already been successfully utilised in materials discovery in works like Crystal-
Gym and ArtiSAN. CrystalGym by Govindarajan et al. [37] is an open-source RL environ-
ment for crystalline material discovery. Here agents optimise target structural properties,
such as band gap and bulk modulus using direct DFT-calculated rewards. ArtiSAN (Ar-
tificial Structure Arranging Net) by Elsborg et al. [14] presents a RL agent that utilises
graph-based representations to discover low-energy atomic configurations in multicompo-
nent systems. By applying atomic switch operations the ArtiSAN is trained on small alloy
supercells ranging from binary to septenary. Remarkably, the ArtiSAN generalises to sys-
tems with over a thousand atoms surpassing conventional methods and finds physically
meaningful structures without energy evaluations once trained.
2.4
Problem Definition
This work set out to leverage the atomic switching proposed by the ArtiSAN [14] and
the state-of-the-art energy evaluator MACE-MP-0 [26], combined with a custom atomic
distortion mechanism, to develop a model capable of applying targeted distortions to in-
dividual atoms and performing pairwise atomic switching for high-entropy alloys. In this
manner, the aim is to build a model capable of applying both small local distortions to
every atom in the system as well as switching across the complete lattice structure paving
the way for a model that could provide state-of-the-art structure predictions for HEAs.
The thought for the framework is depicted in Figure 2.2. The elements in the figure are
then repeated until an RL agent learns to effectively reorganise the atomic structure of the
HEA to reach a lower-energy and more stable atomic ordering.
Emma Hovmand
Page 6 of 56
==PAGE:13==
3
Methodology
3.1
Graph-Based Representation of Materials & Graph Neural Net-
works
Atomistic systems such as crystals and molecules can intuitively lend themselves to
graph-based representations. A graph G = (V, E) is comprised of a collection of nodes V
representing atoms and edges representing interatomic relationships E ⊆V × V between
nodes [38]. These interactions are often defined by spatial proximity [39]. This use-case is
illustrated in Figure 3.1(a). Figure 3.1(b) and (c) illustrate other scenarios where graph
representation can be applied; (b) representing an image by a region adjacency graph and
(c) representing the web, where nodes stand for pages and edges represent the hyperlinks
between them.
The graph-based representation of atomic structures allows graph-based ML techniques
to exploit geometric and chemical information such as atomic numbers and spatial environ-
ment. The concept of graph neural networks (GNNs) were first presented by M. Gori et al.
in 2005 [40] and later by F Scarcelli et al. in 2009 [41]. This groundbreaking work allowed
for the modelling of a chemical compound using graph-representation. GNNs operate di-
rectly over graph-structured data, typically by iteratively updating node representations
through a process coined message passing, which can capture both local and global struc-
ture [38]. The Message Passing Neural Network (MPNN), introduced by Gilmer et al. [39]
form the foundation of many graph-based models for atomistic systems and operates in
two phases: message passing and readout. Each node in the structure is represented by
the node features νv for all v ∈V and edge features ηvw. [38] Style of notation is adopted
from the work of Gilmer et al. [39] and the ArtiSAN [14]. For T time steps, the message
passing process runs and is defined with message function Mt and vertex update function
Ut. For each iteration t ∈T, a node aggregates the messages from its neighbours via Mt
and updates its state using Ut. Following this process forms increasingly informative node
embeddings for each node in the structure. For any node v any message mv at time t + 1
is given by
mt+1
v
=
X
w∈N(v)
Mt
 νt
v, νt
w, ηvw

(4)
N(v) denotes the neighbours of v in the graph G. A typical and flexible manner to con-
struct atomic graphs and define their local neighbourhoods in both periodic and aperiodic
systems, is with k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) [42] or a cutoff radius [43, 44] – which is used
in this work. The updated node features νt+1
n
for all nodes or "vertexes" v ∈V are fetched
with the vertex update function Ut:
νt+1
v
= Ut
 νt
v, mt+1
v

(5)
During the readout phase, some readout function R is utilized to compute a feature vector
for the whole graph according to
ˆy = R
 {ht
v, mt+1
v
}

(6)
In GNN architectures, the readout function serves to aggregate node or edge-level represen-
tations into graph-level predictions [39]. This is especially necessary in atomistic modeling,
where values such as total energy must be derived from the collective structure, as it cannot
be predicted based on individual atoms [45].
In graph-based representations of atomistic structures, the number of atoms varies
across systems, and their order is arbitrary. Therefore, a suitable readout function for
Emma Hovmand
Page 7 of 56
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: Scenarios were the information is represented by graphs: (a) a chemical com-
pound (adrenaline), (b) an image, and (c) a subset of the web.
Figure adapted from
Scarselli et al. [41] (p. 62).
GNNs should satisfy two key requirements: the ability to process inputs of variable size,
and permutation invariance, ensuring the output remains unchanged under any reordering
of the input [46, 47].
Traditional readout functions implement simple sum or average operations across node
representations, implicitly leading to information loss [46]. Universal Graph Pooling (UGP)
by Navarin et al. [46], present a learnable readout function combining node features based
on structural relevance. Inspired by ArtiSAN, the readout function utilised in this work
is Universal Graph Pooling as outlined in Equation 7 and 8. Let ϕ and ρ represent neural
networks, each containing at least one hidden layer. To predict a scalar quantity E, UGP
first processes the feature vector θ(νi) at each node νi using ϕ, and then aggregates the
outputs across all nodes in the graph [14]. This aggregated representation, denoted Θ, is
defines as
Θ =
X
νi∈N
ϕ(θ(νi))
(7)
Finally, the network ϕ is applied to Θ to obtain the global prediction.
E = ρ(Θ)
(8)
This two-stage formulation enables the model to learn flexible, permutation-invariant map-
pings from variable sized node sets to a global property.
Two important classes of functions used in constructing geometric GNN layers, are
denoted invariant and equivariant functions. Following A Hitchhikers Guide to Geometric
GNNs for 3D Atomic Systems by Duval et al. [48] , the action of a group G on a space X
is denoted by g · x, for g ∈G and x ∈X.
A function f : X →Y is G-invariant if
f(g · x) = f(x),
for g ∈G, x ∈X(Ω)
(9)
which means that the output is unaffected by the group action on the input, i.e. that
the function is invariant under the group action, producing the same output regardless of
Emma Hovmand
Page 8 of 56
==PAGE:15==
how the input is transformed by elements of G [38, 48]. Notable invariant models include
SchNet [49] and DimeNet [50], where the invariant features transform according to the
identity matrix [51].
When dealing with molecular or crystal graph structures, the node features are not
only arbitrary vectors but may contain information about the atoms’ coordinates in space.
Therefore, it is desirable that these features can transform to reflect the molecules trans-
formation in space, by ensuring equivariance to the Euclidean group E(3) of rigid motions
(rotations, translations and reflections) [38].
Given a group G acting on a space X, where the action is denoted by g · x for g ∈G
and x ∈X, a function f : X →Y is G-equivariant if
f(ρ(g)x) = ρ(g)f(x),
for g ∈G, x ∈X(Ω)
(10)
which means that the output is affected by the group actions on the input – meaning that
the output transforms under G in the same way as the input [48].
Prominent equivariant models like NequIP [44], that along with invariant scalar fea-
tures, employ E(3)-equivariant convolutions for interactions of geometric tensors in order
to achieve true-to-nature and information-rich representation [51]. Another notable ex-
ample is the rotationally equivariant message passing and the polarisable atom interaction
neural network (PaiNN) [43].
3.1.1
Lattice Structure
Whilst molecules can be represented in 2D by traditional GNNs and as a set of 3D
points in space by finite geometric GNNs, modelling crystals require a different approach
[48]. 90% of naturally occurring and experimentally synthesized solids are crystaline [52].
Coined a unit cell, the simplest repeating unit in a crystaline structure, is made up of
lattice points representing the atoms’ locations. The unit cell is repeated in all directions
in three dimensions constituting the crystal structure.
Some of the simplest unit cells
that are relevant to this work are the simple cubic (SC), body-centered cubic (BCC) and
face-centered cubic (FCC), as illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Crystals are therefore, contrary
to molecules, modelled as infinite periodic. Utilising periodic boundary conditions (PBC),
this infinite repetition is accounted for by representing the unit cell by considering adjacent
atoms in adjacent unit cells in every direction [48].
3.1.2
Geometric GNNs
Geometric GNNs enhance message passing by incorporating spatial geometry - typically
spatial coordinates, angles and distances - and respect geometric symmetries like rotations,
translations and permutations. These are key in materials science and enables modeling
of directional interactions.
Nodes no longer need to be exclusively scalar but can be
geometric objects such as vectors and tensors. This gives more expressive representations
of the environment. The message passing can be thus be written as
⃗mv,t+1
i
=
X
j∈N(i)
⃗Mt(st
i, st
j,⃗vt
i,⃗vt
j, ⃗rij)
(11)
Message and update functions must be rotationally equivariant, to ensure rotational equiv-
ariance of vector features [43]. Notation style is addapted from Schütt et al. [43]. Several
works employ these principles. PaiNN by Schütt et al. [43] uses scalar and vector channels
to achieve rotation equivariance. DimeNet by Gasteiger et al. [50] embeds inter-atomic
distances and transforms messages based on the angle between the nodes, reducing MAE
by 76% on MD17 and 31% on QM9 compared to prior GNNs.
Emma Hovmand
Page 9 of 56
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.2: Cubic unit cells of metals; (Upper row) Depicting the lattice point locations,
(Bottom row) Depicting metal atom locations.
Figure adapted from [52] (Module 11,
Question 5)
3.1.3
MACE
One such geometric GNN, utilized in this work, is MACE: Higher Order Equivariant
Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields by I. Batatia et al.
[27].
While recent advances in equivariant MPNNs achieve impressive accuracy, many
suffer from high computational cost and limited scalability. The work by Batatia et al.
argue that these limits are due to their reliance on two-body massage passing, and therefore
introduce Multi-Atomic Cluster Expansion (MACE) with higher-body order messages. In
this manner, MACE reduces the number of message-passing layers while exceeding or
maintaining state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmarks [27].
These strengths make MACE a particularly compelling choice when modelling chemi-
cally diverse and structurally disordered materials, such as high-entropy alloys, where local
environments can deviate substantially from ideal symmetry and orientation-specific effects
are considerable. This makes MACE the ideal choice for this work. MACE offers multiple
geometric representations for a local environment. Relevant for this work is the scalar
features l0 and the vector features l1. In this work, the l2 matrix features are excluded
during message-passing to improve computational cost.
Emma Hovmand
Page 10 of 56
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.3: Visual illustration of an RL framework.
In this work the environment in
question is a system on a non-fixed crystal lattice. Figure is generated with assistance
from GBT-4o.
3.2
Reinforcement Learning
The subfield of artificial intelligence (AI) known as machine learning (ML) can be
categorised into three subcategories; supervised learning, unsupervised learning and rein-
forcement learning. The development of a ML model based on the principle that it learns
by trial-and-error interaction with an environment is called reinforcement learning – the
focus of this work [53]. Reinforcement learning (RL) is based upon an agent in a current
state, st, interacting with the environment through an action, at, and receiving a reward,
rt, along with the resultant next state st+1. Naturally follows the agent’s objective; to
learn the optimal manner in which to sequentially interact with the environment to max-
imise the reward [54]. This mechanism is depicted in Figure 3.3. The state, s, includes the
parameter values that describe the current configuration of the environment, which the
agent uses to choose an action from the action space, encompassing all valid actions in the
environment [55].
Of principal importance when dealing with sparse reward problems – which many RL
tasks are – is the idea of exploration versus exploitation. With a sparse reward problem,
an agent will not often encounter rewards when acting at random. For RL, in particular,
this is a challenging scenario making it difficult for the agent to learn state-action-reward
(SAR) relations – thus encouraging the use of more sophisticated exploration methods [56].
A common approach is random curiosity-driven exploration [57], but most approaches have
the same goal, namely to encourage the agent to visit new states by rewarding surprise [58],
prediction error [59], prediction uncertainty [60] or information gain [61]. These methods
aim to balance an agent’s need to explore unknown parts of the state space while exploiting
known rewarding behaviours. This balance is vital for efficient learning.
Broadly speaking, there exist two categories within RL: model-free and model-based
learning. In model-based methods, the agent has access to or learns a model of the en-
vironment allowing it to plan its actions, whereas model-free methods learn directly from
interactions without assistance from a model of the environment. With this work, the focus
is on policy optimization, which is one of the two subcategories of model-free learning –
the other being Q-learning [62].
In policy optimization methods, the policy is explicitly represented and optimized
through SAR interactions with the environment. These approaches aim to optimise the
policy parameters θ either directly, with gradient ascent on a performance objective J(πθ),
Emma Hovmand
Page 11 of 56
==PAGE:18==
or indirectly, by maximising approximations of this objective. Said optimisation is cus-
tomarily performed on-policy, meaning that updates only rely on data collected under the
last version of the policy. Usually, policy optimisation also uses a value-function approxi-
mator Vϕ(s) for the on-policy value function V π(s), to assist in guiding the policy update
[62].
Noteworthy examples of policy optimisation algorithms include asynchronous ad-
vantage actor-critic (A3C) [63], trust-region policy optimisation [64], and proximal policy
optimisation [65], which forms the foundation of this work. In contrast, Q-learning uses
an approximator Qθ(s, a) for an optimal action-value function Q∗(s, a), that is typically
based on the Bellmann equation [66]. Typically, Q-learning is off-policy, meaning that each
update can utilise data collected at any point during training, and thus not only the most
recent policy [55, 62].
Policy optimisation can again be divided into two types based on its nature: stochastic
and deterministic. In a deterministic policy, the action is exactly determined by the policy
given the state, at = µ(st). In contrast, stochastic policies define a probability distribution
at ∼π(·|st) conditioned on the current state st, from which an action is sampled, thus
representing a distribution over actions given the state 1. In deep reinforcement learning,
including in this work, a parameterised policy – characterised by outputting computable
functions – is used [55].
In accordance with the PPO algorithm, this work employs a
stochastic and parameterised policy
at ∼πθ(·|st)
(12)
Central to training stochastic policies is the sampling of actions from the policy and
computation of log-likelihoods for particular actions, expressed as log πθ(a|s).
One of
the most common stochastic policies in deep RL – and the type utilised in this work
and in ArtiSAN, from which this project is derived – is the categorical policy, used for
environments with discrete action spaces.
In consistence with categorical policies, this network outputs logits for each action.
Following with a softmax function, the logits are converted into probabilities. Utilising
PyTorch [67], these probabilities are transformed to a categorical distribution from which
an action is sampled. The log-likelihood is subsequently determined
log πθ(a|s) = log[Pθ(s)]a
(13)
where Pθ(s) denotes the last layer of probabilities [55].
3.2.1
The ArtiSAN
Compared to other algorithms for HEA discovery the ArtiSAN’s ability to switch atoms
that are far from each other in the atomic structure of the system sets ArtiSAN, by Elsborg
et al. [14], apart. This is why this project takes its offset from said work.
Fundamental to reinforcement learning is Markov decision processes. A Markov deci-
sion process (MDP) is a mathematical framework to model decision-making in environ-
ments where the outcome is partly under the control of the decision-making agent and
partly random [68]. To fulfill the Markov property, the future is independent of the past
given the present;
P(st+1|st, at) = P(st+1|s1, a1, ..., st, at)
(14)
The previously described SAR coupling can be framed as a MDP. In the case of the
ArtiSAN the MDP is frased as
M = (S, A, F, S0, γ, r)
(15)
1· is replaced by a specific action a from the action space to get π(a|st), which represents the probability
of choosing a given st according to the current policy π
Emma Hovmand
Page 12 of 56
==PAGE:19==
Here S denotes the observable states, A the available actions, F the transition function,
S0 the initial state, γ the discount factor and r the rewards.
In the context of RL, as already mentioned in passing, a value function can be utilised
to guide the agent. These value-functions indicate the expected return if an agent acts
according to a particular policy. The optimal policy is therefore sought by maximising the
expected return, given by a value-function
V π(st) = Eπ
" T
X
t′=t
γt′r(st′, aa′)|st
#
(16)
This work uses the reward defined by [14]. With the horizon, h, the reward per action
is defined
Rt = Ut−1 −Ut
Natoms ,
t ∈1, ..h
(17)
With horizon is meant the total number of actions the agent is allowed in interacting with
the current environment.
As previously described, EMT provides a fast and reasonably accurate estimate of the
system energy. The ArtiSAN utilises the Python implementation of EMT through ASE
[51, 69] for energy calculations. In this work both the MACE-MP-0 [26] and EMT potential
through ASAP [70] were explored.
The undiscounted return J corresponding to the total change in energy per atom over
the environment interaction horizon, is the main training signal. As the ArtiSAN frame-
work aims to optimise atomic structures by lowering the internal energy, this quantity is
interpreted as an approximate measure of the enthalpy change per atom:
J = ∆U =
X
t
Rt = U0 −Uh
Natoms
=
∆U
Natoms
≈
∆H
Natoms
(18)
The ArtiSAN specific flow and pertaining functions are detailed in Section 3.3.1, as to
avoid repetition in this thesis. Here the ArtiSAN flow is described alongside the imple-
mentations of this work.
3.2.2
Proximal Policy Optimization
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) by Schulman et al. [65] is a widely adopted policy
gradient method in reinforcement learning, that stands out for learning stability. PPO is
a variant of Trust-Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) by Schulman et al. [64], that aims
to improve policies without drastic policy updates that can jeopardize learning stability.
General for policy gradient methods, is to maximize the expected cumulative reward
under a parametrised policy πθ given by
LPG(θ) = ˆEt [logπθ(at|st)Ψt] ,
where Ψ = Rt
(19)
Rt is the reward at time step t. Naive gradient ascent on this objective can lead to large
and unstable policy updates. TRPO addresses this issue by introducing a constraint on
the KL-divergence between the new and old policy distributions, thus setting a limit on
the size of the policy update
LTRPO(θ) = ˆEt
 πθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st)Ψt

s.t. ˆEt [KL [πθold(·|st), πθ(·|st)]] ≤δ
(20)
KL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence [71], which is a measure of how one probability
distribution P is different from a second reference probability distribution Q [65]. πθold is
the policy with vector θold of policy parameters before the policy update.
Emma Hovmand
Page 13 of 56
==PAGE:20==
PPO suggests replacing the constrained optimization with a clipped surrogate objective
to prevent policy updates that move the policy too far from its previous version
LCLIP = ˆEt [min(rt(θ)Ψt, clip(rt(θ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Ψt)] ,
rt(θ) =
πθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st)
(21)
Where rt(θ) denote the probability ratio between the current and previous policies. The
implementation of the clipping function serves to discourage large policy updates, ensuring
the new policies stays within ’proximal’ range of its predecessor.
The final PPO objective is comprised of three components: the clipped policy objective
from Equation 21, a value function loss and lastly entropy regularisation to encourage
exploration of the environment [65, 14]. The objective at time t is given by
LPPO
t
(θ) = ˆEt

c1LCLIP
t
(θ) −c2LV F
t
(θ) + c3S[πθ(st)]

(22)
c1, c2 and c3 indicate the scaling coefficients: policy, value and entropy, respectively,
which are utilized to balance the contributions of each term in Equation 22. S[πθ(st)]
denote the entropy of the policy in the current state st. LV F
t
(θ) is the value function loss.
LV F
t
(θ) = MSE(EPS,pred, EPS,true)
(23)
where EPS,pred refers to the predicted post-action energy of the system and EPS,true refers
to the energy calculated by the EMT calculator. This is the value function loss defined for
this work inspired by [14].
Emma Hovmand
Page 14 of 56
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.4: Simple diagram of the flow of the combined distortion and switching framework
3.3
The Distortion Mechanism using MACE
As part of this project it is investigated whether combining ArtiSAN’s work on pairwise
atomic switching, to bring an atomic system to lower energy configurations, with a custom
atomic distortion method is effective. Thereby, this investigation aims to further this kind
of atomic order prediction by combining switching with distortion of the atoms in a system.
In this manner, the capability of switching atoms is utilised, while now also allowing the
system to move from an initial FCC atomic structure to a more optimal lattice structure
for this combination and quantity of materials.
In exploring in what manner to implement the distortion mechanism, two main ideas
emerged. These two methods of implementing the distortion mechanism through MACE,
coined the MLPscale and MLPlogit, will be detailed, but first the framework in which they
will work will be described.
There were many things to consider when first deciding on how to implement the
distortion mechanism. The first step was deciding on how many atoms in the system to
distort at a given time; all, a few, or one. Arguing to preserve the idea of the precise
alterations the ArtiSAN’s pairwise swapping meant for the framework, only one atom will
be applied distortion at a time. Next, the choice of when the distortion mechanism should
be applied to the system. An argument could be made to apply the distortion on the focus
and switch atom subsequently to pairwise switching.
This could reduce time to reach
lower energy structures, since the switching would most likely inherently need distortion
to correctly reflect the true physical structure. A downside to this method is however
that the distortion could be applied to a suboptimal atomic ordering and if distorted
to lower energy, hinder the model from identifying that it still needs to switch to reach
the true minimum. To seamlessly fit into the existing framework the chosen manner in
which the distortion mechanism is integrated, is to use an MLP to decide between action
methods: switching or distortion, subsequently to the choosing of a focus. Finally, the
implementation technique in which the distortion mechanism is implemented is detailed.
The ArtiSAN model only exploits the l0 scalar features from the MACE representation.
In this work, the idea is to leverage the l1 vector features for distortion implementation, as
they encode directional geometric information about the local atomic environment. This
report presents the two methods, that were tried with this project, for selecting the manner
in which to distort with the help of the l1-feature vectors. These methods are detailed in
Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.
3.3.1
Model Structure - Distortion & Switching
The full structure and the flow within the network of this work is illustrated in Figure
3.4. The training process begins with the initialisation of an atomic environment training
system. The ArtiSAN focused on alloys, but for this work nanoparticles like Au13 are
also investigated. The training system is then encoded with ASE and MACE for graph
representation.
After initialisation of the environment, the policy begins with the sampling of a focus
Emma Hovmand
Page 15 of 56
==PAGE:22==
atom. The aim is for the policy to learn to select a focus atom that seems to be poorly
positioned in the current atomic configuration. To enable this, a booster network processes
each node feature ξi combined with the average node embedding ξ to produce a context-
enhanced embedding.
ϕboost : 2 × Dnode →Dnode
(24)
The booster network is utilised to produce the embeddings:
ηfocus
i
= ϕboost([ξ, ξi])
(25)
These embeddings form the input for the MLPfocus, which produces the logits from which
a categorical distribution over all atoms in the system is created. From this distribution a
focus atom is sampled [14].
MLPfocus : Dnode →1
(26)
zfocus
i
= MLPfocus(ηfocus
i
)
(27)
p(af = i|s) = softmax(zfocus
i
) =
exp(zfocus
i
)
P
j exp(zfocus
j
)
(28)
Subsequently, to the sampling of a focus the method in which the action is applied
to said focus is sampled from the MLPmethod. A binary decision is made based upon the
input of the focus’ scalar features.
MLPmethod : Dnode →2
(29)
From the logits produced by MLPmethod a categorical distribution is created from which
to sample the method.
p(m|af, s) = softmax(MLPmethod(ξaf ))
(30)
If 0 is sampled then the action applied to the sampled focus atom will be distortion. In
contrast, if 1 is sampled, switching will be the action applied to the focus atom.
Should the chosen method be switching the input for the MLPswitch is boosted per
Equation 24. The resulting embedding (Equation 31) is fed to MLPswitch (Equation 32).
The produced logits (Equation 33) are utilised to create the categorical distribution (Equa-
tion 34) from which the switch atom is sampled.
ηswitch
i
= ϕboost([ξaf , ξj])
(31)
MLPswitch : Dnode →1
(32)
zswitch
j
= MLPswitch(ηswitch
j
)
(33)
p(as = j|af, s) = softmax(zswitch
j
) =
exp(zswitch
j
)
P
k exp(zswitch
k
)
(34)
It should be noted, that do avoid switching the focus atom with an atom of the same
element, a ’switching-mask’ is utilised [14].
If the chosen method is distortion, one of two distortion implementation methods are
applied. MLPscale and MLPlogit are detailed in Section 3.3.2 and Section 3.3.3, respectively.
For this work, the predictive ability of the critic is sought to be strengthened by in-
cluding the dot products of the focus’ feature vector with the feature vectors of its nearest
neighbours. In this manner, the hope is to give the critic an understanding of the sur-
rounding atoms. The feature vectors of all atoms in the system are summed across Dnode
Emma Hovmand
Page 16 of 56
==PAGE:23==
and normalised to ensure directional consistency, resulting in unit-length vectors to encode
the directional information.
l1 : nobs × Natoms × 3
The reasoning behind the summation of the Dnode l1 vector features for each atom is an-
chored in the idea that the sum must reflect the direction in which the atom most ’wants’
to move. Normalisation is therefore performed after the summation to preserve the idea
of a desired encoded direction within the Dnode MACE l1 vector features. The immediate
neighbours of the focus is extracted from the full list of edges encoded with MACE. The
positions of the focus and neighbouring atoms are also extracted, and the relative posi-
tions from the focus to its neighbours are calculated to provide spatial relationships. Dot
products are computed between the relative positions and the focus’ l1 feature vector.
d+
r = Ej∈N +

(rj −raf ) · vaf

,
d−
r = Ej∈N −

(rj −raf ) · vaf

(35)
This is to quantify how well-aligned the focus’ normalised feature vector is with the relative
positions of its neighbours. Subsequently, the neighbours are classified into positive and
negative, depending on whether the dot product is positive or negative (Equation 35).
The aim of this procedure is to extract the neighbours that the focus’ feature vector is
oriented towards (positive dot products) and the neighbours the focus’ feature vector is
oriented away from (negative dot products). These dot products will be referred to as the
position dot products. Thereupon, follows the computation of dot products between the
focus’ feature vector and its positive and negative neighbours’ feature vectors. These dot
products will be referred to as the feature dot products.
d+
v = Ej∈N +

vj · vaf

,
d−
v = Ej∈N −

vj · vaf

(36)
Thus, the purpose of the classification based on the neighbours relative position to the
focus was to facilitate the sorting of these vector feature dot products. Assuming that
the focus’ l1 feature vector encodes in which direction it would prefer to move, these dot
products between feature vectors should encode interatomic relations. The positive and
negative dot products are averaged for the MLPcritic.
As in the ArtiSAN, the critic evaluates the newly modified system. The node features
are pooled and utilised together with the focus scalar embedding. In this work the switch
atom embedding is not included unless it is the chosen action.
ϕpool =
N
X
i=1
P(ξi)
(37)
To promote the critics predictive capability the input to the critic depends on the
chosen method. If the chosen method is switching the input for the critic is concatenated
like so
ξcritic =

ϕpool, ξaf , ξas, 0, d+
v , d−
v

(38)
If the chosen method is distortion the input to the critic is concatenated in this manner
ξcritic =

ϕpool, 0, 0, ξaf , d+
v , d−
v

(39)
Along with the alteration of the critic to expect input on the form; 4 · Dnode + 2, this
organisation of the input to the critic serves a specific goal.
MLPcritic : 4 · Dnode + 2 →1
(40)
Emma Hovmand
Page 17 of 56
==PAGE:24==
Namely that the benefit of this form of combining the input, enables for part of the network
to learn energy prediction based on distortion and the other to learn energy prediction
based on switching.
The critic outputs the inverse of the predicted energy change
Epred = MLPcritic(ξcritic),
V (s) = −Epred
(41)
Finally the policy is updated
πθ(af, m, as/df|s) = p(af|s) · p(m|af, s) ·
 p(df|af, s)
p(as|af, s)
(42)
where m signifies the method, as indicates the switch atom and df indicates the distortion.
Another reason behind building a distribution for both the distortion and switching action,
is that the network will have equal information for the policy updates no matter the method
sampled from MLPmethod.
The collective graph features are returned from MACE on the form
MACE : nobs × Natoms × 4 · Dnode
. The first quarter of the last dimension, contain the l0 scalar features. The remaining
three-quarters are the l1 vector features. They remain in one dimension, thus they are
split into three-dimensional vectors for the purpose of this use-case. This gives the feature
dimensions
l0 : nobs × Natoms × Dnode
l1 : nobs × Natoms × 3 · Dnode →nobs × Natoms × Dnode × 3
Thus, for every atom there exists Dnode pertaining l1 feature vectors.
With this implementation, it is important to highlight that the focus and method
network is receiving more training than the switch and distortion networks. This is because
the switch and distortion networks are only seeing data, and thus their gradients are also
only updated through backpropagation, when the method chosen is in fact switching or
distortion.
Conversely, to the ArtiSAN this work theorised to improve the critics predictive abilities
by including dot products using the l1 vector features as input. The reason why the l1
vector features cannot be used directly as input to an MLP is due to the fact that vectors
are not rotation invariant. However, the dot products can be included without breaking
invariance rules.
The training framework for the configuration capable of applying both distortion and
pairwise atomic switching is depicted in Algorithm 1.
Emma Hovmand
Page 18 of 56
==PAGE:25==
Algorithm 1 Distortion + Switch Training
Require: NSAR, Nworkers, h
1: Initialize shared agent
2: for each rank = 1 to Nworkers do
3:
i ←0
4:
seed ←rank + i × Nworkers
5:
while i < NSAR do
6:
Choose system size [Nx, Ny, Nz]
7:
Randomize composition of alloy random alloy:
8:
Randomize atom positions
9:
j ←0
10:
while j < h do
11:
Sample focus atom af via MLPfocus
12:
Sample method m ∈{distort, switch} via MLPmethod
13:
Derive local dot products: d+
r , d−
r , d+
v , d−
v
14:
if m = distort then
15:
Compute direction vector vf = normalize
 P
d vaf,d

16:
Sample scaling factor s via MLPscale
17:
Apply distortion: raf ←raf + s · vf
18:
else if m = switch then
19:
Sample switch atom as via MLPswitch
20:
Swap atom types: typeaf ↔typeas
21:
end if
22:
Store state, action, reward in PPO buffer
23:
j ←j + 1
24:
i ←i + 1
25:
end while
26:
end while
27:
Compute value estimate V (s) via critic
28:
Compute gradients from PPO loss
29: end for
30: Aggregate gradients and update agent parameters via Adam
3.3.2
MLPscale
With the scaling network the concept was to leverage the idea that the sum of all
l1 vector features reflect the direction in which the focus atom most ’want’ to move. As
previously mentioned, the feature vectors for the focus atom, along with all other atoms, are
summed across Dnode and normalised to ensure directional consistency, resulting in unit-
length vectors to encode the directional information. Since the atomic distortions necessary
for the system to arrive at a physically sound atomic ordering and lattice structure should
inherently vary in length, we present the scaling method.
With the scaling method, the focus’ distortion is generated by scaling the summed and
normalized vector derived from the focus’ l1 vector features. Along with the focus’ l0 scalar
features, νfocus, and the feature dot product average, computed for the critic input, the
position dot average is likewise included as input for the MLPscale – thus the scale factor
is predicted with the MLPscale
MLPscale : Dnode + 4 →1
(43)
Emma Hovmand
Page 19 of 56
==PAGE:26==
With the scaling input on the form

ξaf , d+
r , d−
r , d+
v , d−
v

(44)
The network outputs a scalar mean µscale for a Gaussian distribution and along with a
learnable log-standard-deviation parameter σscale they make the distribution from which
the scale factor is drawn
αf ∼N(µscale, σ2
scale)
(45)
The distortion for the focus is then
df = αf ·
Dnode
X
1
l1,f
(46)
The distortion is subsequently added to the current position of the focus atom. Distortion
vectors exceeding a predefined threshold are clipped to prevent unrealistic and extreme
atomic movements.
df = clip(αf ·
Dnode
X
1
l1,f, −δ, δ)
(47)
The hope with this approach to distortion implementation using scaling of the summed and
normalised l1,f features with multiple dot products, is to provide a controlled distortion
magnitude appropriately reflecting the local atomic environment.
Initially, the idea of summing all l1 vector features for the focus to use as a distortion
vector, without any scaling, was examined. However, it was soon abandoned since this
would cause an unequal number of MLPs for switching and distortion, thus influencing
the calculated log-likelihood and entropy. Simply put; for the switching scenario the log-
likelihood and entropy would be a concatenation of said focus, method and switching
entities, whilst for the distortion scenario it would only be the focus and method entities,
since there is no network specifically for distortion. This would give a unfair influence over
the entropy and log-likelihood.
3.3.3
MLPlogit
The logit network approach to focus distortion introduces a technique of directly select-
ing a vector among the entirety of the l1,f feature vectors. This means that the distortion
vector will be sampled from the Dnode vector features of the focus. Like the scaling net-
work, the MLPlogit employ the four dot product averages (position and feature, positive
and negative) along with the l0,f scalar features, as input.
MLPlogit : Dnode + 4 →Dnode
(48)
With input concatenated as such

ξaf , d+
r , d−
r , d+
v , d−
v

(49)
The network outputs Dnode logits corresponding to the Dnode l1,f candidate distor-
tion vectors, signifying the probability of choosing each vector. Upon applying a softmax
operation on the logits to produce probabilities, a categorical probability distribution is
constructed from which the vector index i is sampled.
p(i|af, s) = softmax(zMLPlogit)
(50)
Emma Hovmand
Page 20 of 56
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: Simple diagram of the flow of the distortion-only framework
The sampled index i is used to extract the distortion from the associated l1,f vectors.
The vector is normalized relative to the largest norm within the candidate l1,f vectors to
ensure consistency across observations.
˜vj =
vj
maxk ||vk|| + ϵ
for all vj ∈l1,f
(51)
k indexes all candidate vectors in the set l1,f for the current focus. So maxk ||vk|| denotes
the maximum norm over all candidate vectors.
This selected and normalized vector directly serves as the distortion vector for the focus
df = ˜vi
(52)
Where ˜vi is the normalized candidate vector selected based on the sampled index i. The
distortion is subsequently added to the current position of the focus atom.
The hope with this approach to distortion implementation using direct sampling of the
l1,f features, is to provide the network with more direct control of the distortion, since the
l1,f features are learned by MACE, and thereby the network should be able to learn to
sample a certain vector based upon the current system state.
3.3.4
Model Structure - Distortion alone
To investigate the performance of the distortion mechanism on its own, experiments are
conducted on a reduced model structure without the method network that chooses between
distortion and switching.
Thus, also the switching network is excluded.
The reduced
model structure is depicted in Figure 3.5. This evaluation of the distortion mechanism is
conducted using both the MLPscale and MLPlogit approaches.
To assess the networks ability to learn how to meaningfully apply atomic distortion
to a system, experiments are conducted aiming to trigger model overfitting to a specified
training system. If achieved, it would be the first sign that the approach to distortion is
promising.
To investigate if overfitting is possible, three systems are investigated; the nanoparticles
Au2 and Au13 and the a HEA with 50% Ni and 50% Cu.
The training framework for the configuration only applying distortion is depicted in
Algorithm 2.
Emma Hovmand
Page 21 of 56
==PAGE:28==
Algorithm 2 Distortion-Only Training
Require: NSAR, Nworkers, h
1: Initialize shared agent
2: for each rank = 1 to Nworkers do
3:
i ←0
4:
seed ←rank + i × Nworkers
5:
while i < NSAR do
6:
Choose system size [Nx, Ny, Nz]
7:
Randomize composition of alloy
8:
Randomize atom positions
9:
j ←0
10:
while j < h do
11:
Sample focus atom af via MLPfocus
12:
Compute direction vector vf from normalized atomic vector features
13:
Derive local dot products: d+
r , d−
r , d+
v , d−
v
14:
if MLPscale then
15:
Sample scaling factor s via MLPscale
16:
Apply distortion: raf ←raf + s · vf
17:
else if MLPlogit then
18:
Sample feature vector index k via MLPlogit
19:
Apply distortion: raf ←raf + v(k)
f
20:
end if
21:
Store state, action, reward in PPO buffer
22:
j ←j + 1
23:
i ←i + 1
24:
end while
25:
end while
26:
Compute value estimate V (s) via critic
27:
Compute gradients from PPO loss
28: end for
29: Aggregate gradients and update agent parameters via Adam
Emma Hovmand
Page 22 of 56
==PAGE:29==
3.4
Pairwise atomic switching with standard structure optimization al-
gorithms
Inspired by the success of cluster expansion Monte Carlo, this work set out to investi-
gate the combination of pairwise atomic switching with a field-standard atomic structure
optimization algorithm for stable atomic configuration prediction [51, 72].
Structure optimization algorithms can be broadly classified as either local or global.
In this work, local optimisers are explored, as determining the global minimum poses
a much harder and computationally expensive task. When chemically reasonable initial
configurations are utilized and the optimisation process is guided by a physical property
– here, system energy evaluations – a local optimisation approach should be sufficient to
identify stable low-energy structures.
To determine which optimizer to use, a small comparative study of the effectiveness
of the local optimizers BFGS, GPMIN, MDMIN, and BFGSLineSearch was conducted.
The mentioned optimizers are all available with ASE [51]. For this setup, the BFGS and
GPMIN optimizers showed the most promising results, however, even with these, it was
difficult to consistently meet the convergence criterion, defined by the condition that the
force on all individual atoms should be less than a user-defined maximum force threshold:
max
a
|⃗Fa| < fmax
(53)
The maximum force is typically in the range of 5 · 10−2. Due to convergence issues, the
setup was investigated, as it was considered unlikely that the problem was entirely the
fault of the choice of optimizer.
It was this investigation into which atomic structure optimizer to apply that led to the
observation that the MACE-MP-0 calculator struggles with accuracy for smaller atomic
structures. This means that even though the MACE-MP-0 calculator would provide more
accurate energy predictions when the trained model is deployed on larger systems, demon-
strating its generalisation ability – the point of the original ArtiSAN, and also for this
work – is to avoid energy evaluations during inference. Therefore, there is no advantage in
utilizing the MACE-MP-0 calculator over a type of EMT calculator, since it provides less
accurate energy predictions when they are actually needed. Therefore an EMT calculator
is used in the models trained for the experiments displayed in this report.
Two distinct ways of incorporating the BFGS optimization algorithm with the pairwise
switching ability of the ArtiSAN structure are investigated.
3.4.1
BFGS Optimization Algorithm
The Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) algorithm is a quasi-Newton method
commonly used for unconstrained local optimisation problems [73, 74, 75, 76]. In the con-
text of atomic structure optimisation, BFGS iteratively adjust atomic positions to min-
imise the total energy of the system. This method is well suited for smooth, differentiable
potential energy surfaces (PES) and can quickly achieve convergence near local minima.
When using the BFGS optimiser from ASE [77], atomic displacements are determined
based on two quantities. First, the atomic forces ⃗Fa on each atom as returned from the
chosen calculator. Secondly, an approximation of the Hessian matrix. The Hessian matrix
describes the curvature of the PES and is defined as the matrix of second-order partial
derivatives of the total energy E of the system with respect to the atomic coordinates xi
and xj
∂2E
∂xi∂xj
(54)
Emma Hovmand
Page 23 of 56
==PAGE:30==
Near a local minimum, the PES is locally quadratic and the atomic forces and Hessian
can accurately estimate the next step to take to reach an optimal structure. Computing
the Hessian directly is computationally expensive, therefore the BFGS algorithm estimates
it. The algorithm begins with an initial guess, which it then updated during the process
according to the gained information during the optimisation process [77].
In ASE, the optimisation process continues until the convergence criteria in Equation
53 is met.
3.4.2
Configuration 1:
Energy prediction on optimized structure without
model awareness
In this configuration, distortion of the system is applied before the energy of the system
is predicted and returned to the algorithm. With this strategy the system is unaware that
the energy that is returned is calculated on a optimised version of the system rather than
the system as the model sees it. Specifically, when an energy prediction is required, a
copy of the system is distorted with BFGS, and the resulting energy is returned – without
modifying the atomic structure available to the model. For the remainder of this report
this configuration will be referred to as BFGS-unaware. The training framework for this
configuration is depicted in Algorithm 3.
3.4.3
Configuration 2: Energy prediction on optimized structure with model
awareness
In the second configuration, the model is made aware of the BFGS-optimised atomic
structure. As such, when the model request an energy prediction, not only is the energy
based on the BFGS-optimised structure returned, but the atomic coordinates are also up-
dated within the models internal representation. In this way, when the model initiates a
pairwise switching and request an energy-based reward, the switching is applied, followed
by BFGS-optimization of the new configuration and update of the atom coordinates. Fi-
nally the reward, defined as the negative of the energy change, is returned to the model
along with the updated atomic configuration. For the remainder of this report this config-
uration will be referred to as BFGS-aware. The training framework for this configuration
is depicted in Algorithm 3.
Emma Hovmand
Page 24 of 56
==PAGE:31==
Algorithm 3 Switch and BFGS Training
Two BFGS configurations are supported: BFGS-unaware, where energy is returned from a
relaxed copy of the structure; and BFGS-aware, where relaxation also updates the internal
atomic configuration.
Require: NSAR, Nworkers, h
1: Initialize shared agent
2: for each rank = 1 to Nworkers do
3:
i ←0
4:
seed ←rank + i × Nworkers
5:
while i < NSAR do
6:
Choose system size [Nx, Ny, Nz]
7:
Randomize composition of alloy random alloy:
8:
Randomize atom positions
9:
j ←0
10:
while j < h do
11:
Sample focus atom af via MLPfocus
12:
Sample switch atom as via MLPswitch
13:
Swap atom types: typeaf ↔typeas
14:
Apply BFGS optimisation (aware/unaware approach)
15:
Store state, action, reward in PPO buffer
16:
j ←j + 1
17:
i ←i + 1
18:
end while
19:
end while
20:
Compute value estimate V (s) via critic
21:
Compute gradients from PPO loss
22: end for
23: Aggregate gradients and update agent parameters via Adam
Emma Hovmand
Page 25 of 56
==PAGE:32==
3.5
PyTorch Lightning
The original ArtiSAN framework utilised MPI for Python (MPI4PY) [78, 79] to facili-
tate multi-GPU training [14]. MPI4PY provides Python bindings for the Message Passing
Interface (MPI) standard, enabling explicit message-passing and fine-grained control over
distributed computation.
This setup was effective in leveraging multiple GPUs within
a high-performance computing (HPC) environment, supporting parallel rollout collection
during training. However, this kind of distributed parallelisation required significant boil-
erplate code to handle inter-process communication and parallel data collection properly.
Moreover, training the ArtiSAN was time-consuming, requiring one week on 10 GPUs
each with 10 CPUs [14]. Since this work aimed to extend the framework by incorporating
further MLPs to enable atomic position distortions, there was a desire to reduce the com-
putational cost. In addition, there was a desire for improved modularity which can make it
easier to use by other researchers and make reproducibility less complex and enable wide
adoptation. To address this, the model framework has been refactored and rewritten using
PyTorch Lightning [80], replacing the previous MPI4PY Library dependency and helping
to streamline development and the training workflow.
PyTorch Lightning (PTL) is a high-level framework built on top of PyTorch. PTL
offers the abstraction of much of the training loop logic and boilerplate code whilst keep-
ing the flexibility of PyTorch. Along with improving modularity, reducing boilerplate and
streamlining experimentation, this makes the code easier to interpret, as engineering code
is abstracted away, allowing users to focus on model development rather than engineering
infrastructure. Furthermore, the use of computing hardware resources becomes clear, fa-
cilitating switching between running on CPU or GPU (Apple Silicon MPS [81] or CUDA
[82]) and even TPU along with seamless multi-GPU or multi-node training.
This transition from MPI4PY to PTL involved several important changes. The MPI-
based training loop is replaced by the methods train_dataloader, training_step,
val_dataloader, validation_step, and configure_optimizers provided by the
LightningModule abstraction. In this manner, all training and validation code is accessible
within the model module, making the experiments easier to reproduce whilst minimising
the number of mistakes of new users. These methods are, along with the below detailed,
all new functions implemented for this work.
With the aim of implementing distortion in this work, the additional methods; distort
and distort_switch are written. The method distort applies exclusively distortion ac-
tions and it does so with the MLPlogit.
The method distort_switch is the function
utilising all the implementations written for this project. It follows the flow of Figure 3.4,
thus utilising all networks; focus, method, switch or distortions, boost and critic. The
distortion can be applied through the MLPlogit or MLPscale, per the user’s wishes.
The LightningModule demands the existence of a forward method, thus in order to
minimize the amount of changes in other scripts, the forward function simply calls the
step function, which in turn calls either switch, distort or distort_switch depending
on the desired network training.
RL is very sensitive to network weight initialisation and experimentation has therefore
been conducted with different weight initialisation methods. Therefore, there are a myr-
iad of methods to conduct various weight initialisations including; _initialize_weights,
_initialize_weights_zeros, _initialize_weights_scaling, and
_initialize_weights_logitMLP. These methods are still present in the network, since an
optimum model with an optimum hyperparameter combination is yet to be found for the
full objective of this work.
During testing of the multi-GPU training setup with PTL, the method setup_logging
was written to log the separate rollout and loss computation across GPUs to verify that
Emma Hovmand
Page 26 of 56
==PAGE:33==
these were running properly and with separate seeds for each worker. This method was also
utilised to assess that PTLs manner in which it handles gradients and back-propagation,
was working as intended with this RL framework – which is not the typical way to utilize
PTL.
The custom Trainer, facilitates training with the established LightningModule. The
selected accelerator, strategy and number of available devices is passed to the kwargs dic-
tionary, including further Trainer arguments that fit this training objective. These include
specified hyperparameters, specialised environment-specific plugins to ensure correct Slurm
[83] initialisation, along with the Weight and Biases [84] logger to facilitate live logging of
relevant training values.
To facilitate training with both CUDA [82], Apple’s Metal Performance Shaders (MPS)
[81] and CPU, the accelerator, strategy and number of devices for the PTL Trainer are set
automatically depending on availability, making this network hardware agnostic.
This
flexible design and dynamic adaptation to the execution environment ensures seamless
deployment of the model across development environments from local machines to HPCs
with multi-GPU CUDA support. With this, the hope is that the network can be easily
utilized across research projects and integrated with minimal knowledge of the inner net-
work framework, saving time. Furthermore, PTL handles utilization of GPUs and CPUs
on its own, removing the need to assign devices once the training is initiated.
Along with integrating nicely with features such as mixed-precision training, PTL allow
distributed data parallelism, which is utilised in this work. Using the custom Trainer the
state-of-the-art distributed training strategy DDPStrategy is utilised to conduct concurrent
and separate rollouts across workers. With DistributedDataParallel (DDP), each GPU
gets its own process with visibility into a subset of the overall data. Each worker initiates
the model, performs a full forward and backward pass in parallel. In this manner, all
processes participate in training and have the updated state of the model and Trainer
state. Finally, the gradients are synced automatically by PTL and averaged across all
processes. PTL offer multiple DDP strategies, but recommends regular DDP for speed
and performance [85].
In ArtiSAN, early-stopping logic based on the KL-divergence during training is imple-
mented. This early-stopping logic was always triggered across all GPU workers at the same
time, regardless of the fact that they had different rollouts. For this work, often times the
KL-divergence criteria is met on some workers and not on others, encouraging the imple-
mentation of synchronisation across workers, otherwise training halts as some workers are
waiting indefinitely on others. This implementation of KL-divergence based early-stopping
in distributed training, facilitates checking if local KL exceeds the threshold on each GPU.
Workers are synchronised with all_reduce, thus halting training across all workers if any
one GPU flags an issue. This ensures synchronous early-stopping, critical for stability in
distributed RL training. Due to the KL-divergence early-stopping, the Lightning Trainer
must be interrupted with self.trainer.should_stop = True. To be able to restart train-
ing on the next iteration, this flag must be set anew; trainer.should_stop = False, as to
not end training permanently. PTL offers the option of compiling the LightningModule, to
apply further speed-ups, especially on the latest generation of GPUs. This was attempted
but was unsuccessful [86].
Due to the alternative implementation of PTL to facilitate the RL of this network, there
were many issues with initialisation of training on the HPC Niflheim through the Slurm
Workload Manager [83]. Eventually, the issue of multi-GPU training with this custom
setup is solved by launching the training script FORGE.py with the torchrun command,
enabling fault-tolerant and elastic distributed job scheduling [85].
Furthermore to make PTL fit this reinforcement learning framework, the methods
Emma Hovmand
Page 27 of 56
==PAGE:34==
setup, on_train_epoch_end, create_environment and _create_environment_list are
defined.
PyTorch Lightning was not created with RL in mind, meaning that it required creative
workarounds to successfully implement PTL for this work. The main issue with utilising
PTL is that, in e.g. supervised learning scenarios, the entire training dataset is typically
available at the start. Consequently, training can be initiated once, and PTL ensures the
training proceeds with; dividing the dataset into batches and iterating over said batches
for a defined number of epochs whilst updating model parameters after each epoch until a
convergence criterion or early-stopping condition is met. Thus, PTL is not RL-native, ex-
pecting datasets, batches and epoch-wise training, contrasting PPO and other RL methods
which rely on collecting data iteratively through continuous interaction with the environ-
ment. In instance of this work the reward of this interaction is simply the inverse of the
energy change to the system, which the model has interacted with. The main and non-
trivial workaround is establishing the Trainer and running the full optimisation routine
inside a custom outer loop over iterations to simulate RL training epochs. Furthermore,
the RL loop is controlled manually with rollouts and KL-based early-stopping rather than
relying only on LightningModule.training_step and an epoch-batch setup. This means
that many components, like the PPO buffer, creation of environments and other factors
have been moved to be contained within the agent LightningModule. To collect rollouts in
parallel, rollouts could no longer be performed before fitting the PTL Trainer. Therefore,
the second unique customisation of PTL in this work is collecting rollouts in the setup
method. This is a major deviation from standard PTL, that normally expects data to
come from a standard DataLoader, but here interaction data is manually collected from
the environment inside setup, effectively using it as a custom data ingestion step. This
hybrid approach repurposes the setup method to support reinforcement learning workflow
in a natural way within PTL for rollout generation before the training step begins. setup
initialises rollout buffers, seeds and environments per worker and iteration, allowing each
worker to independently collect experience from interaction with the environment, which
ensures diversity in the collected training data. To ensure no repeated rollout systems the
seeds are computed uniquely across all workers per GPU and iteration as shown in
seedi,r = seedinitial + r + i · NGPU
(55)
seedinitial is the seed specified by the user-defined hyperparameters, r is the rank of the
GPU, i is the iteration as defined in the outer loop and NGPU signifies the number of
GPUs available. This seed-setting strategy is necessary due to the way model distribu-
tion is handled in PTL. Specifically, the model is not partitioned across workers until the
Trainer.fit() function is called. Therefore, setting the seed in FORGE.py – prior to model
distribution – is ineffective in ensuring varied environment initialisation across rollouts. If
the seed is set only once at the beginning of training, the first rollout environments are
unique but all subsequent rollout environments are the same. The rollouts are different
across GPUs – meaning that for each GPU there will only be two distinct rollout environ-
ments. This does not mean that the agent will interact with the environments in the same
manner each time, but it inhibits the agent’s opportunity for gathering experience with
different environment configurations. Setting the same seed as a function of the base hy-
perparameter seed plus the GPU rank, still results in repeated rollout environments, with
each GPU consistently sampling the same environment across iterations. Therefore, the
seeding strategy in Equation 55 is utilised. This approach guarantees no repeated rollout
environments for any one or across GPUs, which is essential for effective policy learning
and generalisation in RL settings. Along with setting unique seeds for each worker during
rollout, PTL offers its own seed-setting command to ensure reproducibility.
Emma Hovmand
Page 28 of 56
==PAGE:35==
4
Training Procedure
The training process is described in detail in Section 3.5. This section outlines the
various methods used for data collection for the individual experiments of this work.
This work focused primarily on implementing functional distortion using vector features
from the MACE message passing neural network. The approaches presented in this work
have been tested on a range of chemistries, including both nanoparticles and HEAs on a
crystal lattice structure. In parallel, the BFGS optimisation configurations are explored
to discover if it can work collectively with atomic pairwise switching to reorder atomic
structures to achieve lower energy atomic structures.
4.1
Training Policy
As detailed in Section 3.5, the framework produced for this work, is fitted to support
both CUDA [82] and MPS [81] for GPU computing, depending on what is available on your
local machine or potential supercomputer cluster. The code, in all its variations, has been
tested and run on the Niflheim supercomputer cluster as well as on a local MPS device.
The training flows of the models trained in this work are detailed in the Algorithms
1, 2, and 3. The hyperparameters for the training of the models whose performance is
presented in this work are seen in Table 4.1 and 4.2. Weights and Biases by CoreWeave
[84] is used to track network training and inference. It is also used to produce the graphs
presented in this report.
To better assess whether the distortion mechanism through MACE and BFGS was
working as intended, an evaluation step is implemented in the PyTorch Lightning frame-
work.
This evaluation step deploys the current model on a defined system after a set
number of training steps has been conducted. In this manner, the progression of the model
can be tracked and how well it is learning as training progresses can be assessed. The eval-
uation step also produce a trajectory file with ASE [87] to visualise every step as the model
seeks to optimise the given evaluation structure to the best of its current capabilities.
4.2
Generating Rollout Data
As with any kind of machine learning, the quality of the training data is imperative
to the performance of the final model. Therefore, careful selection and preparation of the
training data is vital. In the context of RL, the method by which the data is generated
during rollout is of utmost importance.
Additionally, selecting an appropriate energy
evaluator is crucial for ensuring that the agent receives meaningful feedback during training.
4.2.1
Pairwise switching with BFGS optimisation
To ensure a fair comparison between the two variants of pairwise atomic switching fused
with BFGS optimisation and the ArtiSAN, the data generation is kept nearly identical to
that used for the ArtiSAN. Specifically, the eight system sizes the network is trained on
are: [2 × 2 × 2], [2 × 2 × 3], [2 × 3 × 3], [3 × 3 × 3], [2 × 2 × 4], [2 × 3 × 4], [2 × 2 × 5], and
[2×2×6]. The number of atoms is calculated as 4 times the listed system size, resulting in
training data consisting of HEAs with between 32 and 108 atoms. During rollout, a random
subset of elements is drawn from the following: Aluminium (Al), Nickel (Ni), Copper (Cu),
Palladium (Pd), Silver (Ag), Platinum (Pt), and Gold (Au). These elements are supported
by both the EMT and MACE-MP-0 energy evaluators considered in this work. To generate
diverse atomic configurations for the agent to explore, the atomic elements assigned to the
lattice are randomly shuffled before being encoded as a HEA object. The systems are
Emma Hovmand
Page 29 of 56
==PAGE:36==
encoded with periodic boundary conditions in both MACE and ASE – meaning that these
systems repeat in the x, y and z directions [14]. This description details the initialisation
of HEAs on a fixed FCC lattice structure. After this, the BFGS optimisation algorithm is
applied as described in Section 3.4.
The loss curves for the BFGS-aware and BFGS-unaware models are displayed in 4.1
and 4.3, respectively.
The training system energy change for the BFGS-aware and BFGS-unaware models
are displayed in 4.2 and 4.4, respectively. These models, which have produced the results
presented in this work, are trained on 10 GPUs and 80 CPUs for 14 days.
4.2.2
Au2
Due to difficulty achieving positive results with the network on HEAs, a shift of focus
towards smaller systems happened. The trivial case of Au2 is explored to test if the network
has the ability to find the one and most stable distance between the two atoms resulting
in the lowest energy configuration. Only sparse detail will be given to this case, since
this is not of any particular interest to this work – except in that it demonstrated to the
author that distortion to better interatomic distances was possible. To facilitate training
to trigger overfitting to this simple system a random distance is sampled from a uniform
distribution between 1.5 and 4. This will serve as the distance between the two gold atoms.
The first gold atom is placed at a chosen random point inside a cube from −1 and 1 in
each dimension. The second gold atom is placed at the random distance with a direction
determined by sampling of a random unit length direction vector. This means that the
two gold atoms are positioned opposite each other on a sphere of random diameter. By
generating the training systems in this way, the aim is that the results should truly reflect if
the model has learned to find the best distance between the two Au atoms - thus overfitting
to all Au2 systems and not just one.
4.2.3
Au13
Scaling up from the Au2 system, the choice fell on the Au13 nanoparticle structure.
When assessing the network’s ability to overfit to the Au13 nanoparticle system, training
is facilitated by initialising 13 Au atoms in a suboptimal centered icosahedral geometry
[88, 89]. The thought behind this choice of initial structure is that the structure is close
enough to the optimal structure that the network should be able to identify the true stable
structure. Contrary to the optimal Au13 centered icosahedral geometry, the Au −Au bond
lengths are purposely suboptimal, with the aim of facilitating the network to find a lower
energy structure with a bond length similar to the experimentally determined 2.884 Å
optimal length [90]. To introduce variability in the training data before energy minimisa-
tion and enhance the networks chance of encountering structures where the network can
retrieve positive-reward feedback, initial distortion of all atoms in the system is applied.
Each component in the distortion displacement vector is randomly sampled from a Gaus-
sian distribution for each atom in the system. The distortion vector applied to atom i
is
di ∼N(0, 0.4I)
(56)
The covariance matrix σ2I, indicate that each component of the three-dimensional vector
is independently drawn from N(0, 0.4) - thus, there is no correlation between x, y and z
displacements. Furthermore, any displacement that exceeds the variance σ2 = 0.4 in any
dimension is clipped to ensure that no extreme distortions are applied.
For fair comparison, the BFGS optimization algorithm is applied to the same initial
Au13 system, with and without the applied Gaussian distortion. The BFGS algorithm finds
Emma Hovmand
Page 30 of 56
==PAGE:37==
its best bid on an optimal structure in four iterations, reaching an energy of 6.596999 eV
with a maximum force of 0.024740 eV/A. The algorithm is designed to stop once its below
a set maximum force threshold. Quite standard and utilised in this work is a threshold of
0.05 eV/A. This initial structure was verified to have an Au −Au distance close to the
experimentally determined Au −Au bond length of 2.884 Å [90]. To assess how influential
the number of neighbours each atom is aware of during training, training is conducted
on fully connected Au13 systems. A function is implemented to facilitate this, and the
pertaining hyperparameter is set.
The overfitting scenarios in this work are trained with a horizon of;
h = Natoms −1
(57)
In theory, the system should be able to achieve a stable atomic structure by fixing one
atom and distortion the remaining atoms.
The loss curves and training system energy change for the Au13 model presented in
this work are displayed in 4.5 and 4.6. For these curves the untouched trajectories are also
depicted along with the exponential moving average, to illustrate how noisy RL loss curves
can look. This particular model, which has produced the results presented in this work, is
trained on 4 GPUs and 32 CPUs for 10 hours.
4.2.4
NiCu
Moving away from the gold nanoparticle, training is initiated on a equiatomic NiCu
system of varying size to assess if the network has the ability to overfit to larger crystal
structures with multiple elements present.
For these experiments initial distortion per
Equation 56 is applied to introduce variability in the training systems. Training is con-
ducted on multiple system sizes, although not at the same time, with equal number of Ni
and Cu atoms on a FCC lattice. The atoms are shuffled at random in the lattice structure
such that it can be assessed if the network learns to apply atomic distortion to the system
depending on element and position. The atoms in the structure are connected to their
nearest neighbours, however training on a fully connected NiCu system is also attempted.
On the same setup a BFGS algorithm is utilised for comparison. The BFGS algorithm
optimises the equiatomic NiCu system to an energy of 6.342119 eV with a maximum force
of 0.038997 eV/A in three iterations.
The loss curves and training system energy change for the NiCu model presented in
this work are displayed in 4.7 and 4.8. This particular model, which has produced the
results presented in this work, is trained on 8 GPUs and 64 CPUs for 12 hours.
4.3
Training Loss Curves & Hyperparameters
Emma Hovmand
Page 31 of 56
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1: Exponential moving averages of the training loss for the BFGS-aware model
training run across 10 GPUs and 80 CPUs for 14 days. (a) Entropy loss, (b) Policy loss
(c) Value loss and (d) Total loss.
Figure 4.2: Exponential moving average of energy change over horizon for the BFGS-aware
training run across 10 GPUs and 80 CPUs for 14 days
Emma Hovmand
Page 32 of 56
==PAGE:39==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.3: Exponential moving averages of the training loss for the BFGS-unaware model
training run across 10 GPUs and 80 CPUs for 14 days. (a) Entropy loss, (b) Policy loss
(c) Value loss and (d) Total loss.
Figure 4.4: Exponential moving average of energy change over horizon for the BFGS-
unaware training run across 10 GPUs and 80 CPUs for 14 days
Emma Hovmand
Page 33 of 56
==PAGE:40==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.5: Exponential moving averages of the training loss for the working Au13 training
run across 4 GPUs and 32 CPUs for 10 hours. (a) Entropy loss, (b) Policy loss (c) Value
loss and (d) Total loss.
Figure 4.6: Exponential moving average of energy change over horizon for the working
Au13 training run across 4 GPUs and 32 CPUs for 10 hours
Emma Hovmand
Page 34 of 56
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.7: Exponential moving averages of the training loss for the equiatomic NiCu
training across 8 GPUs and 64 CPUs for 12 hours. (a) Entropy loss, (b) Policy loss (c)
Value loss and (d) Total loss.
Figure 4.8: Exponential moving average of energy change over horizon for the equiatomic
NiCu training run across 8 GPUs and 64 CPUs for 12 hours
Emma Hovmand
Page 35 of 56
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.1: General Hyperparameters utilised in this work. Adapted from ArtiSAN
Hyperparameter
Value
Actor Network Widths
64
Critic Network Widths
256
Clipping ϵ
0.3
Gradient clipping
0.5
Training epochs
max of 7
ADAM Learning Rate
3 × 10−4
ADAM Learning Rate Annealing Gamma
0.5
ADAM Learning Rate Annealing Frequency
103
ADAM AMSGrad
True
Discount γ
1.0
Target KL Divergence TKL
0.01
MACE Node Dimension Dnode
30
MACE Convolutional Depth
2
Actions per Rollout
130
Monte Carlo Metropolis Temperature
75 K
Table 4.2: Loss coefficient hyperparameter values across the three configurations
Hyperparameter
BFGS-aware/unaware
Au13
NiCu
Policy loss coefficient c1
1
0.005
0.0005
Value loss coefficient c2
22000
220
220
Entropy loss coefficient c3
1.25
0.8
1
Emma Hovmand
Page 36 of 56
==PAGE:43==
5
Results & Discussion
5.1
The MACE Distortion Mechanism
This work explores two distinct methods of distortion implementation through MACE
combined with the novel atomic switching of the ArtiSAN. Both methods leverage atomic
features and spatial relations, via dot products, to compute the distortion best applied to
the atomic position of the focus.
The results presented in this report represent a portion of the total outcomes achieved in
this work. Due to the large number of combinations involving different models, capabilities,
and hyperparameter configurations, only a subset of results are highlighted in this report.
Initially, the full model structure designed for this work and outlined in Section 3.3.1
was tested with MLPscale on a range of HEAs. In this setup, models were trained to
apply both atomic switching and distortion to all atoms in a given system. This model
setup performed very poorly; therefore the author quickly shifted their focus to testing the
distortion network alone to validate that it worked on its own, before reintegrating it into
the combined switching and distortion framework. Therefore, the results from applying
the combined switching and distortion method are not included in this report. However,
the framework – as implemented in code – is available through the GitHub link in Section
7.
5.1.1
MLPscale
The MLPscale was built upon the concept of leveraging the idea that the sum of all
feature vectors reflects the direction and magnitude of the displacement an atom wants
to make. The MLPscale was the first idea implemented in the switching and distortion
framework. Once the distortion network was tested on its own, focus shifted again to the
idea of the MLPlogit, since the MLPscale performed poorly on its own. The author chose
to exclude the MLPscale results from this report in order to give room to the promising
results that this work yielded. Countless hyperparameter configurations were tested to no
avail. An extensive study of hyperparameter configuration results is not included in this
report, as this would divert attention from the objective, which is a model that can apply
both atomic switching and distortion.
One of the reasons the MLPscale network performed so poorly was its approach to
predicting a Gaussian mean and standard deviation from which to sample the scaling
factor. When predicting these parameters, many issues arose due to insufficient network
initialisation.
As a result, the subsequent clipping of the parameters was consistently
triggered, likely hindering the network from learning meaningful scale factors. Numerous
weight initialisation methods were tested, with no success.
5.1.2
MLPlogit
As a result of persistently disappointing results after training countless models with
the MLPscale method, the idea of the MLPlogit emerged. Due to the trivial nature of the
Au2-system, the results depicting the satisfying overfitting to Au2 is not commented on
for the purpose of this report. Instead, the focus will be on the overfitting results of the
Au13 system.
The energy trajectories produced when the trained model is deployed on a Au13 system
are depicted in Figure 5.1. The pertaining initial and final atomic structure is depicted
with ASE in Figure 5.2. These were the first results with this work that indicated that
the network is capable of learning to apply distortion with acceptable success. The fact
Emma Hovmand
Page 37 of 56
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.1: Energy trajectories for Au13 nanoparticle structure optimisation
that the network was trained with a horizon of 12 per Equation 57 is well reflected in
the model’s behaviour, which shows that the model only applies distortions that reduce
energy until this point. The trained network was also deployed with longer horizons, each
demonstrating the consistent and deterministic predictions the network makes. After the
horizon is reached, the network applies distortions that both increase and decrease the
energy – however, with an overall decreasing trend.
The model is also deployed on an Au13 system without initial distortion. This scenario
demonstrates that, even though the model is trained on systems with applied Gaussian
noise, it can still determine how to distort the atoms to reach a lower energy configuration
when applied to a system without this noise.
The model is redeployed on the structure after the horizon of 12. The model again
demonstrates its deterministic behaviour, as the redeployed energy trajectory is exactly
the same as if the model had been allowed to continue optimising on the original structure.
No further work was conducted on this experiment setup since this was an overfitting
experiment with the purpose of showcasing whether the network was able to apply dis-
tortions to a system and successfully bring it to a lower-energy state, close to the BFGS
reference of 6.596999 eV
Moving on from the positive results on the Au13 system, which demonstrated that the
model is capable of learning to apply distortion to the system to bring it to lower energy
and thus more stable atomic structure, the network is trained on an equiatomic NiCu
system. This is done in order to bring the work back to the objective, which is optimizing
HEAs in a crystal lattice structure. In order to leverage the information gained from the
overfitting results on the Au13 system, the chosen lattice structure for the NiCu system
is a 2 × 2 × 2 lattice structure with 2 · 2 · 2 · 4 = 32 atoms. This report includes the best
performing ensemble of results from the NiCu system. Figure 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 all depict
energy trajectories from applying the model to an equiatomic NiCu system similar to what
it has seen in training.
These experiments aim to evaluate if the model’s performance strengthened over time.
Figure 5.3 shows that the model trained for nine hours outperforms the model trained for
Emma Hovmand
Page 38 of 56
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.2: Left: Inital atomic structure of the Au13 nanoparticle.
Right: The final
optimised atomic structure of the Au13 nanoparticle. Plots are created with ASE [51]
Figure 5.3: Energy trajectories for deployed models trained for different time frames de-
ployed on a 2 × 2 × 2 equiatomic NiCu system
Emma Hovmand
Page 39 of 56
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.4: Energy trajectories for deployed models trained for different time frames, with
varying Gaussian noise variance and alternative seeds deployed on a 2 × 2 × 2 equiatomic
NiCu system
Figure 5.5: Long term energy trajectories of two interesting models deployed on a 2×2×2
equiatomic NiCu system
Emma Hovmand
Page 40 of 56
==PAGE:47==
seven hours, when the initial distortion of the inference system is applied. The model was
trained with a horizon of 40. For the sake of these experiments, the model is deployed
with longer horizons to evaluate how deterministic the model is in its predictions. The
energy trajectories coincide, signifying that the model is deterministic in its predictions.
The model trained for ten hours (Figure 5.4) outperforms the model trained for nine
hours when comparing the energy reached at the training horizon when initial distortion
is applied. However, after the training horizon is reached during inference the nine-hour
model outperforms the ten-hour model.
Figure 5.5 depicts the full trajectories of some of the tested configurations with a differ-
ent seed or variance of the initially applied Gaussian distortion. These energy trajectories
are included in this report to demonstrate that, for some configurations, predictions sud-
denly ’explode’ over time. This signifies that the model is not robust in its predictions.
The initial distortion of the FCC lattice structure was implemented to help the agent
learn how to apply distortion to a system. Had the agent only ever seen FCC structures,
the agent’s ability to learn proper distortion of the atoms in a system would be limited,
since the true atomic configuration is so close to FCC in some cases.
In this way, by
implementing initial distortion randomly sampled from a Gaussian, the aim is to help the
agent learn how to distort to reach lower energy configurations, because the possible reward
for proper distortion is more likely to be experienced and learned from by the agent.
Experiments are conducted both with and without applying the initial random Gaus-
sian distortion, which was applied to all training systems. The results show that when the
model is applied to systems with initial distortion, it manages to find energy configura-
tions below the starting point – at least within the training horizon. This could be because
applying the initial distortion makes it easier for the model to identify effective distortion,
as the non-distorted initial FCC lattice structure is too close to the optimal structure of
an equiatomic NiCu system with 32 atoms per BFGS with an energy of 6.342119 eV.
When the initial distortion is not applied to a system the model cannot find a lower energy
configuration, which might suggest overfitting to the distorted system – even though the
distortion is drawn at random from a Gaussian distribution. This, along with the results
using another seed or a different variance of the Gaussian noise – depicted in Figures 5.4
and 5.5 – demonstrates poor generalisability. This is, however, not unexpected for such an
overfitted network.
In Figure 5.3, an experiment is conducted in which the focus was sampled instead of
selected with arg max.
The results show an energy trajectory with more stochasticity,
indicating that the model is not too confident in its predictions.
As expected, the hyperparameters used to achieve success for the Au13 did not produce
similar results for the equiatomic NiCu system. However, the network had been modified
in several ways to achieve the Au13 results; the hidden size in MLPlogit was doubled, the
SELU activation functions were replaced with the Mish activation function, and the atoms
in the system were made fully connected. Making the atoms in the NiCu system fully
connected resulted in larger energies that the network had difficulty handling. Therefore,
for the NiCu system, the number of neighbours was reduced to the nearest neighbours
within a defined threshold.
5.2
BFGS Investigation
In this section the results derived from the pairwise atomic switching coupled with the
standard structure optimization algorithm BFGS is presented. For easier interpretable and
more information dense graphs, the graphs have been edited to include fewer steps.
To demonstrate the BFGS-aware and unaware configuration the models are applied to a
3×3×3 equiatomic NiCu system. This atomic system is comprised of 3·3·3·4 = 108atoms
Emma Hovmand
Page 41 of 56
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.6: Energy trajectories for a 3 × 3 × 3 equiatomic NiCu system
with 108 atoms
– which is the largest atomic system the model interacts with during training. Figure 5.6
depicts the results. The atomic structure of the initial and the lowest energy configuration
reached is depicted with ASE in Figure 5.7.
Both models find a local minima – or at least they believe so – and keep switching
back and forth between two atoms. This signifies to the author that the agent is over-
confident, since sampling or using arg max does not change the optimisation trajectory
significantly, since they inevitable reach similar energy configurations. Utilising sampling
should, namely, infer that the agent could sample itself out of such a local minimum. One
positive aspect of this is that the local minima initiate at different times during inference,
suggesting that it is not due to some unnoticed hardcoded mistake. Furthermore, these
local minima could be caused or partly caused by the BFGS algorithm itself. However,
it is far more likely that this plateauing can be mitigated with further hyperparameter
optimisation of both BFGS configurations.
To access whether or not either of the BFGS configurations is able to generalise to larger
atomic structures, which they have never seen the like, both models are applied to a 7×7×7
equiatomic NiCu system. This atomic system is comprised of 7 · 7 · 7 · 4 = 1372 atoms, and
it therefore has a 1372
108 = 12.7 factor more atoms than any system the model was trained
on. The BFGS-unaware model does not improve the structure of the inference system,
but the BFGS-aware model is able to generalise and leverage its collected knowledge and
apply it to this larger system in order to reduce its energy. To demonstrate why it was
chosen to let the model train for a second week, the results of deploying the BFGS-aware
model trained for one week is included in the plot. This is the best performing instance
of either model after one week of training and it is clear that the additional training was
Emma Hovmand
Page 42 of 56
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.7: Left: Initial atomic structure of the 3 × 3 × 3 equiatomic NiCu system. Right:
The best final optimised atomic structure of the 3×3×3 equiatomic NiCu system – which
is the BFGS-aware with initial BFGS and sampling of actions. Plots are created with ASE
[51]
useful since the BFGS-aware model trained for two weeks outperforms the BFGS-aware
model trained for one week. The results are displayed in Figure 5.8. The atomic structure
of the initial and the lowest energy configuration reached is depicted with ASE in Figure
5.9.
The BFGS-aware configuration outperforms the BFGS-unaware in all cases investigated
for this report. This aligns with the hypothesis, that the BFGS-aware model receives more
information, thus it might be easier for the agent to deduct in which manner to act best.
However due to the limited time available to spend on further hyperparameter optimisation
for either of the setups, further investigation is needed before the BFGS-unaware – or any
configuration – can be harmlessly discarded. The fact that the hyperparameters work that
much better for the BFGS-aware model than they do for the BFGS-unaware, highlight
reinforcement learning’s sensitivity to hyperparameters – and that one must acknowledge,
that there is an element of luck to finding the optimal combination of hyperparameters.
Inspired by ArtiSAN, this work also does not depend on energy evaluations once the
model is trained.
However, for these experiments, energy evaluations are included to
produce the graphs for analysis. Nevertheless, in the case of the BFGS-aware setup, this
model does indeed depend on the updating of the atomic structure that occurs alongside
the energy evaluations. Whether or not the model is able to perform without these atomic
structure BFGS updates, was not looked further into this time round, and should therefore
be interesting to look further into.
The predictions of both BFGS configurations outperform the stand-alone BFGS algo-
rithm. This is evident from the first iterations of both models on any system where initial
BFGS optimisation has been applied. The energy and atomic configuration in the first iter-
ation indicate the state that BFGS optimises the system to. Neither BFGS configuration,
in its current form with two weeks of training, outperforms ArtiSAN.
To assess whether initial BFGS optimisation of the lattice structure affects the mod-
els’ predictive capabilities, all models are evaluated both with and without initial BFGS
optimisation. For the BFGS-unaware models, only the first step differs, while subsequent
Emma Hovmand
Page 43 of 56
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.8: Energy trajectories for a 7 × 7 × 7 equiatomic NiCu system
with 1372 atoms
Figure 5.9: Left: Initial atomic structure of the 7 × 7 × 7 equiatomic NiCu system. Right:
The best final optimised atomic structure of the 7 × 7 × 7 equiatomic NiCu system – this
is the BFGS-aware without initial BFGS and with sampling of actions. Plots are created
with ASE [51]
Emma Hovmand
Page 44 of 56
==PAGE:51==
energy trajectories remain the same. In contrast, the BFGS-aware model shows a difference
in the final energy achieved across both systems presented in this report. For the 3 × 3 × 3
system, the version with initial BFGS optimisation reaches the lowest energy. However, in
the case of the 7 × 7 × 7 system, the version without initial BFGS optimisation reaches a
lower energy configuration.
The models show some promise, but not enough that extensive testing of multiple
element combinations on lattice structures has been deemed a time well spent. The results
presented in this section have been deployed on an equiatomic NiCu system. This was
done since this system has been the object of attention of some of the MACE distortion
systems, and will therefore nicely provide possibility for performance comparison.
The training of both networks with BFGS was initially seven days each. In this way the
thought was that the models could be compared to the original ArtiSAN on performance
based on the same training time. Although, the BFGS-aware model does seem to have
learned to reduce the energy of the system and not act randomly, the model performances
were deemed to have potential for improvement with more training and thus the training of
both models were extended another seven days, with the hope that this could strengthen the
predictive capabilities. For every step in the BFGS aware and unaware networks, between
four and upwards of ten energy evaluations are necessary to reach a atomic configuration
satisfying the specified maximum force. This is not a four- or tenfold multiplication of
the time needed for one step since the model doesn’t go through all the code of sampling
a focus and switcher etc. but it does increase the time of one step around threefold on
average. Taking into account the training time reduction through the implementation of
PyTorch Lightning, this would still mean that for an accurate comparison to the ArtiSAN
in terms of amount of experience the models acquire while training the BFGS-based models
would require three weeks of training.
Emma Hovmand
Page 45 of 56
==PAGE:52==
6
Conclusion & Outlook
This work set out to develop a model capable of employing atomic distortion and pair-
wise switching for atomic structure optimization of compositionally complex materials. The
model framework for employing both distortion and switching has been implemented and
is functional. However, achieving the intended functionality will require further hyperpa-
rameter tuning and potential architectural adjustments. This report highlights promising
results from the implementation of distortion using MACE feature vectors with a custom
MLPlogit. The investigation into integrating pairwise switching – as described in ArtiSAN
– and the standard optimisation algorithm BFGS also shows potential. The BFGS-aware
configuration outperforms both the BFGS-unaware and BFGS alone.
This work has investigated a multitude of potential methods for implementing distor-
tion.
The explored variations include: BFGS-unaware, BFGS-aware, scaling distortion
with switching, scaling distortion without switching, and lastly vector-sampled distortion
without switching. The work to build a model capable of performing both switches and
distortions in a meaningful way – simulating real physics – proved too great a challenge
to overcome within the limited time frame of this thesis. Nonetheless, the work provides
valuable insight into multiple approaches, paving the way for future development of mod-
els for HEA structure discovery, while potentially contributing more broadly to the field
of accelerated materials discovery. Importantly, this work also identifies less promising
approaches, which may help guide future research away from unproductive directions.
The BFGS models both show difficulty in escaping local minima. This prevents further
improvement of the structure prediction for the material.
Predictions improved when
sampling the focus and switch atoms instead of selecting using arg max during inference. In
this way the agent is provided with the opportunity to sample itself out of a local minimum.
This aligns with the findings for the original ArtiSAN [14]. However, in this case, sampling
alone appears insufficient, suggesting that additional strategies may be needed to avoid
becoming trapped in local minima. A rather drastic idea, working against the principle
that the network should be able to learn the patterns itself, is to implement functionality
where a focus and switch atom are periodically selected at random. In this way, the hope
is that the network would be brought out of the local minimum, and possibly choose other
atoms next. This could bring the agent out of its stuck state, potentially enabling further
energy reductions. This functionality could be applied every 30 steps and executed less
frequently as inference progresses to prevent it from hindering convergence. The potential
pitfall is that the system may reverse the forced switch in subsequent steps, returning to
the same local minimum. In contrast to the BFGS configurations, the models perform
better on the Au13 nanoparticle and the equiatomic Ni16Cu16 system when arg max is
used. Notably, both systems were used in overfitting scenarios, and received less training
than the BFGS-based models. This likely results in an agent who is less overwhelmingly
confident in its predictions.
These limitations with the BFGS models may be attributed, at least in part, to sub-
optimal loss coefficients and other poorly tuned hyperparameters. Reinforcement learning
is notoriously difficult to train effectively, as it can be difficult to determine when a good
policy has been learned by the agent. Unlike other types of machine learning, reinforce-
ment learning loss curves are often noisy and less informative about the underlying learning
process. Therefore, the loss curves are less informative to use as an indication of whether
the agent is successfully learning from interaction with the environment, than they are for
other types of machine learning. Consequently, more extensive hyperparameter optimi-
sation should be performed for both BFGS configurations before any assertive conclusion
can be made about their effectiveness. Instead of dedicating time to this tuning process,
Emma Hovmand
Page 46 of 56
==PAGE:53==
the author chose to focus on implementing distortion via MACE. This path with MACE
was considered more challenging but also more promising since if successful, it could yield
a significantly more powerful model with a broad use case across the field of accelerated
materials discovery.
Another point to consider is the idea that the list of elements on which the network is
trained, could be reduced. In such a manner the network would have a better opportunity
to understand the best behaviour and agent policy for fewer elements. Whilst reducing
the use case of the model across a wide range of chemistries, this could however be a
proof of concept, paving the way for further improvements. The same goes for the system
size. Reducing the number of system sizes the agents interacts with during training could
improve the agents possibility to understand how to best interact with its environment.
Although it reduces the likelihood of the model generalising well to larger or different
system sizes, this could prove a useful investigation. This suggestions is not necessarily
made with smaller systems in mind, since the ordering becomes more prominent for larger
systems and thereby possibly easier for the network to comprehend and learn to navigate.
This work set out to utilise the MACE-MP-0 [26] calculator for energy evaluations, but
it proved too uncertain for small systems, leading back to the use of EMT. A very promising
way to improve the networks predictive accuracy is consequently the employment of another
energy evaluator. Two advanced tools from Meta’s FAIR Chemistry team offer promising
machine learning-based alternatives to EMT: OMAT24 [91, 92] and, more recently, UMA
[93, 94]. Universal Models for Atoms (UMA) is a family of ML interatomic potentials
trained on close to 500 million atomic structures from diverse datasets – including the Open
Materials 2024 dataset that is the foundation of OMAT24. Open Materials 2024 (OMAT24)
is a large-scale open dataset accompanied by pre-trained models, comprising more than 110
million DFT calculations focused on structural and compositional diversity. Both UMA
and OMAT24 integrate seamlessly with ASE, facilitating straightforward integration into
the existing model framework. The choice of calculator is a balancing act between the speed
of training and accuracy of energy evaluations. It was also considered to leverage the built-
in MACE already used in the framework for energy evaluations, but this is expected to
cause the same issues as using the MACE-MP-0 energy evaluator.
The loss curves could indeed have been much better for both BFGS configurations, but
after trying hundreds of configurations of hyperparameters for all models in this work, this
extensive work was decided to be left for another time and keep the focus on the MACE
implementation of distortion. Also, the training system energy change should preferably
show a more convincing descending trend. However, by implementing BFGS it was ex-
pected that some variability would be witnessed, since the network had to understand
a more complex configuration. Especially, the entropy loss coefficient should be investi-
gated, to promote more exploration to gain experience and strengthen policy. Adding to
this predicament was the circumstance of limited access to the Niflheim HPC. Due to long
waiting times for full nodes, with all 10 GPUs and all 80 CPUs, which are necessary for
this experiment, this also set a significant horizon on the realization of an optimal hyper-
parameter configuration - thus limiting the time in which hyperparameter tuning could be
performed and new models submitted for training. The focus of this work was decided to
be elsewhere.
Furthermore, a fact that might prove useful in assisting the progress of the BFGS
configurations, is to apply BFGS when initialising the training system.
This was not
implemented in either of the models presented in this work, but has been tried in the
process. It should be noted that as expected the largest energy reductions, when deploying
the model on an inference system, consistently happens on the first switch if there was no
initial application of BFGS optimisation. This could indicate that the network has learned
Emma Hovmand
Page 47 of 56
==PAGE:54==
this behaviour, hindering better understanding of the systems – since it should indeed be
able to find energy reductions of equal magnitude at other times during inference. On the
other hand, this effect is expected to be minimal, since the model has experienced many
more switches where BFGS has been applied than those energy initialisation scenarios
where BFGS is not applied.
Since implementing distortion means that the initial atomic structure of the generated
system can be altered, it would be interesting to see if there could implement a way of
analysing the final structure in order to be able to recognize and reclassify the structure
to further the understanding of the generated material.
Among the various experiments of this work, the most successful results were achieved
with the Au13 nanoparticle structure. For this work the model learned to distort the Au
atoms to a consistently more stable structure by lowering the energy of the system. Since
the working configuration for the Au13 nanoparticle worked poorly when trained for a
Ni16Cu16 system – again highlighting the sensitiveness of reinforcement learning – the
next steps for this investigation, is examining if an issue arises due to the scaling to a
larger system, the inclusion of more than one element or the crystal lattice structure. Also
interesting to inspect would be the effects of a fully connected graph and the implications
of the periodic boundary conditions. Would it be possible to train the network without
PBC, to attain a model that could generalise to systems with PBC? Possibly initiating the
elements in a fixed lattice structure is hindering the network’s possibility to gain experience
with a variety of distortions. This is based on the fact that this work has exclusively had
positive results when initial distortion was applied to the lattice structure of every training
system to provide a wide knowledge base for the agent. Otherwise, all the agent experiences
is the fixed lattice structure and an unwilling bias might be induced. The author believes
that the issue of fully connecting all atoms in the system has been key in achieving the
positive results for the Au13 nanoparticle. It is believed that this enables the agent to
assess all consequences of its distortion. The downside to this is that for larger systems,
the energy values become much larger, which might drown the effect of actions on the
system.
The first step this author will take is to perform extensive hyperparameter optimisation
of the BFGS-aware network. This setup has shown promising results, making it worth-
while to continue investigating. The MACE-based implementation of lattice distortion,
with the MLPlogit, has the potential to become a more impactful solution.
Nonethe-
less, it is this author’s belief that achieving a configuration that generalises well across
chemical spaces will require significant time, effort – and a little luck. This work has ex-
plored countless combinations of fully connected and non-fully connected structures, with
and without periodic boundary conditions, across various element types and counts, using
both nanoparticle and crystal lattice structures. This author believes that this project,
specifically the MACE implementation of distortion with MLPlogit, could initially be suc-
cessful for smaller fully-connected non-periodic systems. The next step, after successfully
employing the MLPlogit on its own across a broader set of atomic structures, is to rein-
tegrate it into the full framework developed in this work – one that enables both atomic
distortion and pairwise switching – by training a method network to decide which action
to apply. It would also be interesting to pretrain the models in order to nudge them in
the right direction. Implementing vacancies or so-called ghost nodes would also be very
relevant for this work, but this implementation lies further in the future.
Emma Hovmand
Page 48 of 56
==PAGE:55==
7
Code Availability
The code for all model configurations are available at GitHub [95] The different types of
models can be trained by specifying the desired configuration in the hyperparameter.yaml
file.
If one desires to conduct experiments with both switching and distortion, merely
distortion or switching with or without either of the two BFGS implementations, the
codebase need only altering in the step function of the LightningModule. The codebase
also includes multiple evaluation scripts. If tracking with Weights and Biases, simply add
a personal API key.
Emma Hovmand
Page 49 of 56
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. Bronze. Accessed 2025-06-6. 2025. url:
https://www.britannica.com/technology/bronze-alloy.
[2]
Easo P. George, Dierk Raabe, and Robert O. Ritchie. “High-entropy alloys”. In:
Nature Reviews Materials 4.8 (2019), pp. 515–534. doi: 10.1038/s41578- 019-
0121-4.
[3]
C. Suryanarayana. “Mechanical alloying and milling”. In: Progress in Materials Sci-
ence 46.1 (2001), pp. 1–184. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6425(99)
00010-9.
[4]
J.-W. Yeh et al. “Nanostructured High-Entropy Alloys with Multiple Principal Ele-
ments: Novel Alloy Design Concepts and Outcomes”. In: Advanced Engineering Mate-
rials 6.5 (May 2004), pp. 299–303. issn: 1527-2648. doi: 10.1002/adem.200300567.
[5]
B. Cantor et al. “Microstructural development in equiatomic multicomponent alloys”.
In: Materials Science and Engineering: A 375–377 (July 2004), pp. 213–218. issn:
0921-5093. doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2003.10.257.
[6]
Hongmin Zhang et al. An unprecedented synergy of high-temperature tensile strength
and ductility in a NiCoCrAlTi high-entropy alloy. 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.
08850. arXiv: 2310.08850 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci].
[7]
Zhen Peng et al. “Corrosion Resistance Enhancement of CoCrFeMnNi High-Entropy
Alloy with WC Particle Reinforcements via Laser Melting Deposition”. In: Materials
16.13 (2023). issn: 1996-1944. doi: 10.3390/ma16134701.
[8]
Y. J. Li et al. “Accelerated atomic-scale exploration of phase evolution in compo-
sitionally complex materials”. In: Materials Horizons 5.1 (2018), pp. 86–92. issn:
2051-6355. doi: 10.1039/c7mh00486a.
[9]
Xianglin Liu, Jiaxin Zhang, and Zongrui Pei. “Machine learning for high-entropy
alloys: Progress, challenges and opportunities”. In: Progress in Materials Science 131
(2023), p. 101018. issn: 0079-6425. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.
2022.101018.
[10]
Wenjiang Huang, Pedro Martin, and Houlong L. Zhuang. “Machine-learning phase
prediction of high-entropy alloys”. In: Acta Materialia 169 (2019), pp. 225–236. issn:
1359-6454. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2019.03.012.
[11]
Ronald Machaka. “Machine learning-based prediction of phases in high-entropy al-
loys”. In: Computational Materials Science 188 (2021), p. 110244. issn: 0927-0256.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2020.110244.
[12]
Cheng Wen et al. “Machine learning assisted design of high entropy alloys with
desired property”. In: Acta Materialia 170 (2019), pp. 109–117. issn: 1359-6454. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2019.03.010.
[13]
Guillermo Vazquez et al. “Efficient machine-learning model for fast assessment of
elastic properties of high-entropy alloys”. In: Acta Materialia 232 (2022), p. 117924.
issn: 1359-6454. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2022.117924.
[14]
Jonas Elsborg and Arghya Bhowmik. “ArtiSAN: navigating the complexity of ma-
terial structures with deep reinforcement learning”. In: Machine Learning: Science
and Technology 5.3 (Aug. 2024), p. 035043. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/ad69ff. url:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2632-2153/ad69ff.
Emma Hovmand
Page 50 of 56
==PAGE:57==
[15]
Xingyue Shi et al. “A review on the applications of graph neural networks in materials
science at the atomic scale”. In: Materials Genome Engineering Advances 2.2 (June
2024). issn: 2940-9497. doi: 10.1002/mgea.50.
[16]
Oliver Wieder et al. “A compact review of molecular property prediction with graph
neural networks”. In: Drug Discovery Today: Technologies 37 (2020), pp. 1–12. issn:
1740-6749. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ddtec.2020.11.009.
[17]
Keith T. Butler et al. “Machine learning for molecular and materials science”. In:
Nature 559.7715 (2018), pp. 547–555.
[18]
Alex Zunger. “Inverse design in search of materials with target functionalities”. In:
Nature Reviews Chemistry 2.4 (Mar. 2018). issn: 2397-3358. doi: 10.1038/s41570-
018-0121.
[19]
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn. “Inhomogeneous Electron Gas”. In: Phys. Rev. 136 (3B
Nov. 1964), B864–B871. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864.
[20]
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham. “Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange and Cor-
relation Effects”. In: Phys. Rev. 140 (4A Nov. 1965), A1133–A1138. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRev.140.A1133.
[21]
Anubhav Jain et al. “Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome ap-
proach to accelerating materials innovation”. In: APL Materials 1.1 (July 2013). issn:
2166-532X. doi: 10.1063/1.4812323.
[22]
James E. Saal et al. “Materials Design and Discovery with High-Throughput Density
Functional Theory: The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD)”. In: JOM
65.11 (Sept. 2013), pp. 1501–1509. issn: 1543-1851. doi: 10.1007/s11837- 013-
0755-4.
[23]
Scott Kirklin et al. “The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD): assessing
the accuracy of DFT formation energies”. In: npj Computational Materials 1.1 (Dec.
2015). issn: 2057-3960. doi: 10.1038/npjcompumats.2015.10.
[24]
Lenz Fiedler et al. “Predicting electronic structures at any length scale with machine
learning”. In: npj Computational Materials 9.1 (June 2023). issn: 2057-3960. doi:
10.1038/s41524-023-01070-z.
[25]
K. W. Jacobsen, J. K. Norskov, and M. J. Puska. “Interatomic interactions in the
effective-medium theory”. In: Phys. Rev. B 35 (14 May 1987), pp. 7423–7442. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevB.35.7423.
[26]
Ilyes Batatia et al. A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry. 2024. arXiv:
2401.00096 [physics.chem-ph]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.00096.
[27]
Ilyes Batatia et al. “MACE: Higher Order Equivariant Message Passing Neural Net-
works for Fast and Accurate Force Fields”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems. Ed. by S. Koyejo et al. Vol. 35. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022,
pp. 11423–11436. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2022/file/4a36c3c51af11ed9f34615b81edb5bbc-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[28]
Paul C. Jennings et al. “Genetic algorithms for computational materials discovery
accelerated by machine learning”. In: npj Computational Materials 5.1 (Apr. 2019).
issn: 2057-3960. doi: 10.1038/s41524-019-0181-4.
[29]
Ziyuan Rao et al. Machine learning-enabled high-entropy alloy discovery. 2022. doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.2202.13753. arXiv: 2202.13753 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci].
Emma Hovmand
Page 51 of 56
==PAGE:58==
[30]
Spyros Kamnis and Konstantinos Delibasis. “High entropy alloy property predic-
tions using a transformer-based language model”. In: Scientific Reports 15.1 (2025),
p. 11861. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-95170-z.
[31]
Jaemin Wang et al. “A neural network model for high entropy alloy design”. In: npj
Computational Materials 9.1 (2023), p. 60. doi: 10.1038/s41524-023-01010-x.
[32]
Novo Nordisk Foundation. Danish Centre for AI Innovation. Accessed: May 2025.
2024. url: https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/projects/danish-centre-for-
ai-innovation/.
[33]
Yael Niv. “Reinforcement learning in the brain”. In: Journal of Mathematical Psy-
chology 53.3 (2009). Special Issue: Dynamic Decision Making, pp. 139–154. issn:
0022-2496. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2008.12.005.
[34]
David Silver et al. “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree
search”. In: Nature 529.7587 (Jan. 2016), pp. 484–489. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.
1038/nature16961.
[35]
David Silver et al. “Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge”. In: Nature
550.7676 (Oct. 2017), pp. 354–359. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature24270.
[36]
David Silver et al. Mastering Chess and Shogi by Self-Play with a General Reinforce-
ment Learning Algorithm. 2017. arXiv: 1712.01815 [cs.AI]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1712.01815.
[37]
Prashant Govindarajan et al. “CrystalGym: A New Benchmark for Materials Dis-
covery Using Reinforcement Learning”. In: AI for Accelerated Materials Design-ICLR
2025.
[38]
Michael M. Bronstein et al. Geometric Deep Learning: Grids, Groups, Graphs, Geodesics,
and Gauges. 2021. arXiv: 2104.13478 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2104.13478.
[39]
Justin Gilmer et al. “Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (2017). arXiv:
1704.01212 [cs.LG].
[40]
Marco Gori, Gabriele Monfardini, and Franco Scarselli. “A new model for earning
in raph domains”. In: vol. 2. Jan. 2005, pp. 729–734. isbn: 0-7803-9048-2. doi: 10.
1109/IJCNN.2005.1555942.
[41]
Franco Scarselli et al. “The Graph Neural Network Model”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks 20.1 (2009), pp. 61–80. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605.
[42]
Matthias Fey et al. SplineCNN: Fast Geometric Deep Learning with Continuous B-
Spline Kernels. 2018. arXiv: 1711.08920 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1711.08920.
[43]
Kristof T. Schütt, Oliver T. Unke, and Michael Gastegger. Equivariant message
passing for the prediction of tensorial properties and molecular spectra. 2021. arXiv:
2102.03150 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03150.
[44]
Simon Batzner et al. “E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and
accurate interatomic potentials”. In: Nature Communications 13.1 (2022), p. 2453.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29939-5.
[45]
Tian Xie and Jeffrey C Grossman. “Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
for an Accurate and Interpretable Prediction of Material Properties”. In: Physical
Review Letters 120.14 (2018), p. 145301.
Emma Hovmand
Page 52 of 56
==PAGE:59==
[46]
Nicolò Navarin, Dinh Van Tran, and Alessandro Sperduti. “Universal Readout for
Graph Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks, IJCNN 2019 Budapest, Hungary, July 14-19, 2019. IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–7.
isbn: 978-1-7281-1985-4. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2019.8852103.
[47]
Manzil Zaheer et al. Deep Sets. 2018. arXiv: 1703.06114 [cs.LG]. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1703.06114.
[48]
Alexandre Duval et al. A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Geometric GNNs for 3D Atomic
Systems. 2024. arXiv: 2312.07511 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.
07511.
[49]
Kristof Schütt et al. “SchNet – A deep learning architecture for molecules and ma-
terials”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 148 (June 2018), p. 241722. doi: 10.
1063/1.5019779.
[50]
Johannes Gasteiger, Janek Groß, and Stephan Günnemann. Directional Message
Passing for Molecular Graphs. 2022. arXiv: 2003 . 03123 [cs.LG]. url: https :
//arxiv.org/abs/2003.03123.
[51]
Ask Hjorth Larsen et al. “The atomic simulation environment—a Python library
for working with atoms”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29.27 (2017),
p. 273002. url: http://stacks.iop.org/0953-8984/29/i=27/a=273002.
[52]
Chem 103 Textbook Team and Chem 104 Textbook Team. Chem 103/104 Resource
Book. License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. University of Wisconsin Pressbooks, 2023. url:
https://wisc.pb.unizin.org/chem103and104/.
[53]
Muddasar Naeem, Syed Rizvi, and Antonio Coronato. “A Gentle Introduction to
Reinforcement Learning and its Application in Different Fields”. In: IEEE Access 8
(Jan. 2020), pp. 209320–209344. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3038605.
[54]
L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. W. Moore. “Reinforcement Learning: A
Survey”. In: Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 4 (May 1996), pp. 237–285.
issn: 1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/jair.301.
[55]
Joshua Achiam. Spinning Up in Deep RL: Part 1 – Key Concepts in RL. Accessed
May 2025. 2018. url: https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/spinningup/
rl_intro.html.
[56]
Pawel Ladosz et al. “Exploration in deep reinforcement learning: A survey”. In: In-
formation Fusion 85 (2022), pp. 1–22. issn: 1566-2535. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.inffus.2022.03.003.
[57]
Jing Li et al. “Random curiosity-driven exploration in deep reinforcement learning”.
In: Neurocomputing 418 (2020), pp. 139–147. issn: 0925-2312. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.08.024.
[58]
Joshua Achiam and Shankar Sastry. Surprise-Based Intrinsic Motivation for Deep
Reinforcement Learning. 2017. arXiv: 1703.01732 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1703.01732.
[59]
Deepak Pathak et al. “Curiosity-driven Exploration by Self-supervised Prediction”.
In: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by
Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh. Vol. 70. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research.
PMLR, June 2017, pp. 2778–2787. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
pathak17a.html.
Emma Hovmand
Page 53 of 56
==PAGE:60==
[60]
Rein Houthooft et al. “VIME: Variational Information Maximizing Exploration”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by D. Lee et al. Vol. 29.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2016. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
files/paper/2016/file/abd815286ba1007abfbb8415b83ae2cf-Paper.pdf.
[61]
Ildefons Magrans de Abril and Ryota Kanai. “Curiosity-Driven Reinforcement Learn-
ing with Homeostatic Regulation”. In: 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN). 2018, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2018.8489075.
[62]
Joshua Achiam. Spinning Up in Deep RL: Part 2 – Kinds of RL Algorithms. Accessed
May 2025. 2018. url: https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/spinningup/
rl_intro2.html.
[63]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning.
2016. arXiv: 1602.01783 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.01783.
[64]
John Schulman et al. Trust Region Policy Optimization. 2017. arXiv: 1502.05477
[cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.05477.
[65]
John Schulman et al. “Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms”. In: CoRR abs/1707.06347
(2017). arXiv: 1707.06347. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
[66]
Richard Bellman. “Dynamic Programming”. In: Science 153.3731 (1966), pp. 34–37.
doi: 10.1126/science.153.3731.34.
[67]
Adam Paszke et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning
Library. 2019. arXiv: 1912.01703 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.
01703.
[68]
Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Pro-
gramming. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994. isbn: 978-0-471-61977-2.
[69]
ASE developers. Pure Python EMT calculator — ASE documentation. Accessed: 1
June 2025. ASE developers, 2025. url: https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/
calculators/emt.html.
[70]
Jakob Schiøtz. ASAP — As Soon As Possible (ASAP3) Documentation. Last up-
dated: April 14, 2025; accessed: June 7, 2025. DTU Physics, 2025. url: https:
//asap3.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
[71]
Solomon Kullback and R. A. Leibler. “On Information and Sufficiency”. In: Annals
of Mathematical Statistics 22 (1951), pp. 79–86.
[72]
D. De Fontaine. “Cluster Approach to Order-Disorder Transformations in Alloys”.
In: ed. by HENRY EHRENREICH and DAVID TURNBULL. Vol. 47. Solid State
Physics. Academic Press, 1994, pp. 33–176. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0081-
1947(08)60639-6.
[73]
C. G. BROYDEN. “The Convergence of a Class of Double-rank Minimization Al-
gorithms 1. General Considerations”. In: IMA Journal of Applied Mathematics 6.1
(Mar. 1970), pp. 76–90. issn: 0272-4960. doi: 10.1093/imamat/6.1.76.
[74]
R. Fletcher. “A New Approach to Variable Metric Algorithms”. In: The Computer
Journal 13.3 (1970), pp. 317–322. doi: 10.1093/comjnl/13.3.317.
[75]
D. Goldfarb. “A Family of Variable Metric Updates Derived by Variational Means”.
In: Mathematics of Computation 24.109 (1970), pp. 23–26. doi: 10.1090/S0025-
5718-1970-0258249-6.
[76]
David F. Shanno. “Conditioning of quasi-Newton methods for function minimiza-
tion”. In: Mathematics of Computation 24.111 (July 1970), pp. 647–656. doi: 10.
1090/S0025-5718-1970-0274029-X.
Emma Hovmand
Page 54 of 56
==PAGE:61==
[77]
Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE). ASE Module Documentation - Structure
Optimisation. Accessed: 2025-06-08. 2024. url: https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/
ase/optimize.html#global-optimization.
[78]
Lisandro Dalcín, Rodrigo Paz, and Mario Storti. “MPI for Python”. In: Journal of
Parallel and Distributed Computing 65.9 (2005), pp. 1108–1115. issn: 0743-7315. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2005.03.010.
[79]
Lisandro Dalcin. mpi4py: Python bindings for the Message Passing Interface (MPI).
Version 4.0.3; released: February 13, 2025; accessed: June 8, 2025. Python Package
Index (PyPI), 2025. url: https://pypi.org/project/mpi4py/.
[80]
William Falcon and The PyTorch Lightning team. PyTorch Lightning. Version 1.4.
Mar. 2019. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3828935. url: https://github.com/Lightning-
AI/lightning.
[81]
Apple Developer. Metal Performance Shaders. Accessed: December 2024. url: https:
//developer.apple.com/documentation/metalperformanceshaders.
[82]
NVIDIA Developer. CUDA Zone. Accessed: December 2024. url: https://developer.
nvidia.com/cuda-zone.
[83]
Morris A. Jette and Tim Wickberg. “Architecture of the Slurm Workload Manager”.
In: Job Scheduling Strategies for Parallel Processing. Ed. by Dalibor Klusáček, Julita
Corbalán, and Gonzalo P. Rodrigo. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, pp. 3–
23. isbn: 978-3-031-43943-8.
[84]
Lukas Biewald. Experiment Tracking with Weights and Biases. Software available
from wandb.com. 2020. url: https://www.wandb.com/.
[85]
PyTorch Lightning Team. GPU training (Intermediate) — PyTorch Lightning 2.5.1.post0
documentation. Accessed: 2025-05-27. 2025. url: https://lightning.ai/docs/
pytorch/stable/accelerators/gpu_intermediate.html.
[86]
Lightning AI. Speed up models by compiling them. Version 2.5.1.post0; Accessed:
9 June 2025. Lightning AI, 2025. url: https://lightning.ai/docs/pytorch/
stable/advanced/compile.html.
[87]
ASE developers. Trajectory files—ASE documentation. Accessed: June 10, 2025.
ASE-developers, 2025. url: https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/io/trajectory.
html.
[88]
Michael W. Heaven et al. “Crystal Structure of the Gold Nanoparticle [N(C8H17)4]
[Au25(SCH2CH2Ph)18]”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 130.12 (Mar.
2008), pp. 3754–3755. doi: 10.1021/ja800561b.
[89]
Jonas Elsborg and Arghya Bhowmik. “Equivariant Graph-Representation-Based Actor–
Critic Reinforcement Learning for Nanoparticle Design”. In: Journal of Chemical In-
formation and Modeling 63.12 (June 2023), pp. 3731–3741. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.
3c00394.
[90]
WebElements. Gold - 79 Au: radii of atoms and ions. Accessed: 10 June 2025. We-
bElements Ltd, 2025. url: https://www.webelements.com/gold/atom_sizes.
html.
[91]
Luis Barroso-Luque et al. Open Materials 2024 (OMat24) Inorganic Materials Dataset
and Models. 2024. arXiv: 2410.12771 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2410.12771.
[92]
Meta AI. OMat24: Open Materials 2024 Dataset and Models. Accessed: 2025-05-31.
2024. url: https://huggingface.co/facebook/OMAT24.
Emma Hovmand
Page 55 of 56
==PAGE:62==
[93]
Brandon M. Wood et al. UMA: A Family of Universal Models for Atoms. FAIR at
Meta. 2025. url: https://ai.meta.com/research/publications/uma-a-family-
of-universal-models-for-atoms/.
[94]
Meta AI. UMA: A Family of Universal Models for Atoms. Accessed: 2025-05-31.
2025. url: https://huggingface.co/facebook/UMA.
[95]
Emma Hovmand. Reinforcement Learning for Structure Discovery of Compositionally
Complex Materials (ArtiSAN_mace0). https://github.com/Emma7671/ArtiSAN_
mace0.git. GitHub repository, accessed 2025-06-12. 2025.
Emma Hovmand
Page 56 of 56
