==PAGE:1==
Development of Tool for Counting People in
Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
A Case Study at Sakskøbing Skole
Master Thesis
DTU Engineering Technology
Department of Engineering Technology and Didactics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
A Case Study at Sakskøbing Skole
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Javier Moreno Prieto
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Engineering Technology and Didactics, Lautrupvang
15, DK-2750 Ballerup Denmark
engtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Engineering Tech-
nology and Didactics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Autonomous Systems, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning, com-
puter vision, and software development, particularly in the context of Python programming
and web technologies.
Javier Moreno Prieto - s233671
Signature
Date
ii
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Drones are increasingly used for data collection in urban planning, traffic monitoring, and
mobility studies. This project investigates the potential of drone-based video combined
with machine learning to automate the detection, tracking, and transport mode classifi-
cation of pedestrians, aiming to reduce the time and manual effort required in traditional
data collection workflows.
A real-world case study was conducted at Sakskøbing Skole in the municipality of Guld-
borgsund, where a drone recorded top-down footage of students arriving at the school.
A custom tool was developed to analyze the video, detect individuals, track their move-
ments, and infer their mode of transport based on their entry and exit zones. The system’s
outputs were compared against manually annotated ground truth data to evaluate its ac-
curacy.
Results indicate that the approach holds potential, but current tracking and classification
performance remains limited. While the system was able to process and analyze the
footage, its accuracy fell short in several cases when compared to manual annotations,
particularly due to challenges such as occlusions and poor pedestrian detections by the
model. These limitations highlight the need for further refinement before the method can
be reliably used for decision-making.
The tool received positive feedback from municipal stakeholders regarding its usability
and interface design, suggesting that it could feasibly support mobility planning workflows.
This work is part of the InnoTech TaskForce initiative, which promotes the use of digital
technologies for sustainable urban development. While the findings demonstrate inter-
est and early potential, further improvements in detection robustness and classification
accuracy are needed before the tool can be deployed at scale.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Javier Moreno Prieto, MSc Autonomous Systems, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Birger Andersen, Professor, Department of Engineering Technology and Didactics
Supervisor
Victor Andrade, Associate Professor, Professor, Department of Engineering Technology
and Didactics
Supervisor
I would like to thank my supervisors, Birger Andersen and Victor Andrade, for their guid-
ance and support throughout the development of the project and the writing of this thesis.
I also extend my thanks to the partners from the InnoTech Taskforce for their work on data
collection for the project.
I would like to thank my family for their support and encouragement since I began this
journey at DTU. A special thanks to Fátima, without her love, support and company, I
would not have made it this far. Finally, I would like to thank my friend Pablo for embarking
on this journey with me, and Jorge for his friendship during this last academic year.
iv
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review and Related Work
3
2.1
Research Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Historical Context of People Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Drone-Based People Detection and Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Overview of STNNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
School Transport Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Alternative Solutions in the InnoTech TaskForce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.7
GDPR Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methods and Procedures
13
3.1
Software and Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Model Selection and Setup
17
4.1
Installation and Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
First Tests and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Post-processing to Enable Tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
Limitations of the Selected Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Data Collection and Testing
21
5.1
Pilot Video
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Final Recording . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3
Ground Truth and Manual Annotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.4
Observed Challenges and Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6
Tool Development
27
6.1
Frontend Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.2
Backend Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.3
Deployment Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.4
Simulator for Development and Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7
Results and Discussion
35
7.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.2
Results Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7.3
Comparison with Hodgson and Chang’s Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.4
Feedback from the User Interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.5
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusions and Future Work
45
8.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
8.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Bibliography
49
A User Manual
53
vi
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This chapter provides an overview of the background, motivation, and objectives of the
thesis. It introduces the challenges in urban mobility, the potential of drone-based video
analysis and machine learning, and the specific focus on school commuting behavior as
a case study.
1.1
Background
Urban mobility is a foundation of sustainable development, shaping how cities grow and
adapt to the needs of their inhabitants. As cities face increasing challenges in managing
traffic congestion and ensuring efficient transportation systems, innovative technologies
such as drones and machine learning are emerging as valuable tools for collecting and
analyzing data to support data-driven urban planning.
The use of drones has been expanding across various fields, including surveillance, in-
frastructure inspection, and data collection. One particularly promising application is their
role in urban planning, where they can provide valuable insights into pedestrian and traffic
movement patterns [1]. Understanding how people navigate through specific areas can
contribute to optimizing urban infrastructure, improving traffic flow, and enhancing public
transportation systems [2].
In the context of mobility research, particularly in school commuting scenarios, under-
standing how students travel to and from school is essential for designing safe and effi-
cient infrastructure. School zones often experience high traffic density during peak hours,
making them priority areas for urban planners aiming to improve pedestrian safety and
traffic management. Traditionally, data on commuting patterns has been gathered through
methods such as Hands Up surveys, family questionnaires, and manual counting [3,
4]. While these approaches provide valuable insights, they are often labor-intensive and
prone to limitations like self-reporting bias and observer error. The growing availability of
drone technology, along with recent advances in machine learning, now offers a promis-
ing alternative, enabling automated, scalable, and non-intrusive data collection that could
complement or even replace manual methods.
1.2
Project Motivation
This project is part of the InnoTech TaskForce initiative, which brings together municipal-
ities, companies, and research institutions to develop concrete and scalable solutions for
sustainable urban development [5].
Within this framework, the goal is to explore the use of drone-based video analysis and
machine learning to develop a tool for analyzing pedestrian behavior around designated
areas of interest, with the aim of providing municipalities with a solution that eases their
data collection procedures. A machine learning-based system processes top-down drone
footage to detect and localize individuals. In a post-processing step, their movement
trajectories are reconstructed, and users can define zones, such as entrances, bus stops,
or drop-off areas, to count how many individuals travel between regions.
As a real-world case study, the project focuses on the arrival patterns of students at a
Danish school. The tool aims to infer modes of transport and evaluate whether such au-
tomated systems could eventually serve as an efficient and scalable alternative to surveys
or field observations in urban mobility studies.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Research Questions
To effectively guide the research and development process, the following research ques-
tions were formulated:
• How can a tool be developed to automatically infer individuals’ modes of transport
upon arrival at a place of interest using drone footage and machine learning?
• How accurately can the tool estimate the number of individuals using each mode of
transport based on their movement patterns within the monitored area?
1.4
Objectives
The primary objective of this thesis is to develop and evaluate a tool that uses drone
footage and machine learning to analyze pedestrian arrival patterns, with the goal of in-
ferring their modes of transport. Specifically, the project aims to:
• Review existing literature on pedestrian detection and tracking techniques, as well
as studies on school commuting behavior.
• Design a system capable of detecting and tracking individuals in drone footage using
suitable machine learning models.
• Automatically infer modes of transport based on reconstructed trajectories.
• Develop a user-friendly interface for interacting with the analysis tool.
• Evaluate the tool’s accuracy and usability through real-world testing and user feed-
back.
2
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review and Related Work
Understanding pedestrian behavior and tracking individuals in urban environments has
been a critical area of research for decades. This chapter reviews the historical context,
state-of-the-art methods, and challenges in people detection and tracking, with a focus on
drone-based approaches. It also examines prior studies on school transport patterns and
alternative solutions proposed by the InnoTech TaskForce, situating the present project
within this broader research landscape. Finally, it discusses the implications of the Gen-
eral Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) for this project.
2.1
Research Methodology
This literature review was conducted in an iterative and exploratory manner. Initially, a
broad search was carried out using academic databases, primarily DTU Findit, which
provides students with access to a wide range of scientific journals and conference pro-
ceedings, including some that are behind paywalls.
For the research on people detection and tracking, an initial set of keywords was identified
to guide the search process. These included:
• ”people”, ”crowd”, ”pedestrian”
• ”tracking”, ”detection”, ”localization”, ”counting”
• ”drone”, ”aerial”, ”top-down”, ”UAV”, ”unmanned aerial vehicle”
• ”computer vision”, ”machine learning”, ”deep learning”, ”neural networks”, ”convolu-
tional neural networks”, ”CNN”
Using these keywords and Boolean operators, search strings were constructed to retrieve
relevant literature. For instance, an early query was:
(”people” OR ”crowd” OR ”pedestrian”) AND (”tracking” OR ”detection” OR ”lo-
calization” OR ”counting”) AND (”drone” OR ”aerial” OR ”top-down” OR ”UAV”)
AND (”computer vision” OR ”machine learning” OR ”deep learning” OR ”neural
networks” OR ”CNN”)
This broad query helped identify a wide range of studies, 1,078 in DTU Findit. The search
was subsequently refined to, for example, exclude papers focusing solely on counting
without any form of localization or tracking, by adding a NOT clause for ”counting”.
Citation chains were explored in both directions, by reviewing the references of key papers
and by identifying newer papers that cited them, especially those that introduced new
datasets, as these are crucial for training and benchmarking models in this field.
Regarding the research on school transport studies, a similar iterative approach was
taken. The initial search focused on general terms related to school transport, such as:
• ”school transport”, ”school commute”, ”school travel”
• ”survey”, ”counting”
The search strings were structured similarly to those for people detection and tracking,
but adapted to focus on school-related terms. For example, an early query was:
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
3
==PAGE:12==
(”school transport” OR ”school commute” OR ”school travel”) AND (”survey”
OR ”counting”)
The initial query returned 507 results, providing a broad overview of studies on children’s
school commute patterns and the methodologies commonly used for data collection.
These queries were subsequently refined to include terms related to drone usage, aiming
to identify studies that employed aerial data collection methods in school mobility con-
texts. The search strings used were similar in structure to those for people detection and
tracking, but adapted to include school-related terms and drone applications.
Given the large volume of literature retrieved through the initial searches, it was not feasi-
ble to perform an in-depth reading of every paper. Instead, a filtering strategy was applied
to efficiently assess the relevance of each study. One criterion was recency, with a pref-
erence for papers published in the last 5 to 10 years, as they are more likely to reflect
current methods and datasets. However, older papers were also considered when they
introduced foundational concepts, established datasets, or methods still referenced in re-
cent work.
For technical papers related to drone-based people tracking, figures and illustrations were
particularly useful for early filtering, as they revealed the type of camera view used. Since
this project focuses on top-down or near-vertical drone imagery, studies that relied on an-
gled or ground-level views were excluded. Abstracts and conclusions were also scanned
to determine whether the paper involved tracking (as opposed to only detection or count-
ing) and whether its approach aligned with the goals of this thesis.
For school transport studies, relevance was assessed primarily through abstracts and
methodology sections.
2.2
Historical Context of People Detection
People detection in images has been an active area of research for decades, even before
the widespread adoption of deep learning techniques. Traditional computer vision meth-
ods were based on hand-crafted features such as Haar cascades [6], which operate by
sliding a detection window across the image and computing simple rectangular features
at multiple scales, which are evaluated through a cascade of increasingly complex clas-
sifiers, or Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG), which consists of the identification of
edges and gradients in the image to create a feature vector that describes the shape and
structure of objects, which later, can be classified using a classifier, such as a Support
Vector Machine (SVM) [7]. However, these approaches have shown limited performance,
especially in real-world scenarios. Studies have shown that even under favorable con-
ditions, such as detecting near pedestrians (over 80 pixels tall), traditional detectors still
miss around 20-30% of targets. Performance deteriorates drastically when pedestrians
are smaller (30-80 pixels tall), where up to 80% may be missed, and becomes nearly
unusable at far scales (under 30 pixels) or under partial and heavy occlusions, where
almost all pedestrians are missed [8]. Notably, this far-scale range, where individuals
appear smaller than 30 pixels, corresponds to the typical pedestrian size in the drone
recordings used in this project.
With the rise of deep learning, particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs), newer,
more robust detection methods have emerged. Architectures like Faster R-CNN, YOLO,
and SSD have significantly improved detection accuracy and speed, making them suit-
able for real-time applications [9, 10]. For example, using YOLO with CCTV cameras, a
mean accuracy of 99.8% was achieved in specific surveillance scenarios, demonstrating
its effectiveness in tasks such as crowd monitoring and urban planning [11].
4
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:13==
However, ground-level cameras introduce several limitations. Occlusion is a common
issue in crowded environments, as people often block each other from view. Furthermore,
the low-angle perspective restricts the field of view, requiring multiple cameras to cover
large areas. This not only increases installation and maintenance costs, but also adds
complexity to the data processing pipeline [12].
2.3
Drone-Based People Detection and Tracking
The increasing accessibility and affordability of drones have introduced new possibilities
for people tracking. Unlike fixed surveillance cameras, drones offer a flexible aerial per-
spective, allowing broader coverage and reduced occlusion without permanent infrastruc-
ture. While the field is still developing, various methods have been explored. For example
Hung et al. [13] achieved a precision of 98% using a Faster R-CNN model trained on a
custom dataset of drone footage, recorded at heights from 5 to 10 meters at a 720p res-
olution; Thakur et al. [14] achieved a precision of 61% with a modified YOLOv5 model
trained on MOT20, a popular multi object tracking dataset [15], and tested on custom
drone footage, outperforming Faster R-CNN and SSD models; and Sha et al. [16] per-
formed multi-object detection using a YOLOv8 model, achieving a precision of 53.3% on
the pedestrian category of the VisDrone2019 dataset [17], which is a large-scale dataset
for drone-based object detection and tracking. These results show that detection perfor-
mance varies greatly depending on the specific scenario and dataset used.
However, these models are typically evaluated on datasets captured from drones flying
at low altitudes with angled views, where people are clearly visible and can be enclosed
with bounding boxes. In contrast, the type of footage considered in this project consists
of top-down, high-altitude recordings in which individuals appear only as small dots, often
showing only the tops of their heads, and may appear blurry due to the low resolution
resulting from high-altitude recording. This makes detection significantly more challenging
and generally requires point-based annotation rather than bounding boxes. While this
overhead view enhances privacy and reduces overlap, it increases the complexity of both
detection and tracking tasks.
To illustrate the differences between these two types of footage, Figure 2.1 shows exam-
ples of low-altitude drone recordings used in previously mentioned studies, where individ-
uals are clearly visible and can be enclosed in bounding boxes, while Figure 2.2 shows
an example of a high-altitude top-down recording, where individuals appear as small dots
and are not easily enclosed in bounding boxes.
(a)
Low-altitude
drone
footage from Hung et al.
[13].
(b)
Low-altitude
drone
footage from Thakur et al.
[14].
(c)
Low-altitude
drone
footage
from
the
Vis-
Drone2019 dataset [17].
Figure 2.1: Examples of low-altitude drone footage from related studies, where individuals
are clearly visible.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Example of high-altitude top-down drone footage from this project final video,
where individuals appear as small dots and are not easily enclosed in bounding boxes.
Machine learning-based tracking approaches, particularly those relying on deep learning,
require large volumes of annotated data to learn robust representations and achieve ac-
ceptable performance. This data serves as the foundation for training models to recognize
individuals across frames under varying conditions. In high altitude aerial imagery, point-
based annotation, where a single point marks each individual’s head, is commonly used.
While this is a form of weak supervision and less labor-intensive than bounding boxes or
segmentation masks, it still presents significant challenges. Annotating crowded drone
footage is time-consuming, as it often contains hundreds of individuals per frame. Iden-
tifying and tracking them is difficult even for human annotators, due to factors such as
low resolution (caused by high flight altitudes), challenging lighting conditions, shadows,
noise, and dense groups where individuals overlap [18].
As a result, there are only a few publicly available annotated datasets for video-based
crowd counting, localization, or tracking from top-down aerial perspectives. One such
dataset is AerialMPT [18], which contains 14 sequences and 307 frames captured by
DLR’s 4K camera system aboard helicopters flying at altitudes between 600 and 1400
meters, with an average resolution of 425×358 pixels. Another is CrowdFlow [19], a syn-
thetic dataset that, while not drone-based, simulates aerial surveillance through both static
and dynamic viewpoints. It includes 10 sequences across five scenes, rendered at HD
resolution (1280×720) and 25 fps. The largest dataset currently available is DroneCrowd
[20], collected using various DJI platforms in diverse scenarios, altitudes, and crowd den-
sities. This dataset comprises 112 Full HD video clips at 25 fps, annotated with over 4.8
million head points.
Various approaches have been developed for people detection and tracking in drone
footage using these datasets. For example, Azimi et al. [18] introduced AerialMPTNet,
a network that integrates appearance, temporal, and graphical information to detect and
track individuals in aerial videos. Although the method achieved a negative MOTA (-16.2),
indicating more tracking errors than correct associations, it still outperformed classical
6
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:15==
tracking baselines evaluated on the same dataset. MOTA (Multiple Object Tracking Ac-
curacy) is a standard metric that combines false positives, false negatives, and identity
switches into a single score, with higher values indicating better tracking performance.
The creators of the DroneCrowd dataset also proposed a custom model for crowd track-
ing, called STNNet. This model combines density estimation with spatial-temporal mod-
eling and incorporates a specialized tracking module tailored to the motion patterns ob-
served in top-down drone views. On the DroneCrowd dataset, STNNet achieved a lo-
calization accuracy of 40.45% and a tracking accuracy of 32.5%, surpassing methods
originally designed for lower-altitude, angled drone footage, such as CSRNet [21] and
DM-Count [22]. A comparison of these methods is presented in Table 2.1. The table
reports localization performance using metrics such as Localization mean Average Preci-
sion (L-mAP) and Average Precision at different spatial thresholds (L-AP@10, L-AP@15,
L-AP@20).
Table 2.1: Performance of different methods for location on the DroneCrowd dataset.
Reproduced from [20].
Method
L-mAP
L-AP@10
L-AP@15
L-AP@20
MCNN
9.05%
9.81%
11.81%
12.83%
CAN
11.12%
8.94%
15.22%
18.27%
CSRNet
14.40%
15.13%
19.77%
21.16%
DM-Count
18.17%
17.90%
25.32%
27.59%
STNNet
40.45%
42.75%
50.98%
55.77%
Several recent studies report modest improvements over the original STNNet. For in-
stance, Nazeer et al. [23, 24] proposed a modified version of STNNet that incorporates
enhanced multi-scale feature extraction, a more precise localization module combining
classification and regression with attention mechanisms, temporal modeling of motion
across frames, and a novel loss function designed to preserve spatial consistency among
neighboring objects over time. These modifications led to an approximate 6% improve-
ment in tracking accuracy. Similarly, Asanomi et al. [25] introduced an attention-based
model trained on the DroneCrowd dataset, which achieved a 10% improvement in tracking
accuracy compared to STNNet.
Recent research has also explored the use of RGB-T (RGB-Thermal) drone imagery for
crowd detection and tracking [26, 27, 28]. These approaches leverage the additional
thermal information to enhance detection and tracking performance, particularly in chal-
lenging lighting conditions or when visual features are limited. However, such methods
fall outside the scope of this project due to hardware constraints.
Despite recent advancements, improvements over STNNet remain relatively modest, and
the practical applicability of newer models is often limited by the lack of publicly available
code, pretrained weights, or sufficient implementation details, which limits reproducibility
and fair comparison. For these reasons, STNNet is selected as the baseline model for
this project.
While the models discussed above demonstrate significant advancements in drone-based
people detection, it is important to note that many of these models focus primarily on
detection, with tracking typically handled through separate post-processing steps. Several
methods have been proposed for Multi-Object Tracking (MOT). However, surveys [29, 30]
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
7
==PAGE:16==
reveal that many of these methods rely heavily on the appearance features of detected
objects, which are not available in the use case of this project.
To address this limitation, other works have explored alternatives based solely on spatial,
motion, or temporal information. For example, ByteTrack [31] uses a simple yet effec-
tive approach combining object detection with YOLOX and tracking with a Kalman filter,
achieving a MOTA of 67.0 on the MOT20 dataset. Similarly, CenterTrack [32] builds on the
CenterNet detector by taking as input the current frame, the previous frame, and the previ-
ous frame’s detections rendered as a heatmap. It jointly detects objects and predicts their
associations with previous point detections, enabling simple, online, and real-time multi-
object tracking without requiring future frames. CenterTrack achieves a MOTA of 66.1 on
the MOT17 benchmark. To address the tracking, previously mentioned AerialMPTNet and
STNNet rely on LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) networks, which are a type of recurrent
neural network (RNN) designed to learn long-term dependencies in sequential data [33].
Specifically, STNNet uses Social LSTM, which incorporates social interactions between
individuals to improve tracking performance on pedestrian scenarios [34].
Despite the advancement in tracking methods, the complexity of many state-of-the-art
implementations and the time constraints of this project led to the choice of a simpler
baseline approach based on the Hungarian algorithm [35]. This method is relatively easy
to implement and integrates effectively with point detections. The Hungarian algorithm
is used to associate detections across consecutive frames by minimizing the overall cost
based on spatial distance between previous positions and new detections. This allows
for the reconstruction of continuous trajectories for each individual over time.
Although more sophisticated methods may incorporate appearance features, motion mod-
els, or deep learning-based re-identification modules, many modern tracking systems still
rely on the Hungarian algorithm (or variants of it) as a core component for data association
due to its efficiency and reliability in solving the assignment problem. It serves as a robust
foundation, especially when working with limited data or when prioritizing computational
simplicity.
2.4
Overview of STNNet
The STNNet (Space-Time Neighbor-Aware Network) is a deep learning architecture specif-
ically designed for people tracking in drone footage from a top-down perspective. Intro-
duced alongside the DroneCrowd dataset, it addresses the limitations of conventional
object detectors in aerial imagery, where individuals appear as small, densely packed
points, often with no distinguishable features.
Unlike traditional frame-by-frame approaches, STNNet takes pairs of consecutive frames
as input and jointly estimates density maps, localized pedestrian positions, and motion
offsets. These outputs are then used to construct trajectories over time.
The architecture is composed of three main modules:
• Density Estimation: Produces a continuous map indicating the likelihood of a per-
son being present at each pixel location.
• Localization Subnet: Refines density maps into discrete object locations using
classification and regression branches. It leverages multi-scale features fused with
attention mechanisms to increase precision.
• Association Subnet: Predicts motion offsets between frames to enable tracking.
It uses a combination of point-based convolutions and a lightweight neural network
8
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:17==
to associate detections forward and backward in time.
A schematic of the model architecture is shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Architecture of the STNNet model.Taken from [20].
STNNet is trained on DroneCrowd, which closely resembles the video data used in this
thesis in terms of camera angle, altitude, and crowd density. Its strong performance, along
with publicly available code and pretrained weights, makes it a practical and well-aligned
choice for this project.
2.5
School Transport Studies
Understanding how children commute to school is a key component of mobility planning,
kids safety, and infrastructure design. These insights help municipalities and schools
develop safer routes, improve accessibility, and promote more active traveling options
such as walking and biking.
Previous studies have explored how children commute to school using a variety of data
collection methods. Fang et al.[3] used questionnaires distributed to students to assess
their travel modes and investigate the relationship between commuting behavior and
spatial cognition. Sersli et al.[4] compared the reliability of different data collection ap-
proaches, including Hands Up surveys (in-class self-reporting), family questionnaires, and
observational counts conducted by trained personnel positioned near schools. Their find-
ings showed that Hands Up surveys and family questionnaires tended to produce similar
results, while observational counts often diverged, highlighting potential limitations such
as recall bias and low participation rates in self-reported methods.
In a Danish context, Christiansen et al. [36] analyzed data from 14 schools in the Region of
Southern Denmark, relying on student commuting diaries and questionnaires collected in
prior studies. Their work focused on examining the influence of school walkability on stu-
dents’ commuting patterns and physical activity levels, illustrating how local infrastructure
plays a key role in shaping travel behavior.
A particularly relevant contribution is the study by Hodgson and Chang [37], which, after a
careful literature search, appears to be the only published work that integrates drone tech-
nology with school travel data collection. In their study, drone footage was recorded simul-
taneously with classroom travel tallies at three elementary schools in Moscow, Idaho. The
videos were manually annotated and compared with the self-reported data. The results
revealed significant discrepancies, particularly between walking and car usage, under-
scoring the challenges of interpreting travel modes from aerial imagery and the limitations
of survey-based methods in capturing complex commuting behaviors. Their findings are
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
9
==PAGE:18==
summarized in Table 2.2, where notable differences are evident between the drone and
tally data, both in total counts and in the precision of individual travel modes.
Table 2.2: Comparison of drone and tally data across three elementary schools, with
precision (%) assuming tally as ground truth. Reproduced from [37].
Source
Bus
Car
Ped
Bike
Total
McDonald Elementary
Drone Average
52.0
26.0
102.7
3.3
184.0
Tally Average
92.0
161.0
55.0
6.0
314.0
Precision (%)
56.5%
16.1%
186.7%
55.0%
58.6%
Lena Whitmore Elementary
Drone Average
20.7
53.7
99.3
3.0
176.7
Tally Average
26.0
97.0
71.0
6.0
200.0
Precision (%)
79.6%
55.4%
139.9%
50.0%
88.4%
Russell Elementary
Drone Average
73.3
17.0
82.7
0.7
173.7
Tally Average
54.0
44.0
27.0
1.0
126.0
Precision (%)
135.7%
38.6%
306.3%
70.0%
137.9%
The authors also investigated how editing drone footage and refining the video review
process affected the reliability of manual annotations. By focusing on predefined areas
of interest (cordon boundaries) and providing clearer instructions to video reviewers, they
improved inter-rater consistency significantly. However, the study also noted key limita-
tions, including limited drone battery life, line-of-sight constraints due to environmental
features (e.g., trees, awnings), and the time required to manually review or edit videos.
This study serves as an important foundation for our work. While their approach still relies
on manual video analysis, it demonstrates the value of drones as a scalable and non-
intrusive tool for observing school commute patterns. It also underlines key challenges,
such as the ambiguity of travel modes inferred from video and the need for standardized
review protocols. In contrast, the present project explores whether such analysis can be
automated using computer vision models trained to detect and track individuals in drone
footage. By doing so, it seeks to reduce the reliance on manual annotation and increase
the scalability of this type of data collection.
2.6
Alternative Solutions in the InnoTech TaskForce
In parallel with the studies discussed above, the InnoTech TaskForce initiative brought
together commercial and research teams to propose alternative solutions for tracking and
analyzing pedestrian behavior in the context of school commuting. The following alterna-
tives were considered:
• See.Sense: A GPS tracker for cyclists and e-scooters. Its scope is limited to users
willing to carry the device, and it requires one device per individual, making it costly
and non-scalable.
• QRoutes: A route-planning tool for identifying the shortest and safest paths. How-
ever, it does not include data collection or analysis capabilities, making it of limited
relevance for tracking purposes.
10
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:19==
• MacQ: An open-source system involving the installation of edge-AI cameras to clas-
sify moving objects. Claimed to require only two cameras per school. One of the
more promising solutions, as strategic camera placement could facilitate effective
classification of arrival modes. Still requires physical installation.
• Omniflow: A system based on smart lamp posts with integrated sensors and edge-
AI processing. Although tracking is not explicitly mentioned, further discussions with
the company could clarify its capabilities. The system is expensive and requires
permanent infrastructure.
• Okapi: A prototype using RFID tags attached to students’ bags. The tags collect
data but must be retrieved afterward to access it. Pricing and scalability remain
unclear.
• UrbanDigital: Analyzes mobile network data to infer individual movements. It may
misattribute data from people merely passing by the school, and some students may
not carry mobile phones, affecting reliability.
• Flowity: Offers object detection in streamed video, claiming to count individuals and
detect movement flows. While explicit tracking is not mentioned, it could potentially
provide insight into arrival modes.
By situating this project within the context of the InnoTech TaskForce, it becomes evident
that the proposed drone-based solution addresses a critical gap in current methodolo-
gies. While several alternatives show promise, they often involve significant infrastructure
investments, require physical installation, or depend on individuals carrying tracking de-
vices. In contrast, the drone-based approach is non-intrusive, scalable, and cost-effective,
making it a practical and innovative tool for analyzing pedestrian behavior around schools.
This positions the project as a valuable contribution to ongoing efforts in mobility analysis
and data-driven urban planning.
2.7
GDPR Considerations
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is a comprehensive data protection law
in the European Union that governs the collection, processing, and storage of personal
data. Given the nature of this project, which involves recording and analyzing drone
footage of individuals in public spaces, ensuring GDPR compliance is essential.
Key considerations relevant to this project include:
• Data Minimization: Only data strictly necessary for achieving the project’s objec-
tives is collected. In this case, the objective is to track pedestrian behavior around
schools, so recordings are limited to specific areas and time windows. The tool
does not attempt to identify individuals, but rather detects and tracks anonymous
movement patterns based on position data.
• Anonymization: The drone operates at a height that results in a top-down view
where individuals appear only as small dots, making personal identification highly
unlikely. This contributes to preserving individual anonymity.
• Purpose Limitation: Data is collected exclusively for the purpose of analyzing
school commuting patterns and supporting urban mobility planning. It is not re-
purposed for unrelated activities.
• Transparency: Relevant stakeholders, including schools, are informed about the
data collection process, its objectives, and the rights of individuals under GDPR.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
11
==PAGE:20==
• Data Security: All collected data is stored securely, with access restricted to au-
thorized personnel only.
All video recordings used in this project will be permanently deleted after the completion
of the thesis to further safeguard privacy and comply with data retention principles.
12
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:21==
3
Methods and Procedures
This chapter provides a detailed account of the methods and procedures employed in this
study, highlighting the tools, technologies, and systematic approach used to achieve the
project’s objectives.
3.1
Software and Tools
A significant portion of the project relies on programming and software development. The
primary programming language used was Python, selected for several compelling rea-
sons. Python is widely adopted in the fields of data science, computer vision, and machine
learning, and benefits from a robust ecosystem of open-source libraries such as PyTorch,
TensorFlow, OpenCV, and scikit-learn. These tools greatly facilitated tasks such as model
evaluation and video processing. Moreover, most of the state-of-the-art tracking models
reviewed and implemented during the project were originally developed in Python, mak-
ing it a natural choice to ensure compatibility and ease of integration. Python’s simplicity
and readability also made it easier to collaborate and maintain the codebase.
Python was chosen over alternatives like MATLAB or R due to its versatility and extensive
support for deep learning frameworks. While MATLAB is strong in numerical computing,
it lacks the same level of community support and modern machine learning libraries. Sim-
ilarly, R is excellent for statistical analysis but is less suited for computer vision and deep
learning tasks compared to Python.
Beyond the machine learning components, Python was also used to develop the backend
of the user tool. Although other languages like Java or C# could have been suitable for this
task, Python was chosen primarily due to its simplicity and the development efficiency it
offered in the context of the project. This decision also aligned well with the author’s prior
experience and proficiency in Python, which allowed for faster prototyping, debugging,
and overall development.
To create a graphical user interface accessible to non-expert users, a web application
was developed using React, a widely adopted JavaScript library for building interactive
user interfaces. React’s component-based architecture and strong community support
made it a suitable choice for creating a responsive and modular frontend that allows users
to upload outputs, define areas of interest, and visualize analysis results. React was
selected over alternatives like Angular or Vue.js because of its flexibility, fast rendering
capabilities, interactive features, and the availability of a rich ecosystem of libraries and
tools that facilitate rapid development.
Manual annotation was carried out using CVAT (Computer Vision Annotation Tool), an
open-source and freely accessible platform developed by Intel. CVAT is widely used in
the computer vision community and is actively maintained, which made it a reliable and
trustworthy choice for generating ground truth data. The tool supports point-based track-
ing, interpolation between frames, and flexible labeling configurations, all of which are
essential features for the type of annotation required in this project.
Initially, Vatic [38], the annotation tool used in the DroneCrowd dataset, was considered
due to the similarities between their videos and ours. However, Vatic’s GitHub reposi-
tory clearly states that the project is no longer maintained and recommends migrating to
CVAT, its modern alternative. This recommendation, combined with CVAT’s widespread
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
13
==PAGE:22==
adoption and active development by Intel, led to its selection as the annotation tool for
this project.
CVAT can be used online via a hosted version or installed locally. For this project, the local
setup was selected to reduce latency and improve performance during annotation ses-
sions. Other annotation tools were also explored, but many offered only limited function-
ality in their free versions or operated under restrictive pricing plans. CVAT, by contrast,
offered full functionality without cost, reinforcing its suitability for this project.
Generative AI tools such as GitHub Copilot, ChatGPT, and Claude were also used during
development to assist with coding tasks. These tools helped generate code, suggest
improvements, and accelerate debugging, contributing to a more efficient development
process.
3.2
Hardware
Machine learning models require significant computational resources, particularly during
inference when processing large, high-resolution images, as in this project. Even without
training, forwarding videos through deep learning models involves substantial computa-
tional load due to the volume of data and the complexity of the network operations. Per-
forming this on standard CPUs would result in slow processing times, making it impractical
for handling full-length videos efficiently.
To address this, the DTU High-Performance Computing (HPC) cluster was used to run
the inference tasks. The HPC environment offers students access to multiple GPUs,
which are essential for accelerating deep learning workloads by parallelizing computations
across thousands of cores. This allowed the videos to be processed in a reasonable
timeframe and enabled iterative testing with different parameter settings.
The drone used for data collection was the DJI Mini 4 Pro, a lightweight and compact
model weighing only 249 grams. This weight is particularly advantageous in Denmark, as
it exempts the drone from requiring special flight permissions, needing only registration
with the Danish Transport Authority.
The drone is equipped with a high-resolution camera capable of recording video at up to
4K resolution and 100 frames per second. The camera is mounted on a gimbal that allows
it to tilt, enabling a true top-down view ideal for our application. Additionally, the inclusion
of a wide-angle lens made it possible to capture a broader area, increasing the coverage
of the observation zone.
The DJI Mini 4 Pro can maintain a stable hover, which is essential for the static tracking
approach used in this project. Its battery life of up to 34 minutes is typical for consumer-
grade drones, although it may not be sufficient to cover the entire period during which
students arrive at school. Nonetheless, considering its technical capabilities and the fact
that it was the only model available through our collaborators, it proved to be an excellent
and practical choice for the project.
3.3
Stages
The project was divided into several stages to ensure a systematic approach to the re-
search:
1. Study of the State-of-the-Art: This stage involved a comprehensive review of the
existing literature and state-of-the-art methods in drone-based pedestrian tracking.
Similar studies on children’s arrival methods to school or work commuting were also
reviewed to understand the context and challenges of the problem.
14
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:23==
2. Implementation of Machine Learning Model: Based on the findings from the lit-
erature review, the selected machine learning model was configured and tested in
the HPC cluster.
3. Recording of Pilot Videos: A pilot video was recorded to test how the models
behave with our setup. Due to time constraints, no annotations were made during
this stage. The pilot video was used to evaluate the performance of the model and
identify any potential issues and improvements needed for the final video recording.
4. Development of User Interface: A user interface was developed to allow users to
interact with the data produced by the models. The interface was designed to be
user-friendly and intuitive. Since this step depended on the data produced by the
models using our videos, a simulation of paths was created to enable development
and testing.
5. Final Video Recording: The final video was recorded taking into account the feed-
back from the pilot video. The video was forwarded through the selected machine
learning model to obtain the locations. Further improvements were made to the
tracker and the user interface based on the results obtained from the final video.
6. Analysis of Results: The results of the tool were analyzed using manual video
counting as the ground truth. Manual counting was performed to determine how
many people went to the school and to annotate their means of transport. This data
was then used to compare with the output of our tool, ensuring the accuracy and
reliability of the results. Additionally, our findings were compared with those from
similar studies discussed in the literature review, to contextualize our performance
and identify strengths and limitations relative to existing approaches.
7. Collection of Feedback: Finally, feedback was collected from final users to eval-
uate the usability and effectiveness of the tool. This feedback was used to assess
if the tool was user-friendly and met the needs of the intended audience. The feed-
back also provided insights into potential improvements and future directions for the
tool.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:25==
4
Model Selection and Setup
In this chapter, it is described how the machine learning model selected, the STNNet,
was installed and configured to run on DTU’s HPC infrastructure. The chapter also dis-
cusses the initial tests conducted with the model, the results obtained, and the limitations
encountered during the process.
4.1
Installation and Configuration
To run the model efficiently, DTU’s HPC infrastructure was used. As explained in Sec-
tion 3.2, this provided access to powerful GPUs, which are essential for deep learning-
based inference.
However, installing STNNet proved to be technically challenging. The original codebase
relied on outdated libraries, including PyTorch 1.6 (released in July 2020), torchvision
0.7 (August 2020), and Python 3.6 (December 2016). At the time of this project, the
latest versions were PyTorch 2.7, torchvision 0.22, and Python 3.13. These tools
are among the core resources in modern machine learning workflows, and maintaining
compatibility with up-to-date versions is essential for long-term usability, security, and
integration with current systems.
Although these earlier versions may not seem particularly old in calendar years, the
machine learning ecosystem evolves rapidly, with frequent updates that improve perfor-
mance, introduce new APIs, and often break compatibility with older code.
Unfortunately, these older versions were no longer supported by the HPC’s system con-
figuration. Initial attempts to upgrade the codebase to more recent library versions were
unsuccessful, primarily due to deep compatibility issues and deprecated functions across
multiple components of the original implementation.
Eventually, a working environment was achieved using miniconda, a lightweight package
and environment manager that facilitates the creation of isolated Python environments.
Miniconda proved particularly useful in this case, as it allowed replication of the original
runtime conditions of the STNNet codebase without interfering with the HPC cluster’s
system configurations.
By creating a dedicated environment with the exact versions of the necessary libraries,
it was possible to satisfy all the model’s legacy dependencies. Miniconda’s environment
isolation also ensured reproducibility, which will be essential for final users who may need
to run the model on their own systems.
A pretrained version of the STNNet model was downloaded from the authors’ repository,
which provided a ready-to-use checkpoint. This checkpoint contained the model’s weights
and architecture, allowing for immediate inference without the need for additional training.
4.2
First Tests and Results
Once installation issues were resolved, the STNNet model was successfully tested using
the test set provided by its authors. The system generated outputs in the form of individual
text files, each corresponding to a specific video frame (e.g., frame0.txt, frame1.txt,
etc.). Each line in these files represents a predicted detection and includes the x and y
pixel coordinates along with a confidence score between 0 and 1. This score reflects the
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
17
==PAGE:26==
model’s certainty that the detection corresponds to a person, with higher values indicating
greater confidence.
935.42 482.10 0.87
For example, the line above describes a detection at pixel position (935.42, 482.10) with a
confidence score of 0.87. However, no tracking identifier is included, despite the fact that
STNNet performs internal tracking during inference.
This lack of tracking information in the output presents a limitation for trajectory analysis,
as detections are frame-level only and not linked across time. To perform meaningful
behavioral analysis, post-processing steps must be added to assign consistent tracking
IDs across frames.
Furthermore, an inspection of the results, such as the one shown in Figure 4.1, reveals
that the model sometimes assigns high confidence scores to non-human elements. In
this example, detections located within buildings have been manually marked in red for
clarity. Those exhibit confidence scores in the 0.6-0.7 range, which are comparable to
those of valid detections. This suggests that confidence scores alone are not always a
reliable criterion for filtering out false positives.
Figure 4.1: Sample frame from the test set with detections overlaid. Only detections with
confidence scores of 0.5 or above are shown.
As a result, it was considered important to investigate how varying the confidence score
threshold affects the final outcomes. This analysis, presented in Section 7.1, explores the
trade-off between reducing false positives and retaining true detections.
In addition, while running the model on the test set, it was observed that the average
processing time per frame was approximately 2 seconds. This represents a significant
computational cost that quickly becomes an issue for long videos. For instance, just
processing a 1-minute video at 25 frames per second (a total of 1500 frames) would
take roughly 50 minutes. This observation highlighted the need to explore strategies for
reducing inference time.
18
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:27==
To address this, a complementary study was conducted to evaluate whether process-
ing fewer frames, by skipping them at regular intervals, could offer meaningful speed-ups
while maintaining acceptable detection and tracking performance. The results of this eval-
uation, presented in Section 7.1, will analyze the impact of frame skipping on the model’s
performance.
4.3
Post-processing to Enable Tracking
Although the STNNet model performs internal tracking during inference, the outputs pro-
vided do not include any tracking identifiers, only frame-level detections. To enable tem-
poral analysis of pedestrian behavior, an external tracking method had to be incorporated.
For this purpose, a simple Hungarian-based tracking algorithm was implemented. This
algorithm operates by associating detections across frames based on their spatial proxim-
ity, using the Hungarian algorithm to solve the assignment problem. The algorithm follows
these steps:
1: Initialize an empty list of active tracks
2: for each frame t do
3:
Extract detections Dt with confidence score above threshold
4:
Compute cost matrix C based on Euclidean distance between old positions and
new detections
5:
Apply Hungarian algorithm to find optimal assignment between tracks and detec-
tions
6:
for each matched pair (track i, detection j) do
7:
Update track i with detection j’s position
8:
Keep track ID unchanged
9:
end for
10:
for each unmatched detection do
11:
Initialize new track with unique ID
12:
end for
13:
for each unmatched track do
14:
Mark as lost or remove if inactive for too long
15:
end for
16: end for
While the implemented tracking method based on the Hungarian algorithm provides a
simple and computationally efficient baseline, it is limited by relying solely on spatial prox-
imity for data association. More robust and sophisticated tracking approaches exist, as
discussed in the literature review.
However, due to constraints related to project scope, computational resources, and the
complexity of integrating and tuning these more advanced models, this work focused on
establishing a functional baseline tracker first. This approach allowed us to validate the
overall system pipeline and perform preliminary temporal analyzes without introducing
additional dependencies or significantly increasing computational requirements. Future
work can build upon this baseline by exploring and integrating more robust tracking meth-
ods to improve performance in complex or crowded scenarios.
4.4
Limitations of the Selected Approach
Despite being one of the best-performing models in the field, STNNet presented several
limitations. These include:
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
19
==PAGE:28==
• Inconsistent detections: The model often misses pedestrians, especially in cases
of low contrast, motion blur, or shadows. Flickering across frames is frequent.
• False positives: Non-human elements such as bicycle or shadows are sometimes
detected as people.
• Lack of tracking output: The need for post-processing to reconstruct trajectories
adds complexity and reduces tracking reliability.
• High resource consumption: Inference is computationally demanding and time-
consuming, limiting scalability for long or high-resolution video sequences.
20
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:29==
5
Data Collection and Testing
This chapter describes the data collection process, including the pilot video recorded to
test the drone setup and the final video captured at Sakskøbing Skole. It also discusses
the manual annotation of the final video to create ground truth data for evaluating the
model’s performance. The challenges encountered during the data collection and anno-
tation process are also highlighted.
5.1
Pilot Video
On April 1, 2025, a pilot video was recorded at Sophieskolen in Nykøbing Falster. This test
aimed to evaluate the suitability of the drone setup and provide feedback for adjustments
before final data collection. Ensuring optimal video quality and framing was critical to
maximize the model’s performance and minimize data collection errors.
(a) Low-angle view: entire body of pedestrians
visible.
(b) Higher-angle view: closer to a top-down
perspective.
Figure 5.1: Framing examples from the pilot drone videos.
Three videos were analyzed during the pilot phase. Two of them were recorded from the
same position at a low altitude and with an oblique, side-view angle (Figure 5.1a). This
perspective, as discussed in the literature review, differed significantly from the top-down
view that the STNNet model was trained on. As a result, these videos were discarded.
The third video, however, was recorded from a much higher altitude and with a viewing an-
gle closer to vertical (Figure 5.1b), better matching the model’s intended input conditions.
This video was therefore selected for further analysis and testing.
All videos were originally recorded in 4K resolution (3840×2160) at 29.97 frames per sec-
ond. To better align with the conditions under which STNNet was trained, the resolu-
tion was downscaled to 1920×1080, and the frame rate was adjusted to 25 FPS. While
the slight mismatch in frame rate was not expected to significantly impact performance,
matching the resolution was essential, as the model architecture only supports inputs of
1920×1080 pixels.
5.1.1
Preliminary Results
The third video was selected for testing. Initial runs using STNNet yielded mixed re-
sults. While some frames correctly detected pedestrians, the predictions exhibited notice-
able flickering, detections appeared and disappeared inconsistently, even for stationary
or slow-moving individuals.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
21
==PAGE:30==
As illustrated in Figure 5.2, the model encountered several challenges. In Figure 5.2a, a
false positive is shown where tires were misclassified as pedestrians with a confidence
around 0.5. Figure 5.2b highlights missed detections, where visible individuals were not
detected at all. Lastly, Figure 5.2c shows the model’s struggle with groups of pedestri-
ans, where multiple individuals were detected as a single person or inconsistently across
frames.
(a) False positive: object mis-
classified as a person.
(b) Missed detections in the
scene.
(c) Multiple pedestrians de-
tected inconsistently.
Figure 5.2: Examples of common detection issues observed in the pilot video.
5.1.2
Feedback and Adjustments Between Pilot and Final
Based on this preliminary evaluation, specific recommendations were communicated to
the video recording team. For the final recording, a fixed resolution of 1080p was re-
quested to eliminate the need for rescaling. Additionally, instructions were given to adjust
the camera angle to achieve a more vertical top-down view. In the analyzed video, the
drone was positioned near the area of interest and pointed the camera at it from a dis-
tance, rather than hovering directly above it. This off-center positioning prevented the
capture of a true top-down perspective. For future recordings, the drone was instructed
to be placed directly above the target area to ensure proper alignment with the model’s
expected input.
Figure 5.3 provides a 3D visualization of the drone’s positions during the pilot recordings
and the proposed final location. The drone’s positions are represented by spheres: the
first two recordings correspond to the red sphere, the third to the yellow sphere, and the
suggested final position is shown in green. The red building represents the school.
Despite these positioning issues, the drone appeared to be stable during flight, and the
recorded footage showed good contrast and color. These aspects indicate that the hard-
ware itself is appropriate for the task, and that the main issues observed were related to
framing and positioning rather than image quality or recording capabilities.
5.2
Final Recording
The final video was recorded on May 12th, 2025, at Sakskøbing Skole, located in the mu-
nicipality of Guldborgsund. The layout of the school was ideal for observation, providing
clear visibility of the main entrances and designated drop-off areas. These elements were
critical for inferring the modes of transport used by arriving students. A one-way road runs
alongside the school, allowing cars to temporarily stop next to the curb to let students out.
Additionally, a designated bus stop accommodates both city buses and smaller school
buses. On both sides of the road, there are bike lanes and pedestrian walkways, enabling
22
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.3: 3D visualization of the drone positions during pilot recordings and proposed
final location. The spheres represent drone positions; the red building is the school.
students to arrive by bicycle or on foot. This spatial separation of arrival points supports
the project’s path analysis approach by making it possible to distinguish between transport
modes based on the initial detection location of each individual.
While we did not personally visit the location, partners from the InnoTech TaskForce who
were present during the video recording provided detailed information about the school’s
arrival dynamics. To support the analysis, they also shared a reference image marking
key arrival zones, such as the bus stop, car drop-off area, and pedestrian paths. This
image, shown in Figure 5.4, served as a valuable guide for interpreting the scene.
Figure 5.4: Annotated reference image of Sakskøbing Skole highlighting key arrival ar-
eas, including the bus stop, car drop-off zone, pedestrian paths, and school entrances.
Provided by InnoTech TaskForce partners to support spatial interpretation during video
analysis.
The recording team implemented the feedback provided after the pilot video. The drone
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
23
==PAGE:32==
was flown at an appropriate altitude, and the camera was oriented directly downward,
resulting in a clear top-down perspective. A wide-angle lens was used for this session,
allowing a broader field of view and improved coverage of the school grounds. The video
was recorded in 1080p resolution at 25 frames per second, matching the conditions used
during the model’s training and ensuring compatibility with the processing pipeline.
The final video was split into two parts due to the limited battery life of the drone, which
allows for approximately 15 minutes of continuous recording. This constraint was antic-
ipated. Although the possibility of using a second drone to continue recording without
interruption was discussed, it was ultimately deemed infeasible due to resource limita-
tions. As a result, there is a risk of missing some individuals who may have arrived during
the brief transition between the two recordings.
Additionally, minor drone movements were observed during the session. These shifts
occurred partly due to wind conditions and partly as a result of manual adjustments made
by the operator when starting the second recording to replicate the original framing. While
this motion is not critical, it may introduce slight inconsistencies in the model’s detection
and tracking output.
5.3
Ground Truth and Manual Annotation
To evaluate the performance of the tracking system and extract meaningful transport-
related data, a manual annotation process was carried out on the final video. This task was
performed using the open-source tool CVAT (Computer Vision Annotation Tool), which
supports point-based annotation and tracking. Each individual appearing in the video was
annotated using a single point located approximately at the center of the head. The goal
was to capture the general movement and trajectory of each person rather than achieving
pixel-perfect accuracy. To streamline the process, CVAT’s interpolation functionality was
utilized, allowing for automatic tracking of points between manually annotated keyframes.
On average, a keypoint was manually annotated every 60 frames, significantly reducing
the manual workload, although regular adjustments were still required to maintain tracking
consistency.
In addition to tracking, each trajectory was labeled with an arrival method based on visual
observation. Categories included ”walking”, ”bike”, ”car” and ”bus”.
The annotation process proved to be highly time-consuming and required constant at-
tention. While some individuals entered the scene and proceeded directly to the school,
others lingered in the area, interacted with others, or moved in and out of occluded regions.
These cases were particularly challenging, as long-term tracking under partial visibility is
prone to errors.
CVAT, while functional and useful, also exhibited some performance issues, such as slow
video loading and occasional interface lag. Despite these limitations, it provided a robust
platform for manual annotation and tracking.
Overall, the manual annotation process reinforced a key motivation behind this project:
the need for a reliable, automated tracking solution. If such a system could deliver con-
sistent and accurate results, it would significantly reduce the time and effort required for
similar use cases in the future.
5.4
Observed Challenges and Limitations
The analysis of the videos captured at different schools made it evident that each lo-
cation presents unique challenges for both pedestrian tracking and transportation mode
24
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.5: Manual annotation of individuals in the final video using CVAT. Each person
was tracked using point annotations across frames, and assigned a transport mode label.
inference. During the evaluation in this project, various issues were observed. In some
cases, buses did not stop at the designated bus stop but parked near the kiss-and-ride
area, and conversely, some cars stopped in the bus zone, creating ambiguity when us-
ing location for classification. Bikers were occasionally seen walking their bicycles rather
than riding them, which would result in misclassification. Some cars stopped or dropped
off passengers outside the frame, making their detection impossible. Environmental oc-
clusions, such as trees, blocked parts of the scene, further complicating detection and
tracking. Additionally, many children were accompanied by parents walking with them to
school, leading to potential overestimations in the number of arrivals.
Apart from these observed challenges, there are other limitations that may arise in dif-
ferent scenarios. For example, if children from different grades have different schedules,
a single recording might not capture all students arriving at the school. Similarly, if a
school has multiple entrances that cannot be included in a single camera frame, multiple
recordings would be necessary to obtain complete coverage, adding complexity.
In conclusion, these findings demonstrate the need for a preliminary analysis of each
school’s layout and arrival patterns. Such an analysis is crucial for planning the recording
to ensure that the data captured provides favorable conditions for the tool to perform
reliably. Furthermore, it also highlights the importance of the developed tool being flexible
enough to adapt to a wide range of scenarios and deployment conditions.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:35==
6
Tool Development
One of the primary goals of this project is to enable non-technical users, such as mu-
nicipal planners or school administrators, to extract meaningful insights from drone video
footage without requiring expertise in computer vision or machine learning. To support
this, a graphical tool was developed to allow users to analyze pedestrian arrival patterns
in an intuitive and accessible way. The idea is that the user should simply upload the
video and define relevant regions, such as bus stops or entrances, via a simple interface.
The system then automatically processes the paths and provides summarized information
about pedestrian flows between these regions.
Although the ultimate goal for the tool is to support end-to-end video processing, including
running the machine learning model directly in the backend, the current implementation
is limited to the post-processing stage. This approach assumes that the model outputs
have already been generated. The limitation arises from the high computational require-
ments of model inference, which currently are performed on DTU’s HPC infrastructure.
Deployment considerations are discussed later in this chapter.
6.1
Frontend Architecture
The frontend of the pedestrian flow analysis tool is implemented as a modern web applica-
tion using React.js, focusing on ease of use and interactivity. The application is designed
to run in a web browser, and it can be hosted on any web server or run locally for devel-
opment purposes.
It allows non-expert users to upload detection data, define analysis zones, and view re-
sults interactively within a clean and structured interface.
6.1.1
User Workflow and Interface
The application includes two main views: the editing view and the results view. The editing
view is used to configure the analysis and annotate areas of interest, while the results view
displays the output trajectories and summary visualizations.
In the editing view, the interface is divided into two columns. The left column provides
the configuration panel, where users can upload a reference image (preferably a frame
extracted from the video to analyze) and detection results (in ZIP format), and configure
tracking parameters such as maximum point-matching distance and minimum detection
confidence. Below that, polygon tools allow users to save, load, edit, delete, and classify
polygons as either sources or destinations. The right column displays the canvas with the
uploaded image, where all interaction takes place. An example of this view is shown in
Figure 6.1.
Polygons are created by clicking on the canvas to define vertices, right-clicking to finish,
and then assigning a name and type. Editing mode enables vertex dragging and poly-
gon renaming, while deletion mode allows removing polygons with a simple click. Users
can also save their polygon configurations to a file for later use or load previously saved
configurations to quickly set up analysis zones. Once the setup is complete, users can
initiate the analysis by clicking the “Run Analysis” button.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.1: Screenshot of the editing view.
Figure 6.2: Screenshot of the editing view: Tracked paths and filters.
In the results view, the same canvas is used to overlay pedestrian trajectories computed
by the backend. Each path is color-coded based on its associated source and destination
regions. Hovering over a path highlights it and reveals its start and end points. Two
sets of checkboxes let users filter the visualization by origin and destination, allowing
multiple filters to be applied simultaneously to focus on specific flows. Additionally, a bar
chart below the canvas presents a summary of the number of individuals moving between
regions, offering a clear and concise overview of the observed patterns (see Figures 6.2
and 6.3).
28
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.3: Screenshot of the editing view: Bar chart summarizing the number of individ-
uals moving between defined source and destination regions.
6.1.2
User Experience Design
The frontend underwent several iterations to ensure a user-friendly and intuitive experi-
ence. The first version focused solely on the core functionality: defining polygons and
performing tracking. However, it lacked an appealing design and essential usability fea-
tures (Figure 6.4a).
Once the basic functionality was in place, development shifted toward enhancing the user
experience. A cleaner interface was designed and additional features were introduced,
such as uploading a reference image, saving polygons, improved text inputs, and a drop-
down menu for selecting source and destination polygons (Figure 6.4b).
Further efforts were made to refine the tool’s usability and visual appeal, gradually ap-
proaching the final look shown in previous sections. To elevate the interface further, pro-
fessional web design guidance was searched. Michelle Schlechtriem, UX designer at
Meili Robots, volunteered to review the tool and provided valuable feedback. Her main
suggestions included:
• Consistent use of colors: The interface initially featured too many inconsistent col-
ors, which overwhelmed the user and distracted from core functionalities. Michelle
recommended defining a single accent color to highlight key actions (e.g., “Run
Analysis” or “Upload Image”), while using neutral tones for secondary buttons (e.g.,
“Save” and “Load”). She also emphasized using consistent colors to distinguish
confirmation and cancellation actions in menus and pop-ups, and ensuring all text
was legible against the background.
• Improved filtering options: The original design allowed filtering of paths using only
one source and one destination polygon via drop-down menus. Michelle suggested
adding checkboxes for each polygon, enabling users to apply multiple filters at once
and better focus on specific flows.
• Efficient use of screen space: The interface initially made inefficient use of verti-
cal space, requiring users to scroll frequently. Michelle recommended rearranging
elements horizontally by placing buttons and filters in a side panel on the left and
the canvas on the right, allowing users to view and interact with all elements more
easily.
• Clear access to results: The results, including a bar chart, were placed below the
canvas and could be missed if users did not scroll down. To address this, Michelle
proposed adding a button labeled “View Results” that would automatically scroll to
the chart, improving discoverability and accessibility.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) First version of the tool interface, focusing
on core functionality but lacking usability fea-
tures.
(b) Second version of the tool interface, with
improved design and usability features.
Figure 6.4: Comparison between the first and second versions of the tool interface.
Additionally, a user manual has been created to complement the tool, providing detailed
instructions on how to use each feature, configure analysis parameters, and interpret
results. This manual can be found in the Appendix A.
6.2
Backend Architecture
The backend of the pedestrian flow analysis tool is implemented in Python using the Flask
web framework. It provides an API for data ingestion, tracking, path analysis, and result
retrieval.
6.2.1
System Overview and Workflow
The backend is structured as a RESTful API, exposing endpoints for uploading data, con-
figuring parameters, monitoring progress, and retrieving results. Upon receiving detection
data and user-defined polygons from the frontend, it executes a multi-stage processing
pipeline:
1. Data Ingestion: Uploaded detection results (as a ZIP archive) and polygon defini-
tions (as JSON) are stored on the server.
2. Tracking: A multi-object tracking algorithm is applied to assign persistent IDs across
frames. The algorithm uses the Hungarian method for optimal assignment, as de-
scribed in section 4.3.
3. Path Analysis: The system computes flow statistics by analyzing trajectories and
matching their start and end points with the defined source and destination polygons.
This results in a summary of how many individuals traveled from each source to each
destination.
4. Velocity-Based Classification: For tracks originating from sources labeled as ”walk-
ing”, the system calculates average velocity in pixels per frame and applies Otsu’s
thresholding method to automatically distinguish between walking and biking move-
ments. Tracks exceeding the calculated threshold are reclassified from ”walking”
to ”biking” sources, enabling differentiated flow analysis for different transportation
modes.
5. Progress Reporting: Real-time updates are sent to the frontend via Server-Sent
Events (SSE), providing user feedback during processing.
30
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:39==
6. Result Delivery: The backend returns the tracked paths classified by their source
and destination polygons, along with a summary of the number of individuals moving
between regions. Results are provided in JSON format for easy integration with the
frontend.
6.2.2
API Endpoints
An API (Application Programming Interface) endpoint is a specific URL path on a server
where a client can send requests to perform certain actions or retrieve data. In this project,
the backend exposes several endpoints that the frontend can call to perform various op-
erations, such as uploading data, starting analyses, and retrieving results. Each endpoint
corresponds to a specific functionality and is designed to handle requests in a standard-
ized way.
The main endpoints exposed by the backend are summarized in Table 6.1.
Endpoint
Method
Description
/api/polygons
POST
Upload or update polygon definitions as JSON.
/api/analyze
POST
Start a new analysis by uploading detection data (ZIP)
and parameters. Runs tracking and path analysis asyn-
chronously.
/api/progress
GET
Retrieve the current progress and status of the analysis.
/api/cancel
POST
Cancel the current analysis task.
/api/results
GET
Download the latest analysis results as JSON.
/api/upload_image
POST
Upload the reference image for annotation and visualiza-
tion.
/api/image
GET
Retrieve the current reference image.
Table 6.1: Summary of backend API endpoints.
Note that as the model inference is not yet integrated into the backend, there is no end-
point for running the STNNet model directly. Once the final deployment is implemented,
an endpoint for uploading video files and triggering model inference needs to be added.
This would allow users to upload raw video footage, which the backend would process to
extract detection results and perform subsequent analysis.
6.2.3
Design Considerations
The backend is built with modularity, scalability, and ease of integration in mind. It uses
standard data formats (JSON and CSV) to simplify further processing and interoperabil-
ity. Comprehensive error handling and real-time feedback mechanisms contribute to a
smooth and responsive user experience.
6.3
Deployment Considerations
Currently, the tool requires manual uploading of detection result files, which, during this
project, were precomputed using DTU’s HPC infrastructure accessed via the author’s per-
sonal credentials. Due to the high computational demands of STNNet, running inference
directly from the frontend is not feasible on standard machines.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Current setup: Users manually upload videos to the HPC cluster, retrieve detection outputs,
and run the frontend and backend locally.
(b) Proposed setup: Users upload videos to a
cloud computing service that integrates the fron-
tend, backend, and model inference, receiving
results directly.
Figure 6.5: Comparison of the current and proposed deployment setups.
Figures 6.5a and 6.5b illustrate the contrast between the current and envisioned sys-
tem architectures. In the current setup, shown in Figure 6.5a, multiple manual steps are
required: uploading videos to the HPC, downloading detection results, and running the
backend/frontend locally. This process, while functional for development and testing, will
not be available to end users as it requires access to the HPC cluster and also adds
complexity to the workflow.
By contrast, the proposed setup in Figure 6.5b integrates all components, frontend, back-
end, and inference, into a unified cloud platform. This would simplify the user experience
significantly by allowing a single upload step via the frontend, followed by automatic pro-
cessing and result delivery, removing the need for HPC access or local setup.
Such deployment, however, incurs infrastructure costs unless a powerful local server is
available. Municipalities should evaluate the feasibility of this approach based on their
available resources. Once the necessary infrastructure is in place, the backend can be
extended to include an endpoint for video uploads that automatically triggers the process-
ing pipeline, transforming the tool into a fully integrated solution.
Finally, the system has been developed with modularity and future extensibility in mind.
New machine learning models with improved accuracy or robustness can be integrated
by adapting their output format to match the existing pipeline, as explained in previous
sections.
6.4
Simulator for Development and Testing
During the early development stages, the STNNet model output was inconsistent and
difficult to rely on for consistent testing. To support tool development despite this, a custom
32
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:41==
simulator was created. The simulator allows the user to manually draw likely pedestrian
paths over the reference frame. From these drawn paths, the script generates synthetic
trajectories that simulate the behavior of real people over time.
Each simulated trajectory includes slight randomness in position and timing to mimic real-
world variation. The output format mirrors that of the machine learning model, allowing
the frontend and backend systems to be tested under realistic conditions before model
inference results were ready.
The simulator was especially useful for validating frontend visualizations and verifying that
the tracking and region-matching logic behaved as expected.
In the future, the simulator could be repurposed for additional use cases, such as generat-
ing synthetic datasets to train users on how to operate the tool, or conducting preliminary
studies of likely pedestrian paths prior to on-site video collection.
(a) Path creator interface for manually draw-
ing synthetic trajectories.
(b) Video playback with simulated paths
overlaid.
Figure 6.6: Simulator interface for generating synthetic pedestrian trajectories using a
Google Maps screenshot of the school.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:43==
7
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents the results of the project. It first focuses on the outcomes of counting
the number of people who used each means of transport, detailing the steps followed to
obtain the final results, a parameter ablation study, the evaluation of the tool’s performance
against the ground truth, and a comparison with previous work in the field. It then includes
the evaluation and feedback provided by end users. Finally, the results are discussed,
initial research questions and objectives are revisited, and future work is proposed.
7.1
Results
Once all tools are ready, and the final video has been recorded, annotated, and pro-
cessed through the model, the results can be evaluated. These will be compared against
the manually annotated ground truth data, summarized in Table 7.1. Some individuals
have been categorized as ”Unknown”. These cases correspond to people who were al-
ready near the school entrances at the beginning of the recording, making it impossible
to determine their method of arrival.
Table 7.1: Summary of ground truth data for the final evaluation.
Total People
Walkers
Bikers
Cars
Buses
Unknown
291
154
55
35
34
13
7.1.1
Source and Destination Polygons
First, the source and destination polygons had to be defined. A large ”walking” source
was created to cover the edges of the road, as walking and biking pedestrians were likely
to enter the frame from those areas. Two ”car” sources were defined: one before the bus
stop and another after the zebra crossing, based on the observation that these were the
main drop-off points for students arriving by car. A ”bus” source was placed at the bus stop,
and the destination polygon was defined as the school building itself, with some tolerance
to account for camera movement and potential early tracking failures. The exact shapes
and positions of the polygons were adjusted across different runs to optimize the results,
and also between the two videos, as the framing varied slightly. A general representation
of the defined polygons is shown in Figure 7.1.
7.1.2
Ablation Studies
An ablation study was conducted to evaluate the performance of the model with different
configurations. More specifically, the tunable parameters were:
• Number of skipped frames: During the forward pass to the model, a mechanism
to skip a determined number of frames was implemented to assess its impact on
the results. Using more frames provides more data but may introduce more noise,
while fewer frames could improve processing time. Defaults to 0, which means no
frames are skipped.
• Maximum distance between two points: Defines the maximum allowed distance
for associating detections across frames. If two points are within this threshold, they
are considered to belong to the same individual. A higher value increases tolerance
to occlusions and missed detections, but also raises the risk of incorrectly linking
different people. Defaults to 50 pixels.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 7.1: Example of source and destination polygons used for the final evaluation.
• Minimum confidence threshold for detections: Filters out low-confidence de-
tections to reduce false positives. Raising this threshold increases precision by dis-
carding uncertain detections, but may lower recall by missing valid ones. Defaults to
0.5, meaning that only detections with a confidence score above 0.5 are considered
valid.
Due to computational and time constraints, not all possible combinations of the parame-
ters were evaluated. Instead, a sequential optimization approach was used, where each
parameter was varied while keeping the others fixed at their best-known values from previ-
ous tests. This method assumes that the parameters are largely independent, which may
not always hold. While this approach provides a practical way to identify a well-performing
configuration, it does not guarantee that the selected setup is the global optimum. Future
work could explore a more exhaustive search of the parameter space to confirm these
findings.
Varying the number of skipped frames
Table 7.2: Effect of skipping frames on transport mode classification.
Frames Skipped
Total People
Walkers
Bikers
Cars
Buses
Unknown
Ground Truth
291
154
55
35
34
13
0
220
18
0
15
0
187
1
240
27
0
44
20
149
2
197
27
2
36
23
111
5
148
14
2
37
11
84
Table 7.2 presents the results of varying the number of skipped frames during model pre-
processing. When the video is processed without skipping any frames, the model detects
only 220 individuals, with no bikers or buses detected and a significant number classified
as ”Unknown” (187). This indicates that the model struggles to maintain consistent tra-
jectories when processing every frame, likely due to noise and more frequent flickering
36
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:45==
in detections. Skipping one frame increases the total number of detected individuals to
240, still with no bikers but now with bus detections. However, the number of ”Unknown”
classifications remains high at 149. Skipping two frames results in a further increase in
total detections to 297, finally detecting some bikers, but still leaving 111 individuals as
”Unknown”. Finally, skipping five frames reduces the detections to 148, showing a signif-
icant drop in classified individuals but also a decrease in unknowns to 84. This suggests
that while skipping frames can reduce noise and improve trajectory continuity, excessive
skipping may lead to missed detections and incomplete trajectories.
For the next two ablation studies, the selected configuration involved skipping one frame,
as this resulted in a higher number of detected individuals. Although many of these were
classified as ”Unknown”, this increases the potential for the subsequent parameter tuning
steps to classify them correctly.
Varying the maximum distance between points
Table 7.3: Ablation study results for varying the maximum distance between points.
Max Distance (px)
Total People
Walkers
Bikers
Cars
Buses
Unknown
Ground Truth
291
154
55
35
34
13
25
265
14
0
22
18
202
50
240
27
0
44
20
149
75
222
27
2
33
21
139
100
224
30
2
30
19
124
The ablation study on varying the maximum distance parameter for tracking reveals a
clear trade-off between detection reliability and trajectory completeness. As shown in
Table 7.3, setting the maximum distance to 25 pixels results in a total of 265 detected
individuals, but with a very low number classified as walkers (14) and none as bikers.
The majority of individuals (202) are labeled as ”Unknown”, indicating that the model is
too strict in associating detections across frames, leading to many short or fragmented
trajectories.
Increasing the maximum distance to 75 pixels improves the classification of walkers and
bikers, with 27 and 2 individuals classified in these categories respectively, while still
maintaining reasonable counts for those arriving by car (33) and bus (21). The total num-
ber of detected individuals decreases slightly to 222, as some trajectories are now linked
to tracks that deviate from the destination polygon, resulting in individuals never being
counted as having arrived at the school.
At 100 pixels, the model detects 224 individuals, with a slight increase in walkers (30)
and a decrease in those classified as arriving by car (30) and bus (19). The number
of ”Unknown” classifications also decreases to 124, suggesting that a larger distance
threshold allows for better association of points across frames, producing more complete
trajectories. However, this comes at the cost of potentially incorrect associations, which
can introduce noise into the classification results.
Determining the optimal maximum distance threshold based on these results is chal-
lenging, as the number of detected individuals varies considerably across configurations.
However, a threshold of 75 pixels appears to offer a good balance between maintaining
trajectory continuity and reducing the number of ”Unknown” classifications, while still pro-
viding sufficient flexibility for associating points across frames. Additionally, this setting
also resulted in the appearance of some individuals being classified as biking, which had
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
37
==PAGE:46==
not occurred with lower distances. This value will be used in the next ablation study.
Varying the minimum confidence threshold
Table 7.4: Ablation study results for varying the minimum confidence threshold.
Min Confidence
Total People
Walkers
Bikers
Cars
Buses
Unknown
Ground Truth
291
154
55
35
34
13
0.0
445
79
2
81
44
239
0.25
223
27
2
41
21
132
0.5
222
27
2
33
21
139
0.75
80
0
0
1
4
75
Finally, the last parameter to be evaluated was the minimum confidence threshold for
the detections. The results, summarized in Table 7.4, show that setting the threshold to
0.0 results a great number of detections (445), with the highest count of walkers (79) of
all configurations. However, the number of ”Unknown” classifications is also very high
(239), indicating that many detections are likely false positives due to the lack of filtering.
Increasing the threshold to 0.25 reduces the total number of detections to 223, with a
more balanced distribution across transport modes, but still leaves a significant number
of ”Unknown” classifications (132). Setting the threshold to 0.5 yields pretty similar results.
Finally, raising the threshold to 0.75 drastically reduces the total number of detections to
80, with almost all individuals classified as ”Unknown” (75), indicating that the model is
too conservative and misses many valid detections.
This suggests that a minimum confidence threshold of 0.25 or 0.5 provides a good bal-
ance between filtering out false positives and retaining enough valid detections for reliable
classification. The threshold of 0.5 will be used in the final evaluation, as it yields a good
number of detections while still maintaining a reasonable level of confidence in the results.
7.2
Results Summary
The results of the ablation studies indicate that the model’s performance is highly sensitive
to the configuration of its parameters. The number of frames skipped, the maximum
distance between points, and the minimum confidence threshold all play crucial roles in
determining the accuracy and reliability of the transport mode classification.
Interestingly, the results suggest that skipping 1 or 2 frames does not lead to significant
information loss, as the classification performance remains relatively stable. This ap-
proach also offers the added benefit of reducing the processing time, making the system
more efficient. Figure 7.2 compares the time taken for processing the video under differ-
ent frame-skipping configurations, highlighting the trade-off between speed and accuracy.
As the most part of the time is spent on the model inference, and the processing time does
not vary depending on the number of frames to analyze, the speed-up grows linearly with
the number of frames skipped.
On Table 7.5, the performance metrics for each class are summarized, including some of
the most commonly used metrics in machine learning for classification tasks. The metrics
are defined as follows:
• Precision (P): The proportion of true positive detections among all detections made
for a class.
P =
TP
TP + FP
38
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:47==
Figure 7.2: Processing time comparison for different frame-skipping configurations.
• Recall (R): The proportion of true positive detections among all actual instances of
a class.
R =
TP
TP + FN
• F1 Score (F1): A metric that balances precision and recall, providing a single score
that reflects both metrics.
F1 = 2 · P · R
P + R
These metrics provide different perspectives on system performance:
• High precision indicates few false positives (detected individuals are correctly clas-
sified)
• High recall indicates few false negatives (most actual individuals are detected)
• F1-score balances both, providing an overall performance measure
Additionally, Figure 7.3 illustrates the trends in F1 scores for each transport mode across
different parameter configurations, providing a visual representation of how performance
varies with changes in the model’s settings.
Parameter
Value
Walkers
Bikers
Cars
Buses
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
Skip Frames
0
1.000
0.117
0.209
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.429
0.600
0.000
0.000
0.000
1
1.000
0.175
0.298
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.795
1.000
0.886
1.000
0.588
0.741
2
1.000
0.175
0.298
1.000
0.036
0.070
0.972
1.000
0.986
1.000
0.676
0.807
5
1.000
0.091
0.167
1.000
0.036
0.070
0.946
1.000
0.972
1.000
0.324
0.489
Max Distance
25
1.000
0.091
0.167
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.629
0.772
1.000
0.529
0.692
50
1.000
0.175
0.298
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.795
1.000
0.886
1.000
0.588
0.741
75
1.000
0.175
0.298
1.000
0.036
0.070
1.000
0.943
0.971
1.000
0.618
0.764
100
1.000
0.195
0.326
1.000
0.036
0.070
1.000
0.857
0.923
1.000
0.559
0.717
Min Confidence
0.0
1.000
0.513
0.678
1.000
0.036
0.070
0.432
1.000
0.603
0.773
1.000
0.872
0.25
1.000
0.175
0.298
1.000
0.036
0.070
0.854
1.000
0.921
1.000
0.618
0.764
0.50
1.000
0.175
0.298
1.000
0.036
0.070
1.000
0.943
0.971
1.000
0.618
0.764
0.75
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.029
0.056
1.000
0.118
0.211
Table 7.5: Performance metrics grouped by parameter values, with per-class results
based on individuals’ inferred mode of arrival: walking, biking, car, or bus.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 7.3: F1 score trends for each transport mode across different parameter configu-
rations.
The results demonstrate that performance varies significantly depending on the param-
eter configuration. For walkers, precision remains consistently high across all configura-
tions, indicating that detected walkers are usually classified correctly. However, recall is
generally low, suggesting that many walkers are not detected, particularly when frames
are skipped or when a high minimum confidence threshold is used. This trade-off is re-
flected in the F1 score. An exception occurs with a minimum confidence of 0.0, where
recall improves notably. However, this configuration results in 445 detected individuals,
suggesting that many of these detections may be spurious.
For bikers, the performance is poor across all configurations, with both precision and recall
remaining very low. This indicates that the model struggles to reliably detect and track
bikers, likely due to their faster and less predictable motion, which challenges trajectory
association.
For individuals arriving by car, performance is generally strong, with F1 scores close to 1
across most configurations. This indicates that the system reliably classifies these indi-
viduals regardless of parameter variations.
For those arriving by bus, precision remains high, while recall is somewhat lower than for
car arrivals, though still substantially better than for walkers or bikers.
Overall, these results reveal that tracking walkers and bikers is not very reliable, which
is a critical limitation given that, according to the ground truth data, these two categories
account for the majority of school arrivals. This issue is mainly caused by the fact that,
in the case study, walkers and bikers typically had the longest paths to the school. As a
result, they were more exposed to potential tracking failures due to occlusions or missed
detections, making them particularly prone to error. An example of this is shown in Fig-
ure 7.4, where a walking individual is occluded by a tree, resulting in a missed detection
before reaching the school.
Although the model appears more reliable for individuals arriving by car or bus based on
the metrics, visual inspection of the tracking results reveals a potential source of misclas-
sification. Due to the layout of the school, both the bus stop and the kiss-and-ride area
are regions frequently traversed by pedestrians and bikers. When tracking fails before in-
dividuals reach these areas and resumes within them, they may be incorrectly classified
as car or bus passengers. This issue is illustrated in Figure 7.5, where a walking individ-
ual is lost in the bus stop area and subsequently misclassified as arriving by bus. This
highlights the complexity of the task and underscores the need for more robust tracking
40
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:49==
Figure 7.4: Example of a tracking failure due to occlusion. The individual is occluded by
a tree, leading to a missed detection before reaching the school.
algorithms capable of handling occlusions and effectively re-identifying individuals.
Figure 7.5: Example of a tracking failure leading to misclassification. The walking individ-
ual is lost in the bus stop area, leading to a misclassification as arriving by bus.
7.3
Comparison with Hodgson and Chang’s Work
To provide context for the results obtained in this project, a comparison with the work
of Hodgson and Chang is presented. Their study, which was explored in the Literature
Review, focused on using drone footage to manually count and classify school arrivals.
To compare the results, the results with Skip Frames = 1, Max Distance = 75 pixels, and
Min Confidence = 0.5 have been selected, as these parameters yielded the one of the
most balanced results across all transport modes. From their study, the Lena Whitmore
Elementary school data was selected, as it gives their best results in terms of classifica-
tion accuracy, using the tally results as ground truth. The results of the comparison are
summarized in Table 7.6 and Figure 7.6.
The results show that our system performs significantly worse than that of Hodgson and
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
41
==PAGE:50==
Table 7.6: Comparison of ground truth and drone-based detections across studies
Source
Metric
Pedestrians
Bikers
Cars
Buses
This Study
Ground Truth
154
55
35
34
Drone
27
2
33
21
Accuracy
17.5%
3.6%
94.3%
61.8%
Hodgson and Chang
Ground Truth
71.0
6.0
97.0
26.0
Drone
99.3
3.0
53.7
20.7
Accuracy
139.4%
50.0%
55.3%
79.7%
Figure 7.6: Comparison of accuracy across studies.
Chang in classifying pedestrians and cyclists. Their accuracy, while not particularly high,
still exceeds ours, with 17.5% for pedestrians and 3.6% for cyclists, compared to our 9.3%
and 1.3%, respectively. In contrast, the classification accuracy for individuals arriving by
car and bus is more comparable. Our method outperforms theirs in identifying car arrivals
(94.3% vs. 55.3%), while it is slightly less accurate in identifying bus arrivals (61.8% vs.
79.7%).
7.4
Feedback from the User Interface
As one of the main goals of this project was to create a user-friendly tool for municipalities,
feedback from potential end users is crucial to assess whether this objective has been met.
Two partners from the InnoTech TaskForce, employees of the Guldborgsund Kommune,
were invited to an online meeting where a demo of the tool was presented, showcasing its
functionalities and workflow. They were asked to provide feedback on the tool’s usability,
features, and overall impression.
The feedback received was generally positive. The partners appreciated the tool’s simplic-
ity, ease of use, and intuitive interface. They specifically highlighted the polygon-based
method for defining sources and destinations, describing it as both useful and flexible.
42
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:51==
The filtering options were also well received, as they made it easier to focus on specific
paths, which is particularly important when many paths overlap.
Some suggestions for improvement were also provided. First, the parameters for the
tracking algorithm were considered difficult to tune, as it was unclear what values to use.
It was explained that these parameters are highly dependent on the scenario, so some
trial and error is often necessary to find a suitable configuration. Future work could explore
ways to automate this process or offer intelligent defaults to guide users.
Second, they noted that it would be ideal if the video itself could be uploaded directly to
the tool, instead of the current method, which requires uploading the model’s output. This
comment reinforces the importance of the deployment approach discussed in previous
chapters.
Finally, they suggested that the tool should be translated into Danish to make it more
accessible for local users. This was a valuable suggestion that had not been considered
during development, yet it is a simple change that could be implemented in future versions
and would significantly improve usability for the target audience.
In conclusion, the feedback from end users indicates that the tool is on the right track in
terms of usability and functionality, but there are still areas for improvement, particularly
in user guidance and accessibility. These insights will be valuable for future iterations of
the tool, ensuring it meets the needs of its intended users more effectively.
7.5
Discussion
This project aimed to explore the feasibility of using drone-based video footage and ma-
chine learning to track pedestrian arrivals at a school, with the ultimate goal of inferring
their modes of transport. Although the approach showed potential in certain areas, the
results highlighted a number of critical limitations and practical challenges that hinder its
effectiveness in its current form.
One of the most significant findings was the inconsistent performance of the machine
learning model. The detection results exhibited high levels of flickering, frequent false
positives, and numerous missed detections. These issues severely impacted the ability
to construct continuous and reliable trajectories of individuals, which are essential for
tracking and classifying modes of arrival. As a direct consequence, the accuracy of the
final output, that is, the categorization and counting of different transport methods, was
considerably low and unreliable.
Another crucial factor that significantly affected the results was the choice of tracking algo-
rithm. The complexity of the task was underestimated, resulting in the use of a relatively
simple Hungarian method-based tracker. This approach proved inadequate for the chal-
lenging scenarios encountered, especially when dealing with occlusions or missed detec-
tions, as it lacked the ability to effectively re-identify individuals or predict their trajectories.
More advanced tracking methods, such as Social-LSTM or its successors, would likely
be better suited for this task, since they are designed to model the complexities of pedes-
trian behavior. Although these methods increase system complexity and computational
demands, their implementation is essential to enhance the robustness of the tracking
process and reduce misclassifications.
Complementing these technical challenges is the high computational demand of the model.
Running inference on the full dataset required substantial computing resources and a sig-
nificant amount of processing time. This presents municipalities with the need to invest
in powerful hardware or cloud computing solutions. Further work will also be needed to
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
43
==PAGE:52==
deploy the model and configure the tool to support for direct upload of drone footage, as
the current setup requires manual processing of each video, as discussed in previous
chapters.
The operational constraints of drone usage also emerged as a limiting factor. Typical
drone battery life restricts flight time to approximately 20 minutes, while student arrivals at
school may span a window of up to an hour. As a result, it is often not feasible to record the
entire arrival sequence in a single flight, making it difficult to capture a complete dataset.
Regarding the drone’s camera, the captured footage had good color contrast and sufficient
detail. Although the original videos were recorded in 4K, they were downsampled to 1080p
at 25 fps to align with the current capabilities of state-of-the-art models, which typically
do not process higher resolutions. While using higher-resolution images could help with
the recognition of individuals at greater altitudes, the computational cost would increase
significantly. Overall, rather than upgrading the camera, a more effective approach to
improving results would have been to conduct multiple recordings at different viewpoints
and altitudes over the same school. This would likely provide more useful results on the
optimal camera height, position and angle.
Additionally, the school’s physical layout, including the number and distribution of en-
trances, the location of drop-off points, and the overall size of the campus plays a crucial
role in the system’s effectiveness. In large schools, it may not be possible to cover all
relevant areas within a single flight or camera frame, leading to gaps in data and incom-
plete detection coverage. Moreover, movements of the drone itself can introduce addi-
tional noise and variability in the footage, leading to the designated source and destination
polygons not aligning throughout the video, further complicating the source identification.
Furthermore, distinguishing between modes of transport proved to be more complex than
initially anticipated. For instance, when a kiss-and-ride area is adjacent to a bus stop,
it becomes challenging to determine whether a student arrived by bus or private vehicle
based solely on their trajectories. Situations such as individuals stepping out of frame
before entering the school or becoming temporarily occluded, e.g., walking under trees,
introduce ambiguity and potential misclassifications. A person seen walking might have
exited a vehicle just outside the drone’s field of view, leading to incorrect assumptions
about their full trip mode. Discrimination between walkers and bikers by means of their
velocities also proved to be unreliable, as very few bikers were detected, due to the poor
reconstruction of their trajectories.
On the positive side, user feedback was very encouraging. The interface was consid-
ered intuitive and easy to use, and the polygon-based approach for defining sources and
destinations was praised for its practicality and flexibility. Although some suggestions for
improvement were made, the overall impression was that the tool is a valuable asset for
municipalities, provided that its current technical limitations and operational constraints
are addressed. Notably, the tool has been designed with flexibility in mind, allowing the
integration of new machine learning models as they become available. This adaptabil-
ity ensures the tool can remain relevant and effective over time, benefiting from future
advancements in tracking accuracy and model performance to overcome some of the
challenges identified in this study.
44
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusions and Future Work
This chapter summarizes the findings of this thesis, revisits the research questions and
objectives, and discusses future work that could enhance the proposed solution. The goal
is to provide a comprehensive overview of the project’s outcomes and outline potential
directions for further research and development.
8.1
Conclusions
This thesis investigated the feasibility of using drone footage and machine learning to
analyze school arrival patterns, focusing on detecting and classifying pedestrian trajec-
tories to infer modes of transport. The results indicate that, while the approach shows
clear potential, it is likely not yet ready for deployment in real-world scenarios. To better
understand its strengths and limitations, the research questions and objectives defined at
the beginning of the project are revisited below.
8.1.1
Addressing the Research Questions
The research questions posed in this thesis were:
• How can a tool be developed to automatically infer individuals’ modes of
transport upon arrival at a place of interest using drone footage and machine
learning?
To address this question, the approach followed four main stages.
First, drone
footage was recorded at the area of interest using a high-altitude, top-down view.
This perspective was chosen to cover the entire area and minimize occlusions and
pedestrian overlap. Second, a machine learning model was employed to detect in-
dividuals in the footage. In this project, the STNNet model was selected due to its
state-of-the-art performance in aerial pedestrian detection at the time of implemen-
tation, though alternative models could also be used.
The third stage involved reconstructing individual trajectories from the detections.
This was achieved using a simple tracker based on the Hungarian algorithm. While
effective for a baseline, more advanced tracking methods could be adopted to im-
prove accuracy. Finally, these trajectories were analyzed to infer modes of trans-
port. This was done by defining a set of user-specified polygons that represented
source zones, where individuals are expected to arrive from using a specific mode
of transport, and a destination zone that serves as the target of the study. The
system inferred transport modes based on the starting and ending points of the re-
constructed trajectories.
All these components were integrated into a user-friendly tool designed for straight-
forward interaction and visualization.
• How accurately can the tool estimate the number of individuals using each
mode of transport based on their movement patterns within the monitored
area?
The tool’s accuracy was evaluated by comparing its output to manually annotated
ground truth data. Overall, the system missed a total of 195 individuals, representing
approximately 70% of total arrivals. In terms of distinguishing between transport
modes, the tool achieved a precision of 94.3% for individuals arriving by car and
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
45
==PAGE:54==
61.8% for those arriving by bus. However, it struggled significantly with walkers and
bikers, with precisions of only 17.5% and 3.6%, respectively.
It is important to note that these results do not necessarily indicate that the system
inherently performs better for certain transport modes. The inference relies solely
on the reconstructed trajectories, and in this case study, walkers and bikers typi-
cally had the longest paths to the school. These paths often passed through the
bus stop and kiss-and-ride areas, which complicated classification. When tracking
failed before individuals reached these key zones and resumed within them, mis-
classification as car or bus passengers occurred. Additionally, detecting cyclists
posed a unique challenge, as classification depended partly on their velocity, which
was unreliable due to poor trajectory reconstruction.
Further tests, especially across different schools with varied layouts and commuting
patterns, could provide deeper insights into the system’s limitations and help guide
improvements in generalizability and robustness.
8.1.2
Addressing the Objectives
The objectives defined for this thesis were:
• Review existing literature on pedestrian detection and tracking techniques, as
well as studies on school commuting behavior.
A literature review was conducted to understand the current state of research in both
pedestrian detection and tracking, as well as school commuting studies. In terms
of detection and tracking, the field is well-established and has significantly evolved
with the rise of deep learning. However, works specifically focused on drone-based
detection are more recent, and those targeting top-down views from high altitudes
remain limited. This lack of research also means a lack of publicly available datasets
for such scenarios, which poses a major limitation for developing and benchmarking
machine learning approaches.
Regarding school commuting behavior, the review revealed an interest in data col-
lection for different purposes. However, the majority of existing studies rely on tra-
ditional methods such as surveys or manual counting. The use of drones for moni-
toring school arrivals is virtually unexplored, highlighting the potential of the solution
proposed in this thesis.
• Design a system capable of detecting and tracking individuals in drone footage
using suitable machine learning models.
The system was designed to process top-down drone footage and detect individu-
als using one of the few models available for this specific setup, the STNNet. As
STNNet does not provide temporal consistency or identity tracking across frames,
a separate tracking component had to be integrated. For this purpose, a simple
tracker based on the Hungarian algorithm was implemented to associate detections
across frames and reconstruct individual trajectories.
• Automatically infer modes of transport based on reconstructed trajectories.
The inference of modes of transport was based on defining source polygons cor-
responding to each mode of transport and a destination polygon representing the
area of interest. By analyzing the starting and ending points of each reconstructed
trajectory within these user-defined regions, individuals were classified according to
the mode of transport associated with their source polygon.
46
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:55==
• Develop a user-friendly interface for interacting with the analysis tool.
A user interface was developed to facilitate interaction with the tool. The interface
allows users to upload the detections, define source and destination polygons, and
visualize the results of the analysis. It was designed to be intuitive and straightfor-
ward, enabling users to easily configure the tool and interpret its output. Hardware
limitations resulted in the decision to process the video previously, requiring users
to upload the model’s output instead of the original footage.
• Evaluate the tool’s accuracy and usability through real-world testing and user
feedback.
The tool’s accuracy was evaluated by comparing its output against manually anno-
tated ground truth data. The results indicated that the tool struggled to accurately
count all individuals and their means of transport in the use case scenario. Further
testing in different environments is needed to assess its generalizability and robust-
ness, while improvements in tracking algorithms are necessary to enhance overall
performance. User feedback was mostly positive, emphasizing the tool’s usability
and flexibility, but also identifying areas for potential enhancement.
8.2
Future Work
Building on the findings and limitations identified in this thesis, several key areas for future
research and development have been identified. Addressing these will be crucial to en-
hancing the accuracy, robustness, and practical applicability of the proposed tool. Future
efforts should focus on:
• Exploring new machine learning models that could improve detection performance,
or developing a custom model trained on a dataset of drone footage with top-down
views.
• Enhancing the tracking algorithm or integrating a more robust existing solution ca-
pable of handling occlusions and re-identifying individuals.
• Investigating alternative methods for identifying bikers, as the current velocity-based
approach showed poor performance.
• Testing the tool in a variety of scenarios, such as different schools with diverse lay-
outs and regions, to evaluate generalizability and robustness.
• Addressing the lack of publicly available datasets for drone-based pedestrian de-
tection by contributing to or creating a dataset of top-down drone footage scenarios.
• Preparing the solution for deployment by enabling users to upload raw drone footage
directly into the tool, rather than requiring model outputs.
• Incorporating the suggestions received through user feedback.
In conclusion, this thesis has demonstrated the potential of using drone footage and ma-
chine learning to analyze school arrival patterns, but it also highlights the significant chal-
lenges that need to be addressed before such a system can be effectively deployed in
real-world scenarios. The findings underscore the importance of continued research and
development in this area, with the goal of creating more accurate and reliable tools for
understanding and improving school commuting behavior.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Younes Akbari et al. “Applications, databases and open computer vision research
from drone videos and images: a survey”. In: Artificial Intelligence Review 54.5
(2021). Cited by: 73, pp. 3887–3938. DOI: 10.1007/s10462-020-09943-1. URL: https:
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85102068680&doi=10.1007%
2fs10462-020-09943-1&partnerID=40&md5=53c9fa8d6ff83b57becfba3338b9d6c8.
[2]
Javier Garau Guzmán and Victor Monzon Baeza. “Enhancing Urban Mobility through
Traffic Management with UAVs and VLC Technologies”. In: Drones 8 (Dec. 2023),
p. 7. DOI: 10.3390/drones8010007.
[3]
Jo-Ting Fang and Jen-Jia Lin. “School travel modes and children’s spatial cogni-
tion”. In: Urban Studies 54.7 (2017). Cited by: 18, pp. 1578–1600. DOI: 10.1177/
0042098016630513. URL: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 -
s2 . 0 - 85018434826 & doi = 10 . 1177 % 2f0042098016630513 & partnerID = 40 & md5 =
c5f6ef000b7ea94063acb835f6122501.
[4]
Stephanie Sersli, Linda Rothman, and Meghan Winters. “Getting at Mode Share:
Comparing 3 Methods of Travel Mode Measurement for School Travel Research”.
In: Journal of School Health 89.5 (2019). Cited by: 4, pp. 365–372. DOI: 10.1111/josh.
12743. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85063674974&
doi=10.1111%2fjosh.12743&partnerID=40&md5=d3863296ade137996c01f0866ff7935c.
[5]
Gate 21. InnoTech – TaskForce. Accessed on 2025-06-01. 2023. URL: https:/ /
gate21.dk/projekt/innotech-taskforce/ (visited on 06/01/2025).
[6]
P. Viola and M. Jones. “Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of sim-
ple features”. In: Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. CVPR 2001. Vol. 1. 2001, pp. I–I. DOI:
10.1109/CVPR.2001.990517.
[7]
N. Dalal and B. Triggs. “Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection”. In:
2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR’05). Vol. 1. 2005, 886–893 vol. 1. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2005.177.
[8]
Piotr Dollar et al. “Pedestrian Detection: An Evaluation of the State of the Art”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 34.4 (2012),
pp. 743–761. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2011.155.
[9]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection”.
In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
2016, pp. 779–788. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.91.
[10]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Re-
gion Proposal Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 39.6 (2017), pp. 1137–1149. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2577031.
[11]
Mahdi Rezaei and Mohsen Azarmi. “Deepsocial: Social distancing monitoring and
infection risk assessment in covid-19 pandemic”. In: Applied Sciences (Switzerland)
10.21 (2020), pp. 1–29. DOI: 10 . 3390 / app10217514. URL: https : / / www . scopus .
com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85094170482&doi=10.3390%2fapp10217514&
partnerID=40&md5=473d47805527e1017e6a8d68bc1f3053.
[12]
David Montero et al. “Multi-camera BEV video-surveillance system for efficient mon-
itoring of social distancing”. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 82 (Mar. 2023),
pp. 1–25. DOI: 10.1007/s11042-023-14416-y.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
49
==PAGE:58==
[13]
Goon Hung et al. “Faster R-CNN Deep Learning Model for Pedestrian Detection
from Drone Images”. In: SN Computer Science 1 (Apr. 2020), p. 116. DOI: 10.1007/
s42979-020-00125-y.
[14]
Narina Thakur et al. “Autonomous pedestrian detection for crowd surveillance using
deep learning framework”. In: Soft Computing 27.14 (2023), pp. 9383–9399. DOI:
10.1007/s00500-023-08289-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-023-08289-4.
[15]
Patrick Dendorfer et al. “MOT20: A benchmark for multi object tracking in crowded
scenes”. In: CoRR abs/2003.09003 (2020). arXiv: 2003.09003. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2003.09003.
[16]
Ang Sha et al. “Vehicle and Pedestrian Detection for UAV Platform Based on Deep
Learning”. In: Advances in Computer Science and Ubiquitous Computing. Singa-
pore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2025, pp. 13–19. ISBN: 978-981-96-5693-6.
[17]
Pengfei Zhu et al. “Vision Meets Drones: A Challenge”. In: arXiv preprint:1804.07437
(2018).
[18]
Seyed Majid Azimi et al. Multiple Pedestrians and Vehicles Tracking in Aerial Im-
agery Using a Convolutional Neural Network. 2021. DOI: 10.3390/rs13101953.
[19]
Gregory Schröder et al. “Optical Flow Dataset and Benchmark for Visual Crowd
Analysis”. In: IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signals-based
Surveillance. 2018.
[20]
Longyin Wen et al. “Detection, Tracking, and Counting Meets Drones in Crowds: A
Benchmark”. In: CVPR. 2021.
[21]
Yuhong Li, Xiaofan Zhang, and Deming Chen. CSRNet: Dilated Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks for Understanding the Highly Congested Scenes. 2018. arXiv: 1802.
10062 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.10062.
[22]
Boyu Wang et al. “Distribution Matching for Crowd Counting”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2020.
[23]
Yi Lei et al. DenseTrack: Drone-based Crowd Tracking via Density-aware Motion-
appearance Synergy. 2024. arXiv: 2407.17272 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2407.17272.
[24]
Mohd Nazeer et al. “Improved STNNet, A benchmark for detection, tracking, and
counting crowds using Drones”. In: MethodsX 13 (2024), p. 102820. ISSN: 2215-
0161. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mex . 2024 . 102820. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2215016124002735.
[25]
Takanori Asanomi, Kazuya Nishimura, and Ryoma Bise. “Multi-Frame Attention with
Feature-Level Warping for Drone Crowd Tracking”. In: 2023 IEEE/CVF Winter Con-
ference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). 2023, pp. 1664–1673. DOI:
10.1109/WACV56688.2023.00171.
[26]
Tao Peng, Qing Li, and Pengfei Zhu. “RGB-T Crowd Counting from Drone: A Bench-
mark and MMCCN Network”. In: Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer
Vision (ACCV). Nov. 2020.
[27]
Wujie Zhou et al. “MJPNet-S*: Multistyle Joint-Perception Network With Knowledge
Distillation for Drone RGB-Thermal Crowd Density Estimation in Smart Cities”. In:
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11.11 (2024), pp. 20327–20339. DOI: 10.1109/JIOT.
2024.3369642.
[28]
Yonghao Xiao, Hong Zheng, and Weiyu Yu. “Automatic Crowd Detection Based
on Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Thermal Imagery”. In: May 2018, pp. 510–516. ISBN:
978-3-319-65977-0. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-65978-7_77.
[29]
Fei Chen et al. “Visual object tracking: A survey”. In: Computer Vision and Image
Understanding 222 (2022), p. 103508. ISSN: 1077-3142. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
50
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:59==
1016/j.cviu.2022.103508. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1077314222001011.
[30]
Zhihong Sun et al. “Multiple Pedestrian Tracking Under Occlusion: A Survey and
Outlook”. In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 35.2
(2025), pp. 1009–1027. DOI: 10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3481425.
[31]
Yifu Zhang et al. “ByteTrack: Multi-Object Tracking by Associating Every Detection
Box”. In: (2022).
[32]
Xingyi Zhou, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl. “Tracking Objects as Points”.
In: CoRR abs/2004.01177 (2020). arXiv: 2004.01177. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2004.01177.
[33]
Ralf C. Staudemeyer and Eric Rothstein Morris. “Understanding LSTM - a tutorial
into Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1909.09586
(2019). arXiv: 1909.09586. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09586.
[34]
Alexandre Alahi et al. “Social LSTM: Human Trajectory Prediction in Crowded Spaces”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR). June 2016.
[35]
H. W. Kuhn. “The Hungarian method for the assignment problem”. In: Naval Re-
search Logistics Quarterly 2.1-2 (1955), pp. 83–97. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
nav.3800020109.
[36]
Lars B. Christiansen et al. “School site walkability and active school transport - asso-
ciation, mediation and moderation”. In: Journal of Transport Geography 34 (2014),
pp. 7–15. ISSN: 0966-6923. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.10.012.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S096669231300210X.
[37]
Cody Hodgson and Kevin Chang. “Using drone technology to collect school trans-
portation data”. In: Travel Behaviour and Society 31 (2023), pp. 1–9. ISSN: 2214-
367X. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tbs . 2022 . 10 . 011. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214367X2200117X.
[38]
Carl Vondrick, Donald Patterson, and Deva Ramanan. “Efficiently Scaling up Crowd-
sourced Video Annotation”. In: Int. J. Comput. Vision 101.1 (Jan. 2013), pp. 184–
204. ISSN: 0920-5691. DOI: 10.1007/s11263-012-0564-1. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11263-012-0564-1.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:61==
A
User Manual
This appendix provides the user manual for the developed software, including step-by-
step instructions on how to install, configure, and operate the system effectively.
The software is organized into three separate repositories:
• https://github.com/DevJav/MySTNNet — A cleaned and streamlined adaptation
of the original STNNet model, with unnecessary files removed.
• https://github.com/DevJav/pedestrian-flow-analyzer-backend — The backend com-
ponent of the application, responsible for data processing and model inference.
• https://github.com/DevJav/pedestrian-flow-analyzer-frontend — The frontend com-
ponent, providing a graphical user interface for user interaction.
Each repository contains a detailed README file with setup and usage instructions. As the
repositories are private, access must be requested directly from the author.
The full user manual is also included below.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
53
==PAGE:62==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
1 / 12
Pedestrian Flow Analysis Tool - User Guide
Overview
The Pedestrian Flow Analysis Tool is a web-based application that analyzes pedestrian movement patterns
from detection data. It combines object tracking with path analysis to understand how people move between
different areas in a space.
Key Features:
Interactive Polygon Drawing: Define source and destination areas
Object Tracking: Automatically track pedestrians across frames
Path Analysis: Analyze movement patterns between defined areas
Visual Results: Interactive charts and path visualizations
Getting Started
Prerequisites
1. A reference image of your analysis area (JPG, PNG, etc.), prefeably a frame from the video to be
analyzed
2. Detection data in ZIP format containing text files with pedestrian positions
3. Web browser (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, or Edge)
4. Python 3.8 or higher
5. Node.js 14 or higher
54
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:63==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
2 / 12
Installation
Backend Setup
1. Navigate to the backend directory:
cd pedestrian-flow-analyzer-backend 
2. Create a virtual environment:
python -m venv venv 
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/macOS 
venv\Scripts\activate     # Windows
3. Install dependencies:
pip install -r requirements.txt 
Frontend Setup
1. Navigate to the frontend directory:
cd pedestrian-flow-analyzer-frontend 
2. Install dependencies:
npm install 
Launching the Application
1. Start the backend server (Flask application):
cd pedestrian-flow-analyzer-backend 
python app.py 
The backend will be available at http://localhost:5000
2. Start the frontend server (in a new terminal):
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
55
==PAGE:64==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
3 / 12
cd pedestrian-flow-analyzer-frontend 
npm start 
The frontend will be available at http://localhost:3000
3. Open your web browser and navigate to http://localhost:3000
4. You should see the main interface with controls on the left and a canvas area on the right
Step-by-Step Tutorial
Step 1: Upload Reference Image
1. Click the "Select New Image" button in the Reference Image section
2. Choose an image file that represents your analysis area
3. The image will appear in the canvas area on the right
Tips:
Use a clear, high-resolution image
Ensure the image covers the entire area you want to analyze
The image should be taken from the same perspective as your detection data
Preferably, use a frame from the video to be analyzed
Step 2: Upload Detection Data
1. In the "Detections File (ZIP)" section, click "Select ZIP"
56
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:65==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
4 / 12
2. Choose a ZIP file containing your detection text files
3. The filename will appear next to the button when successfully selected
Detection File Format: Each text file should contain detection data in the format:
x_coordinate y_coordinate confidence_score 
One detection per line, where coordinates are in pixels relative to your reference image.
Step 3: Configure Tracking Parameters
Adjust the tracking parameters based on your data:
1. Max Distance (px): Maximum pixel distance between detections to link them as the same person
Default: 50 pixels
Increase for faster-moving objects or lower frame rates
Decrease for more precise tracking
2. Min Confidence (%): Minimum detection confidence to include in analysis
Default: 50%
Increase to filter out uncertain detections
Decrease to include more detections
Step 4: Draw Polygons
Understanding Polygon Types
Source: Areas where pedestrians enter or start their journey
Destination: Areas where pedestrians exit or end their journey
Drawing Process
1. Select Polygon Type: Click either "Source" or "Destination"
2. Draw the Polygon:
Click on the canvas to add points
Click around the perimeter of your desired area
Use the crosshair guide to position points precisely
The "Snap to edges" option helps align with image boundaries
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
57
==PAGE:66==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
5 / 12
3. Complete the Polygon:
Right-click to finish drawing
Enter a descriptive name when prompted
The polygon will be saved and displayed with a colored outline
58
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:67==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
6 / 12
Note on Polygon Drawing
You can define multiple polygons to represent different source and destination areas. Polygons with the same
name will be treated as the same area during analysis. For example:
If there are two separate "Bus Stop" polygons in different locations, they will be considered as one
unified "Bus Stop" area in the results.
This allows flexibility in defining areas that span multiple regions or are disconnected geographically.
Polygons called "Walking", will activate the bikers detection mode, allowing you to analyze pedestrian
and biker flows together.
Take care to name polygons consistently to ensure accurate analysis and interpretation of pedestrian flow
patterns.
Visual Guides
Edge Guidelines: Blue dashed lines show image boundaries
Crosshair: Red crosshair helps with precise positioning
Start/End Markers: Green dot shows first point, red dot shows last point
Step 5: Manage Polygons
Edit Mode
1. Click "Edit Polygons" to enter edit mode
2. Click on any polygon to select it (turns purple)
3. Drag corner points to reshape the polygon
4. Click the edit icon (✏ ) to rename a polygon
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
59
==PAGE:68==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
7 / 12
Delete Mode
1. Click "Remove Polygon" to enter delete mode
2. Click on any polygon to select it for deletion
3. Confirm deletion in the pop-up dialog
60
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:69==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
8 / 12
Step 6: Save, Load and Run Analysis
Saving Polygon Sets
1. Click "Save Polygons" to save your defined areas with a custom name
2. Enter a descriptive name for your polygon set in the dialog
A default name with timestamp is provided (e.g., "Polygons_2024-01-15_14-30")
Use descriptive names like "Main_Building_Layout" or "Campus_Central_Area"
3. Click "Save" to store the polygon set for future use
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
61
==PAGE:70==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
9 / 12
Loading Saved Polygon Sets
1. Click "Load Polygons" to access previously saved polygon sets
2. Select from the dropdown list of available polygon sets
Each entry shows the name and number of polygons in the set
3. Click "Load" to replace current polygons with the selected set
62
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:71==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
10 / 12
Running Analysis
1. Ensure you have polygons defined (either drawn or loaded)
2. Ensure detection data is uploaded
3. Click "Run Analysis" to start the tracking and path analysis
Advanced Features
Snap to Edge
When enabled, points automatically snap to image boundaries when drawing near edges. This is useful when
pedestrians appear close to the edges of the image, ensuring polygons align correctly with the visible area.
Step 7: View Analysis Results
After the analysis completes, the view will update to show the results.
Path Visualization
On the image canvas, you will see the paths of tracked pedestrians in different colors. Each color represents a
combination of source and destination areas. If hovered over a path, this will be highlighted, and its initial and
final points will be shown in green and red, respectively.
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
63
==PAGE:72==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
11 / 12
To help with path visualization, on the left side of the canvas, you will see a list of sources and destinations
with checkboxes. You can toggle these checkboxes to show or hide paths for specific source-destination
combinations. Multiple paths can be shown simultaneously, allowing you to compare different routes.
Results Chart
Below the canvas, or pressing the "View Results" button, you will see a bar chart summarizing the pedestrian
flow between source and destination areas.
X-axis: Source areas (including "No source" for tracks that don't start in defined areas)
Y-axis: Number of pedestrians
Colors: Different destination areas
64
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:73==
INSTRUCTIONS.md
2025-06-21
12 / 12
Bars: Height represents the count for each source-destination combination
Interpreting the Data
High bars: Popular routes or high-traffic paths
"No source"/"No destination": Tracks that don't start/end in defined polygons
Empty combinations: No pedestrians traveled between those specific areas
Exporting Results
You can save the analysis results for further use by exporting them as a CSV file. To do this, click the
"Download Results" button. The exported file will contain the following columns:
Source Area: The starting point of pedestrian movement
Destination Area: The endpoint of pedestrian movement
Count: The number of pedestrians for each source-destination combination
Example CSV Format:
Source,Destination,Count 
"Bus","Main Entrance",1 
"Bus","Side Entrance",3 
"Bus","No destination",8 
"Car","Main Entrance",4 
"Car","Side Entrance",13 
"Car","No destination",22 
"Walking","Main Entrance",4 
"Walking","Side Entrance",11 
"Walking","No destination",28 
"no_source","Main Entrance",12 
"no_source","Side Entrance",38 
"no_source","No destination",32 
Development of Tool for Counting People in Drone Footage Using Machine Learning
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Lautrupvang 15
DK-2750 Ballerup
Tlf. 4525 1700
engtech.dtu.dk
