==PAGE:1==
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic
Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implemen-
tation
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Im-
plementation
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Florin-Bogdan Gavriluta
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads
Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Arena for Life Science Automa-
tion, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, at the Technical University of Den-
mark. It was carried out as part of the requirements for obtaining the Master of Science
in Engineering (MSc Eng) degree.
Florin-Bogdan Gavriluta - s232418
Signature
Date
ii
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The advancement in lab automation has significantly improved the efficiency, accuracy,
and repeatability of experiments. However, many existing systems still face challenges,
including a lack of modularity and standardised communication protocols among various
devices.
This project aims to address these issues by integrating a robotic arm into an automated
system for handling microplates between different lab machines. The project objectives
includes: Integrate a robotic arm to automate the movement of microplates between var-
ious lab machines, reducing manual handling and improving workflow efficiency. Imple-
ment the Standardisation in Lab Automation (SiLA) protocol on the robotic arm to ensure
proper communication within the automated system. Set up communications with other
lab devices using the SiLA protocol and run a complete workflow by using the robot arm.
To bridge the robotic arm with the SiLA protocol and provide flexible control, the system is
built upon the Robot Operating System 2 (ROS 2), which acts as an intermediary commu-
nication and control layer. ROS 2 enables modularity, extensibility, and distributed control
by abstracting low-level protocols into high-level services.
Additionally, a user-friendly web interface was developed to enable intuitive creation and
management of automated workflows. This interface allows users to discover and inter-
act with SiLA-compatible devices, test features, and visually design experiments without
requiring programming knowledge, thereby enhancing system accessibility and usability.
The project will investigate the compatibility of the SiLA protocol with existing devices that
were not originally designed for standardised communication. Overcoming these techni-
cal obstacles is essential for the successful implementation of the integrated automated
system. Expected outcomes of the project: A fully integrated robotic arm capable of ef-
ficiently handling microplates within the automated system. Seamless communication
and interoperability among all lab devices using the SiLA protocol. Enhanced workflow
efficiency and reduced manual handling in lab experiments.
This project is conducted in association with DTU Dalsa Lab, and will contribute to the
ongoing improvements in lab automation by addressing the challenges of modularity and
standardised communication. The successful integration of the robotic arm and the im-
plementation of the SiLA protocol will serve as a model for future automation projects,
paving the way for more efficient and cohesive lab environments.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Vilhelm Krarup Møller, my supervisor from
the Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine at the Technical University of Denmark,
and to Xinxin Zhang, my supervisor from the Department of Electrical and Photonics En-
gineering at DTU. I would also like to acknowledge the support of my colleague Kevin
Christian Villena Skytte, as well as Claus Sternberg from the Department of Biotechnol-
ogy and Biomedicine.
Thank you to everyone who has supported and contributed to this project
iv
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Current Industrial Practices
4
2.1
Communication Standards and Protocols(SiLA 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Robot Operating System(ROS 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Web Interfaces for Laboratory Automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Future Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
System Architecture
9
3.1
ROS 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
SiLA 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Raspberry Pi and Docker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Web Page Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
Original tools for arm control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5.1
WINCAPS III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5.2
RobMaster
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5.3
CaoTester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5.4
b-CAP Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.6
Hardware Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
C Implementation for Arm Control
16
4.1
Introduction to b-CAP protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
b-CAP protocol client-server communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Structure of the b-CAP message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
C implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4.1
Key Data Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4.2
Communication Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4.3
Complete Function Interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4.4
Use case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
System Capabilities Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
ROS 2 Implementation
28
5.1
ROS 2 Architecture Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.2
ROS 2 Workspace structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
ROS 2 Service interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4
BcapControllerNode implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.5
Current System Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6
SiLA 2 Integration
35
6.1
SiLA 2 Architecture Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
v
==PAGE:8==
6.2
Driver Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.2.1
Feature Definition in the Base Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2.2
Feature Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.3
Summary of Achieved Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7
Docker and Raspberry Pi Setup
40
7.1
Integration of Docker and Raspberry pi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8
Web Interface for Automated Workflows
43
8.1
Web Interface Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
8.2
Backend Implmenetation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8.2.1
Device Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8.2.2
Core API Endpoints Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8.3
Frontend Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
8.3.1
Technology Stack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
8.4
Functional Milestones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
9
Discussion and Future work
58
9.1
Key Design Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
9.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
9.3
Lessons Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
9.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
10 Conclusion
61
Bibliography
62
vi
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In this chapter, the reasons for the significant need for automation in laboratories are
presented. The motivation behind selecting this project is explained, its objectives are
outlined, and an overview of the thesis chapters and their contents is provided.
Automation in laboratory environments has become much more important in recent years.
Before laboratories began moving towards automation, running an experiment required
a scientist to perform a great deal of manual work. For example, a biologist wishing to
test protein concentration would need to use several machines: first, a device like the
Thermo Multidrop to fill plates with different substances; then a washer to rinse the wells;
and finally a plate reader to take measurements. Each machine has its own control panel
and uses different communication methods. The scientist would have to carry the plates
between machines and configure each device, which is time-consuming. Ideally, a robotic
arm could handle the transfer of plates, and all machines could be controlled from a single
computer. This example illustrates how much automation can improve the quality and
speed of experiments. In an optimal setup, all devices would be connected, the workflow
configured through a central computer, and human intervention required only in the case
of unexpected events.
Recently, more laboratories have been moving towards automation, adopting open stan-
dards such as SiLA2 [1] and robotics frameworks like ROS2 [2] to enable better integration
and flexibility. However, achieving seamless interoperability between diverse devices re-
mains a significant challenge. Another important trend is the development of visual tools
that allow users to create and manage experimental workflows through intuitive graphical
interfaces, making automation more accessible to scientists without deep programming
knowledge. These advances help reduce manual effort, improve reproducibility, and allow
laboratories to adapt their setups as needs evolve.
This issue is not limited to biology laboratories, but is also present in chemistry, industry,
and educational setups. Often, the biggest challenge lies in the fact that these devices use
different protocols and are not designed to work together out of the box. Integrating them
and ensuring smooth operation is not always straightforward, but it can lead to substantial
improvements in laboratory efficiency and flexibility.
1.1
Motivation
The motivation behind this project stems from the belief that automation can significantly
ease the workload of laboratory personnel, helping experiments run faster, more effi-
ciently, and in a more organised manner. It aligns closely with an interest in improving the
way technology supports scientific work and offers an opportunity to contribute to a field
where innovation can have a direct impact on everyday research activities.
As laboratories face increasing pressure to ensure reproducibility, maintain data integrity,
and operate efficiently, the need for open, modular, and interoperable automation sys-
tems has become more evident. Automation is no longer limited to large-scale industrial
environments, it plays a crucial role in research and educational settings as well. Despite
this, many scientists continue to spend a considerable amount of time on repetitive, man-
ual tasks such as transferring microplates, configuring equipment, or handling devices
with incompatible control interfaces.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
1
==PAGE:10==
This project is motivated not only by the technical challenge of integrating different sys-
tems but also by the broader goal of reducing the manual burden on researchers. By
automating routine operations, scientists are given more time and flexibility to focus on
experimental design, data interpretation, and scientific discovery. In doing so, automation
serves as a tool for improving both efficiency and working conditions in the laboratory.
To support this vision, the project explores the integration of a DENSO robotic arm using
the ROS 2 (Robot Operating System) framework alongside the SiLA 2 (Standardization in
Lab Automation) protocol. ROS 2 provides a scalable and real-time-capable architecture
for robotic control, while SiLA 2 enables standardized communication between laboratory
devices from different manufacturers. Combining these two platforms makes it possible
to build a flexible, extensible automation setup that can be adapted to different types of
labs, particularly where modularity and user-friendliness are important.
The main goal of this thesis is to demonstrate that it is possible to connect diverse devices
and technologies in a coherent way, and that experimental workflows can be created and
executed without requiring extensive programming or integration expertise. By working
on this project, the hope is to show that accessible automation is achievable, even in
environments with legacy equipment, and to encourage more laboratories to adopt similar
approaches in their own work.
1.2
Objectives
The primary goal of this thesis is to demonstrate that a DENSO robotic arm can be effec-
tively integrated with modern technologies such as ROS 2 and SiLA 2, and to show that,
with the help of the arm, an automated workflow can be executed in an intuitive manner
with minimal steps.
To achieve this, the following specific objectives were established:
• Integrate the robotic arm with ROS 2 and develop a SiLA 2 driver to enable its use
in transporting microplates between laboratory devices.
• Design and implement a user-friendly web interface that allows users to create and
manage workflows involving all devices equipped with a SiLA 2 driver.
• Evaluate the system by testing the interoperability between the web interface, the
robotic arm, and other laboratory equipment, and assess the overall reliability of the
automated workflow through practical experiments.
By the end of the project, the system is expected to operate with minimal human inter-
vention. The overarching aim is to enhance experimental reproducibility and to present a
proof of concept for future automation initiatives. Through automating tasks such as plate
movement and integrating multiple devices under a single web interface, the system sig-
nificantly reduces the time and effort required to perform laboratory experiments. This
leads to increased workflow efficiency and helps minimise human error, thereby produc-
ing more consistent and reliable results. Furthermore, the web interface is designed to be
accessible to users without programming expertise, lowering the entry barrier for labora-
tory automation. Ultimately, this project contributes to the broader objective of advancing
accessible and modular laboratory automation solutions that support scientific progress.
1.3
Thesis Structure
• Chapter 2: Current Industrial Practices
This chapter presents the current practices in automated workflows. It discusses
2
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:11==
the use of robotic arms, the role of SiLA in enabling easier communication between
devices, and the technologies commonly used for workflow creation and experiment
management.
• Chapter 3: System Architecture
This chapter explains the technologies involved in the system.
It describes the
robotic arm, including the modifications required to make it functional. It also dis-
cusses the original tools used to control the arm, such as WINCAPS and the b-CAP
protocol. Furthermore, it presents an overview of SiLA and ROS 2, along with the
Raspberry Pi setup, the use of Docker, and the technologies employed in develop-
ing the web interface.
• Chapter 4: C Implementation for Arm Control
This chapter details the control of the robotic arm using the C library. It explains
how command packets are constructed and sent, and it presents all the available
commands used for controlling the arm.
• Chapter 5: ROS 2 Implementation
This chapter discusses the ROS 2 implementation that uses the C library. It explains
the structure of the ROS 2 nodes and services developed, and how these interact
with the C-based commands.
• Chapter 6: SiLA 2 Integration
This chapter presents the implementation of SiLA, which builds on the existing ROS
services. It outlines the SiLA features developed and how they are used to interface
with the ROS services.
• Chapter 7: Docker and Raspberry Pi Setup
This chapter explains how the SiLA driver and the ROS 2 workspace were config-
ured to automatically execute upon powering the Raspberry Pi. It details the use of
Docker to ensure a portable and reproducible environment.
• Chapter 8: Web Interface for Automated Workflows
This chapter describes the features of the web application. It explains what users
can do with the interface, and it shows how the backend operates and the data
displayed, and provides an overview of the API endpoints and routes.
• Chapter 9: Discussion and Future work
This chapter discusses the overall performance and reliability of the system, high-
lighting key design decisions, challenges encountered, and lessons learned. It also
outlines potential future improvements, such as expanding device compatibility, re-
fining the web interface, and integrating advanced features like vision systems or AI
tools.
• Chapter 10: Conclusion
This chapter summarises the work done, highlights the main contributions, and re-
flects on the results achieved throughout the project.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Current Industrial Practices
Laboratory automation has become a crucial problem in modern scientific research, yet
it still presents significant challenges in its integration. One problem is that many labo-
ratories operate using older machines, making it harder to integrate them with modern
technologies. These legacy systems often come with vendor specific software that oper-
ates in isolation and was not built for integration into other workflows. Another problem
with the software from the vendors is that they develop their own protocols and interfaces,
information that is usually not public.
Another challenge is financial investment, which for smaller research institutions makes
it very hard to run automated workflows. With all these in my mind scientist should still try
to improve and automate their workflows, because in the end, the results will improve the
quality of experiments and reduce the time it takes to conduct them. This article shows
how, for example, in the field of clinical microbiology, the introduction of automated work-
flows helped improve quality and also the time to report a diagnosis. According to Irene
Burckhardt [3] from the Department for Infectious Diseases, Microbiology and Hygiene,
Heidelberg University Hospital, automation not only reduces manual workload but also
improves consistency, traceability, and diagnostic precision across all stages of sample
processing from inoculation to result reporting.
Traditional systems rely on manual inoculation, incubation and visual interpretation of
culture plates, all of these being prone to human error and inefficiencies. In contrast, an
automated laboratory setup incorporates plate streaking, incubation with time-controlled
imaging, and digital data integration. This transition shortens the time to result and the
time to report, which are crucial metrics, especially in this field. For example, a setup like
this was able to reduce the reporting times for blood cultures by up to 24 hours and for
urine cultures by 4-5 hours, which directly impacts patient outcomes.
Despite current limitations such as partial automation of broth culture, manual follow-up
tasks, and lack of standardised validation data, automation is rapidly evolving. Burck-
hardt emphasises the need for continuous validation, interface development, and open
data sharing to optimise workflows and achieve the goal of fully automated, integrated
microbiology laboratories.
Thus, laboratory automation is not merely a technological upgrade, it is a necessary evo-
lution to meet the modern demands of clinical microbiology. It improves operational effi-
ciency, reduces diagnostic variability, and ultimately enhances patient care.
2.1
Communication Standards and Protocols(SiLA 2)
Laboratory automation has historically been impeded by a lack of common communication
between instruments. Each instruments is usually designed with specific software and
incompatible communication protocols. These systems slow down their integration in
workflows and make laboratories be reliant on specific vendors. This problem has driven
the need for open standards in device communication and integration.
Initially introduced in 2008 [4], SiLA laid the groundwork for a common command set and
data interface for laboratory devices. However, the complexity of device control and rapid
advancement of IT infrastructure required a more flexible, modern approach. SiLA 2,
introduced as its successor, offers a robust, open-source standard designed for modular,
4
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:13==
vendor-neutral device control, aligning with contemporary software engineering principles
such as service orientation, gRPC communication, and middleware-based automation [5].
At the core of SiLA 2 is the concept of each device being represented as a SiLA server,
which exposes its functionality as a set of features, defined using an XML-based Fea-
ture Definition Language (FDL). This allows clients (e.g., workflow engines, LIMS, or
Python scripts) to dynamically discover, query, and control any compliant device on a
network. SiLA 2 abstracts the underlying complexity of diverse hardware implementa-
tions and standardises interactions into simple, intuitive commands like Start_Pump or
Set_Temperature.
Communication between devices and clients is handled via gRPC over HTTP/2, a mod-
ern protocol that supports efficient binary communication, streaming, and asynchronous
event handling. This allows SiLA 2 systems to integrate not only conventional laboratory
hardware but also cloud-based and IoT-enabled devices with high scalability and respon-
siveness [5].
This article [6] demonstrates a practical implementation of the LAPP (Laboratory Automa-
tion Plug & Play) framework for integrating mobile manipulators in laboratory settings
using the TIAGo robot. The system architecture employs SiLA 2 as a standardized com-
munication protocol within a layered structure that extends from low-level actuator control
through ROS to device-level SiLA control.
The implementation uses ArUco markers for visual navigation and arm coordination, where
these markers function as fiducial markers for device identification and provide coordinate
frames for motion planning. The system incorporates digital twins containing geometrical
information of laboratory devices to achieve ”teaching-free” integration, enabling robotic
workflows without manual reprogramming or calibration.
The authors highlight SiLA 2’s contribution in establishing a standardised interface that
reduces repetitive integration efforts and broadens client compatibility, while supporting
device-agnostic approaches independent of the manufacturer.
Through standardised
communication protocols, SiLA 2 enables uniform robot interaction with devices from var-
ious manufacturers, overcoming the constraints of integrator-proprietary communication
protocols that restrict compatibility to specific integrators.
Furthermore, the LAPP framework illustrates SiLA 2’s role in achieving device indepen-
dence through a hierarchical system architecture incorporating digital twins and standard-
ised feature definitions for labware transfer capabilities. The system operates through
action primitives at the low-level actuator and sensor control layer, while higher-level log-
ical interactions are managed through SiLA 2 features in the device-level control layer,
establishing a layered architecture from action primitives through ROS to SiLA control.
This architectural approach represents a significant advancement in modular laboratory
automation by offering a harmonised integration framework.
The article identifies several implementation challenges, including hardware limitations
(robot suspension and wheel slippage problems on uneven laboratory flooring), software
compatibility issues (conflicts between ROS, Python, OS, and robot firmware versions),
network bandwidth constraints with image broadcasting for ArUco marker detection, and
integration complexity with the SiLA-ROS bridge implementation. The paper proposes
that these challenges can be mitigated through ongoing subsystem maintenance and the
community-driven development approach of the SiLA Consortium.
In addition to this, practical implementations of SiLA 2 have been demonstrated in diverse
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
5
==PAGE:14==
laboratory contexts. One notable example involves the integration of the Tecan SPARK
plate reader into LabForward’s LabOperator system. Traditionally, integrating such in-
struments using vendor-specific software (e.g., Tecan’s Magellan) would require several
days. However, using a generic SiLA 2 client, the integration was completed in just two
hours, highlighting the efficiency and interoperability benefits offered by the standard [7].
Another prominent case is the development of a modular cell culture automation system
integrating devices such as incubators, imagers, and robotic arms. This system employed
SiLA 2 to orchestrate multi-device workflows using the UniteFlow engine and a mobile
robot platform. SiLA 2 facilitated standardised control and coordination among heteroge-
neous devices, enabling continuous and unattended operation while minimising the need
for manual configuration or hard-coded integration logic [8].
In summary, SiLA 2 is not just a communication protocol but a full interoperability frame-
work. Its utility in real-world implementations like LAPP shows that it can serve as the
semantic backbone for highly adaptive, robot-integrated lab environments, where devices
are discovered, understood, and controlled through open standards.
2.2
Robot Operating System(ROS 2)
The growing complexity of robotics systems that have more sensors and abilities to per-
ceive and interact with the environment has driven the need for robotic systems that are
not only capable of basic automation but also adaptable, modular, and autonomous. Tra-
ditional robotic solutions, often limited by rigid control architectures and vendor-owned
interfaces, are not sufficient for dynamic applications. In this context, the Robot Operat-
ing System 2 (ROS 2) has emerged as a state-of-the-art middleware designed to meet
the challenges of modern industrial robotics.
ROS 2 builds upon the widely used ROS 1 framework but addresses several of the critical
limitations, including the lack of real-time capabilities, limited support for distributed sys-
tems, and insufficient security. By adopting Data Distribution Service (DDS) as its core
communication protocol, ROS 2 enables real-time, scalable, and fault-tolerant data ex-
change among robotic components. This shift allows ROS 2 to serve as a robust founda-
tion for systems in which robots, sensors, humans, and machines collaborate to achieve
flexible automation goals [9].
The framework supports a modular, node-based architecture where individual compo-
nents, such as perception, trajectory planning, and motion control communicate using
standardised interfaces. This design enables users to build complex and adaptive robotic
behaviours by combining reusable packages. Tools like MoveIt, RViz, and libraries for
vision (OpenCV) and point cloud processing further extend ROS 2’s capabilities for tasks
such as autonomous grasping, obstacle avoidance, and real-time sensor fusion.
In the article [9], they proposed a general ROS 2-based software architecture aimed at
increasing the autonomy of collaborative robots (cobots) through the integration of exter-
nal sensors, high-level planning modules, and reconfigurable behaviours. Their proof-
of-concept shows how ROS 2, combined with a depth camera and a flexible planning
pipeline, can enable a cobot to perform a flexible pick-and-place task in dynamic environ-
ments, something that is not feasible with most commercial cobots using only standard
interfaces.
In addition, a practical deployment of ROS 2 control is presented in the “ROS Based
Control of an Industrial Micro Assembly Robot” case study [10] , detailing the integration
of ROS 2 in a real world micro assembly industrial application. The paper evaluates
6
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:15==
system design, communication reliability, and robustness during operation, underscoring
ROS 2’s maturity in applied robotics contexts.
Despite being relatively new, ROS 2 is already demonstrating its potential to become the
standard in research and industrial robotics. However, challenges remain, including in-
complete porting of ROS 1 packages, the steep learning curve, and the need for robust
real-time guarantees under varying hardware and OS configurations. Nevertheless, ROS
2 offers a future-proof foundation for building flexible, autonomous, and interoperable
robotic systems.
2.3
Web Interfaces for Laboratory Automation
As SiLA2 becomes increasingly integrated into automated workflows, web-based tools
have emerged to facilitate device discovery and workflow management. One of the first
tools encountered when learning SiLA is the SiLA 2 Browser, developed by UniteLabs.
This lightweight, open-source tool is designed to discover SiLA 2 devices on the local net-
work and enables users to interact with their available features. However, its functionality
is limited to exploration and testing, as it was not designed for workflow creation.
A more comprehensive solution is the SiLA 2 Manager, discussed in the article [5] by
Bromig and his team. This system supports automated experiment execution, encom-
passing device discovery, scheduling, and live execution monitoring. Users can write
Python scripts that execute in isolated Docker containers with exclusive device access.
While powerful, this script-based approach may present a barrier for users without pro-
gramming experience.
To address this limitation, a dedicated web-based interface for SiLA 2 workflows was de-
veloped as part of this work. The primary motivation was to create a more user-friendly
and accessible system that accommodates both programmers and non-programmers. In
the implemented web interface, users can discover devices and interact with them using
Jupyter notebooks. They can also test device features, similar to the SiLA Browser, and
construct complete workflows using drag-and-drop functionality with real-time visualisa-
tion of responses, eliminating the need for scripting knowledge.
This hybrid approach ensures that users without coding experience can design and ex-
ecute automated workflows with ease, while advanced users retain full flexibility through
scripting capabilities.
2.4
Future Trends
As laboratory automation advances, the integration of the standards mentioned in the
previous sections will shape the future of intelligent and connected lab environments.
However despite of the fact that these technologies already enhance device interoper-
ability and process flexibility, several trends suggest that even broader transformations
are ahead. One direction will be the rise of no-code tools, which will allow users to design
automation workflows without programming skills. Another trend will be the integration of
robotics with lab equipment. ROS 2 controlled mobile robots that can transport materials
and perform repetitive tasks, while being able to communicated using SiLA with the other
devices. Bridging the two enables fully coordinated workflows across space and systems.
Web interfaces are also evolving to support real-time monitoring and interactive feed-
back, offering users live status updates and alerts during workflow execution. In parallel,
AI tools will support the users in generating automated workflows and offer recommen-
dations based on available devices and goals. Finally, cloud native infrastructure and
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
7
==PAGE:16==
digital twins are expected to enable remote orchestration, simulation and optimisation of
the automation process.
8
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:17==
3
System Architecture
This chapter presents the main technologies used in the project and explains how they
were integrated to create a system capable of supporting automated workflows.
Below, a diagram of the current setup is presented, with the robotic arm positioned at the
center of the various laboratory instruments it interacts with. These include a washer, a
plate reader, a centrifuge, a sealer, a barcode scanner, and a plate filler. All these devices
are interconnected through the use of the SiLA 2 communication standard.
Figure 3.1: System Layout Showcasing the Robotic Arm and Interfacing Machines.
To enable the integration of the robotic arm into a modern, automated workflow, several
modifications were required on both the hardware and software levels.
From a software perspective, multiple tools were employed to simplify the control and
integration of the robotic arm. As shown in Figure 3.2, the system is built upon ROS 2,
which manages the low-level control of the robotic arm and serves as an intermediary
layer between the hardware and SiLA 2. SiLA 2 builds on top of the ROS 2 services
to provide a device driver that can be seamlessly integrated with other SiLA compatible
laboratory instruments.
Docker and a Raspberry Pi were used to deploy the entire setup in a reproducible and au-
tomated fashion, allowing the system to become operational immediately after the Rasp-
berry Pi boots, with no further intervention required.
Additionally, the diagram highlights the three core technologies used in the development
of the web interface: the Flask framework (Python), JavaScript, and HTML. This interface
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
9
==PAGE:18==
is responsible for orchestrating the robotic arm and all other laboratory devices connected
via SiLA 2, ensuring a user-friendly and accessible environment for managing complex
automated workflows.
The interactions between all components related to the robotic arm including its software
architecture and connection to the web-based interface are illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: System architecture of the robot control setup.
3.1
ROS 2
ROS 2 (Robot Operating System 2) is a set of software libraries and tools designed to
support the development of complex robotic systems. As described in the official docu-
mentation[11], ROS 2 provides powerful communication, control, and abstraction mech-
anisms, enabling modular and scalable system architectures. ROS 2 can be integrated
with simulation tools such as Gazebo, allowing for the creation of realistic virtual environ-
ments and digital twins of robotic systems.The framework supports various programming
languages, including Python and C++, and it also provides a rich ecosystem of tools for
visualisation, debugging, and system monitoring.
ROS 2’s architecture is built around the concept of nodes, which are independent pro-
grams that usually perform a specific task. These nodes can be distributed across multi-
ple computers in a network, allowing for a more flexible and scalable system design. For
instance, one computer could run the node responsible for processing sensor data, while
another computer could handle the robot’s motion control. Despite being separated, these
nodes can communicate with each other easily through ROS 2’s communication frame-
work, enabling coordinated operation of the entire robotic system.
In this project, ROS 2 was used to simplify interaction with the robot arm by providing a
more accessible and extensible command interface. Also, because some of its libraries,
it was easier to add debugging support and provide the user with messages that describe
the effect of the commands.
During the programming process, an effort was made to try to replicate the robot arm as
a digital twin in Gazebo and explore the benefits of libraries like MoveIt that are used for
10
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:19==
path planning. However, this was not possible due to hardware limitations. The DENSO
company provides a tool that can export robot conguration data from WINCAPS III to ROS
URDF files, but it is required to have a controller that uses version at least RC8, while the
robot in this project uses an older RC7M unit.
An alternative approach was to work with the available CAD models of the robot. While
these provide the 3D geometry, they lack essential information like joint positions, ori-
entation, and coordinate frame. Without this information it becomes difficult to accurately
construct the UDRF(Unified Robot Description Format) files. Due to time constraints these
limitations made it impractical to fully implement the robot’s digital twin in Gazebo.
3.2
SiLA 2
SiLA 2 is a modern protocol designed to standardise communication and control in labora-
tory automation systems. As described in the official documentation [12]. SiLA provides a
framework that enables users to create setups in which different equipment, regardless of
the core technology they use, they are able to communicate seamlessly with each other.
The protocol is built on modern technologies such as gRPC and HTTP/2 that allow ef-
ficient communication between devices and control systems. This architecture enables
reliable, real-time communication with features like bidirectional streaming and multiple
connections. SiLA’s feature based design allows devices to expose their capabilities in a
standardised way, making them easy to integrate into automated workflows.
An important aspect of SiLA 2 is the use of Extensive Markup Language (XML) files to
define features and their structure. In these XML files, the available commands, their
parameters, and data types are specified. In addition, the response to the commands
can be found in the files, again with the parameters and their corresponding data type.
In laboratory automation, SiLA drivers act as translators between the standardised pro-
tocol and specific device requirements. These drivers implement a set of standardised
features that define how a device can be controlled and monitored, including device con-
nection management, parameter setting, command execution, and status monitoring. The
protocol supports both synchronous and asynchronous operations, with built-in validation
and error handling.
In this project, SiLA was implemented on top of the ROS 2 services, resulting in a stan-
dardised interface for controlling the Denso arm. The implementation follows SiLA’s based
architecture, where clear command interfaces for the arm were created. This standard
makes the robotic arm accessible to other systems that support the SiLA framework and
can be integrated as any other device that uses SiLA in an automated workflow.
3.3
Raspberry Pi and Docker
Given that the SiLA 2 implementation relies on ROS 2 services, and ROS 2 in turn requires
a Linux-based environment, it was necessary to establish a suitable Linux operating sys-
tem on the Raspberry Pi. To achieve this, the standard Raspberry Pi OS was initially
installed, followed by the deployment of a Docker container pre-configured with the ap-
propriate Linux distribution and specific versions of ROS and related dependencies. This
approach ensured consistency, portability, and ease of deployment for running the ROS
services required by the SiLA 2 driver.
Docker is a platform that enables the creation, deployment, and running of applications in
isolated environments called containers [13]. With Docker, you can create an isolated en-
vironment where all the dependencies needed for the project can be found. In this project
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
11
==PAGE:20==
it was used exactly to solve the issue where ROS 2 technologies needed a Linux(Ubuntu
22.04) environment in order to run.
The system was deployed on a Raspberry Pi [14], a compact and cost-effective single-
board computer. The Raspberry Pi serves as the main control unit for the robot arm, run-
ning the containerised applications that handle communication with the robot and execute
control commands. This setup demonstrates how modern containerization technologies
can be effectively used in embedded systems, making the system more portable and
easier to maintain.
3.4
Web Page Technologies
The web page makes use of multiple technologies in order to function and provide the user
with a way of creating automated workflows. The backend implementation utilises Flask
[15] ,which is a Python-based framework that provides a robust foundation for RESTful
API development. It has the benefits that it’s small, light and simple compared with the
other widely used Python frameworks. The frontend architecture is constructed using
HTML5 [16] and JavaScript [17], implementing a component-based design that promotes
modularity and being easily maintainable. The system’s architecture follows the RESTful
principles, using JSON for data serialisation and implementing stateless client-server in-
teractions, meaning that the server doesn’t remember anything from the previous request,
each time the request contains all the information needed, such as device ID, command
and parameters.
In this project, this web page is used to interact with devices communicating SiLA, it has
three different pages, one where the device connection can be seen and you run com-
mands using the jupyter notebooks, another one where you can execute from each device
all the features and lastly a page where you can create workflows by adding features from
any device connected on the network with SiLA 2.
3.5
Original tools for arm control
In order to operate the DENSO VS-068 robotic arm equipped with the RC7M controller,
several official tools and protocols provided by DENSO are used. These tools were origi-
nally designed to support robot programming, testing, debugging, and communication for
the arm. In this section, the most relevant tools are presented: WINCAPS III, RobMaster,
CaoTester, and the b-CAP protocol.
3.5.1
WINCAPS III
WINCAPS III is DENSO’s dedicated software for offline robot programming and simula-
tion. It allows users to create, edit, and debug robot programs in a user-friendly graphical
interface. In addition, it provides 3D simulation of the robot’s motion, which is useful for
verifying movements before uploading code to the actual hardware. The software also
enables configuration of I/O settings, robot parameters, and controller properties.
3.5.2
RobMaster
RobMaster’s main purpose is to facilitate the transfer and management of program files on
the robot controller. For example, it was used in this project to upload the RobSlave.pac
file, which is necessary to enable external control of the robot via a PC.
3.5.3
CaoTester
CaoTester is a diagnostic and communication tool also included in the ORiN2 SDK. It
acts similarly to network traffic analysers such as Wireshark but is specifically designed
for use with DENSO’s robot communication interfaces. Using CaoTester, it is possible to
send commands directly to the robot controller and observe the response in real time.
12
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:21==
This tool was especially useful during debugging, as it allowed us to verify whether the
robot was receiving external commands correctly and whether it was responding as ex-
pected. CaoTester helped us troubleshoot and validate communication between the robot
and the control software running on the host PC.
3.5.4
b-CAP Protocol
The b-CAP protocol is a communication protocol developed by DENSO for efficient data
exchange between the robot controller and external systems. It is commonly used in
network-based control setups and allows external programs to communicate with the
robot over TCP/IP or UDP.
The protocol enables us to send motion commands, read sensor states, query joint po-
sitions, and to manage digital I/O, making it a powerful tool for integrating the robot into
larger automation systems.
3.6
Hardware Modifications
At the beginning of this project, the robotic arm was non-operational. The arm, an older
model, had been transferred among several laboratories over the years, resulting in the
loss of much of its original documentation. Additionally, previous users lacked an en-
gineering background, limiting their ability to assist with troubleshooting. Consequently,
restoring functionality required extensive diagnostic and investigative efforts.
The robotic arm is controlled via an RC7M control unit, which incorporates safety features
that were not initially apparent. Accompanying the control unit is an interface module that
connects to the arm’s gripper and provides ports for the emergency stop button and SIPHA
safety sensors. Originally, the arm was housed within an enclosure featuring multiple
access doors, each equipped with a SIPHA sensor. Opening any of these doors would
interrupt arm operation to ensure safety compliance, as illustrated in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Sipha sensor.
A significant operational challenge was that the arm would not function without receiving
appropriate safety signals. After a detailed review of the control unit’s electrical schemat-
ics (see Figure 3.4), a temporary bypass was implemented for the emergency stop signal
by shorting the corresponding port. Additionally, the number of connected SIPHA sensors
was reduced from eleven to one to simplify the safety interlock system.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Safety Signals [18].
It is important to highlight that the remaining SIPHA sensor could not be bypassed without
consequence. Disabling this sensor would prevent the use of the teaching pendant in
manual mode, which is essential for programming the arm. Therefore, this sensor remains
connected and must be manually disconnected when switching to manual mode, then
reconnected to enable external (computer-based) control. Although replacing the sensor
with a switch is theoretically possible, the controller requires a valid input signal for proper
configuration, preventing the port from being left open.
Another issue encountered was a warning indicating that the encoder batteries had ex-
pired. If all encoder batteries are depleted and the system’s configuration file, which con-
tains calibration data for the joints, is unavailable, a full recalibration and reconfiguration
of the teaching pendant is necessary. While manual recalibration of the joints was pos-
sible, Joint 6 posed a particular challenge as it requires a specialised tool that was not
accessible.
The absence of calibration for Joint 6 primarily affects absolute positioning accuracy. For
example, commanding the arm to move to a predefined absolute position, such as the
“home” or zero position, may result in positional inaccuracies or unexpected joint orien-
tations. However, this limitation does not critically impact the project’s typical workflow,
where joint positions are taught manually using the teaching pendant.
In teaching mode, the robot records the joint angles at the time of teaching, irrespective
of their absolute reference. Provided the joint moves consistently and precisely, its rela-
tive position during task execution remains reliable. Therefore, calibration of Joint 6 was
deemed non-critical within the context of this project.
14
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:23==
In Chapters 4 through 8, all implementation details will be presented, guiding the reader
through each phase and demonstrating the capabilities achieved with the arm after each
step.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
15
==PAGE:24==
4
C Implementation for Arm Control
4.1
Introduction to b-CAP protocol
In order to understand how the C library is implemented, the reader must first understand
the b-CAP protocol and its structure.
The following technical details about the b-CAP protocol, its implementation, and the com-
munication procedures are based on the proprietary documentation provided by DENSO
WAVE Inc. [18]. This documentation is provided with the DENSO robot controller and
forms the basis for the implementation of the C library discussed in this thesis.
4.2
b-CAP protocol client-server communication
The b-CAP protocol is a high-performance communication protocol developed by DENSO
WAVE Inc. as part of the ORiN2(Open Resource interface for the Network) initiative [18].
ORiN provides a standard that allows different automation devices such as robots, PLCs
and sensors to be accessed by a common set of APIs.
ORiN defines logical objects like Controller, Robot, Task, and Variable, each with a set
of well-defined methods. This abstraction allows developers to control a wide variety of
industrial hardware through a consistent programming interface
The b-CAP protocol was designed to enable fast, efficient and reliable communication
between the host system(PC-based application) and a DENSO robot controller. The pro-
tocol communicates over TCP/IP, using port 5007 and uses an object-oriented architec-
ture. Communication is based on a client-server model where the b-CAP client initiates
commands and the robot controller acts as a server, and it executes those commands as
illustrated in the figure below.
Figure 4.1: Communication sequence. [18]
To make things clear, the next two figures will present the communication procedure for
16
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:25==
both the server and the client. The following showcases the communication details for
the server side:
Figure 4.2: Communication on the server side. [18]
The server opens the connection port and waits for the client to connect. It is mentioned in
the manual that it is recommended to open port 5007. After the connection is established,
the server performs the function which corresponds to the request messages. The result
is stored in a response message and sent back to the client.
Figure 4.3: Communication on the client side. [18]
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
17
==PAGE:26==
In Figure 4.3, the communication procedure on the client side is shown. Client establishes
a session by connecting to the server, then sends a request message of the performed
function and waits for a response message from the server.
4.3
Structure of the b-CAP message
Figure 4.4: b-CAP packet structure. [18]
The description of what the elements of the package mean is listed below:
• SOH (Start of Header): 1 byte, fixed value 0x01
• Message Length: 4 bytes (DWORD). Specifies the total message length from SOH
to EOT.
• Serial Number: 2 bytes (WORD). A unique ID used to match requests and re-
sponses.
• Reserved Area: 2 bytes. Always set to 0.
• Function ID / Return Code: 4 bytes (DWORD). Identifies the function (in requests)
or return status (in responses).
• Argument Count: 2 bytes. The number of arguments or return values in the mes-
sage.
• Arguments: Variable length. Describes function inputs or outputs. See argument
structure.
• EOT (End of Transmission): 1 byte, fixed value 0x04
Each argument has the following structure:
Figure 4.5: Argument data structure. [18]
• Argument Length: 4 bytes. Length of this argument (excluding this field).
• Data Type: 2 bytes (WORD). Indicates the type of the data (e.g., VT_I4, VT_BSTR).
• Array Count: 4 bytes. Number of elements (set to 1 if not an array).
• Data: Actual value. Format depends on data type.
18
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:27==
In the table below are listed the different data types with their encoded value and the byte
size.
Data Type
Value
Size (bytes)
Description
VT_EMPTY
0
0
Empty data
VT_NULL
1
0
NULL value
VT_ERROR
10
2
Error code
VT_UI1
17
1
Binary
VT_I2
2
2
Short integer
VT_UI2
18
2
Unsigned short integer
VT_I4
3
4
Long integer
VT_UI4
19
4
Unsigned long integer
VT_R4
4
4
Single-precision floating point
VT_R8
5
8
Double-precision floating point
VT_CY
6
8
Currency data type
VT_DATE
7
8
Date type
VT_BOOL
11
2
Boolean value (true/false)
VT_BSTR
8
Variable
String data
VT_VARIANT
12
Variable
Variant
type
(used
only
with
VT_ARRAY)
VT_ARRAY
0x2000
Variable
Array type (logical OR with base
type, e.g. VT_ARRAY | VT_I4)
Table 4.1: Data Types Used [18]
In Table 4.2 it is presented the functions that can be executed with their representative
IDs and in Table 4.3, the return codes are enumerated with a short description of what
they are.
ID
Function Name
Description
1
Service_Start
Starts the b-CAP service
2
Service_Stop
Stops the b-CAP service
3
Controller_Connect
Connect to a robot controller
4
Controller_Disconnect
Disconnect from the robot controller
7
Controller_GetRobot
Get a robot object
8
Controller_GetTask
Get a task object
9
Controller_GetVariable
Get a variable object
17
Controller_Execute
Execute controller command
62
Robot_GetVariable
Get a variable object of the robot
64
Robot_Execute
Execute robot command
66
Robot_Change
Execute the change command of the robot
72
Robot_Move
Move the robot
84
Robot_Release
Release the robot object
85
Task_GetVariable
Get task variable
88
Task_Start
Start a task
89
Task_Stop
Stop a task
99
Task_Release
Release a task object
101
Variable_GetValue
Get value of variable
102
Variable_PutValue
Set value of variable
111
Variable_Release
Release variable object
Table 4.2: Built-in b-CAP Function IDs [18]
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
19
==PAGE:28==
Code
Name
Description
0x00000000
S_OK
Success
0x80004001
E_NOTIMPL
Not implemented
0x80004004
E_ABORT
Function aborted
0x80004005
E_FAIL
General failure
0x8000FFFF
E_UNEXPECTED
Fatal internal error occurred
0x80010001
E_INVALIDRCVPACKET
Received packet is invalid; robot disconnects
immediately
0x80010002
E_INVALIDSNDPACKET
Sent packet is invalid
0x80010003
E_INVALIDARGTYPE
Argument type is invalid
0x80010004
E_ROBOTISBUSY
Robot is busy; retry later
0x80010005
E_INVALIDCOMMAND
Unknown or malformed command
0x80010011
E_PACKETSIZEOVER
Packet size exceeds 16 MB
0x80010012
E_ARGSIZEOVER
Argument size exceeds allowed limit
0x80070005
E_ACCESSDENIED
Access denied (e.g., permissions issue)
0x80070006
E_HANDLE
Invalid handle used
0x8007000E
E_OUTOFMEMORY
Memory allocation failure
0x80070057
E_INVALIDARG
Invalid argument passed
Table 4.3: Standard b-CAP Return Codes [18]
4.4
C implementation
The b-Cap library implementation has evolved through several versions. The initial ver-
sion, provided on the controller’s installation CD, contained some limitations in its imple-
mentation. Specifically, it did not properly handle data type specifications, which lead to
issues in communication with the robot controller.
Through further investigation, an updated version was found in a GitHub repository [19]
that addressed these limitations. The main improvement was the introduction of proper
data type handling in the functions. This update ensured that each function explicitly
specified the data type of its parameters and return values, making the communication
more robust and type-safe.
The final modification involved streamlining the library by removing duplicate functions.
The library was simplified to retain only the functions that implemented the correct data
type handling, specifically those using the BCAP_VARIANT structure. This consolidation
resulted in a cleaner, more maintainable codebase while preserving all the necessary
functionality.
The b-Cap library provides a C interface for communicating with DENSO robot controllers.
The library’s interface is defined in the header file b-Cap.h, which contains all the neces-
sary type definitions, error codes, and function declarations.
4.4.1
Key Data Structures
The library uses a variant data type structure to handle different types of data in a type-safe
manner:
1
typedef struct {
2
u_short Type;
/* b-CAP Type id */
3
uint32_t Arrays;
/* Array count, must be >= 1 */
4
union {
5
u_char CharValue;
6
u_short ShortValue;
20
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:29==
7
uint32_t LongValue;
8
float FloatValue;
9
double DoubleValue;
10
u_char String[40 + 1];
11
float FloatArray[16];
12
double DoubleArray[16];
13
void
*Data;
/* When the Type is VT_Array */
14
} Value;
15
} BCAP_VARIANT;
Listing 4.1: BCAP_VARIANT Structure
4.4.2
Communication Flow
The library implements a client-server communication model: Below, all the necessary
steps are explained in order to move the arm.
1. Connection Establishment
• Open connection to the controller using bCap_Open
• Start the b-CAP service using bCap_ServiceStart
• Connect to the controller using bCap_ControllerConnect
2. Task Management
• Get the task handle for ”roboslave” using bCap_ControllerGetTask
• Start the task using bCap_TaskStart
3. Robot Control Setup
• Get the robot handle using bCap_ControllerGetRobot
• Enable the robot motor using bCap_RobotExecute with ”Motor” command
• Set the external speed using bCap_RobotExecute with ”ExtSpeed” command
4. Movement Execution
• Move the robot to predefined positions using bCap_RobotMove
4.4.3
Complete Function Interface
The library provides several categories of functions. The return type for each function is
BCAP_HRESULT, which corresponds to the status codes listed in Table 4.3. These codes
provide detailed information about the success or failure of the function call, allowing users
to handle errors and exceptions effectively.
Below is the complete interface as defined in the header file:
1
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_Open(const char *pIPStr , int iPort, int *piSockFd);
2
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_Close(int iSockFd);
3
4
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_ServiceStart(int iSockFd);
5
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_ServiceStop(int iSockFd);
Listing 4.2: Connection Management Functions
1
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_ControllerConnect(int iSockFd , const char *pStrCtrlname ,
2
const char *pStrProvName , const char *pStrPcName ,
3
const char *pStrOption , uint32_t *plhController);
4
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
21
==PAGE:30==
5
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_ControllerDisconnect(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhController);
6
7
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_ControllerGetRobot(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhController ,
8
const char *pStrRobotName , const char *pStrOption , uint32_t *lhRobot);
9
10
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_ControllerGetVariable(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhController ,
11
const char *pVarName , const char *pstrOption , uint32_t *plhVar);
12
13
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_ControllerGetTask(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhController ,
14
char *pTskName , char *pstrOption , uint32_t *plhVar);
15
16
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_ControllerExecute(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhController ,
17
const char *pStrCommand , const BCAP_VARIANT *pVntOption ,
18
BCAP_VARIANT *pvntResult);
Listing 4.3: Controller Operation Functions
1
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_RobotRelease(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhRobot);
2
3
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_RobotGetVariable(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhRobot ,
4
const char *pVarName , const char *pStrOption , uint32_t *lhVarCurJnt);
5
6
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_RobotChange(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhRobot , char *pStrCommand
);
7
8
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_RobotMove(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhRobot , long lComp,
9
const char *pStrPose , const char *pStrOption);
10
11
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_RobotExecuteSlaveMove(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhRobot ,
12
char *pStrCommand , float *pfOption , void *pResult);
13
14
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_RobotExecute(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhRobot ,
15
const char *pStrCommand , const BCAP_VARIANT *pVntOption ,
16
BCAP_VARIANT *pvntResult);
Listing 4.4: Robot Control Functions
1
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_TaskRelease(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhTask);
2
3
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_TaskGetVariable(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhTask ,
4
const char *pVarName , const char *pstrOption , uint32_t *plhVar);
5
6
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_TaskStart(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhTask ,
7
long lMode, char *pStrOption);
8
9
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_TaskStop(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhTask ,
10
long lMode, char *pStrOption);
Listing 4.5: Task Management Functions
1
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_VariableRelease(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhVar);
2
3
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_VariableGetValue(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhVar,
4
void *pVntValue);
5
6
BCAP_HRESULT bCap_VariablePutValue(int iSockFd , uint32_t lhVar,
7
u_short iType, uint32_t lArrays , void *pVntValue);
Listing 4.6: Variable Management Functions
22
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:31==
4.4.4
Use case
To demonstrate how the b-CAP protocol and the C interface can be used to control a
DENSO robotic arm, the following example shows an end-to-end use case. This includes
connecting to the controller, starting the robslave task, powering on the motor, controlling
the gripper, setting speed, and commanding a movement to a taught position.
Header and Main Function
The IP address and port are defined, and the handles and
result variables are initialised.
1
#define CONTROLLER_IP "192.168.8.103"
// IP address of the robot controller
2
#define PORT 5007
// Default b-CAP communication port
3
4
int main() {
5
int sockFd;
// TCP socket file descriptor
6
uint32_t lhController , lhTask , lhRobot;
// Handles for controller , task,
and robot
7
BCAP_HRESULT result;
// Result code for b-CAP operations
Listing 4.7: Setup and declarations
Step 1: Open TCP Connection
1
result = bCap_Open(CONTROLLER_IP , PORT, &sockFd);
2
if (FAILED(result)) {
3
printf("Failed to open connection: %08X\n", result);
4
return -1;
5
}
6
printf("Connection opened successfully.\n");
Listing 4.8: Open connection to controller
This step opens a TCP socket connection to the controller. The user has to provide the
IP address that was assigned in the tablet for the control unit.
Step 2: Start b-CAP Service
1
result = bCap_ServiceStart(sockFd);
2
if (FAILED(result)) {
3
printf("Failed to start service: %08X\n", result);
4
bCap_Close(sockFd);
5
return -1;
6
}
7
printf("B-CAP service started.\n");
Listing 4.9: Start b-CAP service
This command enables the b-CAP service on the controller. It must be done before send-
ing any robot commands.
Step 3: Connect to the Controller
1
result = bCap_ControllerConnect(sockFd, "RC7", "CaoProv.DENSO.VRC",
CONTROLLER_IP , "", &lhController);
2
if (FAILED(result)) {
3
printf("Failed to connect to controller: %08X\n", result);
4
bCap_Close(sockFd);
5
return -1;
6
}
7
printf("Connected to controller.\n");
Listing 4.10: Connect to controller object
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
23
==PAGE:32==
This function connects to the robot controller named RC7 using DENSO’s virtual provider.
The connection also works if these parameters are not mentioned.
Step 4: Get robslave Task Handle
1
result = bCap_ControllerGetTask(sockFd, lhController , "robslave", "", &
lhTask);
2
if (FAILED(result)) {
3
printf("Failed to get task handle: %08X\n", result);
4
bCap_ControllerDisconnect(sockFd , lhController);
5
bCap_ServiceStop(sockFd);
6
bCap_Close(sockFd);
7
return -1;
8
}
9
printf("Task handle for 'robslave' obtained.\n");
Listing 4.11: Get robslave task handle
The robslave task must be running for remote control to work. This retrieves its handle.
Without this task running you cannot execute robot motion commands.
Step 5: Start robslave Task
1
result = bCap_TaskStart(sockFd, lhTask , 1, "");
// Mode 1 = Cycle
execution
2
if (FAILED(result)) {
3
printf("Failed to start 'robslave' task: %08X\n", result);
4
bCap_TaskRelease(sockFd, lhTask);
5
bCap_ControllerDisconnect(sockFd , lhController);
6
bCap_ServiceStop(sockFd);
7
bCap_Close(sockFd);
8
return -1;
9
}
10
printf("'robslave' task started.\n");
Listing 4.12: Start robslave task
This function starts the robslave task, the value 1 that is sent as a parameter means cycle
execution.
Step 6: Get Robot Handle
1
result = bCap_ControllerGetRobot(sockFd , lhController , "", "", &lhRobot);
2
if (FAILED(result)) {
3
printf("Failed to get robot handle: %08X\n", result);
4
bCap_ControllerDisconnect(sockFd , lhController);
5
bCap_Close(sockFd);
6
return -1;
7
}
8
printf("Robot handle obtained.\n");
Listing 4.13: Get robot object handle
This retrieves a handle to the robot itself, enabling control commands like movement or
speed.
Step 7: Control Pin values (e.g., Gripper Control)
1
uint32_t lhVar;
2
result = bCap_ControllerGetVariable(sockFd , lhController , "IO65", "", &
lhVar);
3
if (SUCCEEDED(result)) {
24
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:33==
4
short lValue = -1;
5
result = bCap_VariablePutValue(sockFd , lhVar, VT_BOOL , 1, &lValue);
// Set IO65 ON
6
if (FAILED(result)) {
7
printf("Failed to set variable value: %08X\n", result);
8
}
9
bCap_VariableRelease(sockFd , lhVar);
10
}
11
result = bCap_ControllerGetVariable(sockFd , lhController , "IO64", "", &
lhVar);
12
if (SUCCEEDED(result)) {
13
short lValue = -1;
// -1 (TRUE), 0 (FALSE) for VT_BOOL
14
result = bCap_VariablePutValue(sockFd , lhVar, VT_BOOL , 1, &lValue);
// Set IO64 ON
15
if (FAILED(result)) {
16
printf("Failed to set variable value: %08X\n", result);
17
}
18
bCap_VariableRelease(sockFd , lhVar);
19
}
Listing 4.14: Set I/O values
Digital I/O IO65 and IO64 are used to control the gripper. First, IO65 has to be true and
then by making IO64 true or false, you close or open the gripper.
Step 8: Turn Robot Motor ON
1
BCAP_VARIANT vntOption;
2
memset(&vntOption , 0, sizeof(BCAP_VARIANT));
// Always initialize the
variant
3
4
vntOption.Type = VT_I2;
// VT_I2 = 16-bit signed integer
5
vntOption.Arrays = 1;
// set to 1 if not an array
6
vntOption.Value.ShortValue = 1;
// 1 = Motor ON
7
8
BCAP_VARIANT vntResult;
9
memset(&vntResult , 0, sizeof(BCAP_VARIANT));
// Prepare result container
10
11
result = bCap_RobotExecute(sockFd , lhRobot , "Motor", &vntOption , &
vntResult);
12
printf("Motor on\n");
Listing 4.15: Turn motor ON
The Motor command expects a 16-bit integer. BCAP_VARIANT ensures that the type and
format match the controller’s expectations.
Step 9: Set External Speed
1
BCAP_VARIANT vntOption1;
2
memset(&vntOption1 , 0, sizeof(BCAP_VARIANT));
// Clear the structure
3
4
vntOption1.Type = VT_ARRAY | VT_R4;
// VT_R4 = 32-bit float (as
array)
5
vntOption1.Arrays = 1;
// set to 1 if not an array
6
vntOption1.Value.FloatValue = 10.0f;
// Set the speed
7
8
BCAP_VARIANT vntResult1;
9
memset(&vntResult1 , 0, sizeof(BCAP_VARIANT));
// Result variant
10
11
result = bCap_RobotExecute(sockFd , lhRobot , "ExtSpeed", &vntOption1 , &
vntResult1);
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
25
==PAGE:34==
12
printf("External speed set\n");
Listing 4.16: Set robot speed with ExtSpeed command
Again, based on the documentation, the user must be careful about the data type that
needs to be sent. Another thing that can be noticed is that with one command, you can
change multiple functions, like turning the motor on and changing the speed.
Step 10: Move to Position P1
1
result = bCap_RobotMove(sockFd, lhRobot , 1, "@E P1", "");
2
printf("Move to P1\n");
3
}
Listing 4.17: Move robot to taught position P1
This command moves the robot to the taught position labelled P1 using motion mode 1
(PTP - Point-to-Point). If the user wants the arm to move in straight lines, they should
change the mode to 2. Also, in the string parameter where P1 is mentioned, @E means
the arm will move until it actually reaches P1. For example, if the user uses @P instead
of @E, the arm may not reach the exact endpoint. This can be useful when executing
multiple movement commands consecutively, where for some commands you only want
the arm to pass near the target position rather than reach it precisely.
4.5
System Capabilities Overview
The current system is built on the b-CAP protocol and implemented in C, offering a
reliable and extensible interface for controlling the DENSO robotic arm. Communication
with the robot controller is established over TCP/IP on port 5007, using the functions
bCap_Open, bCap_ServiceStart, and bCap_ControllerConnect.
Key capabilities at this stage include:
• Remote Task Execution: The system retrieves and starts the essential "robslave"
task using bCap_ControllerGetTask and bCap_TaskStart, enabling remote oper-
ation of the robot.
• Motion Control: Movement is executed through bCap_RobotMove, supporting both
point-to-point (PTP) and linear motion modes. Motor activation and speed adjust-
ment are handled via bCap_RobotExecute with the "Motor" and "ExtSpeed" com-
mands.
• Gripper Control via I/O: The gripper is operated by manipulating digital I/O ports
(IO64 and IO65), using bCap_ControllerGetVariable and bCap_VariablePutValue.
• Type-Safe Communication: The use of the BCAP_VARIANT structure ensures ro-
bust, type-safe data exchange across all API functions.
• Structured Function Set: The API offers a clearly categorized set of functions for
connection handling, controller and robot operations, task management, and
variable access, as defined in the b-Cap.h header.
At this stage, the system delivers a reliable low-level control layer for the DENSO arm.
It forms the technical foundation for integrating higher-level automation workflows within
the broader experimental environment.
For a more in-depth understanding of the functions listed in the header file, the user can
consult the documentation, where each function is explained and details about what can
26
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:35==
be changed or not are provided. It should be noted that most of the functions presented in
the use case example are commonly used, while the others are rarely used or not relevant
for arm control.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
27
==PAGE:36==
5
ROS 2 Implementation
One of the main points of this project was to demonstrate that old technology can be
integrated with modern frameworks. The motivation comes from the need for flexible,
scalable, and open-source robotics middleware to enable modular control and high-level
integration with other systems. ROS 2 offers advanced real-time communication, security,
and many libraries that make perceiving the real world easier to manage. By providing
the base and exposing the main functionalities of the arm through ROS 2, this project lays
the groundwork for future developments such as integrating vision systems.
The ROS 2 implementation is built on top of the C library described in the previous chapter.
As mentioned earlier, the system follows a client-server model, where ROS 2 acts as the
client layer, providing a modern, distributed communication framework. It uses the b-CAP
library to communicate with the server running on the robot controller.
5.1
ROS 2 Architecture Overview
Figure 5.1: ROS 2 communication framework
28
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:37==
The architecture of the system is depicted in Figure 5.1. It illustrates how ROS 2 clients
can communicate with the Denso robot through several abstraction layers.
• At the top, a ROS 2 Client makes service calls, such as control the motor or move
the arm, by providing the correct message type. For each service there is a specific
structure for the message file. It include how the Request and the Response should
look like.
• These request are handled by the main node called BcapControllerNode
• The main node with the use of the b-cap library handles command encoding and
communication over TCP/IP.
• The DENSO controller receives these commands and send responses back through
the same path.
5.2
ROS 2 Workspace structure
The implementation follows the standard ROS 2 guidelines for project organization. Typ-
ically, in ROS 2, development begins by creating a workspace. The workspace contains
default folders such as src/, where the actual implementation resides. Below is the struc-
ture of the workspace used in this project:
1
src/￿￿￿
2
cap_client/￿￿￿￿
3
CMakeLists.txt￿￿￿￿
4
include/￿￿￿￿￿
5
cap_client/￿￿￿￿
6
package.xml￿￿￿￿
7
src/￿￿￿￿￿
8
bcap_controller_node.cpp￿￿￿￿
9
srv/￿￿￿￿
10
Connect.srv￿￿￿￿
11
ControllerGetVariable.srv￿￿￿￿
12
Disconnect.srv￿￿￿￿
13
GetHandles.srv￿￿￿￿
14
GripperControl.srv￿￿￿￿
15
HandleTask.srv￿￿￿￿
16
MotorControl.srv￿￿￿￿
17
MoveArm.srv￿￿￿￿
18
SetSpeed.srv￿￿￿
19
cap_library/￿￿￿
20
CMakeLists.txt￿￿￿
21
include/￿￿￿￿
22
cap_library/￿￿￿￿
23
b-Cap.h￿￿￿
24
package.xml￿￿￿
25
src/￿￿￿
26
b-Cap.c
cap_client/
This package serves as the ROS 2 interface for controlling the robot arm.
It import the C library (contained in cap_library) and exposes the robot’s functionalities
via ROS 2 services.
• CMakeLists.txt: The build script for the cap_client package. It defines how to
compile the code and links dependencies.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
29
==PAGE:38==
• include/cap_client/: Folder for header files. Currently empty, reserved for shared
declarations.
• package.xml: Provides metadata such as dependencies, version, and maintainer.
• src/bcap_controller_node.cpp: Implements the ROS 2 node that acts as a client
interface to the robot arm.
• srv/:Contains custom service definitions used by ROS 2 to expose robot function-
alities. Defines the request and response format for each service:
– Connect.srv
– Disconnect.srv
– GetHandles.srv
– SetSpeed.srv
– MoveArm.srv
– MotorControl.srv
– GripperControl.srv
– HandleTask.srv
– ControllerGetVariable.srv
cap_library/
This package encapsulates the b-CAP library implementation used to com-
municate with the robot controller.
• CMakeLists.txt: Build script for compiling the native C library.
• include/cap_library/b-Cap.h: Header file declaring b-CAP functions and inter-
faces.
• package.xml: ROS 2 metadata for the native library.
• src/b-Cap.c: Implements the low-level b-CAP protocol used to control the robot.
5.3
ROS 2 Service interface
Nodes are the fundamental building blocks of a ROS system. Each node is a separate
executable that performs computation and communicates with other nodes. Nodes can
publish messages to topics, subscribe to topics to receive data, or offer/request services.
Services are a communication mechanism between nodes based on a request-response
model. Unlike topics, which use a publisher-subscriber pattern for continuous data stream-
ing, services allow a node (the client) to send a request to another node (the server) and
wait for a response. This is useful for operations that require a specific action or data at a
single point in time, such as commanding a robot arm to move or to create a connection
to the arm.
The system implements nine custom services for robot control as presented in table 5.1,
each with defined request and response fields, as well as a specific purpose:
30
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:39==
Service
Request
Response
Connect.srv
ip_address (string)
success
(bool),
message
(string)
MotorControl.srv
command (int8) 1 for ON,
0 for OFF
success
(bool),
message
(string)
GripperControl.srv
command (int8)-1 for ON,
0 for OFF
success
(bool),
message
(string)
SetSpeed.srv
command (float)
success
(bool),
message
(string)
MoveArm.srv
command (string), mode
(int) 1 means PTP motion,
2 means Linear motion
success
(bool),
message
(string)
HandleTask.srv
option (int32)
success
(bool),
message
(string)
ControllerGetVariable.srv
variable_name (string)
value
(string),
value_type
(string), success (bool), mes-
sage (string)
Disconnect.srv
(empty)
success
(bool),
message
(string)
GetHandles.srv
(empty)
lh_controller
(uint32),
lh_robot
(uint32),
sock_fd
(int32)
Table 5.1: Summary of ROS 2 custom service definitions for robot control
Below it is shown how to call each service:
1
ros2 service call /bcap_connect cap_client/srv/Connect "{ip_address:
'192.168.50.2'}"
2
ros2 service call /bcap_motor_control cap_client/srv/MotorControl "{command:
1}"
3
ros2 service call /bcap_gripper_control cap_client/srv/GripperControl "{
command: -1}"
4
ros2 service call /bcap_handle_task cap_client/srv/HandleTask "{option: 1}"
5
ros2 service call /bcap_move_arm cap_client/srv/MoveArm "{mode: 2, command: '
@0 P0'}"
6
ros2 service call /bcap_speed_control cap_client/srv/SetSpeed "{command: 5}"
7
ros2 service call /bcap_get_variable cap_client/srv/ControllerGetVariable "{
variable_name: '@CURRENT_TRANS '}"
8
ros2 service call /bcap_disconnect cap_client/srv/Disconnect
5.4
BcapControllerNode implementation
The BcapControllerNode class implements all the core functionalities. First, it registers
all nine services and provides callback functions for each one.
In addition to the services, there is a function called checkExternalAutoMode, which en-
sures that the arm is in external mode before it can be controlled.
Most of the services behave exactly as their names suggest, with the exception of the
connect and disconnect services. When connecting, we do much more than just starting
the TCP communication, we also start the ROBSLAVE task, initialise the gripper, and per-
form additional setup. This allows users to control the arm immediately after connecting,
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
31
==PAGE:40==
without needing to carry out these tasks manually. Also when we disconnect, we close
all the features that were started when we connected.
In the code below, the callback function for the connect service will be explained as an
example. Since all other services are implemented in a similar manner, there is no need
to explain each individually.
1
void connect_callback(const std::shared_ptr <cap_client::srv::Connect::Request >
request ,
2
std::shared_ptr <cap_client::srv::Connect::Response > response) {
3
4
if (sockFd != -1) {
5
response ->message = "The controller is already connected , cannot
create a new connection";
6
response ->success = false;
7
} else {
8
std::string ip = request ->ip_address;
9
RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Connecting to DENSO Robot at %s...",
ip.c_str());
10
// Step 1: Open TCP connection
11
result = bCap_Open(ip.c_str(), 5007, &sockFd);
12
if (FAILED(result)) {
13
RCLCPP_ERROR(this->get_logger(), "Failed to open connection: %08X"
, result);
14
response ->message = "Failed to open connection";
15
response ->success = false;
16
return;
17
}
18
// Step 2: Start b-CAP service
19
result = bCap_ServiceStart(sockFd);
20
if (FAILED(result)) {
21
RCLCPP_ERROR(this->get_logger(), "Failed to Start bCap Service:
%08X", result);
22
response ->success = false;
23
response ->message = "Failed to Start bCap Service";
24
return;
25
}
26
// Step 3: Connect to controller
27
result = bCap_ControllerConnect(sockFd, "RC7", "CaoProv.DENSO.VRC",
28
ip.c_str(), "", &lhController);
29
if (FAILED(result)) {
30
RCLCPP_ERROR(this->get_logger(), "Failed to connect to controller:
%08X", result);
31
bCap_Close(sockFd);
32
response ->success = false;
33
response ->message = "Failed to connect to controller";
34
return;
35
}
36
// Step 4: Verify External Auto Mode
37
BCAP_VARIANT vntResult;
38
memset(&vntResult , 0, sizeof(vntResult));
39
result = bCap_ControllerExecute(sockFd, lhController , "GetAutoMode",
40
NULL, &vntResult);
41
if (FAILED(result)) {
42
RCLCPP_ERROR(this->get_logger(), "Failed to check controller mode:
%08X", result);
43
response ->success = false;
44
response ->message = "Failed to check controller mode.";
45
return;
46
}
47
int mode = vntResult.Value.LongValue;
48
if (mode != 2) {
32
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:41==
49
RCLCPP_ERROR(this->get_logger(),
50
"Controller is not in External Auto Mode. Current mode
: %d", mode);
51
response ->message = "Controller must be in External Auto Mode.";
52
response ->success = false;
53
cleanup_connection();
54
return;
55
}
56
// Step 5: Start robslave task
57
result = bCap_ControllerGetTask(sockFd , lhController , "robslave", "",
&lhTask);
58
if (FAILED(result)) {
59
RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Failed to get task handle: %08X",
result);
60
response ->message = "Failed to get task handle";
61
response ->success = false;
62
return;
63
}
64
result = bCap_TaskStart(sockFd , lhTask , 1, "");
65
if (FAILED(result)) {
66
RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Failed to start 'roboslave' task:
%08X", result);
67
response ->message = "Failed to start 'roboslave' task";
68
response ->success = false;
69
return;
70
}
71
72
// Step 6: Get robot handle
73
result = bCap_ControllerGetRobot(sockFd , lhController , "", "", &
lhRobot);
74
if (FAILED(result)) {
75
RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Failed to get robot handle: %08X"
, result);
76
response ->message = "Failed to get robot handle";
77
response ->success = false;
78
return;
79
}
80
// Step 7: Initialize gripper
81
uint32_t lhVar;
82
result = bCap_ControllerGetVariable(sockFd , lhController , "IO65", "",
&lhVar);
83
if (SUCCEEDED(result)) {
84
short lValue = -1;
85
result = bCap_VariablePutValue(sockFd , lhVar, VT_BOOL , 1, &lValue)
;
86
if (FAILED(result)) {
87
RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Failed to set variable value:
%08X", result);
88
response ->message = "Failed to set variable value";
89
response ->success = false;
90
}
91
bCap_VariableRelease(sockFd, lhVar);
92
}
93
94
response ->success = true;
95
response ->message = "Robot initialized correctly , all functionalities
should be available";
96
}
97
}
Listing 5.1: Connect Callback Function Implementation
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
33
==PAGE:42==
In order to run the ROS 2 implementation, you must start the main node using the following
command:
ros2 run cap_client bcap_controller_node
After launching the node, when the user calls the connect service, the following steps are
executed as outlined in the code:
1. Check if the system is already connected.
2. Open a TCP connection.
3. Start the b-CAP service.
4. Connect to the controller.
5. Verify that the controller is in External Auto Mode.
6. Start the robslave task.
7. Obtain the robot handle.
8. Initialise the gripper.
From the code, it is clear that the connect function uses the Connect.srv file to define
the structure of the request and response messages. The goal for every function was to
implement thorough error handling in order to provide detailed feedback whenever users
operate the robotic arm incorrectly or when a function fails for various reasons.
5.5
Current System Capabilities
At this stage of the development, users gain access to the functionalities described in
Chapter 4 through the use of ROS 2 services. This transition not only simplifies interaction
with the robotic arm but also establishes a robust foundation for future integration of vision-
based capabilities, enabled by the extensive library support within the ROS 2 ecosystem.
Essentially, the same control functionalities previously accessible through the low-level
C implementation are now exposed via high-level ROS 2 service calls, offering a more
intuitive and modular interaction model. Once the main ROS 2 node is launched, essential
functions from the original C library become available through service interfaces, reducing
the complexity of manual programming.
To further enhance usability, the ROS 2 services were designed to abstract multiple low-
level operations into single high-level commands. For instance, rather than requiring the
user to execute a series of individual steps,such as initiating a TCP connection, starting
the b-CAP service, and then connecting to the controller, the user can now simply invoke
a single connect service that encapsulates all these procedures. In this way, certain ser-
vices act as composites of multiple C library functions, streamlining the user experience
and minimizing potential errors during setup and execution.
A current limitation of this setup is its dependency on a specific operating system: it re-
quires a Linux distribution compatible with ROS 2 Humble, most notably Ubuntu 22.04.
While alternative distributions may offer partial compatibility, Ubuntu 22.04 provides the
most stable and well-documented environment for this configuration.
34
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:43==
6
SiLA 2 Integration
Due to the high-level access and modular control provided by ROS 2, developing a SiLA 2
driver becomes significantly more straightforward. ROS 2 abstracts many of the low-level
complexities involved in controlling the robotic arm, allowing the SiLA 2 driver to interface
directly with well-defined service endpoints. This greatly facilitates the integration of the
arm into a broader laboratory automation environment, enabling seamless communication
with other devices through the standardised SiLA 2 protocol.
There are several approaches a developer can take to create a SiLA 2 driver. In this case,
the implementation is built using the UniteLabs Component Development Kit (CDK), which
provides a robust and standardised framework for developing components in laboratory
automation.
6.1
SiLA 2 Architecture Overview
Figure 6.1: SiLA 2 driver communication
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
35
==PAGE:44==
In Figure 6.1, the workflow illustrates how the SiLA 2 driver communicates with the rest
of the system. A SiLA client, such as a web application or a Python script using the SiLA
library initiates a request. This request triggers a chain of actions through the system
components, which operate as follows:
1. The SiLA client sends a request to the SiLA 2 driver.
2. The SiLA 2 driver invokes the appropriate SiLA feature.
3. The SiLA feature calls the corresponding service.
4. The ROS 2 service calls the main node called BcapControllerNode
5. BcapControllerNode issues b-CAP commands using the C-based library.
6. The b-CAP commands are transmitted to the robot’s control unit.
7. The control unit executes the command and sends a response.
8. The response is passed back through the same sequence:
• From the control unit to the b-CAP layer,
• Then to the ROS 2 node,
• Back to the SiLA service,
• And finally to the SiLA client.
6.2
Driver Structure
As mentioned above, the driver was created by following the UniteLabs documentation.
The development process begins with the installation of two essential libraries: cruft and
poetry. These tools facilitate the creation of a default project template and provide the
necessary infrastructure for running the application. Cruft is used for project templating,
while poetry handles dependency management and project execution.
After the initial setup, the template generates a comprehensive file structure. However, for
the purpose of adjusting drivers and developing new features, developers primarily focus
on the src directory. This directory contains the core implementation files and follows a
specific organizational structure:
.
￿￿￿unitelabs
￿￿￿denso_arm
￿￿￿bcapcontrol_impl.py
￿￿￿features
￿
￿￿￿bcapcontrol_base.py
￿
￿￿￿__pycache__
￿￿￿__init__.py
￿￿￿__main__.py
￿￿￿__pycache__
￿￿￿bcapcontrol_impl.cpython-310.pyc
￿￿￿__init__.cpython-310.pyc
￿￿￿__main__.cpython-310.pyc
The two most important files for feature development are bcapcontrol_impl.py and
bcapcontrol_base.py, which were created after the project creation. The base file serves
as the foundation where features are defined and their interfaces are specified.
36
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:45==
6.2.1
Feature Definition in the Base Class
The bcapcontrol_base.py file contains the abstract base class that defines the structure
and interface of the SiLA 2 features. This class inherits from sila.Feature and uses the
Abstract Base Class (ABC) metaclass to enforce the implementation of required methods.
In the code below the main structure of the class can be seen together with the connect
function.
1
class BcapControlBase(sila.Feature , metaclass=abc.ABCMeta):
2
"""
3
This Feature provides ROS2-based control of a DENSO robot using the bCAP
interface.
4
"""
5
6
def __init__(self):
7
super().__init__(
8
originator="io.unitelabs",
9
category="robotcontrol",
10
version="0.1",
11
maturity_level="Draft",
12
)
13
14
async def bcap_connect(self, ip_address: str) -> tuple[bool,str]:
15
"""
16
Establishes connection with the robot controller.
17
18
:param ip_address: IP address of the robot arm.
19
:return:
20
- Success: Indicates whether the connection was successful.
21
- Message: Additional information or error message.
22
"""
Listing 6.1: Feature Base Class Definition
From the underlying implementation, it is clear that defining new functions is quite straight-
forward for the developer. You simply need to define the function, provide a brief descrip-
tion, specify the parameter types, and define the type of the returned response.
6.2.2
Feature Implementation
After defining the structure of the functions in the base class, the next step is to implement
their functionalities. The implementation file combines ROS 2 libraries with SiLA 2 proto-
cols to create a bridge between the standardized laboratory automation interface and the
robot-specific control system.
The implementation approach follows a service-oriented architecture where ROS 2 ser-
vice clients are instantiated first, and then these clients are used from within the SiLA 2
features. This design pattern ensures clean separation of frameworks and maintains the
modularity of the system.
For each function, you can add multiple tags, such as whether it is a command or a prop-
erty, and whether it is observable or not. In the case of our drivers, we only define com-
mands, and all of them are unobservable, meaning no status updates are provided until
the command has been fully executed. You can also add constraints to the parameters;
if a value outside the defined range is provided, an error will be triggered.
In the code below, the main libraries and the implementation Class together with the con-
nect function are presented.
1
import rclpy
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
37
==PAGE:46==
2
from rclpy.node import Node
3
import typing
4
5
from unitelabs.cdk import sila
6
7
from .features.bcapcontrol_base import BcapControlBase
8
9
from cap_client.srv import MotorControl , GripperControl , SetSpeed , MoveArm ,
HandleTask , ControllerGetVariable , Connect , Disconnect
10
11
# Custom exception for bCAP-related errors
12
class BcapException(Exception):
13
"""Exception raised for bCAP control errors."""
14
pass
15
16
class BcapControlImpl(BcapControlBase , Node):
17
"""
18
Implementation of the BcapControl feature using ROS2 bCAP interface.
19
"""
20
21
def __init__(self):
22
# Initialize sila.Feature
23
super().__init__()
24
25
# Initialize ROS2 Node
26
if not rclpy.ok():
27
rclpy.init()
28
Node.__init__(self, "bcap_control_node")
29
30
# Create ROS2 service clients for each operation
31
self.client_connect = self.create_client(Connect , "bcap_connect")
32
self.client_motor = self.create_client(MotorControl , "
bcap_motor_control")
33
self.client_gripper = self.create_client(GripperControl , "
bcap_gripper_control")
34
self.client_speed = self.create_client(SetSpeed , "bcap_speed_control")
35
self.client_move = self.create_client(MoveArm , "bcap_move_arm")
36
self.client_handle_task = self.create_client(HandleTask , "
bcap_handle_task")
37
self.client_get_variable = self.create_client(ControllerGetVariable , "
bcap_get_variable")
38
self.client_disconnect = self.create_client(Disconnect , "
bcap_disconnect")
39
40
def __hash__(self):
41
return id(self)
42
43
@sila.UnobservableCommand()
44
@sila.Response(name="Success")
45
@sila.Response(name="Message")
46
async def bcap_connect(self, ip_address: str) -> tuple[bool,str]:
47
if not self.client_connect.wait_for_service(timeout_sec=3.0):
48
return False, "Service not available"
49
request = Connect.Request()
50
request.ip_address = ip_address
51
future = self.client_connect.call_async(request)
52
rclpy.spin_until_future_complete(self, future)
53
result = future.result()
54
if result is None:
55
raise BcapException("Connection failed: No response from service")
56
return result.success , result.message
38
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:47==
Listing 6.2: Feature Implementation Class
The last thing the developer has to do in order to have a driver running is to register the
implementation class in the init file.
6.3
Summary of Achieved Capabilities
At this stage, a fully functional SiLA 2 driver has been developed, integrating both the
low-level C library and the ROS 2 services. This configuration offers users a simplified
and accessible interface for executing commands and incorporating the robotic arm into
automated workflows.
Figure 6.2: Exposed robotic arm features as seen by SiLA 2-compatible clients.
As illustrated in Figure 6.2, the robotic arm’s functionalities are exposed as a unified SiLA 2
feature, which can be detected and utilised by any web interface or software supporting the
SiLA 2 protocol. This feature aggregates all essential commands required to control the
arm. Each command is internally mapped to its corresponding ROS 2 service, ensuring
seamless integration between the SiLA 2 driver and the underlying control infrastructure.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
39
==PAGE:48==
7
Docker and Raspberry Pi Setup
Docker is a platform for developing, shipping, and running applications in isolated envi-
ronments called containers. Containers are lightweight, portable, and self-contained units
that package an application along with all its dependencies, libraries, and configuration
files. This approach ensures that the application runs consistently across different com-
puting environments, from development machines to production servers.
A Docker image is a read-only template that contains the application code, runtime envi-
ronment, system tools, libraries, and settings. Images are built from a Dockerfile, which
contains instructions for creating the image. When a Docker image is run, it becomes a
container, a running instance of the image.
The Raspberry Pi is a series of single-board computers developed by the Raspberry Pi
Foundation, designed to promote computer science education and provide an affordable
platform for various computing projects. These credit-card-sized computers feature ARM-
based processors and run Linux-based operating systems, making them ideal for embed-
ded systems, IoT applications, and educational purposes.
7.1
Integration of Docker and Raspberry pi
A SiLA 2 driver has been developed that enables seamless integration of the robotic arm
into laboratory workflows. However, a key challenge remains: the setup still requires the
manual execution of several commands to initiate operation. Specifically, the ROS 2 node
must be launched, the appropriate environment activated, and additional configuration
steps performed to ensure the system functions correctly.
To enhance usability and streamline deployment, the decision was made to automate
this process by deploying the entire system on a Raspberry Pi. This approach allows all
required components to initialise automatically upon system boot, eliminating the need
for user intervention. Given that the ROS 2 framework depends on a specific version
of Linux, while the Raspberry Pi typically runs the Raspbian operating system, Docker
was selected as the deployment solution. Docker enables the creation of a containerised
environment in which the appropriate Linux distribution and ROS 2 version can be reliably
executed. The following image was selected for deployment:
docker pull ros:humble-perception-jammy
The selected Docker image incorporates the necessary Linux distribution and ROS 2 ver-
sions, facilitating seamless integration of the previously developed system components.
Following the deployment of the image, the ROS 2 workspace and SiLA driver were cloned
and configured in accordance with the instructions detailed in the accompanying README
file hosted in the project’s GitHub repository [20], which contains the complete source
code. Upon successful setup of the workspace, an automated startup configuration was
implemented to ensure the system initialises correctly upon boot.
The initial task involved creating a bash script that encapsulates all essential commands
required to operate the robotic arm:
1
#!/bin/bash
2
# Wait for Docker
3
until docker info > /dev/null 2>&1; do
40
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:49==
4
echo "Waiting for Docker to start..."
5
sleep 2
6
done
7
8
# Start ROS container
9
sudo docker start ros_container &
10
sleep 5
11
12
# Run ROS setup and node
13
sudo docker exec -i ros_container bash -c "
14
cd /home/Automated -HTS-System/instruments/robot_arm_system/ros2_ws &&
15
source /opt/ros/humble/setup.bash &&
16
source install/setup.bash &&
17
ros2 run cap_client bcap_controller_node
18
" &
19
20
# Run SiLA driver
21
sudo docker exec -i ros_container bash -c "
22
cd /home/Automated -HTS-System/instruments/robot_arm_system/ros2_ws &&
23
source /opt/ros/humble/setup.bash &&
24
source install/setup.bash &&
25
cd .. &&
26
cd denso-arm &&
27
source robot_env/bin/activate &&
28
/root/.local/bin/poetry run connector start -v
29
" &
Listing 7.1: Startup Script for Robot System
This script first waits for the Docker daemon to start by checking docker info in a loop.
Once Docker is ready, it starts the container named ros_container. After a short delay,
it executes the required commands within the container to launch both the ROS node
(bcap_controller_node) and the SiLA driver. The ROS environment is properly sourced
before execution, and the Python virtual environment used by Poetry is also activated
before starting the connector.
Subsequently, a systemd service named start_robot.service was created and enabled
to automate the execution of the script during each system startup of the Raspberry Pi.
1
[Unit]
2
Description=Start robot automation at boot
3
After=network.target network -online.target docker.service
4
Requires=docker.service
5
6
[Service]
7
Type=simple
8
ExecStart=/home/arm/start_system_arm.sh
9
RemainAfterExit=yes
10
TimeoutStartSec=300
11
Restart=always
12
User=arm
13
14
[Install]
15
WantedBy=multi-user.target
Listing 7.2: Systemd Service Configuration
This configuration defines a simple systemd service. Systemd is the init system and ser-
vice manager for Linux operating systems, responsible for starting and managing system
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
41
==PAGE:50==
services during boot and runtime. It provides a standardised way to configure, start, stop,
and monitor services, ensuring proper system initialisation and service dependencies.
The service configuration specifies dependencies on both the network and Docker ser-
vices to ensure they are initialised before our script runs. The ExecStart line points to
the previously created bash script, and Restart=always guarantees that the service will
attempt to restart in case of failure. The service runs under the arm user.
42
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:51==
8
Web Interface for Automated Workflows
After registering the SiLA driver on the Raspberry Pi, the system becomes fully operational
approximately two minutes after boot, with no additional user configuration required to
operate the robotic arm.
To address the need for an accessible method of creating automated workflows, a web
interface was developed. Although it shares features with existing laboratory automa-
tion tools, this interface introduces enhancements specifically designed to accommodate
users without programming experience.
The web application was implemented using three core technologies: Python for the back-
end logic, and JavaScript and HTML for the frontend. It is not deployed publicly but runs
locally within the laboratory network and is accessible via port 5000.
8.1
Web Interface Overview
Figure 8.1: Main Page
Figure 8.1 shows the initial page that loads when the application is running. On the home-
page, the server list is displayed on the left, and Jupyter notebooks are shown on the right.
Users can use the sila2.client library within these notebooks to interact with connected de-
vices.
Each server card displays the server’s address, making it easy to identify where to con-
nect. The list of servers is not updated automatically. To discover available devices, users
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
43
==PAGE:52==
need to click the Refresh All button. This button sends a broadcast message to identify
all devices on the network that support SiLA communication.
On the left side of the page, there is a navigation panel for switching between pages.
Pressing the Refresh All button will also update the discovered devices across all pages
of the application.
When starting the web page, the developer must also launch the Jupyter Notebook server
in order to access the notebooks. This web page was built as a prototype, so features such
as saving workflows to a database or managing user accounts were not implemented.
Instead, workflows are saved locally in a folder.
Figure 8.2: Device Page
When the user clicks the Devices button in the navigation panel, a page displaying all
active servers is shown first. If the user then clicks on a specific server, a page similar
to Figure 8.2 will appear. This page displays all the executable features of the selected
server. Additionally, a workflow log is provided to show the results of executed commands.
In this example, the server includes basic commands such as printing or changing the
server name. When the Server Name function was executed, the server name was suc-
cessfully returned and displayed in the workflow log.
44
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:53==
Figure 8.3: Workflow Page
The final feature of the web page is shown in Figure 8.3. At the top, we can see the Saved
Workflows section, where previously saved workflows can be loaded into the project. After
loading a workflow, the user can still modify the parameters of its features.
Below the saved workflows, there is a search bar and a list of all features from all active
drivers. These features can be added to the Workflow Builder panel. Within this panel,
there are several buttons available: one to run all loaded commands, one to stop the
workflow, and others to save or clear the workspace.
It’s important to note that the Stop button does not cancel the currently running operation;
it only prevents the remaining commands from being sent.
Finally, on the right side of the page, there is the Execution Results log, where the outputs
of the executed functions are displayed.
In Figure 8.4, we can see a workflow that was executed using two drivers. One of the
drivers provides basic commands, while the other runs on a Raspberry Pi and controls an
Arduino with an LED. Two workflows were loaded, combining features from both drivers,
along with an additional function that was added separately. On the right side of the page,
the Execution Results can be seen.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 8.4: Executed Workflow
8.2
Backend Implmenetation
The backend is built using Flask, a lightweight Python web framework selected for its sim-
plicity and flexibility. The application integrates the SiLA2 protocol through the sila2.client
library, enabling standardized communication with laboratory devices.
Key Technologies used:
• Flask: Web framework for RESTful API endpoints
• SiLA2 CLient: Standardized device communication protocol
• Zeroconf: Automatic device discovery on local networks
• JSON: Data serialization for API communication
• lxml: XML parsing for Feature Description Language (FDL)
• atexit: Python module for cleanup operations
8.2.1
Device Discovery
The code below presents the main function used for discovery.
1
def discover_sila_devices(timeout=3):
2
global zeroconf , listener , cached_devices
3
4
if zeroconf:
5
zeroconf.close()
6
if listener:
7
listener.cleanup()
8
9
zeroconf = Zeroconf()
10
listener = SilaListener()
46
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:55==
11
ServiceBrowser(zeroconf , "_sila._tcp.local.", listener)
12
sleep(timeout)
13
zeroconf.close()
14
15
cached_devices = listener.devices
16
return cached_devices
Listing 8.1: Discover SiLA Devices Function
Discovery Process:
• Resource Cleanup: Ensures a clean state before starting the discovery process.
• Zeroconf Initialization: Creates a new Zeroconf service instance.
• Listener Creation: Instantiates a SilaListener to handle discovered devices.
• Service Browser: Begins searching for _sila._tcp.local. services.
• Timeout Management: Waits for the specified duration to receive responses from
devices.
• Cache Update: Stores the discovered devices in a cache for later use by the appli-
cation.
At step 3 in the discovery process the SilaListener class is used to maintain the state for
discovered devices and manages network discovery resources.
1
class SilaListener:
2
def __init__(self):
3
self.devices = []
# Stores discovered device information
4
self.zeroconf = None
# Zeroconf service instance
5
self.browser = None
# Service browser instance
Listing 8.2: SilaListener Class Initialization
Proper resource management is critical to prevent memory leaks and ensure network
connections are properly closed:
1
def cleanup(self):
2
if self.browser:
3
self.browser.cancel()
# Stop active service discovery
4
if self.zeroconf:
5
self.zeroconf.close()
# Close network connections
6
self.devices = []
# Clear device cache
Listing 8.3: Resource Cleanup Method
The SilaListener class implements three key callback methods that are automatically
invoked by the ServiceBrowser when network events occur.
Service Addition
The add_service method processes newly discovered SiLA services:
1
def add_service(self, zeroconf , service_type , name):
2
info = zeroconf.get_service_info(service_type , name)
3
if not info:
4
return
5
6
addresses = info.parsed_addresses()
7
if not addresses:
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
47
==PAGE:56==
8
return
9
ip, port = addresses[0], info.port
Listing 8.4: Service Addition Handler
The process flow involves:
1. Service Detection: Receives notification when new SiLA service is found
2. Information Retrieval: Extracts service details (IP, port, metadata)
3. Address Resolution: Parses network addresses from service information
4. Validation: Ensures service information is complete
Device Connection & Status Verification
After discovering a service, the system attempts to establish a connection and extract
device capabilities:
1
client = None
2
status = "Offline"
3
server_name = name
4
features = []
5
6
try:
7
client = SilaClient(ip, port, insecure=True)
8
server_name = client.SiLAService.ServerName.get()
9
status = "Online"
10
11
for fname, feature in client._features.items():
12
features.append(self.extract_feature_details(feature , fname))
13
except Exception as e:
14
logging.warning(f"Failed to connect to {name} at {ip}:{port} — {e}")
15
if client:
16
try:
17
client.close()
18
except:
19
pass
Listing 8.5: Device Connection Process
The connection process includes:
1. Client Creation: Establishes SiLA2 connection to device
2. Server Name Retrieval: Gets actual device name from SiLA service
3. Feature Discovery: Iterates through all available features
4. Error Handling: Gracefully handles connection failures
5. Resource Cleanup: Ensures connections are properly closed
Device Information Storage
Discovered devices are stored in order to have access to them in the frontend implemen-
tation:
1
device_id = len(self.devices)
2
3
device_info = {
4
"id": device_id ,
48
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:57==
5
"name": server_name ,
6
"address": ip,
7
"port": port,
8
"status": status,
9
"features": features
10
}
11
self.devices.append(device_info)
Listing 8.6: Device Information Structure
Device features are extracted by parsing the XML Feature Description Language docu-
ments provided by SiLA2-compliant devices.
XML Feature Extraction
The parsing process begins with XML namespace setup and feature data structure initial-
isation:
1
def extract_feature_details(self, feature , fname):
2
fdl_node = feature._fdl_node
3
ns = {"sila": "http://www.sila-standard.org"}
4
5
feature_data = {"name": fname, "functions": [], "properties": []}
Listing 8.7: FDL Parsing Initialization
Command Extraction Process
Commands are extracted using XPath queries to find all Command elements in the FDL:
1
for command in fdl_node.xpath(".//sila:Command", namespaces=ns):
2
cmd_name = command.find("sila:Identifier", namespaces=ns).text
3
params = command.findall("sila:Parameter", namespaces=ns)
4
param_types = []
5
6
for param in params:
7
pname = param.find("sila:Identifier", namespaces=ns).text
8
dtype = param.find(".//sila:Basic", namespaces=ns)
9
dtype_text = dtype.text if dtype is not None else "Unknown"
10
param_types.append({
11
"name": pname,
12
"type": dtype_text
13
})
14
15
feature_data["functions"].append({
16
"name": cmd_name ,
17
"param_type": param_types
18
})
Listing 8.8: Command Extraction
The parsing logic involves:
1. XPath Queries: Uses XPath to find all Command elements
2. Parameter Analysis: Extracts parameter names and types
3. Type Resolution: Maps SiLA2 data types to application types
4. Data Structure: Creates standardized command representation
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
49
==PAGE:58==
Property Extraction
Read-only device properties are extracted for monitoring purposes:
1
for prop in fdl_node.xpath(".//sila:Property", namespaces=ns):
2
prop_name = prop.find("sila:Identifier", namespaces=ns).text
3
dtype = prop.find(".//sila:Basic", namespaces=ns)
4
feature_data["properties"].append({
5
"name": prop_name ,
6
})
Listing 8.9: Property Extraction
The discovery system handles the complete lifecycle of network services, including up-
dates and removals.
Service Update
When device information changes, the system updates the device list:
1
def update_service(self, zeroconf , service_type , name):
2
self.devices = [d for d in self.devices if d['name'] != name]
3
self.add_service(zeroconf , service_type , name)
Listing 8.10: Service Update Handler
This method handles device reconnection or configuration changes by removing the old
entry and adding updated information.
Service Removal
When devices go offline, they are automatically removed from the device list:
1
def remove_service(self, zeroconf , service_type , name):
2
self.devices = [d for d in self.devices if d['name'] != name]
Listing 8.11: Service Removal Handler
All these methods are automatically called when the Refresh All button is pressed to
discover the devices on the network.
8.2.2
Core API Endpoints Design
API endpoints refer to specific Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) that serve as access
points to the functionalities of a web service or application. In the context of the devel-
oped web interface, multiple endpoints were designed to handle distinct operational tasks,
ranging from device discovery to workflow execution and management. A comprehensive
overview of all available endpoints is presented in Table 8.1.
50
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:59==
Endpoint
Method
Purpose
Description
/
GET
Homepage
Renders the main application
interface with server list and
Jupyter notebooks
/devices
GET
Device List
Displays all discovered SiLA
devices with their status and
connection details
/server_workflow/<int:server_id>
GET
Server
Workflow
Individual device workflow in-
terface showing available fea-
tures and execution log
/builder
GET
Workflow
Builder
Main
workflow
construction
interface
with
drag-and-drop
functionality
/execute
POST
Single Com-
mand
Executes individual commands
on specific devices with param-
eter validation
/save_workflow
POST
Workflow
Persistence
Saves workflow definitions to
JSON files without execution
/refresh_devices
POST
Device
Dis-
covery
Triggers manual device discov-
ery and updates the cached de-
vice list
/list_saved_workflows
GET
Workflow
Retrieval
Returns list of all saved work-
flows with metadata
/saved_workflows/<path:filename>
GET
Workflow
Loading
Serves specific workflow JSON
files for loading into the builder
/delete_workflow/<path:filename>
DELETE Workflow
Deletion
Removes workflow files from
the saved_workflows directory
/rename_workflow
POST
Workflow
Renaming
Updates
workflow
metadata
and filename while preserving
content
Table 8.1: Complete API Endpoints Overview
The /execute endpoint is the core of the system, handling complex device communication
with parameter validation, type conversion, and SiLA2 client management. In contrast,
the other endpoints serve simpler UI purposes, displaying device information, managing
workflow files, and refreshing device discovery. While /execute performs the actual lab-
oratory device control, the remaining endpoints primarily support the web interface and
data management functions.
The endpoint accepts a JSON payload with the following structure:
1
{
2
"server_name": "string",
3
"feature_name": "string",
4
"command_name": "string",
5
"param_values": ["value1", "value2", ...]
6
}
Listing 8.12: Execute Endpoint Request Format
• server_name: The name of the target SiLA2 device
• feature_name: Name of the device feature containing the command
• command_name: Specific command to execute
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
51
==PAGE:60==
• param_values: Array of parameter values in the order defined by the command
The /execute endpoint implements a multi-stage workflow to ensure robust command
execution:
1. Parameter Validation
The first stage validates if there is a server name provide in the json:
1
@app.route('/execute', methods=['POST'])
2
def execute():
3
data = request.get_json() or {}
4
server_name = data.get('server_name')
5
if not server_name:
6
return jsonify(success=False, error="No server name provided")
Listing 8.13: Request Parsing and Validation
2. Device Discovery and Lookup
The endpoint searches for the target device using the provided server name:
1
device = next((s for s in cached_devices if s['name'] == server_name),
None)
2
if device is None:
3
return jsonify(success=False, error=f"Unknown server name: {
server_name}")
Listing 8.14: Device Lookup Logic
3. SiLA2 Client Connection
The system establishes a connection to the target device:
1
try:
2
client = SilaClient(device['address'], device['port'], insecure=True)
3
feature_name = data.get('feature_name', '')
4
command_name = data.get('command_name', '')
5
params = data.get('param_values', []) or []
Listing 8.15: Client Connection
4. Feature and Command Validation
The system validates that the specified feature and command exist on the target device:
1
feature = client._features.get(feature_name)
2
if feature is None:
3
return jsonify(success=False, error=f"Feature '{feature_name}' not
found")
4
5
command = getattr(feature , command_name , None)
6
if command is None:
7
return jsonify(success=False, error=f"Command '{command_name}' not
found in feature '{feature_name}'")
Listing 8.16: Feature and Command Validation
5. Parameter Type Resolution
The system determines the expected parameter types for the command:
52
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:61==
1
param_types = []
2
for f in device['features']:
3
if f['name'] == feature_name:
4
for func in f['functions']:
5
if func['name'] == command_name:
6
param_types = [p['type'] for p in func['param_type']]
7
break
8
break
Listing 8.17: Parameter Type Resolution
6. Parameter Type Conversion
The system converts parameters to their expected types using the convert_param_to_type
function:
1
converted_params = []
2
for i, param in enumerate(params):
3
param_type = param_types[i] if i < len(param_types) else "String"
4
converted_params.append(convert_param_to_type(param, param_type))
Listing 8.18: Parameter Type Conversion
The convert_param_to_type function handles type conversion:
1
def convert_param_to_type(param_value , param_type):
2
if param_value is None:
3
return None
4
5
try:
6
if param_type == "String":
7
return str(param_value)
8
elif param_type == "Integer":
9
return int(param_value)
10
elif param_type == "Boolean":
11
if isinstance(param_value , str):
12
return param_value.lower() == "true"
13
return bool(param_value)
14
elif param_type == "Float":
15
return float(param_value)
16
else:
17
return param_value
18
except (ValueError , TypeError):
19
return param_value
Listing 8.19: Parameter Type Conversion Function
7. Command Execution
The actual command execution is performed with proper error handling:
1
result = command.get(*converted_params) if hasattr(command , 'get')
else command(*converted_params)
2
return jsonify(success=True, result=str(result))
3
except Exception as e:
4
return jsonify(success=False, error=str(e))
5
finally:
6
try:
7
client.close()
8
except:
9
pass
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
53
==PAGE:62==
Listing 8.20: Command Execution Logic
8.3
Frontend Implementation
The frontend is built using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to provide an intuitive user in-
terface for workflow creation and device management. The interface is designed to be
accessible to users with no programming experience while still offering advanced func-
tionality for users with experience in the programming field.
8.3.1
Technology Stack
The frontend utilises standard web technologies:
• HTML5: Semantic markup for page structure and accessibility
• CSS: Responsive design with modern styling and animations
• JavaScript: Dynamic functionality and API communication
• Sortable.js: Drag-and-drop functionality for workflow construction
• Fetch API: Asynchronous communication with backend endpoints
In the snippets of code below, some of the more important functions are presented:
The frontend dynamically updates the available commands list based on discovered de-
vices:
1
function updateCommandsList(servers) {
2
const commandsList = document.getElementById('commandsList ');
3
const template = document.getElementById('command -template ');
4
5
commandsList.innerHTML = '';
6
7
servers.forEach(server => {
8
const serverSection = document.createElement('div');
9
serverSection.className = 'mb-3';
10
serverSection.innerHTML = `<h6 class="border-bottom pb-2">${server.name}</
h6>`;
11
12
server.features.forEach(feature => {
13
feature.functions?.forEach(func => {
14
const command = template.content.cloneNode(true);
15
const card = command.querySelector('.command -item ');
16
const title = card.querySelector('.card-title ');
17
const details = card.querySelector('.text-muted ');
18
const addButton = card.querySelector('.add-command ');
19
20
title.textContent = func.name;
21
details.textContent = `${feature.name} (${server.name})`;
22
23
const commandData = {
24
serverName: server.name,
25
featureName: feature.name,
26
commandName: func.name,
27
paramTypes: func.param_type
28
};
29
30
addButton.dataset.commandData = JSON.stringify(commandData);
31
addButton.addEventListener('click', () => addWorkflowStep(commandData)
);
54
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:63==
32
33
serverSection.appendChild(command);
34
});
35
});
36
37
commandsList.appendChild(serverSection);
38
});
Listing 8.21: Command List Update Function
Workflow Construction System
The workflow builder implements a drag-and-drop interface using Sortable.js:
1
function initializeWorkflowBuilder() {
2
// Initialize sortable for individual steps
3
new Sortable(workflowContainer , {
4
group: 'workflow -steps',
5
animation: 150,
6
onEnd: function(evt) {
7
updateWorkflowOrder();
8
}
9
});
10
11
// Initialize sortable for workflow containers
12
new Sortable(workflowsContainer , {
13
group: 'workflows ',
14
animation: 150,
15
onEnd: function(evt) {
16
updateWorkflowOrder();
17
}
18
});
19
}
Listing 8.22: Workflow Drag-and-Drop Setup
Command Execution Interface
Individual command execution is handled through the execute endpoint:
1
function executeStep(button) {
2
const stepCard = button.closest('.workflow -step ');
3
const data = JSON.parse(stepCard.dataset.stepData);
4
5
const parameters = Array.from(stepCard.querySelectorAll('.param-input ')).map
(input => {
6
const value = input.value.trim();
7
if (/^(true|false)$/i.test(value)) {
8
return value.toLowerCase() === 'true ';
9
}
10
if (!isNaN(value) && value !== '') {
11
return Number(value);
12
}
13
return value || null;
14
});
15
16
fetch('/execute ', {
17
method: 'POST',
18
headers: {
19
'Content -Type': 'application/json'
20
},
21
body: JSON.stringify({
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
55
==PAGE:64==
22
server_name: data.serverName ,
23
feature_name: data.featureName ,
24
command_name: data.commandName ,
25
param_values: parameters
26
})
27
})
28
.then(response => response.json())
29
.then(result => {
30
stepCard.classList.add(result.success ? 'execution -success ' : 'execution -
error ');
31
showStepResult(data.commandName , parameters , result);
32
});
33
}
Listing 8.23: Step Execution Function
The workflow builder interface uses HTML structure with Bootstrap CSS classes to create
a three-column layout:
1
<div class="container -fluid">
2
<div class="row">
3
<div class="col-md-3 bg-light border -end vh-100 overflow -auto">
4
<!-- Left column: Available Commands -->
5
</div>
6
<div class="col-md-6 vh-100" id="workflow -canvas">
7
<!-- Middle column: Workflow Builder -->
8
</div>
9
<div class="col-md-3 bg-light border -start vh-100 overflow -auto">
10
<!-- Right column: Execution Results -->
11
</div>
12
</div>
13
</div>
Listing 8.24: Main Layout Structure
The HTML structure consists of nested <div> elements, while the CSS classes (Bootstrap
framework) provide the styling and layout behavior:
• container-fluid: Bootstrap class for full-width container
• row: Bootstrap class for grid row
• col-md-3: Bootstrap class for responsive column (25% width)
• col-md-6: Bootstrap class for responsive column (50% width)
• vh-100: Bootstrap utility class for viewport height
• overflow-auto: Bootstrap utility class for scrollable content
• bg-light: Bootstrap class for light background
• border-end/border-start: Bootstrap classes for borders
This creates a fixed-height, three-column layout where users can browse available com-
mands on the left, build workflows in the center, and view execution results on the right.
8.4
Functional Milestones
This chapter concludes the implementation section of the master’s thesis project. It is
important to note that not all parts of the code are presented here, as including the entire
56
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:65==
codebase would be excessively extensive. Instead, the most significant and representa-
tive components from each implementation chapter have been selected for presentation.
For further details and comprehensive code analysis, the project’s GitHub repository is
available at [20]. The repository contains instructions for recreating the setup and in-
stalling all necessary components required to operate the robotic arm. Additionally, it
includes SiLA drivers for the other devices intended to interact with the robotic arm.
From an implementation perspective, this represents the final milestone of the project.
By leveraging all the technologies discussed in the preceding chapters, the system now
comprises a robotic arm that can be seamlessly integrated with other devices via the SiLA
web interface. At this stage, it is possible to test equipment and create workflows capable
of simulating meaningful experimental procedures.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
57
==PAGE:66==
9
Discussion and Future work
The main objective of this project was to show that a legacy robotic system could be
successfully integrated into a modern laboratory environment using tools like ROS 2 and
SiLA 2. The developed system, consisting of a Denso robotic arm, ROS 2 middleware,
and a SiLA 2 interface, together with a custom-built web page, proved to be capable of
executing automated workflows with minimal user intervention.
The robotic arm was successfully controlled via a chain of technologies, from the web
interface to SiLA, then accessing the ROS 2 services, which called the b-cap library im-
plemented in C, that communicated directly with the robot controller. The end-to-end flow
worked reliably for all the features that were implemented for the arm system.
The software system is designed to be easily portable across different platforms. For the
web interface, the developer is required to install only a minimal set of libraries before
the application is fully operational. The web page is compatible with all major operating
systems, including Linux, Windows, and macOS.
In the case of the Raspberry Pi, although the setup involves several configuration steps,
users can easily replicate the environment on other Raspberry Pi devices by following the
detailed instructions provided in the project’s GitHub repository. It is recommended to use
a Raspberry Pi 4 for optimal performance.
The entire setup process typically takes approximately one hour. Once configured, the
robotic arm can be operated immediately upon powering on the device, with no further
configuration required.
One of the major accomplishments was achieving a modular and standardised interface
that allows the robotic arm to be used interchangeably with other lab equipment. The sys-
tem showed promising results during test runs, with accurate and repeatable arm move-
ments and successful execution of multiple workflow commands from the web application.
9.1
Key Design Choices
Several architectural decisions shaped the outcome of the project:
• ROS 2: This allowed for clean service abstraction and scalable communication,
while at the same time being easily integrable with other libraries that could enhance
the system in the future.
• SiLA 2: First of all it provides a flexible and vendor-neutral communication protocol,
and makes it very easy to build automated workflows with the other SiLA drivers.
• Docker and Raspberry pi: These tools enable a system that is ready for use im-
mediately after powering on.
• Web interface with Flask + JavaScript: This choice lowered the barrier for non-
programmers to interact with the system and demonstrated how user interfaces can
simplify automation adoption.
9.2
Challenges
Despite the overall success, the project encountered multiple challenges:
58
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:67==
• Legacy hardware constraints: The RC7M controller was not supported by modern
DENSO tools for ROS/Gazebo integration, limiting digital twin functionality
• CAD files: The CAD files for the arm that can be found on the company website
don’t provide sufficient information to create the digital twin
• Calibration: Joint 6 could not be fully calibrated due to lack of specialized tools,
which introduced some constraints in absolute positioning.
• Safety features and bypassing: It took a long time to figure out that the system
was built with an additional emergency mechanism and how to bypass this setup in
order to be able to use the arm.
9.3
Lessons Learned
A key lesson from this project is that even outdated or isolated hardware can be trans-
formed into modern, programmable components with the right software architecture and
abstraction layers. Another important takeaway is the value of open protocols like SiLA
and ROS 2 for developing systems that are independent of vendor-specific tools and more
maintainable in the long run.
9.4
Future Work
This project lays a foundation for many potential enhancements and extensions:
• Digital Twin and Simulation Integration: Future work could focus on implementing
a digital twin of the robot in a simulated environment such as Gazebo. This would
enable path planning, collision detection, and pre-execution validation using ROS 2
and MoveIt. Achieving this may require access to a newer controller (e.g., RC8) or
approximating some of the missing CAD file data and to test if it’s sufficient.
• Vision System Integration: Adding cameras and integrating vision libraries (such
as OpenCV) through ROS 2 nodes would allow the system to visually identify plate
positions and confirm placements. This would improve robustness and reduce de-
pendency on predefined coordinates.
• AI-Driven Workflow Suggestions: Integrating AI tools for workflow recommenda-
tion or anomaly detection could further enhance system intelligence and efficiency.
• Advanced User Interface Features: While the current web interface allows users
to create workflows, several features could improve the overall user experience.
These include automatic device discovery, enhanced drag-and-drop capabilities,
editing of saved workflows, database storage of workflow information, and improved
UI layout and responsiveness.
• Cloud Connectivity and Remote Operation: With further containerization and de-
ployment on cloud platforms, users could remotely access and schedule lab opera-
tions, expanding usability and accessibility.
• Robust Error Handling: Due to the multiple layers of software involved, the sys-
tem occasionally fails to return meaningful error messages when a command fails.
Improving this requires more extensive testing by additional users to uncover edge
cases and ensure proper error reporting and handling.
The system developed in this thesis demonstrates that effective lab automation does not
necessarily require purchasing entirely new equipment. By adopting open protocols and
modular software design, cost-effective automation solutions can be built using a mix
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
59
==PAGE:68==
of legacy and modern devices. This approach could be especially beneficial for small
research laboratories and academic institutions with limited resources.
60
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
==PAGE:69==
10
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to explore and demonstrate how a legacy robotic system can
be successfully integrated into a modern lab automation environment using open-source
technologies. The technologies presented in the previous chapters together formed a
cohesive, modular, and user-friendly automation system.
The project began with a non-functional robotic arm that had been inactive for some time
and lacked documentation, particularly regarding its hardware safety features. Through
methodical debugging, hardware adjustments, and protocol analysis, the arm was re-
stored to operational status. Using the b-CAP protocol as the foundational communication
method, a custom C library was adapted to interface with the robot’s controller. This was
then extended into a ROS 2-based system, providing a scalable and structured interface
for issuing commands and managing robot operations.
On top of the ROS 2 layer, a SiLA 2 driver was implemented to expose the robot’s ca-
pabilities in a standardized, interoperable format. This enabled seamless communication
with other SiLA-compliant devices and demonstrated the potential for integrating legacy
equipment into broader laboratory ecosystems. To further enhance usability, a web appli-
cation was developed for managing and executing workflows. It provided real-time device
interaction, command execution, and a foundation for drag-and-drop workflow design.
Key Contributions
• Revival and Integration of Legacy Hardware: The successful restoration and con-
trol of a DENSO robotic arm using modern software tools.
• Development of a Modular Control Architecture: A layered system composed of
a C library, ROS 2 services, and a SiLA 2 interface to manage device communication
and interoperability.
• User-Friendly Web Interface: A web page that allows users to configure, control,
and monitor workflows in a visual, accessible way.
• Proof of Concept for Future Automation Projects: A working model that demon-
strates that it is possible to connect diverse lab equipment through standardised
communication protocols.
In conclusion, this project successfully addressed the need for automation in the labora-
tory environment. Despite the challenges posed by outdated tools and missing documen-
tation, the use of open standards such as ROS 2 and SiLA 2 enabled the development of
a functional and scalable solution. Furthermore, the inclusion of a graphical user interface
ensures that the system is not only technically robust but also accessible to users with
varying levels of technical expertise.
This project also demonstrated that even legacy technologies, when combined with mod-
ern tools, can yield impactful and meaningful solutions that contribute to ongoing mod-
ernisation efforts. The integration presented here is not a final solution but rather a step
toward fully connected, intelligent laboratory environments. It is hoped that this thesis
encourages further experimentation and innovation in bridging the gap between old and
new technologies in practical and meaningful ways.
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
61
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[1]
SiLA Home Web Page. URL: https://sila-standard.com/.
[2]
Ros2 Home Web Page. URL: https://www.ros.org/.
[3]
Irene Burckhardt. Laboratory automation in clinical microbiology. DOI: 10. 3390 /
bioengineering5040102. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5d52e854d9001d01af7c5f50.
[4]
Henning Bär, Remo Hochstrasser, and Bernd Papenfuß. SiLA: Basic standards
for rapid integration in laboratory automation. DOI: 10 . 1177 / 2211068211424550.
URL: https : / / www - sciencedirect - com . proxy . findit . cvt . dk / science / article / pii /
S2472630322016673.
[5]
Lukas Bromig et al. The SiLA 2 Manager for rapid device integration and workflow
automation. DOI: 10.1016/j.softx.2022.100991. URL: https://www-sciencedirect-
com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/science/article/pii/S2352711022000103.
[6]
Panna Zsoldos et al. Towards Robotic Laboratory Automation Plug & Play: Refer-
ence Architecture Model for Robot Integration. DOI: 10.1016/j.slast.2024.100168.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2472630325000093.
[7]
Georg Hinkel, Jörg Kunert, and Jason Meredith. The Tecan SiLA2 SDK: A royalty-
free, open-source framework to develop SiLA 2 servers and clients. DOI: 10.1016/
j . slast . 2023 . 07 . 001. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2472630323000444.
[8]
Patrick Courtney et al. An out-of-hours cell culture autopilot proof of concept based
on a modular architecture using the SiLA 2 open standard. DOI: 10.1016/j.slast.2025.
100279. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2472630325000378.
[9]
Andrea Bonci et al. Robot Operating System 2 (ROS2)-Based Frameworks for In-
creasing Robot Autonomy: A Survey. DOI: 10.3390/app132312796. URL: https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/664a9dd344f79d2850fe1e50.
[10]
Niklas Terei, Rolf Wiemann, and Annika Raatz. ROS-Based Control of an Industrial
Micro-Assembly Robot. DOI: 10.1016/j.procir.2024.10.184. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212827124013416.
[11]
Ros2 Humble documentation. URL: https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/.
[12]
SiLA documentation. URL: https://sila2.gitlab.io/sila_base/.
[13]
Docker documentation. URL: https://docs.docker.com/.
[14]
Raspberry pi documentation. Accessed: 2025-06-09. URL: https://www.raspberrypi.
com/documentation/.
[15]
Flask documentation. URL: https://python-adv-web-apps.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
flask.html.
[16]
HTML5 documentation. URL: https://www.w3schools.com/html/default.asp.
[17]
JavaScript documentation. URL: https://www.w3schools.com/js/.
[18]
Specifications of b-CAP Communication. Proprietary documentation provided with
DENSO robot controller. DENSO WAVE Inc.
[19]
quangounet. denso. URL: https://github.com/quangounet/denso/tree/master/bcap/
Include/C.
[20]
Kevin and Bogdan. Robot Arm System. URL: https://github.com/DALSA- Lab/
Automated-HTS-System/tree/main/instruments/robot_arm_system.
62
Enhancing Lab Automation through Robotic Arm Integration and SiLA Protocol Implementation
