==PAGE:1==
Towards fibroblast activating protein specific CAR T cells for targeting cardiac fibrosis:
Development of porcine CAR T cells for use in a porcine model of
metabolic syndrome
Helene Bundgaard Larsen & Caroline Stengaard Jepsen
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Towards fibroblast activating protein specific CAR T cells for target­
ing cardiac fibrosis: Development of porcine CAR T cells for use in
a porcine model of metabolic syndrome
Authors:
Helene Bundgaard Larsen & Caroline Stengaard Jepsen
Department:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Anker Engelunds Vej,
Building 202, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
Supervisor:
Peter M. H. Heegaard
Co­supervisor:
Carlos Rodriguez Pardo
Credits:
2x 35 ECTS points
Submission date:
1st of July 2025
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was carried out by Caroline Stengaard Jepsen and Helene Bundgaard
Larsen over a six­month period from January to July 2025 as part of the final require­
ments for obtaining a Master’s degree in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project was conducted within the In­
nate Immunology and Metabolism Group at the Department of Health Technology and
focused on advancing knowledge in the intersection of immunology, metabolism, and
therapeutic innovation. The work was completed under the supervision of Professor
Peter M. H. Heegaard with co­supervision by PhD student Carlos Rodriguez Pardo.
Helene Bundgaard Larsen
Signature
Date
Caroline Stengaard Jepsen
Signature
Date
ii
1st July 2025
1st July 2025
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Peter M. H. Heegaard for always being helpful
and supportive throughout the course of this project. His expertise and willingness to
help at every stage have been invaluable to us. We are also deeply thankful to the
members of the Innate Immunity and Metabolism group for their warm welcome and
entrusting us with this work. A special gratitude to Carlos Rodriguez Pardo for his
exceptional support, always taking the time to assist us with both theoretical questions
and practical matters in and outside of the laboratory.
We also wish to thank Henriette Tackmann Vorsholt for her kindness and for helping
us with performing ELISA, PBMC isolation, and other experimental procedures. We
would like to extend our special thanks to Sebastien Sebbaha, whose instructions for
using the flow cytometer were generously helpful in solving any difficulties encountered
and for his kindness in always being so helpful. We are also grateful to Panchale Olsen
for her valuable assistance with plasmid amplification and purification, as well as the
production of lentivirus used in our experiments. We also wish to thank the staff and
researchers at the Department of Health Technology for their helpfulness and support.
Finally, we wish to express our appreciation to our families and friends whose unwa­
vering support and encouragement helped us through the most challenging moments
of this journey. A huge thank you to Babette for proofreading parts of our report and
giving constructive feedback. And finally, a heartfelt thank you to Jeppe for patiently
reviewing draft after draft of our report and providing invaluable suggestions — often
long after normal working hours.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
APC
Antigen presenting cell
AT
Adipose tissue
BAT
Brown adipose tissue
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
C of A
Certificate of analysis
CAR
Chimeric antigen receptor
CNT
Control­not­treated
CVD
Cardiovascular disease
DAMP
Damage­associated molecular pattern
DOCA
Deoxycorticosterone acetate
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
ECM
Extracellular matrix
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
FAP­α
Fibroblast activation protein­α
FBS
Fetal bovine serum
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
GFP
Green fluorescent protein
HDL
High­density lipoprotein
HFpEF
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
HFrEF
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
HF
Heart failure
HIF1α
Hypoxia induced factor α
HIV­1
Human immunodeficiency virus 1
HRP
Horseradish peroxidase
IFN­γ
Interferon­γ
IL
Interleukin
LAC
Lymphocyte activation cocktail
LDL
Low­density lipoprotein
LNP
Lipid nanoparticle
LV
Left ventricular
mAb
Monoclonal antibody
iv
==PAGE:6==
MCP1
Monocyte chemoattractant protein­1
MetS
Metabolic Syndrome
MHC
Major histocompatibility complex
MIF1
Macrophage inflammation factor 1
MMP
Matrix metalloproteinase
NIR
Near­Infrared
O/N
Overnight
OD
Optical density
PBMC
Peripheral blood mononuclear cell
PBS
Phosphate­buffered saline
pCART­19
CD19­porcine CAR T cell
pMHC
Peptide major histocompatibility complex
RPMI
Roswell Park Memorial Institute
RT
Room temperature
ScFv
Single­chain variable fragment
SEB
Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B
SGLT2
Sodium–glucose cotransporter 2
TCR
T cell receptor
TGF­β
Transforming growth factor­β
TMB
3,3’,5,5’­tetramethylbenzidine
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
VH
Variable heavy chain
VL
Variable light chain
VSV­IN
Vesicular stomatitis virus­Indiana
VSV­NJ
Vesicular stomatitis virus­New Jersey
VSV
Vesicular stomatitis virus
WAT
White adipose tissue
WHO
World Health Organization
v
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Cardiac fibrosis is a key driver of heart failure (HF), particularly heart failure with pre­
served ejection fraction (HFpEF). HFpEF affects approximately 3 million individuals in
the U.S. and accounts for over 50% of all HF cases. Despite extensive research, no
approved therapies directly target cardiac fibrosis or HFpEF. Recent studies in mouse
models have shown that chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells targeting activated
fibroblasts can effectively treat HF associated with fibrosis. However, the limited phys­
iological relevance of rodent models highlights the need for more translationally ap­
propriate models. The Ossabaw pig represents a robust model of cardiac fibrosis and
HFpEF and offers greater physiological similarity to humans.
This project represents the first phase in the de novo development of porcine CAR T
cells, a process not previously established in the literature. The project aimed to de­
sign and develop porcine CAR T cells using a well­characterized human CD19­CAR
T cell construct as a foundational template. A porcine­specific CD19­CAR construct
(pCART­19) was made by aligning domains of a validated human CD19­CAR with
porcine homologs. Next, a porcine T cell activation procedure was developed for the
expansion of the cells and CAR gene delivery. Based on CD25 expression analyzed by
flow cytometry and IFN­γ secretion detected by ELISA, the peak activation of porcine
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was achieved using 20 μg/mL anti­CD3
monoclonal antibody (mAb) and 8 μg/mL anti­CD28 mAb in combination with 100 IU/mL
IL­2. Nucleofection and viral transduction were assessed as gene delivery systems for
pCART­19 plasmid delivery into porcine cells. Lentiviral transduction yielded up to 2%
transduction efficiency, whereas nucleofection yielded up to 15.4% transfection effi­
ciency.
The development of porcine CAR T cells remains in its early stages, requiring further
optimization and additional research to fully establish robust generation methods. This
project has taken the first steps in the development of porcine CAR T cell development.
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
iv
Abstract
vi
1 Introduction
1
Aims and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Chapter 1: Obesity, inflammation & fibrosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.1 The adipose tissue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.1.2 Hypoxia, ECM remodelling and chronic inﬂammation . . . . . . . .
6
1.1.3 Cardiac fibrosis and HFpEF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Chapter 2: T Cells: Central players in the immune defense
. . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.1 Development of T cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.2 T cell activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Chapter 3: CAR T cell therapy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.3.1 The chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.2 CAR T cell development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Chapter 4: The porcine model for obesity, MetS, and HFpEF
. . . . . . . . .
22
1.4.1 The Ossabaw pig model for MetS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
1.4.2 A porcine model for HFpEF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2 Methods
26
2.1 Animal model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2 PBMC isolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3 CAR construct and plasmid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4 Transformation of CAR plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.5 Transfection and purification of lentivirus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.6 Cell culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.7 Porcine T cell activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.8 Gene delivery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.8.1 Viral transduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.8.2 Nucleofection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.9 Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.9.1 Surface staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.9.2 Compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.10 Sandwich ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.10.1 IFN­γ ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
vii
==PAGE:9==
2.10.2 IL­2 ELISA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.11 Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3 Results
36
pCART­19 construct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Activation of porcine T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Gene delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Viral transduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Nucleofection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4 Discussion
49
Activation of porcine T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Gene delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Viral transduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Nucleofection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
General discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5 Conclusion
58
6 Further perspectives
59
References
75
Appendices
76
viii
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 1 in 8 people worldwide was obese
in 2022 [1]. Obesity is considered an excessive and abnormal fat accumulation in adi­
pose and ectopic tissues, which can impair health [1, 2]. Excessive and abnormal fat
accumulation is associated with major health risks, such as hypertension (high blood
pressure), dyslipidemia (abnormal levels of lipids in the bloodstream), and insulin re­
sistance, all of which are associated with metabolic syndrome (MetS) [3]. MetS is a
syndrome caused by a cluster of symptoms leading to a higher risk of developing disor­
ders such as diabetes and cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) [3]. In 2019, an estimated 5
million deaths were due to comorbidities associated with obesity [1]. These associated
diseases make obesity a significant economic burden, and in 2021, CVDs resulted in
an estimated €282 billion economic burden for the European Union [4].
Abnormal accumulation of cardiac adipose tissue can cause innate immune activation
and initiate myocardial fibrosis [5]. Activation of the resident fibroblasts and recruitment
of fibroblasts to the cardiac tissue result in the formation of scar tissue [6]. Normally,
during tissue challenges, like cardiac injuries, the formation of scar tissue is important
to maintain the integrity of the heart’s chambers [6]. However, in obesity­induced fibro­
sis, the fibrotic response becomes maladaptive due to persistent activation of fibrotic
pathways [7, 8]. This maladaptive activation results in the over­accumulation of ex­
tracellular matrix (ECM). Growth of ECM alters the cardiomyocyte niche, leading to a
progressive loss of cardiac function and stiffening the heart’s myocardium [6, 7]. Car­
diac fibrosis leads to most types of heart failure (HF), particularly HF with preserved
ejection fraction (HFpEF), which is the impairment of diastolic contraction [9]. HFpEF is
associated with several clinical comorbidities, such as hypertension, obesity, diabetes,
and symptoms such as left ventricular (LV) enlargement [10]. HFpEF is a significant
public health concern affecting approximately 3 million people in the U.S. [5] and is
estimated to be responsible for more than 50% of HF cases [9]. HFpEF is associated
with high morbidity and mortality with a 5­year survival rate of only 35% after hospital­
ization. Survivors often experience a markedly reduced quality of life [5], highlighting
an urgent need for treatment and prevention.
1
==PAGE:11==
Finding effective treatments for cardiac fibrosis remains a challenge. Treatment ap­
proaches, including epigenetic therapies and CRISPR, are being developed to regulate
gene expression associated with fibrosis [11]. Despite extensive research and promis­
ing results from pre­clinical trials, no approved therapies specifically targeting cardiac
fibrosis exist [11]. The absence of approved therapies might be due to difficulties re­
garding off­target effects, feasible routes of delivery, and limited animal models [11].
Hence, new approaches to overcome current challenges are desired.
In recent years, significant advancements in cancer therapy have been achieved with
the development of antigen­specific cytotoxic T cells that directly target cancer cells
through engineered receptors on the T cell [12].
This therapy, known as chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy, involves engineering T cells to target specific
antigens [13]. CAR T cell treatments have been approved by the Food and Drug Ad­
ministration (FDA) for patients with certain types of leukemia and lymphoma [14, 15]
due to their ability to successfully eliminate cancer cells. Based on the success of CAR
T cell therapy in cancer treatment, it has been reasoned that engineered T cells can
also be used to target non­cancer cells, including fibroblasts in the myocardium [16,
17].
In the context of cardiac fibrotic tissue, it is possible to target activated cardiac fibrob­
lasts as these display different characteristics than inactivated, homeostatic fibroblasts
[6]. Activated fibroblasts express unique cell surface markers and can be distinguished
from homeostatic fibroblasts allowing for specific targeting [6]. Previous studies have
demonstrated that using CAR T cells to specifically eliminate activated fibroblasts can
serve as a therapy for fibrotic HF in a mouse model [16, 17]. In the studies, fibroblast
activation protein α (FAP­α) was identified as a potential candidate for targeting cardiac
fibroblasts [16, 17]. FAP is a transmembrane glycoprotein originally found in activated
fibroblasts and is virtually absent in healthy adult tissues [18]. FAP is expressed during
embryonic development, wound healing, and malignancy [19] and is shown to increase
during scar tissue formation [18, 20].
FAP expression is also observed on the surface of cancer­associated fibroblasts in var­
ious malignancies, including breast, lung, and colorectal cancer [18, 21]. This makes
FAP an interesting target for different types of cancer, leading to more studies using
2
==PAGE:12==
FAP­specific CAR T cells to effectively target and reduce FAP+ cancer­associated fi­
broblasts [22, 23].
FAP­specific CAR T cells have shown great potential in previous studies with diverse
targets [16, 17, 22, 23]. However, only a limited number of studies [16, 17] have inves­
tigated FAP­CAR T cells in the context of eliminating activated fibroblasts as a therapy
for human fibrotic heart disease. These studies rely on rodent models where mouse
T cells express a CAR specific to mouse FAP [16, 17]. Clear metabolic and physio­
logical differences exist when comparing rodents to humans [24], which necessitates
finding more translationally relevant animal models for studying obesity and its related
diseases. Accordingly, pigs have been pursued as an attractive biomedical model for
human obesity, as their metabolic features, cardiovascular system, and the dimensions
of the organs are close to those of humans [24]. Especially, the Göttingen and the Os­
sabaw breeds have proven to be great models of cardiac fibrosis and HFpEF induced
by a combination of a Western diet and induced hypertension [25, 26]. These features
make the porcine a great comparative animal model contributing to increased transla­
tional value in the further research on human obesity, MetS, and related diseases [24]
including HFpEF.
3
==PAGE:13==
Aims and objectives
As it has been shown that FAP can be effectively targeted by engineered T cells in mice
[16, 17], the broader objective beyond this project is to investigate FAP­targeted CAR
T cell therapy as a treatment for cardiac fibrosis using the Ossabaw pig model. The
central hypothesis is that immunologically targeting activated cardiac fibroblasts using
FAP­CAR T cells will result in the depletion of activated cardiac fibroblasts, a reduction
in cardiac fibrosis, and improved cardiac function.
This project represents the initial phase in the de novo development of porcine CAR T
cells — a process not previously established or described in the literature. As such, all
work is exploratory and serves as proof of concept. The project focuses on designing
and developing porcine CAR T cells using a well­characterized human CD19­CAR T
cell construct as a foundational template.
The aims of this thesis can be divided into the following objectives:
• Designing and developing a porcine CD19­CAR construct.
• Developing a porcine T cell activation and proliferation procedure.
• Testing different gene delivery systems, namely viral transduction and nucleofec­
tion, for porcine CD19­CAR plasmid delivery into porcine T cells.
4
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1:
1.1 Obesity, inflammation & fibrosis
According to the WHO, obesity is defined by excessive fat accumulation in adipose
and ectopic tissues [1]. Obesity can lead to an increased risk of heart disease among
other conditions [1]. Obesity is typically categorized using body mass index (BMI),
calculated as a person’s weight (in kilograms) divided by the square of the height (in
meters) [1]. BMI provides a practical method to standardize and categorize obesity
severity at the population level. A person with a BMI of 30 or more is considered obese
and severely obese people are defined as having a BMI over 40 [27]. However, BMI
does not differentiate between lean and fat mass nor does it provide insight into the fat
distribution in the body [28]. It is well established that humans consume energy from
food and drink and expend it during basal metabolic functions and activities [28]. When
in equilibrium, the body’s energy input balances the sum of energy outputs. However,
when energy consumption surpasses energy expenditure, the excess energy is stored
as fat [28]. The primary tissue initially affected by this energy overconsumption is the
fat tissue, also known as the adipose tissue (AT) [29].
Metabolic health and whole­body energy homeostasis depend on how well AT man­
ages excess consumed nutrients [29]. To accommodate excess lipids, AT can respond
rapidly and dynamically through adipocyte hypertrophy (enlarged adipocytes) and hy­
perplasia (increased cell number) [29, 30]. In the obese state, AT remodeling is patho­
logically accelerated featuring inefficient blood vessel formation, ECM overproduction,
increased immune cell infiltration, and subsequent proinflammatory responses in the
AT [30]. Obesity might be accompanied by risk factors including dyslipidemia, hyper­
tension, insulin resistance, and impaired glucose tolerance, all contributing to MetS [3].
The official clinical criteria for MetS are defined by central obesity (abnormal fat distri­
bution) and at least two of the following risk factors: raised level of triglycerides in the
blood, reduced high­density lipoprotein (HDL)­cholesterol, hypertension, and raised
fasting glucose in plasma [3].
5
==PAGE:15==
1.1.1 The adipose tissue
Humans have two main types of AT: white AT (WAT) and brown AT (BAT), which differ
in functionality, morphology, and at the metabolic level [31]. WAT accumulates surplus
energy mainly as triglycerides, whereas BAT disperses energy directly as heat [31].
WAT is specialized in storing energy and is an important endocrine organ involved
mainly in weight regulation [31]. The energy is stored in AT distributed throughout the
body. The two main compartments are subcutaneous and visceral. Subcutaneous
WAT accumulates under the skin where the visceral WAT is located in the body cavity
beneath the abdominal muscles [31]. WAT is composed of a diverse range of cell types,
mainly adipocytes (30­50%), pre­adipocytes, fibroblasts, and immune cells such as
macrophages, dendritic cells, T cells, and B cells [32, 33]. Furthermore, AT comprises
ECM and blood vessels [32].
Adipocytes are a dynamic cell population controlling the ongoing renewal of cells. As a
result of the continuous formation of new adipocytes to replace old ones, around half of
the adipocytes in the human subcutaneous body fat are replaced every eight years [34].
In normal conditions, the pre­adipocytes develop into lipid­filled mature adipocytes at
the same rate as adipocytes die, ensuring that the number of adipocytes remains con­
stant [34]. In contrast, the accumulation of human body fat results from both adipocyte
hypertrophy and adipocyte hyperplasia. As a result, all overweight and obese peo­
ple exhibit some degree of hypertrophy. Hyperplasia is more closely associated with
obesity severity and is most noticeable in severely obese people [31].
When the expansion capacity of AT is exceeded, excess lipids are believed to ac­
cumulate in ectopic tissues [2]. This leads to abnormal levels of free fatty acids in the
bloodstream (dyslipidemia), impaired AT expansion, cardiovascular complications, and
insulin resistance which are key features of MetS [2]. These changes are thought to
represent a crucial link between obesity and the development of other MetS­associated
conditions.
1.1.2 Hypoxia, ECM remodelling and chronic inﬂammation
The expansion of AT causes changes in several factors, including the up­ and down­
regulation of different molecules and cell types, as depicted in figure 1.1. A critical
factor during the expansion of AT is the diffusional limit of oxygen due to the inability
6
==PAGE:16==
of excessive blood vessel formation to keep pace with tissue expansion [30, 35]. An
acute and eventually chronic state of hypoxia in the AT will occur [36], and as a re­
sult, hypoxia­induced factor α (HIF1α) is induced in adipocytes [29, 36]. In addition,
inflammation in obese AT caused by hypoxia can lead to further ECM accumulation
and upregulation of key inflammatory genes, leading to secretion of interleukin (IL)­6
and macrophage inflammation factor 1 (MIF1) through the HIF1α induction [35].
For adipocytes to increase in size and number, the ECM must be remodeled [2, 37].
The ECM is primarily composed of proteins, which are secreted by various cell types,
including adipocytes, to facilitate AT remodeling. To remove excess ECM and allow
adipocyte hypertrophy, proteases such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) must
break down the excess matrix [2, 37]. If the ECM is insufficiently remodeled, adipocytes
will be enclosed in a tight ECM, lose their normal functions, and have a higher proba­
bility of undergoing necrosis [35, 37]. Following cell death, lipid droplets linger in the
tissue for many weeks and dysfunctional adipocytes will surround the lipid droplets,
stimulating the infiltration of macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and mast cells,
Figure 1.1: Representation of the events associated with expansion of adipose tissue (AT) in
obesity. Expansion of AT causes changes in several factors. Due to hypoxia, the transcription fac­
tor hypoxia­induced factor α (HIF1α) is induced, which leads to upregulation of interleukin (IL)­6 and
macrophage inflammation factor 1 (MIF1). An insufficient remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
results in a tight ECM. The remaining hypertrophic adipocytes secrete leptin, tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
IL­6, and monocyte chemoattractant protein­1 (MCP­1), causing further recruitment and activation of im­
mune cells, whilst reducing the anti­inflammatory hormone adiponectin and anti­inflammatory cytokine
production. Figure created in BioRender.
7
==PAGE:17==
resulting in a proinflammatory environment [35]. Hypertrophic adipocytes secrete in­
flammatory cytokines, proteins, and hormones collectively called adipokines. These in­
clude leptin, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL­6, and monocyte chemoattractant protein­1
(MCP­1) [33, 38]. These adipokines cause the recruitment and activation of immune
cells while reducing the anti­inflammatory hormone adiponectin and anti­inflammatory
cytokine production [33, 38].
Macrophages are the most abundant innate immune cells inﬁltrating and accumulating
in WAT. They constitute up to 40–50% of all WAT cells and although many factors are in­
volved in the recruitment of macrophages, it is mainly attributed to adipocyte death [33,
39]. When macrophages surround dead adipocytes, they form a unique structure called
crown­like structures where macrophages scavenge the residual lipid droplets of dead
adipocytes [39, 40]. During obesity, AT macrophages are polarized into proinﬂamma­
tory M1­like macrophages, secreting proinﬂammatory cytokines such as TNF, IL­1β,
and IL­6 [6]. Macrophage­inducible C­type lectin is expressed in these macrophages
enhancing the formation of crown­like structures, activating myofibroblasts, and the ex­
pression of profibrotic genes [40]. Although initially essential for healthy tissue expan­
sion and remodeling, AT macrophages can lead to impaired adipogenesis and fibrotic
onset when they are sustained during obesity [33].
1.1.3 Cardiac fibrosis and HFpEF
Cardiac fibrosis plays a critical role following myocardial tissue challenge where a rapid
onset of the fibrotic repair mechanisms is activated to avoid further rupture of the my­
ocardium [6]. Cardiac fibroblasts are important cells for the maintenance and home­
ostasis of the cardiac ECM in both health and injury [8]. However, dysregulation of
the fibrotic homeostasis can have fatal consequences for the heart’s function [7]. Re­
search links fibrosis and HFpEF due to persistent activation of the fibrotic pathway
and stiffening of the myocardium, suggesting fibrotic development as one of the main
drivers for developing HFpEF [5, 9, 41]. According to Tang et. al. [26] about 60% of all
HFpEF cases are driven by MetS where for instance obesity, hyperglycemia, insulin
resistance, and hypertension are associated with HFpEF [26]. HFpEF is characterized
by impaired diastolic function due to LV stiffness which can be caused by myocardial
fibrosis. The ventricular filling during diastole is reduced due to impaired relaxation
8
==PAGE:18==
which lowers the stroke volume [5, 9]. HFpEF is part of a complex and heterogeneous
condition associated with comorbidities and dysfunctions, such as obesity, MetS, and
fibrosis, that contribute to its development [5].
The proinflammatory environment associated with inflammation during obesity, as de­
picted in figure 1.2, is similar to the inflammatory environment observed during fibrotic
processes resulting from a tissue challenge. In contrast to normal wound healing where
the acute proinflammatory response is self­limiting [42], the proinflammatory response
during ECM remodeling does not stop in obese tissue [43]. Damage­associated molec­
ular patterns (DAMPs) are continuously released from the apoptotic cells and result in
the recruitment of proinflammatory immune cells and fibroblasts [44, 45]. Profibrotic
signaling events include secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and profibrotic regu­
lators, such as TNF, IL­1β, IL­6, and transforming growth factor­β (TGF­β), secreted
from cardiac fibroblasts and immune cells [6, 11]. These signaling events contribute to
further production of ECM components, mainly collagens, which can eventually result
in reduced myocardial contractility and function of the heart [45].
The link between obesity, inflammation, fibrosis, and HF is complex and still not fully
understood. Many studies have investigated the role of each component and its asso­
ciation with the others. Obesity and hypertension have been associated with cardiac
fibrosis dysregulation as critical factors for HFpEF development [45, 46]. Furthermore,
a study on HFpEF by Westermann et al. [47] observed a positive correlation between
myocardial inflammation, collagen accumulation, and diastolic dysfunction, suggesting
a direct influence of inflammation on fibrosis which further results in diastolic dysfunc­
tion. They also found an increased level of TGF­β [47]. TGF­β is a key fibrotic regulator
and is involved in the fibrotic repair process by transdifferentiating cardiac fibroblasts
into myofibroblasts which can stimulate an overproduction of ECM molecules (including
collagen) to fill out the wound [44, 47]. They showed that myocardial fibrosis is facil­
itated by immune cell invasion and TGF­β secretion leading to increased myocardial
stiffness [47]. Transcriptomics has also been investigated in obesity studies, showing
a strong correlation between ECM remodeling and proinflammatory regulation during
obesity, and an association with fibrosis in WAT [48]. Together, these studies suggest
a strong connection between obesity­induced chronic inflammation, ECM remodeling,
9
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.2: Heart and cell environment at different stages. A: Lean, healthy heart. The normal
lean myocardium of the heart is surrounded by normal numbers of immune cells. No upregulation of
proinflammatory cytokines or chemokines. The ECM production is balanced. B: Lean injured heart.
After a heart injury, cardiac fibroblasts and immune cells are recruited to the damaged area. The cells
secrete proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, leading to collagen production and fibrosis to repair
the tissue. The inflammatory response is self­limiting. C: Obese heart. Cardiac adipose tissue (AT)
surrounds the heart. Expanding cardiac adipose AT results in a proinflammatory environment, leading to
upregulation and recruitment of proinflammatory cardiac fibroblasts and immune cells. Proinflammatory
cytokines and chemokines levels are increased, and collagen production is unbalanced, leading to a
tight ECM and a fibrotic stage in the heart. The level of leptin is increased, facilitating inflammation,
while the anti­inflammatory hormone adiponectin is downregulated. Figure created in BioRender.
and activation of other profibrotic pathways, ultimately leading to collagen accumulation
and increased myocardial stiffness characteristic of HFpEF.
Currently, a few FDA­approved anti­fibrotic treatments exist; however, none of them
treat HFpEF. Some preclinical trials have been established to test a potential inhibition
of myocardial fibrosis, yet most studies focus on HF with reduced ejection fraction
(HFrEF) [5]. Some HFpEF cases are treated with sodium–glucose cotransporter 2
(SGLT2) inhibitors which have been shown to reduce death and hospitalization [49].
However, these drugs regulate hypertension and do not directly target fibrosis. New
approaches are needed to progress the discovery of new antifibrotic therapeutics to
treat HFpEF.
10
==PAGE:20==
Cardiac fibroblasts play a crucial role in cardiac remodeling and fibrosis making them
attractive therapeutic targets for the treatment of HF [20]. Studies have demonstrated
that activated fibroblasts significantly upregulate the expression of fibroblast activation
protein α (FAP­α) [16, 17, 18], where FAP has been recognized as a key marker of
activated fibroblasts in injured tissue [17]. FAP is a transmembrane glycoprotein with
protease activity. Several mechanisms by which FAP contributes to fibrosis have been
proposed. Primarily, its enzymatic activity enables the processing of bioactive proteins,
such as growth factors, chemokines, and hormones, often leading to their degradation
[50]. The amount of FAP expressed on cells is positively affected by some proinflam­
matory and profibrotic cytokines like TGF­β, TNF, and IL­1β [50]. For instance, TGF­β­
mediated processes during myocardial wound healing induces increased FAP expres­
sion in cardiac fibroblasts [20]. Stiff matrix and collagens act as negative regulators of
FAP expression [50]. The use of engineered T cells has been shown to effectively tar­
get FAP and decrease fibrosis in a mouse model of cardiac fibrosis [16, 17] without any
signs of toxicity [17]. This highlights FAP as a promising fibrotic target for therapeutic
strategies aimed at treating cardiac fibrosis.
Immunotherapy is one of the fastest­growing fields in medical research having revo­
lutionized cancer treatments and expanded into autoimmune diseases, infectious dis­
eases, and even fibrosis. Utilizing the patient’s immune cells, particularly T cells, to
combat and remodel cardiac fibrosis is within the scope of this report and their mech­
anisms are further elaborated in the next chapter.
11
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2:
1.2 T Cells: Central players in the immune defense
The immune system comprises cells, molecules, and processes to protect the body
against infections and diseases. Two main responses within the immune system are
involved during infection [51]. The first line of defense is the innate immune response
which is initiated rapidly as a nonspecific defense, occurring immediately or within
hours of encountering a pathogen. The innate immune response has no immuno­
logic memory and is unable to recognize and memorize already encountered antigens
during re­exposure [52]. The innate immune response comprises the physical barriers
of epithelial cells in the skin, airways, and gastrointestinal tract, along with immune
cells like macrophages, dendritic cells, and mast cells [52]. The second line of defense
is the adaptive immune response which is antigen­specific and is initiated later than
the innate response. The adaptive system is capable of memorizing and recognizing
the antigen, leading to a more rapid and efficient immune response upon subsequent
exposure to the antigen [51]. Cells of the adaptive immune system include T and B lym­
phocytes. T cells play a crucial role in the defense against pathogens by directly killing
infected cells and regulating other immune cells [53]. The following sections elaborate
on the unique properties and functions of T cells, which are utilized or remodeled when
developing therapeutic applications like CAR T cells.
1.2.1 Development of T cells
During development, the T cells undergo T cell receptor (TCR) affinity maturation,
where T cells are selected for expansion depending on their binding affinity for the
self­peptide major histocompatibility complex (self­pMHC). T cells whose TCR has ei­
ther too weak or too strong an affinity for pMHC are removed by positive and negative
selection, respectively. This selection process is called central tolerance and is highly
important to ensure a diverse repertoire of self­tolerant mature T cells and the elimina­
tion of self­reactive T cells, thus avoiding autoimmunity. Double­positive (CD8+CD4+)
thymocytes that pass both positive and negative selection will differentiate into spe­
cific functional subsets of either single positive CD8+ or CD4+ T cells. CD8+ T cells
recognize antigens presented on MHC class I molecules, which stimulate the T cells
to differentiate into activated cytotoxic T cells capable of directly killing target cells in­
12
==PAGE:22==
fected by foreign agents. CD4+ T cells recognize antigens presented on MHC class II
molecules. These activated T cells have no cytotoxic activity but help mediate the im­
mune response by directing and assisting other cells and regulating the type of immune
response that develops.
1.2.2 T cell activation
T cell activation require the action of antigen presenting cells (APCs), usually dendritic
cells, for the T cell to recognize a specific antigen presented on MHC molecules on
the APC. Activation of a resting T cell triggers its proliferation and differentiation. The
process of T cell activation is tightly controlled and involves a series of integrated acti­
vating signals. These molecular interactions can be separated into three main signals:
1) antigen recognition, 2) co­stimulation, and 3) cytokine­mediated differentiation and
expansion, as depicted in figure 1.3.
Signal 1 is produced when the TCR makes contact with pMHC presented on the surface
of an APC. The CD4 and CD8 molecules act as co­receptors, assisting the TCR in es­
Figure 1.3: T cell activation. T cell activation is initiated by contact between the T cell receptor (TCR) on
the T cell surface and the antigen presented by a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule on an
antigen­presenting cell (APC) (signal 1). The costimulatory signal (signal 2) comprises the interaction
of costimulatory receptor molecules, like CD28 molecules, on the T cells with their membrane­bound
ligands, like B7 molecules, on the surface of the APC. The third signal (signal 3) comprises the cytokines,
like IL­2, secreted by the APC or other immune cells binding to their specific receptor on the T cell surface.
Figure created from a template in BioRender.
13
==PAGE:23==
tablishing interactions with the specific pMHC complex. TCR heterodimers have very
short cytoplasmic tails that are incapable of transducing signals upon antigen interac­
tion, requiring the accompanying CD3 subunits to perform this function. Five different
CD3 polypeptides (CD3γ, CD3δ, CD3ε, CD3ζ, and CD3η) are associated with TCRs
on the T cell to assemble as a TCR­complex.
Signal 2 comprises the interaction of the costimulatory receptor molecules on the T
cells with their membrane­bound ligands on the surface of the APC. One costimulatory
receptor is the CD28 protein that binds to B7 molecules (CD80 and CD86) on APCs
during antigen recognition. Delivery of signal 1 without the engagement of CD28 to pro­
vide signal 2, results in a prolonged unresponsive state known as anergy. However,
when CD28 costimulation occurs simultaneously with signal 1, it leads to the prolifera­
tion of T cells and the expression of their effector functions. Furthermore, it promotes
the secretion of IL­2 and the expression of its high­affinity receptor on the cell surface.
The binding of IL­2, together with the binding of other cytokines to their respective re­
ceptors, generates signal 3 which further drives the proliferation and differentiation of
the antigen­specific T cells. The strength and duration of the T cell activation are the
main determinants of T cell differentiation. Strong and sustained activation results in
effector functions, such as cytotoxic activity, and drives the T cells to terminal effector
differentiation, resulting in effector T cells. Conversely, weaker and transient activa­
tion results in the differentiation into memory T cells, which have the characteristics of
long­term survival and rapid response to reencounter with the same antigen [54].
T cell development is regulated at many levels and involves the destruction of self­
reacting T cells. To exploit T cells for fibrotic therapies, it is necessary to modify these
cells to recognize FAP as a target. To achieve this, genetically modified T cells ex­
pressing chimeric antigen receptors that can recognize and target FAP­expressing fi­
broblasts are needed.
14
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3:
1.3 CAR T cell therapy
Chimeric antigen receptors, or CARs, are synthetically engineered receptors designed
to redirect T cells to specifically recognize and eliminate cells expressing a specific tar­
get antigen. Upon binding to the target antigen, the CAR activates the T cell triggering
a robust cytotoxic immune response [55]. One of the key advantages of CAR T cells
is their ability to function independently of MHC recognition [56]. CAR T cell therapy
represents a promising form of immunotherapy for cancer treatment. In 2017, FDA
approved anti­CD19­CAR T cell therapy for patients with certain types of leukemia and
lymphoma [14, 15]. Anti­CD19­CAR T cells recognize and bind to CD19 on cancerous
B cells (and normal B cells) leading to targeted killing of the B cells [57, 58]. This ap­
proval was based on its demonstrated success in effectively eradicating cancer cells
[57, 58].
The success of CAR T cell therapy in treating cancers has inspired the exploration
of engineered T cells for non­cancerous conditions, such as cardiac fibrosis. Recent
studies have shown that FAP­CAR T cells can successfully target and reduce cardiac
fibrosis [16, 17]. In a mouse model of cardiac fibrosis and heart failure induced by con­
tinuous infusion of angiotensin II and phenylephrine, the adoptive transfer of FAP­CAR
T cells restored cardiac function and significantly reduced fibrosis [17]. Remarkably,
these effects were observed even when the CAR T cells were administered after signif­
icant fibrosis had already developed [17]. Since fibroblast activation plays a critical role
in normal wound healing across various tissues, the use of persistent anti­fibrotic CAR
T cells carries a potential risk of interfering with future injury responses. To address
this, researchers have employed mRNA technology to develop transient anti­fibrotic
CAR T cell therapies [16]. In mice, efficient delivery of mRNA encoding the FAP­CAR
to T cells generated transient but functional CAR T cells in vivo for up to a week. This
effectively reduced fibrosis and restored cardiac function following injury [16].
Multiple lines of FAP­CAR T cells have been developed in the context of cancer therapy
[21, 22, 23]. FAP expression has been observed at moderate to high levels on the sur­
face of cancer­associated fibroblasts in various malignancies, including breast, lung,
15
==PAGE:25==
colorectal, prostate, stomach, pancreatic, thyroid, cervical, and urothelial cancers [18,
21]. This makes FAP an intriguing therapeutic target and several studies have demon­
strated that FAP­CAR T cells can effectively reduce FAP­positive cancer­associated
fibroblasts [21, 22, 23].
Currently, most developed FAP­CAR T cells have focused on cancer treatment. How­
ever, recent findings on non­cancerous targeting CAR T cells, like the antifibrotic CARs
[16, 17], open up new and less explored directions in CAR T cell therapy. The next
sections will cover the key features of CAR T cells and their production.
1.3.1 The chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)
The CAR is based on the signaling domains of a TCR. The fundamental domains of the
CAR are the extracellular domain, hinge, transmembrane, and intracellular signaling
domains as shown in figure 1.4. In addition to the fundamental domains, the leader
peptide is important in translocating the CAR to the membrane of the T cell [59]. The
extracellular domain of the CAR, also referred to as the antigen­binding domain, con­
tains a single­chain variable fragment (ScFv) designed to specifically recognize the
target antigen. The ScFv consists of the variable regions of the heavy (VH) and light
(VL) chains derived from a monoclonal antibody (mAb). Additionally, the chains are
connected with a flexible linker [12, 55]. The ScFv has several characteristics beyond
recognizing and binding the target epitope. The positioning and interaction between the
VH and VL chains affect the affinity of the CAR when recognizing the epitope, which is
key for the function of the CAR [12]. The binding affinity must induce the signal through
the CAR to activate the T cells but not cause cell death or trigger toxicities [12, 55]. In
addition, the antibody must be selected to specifically target the intended cells to pre­
vent on­target off­tumor effects. These effects has been seen for some solid tumors,
due to antigen expression on normal tissues [12, 55].
The antigen­binding domain is connected with the hinge domain which is part of the
extracellular structure. The ideal hinge length is dependent on the steric hindrance
and epitope position. A long hinge domain adds more flexibility and better access to
membrane­proximal epitopes on the target cell, while a shorter hinge domain results in
greater access to the membrane­distal epitopes [55, 60]. However, the proper length
of the hinge must be determined empirically for each antigen­binding domain [55]. The
16
==PAGE:26==
transmembrane domain is situated between the hinge domain and the intracellular do­
main and acts as a connection between intra­ and extracellular components [55, 61].
The main function of the transmembrane domain is to anchor the extracellular domains
to the T cell membrane. The transmembrane domain has also been shown to provide
stability of the CAR expression and signaling [61, 62]. Mostly, the transmembrane
domain derives from amino acids of CD3ζ, CD4, CD8α, or CD28 transmembrane do­
mains [55]. The transmembrane domain of CAR T cells remains relatively unexplored
likely due to its limited influence on overall CAR functionality [55].
Lastly, the intracellular domain is composed of the CD3ζ signaling domain derived from
the CD3ζ subunit of the TCR. The first generation of CAR T cells was based solely on
the CD3ζ signaling domain; however, T cell activation is not sustained by one signal­
ing motif alone [63, 64]. Consequently, engineering work continued to generate CAR
constructs with better T cell­activating properties. The second generation of CAR T
Figure 1.4: Components of the chimeric antigen receptor (CAR). The CAR is generally composed of
four key domains. The extracellular antigen binding domain, which is a single­chain variable fragment
(ScFv) derived from the variable heavy (VH) and variable light (VL) chain from an antigen­specific­
monoclonal antibody (mAb). The hinge domain, which is responsible for flexibility and adds length. The
transmembrane domain, which is located in the T cell membrane, anchors the extracellular domains
to the T cell. The intracellular domains of the CAR depend on the generation. First­generation CAR
contains CD3ζ as the signaling domain, derived from the T cell receptor (TCR). Second­generation CAR
includes additional co­stimulatory domains to enhance T cell activation, survival, and function. Figure
created in BioRender.
17
==PAGE:27==
cells includes a co­stimulatory domain in series with the CD3ζ intracellular signaling
domain resulting in enhanced cytokine release and proliferation [64, 65, 66]. These
two components of the intracellular domain are analogous to the two signals of nat­
ural T cell activation. The CD3ζ domain corresponds to signal 1 of T cell activation
and the co­stimulatory domain permits signal 2 of the T cell activation [64]. Later, two
co­stimulatory domains were added in tandem leading to the third generation of CAR
T cells [67]. Currently, generations 4 and 5 with other stimulatory components have
been added to the list [12]. For now, commercially available CAR T cells are made
from the second generation CAR T cells, as the other generations have not proven a
higher level of clinical performance compared to the second generation CAR T cells
[12]. The most used co­stimulatory domains are the CD28 and the 4­1BB domains
[55]. The CAR with a CD28 domain contributes to effector memory T cell differentia­
tion, provides rapid, effective signaling, and high cytokine release. While comparing
with the 4­1BB domain, the CAR T cells differentiate into central memory T cells with
lower cytokine release, resulting in sustained signaling [55, 64].
1.3.2 CAR T cell development
The production of CAR T cells is carried out by a multi­step manufacturing process
beginning with the isolation of T cells from blood followed by their activation and prolif­
eration. The second step is the delivery of the CAR gene into the T cell. Gene delivery
methods include viral transduction or other transfection methods such as nucleofec­
tion. Lastly, the CAR T cells are expanded and after quality control testing, the product
is injected into the patient [68, 69].
The expansion of T cells is typically done by activating the T cells with antibodies target­
ing CD3 and CD28, preferably anti­CD3/CD28 antibody­coated paramagnetic beads.
These antibodies or beads are often supplemented with cytokines where IL­2 is com­
monly used [69, 70]. T cell stimulation is an indispensable step in the CAR T cell
manufacturing of FDA­approved CAR T therapies [71]. T cell activation before gene
delivery impacts the CAR­T transduction efficiency when using lentiviral transduction
[72, 73]. Furthermore, to generate a therapeutic dose of T cells, a robust activation
protocol is necessary to expand CAR T cells after CAR gene delivery [74]. T cell ac­
tivation after transduction has shown to facilitate T cells to differentiate into subsets
18
==PAGE:28==
including effector and memory T cells. Differentiation of T cells have been suggested
to influence the survival and effectiveness of the CAR T cells [71, 72, 75].
Another critical step during CAR T cell manufacturing is introducing the CAR gene into
the T cells. In CAR T cell development, different methods such as electroporation and
viral vectors have been used [69]. The most commonly used method for CAR gene
delivery is transduction using viral vectors [76, 77]. Two viral vectors are primarily
used in industry and trials: The gamma retrovirus and the lentivirus (both subtypes of
retrovirus), because of their capability to integrate their genes into the host cell DNA
[76].
Lentivirus is the most applied viral vector and is often derived from the human im­
munodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV­1) [76]. Unlike wild­type HIV­1, lentiviral vectors are
modified to be replication­incompetent and their envelope is typically pseudotyped with
alternative envelope glycoproteins [76, 78]. Various envelope proteins are applied in
the production of lentiviral vectors, one of them being the envelope glycoprotein of
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), abbreviated as the VSV­G protein. This protein is
the most commonly used for pseudotyping the envelope of lentiviral vectors [76, 78].
For the lentivirus to transfer genetic material to cells, the host cells need low­density
lipoprotein (LDL)­receptor expression. This receptor is important since the virus infects
the host cell via endocytosis mediated by VSV­G and LDL­receptor interaction [76, 78].
Targeting LDL­receptors is advantageous since a broad range of cell types in different
host species express LDL­receptors [78]. However, the expression level of the LDL
receptors is lower in resting T cells compared to activated T cells. Consequently, stim­
ulation is necessary to upregulate LDL receptor expression to ensure viral transduction
[73].
Lentiviral vectors are generated using a cell line, referred to as packaging cells, which
produces the viral particles. Packaging cells are expanded and transfected with plas­
mid DNA encoding the necessary proteins for lentiviral vector production. These plas­
mids encode the structural viral genes (packaging and envelope plasmids) and the
genetic material (transfer plasmid). Co­transfection of these plasmids allows packag­
ing cells to produce the lentiviral vector particles, which can be harvested from the
culture medium [77].
19
==PAGE:29==
Even though many safety precautions are already implemented during the transduction
protocol, the use of viral vectors in the clinic should be considered due to insertional
mutagenesis in patients [77] and the risk of exposure to the lentivirus during manufac­
turing [79]. It has been speculated that mRNA­based CAR T cell manufacturing could
address these issues as it employs viral vector­free CAR T cell technology that can
produce transient expression of CARs [80, 81]. CAR T cells manufactured with mRNA
transiently express CAR molecules and produce cytotoxicity only up to one week [80],
which is normally not seen as ideal for therapy. However, in the case of FAP­targeting
CAR T cells, persistent antifibrotic CAR T cells could pose a risk for the setting of fu­
ture injuries as fibroblast activation is part of a normal wound healing process in many
tissues [18]. Therefore, studies have employed mRNA technology to develop transient
FAP­targeting CAR T cell therapies to target cardiac fibrosis successfully [16]. Further­
more, in other studies and clinical trials, mRNA has been introduced to make efficient
transient CAR T cells [80, 81].
Electroporation is an alternative method for gene delivery. Through the use of voltage
pulses between two electrodes, electroporation creates an electric field that disrupts
the physical structure of the cell membrane, increasing cell permeability and enabling
the entry of foreign molecules, such as mRNA or DNA, into the cytoplasm [82]. Since
mRNA is limited to the cytoplasm and cannot undergo genomic integration, it is innately
unstable and diluted throughout cell division ensuring that these CAR T cells are tempo­
rary by design. Obstacles when using plasmid DNA are the entry into the nucleus, and
the risk of random genomic insertion, which is a concern for clinical safety [83, 84]. This
is also the main reason why electroporation of mRNA is preferable to electroporation
over plasmid DNA [83, 84]. A challenge of using electroporation as a delivery system
concerns the risk of cell damage, potentially reduced viability, expansion, and efficacy
due to membrane disruption [82, 85]. Some cell types, including primary cells, show
low transfection efficiency when using conventional electroporation. Nucleofection has
been developed to deliver mRNA and DNA plasmid directly into the cell nucleus and
is the most common electroporation method due to its high transfection efficiency [86].
However, optimizing electroporation and nucleofection parameters (voltage, pulse du­
ration, buffer composition) is crucial for efficiency and viability.
20
==PAGE:30==
CAR T cell development has been tested in rodent models for different targets. Devel­
opment of FAP­CAR T cells has even been shown as a potential therapy for cardiac
fibrosis in mice [16, 17]. This study aims to develop CAR T cells in a more translation­
ally relevant animal model, the porcine model, which is further discussed in the next
chapter.
21
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4:
1.4 The porcine model for obesity, MetS, and HFpEF
Animal models are important in preclinical research and safety studies. This includes
research within the mechanisms underlying obesity, obesity­related metabolic dysfunc­
tion, and associated comorbidities [87]. Using rodents as an animal model for obesity
and MetS has been fundamental in research due to their inexpensive maintenance,
well­studied genome, and ease of genetic modification [24]. However, rodents cannot
naturally develop all the required risk factors of MetS [24]. Additionally, the metabolism
and physiology in rodents, like the heart rate [88] and the basal metabolic rate [89], are
different from those of humans which may complicate the translation of biomedical re­
search into effective treatments [24, 90]. Despite these limitations, rodent animal mod­
els are still extensively used [90]. For instance, Rurik et. al. have employed a mouse
model of cardiac fibrosis to investigate a novel CAR T cell–based immunotherapy [16,
17].
To better replicate the key features of human obesity, MetS, and HFpEF, large animal
models have been developed and increasingly studied. One such model is the porcine
model [87, 90, 91]. Their natural development of human­like obesity and metabolic
conditions makes porcine a more translationally relevant model than rodents. Pigs
are also similar to humans in terms of organ size, mechanisms of inflammation, and,
importantly, the cardiovascular system [87]. To reproduce obesity and cardiovascular
comorbidities of MetS, various breeds of pigs, including Landrace, Yucatan, Göttingen,
and Ossabaw, have been used [24, 25, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96]. Generally, live­
stock breeds such as Landrace pigs have a leaner phenotype than miniature porcine
breeds [91]. Thus, miniature breeds such as Göttingen, Ossabaw, and Yucatan have
been shown to build up to twice the body weight of control pigs, emphasising their
disposition to fat development and accumulation [91]. Landrace pig breeds have been
shown not to develop MetS in short­term studies, nor do they exhibit secondary cardiac
comorbidities in response to diet alone [91].
22
==PAGE:32==
1.4.1 The Ossabaw pig model for MetS
The Göttingen and Yucatan breeds are commonly utilized in the research of obesity,
MetS, and CVD [24, 25, 91, 92, 93]. However, Ossabaw pigs in particular have proven
to be excellent models for MetS when fed a high­fat and caloric­rich diet [90, 91, 94].
The Ossabaw breed is referred to as a minipig due to its size of 30–70 kg when fully
developed [87]. In addition, the Ossabaw minipig has proven to be a suitable model for
MetS because of its thrifty genotype [87, 90, 91]. The special genotype is believed to
be due to the pigs’ origin [90, 91]. Originating from an isolated island in Georgia, USA,
Ossabaw pigs developed their ability to rapidly store fat, a beneficial trait for surviving
long periods without accessible food. It is believed that humans possess a similar
genotype due to their history as hunter­gatherers [87, 94].
The Ossabaw pig is one of the most investigated and well­identified porcine models of
MetS and has shown high applicability in modeling human pathology. Various studies
[26, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98] have supported the model by exploring numerous risk factors
of MetS, including obesity, dyslipidemia, hypertension, insulin resistance, and glucose
intolerance. Particularly, obese female Ossabaw pigs have been shown to develop risk
factors of MetS, including visceral adipose expansion, hypertriglyceridemia, increased
LDL cholesterol, primary insulin resistance, mild hypertension, and coronary artery
disease [96]. Furthermore, obese Ossabaw pigs exhibit pathological features similar
to those seen in human HFpEF [26, 91, 98], making them very interesting for further
research within the development of HFpEF animal models.
1.4.2 A porcine model for HFpEF
The absence of adequate animal models makes the development of effective ther­
apy options for HFpEF difficult [5]. Only a few animal models of HFpEF have been
provided, indicating the difficulty in replicating the clinical characteristics of HFpEF in
animals [5, 91]. Most animal models are cardiac pressure­overload models, solely fo­
cusing on hypertension as driver for HFpEF to develop LV concentric hypertrophy and
diastolic dysfunction, where the LV responds to pressure overload by becoming thicker
and developing improper relaxation of the heart muscle. Only a few models replicate
the complexity of human HFpEF, including aspects of blood pressure, heart function,
and systemic changes, like vascular stiffness, fibrosis, inflammation, obesity, MetS,
23
==PAGE:33==
and diabetes [5]. Using animals like pigs which are predisposed to CVD, provides an
optimal foundation on which exposure to a Western diet (high in fat, salt, and sugar)
and hypertension will ultimately induce HFpEF.
Porcine models of HFpEF have been described with varying success. Pig models that
use hypertension as the main driver of HFpEF include those that focus on hyperten­
sion in the myocardium by mechanical manipulations. Devices that constrict the aorta
with bands [99] and stents [100] or chronic high­rate pacing [101], all result in increas­
ing myocardial mass, cardiac stiffness, and cardiac fibrosis. However, the absence of
the naturally occurring HFpEF phenotype significantly limits their clinical applicability
[5]. Another approach to define a model for HFpEF is within the deoxycorticosterone
acetate (DOCA) salt­induced porcine model which represents a pharmacologically in­
duced model of hypertension.
The first DOCA model was described in domestic Landrace pigs fed a diet high in fat,
salt, and sugar, and given a subcutaneous DOCA depot lasting for 12 weeks, leading to
obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and cardiovascular structural changes that mimic
the phenotype of human HFpEF [102]. The DOCA salt­induced porcine model has
later been used in other studies, including a study by Sharp et al. [25] using Göttingen
mini­pigs fed with a Western diet high in cholesterol, fat, fructose, and salt and given
a subcutaneous DOCA depot lasting for 20 weeks [25]. Multiple comorbidities, includ­
ing obesity, heightened cholesterol, pre­diabetic phenotype, hypertension, as well as
HFpEF, were induced in the adult female Göttingen mini­pigs [25]. Furthermore, the
HFpEF mini­pigs demonstrated increased myocardial ﬁbrosis associated with intersti­
tial lipid deposition within the myocardium [25].
A newly published study by Tang et al. [26] has reported Ossabaw pigs fed a Western
diet for 6 months and given DOCA depots lasting for 60 days and again after 3 months
to exhibit the entire constellation of human HFpEF driven by MetS. This includes obe­
sity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, glucose intolerance, insulin resistance, liver and pan­
creatic abnormalities, cardiac fibrosis, increased LV filling pressures, LV hypertrophy,
HFpEF, and impaired exercise capacity [26].
In the same study, Tang et al. [26] have also reported a six­fold increase in the en­
dogenous mineralocorticoid aldosterone in Ossabaw pigs fed a similar Western diet
24
==PAGE:34==
in another study cohort without DOCA. Tang et al. emphasize that the greater serum
aldosterone level in MetS compared to lean Ossabaw pigs may explain a natural in­
crease in blood pressure. Especially since treatment of MetS Ossabaw pigs with the
mineralocorticoid receptor blocker spironolactone decreased blood pressure to levels
not significantly different from lean controls [26]. Furthermore, Edwards et al. [103]
have demonstrated that the administration of DOCA is not necessary to induce hyper­
tension in the Ossabaw model. They found that Ossabaw pigs fed a Western diet for
6­12 months exhibited high blood pressures of around 160/100 [103]. Thus, Ossabaw
pigs may not require DOCA supplement unlike other pig breeds [25, 102].
The naturally occurring comorbidities related to human HFpEF and diastolic dysfunc­
tion have also been described in another study using the Ossabaw pig model [98]. Li et
al. [98] have shown that Ossabaw pigs fed with an atherogenic diet, high in cholesterol
and fat, after 14 weeks developed central obesity, pericardial fat, insulin resistance,
myocardial inflammation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, cardiac fibrosis,
and diastolic dysfunction. The increased myocardial fibrosis and stiffness observed in
the group of obese and MetS Ossabaw pigs were thought to contribute to LV diastolic
dysfunction [98].
Ossabaw pigs show enormous potential as an HFpEF animal model. Their naturally
occurring comorbidities of human HFpEF are well described [26, 98] and support the
Ossabaw pigs as an obvious choice within research and treatment development hereof.
Using an Ossabaw pig model to explore CAR T cell therapy for treating fibrotic HFpEF
is therefore suitable.
25
==PAGE:35==
2 Methods
This project represents the initial phase in the de novo development of porcine CAR T
cells by using a well­characterized human CD19­CAR T cell construct as a foundational
template. Different methods for the development of porcine CAR T cells have been
investigated. The first part involves developing a procedure for porcine T cell activation.
The second part includes the assessment of two delivery systems for CAR delivery:
viral transduction and nucleofection. An overview is presented in figure 2.1, where an
outline of the experimental part of the project is shown.
Figure 2.1: Experimental flow chart. The experimental part of this project includes peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMC) isolation, PBMC activation (or no activation), gene delivery (nucleofection or
viral transduction), and CAR expression assessment via flow cytometry. Figure created in BioRender.
2.1 Animal model
Ossabaw pigs were housed at the Ossabaw facility at the Technical University of Den­
mark (DTU) (https://ossabaw.dtu.dk). Animals were kept on a natural light cycle at a
temperature of 20 ± 2 °C and had unlimited access to water. The pigs were given
straw wood bedding and had continuous access to enrichment. The pigs consumed
2500 kcal of standard chow per day. Gender, age, and peripheral blood mononuclear
cell (PBMC) isolation of the Ossabaw pigs used in this project are seen in table 1.
2.2 PBMC isolation
PBMCs were isolated from fresh blood samples from Ossabaw pigs from the Oss­
abaw facility at DTU. The blood was collected in vacutainer tubes and stabilized us­
ing Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) disodium salt. The stabilized blood was
diluted 1:2 with sterile phosphate­buffered saline (PBS) + 2% heat­inactivated fetal
26
==PAGE:36==
Table 1: Blood samples from Ossabaw pigs used in this project.
PBMC ID
Sample time point
Pig
Gender
Age at sampling
#85.1
14.04.2025
Control animal 85
Female
3 years, 7 months
#86.1
14.04.2025
Control animal 86
Female
3 years, 7 months
#86.2
27.05.2025
Control animal 86
Female
3 years, 8 months
#107.1
11.11.2024
Control animal 107
Male
10 months, 8 days
#109.1
04.06.2025
Control animal 109
Female
1 year, 5 months
#110.1
04.06.2025
Control animal 110
Female
1 year, 5 months
#111.1
04.06.2025
Control animal 111
Female
1 year, 5 months
#112.1
11.11.2024
Control animal 112
Female
10 months, 8 days
#112.2
04.06.2025
Control animal 112
Female
1 year, 5 months
bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco 10500­064). StemCell SepMate 50 mL tubes were pre­
pared with 15 mL room temperature (RT) Lymphoprep (Stemcell, 07861), and the di­
luted blood samples were added carefully. The tubes were centrifuged for 20 minutes
(2400 RPM, RT). The supernatant was transferred into new 50 mL tubes and washed
once with sterile PBS + 2% FBS by topping up to 50 mL. The samples were centrifuged
for 8 minutes (1500 RPM, RT). The remaining red blood cells were removed by adding
2 mL red blood cell lysis buffer (1.55 M NH4Cl, 0.100 M KHCO3, 0.994 mM EDTA in
MilliQ water) diluted 1:20 for a max of 2­3 minutes. The samples were washed twice
using 50 mL sterile PBS + 2% FBS and spun down for 8 minutes (1500 RPM, RT).
The cells were resuspended in sterile PBS + 2% FBS. The cell count was performed
using NucleoCounter® NC202 (ChemoMetec). Vials with 10x106/mL cells in freezing
solution (50% FBS, 10% DMSO, 40% RPMI (Roswell Park Memorial Institute)(Gibco
61870) were frozen at ­80 °C for 2 days before being transferred to a nitrogen tank at
­190 °C.
2.3 Porcine CAR construct and plasmid
The porcine CAR plasmid (pCART­19) used in this report was based on a previously es­
tablished in­house second­generation human CD19­CAR plasmid (Health Technology,
DTU). The original plasmid contains relevant elements required for lentiviral systems
and bacterial transformation.
The CAR construct is seen in figure 3.1 where the essential domains of the CAR are
highlighted. The domains of the CAR construct includes CD8aL, CD19­specific ScFv,
a hinge and transmembrane CD8α domain, and intracellular co­stimulatory domains
27
==PAGE:37==
(CD3ζ and CD28) (Health Technology, DTU). Additionally, a T2A skip element was
present for tracking purposes to combine a green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene with
the CAR construct. To optimize for porcine integration, each domain of the original
CAR construct was aligned using BLAST® (NCBI) with the porcine counterpart found
in the Uniprot database. The CAR construct was synthesized using the backbone of
the lentiviral plasmid (Heath Technology, DTU) (see appendix A1) and produced by
GenScript.
2.4 Transformation of pCART­19 plasmids
To maintain a stock of pCART­19 plasmid used for the development of CAR T cells,
a transformation of the plasmid into E. coli was performed. The amplification was
conducted using One Shot™Stbl3™Chemically Competent E. coli cells (Invitrogen,
C7373­03). One vial (50 μL) One Shot™Stbl3™E. coli cells were thawed on ice and
0.1 μg of plasmid was added to the vial with E. coli and mixed gently. The vial was
incubated on ice for 30 minutes, heat­shocked at 42 °C for 45 seconds, and then incu­
bated on ice for 2 minutes. Subsequently, 250 μL of S.O.C medium at RT (Invitrogen,
C7373­03) was added to the vial followed by incubation at 37 °C for 1 hour at 225 RPM
in a shaking incubator. A volume of 25 μL was plated on a 37 °C LB agar plate contain­
ing 100 μg/mL ampicillin and incubated overnight at 37 °C. One colony was selected
for inoculation in pre­warmed LB medium supplemented with 100 μg/mL ampicillin and
incubated overnight at 37 °C at 225 RPM in a shaking incubator. Plasmid purification
was carried out using QIAGEN® Plasmid Plus Maxi Kit by following the manufacturer’s
instructions. The concentration of the DNA was measured at 260 nm, and the pu­
rity was measured at 280 nm and 230 nm using a Thermo Scientific NanoDrop 1000
Spectrophotometer before storage at ­18 °C.
2.5 Transfection and purification of lentivirus
Lentiviruses for gene therapy are mainly produced in cultured mammalian cells. To
generate the virus, cultured cells are transfected with a combination of packaging plas­
mids encoding the viral genome, an envelope plasmid, and a transfer plasmid carrying
the gene of interest. The packaging cells produce viral particles, which can then be
collected from the culture medium and purified.
Lentivirus with pCART­19 plasmid was produced using HEK­293T cells (Health Tech­
28
==PAGE:38==
nology, DTU). In a tube, 2.3 mL of Opti­MEM™I Reduced Serum Medium (Gibco
31985062) and 55.5 µL p3000 reagent (Lipofectamine™3000 Transfection kit, Invit­
rogen) were mixed. The lentivirus envelope plasmid, packaging plasmids and trans­
fer plasmid, 7.82 µg pRSV.REV (Addgene plasmid 12253), 7.82 µg pMDLg/p.RRE
(Addgene plasmid 12251), 3.04 µg pMD2.G (Addgene plasmid 12259), and 6.52 µg
pCART­19 plasmid were added slowly to the tube. The content of the tube was trans­
ferred dropwise to another tube containing 2.3 mL Opti­MEM and 64.5 µL Lipofec­
tamine 3000 (Lipofectamine™3000 Transfection kit, Invitrogen) and was incubated
for 15­20 minutes at RT. HEK­293T cells were cultured to around 80% confluency and
the media was removed carefully. DNA lipid complexes were slowly added and in­
cubated at 37 °C for 15 minutes. A volume of 30 mL pre­heated RPMI with HEPES
(Gibco 72400047) + 10% FBS + 1% Penicillin­Streptomycin (Gibco 15140122) was
added to the cells. Lentivirus was collected 24 and 48 hours after transfection. The
supernatant was harvested and centrifuged for 10 minutes (500 x g) to remove resid­
ual HEK­293T cells. The supernatant was harvested once more and gently mixed
(3:1) with Lenti­X­Concentrator (Takara Bio, 631231). The mixture was incubated for
30 minutes to overnight at 4 °C, depending on the harvesting time of the supernatant
(24 or 48 hours, respectively). After incubation the samples were centrifuged for 45
minutes (1500 x g, 4 °C). The supernatant was carefully removed and the pellet was
resuspended in 300 µL PBS. The sample was stored at ­80 °C until use.
2.6 Cell culture
To obtain the acquired number of cells for the experiments, porcine PBMC vials were
thawed before each experiment. For each vial, cells were thawed using 10 mL pre­
heated (37 °C) RPMI + 10% FBS, and spun down for 5 minutes (1500 RPM). The
supernatant was carefully discarded and the cells were washed in 5 ml of RPMI + 10%
FBS, followed by centrifugation for 5 minutes (1500 RPM). The supernatant was care­
fully discarded and the cells were resuspended in RPMI + 10% FBS and counted using
NucleoCounter® NC202 (ChemoMetec). Subsequently, the cells were spun down for
5 minutes (1500 RPM), supernatant was removed, and RPMI + 10% FBS was added
to obtain a concentration of 2×106 cells/mL.
29
==PAGE:39==
2.7 Porcine T cell activation
To develop an activation protocol for porcine PBMCs, the cells were stimulated in vari­
ous ways with different concentrations and stimulators. A 48­well plate setup was used
for the stimulation of porcine PBMCs. Wells intended for stimulation were coated with
different concentrations of porcine­specific anti­CD3 mAb and the plate was incubated
at 37 °C for 2 hours. The supernatant was removed and the plate was washed once
with PBS to remove unbound antibodies. The PBMCs were resuspended in RPMI +
10% FBS and adjusted to 2×106 cells/mL. In each well 475 μL of the 2×106 cells/mL
cell suspension was added. Each well was incubated with 25 μL stimulator diluted in
RPMI + 10% FBS or 25 μL RPMI + 10% FBS without coating or stimulator for CNT
(control­not­treated) samples. The plate was incubated for 48­72 hours at 37 °C (5%
CO2 + humidity).
2.8 Gene delivery
2.8.1 Viral transduction
To assess the ability of lentivirus to deliver the CAR gene to stimulated and unstimu­
lated porcine PBMCs, the cells were transduced with different amounts of pCART­19
lentivirus. Lentivirus was added to samples after 48­72 hours of PBMC activation (sec­
tion 2.7). The samples were incubated for 3­4 days at 37 °C (5% CO2 + humidity). RPMI
+ 10% FBS was added to the samples at day 2­3 to supply the cells with nutrients. After
3­4 days of incubation, the cells were analyzed using flow cytometry, as described in
section 2.9.
2.8.2 Nucleofection
To assess nucleofection as a transfection method for stimulated and unstimulated
porcine PBMC, the cells were transfected with the desired plasmid using different nu­
cleofection pulse codes. Nucleofection was conducted using a Lonza 4D­Nucleofecter®.
Activated PBMCs were stimulated 3 days prior to nucleofection. Thawed unstimulated
PBMCs were resting at 37 °C (5% CO2 + humidity) with 20 IU/mL IL­2 for 1.5­2 hours
before nucleofection.
Depending on the necessary volume, either a Nucleocuvette® strip (20 µL/well) or a
cuvette (100 µL/cuvette) was used. Cells were counted to get 1­2x106 cells per 20 µL
well (16­well Nucleocuvette® Strip, Lonza) or 5x106 cells per 100 µL Nucleocuvette®
30
==PAGE:40==
cuvette (Lonza).
A mastermix for each well in Nucleocuvette® Strip or Nucleocuvette® cuvette was
prepared.
The mastermix contained 0.5 µL/well or 2.5 µL/cuvette single stranded
oligodeoxynucleotides (SSODNs) for enhancing plasmid uptake and nuclear delivery,
the desired concentration of the plasmid of interest (pmaxGFP™(Lonza) or plasmid
produced during this project (pCART­19), and 20 µL/well or 100 µL/cuvette supple­
mented 4D­Nucleofector™Solution P3 (Lonza).
The cells were centrifuged for 8 minutes (100 x g, RT). After centrifugation, the su­
pernatant from the cells was completely removed and the cell pellet was resuspended
carefully in the mastermix. The cells were quickly transferred to the Nucleocuvette®
strip or the cuvette and nucleofected using the desired pulse code(s). After nucleofec­
tion, 80 µL/well or 900 µL/cuvette μL RPMI + 10% or 20% FBS (37 °C) was added to
each well of the strip or in the cuvette and incubated for 15 minutes at 37 °C, 5% CO2.
Each sample was transferred into fresh RPMI supplemented with 10 or 20% FBS, peni­
cillin/streptomycin, and varying concentrations of IL­2 (depending on the experiment,
see results) in a 48­well plate or 6­well plate. The cells were incubated for 1­3 days at
37 °C, 5% CO2, and harvested for analysis by flow cytometry (section 2.9).
2.9 Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry was used to analyze cells by observing internal complexity and size of
the cells allowing for the examination of phenotypical properties. To differentiate cell
populations, cells were stained with specific antibodies conjugated to fluorochromes
before analysis which allows for the detection of optical signal emission. As the pCART­
19 is built to express GFP, its expression can be associated directly with CAR activity.
As a result, no antibody staining was required to identify the CAR­positive population.
Sample analysis was performed on either the LSRFortessa™flow cytometer or the
BD FACSCanto™II flow cytometer. Data analysis of flow cytometric raw data was
performed by FACSDiva Software and further analyzed with FlowJo Software for Mac
(Version 10.10.0, BD Bioscience).
2.9.1 Surface staining
Cells were transferred to a sterile Corning® 96­well Clear Round or V­shaped Bottom
TC­treated Microplate and washed twice in 200 μL FACS buffer (PBS, 2% FBS) by
31
==PAGE:41==
centrifugation for 5 minutes (1500 RPM, RT). The cells were stained with the given
antibody cocktail and the Near­Infrared (NIR) viability dye for staining dead cells. The
cells were incubated for 15­20 minutes in the dark at RT, and subsequently washed
twice in 200 μL FACS buffer for 5 minutes (1500 RPM, RT). The cells were resuspended
in 200 μL FACS buffer. The staining antibodies used in this project are found in table
2.
Table 2: Antibodies used for porcine PBMC stimulation and flow cytometry.
Specificity
Clone
Isotype
Host species
Target species
Fluorochrome
Source
Porcine PBMC stimulation
CD3ε
UCHT1
IgG1
Mouse
Human
­
BioLegend
CD3ε
PPT3
IgG1
Mouse
Porcine
­
BIO­RAD
CD28
3D11
IgG1
Mouse
Porcine
­
BIO­RAD
Flow cytometry
NIR Viability Dye
Near­Infrared
Invitrogen
LDL­receptor
C7
IgG2b
Mouse
Human
PE
BD Pharmingen
CD25
K231.3B2
IgG1
Mouse
Porcine
Alexa 488
BIO­RAD
CD3ε
BB23­8E6­8C8
IgG2a
Mouse
Porcine
PerCP­Cy5.5
BD Pharmingen
2.9.2 Compensation
Before sample analysis on either the LSRFortessa™flow cytometer or the BD FAC­
SCanto™II flow cytometer, a compensation was run and computed using FACSDiva
software (BD, USA) to minimize spectral overlaps in the emission wavelengths of flu­
orochromes, allowing for more accurate detection of individual markers in multi­color
antibody panel analysis. OneComp eBeads™were used for fluorochrome­conjugated
antibodies. OneComp eBeads™bind to the Fc region of fluorochrome­conjugated
antibodies creating a signal that mimics stained cells giving single­color compensa­
tion controls. OneComp eBeads™(Thermofisher, 01­1111­41) were prepared for each
fluorochrome­conjugated antibody by staining one drop of beads with 1μL of antibody
and incubating at RT for 10 minutes. The beads were washed twice in FACS buffer by
centrifugation for 5 minutes (500 x g). Each compensation control was resuspended
in 200 μL FACS buffer.
For the NIR compensation beads, the ArC™Amine Reactive Compensation Bead Kit
(Thermofisher, A10346) was used. ArC™Amine Reactive Beads are chemically mod­
ified to covalently bind amine­reactive dyes, like NIR, while ArC™Negative Beads lack
functional groups providing a dye­negative reference population. One drop of ArC™
Amine Reactive beads was mixed with 1 μL of NIR dye and 100 μL PBS followed by
incubation for 30 minutes at 4 °C. Subsequently, the beads were washed twice in 2
32
==PAGE:42==
mL PBS by centrifugation for 5 minutes (500 x g). One drop of ArC™Amine Nega­
tive beads was added to the control and mixed. The NIR compensation control was
resuspended in 200 μL FACS buffer.
2.10 Sandwich ELISA
ELISA (Enzyme­linked immunosorbent assay) was used to detect cytokines from the
supernatant obtained after PBMC stimulation (section 2.7). The principle of a sand­
wich ELISA is to first coat a plate with a capture antibody specific to the protein of
interest. Then the protein of interest is added to the plate and binds to the capture
antibody. Subsequently, a detection antibody is added, which is linked to an enzyme
that produces a measurable signal. In this case, the detection antibody is biotinylated,
allowing it to bind tightly to streptavidin that is conjugated to HRP (horseradish peroxi­
dase). When streptavidin­HRP is added, it binds to the biotin on the detection antibody
and the HRP enzyme then catalyzes a colorimetric reaction upon substrate addition,
producing a measurable wavelength proportional to the amount of protein of interest.
2.10.1 IFN­γ ELISA
The stimulatory effect of different stimulators was assessed by detecting the concen­
tration of the cytokine Interferon­γ (IFN­γ) secreted from the stimulated pig PBMCs
using porcine IFN­γ ELISA. A NUNC MaxiSorp 96­well microtiter plate was coated
with 50 μL per well of porcine­specific IFN­γ mAb (P2F6) (MP700 Thermo Fisher Sci­
entific) to a concentration of 1 µg/mL in 0.05M, pH 9.6 carbonate buffer and incubated
at 4 °C overnight (O/N). The plate was emptied and incubated on a shaking table for
1 hour at RT with 200 μL blocking solution (PBS, 1% skimmed milk powder (Sigma­
Aldrich, 70166), 0.05% Tween­20 (Serva, 2037470.01)) per well. The microtiter plate
was washed 3 times in washing buffer (PBS, 0.01% Tween­20). Each sample was
diluted 1:2 in dilution buffer (PBS, 1% skimmed milk powder, 0.05% Tween­20). The
IFN­γ standard (RnD 985­PI, 100 µg/mL) was diluted to a start concentration of 1000
pg/mL in dilution buffer, and a 2­fold dilution was made. To the microtiter plate, 50
μL/well of the samples and controls were added. The microtiter plate was incubated
for 1 hour on a shaking table at RT. Subsequently, the microtiter plate was washed 5
times in washing buffer, and 50 μL biotinylated mouse anti­pig IFN­γ (P2C11) (559958,
BD Pharmingen) diluted 1:500 in dilution buffer was added to each well. The microtiter
plate was incubated for 1 hour on a shaking table at RT followed by washing 5 times in
33
==PAGE:43==
washing buffer. Subsequently, 50 μL HRP­streptavidin (SNN1004 Invitrogen) diluted
1:10000 in dilution buffer was added to each well. The microtiter plate was incubated for
30 minutes on a shaking table at RT followed by washing 5 times in washing buffer. The
microtiter plate was aspirated and tapped on absorbent paper to remove excess liquid
and 50 μL TMB substrate (3,3’,5,5’­tetramethylbenzidine/H2O2 (Kem­En­Tec 5280A))
was added to each well and incubated in the dark for 1­30 minutes. The reaction was
stopped by adding 150 μL sulfuric acid 0.5 M H2SO4 per well. The optical density (OD)
values were read at 450 nm and at 650 nm for the background absorbance using a
Multiskan Ex reader (Gen5, BioTek Instruments).
2.10.2 IL­2 ELISA
The stimulatory effect of different stimulators was assessed by detecting the concen­
tration of the cytokine IL­2 secreted from the stimulated pig PBMCs using porcine IL­2
ELISA. A NUNC MaxiSorp 96­well microtiter plate was coated with 100 μL per well
of porcine IL­2 capture antibody (841264) (DuoSet ELISA development system (Cat.
DY652), R&D Systems) to the working concentration indicated on the certificate of anal­
ysis (C of A) in reagent diluent (PBS, 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), pH 7.2­7.4) and
incubated at RT O/N. PBS was made by diluting 1:10 of sterile PBS pH 7.2 DTU stock
solution (Gibco 10x) in milliQ H2O. The plate was washed 3 times in washing buffer
(PBS, 0.01% Tween­20) and blocked for 1 hour at RT with 300 μL reagent diluent per
well. The microtiter plate was washed 3 times in washing buffer. Each sample was
diluted 1:2 in reagent diluent. The IL­2 standard (Porcine IL­2 Standard, 841266, 150
ng/mL) was diluted to a start concentration of 3000 pg/mL in reagent diluent and a 2­
fold dilution was made in 7 wells. To the microtiter plate, 100 μL/well of the samples
and controls were added. The microtiter plate was incubated for 2 hours at RT. Subse­
quently, the microtiter plate was washed 3 times in washing buffer and 100 μL porcine
IL­2 detection antibody (841265) (DuoSet ELISA development system (Cat. DY652),
R&D Systems) diluted to the working concentration indicated on the C of A in reagent
diluent was added to each well. The microtiter plate was incubated for 2 hours at RT
followed by washing twice in washing buffer. Subsequently, 100 μL HRP streptavidin
(890803) (DuoSet ELISA development system (Cat. DY652), R&D Systems) diluted
1:200 in dilution buffer was added to each well. The microtiter plate was incubated
for 20 minutes at RT in the dark followed by washing 3 times in washing buffer. The
34
==PAGE:44==
microtiter plate was aspirated and tapped on absorbent paper to remove excess liquid,
and 100 μL TMB substrate (Kem­En­Tec 5280A) was added to each well and incu­
bated in the dark for 20 minutes. The reaction was stopped by adding 50 μL sulfuric
acid 0.5 M H2SO4 per well. The OD values were read at 450 nm and at 650 nm for the
background absorbance using a Multiskan Ex reader (Gen5, BioTek Instruments).
2.11 Statistical analysis
Raw data from flow cytometry was analyzed using FlowJo 10.10.0. Before data anal­
ysis, compensation was adjusted. Frequencies were extracted from FlowJo and ana­
lyzed in GraphPad Prism software (version 10.4.1 for Windows, GraphPad Software).
Standard curves for ELISA analysis were made in Ascent Software Version 2.6 as
linear regression, sigmoid logistic, or four­parameter logistics for IFN­γ and IL­2. Raw
data from the ELISA results were analyzed in Ascent Software Version 2.6 and then
further analyzed in GraphPad Prism software (version 10.4.1 for Windows, GraphPad
Software).
This thesis serves as a proof of concept project, focusing on the creation of porcine
CAR T cells, rather than generating technical and biological replicates. Statistical anal­
ysis between samples of CD25 expression, IFN­γ secretion, IL­2 secretion, and CAR
transfection efficiency from nucleofection and viral transduction could not be performed
due to a lack of replicates.
35
==PAGE:45==
3 Results
The following section presents the results from the de novo development of porcine
CD19­CAR T cells using a well­characterized human CD19­CAR T cell construct as
a foundational template. The results include the design of a porcine CD19­CAR con­
struct, the development of an activation procedure tailored to pig T cells, and the eval­
uation of viral transduction and nucleofection as gene delivery methods. A substantial
portion of the data generated during the optimization of experimental methods is pro­
vided in the appendix.
pCART­19 construct
A well­established CD19­specific CAR backbone, originally developed for human use,
was selected to test the feasibility of creating functional porcine CAR T cells. To tailor a
construct specific to pigs, each domain of the original human CD19­CAR construct was
aligned with the porcine analog and evaluated for use in the construct. The porcine­
specific CD19­CAR construct (pCART­19) was designed as illustrated in figure 3.1.
The first element of the construct, the elongation factor 1α (EF­1α) promoter, was re­
placed with a porcine EF­1α promoter kindly donated by Asghar Ali, Gene Center Mu­
nich. The next element assessed was the CD8­α leader (L) sequence, which was
identified in UniProt under entry Q6R2U9 (signal domain). Alignment of the porcine
and human CD8­αL amino acid sequences revealed 83% query coverage and 75%
identity (see appendix A2). Due to the limited sequence similarity, the porcine CD8­αL
sequence was selected for use in the CAR construct to ensure maximized compatibil­
ity. The subsequent unit in the construct is the single­chain variable fragment (scFv)
targeting CD19. To retain specificity for CD19+ cells the variable heavy (VH) and light
Figure 3.1: Porcine CD19­CAR construct (pCART­19). From left to right the construct begins with
the porcine­specific elongation factor 1α (EF­1α) promoter. This is followed by porcine CD8­α leader
peptide, serving as the porcine analog of the human counterpart. The single­chain variable fragment
(scFv) targeting CD19 remains unchanged from the original human CD19­CAR construct. Next is the
CD8­α hinge and transmembrane domain (CD8­α HT), both derived from the human version. The in­
tracellular domains of CD28 and CD3ζ are porcine­specific. Finally, the T2A sequence and enhanced
green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter gene are retained from the original construct. Figure created
in PowerPoint.
36
==PAGE:46==
(VL) chains along with the linker region were preserved from the original human CD19­
CAR design.
An alignment was performed between the hinge and transmembrane domain from the
original human CD8­α domain and a porcine CD8­α transmembrane domain (Uniprot
entry A0A4X1W571). The alignment yielded a query coverage of 28% and a sequence
identity of 63% (see appendix A3). Despite this partial similarity, the human CD8­α
hinge and transmembrane domains were retained in the final construct based on the
rationale that the transmembrane region would not significantly affect the CAR func­
tion. The porcine CD28 domain (Uniprot, A0A8D0J3N4) was used in the construct, to
enhance compatibility with porcine T cell signaling. The intracellular domain of human­
CD3ζ was compared with the porcine sequence (Uniprot, Q9XSJ9), which exhibited
no amino acid differences (appendix A4). The human­CD3ζ domain was therefore
included in the construct without modification. The final components of the construct
included a T2A self­cleaving peptide sequence followed by an enhanced green fluores­
cent protein (GFP) reporter. The T2A sequence facilitates the expression of multiple
proteins from a single mRNA transcript by inducing ribosomal skipping which prevents
the formation of a peptide bond at the T2A site. As a result GFP is translated as a
separate protein enabling the identification and analysis of transfected cells via flow
cytometry.
Activation of porcine T cells
The initial experiments in the development of pCART­19 cells focused on activating
porcine T cells. Having a functioning activation procedure is important to expand the
cells and deliver the gene of interest. Activated T cells are especially important in viral
transduction due to the upregulation of LDL­receptors [78]. Activated T cells might also
benefit the nucleofection efficiency as seen for human T cells [104]. Several stimulation
experiments were conducted to determine the optimal conditions for T cell activation.
Activation was evaluated based on IFN­γ determined by ELISA (section 2.10) and the
expression of the cell surface activation marker CD25 analyzed by flow cytometry (sec­
tion 2.9) (see gating strategy in appendix B1).
37
==PAGE:47==
Plate­bound anti­human CD3 mAb activation
Initially, the cells were stimulated using plate­bound human­specific anti­CD3 mAb
(Ultra­LEAF purified anti­human CD3, mouse IgG1 anti­human, clone: UCHT1, Bi­
oLegend) and soluble porcine­specific anti­CD28 mAb (mouse IgG1 anti­pig, clone:
3D11, Bio­rad) supplemented with human IL­2 (Human IL­2 Recombinant Protein, Pe­
proTech®). This experiment did not show any activation of the pig PBMCs (data not
shown). The lack of activation might be due to the absence of one or more of the
three stimulation signals described in section 1.2.2. The anti­CD28 mAb used in the
experiment was porcine­specific and literature has confirmed cross­reactivity between
human IL­2 and porcine IL­2 [105]. Thus, it was rationalized that the human­specific
anti­CD3 mAb might not be cross­reactive towards the porcine CD3 complex.
Anti­CD3 mAb­coated Dynabead activation
The human­specific anti­CD3 mAb was replaced with a porcine­specific anti­CD3 mAb
(mouse IgG1 anti­pig CD3ε, clone: PPT3, Bio­Rad) in a new experimental setup.
In previous research the anti­CD3ε clone PPT3 mAb was demonstrated to activate
porcine T cells [70, 106]. Uehlein et al. demonstrated activation using anti­CD3 mAb (5,
10, or 20 mg/ml, clone PPT3; AbD Serotec)­coated Dynabeads™Pan Mouse IgG (Life
Technologies). To obtain a similar activation protocol, Dynabeads™M­450 Epoxy were
coated with anti­porcine CD3 clone PPT3 mAb (following the manufacturer’s instruc­
tions) and used in combination with soluble anti­porcine CD28 mAb and human IL­2 at
different concentrations. However, no activation was seen except for the positive con­
trols stimulated with SEB (Staphylococcal enterotoxin B) and LAC (Lymphocyte activa­
tion cocktail) (see appendix B2). To assess the poor outcome of the bead­stimulation,
a new experiment was performed to test the functionality of the anti­CD3 mAb­coated
Dynabeads™. The performance of the beads in isolating CD3+ cells was evaluated us­
ing anti­CD3 mAb­coated Dynabeads™from the previous experiment with additional
controls including BSA­blocked Dynabeads™and a non­isolated PBMC population.
No difference in isolation between the anti­CD3 mAb­coated Dynabeads™and the
control conditions was observed (see appendix B3). These results revealed dysfunc­
tional anti­CD3 mAb­coated Dynabeads™which was likely due to limited or no anti­
CD3 mAb coating of the beads. This clarified why anti­CD3 mAb­coated Dynabeads™
did not yield any cell activation in the previous experiment (appendix B2).
38
==PAGE:48==
Plate­bound anti­porcine CD3 mAb activation
Based on the results presented above, plate­bound anti­CD3 mAb was tested in a
new cell activation experiment. Cells were stimulated using different concentrations of
plate­bound anti­porcine CD3 mAb (5/10 µg/mL) and soluble anti­porcine CD28 mAb
(2/4 µg/mL) in combination with 100 IU/mL IL­2. After 48 hours, CD25 expression was
examined using flow cytometry, and IFN­γ release was detected with ELISA. The anti­
CD3 mAb and anti­CD28 mAb stimulated cells showed close to 25% CD25 expression
from both of the two stimulation conditions and the level of IFN­γ was slightly increased
(see appendix B4). To improve the activation protocol, six different conditions of anti­
CD3 (5/10/20 µg/mL) mAb and anti­CD28 (2/4/8/16 µg/mL) mAb were tested. Fresh
and thawed porcine PBMCs from pigs 85 and 86 were used to examine any differences
in activation efficiency when using fresh and thawed samples. PBMCs were assessed
for CD25 expression and IFN­γ secretion 48 and 72 hours after stimulation (figure 3.2
and figure 3.3). IL­2 secretion was also measured. However, no IL­2 secretion was
detected in any of the samples besides the two positive controls (see appendix B5).
CD25 expression from plate­bound anti­porcine CD3 mAb activation
CD25 expression was assessed 48 and 72 hours after stimulation in fresh PBMCs
(figure 3.2A+B). The results revealed a difference between pig 85 and pig 86 with pig
86 showing higher CD25 expression overall. For pig 86, CD25 expression remained
quite consistent across all activation conditions after 48 hours (∼50%) and 72 hours
(∼65%), respectively. Pig 85 showed the highest CD25 expression under the less con­
centrated conditions after 48 hours (∼35%) and 72 hours (∼48%). Overall, the thawed
PBMCs showed lower CD25 expression than fresh cells and the CD25 expression was
more similar between pigs 85 and 86 in thawed cells (figure 3.2C+D). Pig 85 showed
a tendency to express slightly more CD25 than pig 86 in thawed PBMCs. The CD25
expression in thawed PBMCs was highest in both pigs when treated with the most con­
centrated activation conditions (20 µg/mL anti­CD3ε mAb and 8/16 µg/mL anti­CD28
mAb; ∼40­55%). In general, the CD25 expression increased from 48 hours to 72 hours
for both the fresh and thawed PBMCs.
39
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.2: The percentage of CD25+ live cells measured 48 hours and 72 hours after stimulation
using flow cytometry. Fresh or thawed PBMCs were stimulated with either 20 µg/mL anti­CD3 mAb
with 8 µg/mL anti­CD28 mAb, 2 µg/mL SEB, or 1 µL/mL LAC. In all samples 100 IU/mL IL­2 was added.
CD25 expression assessed A) 48 hours and B) 72 hours after activation of fresh PBMCs, and C) 48
hours and D) 72 hours after activation of thawed PBMCs. CNT; unstimulated control, CD3; anti­CD3
mAb, CD28; anti­CD28 mAb. The symbols represent each sample. The PBMCs #85.1 and #86.1 (see
table 1) from pigs 85 and 86 were used in this experiment.
IFN­γ secretion from plate­bound anti­porcine CD3 mAb activation
The results of IFN­γ secretion from the fresh PBMCs were detected after 48 hours of
activation using ELISA (figure 3.3A). Most of the samples were over the upper limit
of quantification of the standard curve indicated by arrows. The measurements of
IFN­γ secretion within the detection limit ranged between 2500­3000 pg/mL across all
activation conditions. The fresh PBMCs from pig 86 stimulated with 20 µg/mL anti­CD3
mAb and 8 µg/mL anti­CD28 mAb showed the most IFN­γ secretion compared to the
other PBMCs of pig 86 stimulated with other concentrations of anti­CD3 mAb and anti­
CD28 mAb. The IFN­γ secretion from thawed PBMCs was measured after 48 hours
40
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.3: IFN­γ secretion measured 48 and/or 72 hours after stimulation using ELISA. Fresh or
thawed PBMCs were stimulated with either 20 µg/mL anti­CD3 mAb + 8 µg/mL anti­CD28 mAb, 2 µg/mL
SEB, or 1 µL/mL LAC. In all samples, 100 IU/mL IL­2 was added during stimulation. IFN­γ secretion
measured A) 48 hours after activation of fresh PBMCs, and B) 48 hours, and C) 72 hours after activation
of thawed PBMCs. CNT; unstimulated control, CD3; anti­CD3 mAb, CD28; anti­CD28 mAb. The arrow
indicates that the samples are over the upper limit of quantification of the standard curve. Samples
with a value of 0 represent measurements that fall below the standard curve. The symbols represent
replicates of each sample. The PBMCs #85.1 and #86.1 (see table 1) from pigs 85 and 86 were used
in this experiment.
and 72 hours of stimulation (figure 3.3B+C). PBMCs from pig 85 showed a tendency
to secrete more IFN­γ than pig 86 (pig 85; 3000­8000 pg/mL, pig 86; <2000 pg/mL).
This followed the same tendency as the CD25 expression. After 48 and 72 hours, the
two activation conditions using 20 µg/mL anti­CD3 mAb showed the strongest IFN­γ
secretion among all six anti­CD3/CD28 mAb activation conditions in pig 85. The same
tendency was seen after 48 hours for pig 86. Overall, the level of IFN­γ was slightly
increased after 72 hours of activation in both pigs.
41
==PAGE:51==
From both CD25 expression and IFN­γ secretion, the optimal activation condition was
identified as 20 µg/mL anti­CD3 mAb and 8 µg/mL anti­CD28 mAb in combination with
100 IU/mL IL­2. This conclusion was primarily drawn from experiments using thawed
samples as these constitute the main sample type throughout this project. The selected
activation condition was subsequently used for PBMC stimulation prior to both lentiviral
transduction and nucleofection.
Gene delivery
Viral transduction
LDL­receptor detection
One approach for gene delivery in this project was the use of lentiviral transduction
which had already been established for human T cells in the T cell and Cancer re­
search group at DTU. The lentivirus presented in this project was pseudotyped with
Indiana VSV­G protein. As elaborated in section 1.3.2, LDL­receptors expressed on
the T cell surface are needed for successful gene delivery when using lentivirus pseu­
dotyped with VSV­glycoprotein. Thus, the initial experiments aimed at detecting the
LDL­receptor expressed on the T cell surface by flow cytometry (see gating strategy in
appendix C1). Both unstimulated and stimulated cells were analyzed for LDL­receptor
expression using the human­specific anti­LDL­receptor mAb (BD Pharmining) in multi­
ple experiments (data not shown). The stimulated porcine PBMCs, using the optimized
activation protocol of 20 μg/mL anti­CD3 mAb, 8 μg/mL anti­CD28 mAb, and 100 UI/mL
IL­2, showed a low level of LDL­receptor expression (below 0.5% after stimulation for
48 hours) (see appendix C2).
Assessment of viral transduction
Although the LDL­receptor could not be detected, the porcine PBMCs were transduced
with the pCART­19 plasmid using lentivirus. The transduction was performed on un­
stimulated and stimulated PBMCs using the optimized stimulation conditions. The cells
were treated with 10 μL lentivirus per 1 million cells in a volume of 1 mL and the GFP
expression was analyzed by flow cytometry 96 hours following viral transduction (see
gating strategy in appendix C3). The experiment yielded low GFP expression in un­
stimulated and stimulated PBMCs with the maximum expression reaching around 0.6%
and 0.9% respectively (see appendix C4).
42
==PAGE:52==
In an attempt to increase GFP expression levels, the concentration of lentivirus was
increased to 15 μL per 1 million cells in a volume of 1 mL in stimulated PBMCs from
pigs 85 and 86. In addition, for three different samples, the virus was added 24, 48,
and 72 hours after stimulation, respectively, to assess the optimal time point for trans­
duction post­stimulation. The GFP expression was analyzed 4 days after the last viral
transduction time­point. Still, viral transduction yielded low GFP expression with the
highest GFP expression after 24 hours of activation reaching around 1.9% and 0.8%
in pig 85 and 86, respectively (see appendix C5).
Nucleofection
As lentiviral transduction of porcine PBMCs yielded low GFP expression, nucleofection
was assessed as another approach for gene delivery. Nucleofection of porcine cells
was initially tested using the commercial pmaxGFP™plasmid to confirm the feasibility
of transfecting porcine PBMCs. Following this, the pCART­19 plasmid was introduced
for the generation of porcine CD19­CAR T cells.
Nucleofection optimization using pmaxGFP™plasmid
The commercial pmaxGFP™plasmid, optimized for nucleofection, was utilized in the
initial experiments to evolve and optimize the nucleofection procedure. The initial nu­
cleofection experiments were performed in unstimulated PBMCs using 1, 2, or 3 µg
pmaxGFP™per 1 million cells, resulting in 100% cell death (results not shown). To im­
prove the survival rate, nucleofection was conducted on stimulated and unstimulated
PBMCs from pig 85 using 7 different nucleofection pulse codes. To avoid DNA toxicity
only 0.3 µg pmaxGFP™per 1 million cells was used. PBMCs were analyzed by flow
cytometry 96 hours after nucleofection. Unactivated cells showed higher viability than
activated cells, and three nucleofection codes ­ DR115, DT113, DT115 ­ were chosen
for further experiments, based on their resulting survival rates from approximately 39%
to 65% in unactivated cells (see appendix D1). The live cells showed low GFP expres­
sion ranging from approximately 2% to 4% using codes DR115, DT113, and DT115.
Based on this experiment, unactivated cells were used from here.
In a new experiment the GFP expression was optimized using the identified pulse
codes (DR115, DT113, and DT115). The concentration of pmaxGFP™plasmid was in­
creased to 1 µg per 1 million cells and nucleofection was performed using PBMCs from
43
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.4: The percentage of live lymphocytes and GFP expression in live lymphocytes after
nucleofection with 1 µg pmaxGFP™per million cells using different pulse codes. Viability and
GFP expression assessed A) 24 hours, B) 48 hours, and C) 72 hours after nucleofection with codes
DR115, DT113, and DT115, respectively. All samples consist of unstimulated cells thawed 2 hours
before nucleofection and incubated with 20 IU/mL IL­2. After nucleofection, cells were cultured in RPMI
supplemented with 10% FBS and 20 IU/mL IL­2. D) Example of a backgating strategy to validate GFP
expression used for analyzing the results. The gates were set based on the CNT sample. The backgating
analysis is obtained from the sample nucleofected using code DT115 after 48 hours. Gating hierarchy:
Lymphocytes; Single cells, Live cells: GFP+. The gates were set based on the CNT samples. CNT;
non­nucleofected control, h; hours. The PBMCs #86.2 (see table 1) from pigs 86 were used in these
experiments.
44
==PAGE:54==
pig 86. Cell viability and GFP expression were evaluated by flow cytometry at 24, 48,
and 72 hours post­nucleofection (figure 3.4A–C). The highest level of GFP expression
was observed 48 hours post­nucleofection using pulse code DT113 with approximately
12% GFP+ cells. A similar level of expression (∼11%) was achieved using nucleofec­
tion code DT115. However, a marked decline in cell viability was noted between 24
and 48 hours. To confirm that the live cells expressing GFP were accurately identi­
fied, a backgating approach was used to trace their characteristics in earlier analysis
steps. This approach enabled the localization of GFP+ cells within the overall popula­
tion, revealing whether they resided in an ambiguous zone between live and dead cell
populations. All GFP+ cells derived 24 and 48 hours after nucleofection with codes
DR115, DT113, and DT115 resided within the live lymphocyte population. These re­
sults were equivalent to the GFP+ cells in the example of backgating from nucleofection
with code DT115 assessed after 48 hours (figure 3.4D).
Assessment of pCART­19 plasmid nucleofection
The initial nucleofection experiments show that nucleofection of porcine PBMCs with
pmaxGFP™plasmid is possible. Next, the viability and GFP expression from cells
transfected with pCART­19 were assessed to test the nucleofection efficiency of the
pCART­19 plasmid. The experimental setup from above was repeated with PBMCs
from pig 86 using nucleofection codes DR115, DT113, and DT115 with 1 µg pCART­19
plasmid per 1 million cells. The GFP expression and cell survival were analyzed 24,
48, and 72 hours after nucleofection.
The cell populations nucleofected with DT113 and DR115 showed maximum GFP ex­
pression of around 3.4% (see appendix D2). However, the nucleofection code DT115
resulted in a higher transfection level. The highest GFP expression was detected af­
ter 48 hours with a GFP expression of 15.4%, but decreased rapidly after 72 hours to
0.26% GFP expression (figure 3.5A). To optimize the GFP expression, nucleofection
using pulse code DT115 was repeated in triplicate using 1.5 µg pCART­19 plasmid per
1 million cells using PBMCs from pig 86. RPMI supplemented with 20% FBS and 500
IU/mL IL­2 was used after nucleofection to increase cell survival. To compare nucle­
ofection with 1 µg and 1.5 µg pCART­19 plasmid, one of the triplicates are visualized
in histograms next to the previous experiment (figure 3.5B). However, the transfec­
45
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.5: Validation of GFP expression in live lymphocytes assessed 24, 48, and 72 hours after
nucleofection with pulse code DT115. GFP expression in live lymphocytes (blue) overlayed with
CNT sample (red). All samples consist of unstimulated cells thawed 2 hours before nucleofection and
incubated with 20 IU/mL IL­2. A) Cells from pig 86 nucleofected with 1 µg pCART­19 plasmid per million
cells. After nucleofection, cells were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 20 IU/mL IL­2.
B) Cells from pig 86 nucleofected with 1.5 µg pCART­19 plasmid per million cells. After nucleofection,
cells were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 20% FBS and 500 IU/mL IL­2. CNT; non­nucleofected
control, h; hours. The PBMCs #86.2 (see table 1) from pigs 86 were used in these experiments.
46
==PAGE:56==
tion efficiency in this experiment was lower with a GFP expression of 2.02% after 48
hours compared to the nucleofected cells using 1 µg pCART­19 plasmid (figure 3.5A). A
backgating analysis (see appendix D3) was further generated to assess the difference
between the two results.
Cell survival and GFP expression in the two experiments are also plotted and visual­
ized in a bar chart (figure 3.6). All three replicates showed very low GFP expression
compared to the experiment using 1 µg pCART­19 plasmid per 1 million cells 24 and 48
hours after nucleofection. In particular, the two experiments differed when observing
the GFP expression after 48 hours (figure 3.6B). However, the cell viability was higher
for cells nucleofected with 1.5 µg pCART­19 plasmid per 1 million cells.
Due to limited PBMCs from pig 86, four other pigs (109­112) were introduced. The
conditions from the previous experiment yielding up to 15.4% GFP expression (figure
3.5A) were repeated with one adjustment. Instead of using 20 IU/mL IL­2, 500 IU/mL IL­
2 was used after nucleofection to obtain better cell survival. However, this experiment
also showed low GFP expression (see appendix D4I+II). As similar GFP expression
was not obtained, different conditions were applied in additional experiments: 1.5 µg
pCART­19 plasmid concentrations per 1 million cells were tested, 1 and 2 million cells
per nucleofector well (20 µL) were tested, and nucleofection codes DN100 and EO115
were reintroduced. However, none of the conditions increased GFP expression much
in pigs 109­112 (see appendix D4III­IV).
To explore if PBMCs from pigs 109­112 were more resistant to nucleofection, more
nucleofection codes were reintroduced (DN100, EH100, EO115, and FI115) and tested
on PBMCs from pigs 86 and 111 for comparison. Cells were nucleofected with 1.5
µg per 1 million cells pCART­19 plasmid, and cell survival and GFP expression were
assessed by flow cytometry 24, 48, and 72 hours after nucleofection. All four pulse
codes resulted in detectable GFP expression, with two of the pulse codes showing up
to 25% GFP expression, but with low viability below 14% after 48 hours (see appendix
D5). The backgating analysis showed that the GFP+ cells might originate from the low­
viability or dying cell population when observing the forward scatter (FSC­A). However,
the NIR­staining showed the GFP+ cells remain from the live gate (see appendix D6).
47
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.6: The percentage of live lymphocytes and GFP expression in live lymphocytes as­
sessed 24, 48, and 72 hours after nucleofection with pulse code DT115 in two different experi­
ments. All samples consist of unstimulated cells thawed 2 hours before nucleofection and incubated
with 20 IU/mL IL­2. The left side of the graphs shows PBMCs from pig 86 nucleofected with 1 µg pCART­
19 plasmid per million cells. After nucleofection, cells were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10%
FBS and 20 IU/mL IL­2. The right side of the graphs shows three replicates of PBMCs from pig 86
nucleofected with 1.5 µg pCART­19 plasmid per million cells. After nucleofection, cells were cultured in
RPMI supplemented with 20% FBS and 500 IU/mL IL­2. CNT; non­nucleofected control, h; hours. The
PBMCs #86.2 (see table 1) from pigs 86 were used in these experiments. The symbols represent each
replicate, and error bars represent the SD of the mean.
To summarize, the last experiments (appendix D5) showed between 8­25% GFP ex­
pression using codes EH100, EO115, and FI115; still, the low viability of these cells
makes the results difficult to interpret. However, the experiment illustrated in figure
3.5A showed a clear live nucleofected lymphocyte population with 15.4% GFP expres­
sion, indicating porcine CD19­CAR T cells.
48
==PAGE:58==
4 Discussion
This project represents the initial steps toward developing FAP­specific porcine CAR
T cells, establishing a proof of concept for a previously uncharacterized system. In
this thesis, we demonstrated the initial steps in generating porcine CAR T cells by
stimulating porcine PBMCs and introducing a CD19­CAR construct using nucleofec­
tion. Lentiviral transduction was also explored as a method for gene delivery, although
with limited success in porcine cells. The following section will discuss these findings
in greater detail including their limitations and future potential for porcine CAR T cell
development.
Overall, only one or two replications of each sample were used and only samples from
1­4 pigs were used in each experiment to establish a proof of concept. Due to the
small sample size and thus lack of statistical analysis, results in this report should be
interpreted with caution and be repeated with more replicates and samples from more
pigs.
Activation of porcine T cells
In most studies, T cells are activated before viral transduction or nucleofection to ex­
pand T cells and enhance gene delivery efficiency [71, 72, 73]. To mimic this approach
in porcine cells, we made a procedure for porcine T cell activation using anti­CD3 mAb
and anti­CD28 mAb and IL­2. This stimulation method was designed to replicate the co­
stimulatory signals required for effective activation, proliferation, and increased trans­
fection susceptibility. Optimizing activation conditions was believed to be a critical step
toward enabling efficient gene delivery and functional CAR T cell development in pigs.
To assess T cell activation, CD25 cell surface expression and IFN­γ secretion from
porcine PBMC samples were evaluated. The optimal conditions were determined to
be 20 µg/mL anti­CD3 mAb and 8 µg/mL anti­CD28 mAb. Activation with 20 µg/mL
anti­CD3 mAb and 8 µg/mL anti­CD28 mAb resulted in an optimum of around 65%
and 50% CD25 expression in fresh and thawed PBMCs (figure 3.2B+D) and an IFN­γ
secretion of around 3000 pg/mL and 7000 pg/mL in fresh and thawed PBMCs, respec­
tively (figure 3.3). CD25 is a commonly used marker for late activation in human T cells
[107]. Normally, CD25 expression peaks 72 hours after stimulation [107], explaining
the increased CD25 expression from 48 hours to 72 hours for both the fresh and thawed
49
==PAGE:59==
samples (figure 3.2). Ideally, a combination of both CD25 and CD69 activation mark­
ers would give better insight into the activation dynamics of the T cells as CD69 is a
commonly used early activation marker for human lymphocytes [107]. A study by Tian
et al. [108] has recognized CD69 as an early activation marker for porcine lymphocytes
and has developed an mAb specific to pig CD69 for detection; however, this mAb has
not been commercialized yet.
Very few studies exist describing the activation of porcine T cells using anti­CD3 and
anti­CD28 antibodies. Only one article by Uehlein et. al [70] has reported an approach
for activating porcine T cells which involves anti­CD3 mAb­coated beads and soluble
anti­CD28 mAb. In the present study, a bead­activation approach was tested (results
section: Activation of porcine PBMCs + appendix B2); however, the beads did not
result in proper efficiency, probably due to anti­CD3 mAb­coupling procedure problems
(appendix B3). Therefore, plate­bound anti­CD3 mAb was used instead. However, it
is speculated that using anti­CD3 mAb­coated beads for activation would give better
efficiency and require smaller concentrations of antibodies compared to plate­bound
activation methods. Uehlein et. al [70] have reported that porcine CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells stimulated for 3 days with anti­CD28 mAb in solution and anti­CD3 mAb­coated
beads showed the optimum induced activation and proliferation of both porcine CD4+
and CD8+ T cells using 10 ng/mL anti­pCD28 mAb and 1 µg/mL anti­CD3 mAb. Thus,
much lower concentrations of antibody to achieve an optimal activation were used by
Uehlein et. al, compared to this study. However, it can be difficult to compare as
activation markers, cell concentrations, and the used cell populations (PBMCs vs. T
cells) differ. Additionally, research on human lymphocyte activation suggests benefits
from using bead­based activation methods. Casati et al. [109] have compared the
use of plate­bound anti­CD3 + soluble anti­CD28 antibodies with anti­CD3 + anti­CD28
mAb­coated MACSiBeads, and a human reagent consisting of anti­CD3 and anti­CD28
antibodies immobilized on flexible matrices (TransAct). Cytokine secretion of IL­2 and
IFN­γ upon re­stimulation with target cells was higher in CD8+ T cells stimulated with
MACSiBeads and TransAct compared to CD8+ T cells stimulated using plate­bound
anti­CD3 and anti­CD28 antibodies.
50
==PAGE:60==
To assess cell stimulation, CD25 expression was analyzed using flow cytometry. The
results showed low CD25 expression in the positive control with SEB­stimulated cells
compared to both stimulation with LAC and anti­CD3/CD28 mAb stimulation. However,
similar results have been reported in another study by Moorton et al. [110]. In this
study, stimulation with 0.5 µg/mL SEB per 5x105 porcine PBMCs showed no significant
difference in CD25 expression in two of three T cell subsets compared to controls
[110]. The CD25 expression varied between pigs from around 10% to 40% after SEB
activation in the CD4+ T cell subset [110], where the results presented in this report
show around 15­20% CD25 expression 48­72 hours after activation.
IL­2 secretion was also analyzed using ELISA to assess cell activation in this study.
However, no IL­2 secretion was detected in porcine PBMCs stimulated with anti­CD3
mAb and anti­CD28 mAb (appendix B5). The effect of IL­2 secretion by anti­CD3/CD28
antibody stimulation in pig cells remains unknown, but studies on human and mouse
lymphocytes are mostly conflicting with the results presented here. Kilpinen et al. [111]
and Hombach et al. [112] both have reported increased IL­2 secretion by human T
cells after 24 hours and 48 hours using stimulation with plate­bound anti­CD3 mAb (0.5
µg/mL) and anti­CD28 mAb (2 µg/mL). One reason for the low IL­2 detection might be
that IL­2 is internalized and degraded by T cells. Duprez el. al. [113] have investigated
the IL­2 and IL­2­receptor kinetics from the T cell line, IARC 301. They found that IL­2
internalization happens after 20­30 minutes and that re­expression of IL­2 receptors on
the cell takes around 30 minutes [113]. Therefore, IL­2 might be internalized by the T
cells in pace with IL­2 production resulting in levels below the detection limit after 24 to
48 hours. However, the positive controls, LAC and SEB, showed IL­2 expression. As
LAC stimulation is powerful, it may be explained by the IL­2 secretion from activated
cells being faster than IL­2 internalization. As SEB stimulation showed lower CD25
expression than other stimulators, this could give rise to less IL­2 internalization by the
T cells (as CD25 is a part of the IL­2 receptor). These are speculations and further
experiments are needed to draw further conclusions.
51
==PAGE:61==
Gene delivery
Viral transduction
Viral transduction was assessed as a gene delivery system for porcine CAR T cell
development using a well­established protocol for lentiviral delivery to human T cells.
However, the experiments conducted in this thesis did not provide encouraging results.
LDL­receptor expression is critical for transduction with VSV­G pseudotyped lentivirus
[78], however both stimulated and unstimulated PBMCs exhibited LDL­receptor ex­
pression below 0.5% in the present study (appendix C2). The lack of detection may
be attributed to the use of a human LDL­receptor­specific antibody. However, Lev­
eringhaus et. al [114] have demonstrated detection of porcine LDL­receptors using
both a monoclonal and a polyclonal antibody derived from humans. In addition, one of
the antibodies was confirmed to be suitable for LDL­receptor detection in pigs by the
manufacturer [114]. However, the anti­LDL­receptor antibody used in this project has
not been reported to cross­react with pig LDL­receptors which may explain the lack of
detected LDL­receptors.
Although no LDL­receptors were detected, viral transduction was still tested and porcine
PBMCs were transduced with lentivirus encoding the pCART­19 construct. Although
this study did not show efficient results (<2% GFP expression (appendix C5)), viral
transduction in porcine cells in vitro has been successful in previous studies. Sinn
et. al. [115] have found that Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)­derived lentivirus
is a more suitable vector than HIV derived lentivirus in a pig model of cystic fibrosis
using porcine kidney epithelia cells and pig airway epithelia cells. In addition, they
demonstrated that pseudotyping the lentivirus with the GP64 envelope resulted in the
highest efficacy compared to other envelope proteins, including VSV­G [115]. In the
present project, an HIV­based lentiviral vector pseudotyped with the VSV­G envelope
was used which may have contributed to the poor transduction outcome. However,
porcine T cells might need other pseudotyped envelopes than pig epithelia cells. Al­
ternative envelope proteins could be explored in future studies to improve efficiency.
According to Howerth et. al., VSV is consistently isolated from feral Ossabaw pigs on
Ossabaw Island [116]. It is therefore likely that the pig cells can be infected with VSV.
However, the VSV found in Ossabaw pigs belongs to the New Jersey serotype (VSV­
52
==PAGE:62==
NJ), where the gene encoding the envelope glycoprotein used in this project is from the
Indiana serotype (VSV­IN) which was also used by Sinn et. al. [115]. The glycoprotein
in the VSV­NJ has also been reported to play a major role in VSV pathogenicity in
pigs causing more severe lesions than VSV­IN [117]. Therefore, utilizing the VSV­NJ­
G protein for pseudotyping lentivirus may result in improved transduction efficiency in
porcine cells.
Lentiviral transduction was not pursued further for gene delivery due to several factors.
First, it would require the design and production of a new viral vector, which has not
previously been tested within the research group. Second, the primary aim of the
project was to develop transient CAR T cells as a foundation for subsequent FAP­CAR
T cell development which is an approach not compatible with the permanent integration
typical of viral vectors.
Nucleofection
Gene delivery using nucleofection was assessed to develop CD19­CAR T cells. In
this project, GFP expression was observed in PBMCs nucleofected with pmaxGFP™
and pCART­19 plasmid. Robust GFP expression with decent cell viability was only ob­
served in one experiment using pCART­19 plasmid despite several attempts to improve
GFP expression. A tendency across the samples of both pmaxGFP™and pCART­19
showed most GFP expression 48 hours after nucleofection.
The literature provides minimal insight into the nucleofection of porcine T cells or PBMCs.
Zhao et al. [118] is one of a few studies that have used nucleofection to transfect un­
stimulated and stimulated porcine PBMCs. Zhao et al. showed that activated T cells
exhibited reduced transfection efficiency compared to unstimulated T cells. Consis­
tent with the findings of our results which also demonstrated reduced transfection ef­
ficiency in stimulated cells compared to unstimulated cells (appendix D1). In contrast
to porcine cells, Lai et al. [119] have reported that activated mouse T cells were more
efficiently transfected than resting T cells when using nucleofection­mediated DNA de­
livery. Aksoy et al. [120] have demonstrated that stimulated human PBMCs showed
higher transfection efficiency compared to unstimulated cells when using 7.5 μg plas­
mid DNA per 1 million cells [120]. Higher transfection efficiencies in unstimulated T
cells seem to be porcine­restricted. Zhao et al. [118] have suggested that a mecha­
53
==PAGE:63==
nism may cause activated porcine T cells to be resistant to transfection. However, due
to a knowledge gap in the porcine T cell activation, the mechanism remains unknown.
Activated porcine T cells may possess different characteristics from activated murine
and human T cells, which makes porcine T cells more resistant to exogenous genes
[118].
As only a few studies have investigated nucleofection of porcine cells. Comprehensive
information regarding the normal/standard level of nucleofection efficiency and viability
in porcine PBMCs is limited. According to Zhao et al. [118], the nucleofection of 0.8
μg pmaxGFP™per 1 million cells in resting porcine T cells resulted in 35% to 39%
GFP expression with 51% viability after 24 hours. In contrast, activated porcine T cells
resulted in 18% to 23% GFP expression with around 53% viability after 24 hours [118].
Unlike Zhao et al., the present data achieved the highest GFP expression after 48
hours post­nucleofection, where unstimulated cells showed 12% GFP expression with
19% viability using 1 μg pmaxGFP™per 1 million cells (figure 3.4C). The highest GFP
expression 24 hours after nucleofection was around 7% with around 35% cell viability
(figure 3.4A). Using pCART­19 plasmid, a maximum GFP expression of 15.4% with
14.2% viability was observed when using 1 μg pCART­19 plasmid per 1 million cells
48 hours after nucleofection (figure 3.5A and figure 3.6).
The initial experiment testing different nucleofection codes on both stimulated and un­
stimulated PBMCs (appendix D1) was the basis for the choices in further experiments.
The GFP expression was only assessed after 96 hours post­nucleofection and showed
that unstimulated PBMCs had higher viability and GFP expression; thus, unstimulated
cells were used throughout this project. Detecting the viability and GFP expression
earlier could have resulted in another outcome and guided the experiments in another
direction as assessment 96 hours post­nucleofection is several days after peak expres­
sion.
In the present study, the gene used for delivery was designed as a DNA plasmid to
accommodate lentiviral vector production (described in section 1.3.2 and section 2.5).
However, using nucleofection­mediated RNA delivery might result in higher transfec­
tion levels and cell viability compared to nucleofection­mediated plasmid DNA delivery.
Furthermore, as mRNA is limited to the cytoplasm and cannot undergo genomic inte­
54
==PAGE:64==
gration, it does not pose a risk of random genomic insertion which is a concern when
using plasmid DNA [83, 84]. Zhao et al. [118] and Aksoy et al. [120] have reported that
nucleofection­mediated RNA delivery has shown higher transfection levels and cell vi­
ability compared to nucleofection­mediated DNA delivery in both porcine and human T
cells. Zhao et al. [118] have demonstrated that both plasmid DNA and mRNA could be
introduced into porcine T cells efficiently. However, nucleofection­mediated mRNA de­
livery resulted in higher transfection levels and cell viability compared to nucleofection­
mediated DNA delivery. Yet, a large amount of high­quality mRNA (6–7 μg/106 cells)
was required to obtain GFP expression of around 50% and a smaller amount of plasmid
DNA (0.8 μg/106 cells) was required to obtain the highest GFP expression (∼35­40%)
observed for nucleofection­mediated DNA delivery [118]. One of the main obstacles
with using plasmid DNA is its limited ability to enter the nucleus [83, 84] which could
potentially contribute to lower transfection efficiency and levels. Additionally, DNA can
be toxic to cells [83, 84], which could affect cell viability. This also limits the maximum
amount of DNA that can be used before becoming harmful to the cells, which may
contribute further to limited transfection levels.
Poor cell survival rates due to DNA toxicity have been addressed before. Several
studies have stated that the transfection with plasmid DNA of human and mouse lym­
phocytes and other cells resulted in the apoptosis of transfected cells induced by the
uptake of exogenous DNA after transfection [121, 122, 123]. However, applying a
caspase inhibitor to block apoptotic pathways in the cells improved cell viability and
transgene expression in all reported cases [121, 122, 123]. Thus, transfection effi­
ciency and cell survival of porcine PBMCs could potentially be improved by applying a
caspase inhibitor after nucleofection with the pCART­19 plasmid.
The size of the plasmid may also have an impact on both transfection efficiency and cell
viability. As the pCART­19 plasmid was designed for viral transduction, it carries addi­
tional viral elements that make the plasmid larger (10 kbp in total). It has been reported
by Lesueur et al. [124] that the size of the plasmid is directly linked to a reduction in
cell survival and transfection efficiency. Furthermore, the viral elements (and bacterial
backbone) within the plasmid could cause the plasmid to be silenced in the nucleus of
the target cells. This effect has been reported in human and mouse cells by Wang et al.
55
==PAGE:65==
[125] and Geis et al. [126] where unintegrated retroviral DNA were potently silenced
after nuclear entry. Thus, using the pCART­19 plasmid designed for viral transduction
for direct nucleofection could result in low and/or unstable CAR expression in porcine
PBMCs. The nucleofection efficiency and cell survival of porcine PBMCs might poten­
tially be optimized by removing the genes necessary for viral transduction, resulting in
both reduced size and reduced risk of silencing the plasmid.
The purity of the plasmid DNA can also have an impact on the outcome of transfection
efficiency and cell survival. To accommodate this, an endotoxin removal step was
used during the plasmid purification (section 2.4), and the purity was assessed to be
sufficient in all three plasmid batches. Furthermore, to assess the risk of an inefficient
plasmid batch, different batches of pCART­19 plasmid were compared in terms of GFP
expression and cell viability in a non­nucleofected control as well as after nucleofection
with different pulse codes (results not shown). The results showed no clear difference
between the different plasmid batches.
General discussion
In addition to the discussed topics related to T cell activation, lentiviral transduction,
and nucleofection, several broader observations emerged during the course of this
project. Notably, several pigs were involved in this project due to limited availability
of blood samples at the time of experiment execution. Considerable animal­to­animal
variation was observed, particularly in activation marker expression and overall trans­
fection success. Especially, a clear difference between IFN­γ secretion was identified
between pigs 85 and 86 with pig 85 exhibiting substantially more IFN­γ secretion (fig­
ure 3.3). One study by Moorton et al. [110] also observed a notable animal­to­animal
variation between pigs when investigating activation­induced markers for pig PBMCs
[110]. Concerning transfection variations, a notable difference was observed between
pigs 86 and 111 (appendix D4) as PBMCs from pig 86 seemed to be more responsive
to transfection than PBMCs from pig 111. It is speculated that the age of the pigs may
impact the nucleofection efficiency and viability as pig 86 was 3 years and 8 months
old when the blood was collected and pig 111 was 1 year and 5 months old at the
time of blood collection (see table 1). In addition, GFP expression differed from exper­
iment to experiment for pig 86 with the nucleofection pulse code DT115 (figure 3.6).
The observed differences suggest that individual biological variability may influence
56
==PAGE:66==
experimental outcomes and should be considered in future studies.
The broader objective beyond this project is to investigate FAP­targeted CAR T cell
therapy as a treatment for cardiac fibrosis and HFpEF using the Ossabaw pig model.
Thus, it is desired to establish a consistent nucleofection protocol for gene delivery of
CAR genes to porcine cells as this allows for the transient expression of the CARs.
Other gene delivery methods also allow for transient CAR T cells. Nanoparticle de­
livery is gaining interest as an in vivo gene delivery system to develop transient CAR
expression in cells. A study by Argueta et al. [127] has shown promising results us­
ing mRNA encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) to reprogram circulating immune
cells in vivo to express a CAR targeting TROP2 which is overexpressed in many ep­
ithelial tumors. This is the first intravenously delivered mRNA­based CAR therapy to
enter clinical trials and provides the first evidence of successful delivery of mRNA­CAR
therapy in humans [128]. LNP delivery of FAP­specific CAR T cells has also been es­
tablished in mice [16]. Rurik et al. [16] developed transient CAR T cells in vivo by
delivering mRNA in T cell–targeted LNPs in a mouse model of heart failure. Efficient
delivery of mRNA encoding the CAR to T lymphocytes was observed which produced
transient, effective CAR T cells in vivo. This in vivo generation of FAP­specific CAR T
cells using LNPs could also be desirable to develop in a porcine model which is more
translationally relevant to humans. Porcine CAR T cells show great potential but are
still in the initial phase and need more development. The functionality of the devel­
oped CAR T cells also needs to be validated in the future. Other future perspectives
are elaborated later.
57
==PAGE:67==
5 Conclusion
Only a few preclinical trials have shown promising results in treating HFpEF, and no
approved therapies targeting cardiac fibrosis exist. FAP­CAR T cell therapy may be
a potential treatment option for obesity­induced fibrosis and HFpEF once it is fully de­
veloped. The broader objective beyond this project centers on developing FAP­CAR
T cells for targeting cardiac fibrosis in a porcine model. For proof­of­concept, porcine
CD19­CAR T cells were designed by aligning the domains of a well­established human
CD19­CAR T cell construct with porcine sequences.
Several approaches were tested to obtain successful gene delivery of the pCART­19
plasmid. Most literature describes T cell activation as an important step before viral
transduction and nucleofection. A procedure for porcine T cell activation was devel­
oped using plate­bound anti­CD3 mAb, soluble anti­CD28 mAb, and IL­2. Activation
was assessed based on IFN­γ secretion and CD25 expression, where optimimal condi­
tions were determined to be 20 μg/mL anti­CD3 mAb and 8 μg/mL anti­CD28 mAb with
100 IU/mL IL­2. Despite efforts to optimize T cell activation needed for viral transduc­
tion of pCART­19, all viral transduction experiments resulted in low GFP expression.
To improve GFP expression, alternatives such as replacement of lentiviral species and
serotypes could be explored. Transient CAR T cells are preferred for targeting fibro­
sis due to the many functions of fibroblasts, thus nucleofection is more desirable as
a gene delivery system. Most literature describes T cell activation as an important
step before nucleofection; however, this project achieved better results with unstimu­
lated PBMCs. PBMCs nucleofected with the pCART­19 plasmid showed up to 15.4%
GFP expression. However, high GFP expression was observed only in the initial ex­
periment despite several optimization experiments being performed. To optimize the
nucleofection efficiency and cell survival, nucleofection­mediated RNA delivery could
be attempted. Furthermore, nucleofection using the pCART­19 plasmid with reduced
size and exclusion of viral genes is a target for further investigation.
Despite the need for improving gene delivery efficiency and functionality, these findings
provide valuable insights into CAR gene delivery in porcine PBMCs. This project has
taken the first steps in the development of porcine CAR T cells to pave the way for
more research in translational­relevant porcine animal models.
58
==PAGE:68==
6 Further perspectives
As this project covers the initial phase in the de novo development of porcine CAR
T cells, all results serve as proof of concept. Thus, repetition of the experiments is
needed to ensure reproducibility, reliability, and a solid foundation for the porcine CAR
T cell production. Also, more samples are required in future experiments to include
statistical analysis and improve statistical power. To establish the functionality of the
developed CD19­CAR T cells, in vitro testing of CAR T cell cytotoxicity towards target
cells must be performed.
Parameters like age, gender, and obesity state (diet) of the sample pigs should be
investigated to determine their influence on the efficacy of CAR expression and func­
tionality. When the porcine CAR T cell procedure is optimized and finalized, the next
step will be to design the FAP­CAR, develop FAP­targeting porcine CAR T cells, and
test CAR expression and functionality in vitro.
After the development of FAP­CAR T cells in vitro, CAR T cells must be tested in vivo.
Here, the Ossabaw model becomes particularly effective as it is an outstanding in vivo
(and in vitro) animal model for translationally applicable efficacy and safety studies. It is
highly important to conduct safety studies on the developed FAP­CAR T cell as CAR T
cell therapy is associated with important acute toxicities. Infusion of CAR T products,
including the FDA­approved anti­CD19­CAR T cells, can induce a potentially lethal
cytokine release syndrome [57, 129]. Fortunately, this syndrome is typically transient
and can be managed with IL­6 blockade (tocilizumab) [129]. CAR T cell therapy is also,
however rarely, associated with neurotoxicity and cardiotoxicity, potentially through on­
target effects on unintended tissues or cross­reactivity with proteins in the brain and
heart. Cases of cardiotoxicity following CAR T cell administration, possibly due to un­
foreseen cross­reactivity, are particularly relevant to this project [130].
This underlines the need for careful CAR design to ensure safety in the future. The
binding strength of the individual CAR to the target antigen is also important to assess
as preliminary FAP­CAR constructs have shown some toxicity. However, this can be
mitigated by altering the antibody upon which the CAR is based [22, 131].
59
==PAGE:69==
In the future, it is important to optimize the quantity, strength, and persistence of CAR
T cells to ensure that beneficial, homeostatic fibroblasts remain in the myocardium
and help maintain a healthy ECM after excessive fibrosis is cleared. Additionally, new
cardiac challenges require activation of fibroblasts, highlighting the need for transient
CAR T cells. Therefore, future efforts should focus on engineering FAP­CAR T cells
with transient activity [6].
Overall, this may give rise to new treatment option for cardiac fibrosis and HFpEF
by the generation of FAP­CAR T cells which allows for the complexity of the HFpEF
phenotype to be taken into account. Designing porcine CAR T cells opens up new
territory allowing for the implementation of better translational­relevant porcine animal
models, specifically the Ossabaw model, for further studies on obesity, MetS, cardiac
fibrosis, and HFpEF.
Furthermore, the FAP­CAR T cells might prove useful as treatment in other diseases.
Pulmonary fibrosis is another disease with limited therapeutic options. Researchers
have already established a similar method creating FAP­CAR T cells to reduce acti­
vated fibroblasts in the lungs [132] showing that the application of FAP­CAR T cells is
not limited to a specific organ or cancer therapy. Not only will it improve our under­
standing of the complex link between obesity, MetS, cardiac fibrosis, and HFpEF, but
also allow us to further utilize the Ossabaw pig model. Both in immunology research
and the development of effective treatments relevant for metabolic dysfunctions and
cardiovascular diseases and many other disorders.
60
==PAGE:70==
References
[1]
World Health Organization. Obesity and overweight. Mar. 2024.
[2]
Virtue, Sam and Vidal­Puig, Antonio. “Adipose tissue expandability, lipotoxic­
ity and the Metabolic Syndrome — An allostatic perspective”. In: Biochimica
et Biophysica Acta (BBA) ­ Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids 1801.3 (Mar.
2010), pp. 338–349. DOI: 10.1016/J.BBALIP.2009.12.006.
[3]
Alberti, K. G.M.M., Zimmet, P., and Shaw, J. “Metabolic syndrome ­ A new
world­wide definition. A consensus statement from the International Diabetes
Federation”. In: Diabetic Medicine 23.5 (May 2006), pp. 469–480. DOI: 10.1111/
J.1464-5491.2006.01858.X.
[4]
Luengo­Fernandez, Ramon et al. “Economic burden of cardiovascular dis­
eases in the European Union: a population­based cost study”. In: European
Heart Journal 44.45 (Dec. 2023), pp. 4752–4767. DOI: 10.1093/EURHEARTJ/
EHAD583.
[5]
Shah, Sanjiv J. et al. “Research Priorities for Heart Failure with Preserved
Ejection Fraction: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Working Group
Summary”. In: Circulation 141.12 (Mar. 2020), pp. 1001–1026. DOI: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.119.041886/SUPPL{\_}FILE/CIRC{\_}CIRCULATIONAHA-
2019-041886{\_}SUPP1.PDF.
[6]
Rurik, Joel G., Aghajanian, Haig, and Epstein, Jonathan A. “Immune Cells and
Immunotherapy for Cardiac Injury and Repair”. In: Circulation research 128.11
(May 2021), pp. 1766–1779. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318005.
[7]
Rommel, Karl Philipp et al. “Extracellular Volume Fraction for Characterization
of Patients with Heart Failure and Preserved Ejection Fraction”. In: Journal of
the American College of Cardiology 67.15 (Apr. 2016), pp. 1815–1825. DOI:
10.1016/j.jacc.2016.02.018.
[8]
Kleinbongard, Petra et al. “Cardiac fibroblasts: answering the call”. In: American
Journal of Physiology ­ Heart and Circulatory Physiology 327.3 (Sept. 2024),
H681–H686. DOI: 10.1152/AJPHEART.00478.2024,.
[9]
Sweeney, Mark, Corden, Ben, and Cook, Stuart A. “Targeting cardiac fibro­
sis in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: mirage or miracle?” In:
==PAGE:71==
EMBO Molecular Medicine 12.10 (Oct. 2020), e10865. DOI: 10.15252/EMMM.
201910865.
[10]
Ho, Jennifer E. et al. “Differential Clinical Profiles, Exercise Responses, and
Outcomes Associated with Existing HFpEF Definitions”. In: Circulation 140.5
(July 2019), pp. 353–365. DOI: 10 . 1161 / CIRCULATIONAHA . 118 . 039136 /
SUPPL{\_}FILE/CIRC{\_}CIRCULATIONAHA-2018-039136{\_}SUPP1.PDF.
[11]
Raziyeva, Kamila, Kim, Yevgeniy, Zharkinbekov, Zharylkasyn, Temirkhanova,
Kamila, and Saparov, Arman. “Novel Therapies for the Treatment of Cardiac
Fibrosis Following Myocardial Infarction”. In: Biomedicines 2022, Vol. 10, Page
2178 10.9 (Sept. 2022), p. 2178. DOI: 10.3390/BIOMEDICINES10092178.
[12]
Wang, Jia Yi and Wang, Liang. “CAR­T cell therapy: Where are we now, and
where are we heading?” In: Blood Science 5.4 (Nov. 2023), p. 237. DOI: 10.
1097/BS9.0000000000000173.
[13]
Eshhar, Zelig, Waks, Tova, Gkoss, Gideon, and Schindler, Daniel G. “Spe­
cific activation and targeting of cytotoxic lymphocytes through chimeric single
chains consisting of antibody­binding domains and the γ or ζ subunits of the im­
munoglobulin and T­cell receptors”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 90.2 (Jan. 1993), pp. 720–724. DOI:
10.1073/PNAS.90.2.720.
[14]
Mullard, Asher. “FDA approves first CAR T therapy”. In: Nature Reviews Drug
Discovery 16.10 (Oct. 2017), p. 669. DOI: 10.1038/NRD.2017.196.
[15]
Food and drug administration. FDA approves CAR­T cell therapy to treat adults
with certain types of large B­cell lymphoma | FDA. Oct. 2017.
[16]
Rurik, Joel G. et al. “CAR T cells produced in vivo to treat cardiac injury”. In:
Science (New York, N.Y.) 375.6576 (Jan. 2022), p. 91. DOI: 10.1126/SCIENCE.
ABM0594.
[17]
Aghajanian, Haig et al. “Targeting cardiac fibrosis with engineered T cells”. In:
Nature 573.7774 (Sept. 2019), pp. 430–433. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-019-1546-z.
[18]
Fitzgerald, Allison A. and Weiner, Louis M. “The role of fibroblast activation
protein in health and malignancy”. In: Cancer and Metastasis Reviews 2020
39:3 39.3 (June 2020), pp. 783–803. DOI: 10.1007/S10555-020-09909-3.
==PAGE:72==
[19]
Scanlan, Matthew J et al. “Molecular cloning of fibroblast activation protein a, a
member of the serine protease family selectively expressed in stromal fibrob­
lasts of epithelial cancers”. In: Immunology 91 (1994), pp. 5657–5661.
[20]
Tillmanns, Jochen et al. “Fibroblast activation protein alpha expression identi­
fies activated fibroblasts after myocardial infarction”. In: Journal of Molecular
and Cellular Cardiology 87 (Oct. 2015), pp. 194–203. DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.
2015.08.016.
[21]
Bughda, Reyisa, Dimou, Paraskevi, D’souza, Reena R., and Klampatsa, As­
tero. “Fibroblast Activation Protein (FAP)­Targeted CAR­T Cells: Launching an
Attack on Tumor Stroma”. In: ImmunoTargets and Therapy 10 (2021), p. 313.
DOI: 10.2147/ITT.S291767.
[22]
Wang, Liang Chuan S. et al. “Targeting fibroblast activation protein in tumor
stroma with chimeric antigen receptor T cells can inhibit tumor growth and aug­
ment host immunity without severe toxicity”. In: Cancer immunology research
2.2 (Feb. 2014), pp. 154–166. DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0027.
[23]
Schuberth, Petra C. et al. “Treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma by
fibroblast activation protein­specific re­directed T cells”. In: Journal of Trans­
lational Medicine 11.1 (Aug. 2013), pp. 1–11. DOI: 10 . 1186 / 1479 - 5876 - 11 -
187/FIGURES/4.
[24]
Spurlock, Michael E. and Gabler, Nicholas K. “The Development of Porcine
Models of Obesity and the Metabolic Syndrome”. In: The Journal of Nutrition
138.2 (Feb. 2008), pp. 397–402. DOI: 10.1093/JN/138.2.397.
[25]
Sharp, Thomas E. et al. “Novel Göttingen Miniswine Model of Heart Failure
With Preserved Ejection Fraction Integrating Multiple Comorbidities”. In: JACC:
Basic to Translational Science 6.2 (Feb. 2021), pp. 154–170. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jacbts.2020.11.012.
[26]
Tang, Xian­Liang et al. “A new model of heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction induced by metabolic syndrome in Ossabaw miniature swine”. In: Basic
Research in Cardiology 2025 (May 2025), pp. 1–20. DOI: 10.1007/S00395-025-
01112-1.
[27]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Adult BMI Categories | BMI | CDC.
Mar. 2024.
==PAGE:73==
[28]
Oussaada, Sabrina M. et al. “The pathogenesis of obesity”. In: Metabolism:
Clinical and Experimental 92 (Mar. 2019), pp. 26–36. DOI: 10.1016/J.METABOL.
2018.12.012/ASSET/47312D89-1013-4835-9E9D-C672D1AF0299/MAIN.ASSETS/
GR1.JPG.
[29]
Sun, Kai and Scherer, Philipp E. “Adipose Tissue Dysfunction: A Multistep Pro­
cess”. In: Springer­Verlag Berlin Heidelberg (2010), pp. 67–75. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-642-13517-0{\_}6.
[30]
Sun, Kai, Kusminski, Christine M., and Scherer, Philipp E. “Adipose tissue re­
modeling and obesity”. In: The Journal of clinical investigation 121.6 (June
2011), pp. 2094–2101. DOI: 10.1172/JCI45887.
[31]
Gil, Angel, Olza, Josune, Gil­Campos, Mercedes, Gomez­Llorente, Carolina,
and Aguilera, Concepcin M. “Is adipose tissue metabolically different at different
sites?” In: International Journal of Pediatric Obesity 6.S1 (Sept. 2011), pp. 13–
20. DOI: 10.3109/17477166.2011.604326.
[32]
Mattu, Harman S. and Randeva, Harpal S. “Role of adipokines in cardiovascular
disease”. In: Journal of Endocrinology 216.1 (Jan. 2013), T17–T36. DOI: 10.
1530/JOE-12-0232.
[33]
Hildebrandt, Ximena, Ibrahim, Mohamed, and Peltzer, Nieves. “Cell death and
inflammation during obesity: ”Know my methods, WAT(son)””. In: Cell Death &
Differentiation (2022). DOI: 10.1038/s41418-022-01062-4.
[34]
Spalding, Kirsty L. et al. “Dynamics of fat cell turnover in humans”. In: Nature
453.7196 (June 2008), pp. 783–787. DOI: 10.1038/NATURE06902,.
[35]
Sun, Kai, Tordjman, Joan, Clément, Karine, and Scherer, Philipp E. “Fibro­
sis and Adipose Tissue Dysfunction”. In: Cell Metabolism 18.4 (Oct. 2013),
pp. 470–477. DOI: 10.1016/J.CMET.2013.06.016.
[36]
Halberg, Nils et al. “Hypoxia­Inducible Factor 1α Induces Fibrosis and Insulin
Resistance in White Adipose Tissue”. In: Molecular and Cellular Biology 29.16
(Aug. 2009), p. 4467. DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00192-09.
[37]
Khan, Tayeba et al. “Metabolic Dysregulation and Adipose Tissue Fibrosis: Role
of Collagen VI”. In: Molecular and Cellular Biology 29.6 (Mar. 2009), p. 1575.
DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01300-08.
==PAGE:74==
[38]
Khanna, Deepesh, Khanna, Siya, Khanna, Pragya, Kahar, Payal, and Patel,
Bhavesh M. “Obesity: A Chronic Low­Grade Inflammation and Its Markers”. In:
Cureus 14.2 (Feb. 2022), e22711. DOI: 10.7759/CUREUS.22711.
[39]
Cinti, Saverio et al. “Adipocyte death defines macrophage localization and func­
tion in adipose tissue of obese mice and humans”. In: Journal of Lipid Research
46.11 (Nov. 2005), pp. 2347–2355. DOI: 10.1194/JLR.M500294-JLR200.
[40]
Tanaka, Miyako et al. “Macrophage­inducible C­type lectin underlies obesity­
induced adipose tissue fibrosis”. In: Nature communications 5 (2014). DOI: 10.
1038/NCOMMS5982.
[41]
Duprez, Daniel A. et al. “Predictive value of collagen biomarkers for heart fail­
ure with and without preserved ejection fraction: MESA (Multi­Ethnic Study
of Atherosclerosis)”. In: Journal of the American Heart Association 7.5 (Mar.
2018). DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.007885/ASSET/56052794- 6E68- 4C7F- 9C56-
1E6C99D84417/ASSETS/IMAGES/LARGE/JAH32987-FIG-0001.JPG.
[42]
Sansbury, Brian E. and Spite, Matthew. “Resolution of Acute Inflammation and
the Role of Resolvins in Immunity, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology”. In: Cir­
culation research 119.1 (June 2016), p. 113. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.
307308.
[43]
Pellegrinelli, Vanessa, Carobbio, Stefania, and Vidal­Puig, Antonio. “Adipose
tissue plasticity: how fat depots respond differently to pathophysiological cues”.
In: Diabetologia (2016). DOI: 10.1007/s00125-016-3933-4.
[44]
Marcelin, Geneviève, Gautier, Emmanuel L., and Clement, Karine. “Adipose
Tissue Fibrosis in Obesity: Etiology and Challenges”. In: Annual Review of
Physiology 84.Volume 84, 2022 (Feb. 2022), pp. 135–155. DOI: 10 . 1146 /
ANNUREV-PHYSIOL-060721-092930/CITE/REFWORKS.
[45]
Díez, Javier, González, Arantxa, and Kovacic, Jason C. “Myocardial Interstitial
Fibrosis in Nonischemic Heart Disease, Part 3/4: JACC Focus Seminar”. In:
Journal of the American College of Cardiology 75.17 (May 2020), pp. 2204–
2218. DOI: 10.1016/J.JACC.2020.03.019.
[46]
Paulus, Walter J. and Tschöpe, Carsten. “A novel paradigm for heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction: Comorbidities drive myocardial dysfunction and re­
modeling through coronary microvascular endothelial inflammation”. In: Jour­
==PAGE:75==
nal of the American College of Cardiology 62.4 (July 2013), pp. 263–271. DOI:
10.1016/j.jacc.2013.02.092.
[47]
Westermann, Dirk et al. “Cardiac Inflammation Contributes to Changes in the
Extracellular Matrix in Patients With Heart Failure and Normal Ejection Frac­
tion”. In: (2011). DOI: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.109.931451.
[48]
Henegar, Corneliu et al. “Adipose tissue transcriptomic signature highlights the
pathological relevance of extracellular matrix in human obesity”. In: Genome
Biology 9.1 (Jan. 2008), pp. 1–32. DOI: 10.1186/GB-2008-9-1-R14/FIGURES/5.
[49]
Anker, Stefan D. et al. “Empagliflozin in Heart Failure with a Preserved Ejection
Fraction”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 385.16 (Oct. 2021), pp. 1451–
1461. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMOA2107038/SUPPL{\_}FILE/NEJMOA2107038{\_
}DATA-SHARING.PDF.
[50]
Basalova, Nataliya, Alexandrushkina, Natalya, Grigorieva, Olga, Kulebyakina,
Maria, and Efimenko, Anastasia. “Fibroblast Activation Protein Alpha (FAPα)
in Fibrosis: Beyond a Perspective Marker for Activated Stromal Cells?” In:
Biomolecules 13.12 (Dec. 2023), p. 1718. DOI: 10.3390/BIOM13121718.
[51]
Marshall, Jean S, Warrington, Richard, Watson, Wade, and Kim, Harold L. “An
introduction to immunology and immunopathology”. In: Allergy Asthma Clin Im­
munol 14.2 (2018), p. 49. DOI: 10.1186/s13223-018-0278-1.
[52]
Turvey, Stuart E. and Broide, David H. “Innate immunity”. In: Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology 125.2 SUPPL. 2 (Feb. 2010), S24–S32. DOI: 10.1016/
j.jaci.2009.07.016.
[53]
Kharkwal, Shalu Sharma and Porcelli, Steven A. “T cell immunity”. In: Manage­
ment of Infections in the Immunocompromised Host (June 2018), pp. 27–41.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-77674-3{\_}2.
[54]
Henning, Amanda N., Roychoudhuri, Rahul, and Restifo, Nicholas P. “Epige­
netic control of CD8+ T cell differentiation”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology
2018 18:5 18.5 (Jan. 2018), pp. 340–356. DOI: 10.1038/nri.2017.146.
[55]
Sterner, Robert C. and Sterner, Rosalie M. “CAR­T cell therapy: current limita­
tions and potential strategies”. In: Blood Cancer Journal 2021 11:4 11.4 (Apr.
2021), pp. 1–11. DOI: 10.1038/s41408-021-00459-7.
==PAGE:76==
[56]
Zmievskaya, Ekaterina et al. “Application of CAR­T Cell Therapy beyond Oncol­
ogy: Autoimmune Diseases and Viral Infections”. In: Biomedicines 2021, Vol.
9, Page 59 9.1 (Jan. 2021), p. 59. DOI: 10.3390/BIOMEDICINES9010059.
[57]
Maude, Shannon L. et al. “Tisagenlecleucel in Children and Young Adults with
B­Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 378.5
(Feb. 2018), pp. 439–448. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMOA1709866/SUPPL{\_}FILE/
NEJMOA1709866{\_}DISCLOSURES.PDF.
[58]
Levine, John E. et al. “Pooled safety analysis of tisagenlecleucel in children
and young adults with B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia”. In: Journal for Im­
munoTherapy of Cancer 9.8 (Aug. 2021). DOI: 10.1136/JITC-2020-002287,.
[59]
Mazinani, Marzieh and Rahbarizadeh, Fatemeh. “CAR­T cell potency: from
structural elements to vector backbone components”. In: Biomarker Research
2022 10:1 10.1 (Sept. 2022), pp. 1–24. DOI: 10.1186/S40364-022-00417-W.
[60]
Hudecek, Michael et al. “The nonsignaling extracellular spacer domain of
chimeric antigen receptors is decisive for in vivo antitumor activity”. In: Can­
cer Immunology Research 3.2 (Feb. 2015), pp. 125–135. DOI: 10.1158/2326-
6066.CIR- 14- 0127/470251/AM/THE- NON- SIGNALING- EXTRACELLULAR-
SPACER-DOMAIN-OF.
[61]
Bridgeman, John S. et al. “The Optimal Antigen Response of Chimeric Antigen
Receptors Harboring the CD3ζ Transmembrane Domain Is Dependent upon
Incorporation of the Receptor into the Endogenous TCR/CD3 Complex”. In: The
Journal of Immunology 184.12 (June 2010), pp. 6938–6949. DOI: 10.4049/
JIMMUNOL.0901766.
[62]
Fujiwara, Kento et al. “Hinge and Transmembrane Domains of Chimeric Antigen
Receptor Regulate Receptor Expression and Signaling Threshold”. In: Cells 9.5
(May 2020). DOI: 10.3390/CELLS9051182.
[63]
Hege, Kristen M. et al. “Safety, tumor trafficking and immunogenicity of chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR)­T cells specific for TAG­72 in colorectal cancer”. In:
Journal for immunotherapy of cancer 5.1 (Mar. 2017). DOI: 10.1186/S40425-
017-0222-9.
[64]
Honikel, Mackenzie M and Olejniczak, Scott H. “Co­Stimulatory Receptor Sig­
naling in CAR­T Cells”. In: Biomolecules (2022). DOI: 10.3390/biom12091303.
==PAGE:77==
[65]
Imai, C. et al. “Chimeric receptors with 4­1BB signaling capacity provoke potent
cytotoxicity against acute lymphoblastic leukemia”. In: Leukemia 2004 18:4 18.4
(Feb. 2004), pp. 676–684. DOI: 10.1038/sj.leu.2403302.
[66]
Maher, John, Brentjens, Renier J., Gunset, Gertrude, Rivière, Isabelle, and
Sadelain, Michel. “Human T­lymphocyte cytotoxicity and proliferation directed
by a single chimeric TCRzeta /CD28 receptor”. In: Nature biotechnology 20.1
(2002), pp. 70–75. DOI: 10.1038/NBT0102-70.
[67]
Zhong, Xiao Song, Matsushita, Maiko, Plotkin, Jason, Riviere, Isabelle, and
Sadelain, Michel. “Chimeric antigen receptors combining 4­1BB and CD28 sig­
naling domains augment PI3kinase/AKT/Bcl­XL activation and CD8+ T cell­
mediated tumor eradication”. In: Molecular therapy : the journal of the Amer­
ican Society of Gene Therapy 18.2 (Feb. 2010), pp. 413–420. DOI: 10.1038/
MT.2009.210.
[68]
Rosenberg, Steven A and Restifo, Nicholas P. “Adoptive cell transfer as per­
sonalized immunotherapy for human cancer”. In: Science (2015).
[69]
Vormittag, Philipp, Gunn, Rebecca, Ghorashian, Sara, and Veraitch, Farlan S.
“A guide to manufacturing CAR T cell therapies”. In: Current Opinion in Biotech­
nology 53 (Oct. 2018), pp. 164–181. DOI: 10.1016/J.COPBIO.2018.01.025.
[70]
Uehlein, Sabrina et al. “Human­like Response of Pig T Cells to Superagonistic
Anti­CD28 Monoclonal Antibodies”. In: The Journal of Immunology 207.10 (Nov.
2021), pp. 2473–2488. DOI: 10.4049/JIMMUNOL.2100174.
[71]
Ayala Ceja, Melanie, Khericha, Mobina, Harris, Caitlin M., Puig­Saus, Cristina,
and Chen, Yvonne Y. “CAR­T cell manufacturing: Major process parameters
and next­generation strategies”. In: The Journal of Experimental Medicine 221.2
(Feb. 2024), e20230903. DOI: 10.1084/JEM.20230903.
[72]
Zhang, David K.Y. et al. “Enhancing CAR­T cell functionality in a patient­specific
manner”. In: Nature Communications 2023 14:1 14.1 (Jan. 2023), pp. 1–13.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36126-7.
[73]
Amirache, Fouzia et al. “Mystery solved: VSV­G­LVs do not allow efficient gene
transfer into unstimulated T cells, B cells, and HSCs because they lack the LDL
receptor”. In: Blood 123.9 (Feb. 2014), pp. 1422–1424. DOI: 10.1182/BLOOD-
2013-11-540641.
==PAGE:78==
[74]
Zhang, David K Y, Cheung, Alexander S, and Mooney, David J. “Activation and
expansion of human T cells using artificial antigen­presenting cell scaffolds”. In:
Nature Protocols (2020). DOI: 10.1038/s41596-019-0249-0.
[75]
Chen, Gregory M. et al. “Integrative bulk and single­cell profiling of pre­
manufacture T­cell populations reveals factors mediating long­term persistence
of CAR T­cell therapy”. In: Cancer discovery 11.9 (Sept. 2021), p. 2186. DOI:
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-1677.
[76]
Dautzenberg, Iris J C, Martijn, •, Rabelink, J W E, and Hoeben, Rob C. “The sta­
bility of envelope­pseudotyped lentiviral vectors”. In: Gene Therapy 28 (2021),
pp. 89–104. DOI: 10.1038/s41434-020-00193-y.
[77]
Milone, Michael C. and O’Doherty, Una. “Clinical use of lentiviral vectors”. In:
Leukemia 2018 32:7 32.7 (Mar. 2018), pp. 1529–1541. DOI: 10.1038/s41375-
018-0106-0.
[78]
Finkelshtein, Danit, Werman, Ariel, Novick, Daniela, Barak, Sara, and Rubin­
stein, Menachem. “LDL receptor and its family members serve as the cellular re­
ceptors for vesicular stomatitis virus”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 110.18 (Apr. 2013), pp. 7306–7311.
DOI: 10.1073/PNAS.1214441110/SUPPL{\_}FILE/PNAS.201214441SI.PDF.
[79]
Schlimgen, Ryan et al. “Risks Associated With Lentiviral Vector Exposures and
Prevention Strategies”. In: Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine
58.12 (2016), p. 1159. DOI: 10.1097/JOM.0000000000000879.
[80]
Birkholz, K. et al. “Transfer of mRNA encoding recombinant immunoreceptors
reprograms CD4+ and CD8+ T cells for use in the adoptive immunotherapy
of cancer”. In: Gene Therapy 2009 16:5 16.5 (Jan. 2009), pp. 596–604. DOI:
10.1038/gt.2008.189.
[81]
Jayasooriya, Vidura, Ringwelski, Beth, Dorsam, Glenn, and Nawarathna, Dhar­
makeerthi. “mRNA­based CAR T­cells Manufactured by Miniaturized Two­step
Electroporation Produce Selective Cytotoxicity Toward Target Cancer Cells”. In:
Lab on a chip 21.19 (Oct. 2021), p. 3748. DOI: 10.1039/D1LC00219H.
[82]
Xiao, Kaiting et al. “mRNA­based chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapy: Basic
principles, recent advances and future directions”. In: Interdisciplinary Medicine
2.1 (Jan. 2024), e20230036. DOI: 10.1002/INMD.20230036.
==PAGE:79==
[83]
Lukjanov, Viktor, Koutná, Irena, and Šimara, Pavel. “CAR T­Cell Production Us­
ing Nonviral Approaches”. In: Journal of Immunology Research 2021 (2021),
p. 6644685. DOI: 10.1155/2021/6644685.
[84]
Juncker, Théo, Chatton, Bruno, and Donzeau, Mariel. “The Prodigious Po­
tential of mRNA Electrotransfer as a Substitute to Conventional DNA­Based
Transient Transfection”. In: Cells 12.12 (June 2023), p. 1591. DOI: 10.3390/
CELLS12121591/S1.
[85]
Batista Napotnik, Tina, Polajžer, Tamara, and Miklavčič, Damijan. “Cell death
due to electroporation – A review”. In: Bioelectrochemistry 141 (Oct. 2021),
p. 107871. DOI: 10.1016/J.BIOELECHEM.2021.107871.
[86]
Zhang, Xia and Piedrahita, Jorge A. “Advances in the Generation of Transgenic
Domestic Species via Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer”. In: Principles of Cloning:
Second Edition (Jan. 2014), pp. 95–106. DOI: 10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 386541-
0.00008-4.
[87]
Zhang, Yaolei et al. “The genome of the naturally evolved obesity­prone Oss­
abaw miniature pig.” In: Iscience 24.9 (Sept. 2021), pp. 103081–103081. DOI:
10.1016/J.ISCI.2021.103081.
[88]
Janssen, Paul M.L., Biesiadecki, Brandon J., Ziolo, Mark T., and Davis,
Jonathan P. “The Need for Speed; Mice, Men, and Myocardial Kinetic Reserve”.
In: Circulation research 119.3 (July 2016), p. 418. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.
116.309126.
[89]
Brzek, Paweł et al. “Significance of variation in basal metabolic rate in labora­
tory mice for translational experiments”. In: Journal of Comparative Physiology.
B, Biochemical, Systemic, and Environmental Physiology 192.1 (Jan. 2021),
p. 161. DOI: 10.1007/S00360-021-01410-9.
[90]
Sturek, Michael, Alloosh, Mouhamad, and Sellke, Frank W. “Swine Disease
Models for Optimal Vascular Engineering”. In: Annual Review of Biomedical
Engineering 22.Volume 22, 2020 (June 2020), pp. 25–49. DOI: 10 . 1146 /
ANNUREV-BIOENG-082919-053009/CITE/REFWORKS.
[91]
Cluzel, Gaston L., Ryan, Paul M., Herisson, Florence M., and Caplice, Noel M.
“High­fidelity porcine models of metabolic syndrome: a contemporary synthe­
==PAGE:80==
sis”. In: American Journal of Physiology ­ Endocrinology and Metabolism 322.4
(Apr. 2022), E366–E381. DOI: 10.1152/AJPENDO.00413.2021.
[92]
Curtasu, Mihai V. et al. “Obesity Development in a Miniature Yucatan Pig Model:
A Multi­compartmental Metabolomics Study on Cloned and Normal Pigs Fed
Restricted or Ad Libitum High­Energy Diets”. In: Journal of proteome research
18.1 (Jan. 2019), pp. 30–47. DOI: 10.1021/ACS.JPROTEOME.8B00264.
[93]
Dixon, Joseph L. et al. “Increased atherosclerosis in diabetic dyslipidemic
swine”. In: Journal of Lipid Research 43.10 (Oct. 2002), pp. 1618–1629. DOI:
10.1194/JLR.M200134-JLR200.
[94]
Lee, Lydia et al. “Nutritional Model of Steatohepatitis and Metabolic Syndrome
in the Ossabaw Miniature Swine”. In: Hepatology (Baltimore, Md.) 50.1 (2009),
p. 56. DOI: 10.1002/HEP.22904.
[95]
Neeb, Zachary P. et al. “Metabolic Syndrome and Coronary Artery Disease in
Ossabaw Compared with Yucatan Swine”. In: Comparative Medicine 60.4 (Aug.
2010), p. 300.
[96]
Dyson, Melissa C, Alloosh, Mouhamad, Vuchetich, James P, Mokelke, Eric A,
and Sturek, Michael. “Components of Metabolic Syndrome and Coronary Artery
Disease in Female Ossabaw Swine Fed Excess Atherogenic Diet”. In: (2006),
pp. 35–45.
[97]
Edwards, Jason M. et al. “Exercise training decreases store­operated
Ca2+entry associated with metabolic syndrome and coronary atherosclerosis”.
In: Cardiovascular Research 85.3 (Feb. 2010), pp. 631–640. DOI: 10.1093/
CVR/CVP308.
[98]
Li, Zi Lun et al. “Transition from obesity to metabolic syndrome is associated
with altered myocardial autophagy and apoptosis”. In: Arteriosclerosis, Throm­
bosis, and Vascular Biology 32.5 (May 2012), pp. 1132–1141. DOI: 10.1161/
ATVBAHA.111.244061.
[99]
Olver, T. Dylan et al. “Western Diet­Fed, Aortic­Banded Ossabaw Swine: A Pre­
clinical Model of Cardio­Metabolic Heart Failure”. In: JACC: Basic to Transla­
tional Science 4.3 (June 2019), pp. 404–421. DOI: 10.1016/J.JACBTS.2019.02.
004.
==PAGE:81==
[100]
Gyöngyösi, Mariann et al. “Porcine model of progressive cardiac hypertrophy
and fibrosis with secondary postcapillary pulmonary hypertension”. In: Journal
of Translational Medicine 15.1 (Oct. 2017), p. 202. DOI: 10.1186/S12967-017-
1299-0.
[101]
Tune, Johnathan D. et al. “Chronic high­rate pacing induces heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction­like phenotype in Ossabaw swine”. In: Basic Re­
search in Cardiology 117.1 (Dec. 2022). DOI: 10.1007/s00395-022-00958-z.
[102]
Schwarzl, Michael et al. “A porcine model of hypertensive cardiomyopathy: Im­
plications for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction”. In: American Journal
of Physiology ­ Heart and Circulatory Physiology 309.9 (2015), H1407–H1418.
DOI: 10.1152/AJPHEART.00542.2015.
[103]
Edwards, Jason M. et al. “Exercise training decreases store­operated
Ca2+entry associated with metabolic syndrome and coronary atherosclerosis”.
In: Cardiovascular Research 85.3 (Feb. 2009), p. 631. DOI: 10 . 1093 / CVR /
CVP308.
[104]
Zhang, Zhang, Qiu, Shunfang, Zhang, Xiaopeng, and Chen, Wei. “Optimized
DNA electroporation for primary human T cell engineering”. In: BMC Biotech­
nology 18.1 (Jan. 2018), p. 4. DOI: 10.1186/S12896-018-0419-0.
[105]
Collins, R. A., Tayton, H. K., Gelder, K. I., Britton, P., and Oldham, G. “Cloning
and expression of bovine and porcine interleukin­2 in baculovirus and analysis
of species cross­reactivity”. In: Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology
40.4 (Apr. 1994), pp. 313–324. DOI: 10.1016/0165-2427(94)90042-6.
[106]
Kirkham, P A, Takamatsu, H, Yang, H, and Parkhouse, R M E. “Porcine CD3R:
its characterization, expression and involvement in activation of porcine T lym­
phocytes”. In: Immunology 87 (1996), pp. 616–623.
[107]
Chiappelli, F. “Immunity”. In: Encyclopedia of Stress (Jan. 2007), pp. 485–492.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-012373947-6.00222-1.
[108]
Tian, Yunfei et al. “Development of a Monoclonal Antibody to Pig CD69 Reveals
Early Activation of T Cells in Pig after PRRSV and ASFV Infection”. In: Viruses
14.6 (June 2022), p. 1343. DOI: 10.3390/V14061343/S1.
[109]
Casati, Anna et al. “Clinical­scale selection and viral transduction of human
naïve and central memory CD8+ T cells for adoptive cell therapy of cancer pa­
==PAGE:82==
tients”. In: Cancer Immunology, Immunotherapy 62.10 (Oct. 2013), pp. 1563–
1573. DOI: 10.1007/S00262-013-1459-X/FIGURES/5.
[110]
Moorton, Madison et al. “Investigation of activation­induced markers (AIM) in
porcine T cells by flow cytometry”. In: Frontiers in Veterinary Science 11 (May
2024), p. 1390486. DOI: 10.3389/FVETS.2024.1390486/BIBTEX.
[111]
Kilpinen, S. and Hurme, M. “Low CD3+CD28­induced interleukin­2 production
correlates with decreased reactive oxygen intermediate formation in neonatal
T  cells”. In: Immunology 94.2 (June 1998), pp. 167–172. DOI: 10.1046/J.1365-
2567.1998.00507.X.
[112]
Hombach, Andreas et al. “Tumor­Specific T Cell Activation by Recombinant Im­
munoreceptors: CD3ζ Signaling and CD28 Costimulation Are Simultaneously
Required for Efficient IL­2 Secretion and Can Be Integrated Into One Com­
bined CD28/CD3ζ Signaling Receptor Molecule”. In: The Journal of Immunol­
ogy 167.11 (Dec. 2001), pp. 6123–6131. DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.11.6123.
[113]
Duprez, V. and Dautry­Varsat, A. “Receptor­mediated endocytosis of interleukin
2 in a human tumor T cell line. Degradation of interleukin 2 and evidence for the
absence of recycling of interleukin receptors.” In: Journal of Biological Chem­
istry 261.33 (Nov. 1986), pp. 15450–15454. DOI: 10.1016/S0021-9258(18)66732-
8.
[114]
Leveringhaus, Elena et al. “Porcine low­density lipoprotein receptor plays an
important role in classical swine fever virus infection”. In: Emerging Microbes
and Infections 13.1 (2024). DOI: 10 . 1080 / 22221751 . 2024 . 2327385 / ASSET /
C3FA5AE6- CBBC- 4AE2- B2F3- 1D98B98625AA/ASSETS/GRAPHIC/TEMI{\_
}A{\_}2327385{\_}F0005{\_}OC.JPG.
[115]
Sinn, Patrick L. et al. “Lentiviral vector gene transfer to porcine airways”. In:
Molecular Therapy Nucleic Acids 1.NOV (Jan. 2012), e56. DOI: 10.1038/MTNA.
2012.47/ASSET/7A4FB664-35F8-4EA7-8570-5575DDB4462E/MAIN.ASSETS/
GR6.JPG.
[116]
Howerth, Elizabeth W., Stallknecht, David E., Dorminy, Mark, Pisell, Tracy, and
Clarke, Gerard R. “Experimental Vesicular Stomatitis in Swine: Effects of Route
of Inoculation and Steroid Treatment”. In: Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic In­
vestigation 9.2 (1997), pp. 136–142. DOI: 10.1177/104063879700900205.
==PAGE:83==
[117]
Martinez, Isidoro, Rodriguez, Luis L., Jimenez, Carlos, Pauszek, Steven J.,
and Wertz, Gail W. “Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Glycoprotein Is a Determinant
of Pathogenesis in Swine, a Natural Host”. In: Journal of Virology 77.14 (July
2003), pp. 8039–8047. DOI: 10.1128/JVI.77.14.8039-8047.2003,.
[118]
Zhao, Xinxin et al. “High transfection efficiency of porcine peripheral blood
T cells via nucleofection”. In: Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology
144.3­4 (Dec. 2011), pp. 179–186. DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2011.10.003.
[119]
Lai, Wendy, Chang, Cheong Hee, and Farber, Donna L. “Gene transfection and
expression in resting and activated murine CD4 T cell subsets”. In: Journal of
Immunological Methods 282.1­2 (Nov. 2003), pp. 93–102. DOI: 10.1016/J.JIM.
2003.07.015.
[120]
Aksoy, Pinar, Aksoy, Arman, Czech, Eric, and Hammerbacher, Jeff. “Electropo­
ration characteristics of human primary T cells”. In: (2019). DOI: 10.1101/466243.
[121]
Li, L. H. et al. “Apoptosis Induced by DNA Uptake Limits Transfection Effi­
ciency”. In: Experimental Cell Research 253.2 (Dec. 1999), pp. 541–550. DOI:
10.1006/EXCR.1999.4666.
[122]
Li, L. H., Mccarthy, P., and Hui, S. W. “High­efficiency electrotransfection of
human primary hematopoietic stem sells”. In: The FASEB Journal 15.3 (Mar.
2001), pp. 586–588. DOI: 10.1096/FJ.00-0447FJE.
[123]
Yoshida, Tatsushi, Yamasaki, Kenta, and Tadagaki, Kenjiro. “Caspase inhibition
improves viability and efficiency of liposomal transfection”. In: Scientific Reports
13.1 (Dec. 2023), pp. 1–9. DOI: 10.1038/S41598-023-49027-Y;SUBJMETA=1647,
337,631;KWRD=BIOLOGICAL+TECHNIQUES,MOLECULAR+BIOLOGY.
[124]
Lesueur, Léa L., Mir, Lluis M., and André, Franck M. “Overcoming the Specific
Toxicity of Large Plasmids Electrotransfer in Primary Cells In Vitro”. In: Molec­
ular Therapy. Nucleic Acids 5.3 (2016), e291. DOI: 10.1038/MTNA.2016.4.
[125]
Wang, Gary Z., Wang, Ying, and Goff, Stephen P. “Histones Are Rapidly Loaded
onto Unintegrated Retroviral DNAs Soon after Nuclear Entry”. In: Cell Host and
Microbe 20.6 (Dec. 2016), pp. 798–809. DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.10.009.
[126]
Geis, Franziska K. and Goff, Stephen P. “Unintegrated HIV­1 DNAs are loaded
with core and linker histones and transcriptionally silenced”. In: Proceedings
==PAGE:84==
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 116.47
(2019), pp. 23735–23742. DOI: 10.1073/PNAS.1912638116,.
[127]
Argueta, Shannon et al. “In vivo programmed myeloid cells expressing novel
chimeric antigen receptors show potent anti­tumor activity in preclinical solid
tumor models”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 15 (2024). DOI: 10.3389/FIMMU.
2024.1501365/PDF.
[128]
Study Details | Study of MT­302 in Adults With Advanced or Metastatic Epithelial
Tumors | ClinicalTrials.gov.
[129]
Frey, Noelle and Porter, David. “Cytokine Release Syndrome with Chimeric
Antigen Receptor T Cell Therapy”. In: Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplan­
tation 25.4 (Apr. 2019), e123–e127. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2018.12.756.
[130]
Linette, Gerald P. et al. “Cardiovascular toxicity and titin cross­reactivity of
affinity­enhanced T cells in myeloma and melanoma”. In: Blood 122.6 (Aug.
2013), pp. 863–871. DOI: 10.1182/BLOOD-2013-03-490565.
[131]
Tran, Eric et al. “Immune targeting of fibroblast activation protein triggers recog­
nition of multipotent bone marrow stromal cells and cachexia”. In: Journal of
Experimental Medicine 210.6 (June 2013), pp. 1065–1068. DOI: 10.1084/JEM.
20130110,.
[132]
Yan, Jing et al. “Targeted immunotherapy rescues pulmonary fibrosis by reduc­
ing activated fibroblasts and regulating alveolar cell profile”. In: Nature Com­
munications 2025 16:1 16.1 (Apr. 2025), pp. 1–17. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-
59093-7.
==PAGE:85==
Appendices
A. CAR plasmid and construct
A1. Plasmid map for pCART­19
Figure A1: pCART­19 plasmid.
==PAGE:86==
A2. Alignment of human and porcine CD8aL
Figure A2: The sequence coding for porcine CD8αL was found in Uniprot with entry Q6R2U9 (signal
domain). The porcine and human CD8αL amino acid sequences were aligned, giving an 83% query
coverage and an identity of 75.00%.
A3. Alignment of human and porcine CD8 hinge and
transmembrane domain
Figure A3: The sequence coding for porcine CD8 hinge and transmembrane was found in Uniprot with
entry A0A4X1W571. The porcine and human CD8 hinge and transmembrane amino acid sequences
were aligned, giving an 28% query coverage and an identity of 63%.
==PAGE:87==
A4. Alignment of human and porcine CD3ε
Figure A4: The sequence coding for porcine CD3ε was found in Uniprot with entry Q9XSJ9. The porcine
and human CD3ε amino acid sequences were aligned, giving a 100% query coverage and an identity
of 100%.
B. T cell activation optimization
B1. Gating strategy for CD25 expression
Figure B1: Gating strategy for the expression marker CD25 for analysis of T cell activation. The gates
were set based on the CNT sample. Cells were gated as lymphocytes, single cells, live cells, and CD25+
cells.
==PAGE:88==
B2. CD3 dynabead activation assay
Figure B2: CD25 expression, IL­2, and IFN­γ secretion measured after 48 hours of stimulation using
flow cytometry and ELISA. PBMCs were stimulated with different bead/cell ratio anti­CD3 mAb­coated
Dynabeads™+ different concentrations anti­CD28 mAb, 2 µg/mL SEB, or 2 µL/mL LAC. In all samples,
20 IU/mL IL­2 was added during stimulation. I) IFN­γ and II) IL­2 secretion measured by ELISA following
cell activation. III) CD25 expression analyzed with flow cytometry after activation of cells. CNT; unstim­
ulated control. The arrow indicates that the samples are over the upper limit of quantification of the
standard curve. Samples with a value of 0 represent measurements that fall below the standard curve.
The symbols represent replicates of each sample. The PBMCs #112.2 (see table 1) from pig 112 was
used in this experiment.
==PAGE:89==
B3. CD3 dynabead control experiment
Figure B3: Control experiment to test the ability of porcine­specific CD3­coated Dynabeads™to iso­
late CD3+ cell population using MACS cell separation, following the manufacturer’s instructions (Ther­
moFisher). I) CD3+ population gated from the unisolated PBMC population. II) CD3+ population gated
from the PBMC population mixed with BSA­blocked Dynabeads™. III) CD3+ population gated from the
PBMC population mixed with anti­CD3ε­coated Dynabeads™. The PBMCs #112.1 (see table 1) from
pig 112 were used in this experiment.
B4. Plate bound CD3 activation assay
Figure B4: CD25 expression, IL­2, and IFN­γ secretion measured after 48 hours of stimulation using
flow cytometry and ELISA. PBMCs were stimulated with either 20 µg/mL anti­CD3 mAb + 8 µg/mL anti­
CD28 mAb, 2 µg/mL SEB, or 2 µL/mL LAC. In all samples, 100 IU/mL IL­2 was added during stimulation.
I) IFN­γ and II) IL­2 secretion measured by ELISA following cell activation. III) CD25 expression analyzed
with flow cytometry after activation of cells. CNT; unstimulated control, CD3; anti­CD3 mAb (PPT3),
CD28; anti­CD28 mAb. The arrow indicates that the samples are over the upper limit of quantification
of the standard curve. Samples with a value of 0 represent measurements that fall below the standard
curve. The symbols represent replicates of each sample. The PBMCs #107.1 (see table 1) from pig 107
were used in this experiment.
==PAGE:90==
B5. ELISA IL­2 secretion results from activated cells
Figure B5: IL­2 secretion measured after 48 and/or 72 hours of stimulation using ELISA. Fresh or
thawed PBMCs were stimulated with either 20 µg/mL anti­CD3 mAb + 8 µg/mL anti­CD28 mAb, 2 µg/mL
SEB, or 1 µL/mL LAC. In all samples, 100 IU/mL IL­2 was added during stimulation. IL­2 secretion
measured by ELISA I) 48 hours after activation of fresh PBMCs, II) 48 hours after activation of thawed
PBMCs, and III) 72 hours after activation of thawed PBMCs. CNT; unstimulated control, CD3; anti­CD3
mAb, CD28; anti­CD28 mAb. The arrow indicates that the samples are over the detection limit of the
standard curve. Samples with a value of 0 represent measurements that fall below the standard curve.
The PBMCs #85.1 and #86.1 (see table 1) from pigs 85 and 86 were used in this experiment.
==PAGE:91==
C. Viral transduction optimization
C1. Gating strategy for LDL­receptor expression
Figure C1: Gating strategy for the LDL­receptor to assess the ability of viral transduction. The LDL
receptor antibody is PE­conjugated. The gates were set based on the CNT sample. Cells were gated
as lymphocytes, single cells, live cells, and LDL­receptor+ cells. CNT; unstimulated control.
C2. LDL­receptor expression
Figure C2: The percentage of LDL­receptor expression in activated lymphocytes assessed by flow
cytometry 48 hours following PBMC activation. The cells were stimulated with either 20 µg/mL CD3
+ 8 µg/mL CD28, 2 µg/mL SEB, or 1 µL/mL LAC. In all samples, 100 IU/mL IL­2 was added during
stimulation. CNT; unstimulated control, CD3/CD28; anti­CD3 mAb and anti­CD28 mAb. The PBMCs
#85.1 and #86.1 (see table 1) from pigs 85 and 86 were used in this experiment.
==PAGE:92==
C3. Gating strategy for GFP expression after viral transduction
Figure C3: Gating strategy for the GFP expression to assess the ability of viral transduction. The gates
were set based on the CNT sample. Cells were gated as lymphocytes, single cells, live cells, and GFP+
cells. CNT; non­transduced control.
C4. Viral transduction in activated and unactivated T cells
Figure C4: The percentage of GFP expression in activated and unactivated lymphocytes assessed
by flow cytometry 96 hours following viral transduction. Cells were activated with 20 µg/mL CD3, 8
µg/mL CD28, and 100 IU/mL IL­2. The unactivated T cells were treated with 20 IU/mL. Lentiviral vector
containing the pCART­19 plasmid was added to the PBMCs at a volume of 5 µL per sample, 72 hours
after stimulation. CNT; non­transduced control. The PBMCs #85.1 (see table 1) from pig 85 were used
in this experiment.
==PAGE:93==
C5. Viral transduction 24, 48 and 72 hours after activation
Figure C5: The percentage of GFP expression in activated lymphocytes assessed by flow cytometry 96
hours following viral transduction. Lentiviral vector containing the pCART­19 plasmid was added to the
PBMCs at a volume of 15 µL per sample, 24, 48, and 72 hours after stimulation with 20 µg/mL anti­CD3
mAb, 8 µg/mL anti­CD28 mAb, and 100 IU/mL IL­2. GFP expression was assessed by flow cytometry
96 hours following the last viral transduction. CNT; non­transduced control activated for 72 hours. The
PBMCs #85.1 and #86.1 (see table 1) from pigs 85 and 86 were used in this experiment.
==PAGE:94==
D. Nucleofection optimization
D1. Test of nucleofection codes using pmaxGFP
Figure D1: The percentage of live lymphocytes and GFP expression in live lymphocytes assessed 96
hours after nucleofection with 0.3 µg pmaxGFP plasmid per 1 million cells using 7 different nucleofection
pulse codes. I) Activated PBMCs were stimulated 3 days before nucleofection, and II) unstimulated
PBMCs were thawed 2 hours before nucleofection and cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS
and 20 IU/mL IL­2. After nucleofection, cells were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and
20 IU/mL IL­2. CNT; non­nucleofected control. The PBMCs #85.1 (see table 1) from pig 85 were used
in this experiment.
D2. Test of nucleofection codes using pCART­19
Figure D2: The percentage of live lymphocytes and GFP expression in live lymphocytes assessed I)
24 hours, II) 48 hours, and III) 72 hours after nucleofection with 1 μg pCART19 plasmid per million
cells using pulse codes DR115 and DT113. All samples consist of unstimulated cells thawed 2 hours
before nucleofection and incubated with 20 IU/mL IL­2. After nucleofection, cells were cultured in RPMI
supplemented with 10% FBS and 20 IU/mL IL­2. CNT; non­nucleofected control, h; hours. The PBMCs
#86.2 (see table 1) from pig 86 were used in this experiment.
==PAGE:95==
D3. Backgating strategy for pCART­19 GFP expression
Figure D3: Examples of backgating analysis of results from 48 hours after nucleofection shown in
figure 3.5. Backgating of I) CNT sample and II) sample using nucleofection pulse code DT115 from the
experiment using 1 µg pCART­19 plasmid per 1 million cells (figure 3.5A). Backgating of III) CNT sample
and IV) sample using nucleofection pulse code DT115 from the experiment using 1.5 µg pCART­19
plasmid per 1 million cells (figure 3.5B). Gating hierarchy: Lymphocytes; Single cells, Live cells: GFP+.
The gates were set based on the CNT samples. CNT; non­nucleofected control.
==PAGE:96==
D4. Test of pCART­19 concentrations and cell survival
Figure D4: The percentage of live lymphocytes and GFP expression in live lymphocytes assessed 24
and/or 48 hours after nucleofection using 2­3 different nucleofection pulse codes. I+II) Nucleofection
with 1 µg pCART­19 plasmid per 1 million cells with a cell concentration of 1 million in one well (20
µL Nucleocuvette® strip), III) 1.5 µg pCART­19 plasmid per 1 million cells with a cell concentration of 1
million in one well (20 µL Nucleocuvette® strip), and IV) 1.5 µg pCART­19 plasmid per 1 million cells with
a cell concentration of 2 million in one well (20 µL Nucleocuvette® strip). All samples were unstimulated
PBMCs thawed 2 hours before nucleofection and cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10 or 20% FBS
and 500 IU/mL IL­2. CNT; non­nucleofected control, h; hours. The PBMCs #109.1, #110.1, #111.1, and
#112.2 (see table 1) from pigs 109­112 were used in these experiments. The symbols represent each
pig sample, and error bars represent the SD of the mean.
==PAGE:97==
D5. Reintroducing nucleofection codes in pigs 86 and 111
Figure D5: The percentage of live lymphocytes and GFP expression in live lymphocytes assessed I) 24
hours, II) 48 hours, and III) 72 hours after nucleofection with 1.5 µg pCART­19 plasmid per million cells
using different pulse codes in pig 86 and 111. All samples consist of unstimulated cells thawed 2 hours
before nucleofection and incubated with 20 IU/mL IL­2. After nucleofection, cells were cultured in RPMI
supplemented with 20% FBS and 500 IU/mL IL­2. CAR; pCART­19 plasmid, CNT; non­nucleofected
control, h; hours, 86; PBMC ID #86.1, 111; PBMC ID #111.1. The PBMCs #86.1 and #111.1 (see table
1) from pigs 86 and 111 were used in these experiments.
==PAGE:98==
D6. Backgating strategy for pCART­19 GFP expression
Continues on next page
==PAGE:99==
Continues on next page
==PAGE:100==
Figure D6: Examples of backgating analysis of results from 24, 48, and 72 hours after nucleofection
shown in figure D5. Examples are from pig 86 and 111 CNT samples and samples nucleofected with
pulse code EH100. Gating hierarchy: Lymphocytes; Single cells, Live cells: GFP+. The gates were set
based on the CNT samples. CNT; non­nucleofected control.
==PAGE:101==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej, Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
