==PAGE:1==
Structural Analysis of Global Bifurcation
Manifolds and Chaotic Attractors through
Tropicalization of Perturbed Systems
Master’s Thesis
Andreas Hussain Sarantaris
June 2025
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Structural Analysis of Global Bifurcation Manifolds and Chaotic Attractors through Trop-
icalization of Perturbed Systems
Master’s Thesis
June 2025
By
Andreas Hussain Sarantaris
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
We build upon recent work adapting methods from tropical geometry to the study of
dynamical systems. Tropical geometry reduces nonlinear problems to piecewise-linear ones,
which are more amenable to analysis and retain some important topological and geometric
properties of the original perturbed algebraic equations.
Tropicalization of dynamical
systems, in a similar fashion, reduces a smooth dynamical system to a piecewise-constant
one with linear switching boundaries. Perturbed dynamical systems arise in many models
of physical systems, but only certain classes of such systems lend themselves to analytical
study using current methods, and numerical study of perturbed systems is diﬀicult due to
large differences in their parameters.
The utility of tropicalization is presented, as it reveals the asymptotic location and struc-
ture of global bifurcation manifolds and invariant sets, including limit cycles and chaotic
attractors. This offers a global picture of the asymptotic behavior of the system, that
can subsequently be studied in greater detail by other methods, although we argue for
the future possibility of the analysis to be further refined. We substantiate this with an
exposition of tropical geometry, tracing its development from Puiseux series and Newton
polygons, and motivate the use of tropicalization of dynamical systems through Puiseux
series expansions of the bifurcation manifolds and invariant sets of the perturbed systems.
The theoretical framework of tropical dynamical systems is extended to arbitrary dimen-
sions, presenting explicit expressions for the piecewise-linear maps that govern the tropi-
cal dynamics, which are subsequently used to study the global tropical bifurcations. We
substantiate the global analysis by first considering local bifurcations, showing how the
tropical system determines the asymptotic location of bifurcation manifolds – or even the
exact location for simple systems. We consider a tropicalization of a chemical model where
the tropical approach initially breaks down, but show how a simple principle from tropical
geometry restores its predictive power in such degenerate cases. We show the simplic-
ity of constructing and analyzing global bifurcations of tropical systems, revealing their
asymptotic structure in the perturbed system.
Finally, we construct a tropical system with a chaotic attractor, where the Poincaré map
is a piecewise-linear map which is shown to be chaotic for some parameter values. We
relate this to the perturbed system by showing the common hallmarks of chaos through
numerical simulations, and we identify a Shilnikov bifurcation at specific parameter values,
thereby proving rigorously the existence of a chaotic attractor in the perturbed system, at
least for some parameter values.
The main objective of the present thesis is to show the utility and simplicity of tropicaliza-
tion in analyzing global bifurcation manifolds and invariant sets of perturbed dynamical
systems, and motivate further research into the subject in the aim of establishing a rigorous
theory of tropical dynamical systems.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would first of all like to thank my supervisor, associate professor Christian Henriksen
who gave me valuable sparring, thoughtful suggestions and challenged my assumptions,
although he was not familiar with the previous work in the novel field of tropical dynamical
systems. He pushed me back on track when I diverged too much into research that was
not relevant for the current project, which I am grateful for.
Secondly, but with no less emphasis, I would like to thank associate professor Kristian
Uldall Kristiansen who was my supervisor in my bachelor thesis, and who introduced me,
in a group project, to the field of tropical dynamics of which he is one of the pioneers. I
chose the project because of his enthusiastic presentation of it, which I have never since
regretted. I am grateful for all the opportunities he has given me, and the time he has spent
for supervising me, providing constructive feedback and showing excitement for my ideas
and results, which he even gave me the honor of documenting and expanding upon in an
academic paper currently under review. And I would also like to thank the group members
of the initial project which sparked this journey, Jonas Dammann, Thomas Haastrup and
Victor Hansen.
I am grateful for all the help and support that my wife and daughter have shown me,
supporting me through all of my study, and giving me time to write reports and theses in
odd times, especially in the hectic days before the deadlines. And I am grateful to them for
sharing my excitement and encouraging me in drawing my ”spiders” and ”snails”, which
my drawings resemble, and my four year old daughter getting excited with my simulations
of chaotic attractors, and drawing her own doodles, exclaiming ”Chaos!”, which has now
become a household word used in various circumstances.
I would also like to thank my parents and brother who have showed much interest in my
work, actively listening to my explanations of my field of research, and asking me diﬀicult
questions which has given me food for thought for how to progress in my work and explain
the subject matter in a clear and simple way. I am particularly grateful for all the help
my brother has provided me in creating some of the figures.
Lastly, and most importantly, I would like to express my gratitude to God – the Creator
and Sustainer of this complex and ”chaotic” world we live in and seek to gain knowledge
about – for His continuous help and guidance through His subtle way of providing ideas
and intuitions, and for leading me to the path that I am taking in life.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Global Bifurcations and Chaos
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Perturbation Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Tropical Geometry and Tropical Dynamical systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Motivation and Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
A Journey from Algebraic Geometry to Tropical Dynamics
9
2.1
Preparations and Departure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Positive Roots and Descartes’ Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Puiseux Series Expansions and Newton Polygons . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.3
Signed Subdivisions and Positive Root Count . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.4
Multiple Roots and Bifurcations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Explorations Along the Way . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.1
Intersections of Curves and Bernstein’s Theorem . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.2
Isolated Roots of Real Polynomial Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.3
Patchworking Real Curves and Viro’s Method . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.2.4
Multivariate Descartes’ Rule and Itenberg and Roy’s Conjecture
. .
30
2.3
Reaching the Tropics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3.1
Tropical Curves and Their Intersections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3.2
Tangential Intersections and Tropical Modifications . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.3.3
On Positive Solutions and Multivariate Descartes’ Rule
. . . . . . .
37
3
Extending the Framework of Tropical Dynamical Systems
39
3.1
The Flow in the Tropical Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
The Piecewise-Constant System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3
Nullclines, Equilibria and Cycles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4
Tropicalization of the Autocatalator Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.5
Trajectories and Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Local Tropical Bifurcations
54
iv
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
4.1
Saddle-Node Bifurcations of Tropical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.1
A Prototype System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.1.2
Transversal Intersection of the Tropical Nullclines
. . . . . . . . . .
55
4.1.3
Tangential Intersection of the Tropical Nullclines . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.1.4
Saddle-Focus Bifurcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.1.5
Determining Intersections of Tropical Curves from a Subdivision . .
58
4.2
Hopf Bifurcations and Canard Explosions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2.1
Intersection of Nullclines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.2.2
Mixed Flow Vectors and Poincare Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.2.3
A Hopf Bifurcation with a Crossing Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2.4
Different Types of Cycles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.2.5
Canard Explosions at Tangential Intersections
. . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5
Global Tropical Bifurcations
69
5.1
Saddle Connections in One-Parameter Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.1.1
An Unbounded Canard Explosion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.1.2
Homoclinic Bifurcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.2
Three-Dimensional Bifurcation Manifolds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.2.1
A Saddle-Node Bifurcation on an Invariant Circle . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.2.2
A Degenerate Homoclinic SNIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.2.3
A Saddle-Node Bifurcation on Canard Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.2.4
A Three-Dimensional Bifurcation Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.3
Bifurcations Dependent on Initial Coeﬀicients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5.3.1
Saddle-Node Bifurcation of Limit Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5.3.2
Heteroclinic Saddle-Node Bifurcation at Infinity
. . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.3.3
Determining Two-Parameter Bifurcation Diagrams . . . . . . . . . .
87
6
Tropical Chaos
90
6.1
Construction of a Tropical Rössler-Type Attractor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
6.2
Structure of the Chaotic Attractor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6.3
Tropical Return Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
6.3.1
Reinjection and a Shilnikov Bifurcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
6.3.2
A Boundary Crisis Bifurcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
6.3.3
The Piecewise-Linear Poincaré Map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
6.4
Simulations and Bifurcation Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.4.1
Period-Doubling Toward the Tropical Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
6.4.2
Period Incrementing Toward the Boundary Crisis . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7
Discussion and Conclusion
103
7.1
Equilibria and Intersections of Tropical Curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
7.2
Tropical Phase Portraits and Automatization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
7.3
Local bifurcations and Tangential Intersections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
v
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
7.4
Global Phenomena and Cycles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
7.5
Chaotic Attractors of Tropicalized Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
7.6
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Bibliography
111
A More Saddle-Node Bifurcations
116
A.1 Saddle-Node Bifurcations by Flips of the Subdivisions . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
A.2 Codimension-2 Double Saddle-Node Bifurcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
vi
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Our world consists of systems which are constantly changing over time, both those that we
humans have created, as well as the ones that have been created for the world to produce
and sustain complex and dynamic structures. These systems follow laws that govern how
the states of the systems change over time, given their interaction with each other, which
can be described by mathematical models. Some systems have laws that are well-described,
such as Newton’s laws of motion, the laws of thermodynamics and electromagnetism, to
name a few. Others are determined on a case by case basis through constructing a model
that fits the data and verifying them.
The theory of dynamical systems is the study
of such time-dependent systems that often arise from mathematical models of physical
phenomena. In this field, one is interested in the qualitative behavior of the system and
the structural changes that occur in the system, such as stationary states, oscillations and
chaotic behavior.
1.1
Global Bifurcations and Chaos
Various changes can occur in dynamical systems, e.g. the number and stability of equilib-
ria, limit cycles and chaotic attractors (often used interchangeably with the term strange
attractors, although the definitions of both terms are contested and debated). The local
bifurcations, i.e. those of equilibria, are generally well understood and can be determined
using analytical or numerical computations by solving systems of equations. The only
local bifurcations that are robust – in the sense that they are guaranteed to occur even
under small perturbations – are the saddle-node bifurcation and the Hopf bifurcation, i.e.
the creation of two equilibria, and the change in stability of a single equilibrium. The
latter typically leads to the creation of a small amplitude limit cycle near the equilibrium.
The case of global bifurcations is completely different. For the most part, these the
changes in oscillatory or chaotic behavior cannot be determined explicitly by analytical
methods. Here it is generally not easy to determine all bifurcations that can occur in
a system, let alone when they occur, especially when the number of parameters is large.
1
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
This information is however very important to know as this can have a drastic effect on
the system, by the occurrence or disappearance of oscillatory or chaotic behavior.
Typically – in applications – one would resort to numerical explorations, as analytical
study becomes diﬀicult very quickly when the size of the system increases. However, nu-
merical computations are prone to error and require some intuition about where to look
for global invariant manifolds and their bifurcations. Arguably the most challenging prob-
lem is numerical accuracy and stability when the parameters of the system have large
differences in their orders of magnitude, which is common in physical systems, even after
non-dimensionalization of the parameters. These are called stiff problems, and are gener-
ally much more diﬀicult to analyze. And even when a bifurcation or an invariant manifold
is determined numerically for one specific choice of parameters, it is still challenging to
follow it around in the space of parameters or phase space. Another problem is where to
look for qualitatively different dynamics, as one cannot numerically guarantee that the
numerical computations that have been conducted show all the dynamics of the system.
Chaotic attractors are similarly only substantiated by numerical methods typically, out-
side the community of pure mathematicians, and thus lack mathematical rigor.
One
would then use multiple different methods to provide evidence for chaotic behavior, as a
system that behaves chaotically for some – possibly large – time interval, can settle to
oscillatory behavior, in a phenomenon termed transient chaos. Often one would compute
trajectories from different initial conditions to find a region of space where trajectories are
attracted to some aperiodic dense invariant set. One would then determine an approxi-
mate section, transversely through the attractor, and determine the point of return for a
trajectory that goes through the section, establishing a Poincaré map. This map is often
almost a flat curve as chaotic attractors usually contract the flow in one direction and
expand in another. This provides an opportunity to idealize this two-dimensional map to
a one-dimensional one, which is easier to study. One can then study the map for different
parameters and create a bifurcation diagram showing period-doubling and intermittency,
which are global bifurcations that are hallmarks of chaos. One would also need to es-
tablish a trapping region, i.e. ensure that the trajectories cannot escape from the region
where chaos is hypothesized. As trajectories of dynamical systems do not intersect, this
one-dimensional map is merely an idealization. One therefore cannot generally conclude
– with mathematical rigor – the behavior of the full continuous system from the behavior
of the one-dimensional map.
This was however the principle behind the analysis and evidence that Lorenz used in
1963 to propose that the system he had derived from a weather model did indeed have
a chaotic attractor, although he used another type of one-dimensional map, subsequently
named after him. See e.g. [39] for a thorough disposition of this. The Lorenz system was
the first physical model where deterministic chaos was proposed, rather than explaining
the chaotic behavior of models as ”noise”, and it opened up a large field of research into
physical models with chaotic behavior.
2
==PAGE:10==
1.2.
PERTURBATION THEORIES
In 1967, Smale determined a geometric and mathematically rigorous way of understand-
ing deterministic chaos, through his horseshoe map. See e.g. [37] for a short introduction.
The existence of a Smale horseshoe in a dynamical system implies chaos, in a rigorous
sense. However, it is far from all systems that can have such a horseshoe as it requires
a transversal homoclinic point of the Poincaré map of the system, which not typical for
general dynamical systems. Moreover, it requires a global analysis of the system, which
as we mentioned, is generally diﬀicult to obtain. Indeed, the Lorenz system is not such a
system, and the question of whether the Lorenz system had a chaotic attractor remained
open for many decades. This was the fourteenth problem listed by Smale in 1998 in his
famous list of mathematical problems for the twenty-first century [38]. However, in 2002
Tucker gave a computer assisted proof of the existence of a chaotic attractor [42], in a
rigorous sense, thereby solving Smale’s fourteenth problem. The aid of a computer was
necessary because of the many computations necessary, although only the existence of the
chaotic attractor was only established for the single set of parameters that Lorenz had
considered.
A simpler way to rigorously prove the existence a chaotic attractor is to prove the
existence of a homoclinic loop from a saddle-focus to itself, which is a global bifurcation
due to Shilnikov, see e.g. [11]. This establishes the existence of a Smale horseshoe in the
Poincaré map near the homoclinic loop. However, again the problem lies in establishing
the existence of such a homoclinic loop, which is usually diﬀicult to determine rigorously,
and it is again not a typical case in systems that are assumed to be chaotic.
1.2
Perturbation Theories
Analytical methods for determining global bifurcations do exist for certain types of systems.
Hamiltonian systems are arguably the most well understood, as the invariant manifolds are
completely defined by the level curves of the Hamiltonian function. This property means
that there is not much that can occur, e.g. no limit cycles, as oscillations are not isolated.
Thus when a trajectory moves in an orbit it stays in that orbit. These systems occur
most notably in astronomical models of celestial motion, or trajectories of space crafts, as
energy conservation is usually a reasonable assumption. On planet Earth, this assumption
generally does not hold. However, some systems are perturbations of Hamiltonian systems,
whereby one can obtain crucial information of the behavior and dynamics from determining
the break-up of the invariant manifolds of the Hamiltonian system when a small parameter
is turned on. This is the subject of regular perturbation theory, where the main tool is
Melnikov functions, which in principle are integrals that measure the distance between the
stable and unstable manifold of a saddle point. If this distance can be both positive and
negative for a small perturbation one can conclude a transversal intersection, and thus a
homoclinic bifurcation. See e.g. [17] for a short exposition of how to use Melnikov theory
to determine the existence of a Smale horseshoe in a simple example.
Another type of system which lends itself to analytical study are slow-fast systems,
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
or more generally, multiple time-scale systems. These are systems where the change of
the state occur on different time scales for some of the variables, and are associated
with stiff problems in numerical simulations, and therefore diﬀicult to analyze numerically.
Trajectories in such systems quickly becomes attracted to a slow manifold, where the
fast equations cancel each other and the dynamics is governed by the slow equations.
This slow manifold is close to part of the nullcline of the fast variables, called a critical
manifold. This is the basis of geometric singular perturbation theory, where Fenichel’s
theorems establish the existence of a slow manifold from the existence of a normally
hyperbolic critical manifold. The dynamics on the slow manifold requires the use of the
blow-up method when normal hyperbolicity is lost, which is effective but tedious, as it
often requires many analytical considerations. See e.g. [2] for a survey on the blow-up
method with examples, and [21] for a review on geometric singular perturbation theory,
including the use of the blow-up method. For more a more detailed exposition one can
consult the textbook [22].
In the latter reference, a slow-fast Lorenz-type attractor is
constructed by utilizing the properties of the slow manifold.
Many physical systems, e.g. in biology, chemistry and neuroscience, can be modelled
as slow-fast systems as they have so-called relaxation oscillations where sudden leaps or
pulses are followed by a longer pause where the state changes slowly. These relaxation
oscillations are usually created in so-called canard explosions, which are global phenomena
where the limit cycle rapidly increases in size and structure from initially being created in
a Hopf bifurcation. Although many systems are slow-fast (or can be transformed to one
through scaling) it is far from all. Thus there is a need for a general method that can be
used to analyze a more general class of systems.
1.3
Tropical Geometry and Tropical Dynamical systems
The present thesis builds upon recent studies in adapting methods from the field of tropical
geometry to the study of dynamical systems, in particular for chemical reaction networks.
This endeavor was initiated in series of papers, all co-authored by Radulescu. See [29, 30,
33, 35, 7], ordered from the earliest to the most recent. Tropical geometry reveals some of
the important topological structure and geometric properties of algebraic equations. This
has been utilized in the before-mentioned papers to determine model reductions of large
chemical reaction networks by tropical equilibration, which essentially is to iteratively re-
duce the number of variables by considering the dynamics on slow manifolds of increasingly
smaller dimension. The location of the slow manifolds are close to the edges of a polygonal
object called a tropical curve, or in higher dimensions, the faces of tropical hypersurfaces.
This reduces the nonlinear problem to a piecewise-linear one, significantly reducing the
complexity of the analysis.
In the master’s thesis of Portisch [32] – supervised by Peter Szmolyan – the flow on
the other faces of the tropical hypersurface was considered, which had been touched upon
briefly in [29]. This reduces the nonlinear problem to a piecewise-constant one with linear
4
==PAGE:12==
1.3.
TROPICAL GEOMETRY AND TROPICAL DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
boundaries between them. Piecewise-smooth systems have been studied extensively as
many physical systems can be modelled by a discontinuous system.
See e.g. [10] for
a detailed introduction to the analysis of such system.
Portisch analyzing a chemical
model and determined a piecewise-constant system with the same qualitative behavior as
the perturbed one, which was substantiated using geometric singular perturbation theory.
Notions of switching manifolds from the theory of piecewise-smooth systems were used,
with crossing and sliding described for the piecewise-constant system.
In the Bachelor’s thesis [36], the present author – under supervision of Kristian Kris-
tiansen – developed upon the method to define a piecewise-constant system for any planar
polynomial dynamical system with the edges of the tropical curve as switching manifolds1.
The main focus was studying the tropical system in its own right, and using methods from
tropical geometry – such as subdivisions of the Newton polygon of the system – to gain
information on the possible structure of the dynamics and the number of limit cycles. See
e.g. [25] for a detailed introduction to the field of tropical geometry, or [8] for a lighter
overview. Subdivisions of the Newton polygon are polygonal graphs dual to the tropical
curves, and can change through flips of the triangulations, possibly changing the dynamics
of the system. A distinction was made between sliding cycles and crossing cycles, where
the later are defined to be cycles that exclusively move between crossing manifolds, while
sliding cycles must have points on a sliding manifold.
The main results of the bachelor’s thesis of the present author was determining an upper
bound on the number of hyperbolic sliding cycles for a system of a given degree. More
specifically it was found that a planar system of degree N cannot have more than N2+2 N
hyperbolic sliding cycles, in a suﬀiciently generic system. This was determined by using
the properties of the subdivisions of the Newton polygon dual to the tropical curve. The
result relates to the second part of Hilbert’s sixteenth problem on whether the number
of limit cycles that a planar polynomial system, of a given degree, can have is bounded.
This problem is still open, even for the quadratic case. The number of hyperbolic crossing
cycles of a tropical system is also bounded, although an explicit bound is not specified
as of yet. The properties of the dual subdivisions were also used to construct a family of
systems of arbitrary degree with many limit cycles, more specifically in the order of 1
2 N2.
Thus it is very close to the upper bound, only separated by a factor of 2. This shows
how the tropical approach can be used to construct systems with prescribed dynamics
and qualitative behavior, similar to Viro’s method which also uses subdivisions of Newton
polygons and was foundational to the field of tropical geometry. See [45] for an introduction
to Viro’s method and its relation to tropical geometry – as well as its relation to the first
part of Hilbert’s sixteenth problem, which is the algebraic equivalent to the second part.
Our point of departure is the forthcoming paper by Kristiansen (currently available as
pre-print [20]) which is co-authored by the present author, and partially based on the
1Much of the work in [36] was initiated in a group project of the present author and three fellow students
under the supervision of Kristiansen.
5
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
results from the before-mentioned theses. There the theory of tropical dynamical systems
is made rigorous by providing a clear definition and establishing existence of solutions. The
main result of the paper is that the number of structurally stable equivalence classes that
a tropical dynamical system can have is finite, a result not found in dynamical systems
generally. This was done through the study of separatrices in the system – which are the
main source of global bifurcations – as well as crossing cycles and subdivisions. The main
result is demonstrated on a generalized chemical model to show that it has exactly 15
structurally stable equivalence classes in the tropical sense.
1.4
Motivation and Outline of the Thesis
Except for the short mentions in [20] no detailed study on global bifurcations of tropical
dynamical systems has been done. Some studies on local bifurcations have been conducted
in the master’s thesis by Nielsen [28], also supervised by Kristiansen. In this thesis we
seek to show the utility of tropicalization of dynamical systems, and how it can be used
to determine the asymptotic position and structure of global bifurcation manifolds and
invariant sets, both limit cycles and chaotic attractors.
We do this by first given an exposition of the developments of tropical geometry, from its
roots in algebraic geometry and Viro’s method, for the study of nonlinear equation using
Puiseux series and Newton polygons. This is the subject of chapter 2. Tropical geometry is
mostly concerned with algebraically closed fields, such as the complex numbers, whereas
Viro’s method is concerned with the topological structure of real algebraic geometries.
We show some results and challenges that are faced in the field of real algebraic geometry
and show how (real) tropical geometry can be a powerful tool in the study of algebraic
equations, as well as substantiate the use of tropical geometry for dynamical systems
through Puiseux series expansions of the bifurcation manifolds and the invariant sets of
the perturbed system.
In chapter 3 we utilize the concepts that were developed in the previous chapter, giving
an introduction to tropical dynamical systems, while extending the theoretical framework
to arbitrary dimensions. Here we also present explicit expressions for the flow maps from
a point in a domain to a switching manifold, as well as the transition maps between the
switching manifolds and return maps from a switching manifold to itself. These maps are
used in the following chapters, particularly in the study of global bifurcations and chaos.
In chapter 4 we present some results on local bifurcations, showing how bifurcations
of tropical systems can arise and their correspondence with bifurcations of the perturbed
system.
For Hopf bifurcations specifically we show how the bifurcation point can be
determined more precisely by controlling the angle of the flow vectors in each domain
of the piecewise-constant system. Here we get the first glimpse of a Poincaré map of a
tropical system, which will be used more heavily in the following chapters. The chapter
is concluded by considering a chemical model called the templator system, which was
6
==PAGE:14==
1.4.
MOTIVATION AND OUTLINE OF THE THESIS
analyzed by Brøns in [4]. Here we see a break down of the usual approach of tropicalization,
as the critical manifold is not hyperbolic, i.e. the nullclines of the tropical system do not
intersect transversely. However, we show how a principle from tropical geometry – called
tropical modification – can be used to transform the system and determine the position and
stability of the equilibrium, which depend on the higher order terms of the Puiseux series
of the parameters. Thereby we reveal more terms of the parameters where the canard
explosion occurs in the asymptotic limit.
In chapter 5 we begin the study of global planar bifurcations of tropical systems, by first
constructing an example of a system where a canard explosion occurs at another parameter
value than the Hopf bifurcation, which has been the case in the examples considered
previously. The amplitude of the canard cycle increases to infinity and is destroyed in a
heteroclinic bifurcation when the unstable manifold of a finite saddle connects to the stable
one of an infinite saddle. However, all this – from the canard explosion to the heteroclinic
bifurcation – occurs at the same parameter value of the tropical system. Next we construct
a one-parameter system with a homoclinic bifurcation, which is then extended to a three-
parameter system with many different types of bifurcations, both local and global ones.
Most interestingly a saddle-node bifurcation on the limit cycle occurs, which is commonly
called a saddle-node bifurcation on an invariant circle. We show how to determine the
asymptotic structure of the bifurcation manifolds, as well as the codimension-2 curves
between them, which meet in three codimension-3 bifurcation points. Using the analysis
we establish a region of existence of a limit cycle in the three-dimensional parameter space.
Concluding the chapter we construct a system where the direction of a flow vector can be
controlled by a small change in the parameter. In this small range two limit cycles are
created in a saddle-node bifurcation of the Poincaré map. This provides a more intricate
bifurcation diagram where the bifurcation curves can be nonlinear (more specifically a
ratio of linear expressions), contrary to the piecewise-linear bifurcation manifolds in the
usual parameters. Before leaving the small parameter interval, a heteroclinic bifurcation
occurs at the creation of a saddle-node at infinity.
Finally, in chapter 6, we ascend from planar systems into the three-dimensional phase
space and construct a tropical system with a chaotic attractor. We substantiate this by
showing the common hallmarks of chaos through numerical studies, as well as showing
that the system has a Shilnikov bifurcation at the creation of a homoclinic loop, thereby
proving that the perturbed system, at least for some parameter values, has a chaotic at-
tractor. We determine and analyze the Poincaré map of the tropical system and relate it
to the numerical bifurcation diagrams. We use the Poincaré map to determine another
bifurcation called a boundary crisis, which occurs when the attractor intersects its own
boundary. In the numerical studies we see period incrementing in the intermittency in-
tervals, which builds up on the route to the boundary crisis. In the tropical system a
cylinder of periodic orbits is created, which breaks up for the perturbed system, although
the cylindrical structure of the attractor is preserved close to the bifurcation point.
7
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
Before we begin, we note that to generate the figures in the thesis where tropical ge-
ometry (and more specifically tropical dynamics) is used, we have utilized (and expanded
upon) a MATLAB toolbox called Tropical Dynamics Toolbox, which is developed by the
present author, and described in [36]. The toolbox can be downloaded at:
https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/132058-tropical-
dynamics-toolbox
8
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
A Journey from Algebraic
Geometry to Tropical Dynamics
In this chapter we will introduce the background of the main framework used in this thesis,
and explore its development from its roots in algebraic geometry and Puiseux series for
solving polynomial equations. The main tool for many of the results is the Newton polygon,
which transforms the problem from an algebraic one to a polyhedral one. The Newton
polygon was subsequently used in Viro’s method of patchworking, which has proved itself
to be the most powerful tool to determine real algebraic curves with prescribed topology
and solved some very old problems in algebraic geometry.
Tropical geometry generalized Viro’s method to complex curves and provides a general
framework for studying the topology of algebraic structures. The Newton polygon is again
relied upon, but more important is the concept of the tropical curve, which is the dual
graph of the Newton polygon. We aim to use this as the foundation from which the theory
of tropical dynamical systems can be built upon for the qualitative study of ordinary
differential equations, and this is the point of departure for the present thesis.
2.1
Preparations and Departure
We begin in the rich field of algebraic geometry where the main focus is polynomial equa-
tions, which form the foundation of mathematical models in science and engineering. These
equations have challenged mankind throughout history and much is still left uncharted.
We will show how the main tool developed by Newton in the 17th century has been refined
in the subsequent centuries to discover new results with regards to the solutions of the
equations, particularly the number of isolated solutions and their positions.
The present section is primarily based on and inspired by chapter 1 and 3 in the text-
book [41] by Sturmfels, and his more condensed article [40]. However, we will take the
opportunity to introduce our notation, terminology, techniques and examples which will
be used throughout this thesis, while providing some of our own results that we have not
9
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
been able to find in the literature, particularly a proposition and a conjecture (i.e. Propo-
sition 2.25 and Conjecture 2.26), as well as some observations on the number of positive
roots.
2.1.1
Positive Roots and Descartes’ Rule
Using common algebraic notation we let F[x] denote a univariate polynomial in the vari-
able x with coeﬀicients in the field of F, and let deg f denote the degree of f. We will
restrict our attention to F = R or F = C, which is most common in application. The fol-
lowing fundamental result provides the exact number of complex roots of real or complex
polynomials.
Theorem 2.1 (The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra). A polynomial f ∈C[x] has exactly
deg f complex roots, counting multiplicity.
A limitation of this theorem is that the number of real roots could be much less than the
number of complex roots, and these are often the ones of interest in engineering contexts,
and in the study of dynamical systems.
In 1637 Descartes formulated a rule to determine an upper bound on the number of
positive roots. This bound only depends on the number of terms and their signs, and is
therefore independent of the degree. This is beneficial as the number of terms in polynomi-
als studied in applications is typically much smaller than the degree of the polynomial, and
therefore this result generally provides a much better estimate of the number of positive
roots than the fundamental theorem of algebra. Such polynomials are interchangeably
called sparse polynomials, fewnomials or Lacunary polynomials. We first introduce some
necessary notation and terminology that will be used throughout the thesis before stating
the rule.
Let f ∈R[x] be a real univariate polynomial with K non-zero coeﬀicients ak ∈R∗for
k = 1, . . . , K, where we abbreviate R∗= R \ {0}. Then f can be written as
f(x) =
K
X
k=1
ak xnk ,
x ∈R ,
where and nk ∈N0 are the degrees of the monomial terms. The monomials are ordered
such that the degrees are in ascending order, i.e. nk < nk+1, whereby we have deg f = nK.
We say that f has a sign alternation if two consecutive coeﬀicients ak and ak+1 have
different sign. Now we are ready to state the result.
Theorem 2.2 (Descartes’ Rule of Signs). The number of positive roots of a real univariate
polynomial, counting multiplicity, is at most equal to the number of sign alternations of
its coeﬀicients.
Although Descartes’ rule only applies to positive roots, one can determine the number
of negative roots by using Descartes’ rule on the polynomial given by f(−x), which is
10
==PAGE:18==
2.1.
PREPARATIONS AND DEPARTURE
equal to f except that the sign of the monomials with odd degree are reversed. A simple
corollary of Descartes’ rule is that the number of positive roots is at most K −1, while for
non-zero real roots it is 2 K −1. Another property is that the number of positive roots,
counting multiplicity, has the same parity as the number of sign alternations.
The following example shows that the number of real roots can be arbitrarily smaller
than the number of complex roots, thereby showing the benefit of Descartes’ rule.
Example 2.3 (Univariate trinomial). As an example we can consider a trinomial given
by f(x) = a1 xn1 −a2 xn2 + a3 xn3 where ak > 0 and n1 < n2 < n3. By the fundamental
theorem of algebra, the number of complex roots is deg f = n3, although only n3 −n1 of
them are non-trivial as the root x = 0 has multiplicity n1. However, by Descartes’ rule
this polynomial can at most have two positive roots, counting multiplicity, as the sequence
of signs is (+, −, +), otherwise it will have no roots.
△
The bound provided by Descartes’ rule was shown to be sharp for any given sequence
of signs of a polynomial in 1999 by Grabiner [12]. More specifically, he constructed a
polynomial which obtained the maximum number of positive roots (as well as negative).
Grabiner also showed that the number of positive (and negative) roots could arbitrarily be
decreased by any even integer. In 2014 Albouy and Fu [1] generalized Grabiner’s result by
showing that it is always possible to determine a polynomial with a given list of distinct
monomial degrees, signs of the coeﬀicients and set of positions of positive roots if and only
if the difference between the number of sign alternations and the number of roots is even
and non-negative. The result even holds when allowing the degrees of the monomials to
be real numbers.
One limitation of Descartes’ rule is that it only determines an upper bound as it does not
consider the value of the coeﬀicients, while the exact number of positive roots for specific
values of the coeﬀicients could be much lower. Another limitation is that it only applies to
univariate polynomials. We will revisit generalizing the rule to multivariate polynomials
in Section 2.2.4, while the exact count in the univariate case will be the subject of the
following sections.
2.1.2
Puiseux Series Expansions and Newton Polygons
Now we consider polynomials with coeﬀicients that are functions of a parameter ϵ > 0,
more specifically Puiseux series. The field of Puiseux series in the variable ϵ with coef-
ficients in the field F is denoted F{{ϵ}}. These are formal series with rational exponents
that have a common denominator and are bounded below, i.e. there is a smallest exponent
αk ∈Q. The smallest exponent is significant in that it denotes the order – or asymptotic
behavior – of ak as ϵ →0. We then have ak(ϵ) ∼δk ϵαk for some δk ∈R, where ”∼”
denotes asymptotic equivalence. The parameters αk and δk are called the initial exponent
and initial coeﬀicient of ak, respectively.
Descartes’ rule provided an upper bound on the number of positive roots, however,
11
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
the result does not provide information on the position of the root. A well-known result
of Galois theory is that only polynomial equations of degree less than five have general
algebraic solutions, i.e. there is generally no way to express the roots of a polynomial of
degree five as a sum of radicals. Therefore, when considering polynomials of high degree
one has to determine approximations from infinite series.
In 1671, Newton developed a method to iteratively determine the terms of a series that
approximates the solutions to a polynomial equation with two variables near the origin,
where one variable is expressed in terms of the other. This method was further developed
by Puiseux in 1850, who proved the following theorem, which is a generalization of the
fundamental theorem of algebra. It states that the field of Puiseux series with complex
coeﬀicients is algebraically closed.
Theorem 2.4 (Puiseux’s Theorem). Let f ∈C{{ϵ}}[x]. Then f has deg f roots in C{{ϵ}},
counting multiplicity.
The proof of Puiseux’s theorem provides a method for computing the terms of the
Puiseux series iteratively for each root. We will outline the idea behind the proof, thereby
presenting the method, but we will leave out some details necessary for a rigorous proof.
Many of the definitions and concepts introduced here will be used in subsequent sections
and chapters.
We express the roots as Puiseux series, i.e. each root x ∈C{{ϵ}} is written as
x(ϵ) =
∞
X
j=0
xj ϵuj ,
(2.1)
where xj ∈C and uj ∈Q with uj < uj+1 for all j = 0, . . . , ∞. Inserting the presumed
solution in the polynomial equation would give us an infinite number of terms in the
equation. However, we only have to consider the lowest order terms of ak and x initially
to determine the initial exponent and initial coeﬀicient of x as we have x(ϵ) ∼x0 ϵu0. We
let ˜f denote the truncated polynomial given by
˜f(x) =
K
X
k=1
δk ϵαk xnk ,
which is produced from f by only considering the initial terms of the coeﬀicients. To
determine the initial term of the root x it is suﬀicient to consider the equation ˜f(x0 ϵu) = 0,
where
˜f(x0 ϵu) =
K
X
k=1
δk xnk
0 ϵαk+nk u .
At any given point u ∈R we have that f (and likewise ˜f) is of the order of the smallest
exponent of ϵ. We thus let Fk denote the exponents, i.e. Fk(u) = αk + nk u for each k,
and let Fmin denote the smallest exponent, i.e. Fmin(u) = min
k
Fk(u). The function Fmin is
12
==PAGE:20==
2.1.
PREPARATIONS AND DEPARTURE
called a tropical polynomial (or the tropicalization of f), and the functions Fk are called
tropical monomials. We will revisit these constructions in section 2.3. Multiplying the
equation ˜f(x0 ϵu) = 0 by ϵ−Fmin(u) > 0 we get
K
X
k=1
δk xnk
0 ϵFk(u)−Fmin(u) = 0 .
(2.2)
In the limit ϵ →0 all terms vanish except the terms of index k where Fk attains the
minimum. Thus for the equation to be satisfied for some u there must be at least two
terms that attain the minimum at u. We notice than that we can determine the initial
exponents of the roots using only linear algebra, by solving the equations Fk(u) = Fj(u)
for u for all pairs j ̸= k and checking if each solution satisfy Fk(u) = Fmin(u). It will be
useful to define a function containing the indices of the terms that attain the minimum.
Definition 2.5. Let f ∈C{{ϵ}}[x]. The set valued function Mf given by
Mf(u) = arg min
k {αk + nk u} ,
u ∈R
is called the initial index function of f.
Remark 2.6. The condition that the minimum at u is attained at least twice is equivalent
to |Mf(u)| ≥2.
Newton – and later Puiseux – used a geometric approach for determining the order of
the roots by lifting the support A by the order of the coeﬀicients, thereby obtaining a
point configuration ˆ
A consisting of the points (nk, αk), which we will call the lifted support
of f. The condition that the minimum of Fmin is attained at least twice at a point u = u0
is equivalent to the lower convex hull of this point configuration having an inward pointing
normal vector (u0, 1) at some edge. This condition is equivalent to the line segment of
the edge having slope −u0. The following construction is one of the most essential in the
study of tropical geometry, and can – among other thing – be used to determine the initial
exponents.
Definition 2.7. Given f ∈C{{ϵ}}[x] with lifted support ˆ
A. The convex hull of ˆ
A, denoted
by ˆN f, is called the lifted Newton polygon of f.
Remark 2.8. Traditionally, in the Newton-Puiseux method, the term Newton polygon
refers to the lower convex hull of the lifted support of f, although it is a polygonal chain
rather than a polygon. We will instead refer to it as the lower boundary of ˆN f and reserve
the term Newton polygon for the convex hull of the support of bivariate polynomials with
coeﬀicients in a third variable (this is the subject of section 2.2), which is also a convention
in tropical geometry.
The lifted Newton polygon only retains a subset of the monomials in f, which are the
only ones relevant for determining the initial term of the Puiseux expansion of the roots.
13
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
Definition 2.9. Given f ∈C{{ϵ}}[x] with lifted Newton polygon ˆN f. A monomial of f
with degree n is said to be contributing if the lower boundary of ˆN f contains a vertex with
first coordinate n.
Now that we have obtained the initial exponent of the roots we can determine the initial
coeﬀicients. The following polynomial is used in this regard.
Definition 2.10. Let f ∈C{{ϵ}}[x] and u ∈R. The initial form of f at u is a polynomial
initu f, given by
initu f(x) =
X
k∈Mf(u)
δk xnk .
(2.3)
Remark 2.11. The initial form of f contains the nonvanishing terms of (2.2) when x0
has initial exponent u0, and thus the roots of initu0 f are the initial coeﬀicients of the
roots of f that have initial exponent u0. The roots of initu0 f are often much easier to
determine than the roots of f, and can often be solved explicitly as the initial form at u0
is a binomial in the case where only one root has order u0.
We summarize the Newton-Puiseux method in the following algorithm for determining
Puiseux expansions for all non-zero complex roots of f.
Algorithm 2.12 (The Newton-Puiseux method).
1. Initialize with umin = −∞and f0 = f.
2. Let ˆ
A = {(nk, αk) : k = 1, . . . , K} be the lifted support of f0, where αk = ord ak.
3. Let ˆN = conv ˆ
A be the lifted Newton polygon of f0.
4. For each edge of ˆN that has an inward pointing normal vector (u0, 1) for some
u0 > umin, do the following:
(a) Determine the initial form initu0 f0, given in (2.3), which contains the terms
that correspond to points on the edge.
(b) For each root x0 ∈C∗of initu0 f0 do the following:
i. If f0(x0 ϵu0) = 0 then we have found an exact root.
ii. Otherwise, run this algorithm from step 2 on the polynomial f1 given by
f1(y) = f0(x0 ϵu0 + y) and set umin = u0 to obtain the values u1 and x1 of
the next term in the Puiseux expansion (2.1).
Proof. We will prove the correctness of this algorithm, i.e. that it determines the Puiseux
series expansions of all complex roots. The algorithm outlined is equivalent to the one
described in the proof of Puiseux’s theorem in chapter 4 section 3 of [46], except that the
iteration uses ¯f1(¯y) = ϵ−u0 f0
 ϵu0 (x0+ ¯y)

. These iterations compute the same coeﬀicients
xj, but different initial exponents vj. These are related to our initial exponents uj by
14
==PAGE:22==
2.1.
PREPARATIONS AND DEPARTURE
0
1
2
3
4
5
n
-1/2
0
1/2
1
3/2
,
Figure 2.1: A lifted Newton polygon and its support. The point (2, 1
2) is not contained in
these sets, while the point of the quartic term is. However, it is not contributing.
uj = v0 + . . . + vj. There are some algorithmic benefits to using ¯fj instead of fj, however,
these are not relevant in the present thesis. We shall now show that our algorithm is
equivalent to the one in [46]. We notice that multiplying all terms of the polynomial f1
by ϵ−u0 translates all the points in ˆ
A by the vector (0, −u0), while the transformation
y = ϵu0 ¯y translates each point (nk, αk) by the vector (0, nk u0). Thus we have that ˆ¯
A
consists of points

nk, αk + u0 (nk −1)

, which linearly stretches the point set ˆ
A in the
second coordinate and thus preserves the topology of the lower convex hull. This concludes
the proof.
■
Remark 2.13. The algorithm for the Newton-Puiseux method can potentially run indef-
initely as there is generally infinitely many non-zero terms in the expansion, so one has to
choose when to terminate. This could be when a certain number of terms in the Puiseux
series of x have been determined, or a suﬀicient accuracy is reached. A natural point to
stop – when it is known that all roots are simple – is when all expansions are distinct.
Remark 2.14. Notice that the algorithm contains two loops in each iteration, thereby
potentially branching out. However, by Puiseux’s theorem, we are guaranteed that we will
at most have deg f branches in the algorithm.
To demonstrate how to use the Newton-Puiseux method we consider a simple example.
Example 2.15. We consider a quintic polynomial given by
f(x) = δ00 ϵ + δ10 x +

δ20 ϵ−1
2 + δ21 ϵ
1
2

x2 + δ30 ϵ−1
2 x3 + δ40 ϵ
3
2 + δ50 x5 ,
(2.4)
where δkj ∈R∗. This polynomial has the lifted Newton polygon shown in Figure 2.1. The
truncated polynomial ˜f discards those δkj with j > 0, which in this case is only the term
δ21 in the Puiseux series of the coeﬀicient of the quadratic term. We thus have
˜f(x) = δ0 ϵ + δ1 x + δ2ϵ−1
2 x2 + δ3 ϵ−1
2 x3 + δ4 ϵ
3
2 + δ5 x5 ,
15
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
where δk = δk,0. The lifted support is defined by the truncated polynomial, more explicitly
ˆ
A =

(0, 1), (1, 0),
 2, −1
2

,
 3, −1
2

,
 4, 3
2

, (5, 0)
	
,
and the lifted Newton polygon is then the convex hull, which in this case equals the lifted
support, as there are no interior points, besides (2, 1
2). To use the Newton-Puiseux method
we only need to consider the edges of the lower boundary of the lifted Newton polygon,
i.e. the black polygonal chain in the figure. The inward pointing normal vectors with unit
second component are (1, 1), (2, 1), (0, 1) and (−4, 1), therefore f has complex solutions
with four different initial exponents, i.e. u10 = 1, u20 = 2, u30 = 0 and u40 = −4. We
consider the initial form at u10, i.e. we have
initu=1 f(x) = δ0 + δ1 x ,
This has the unique solution x10 = −δ0
δ1 , which is the initial coeﬀicient of the root with
initial exponent u10, and thus x ∼−δ0
δ1 ϵ is the asymptotic behavior of a root of f for ϵ
suﬀiciently small. It is a positive root if and only if δ0 and δ1 have different sign. Similarly
can be done for the other roots, and the initial exponents u20 and u30 also correspond to
the initial exponent of unique roots of f, i.e. we have
x ∼−δk
δk+1
ϵuk+1,0 ,
for all k = 0, . . . , 2. We then consider the initial exponent u40. We have
initu=−4 f(x) = δ3 x3 + δ5 x5 .
We disregard the trivial solutions, whereby we get two non-zero solutions x+
10 and x−
10,
given by x±
10 = ±
q
δ3
δ5 . Thus f has two roots given by
x ∼±
r
δ3
δ5
ϵ−4 ,
which are real if and only if δ3 and δ5 have the same sign, and in that case there is one
positive and one negative root with initial exponent u40 = −4. Finally, we determine the
next term in the Puiseux series solution with initial exponent u10 = 1. We let f1 be the
function given by f1(y) = f

−δ0
δ1 ϵ + y

, whose truncated polynomial is given by
˜f1(y) = δ02 δ2
δ12
ϵ3/2 + δ1 y + δ2 ϵ−1
2 y2 + δ3 y3ϵ−1
2 −5 δ0 δ5
δ1
ϵ y4 + δ5 y5 .
The lifted Newton polygon of f1 is shown in Figure 2.2. The inward pointing normal
vectors of the lower boundary are then (2
3, 1), (2, 1), (0, 1) and (−4, 1). We seek an initial
exponent larger than 1, as this is the initial exponent of the root that we considered, thus
the only choice is u11 = 2. The initial form of f1 at u11 is given by
initu=2 f1(y) = δ02 δ2
δ12
+ δ1 y ,
16
==PAGE:24==
2.1.
PREPARATIONS AND DEPARTURE
0
1
2
3
4
5
n
-1/2
0
1/2
1
3/2
,
Figure 2.2: The lifted Newton polygon for the polynomial f1 in Example 2.15.
which is a binomial and thus has a unique root. We conclude that f has a root given by
x ∼−δ0
δ1
ϵ −δ02 δ2
δ13
ϵ2 ,
for all ϵ suﬀiciently small, which is positive if and only if δ0 and δ1 have opposite signs. △
The simple example above shows the ease with which one can determine the number
and asymptotic behavior of the roots of a polynomial using the Newton-Puiseux method
in the case where the initial forms are binomials, and even the number of positive roots.
2.1.3
Signed Subdivisions and Positive Root Count
We will now consider positive roots again, and we begin by presenting a result on binomials,
which is the one-dimensional case of Lemma 2 in [19].
Proposition 2.16. Let f be a real binomial on the form f(x) = a xn + b xm, where
a, b ∈R∗and n, m ∈Z with n < m. Then f has a unique positive root x∗= (−a
b)
1
m−n if
and only if a b < 0. Moreover, −x∗is also a root of f if and only if n and m have the
same parity.
Remark 2.17. This result is stated for n, m ∈Z, however, the result for the positive root
also holds for n, m ∈R.
Remark 2.18. A direct consequence of the result is that f has no positive roots if and
only if a b > 0, and it has no real roots if in addition n and m have the same parity.
We notice that it is suﬀicient to consider the signs of the coeﬀicients to determine
whether or not a binomial has positive roots. We therefore label each point in the lifted
support by its sign and allow the geometric constructions obtained from the lifted support
to also be labelled. When considering the number of positive roots it is not necessary to
know the slopes of the line segments in the generic case, thus we disregard the second
coordinate of the lifted Newton polygon, and consider the Newton segment, which is the
17
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
0
1
2
3
4
5
-1/2
0
1/4
1/2
1
3/2
,
+
!
+
!
!
+
!
0
1
2
3
4
5
n
+
!
+
!
!
Figure 2.3: A lifted Newton polygon with its signed support (top), and its signed subdivi-
sion (bottom).
line segment obtained by taking the convex hull of the (unlifted) support of f.
Definition 2.19. Given f ∈C{{ϵ}}[x] with lifted Newton polygon ˆN f and Newton seg-
ment N f. The subdivision of the Newton segment of f obtained by projecting ˆN f onto
N f is called the subdivision induced by f, denoted Sf.
The following definition provides the edges of the signed subdivision of f with a property
that ensures that an edge corresponds to a positive root. We let the property be generalized
to all polygonal graphs, i.e. also the lifted Newton polygon.
Definition 2.20. An edge of a signed polygonal graph is said to be alternating if the
endpoints of the edge have different signs.
Figure 2.3 shows the lifted Newton polygon of Example 2.15 with its the signed support,
and the signed subdivision. The alternating edges are colored red.
Now we can state the following generalization of Descartes’ rule which determines the
exact number of positive roots of polynomials in the field of Puiseux series in the generic
case.
It is the one-dimensional case of Theorem 2 in [19].
We will mention the two-
dimensional case in section 2.2.3.
Theorem 2.21. Given f ∈R{{ϵ}}[x] with signed subdivision Sf. If Mf(u) ≤2 for all
u ∈R, then the exact number of positive roots of f is equal to the number of alternating
edges in Sf for all ϵ suﬀiciently small.
This result provides a way to determine the coeﬀicients of a polynomial such that it
attains the upper bound given by Descartes’ rule on the maximum number of positive
and/or negative roots that the polynomial can have, i.e. one can just choose the initial
exponents of the coeﬀicients such that all monomials are contributing. More specifically,
18
==PAGE:26==
2.1.
PREPARATIONS AND DEPARTURE
one must ensure that no non-alternating edge in the labelled subdivision of N f contains a
point of A with sign opposite to the sign of the endpoints of the edge, and no alternating
edge contains a pair of points with signs in the same order as the signs of the endpoints.
This is a similar result as the one found by Grabiner in [12] (which we mentioned briefly
in Section 2.1.1), although it is a more general suﬀicient condition on the coeﬀicients.
Interestingly, Grabiner’s construction is a polynomial in the field of Puiseux series and
can therefore be determined by considering the lifted Newton polygon. The coeﬀicients
in the construction are given by ak = δk ϵn2
k, with δk being the desired sign of ak, and
thus the slope of the line segments between two consecutive points in the lifted support
will increase as nk increases by the fact that initial exponents are increasing quadratically.
We note that any sequence of the initial exponents that increase faster than linearly on
the degrees will provide such a realization of the upper bound as we are then guaranteed
that all points in the lifted support are in the lower convex hull. Grabiner also provided
the suﬀicient condition ϵ >
1
nK , which the Newton-Puiseux method does not provide, and
interestingly it depends on the degree of f.
As stated before, Grabiner additionally provided a way to lower the number of roots
by an even integer, although more implicitly by using another small parameter. We can
again consider the lifted Newton polygon and note that one can simply move some of the
points in the lifted support into the interior of the convex hull by choosing the respective
initial exponents large enough, whereby we can likewise decrease the number of positive
roots by an even integer when two alternating edges become a single nonalternating edge.
We will expand more on this in the following section.
We also notice that the result of Albouy and Fu in [1] (also mentioned in relation to
Grabiner’s result) can be generalized by considering the lifted Newton polygon, however
only for a given set of initial exponents of the roots. More specifically, given a signed
support and a set of initial exponents uj,0 of the positive roots, we can choose the initial
exponents of the coeﬀicients such that the lifted Newton polygon has alternating edges
with negative slope equal to the initial exponents of the roots, as long as the number of
possible alternating edges is larger than the number of roots by an even number.
2.1.4
Multiple Roots and Bifurcations
We conclude the study of univariate polynomials by making some observations on mul-
tiple roots which are relevant for determining bifurcation curves for both algebraic- and
differential equations.
Determining the condition on the coeﬀicients of a polynomial that ensures it has a
multiple root is generally computationally diﬀicult, as the condition takes the form of a
polynomial equation with the coeﬀicients as indeterminates, and the dimension of the so-
lution set is generally equal to the number of coeﬀicients. The polynomial associated with
this equation is called the discriminant, and is a generalization of the well know discrimi-
19
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
nant of a quadratic polynomial, given by ∆= a2
1 −4 a0 a2. In general, the discriminant of
a polynomial can be determined explicitly by computing the determinant of a matrix of
size 2 nK −1 with the coeﬀicients of f and its derivative as entries (see section 12.1 in [9]).
However, when the number of terms is small the discriminant can be computed easily.
The following result states a discriminating condition on the coeﬀicients for a trinomial,
which can be derived from its discriminant.
Proposition 2.22. Let f ∈R[x] be a trinomial on the form f(x) = a1 xn1 −a2 xn2 +a3 xn3
where ak > 0 and n1 < n2 < n3. Furthermore, let n12, n23, n13 ∈N be the difference
between the degrees, i.e. njk = nk −nj for j, k ∈{1, 2, 3}. Then f has two positive roots
if and only if
 a2
n13
n13
>
 a1
n23
n23  a3
n12
n12
.
If the inequality is changed to an equality then f has a double root located at x =

a1
a3
n12
n23

1
n13 .
Otherwise f has no positive roots.
Proof. This statement is equivalent to proposition 2 in [1]. It can also be derived from the
vanishing of the discriminant given in equation (1.38) in chapter 12 of [9].
■
The initial form of f is generally a binomial, however, it will be a trinomial in case of a
double root. The following result determines a suﬀicient condition for f to have a double
root and the asymptotic structure of the bifurcation curve.
Proposition 2.23. Let f ∈R{{ϵ}}[x]. Assume that ˆN f has an edge with negative slope
u∗
0, where Mf(u∗
0) = {i, j, k} for some 0 < i < j < k.
Furthermore, assume without
loss of generality that δi, δk > 0, and let nij, njk, nik ∈N be the absolute value of the
difference between the degrees. Then f has a positive double root x∗∈R>0{{ϵ}} at some
a∗
j ∈R<0{{ϵ}} for ϵ > 0 suﬀiciently small. The double root has initial exponent u∗
0 and
coeﬀicient x∗
0, given by
u∗
0 = αi −αk
nik
,
x∗
0 =
 δi
njk
nij
δk
1/nik
,
and similarly for a∗
j we have
α∗
j = njk
nik
αi + nij
nik
αk ,
δ∗
j = −nik
 δi
njk
njk  δk
nij
nij1/nik
.
Moreover, f will have two positive roots in a small neighborhood of x∗and a∗
j when aj > a∗
j,
and no real root nearby when the inequality is reversed.
Proof. As
Mf(u∗
0)
 = 3 and δj has opposite sign of δi and δk then initu∗
0 f has a root of
multiplicity 2 for some value of δj. The three points in ˆ
A must be collinear, i.e. have the
20
==PAGE:28==
2.1.
PREPARATIONS AND DEPARTURE
same negative slope u∗
0 = −
α∗
j −αi
nj−ni = −
αk−α∗
j
nk−nj , whereby we obtain two equations which we
can solve for u∗
0 and α∗
j. The initial form of f at u∗
0 with aj = δ∗
j is a trinomial and thus
we can use Proposition 2.22 (with a2 = −δ∗
j ) to obtain x∗
0 and δ∗
j at the double root. The
result follows from the convergence of the Puiseux series for all ϵ > 0 suﬀiciently small,
which is guaranteed by Puiseux’s theorem and the structure of the lifted Newton polygon
of f.
■
Similar result could in principle be obtained for roots of any multiplicity, by determining
the discriminant1 of the initial form of f, although it would quickly become unpractical
as the multiplicity increases. However, the the condition on the order of the coeﬀicients at
multiple roots is linear, whereby one can obtain important information on the asymptotic
structure of the bifurcation manifold for the root locus using only linear algebra.
In the following example we use Proposition 2.23 to determine the bifurcation curve
where a polynomial has a positive double root.
Example 2.24 (Continuation of Example 2.15). We consider (2.4) again, but choose the
signs of the initial coeﬀicients to be as in Figure 2.4. Now the coeﬀicient of the linear
terms is considered a parameter, i.e. an unknown Puiseux series, and the initial exponent
of the linear term is chosen such that the point (1, α1), in the lifted support, is collinear
with the points (0, 1) and (2, −1
2). Using Proposition 2.23 we get
δ∗
1 = −2 (δ0 δ2)
1
2 ,
α∗
1 = 1
2 α0 + 1
2 α2 = 1
4
x∗
0 =
δ0
δ2
 1
2
,
u∗
0 = 1
2 (α0 −α2) = 3
4 .
Thus, a necessary condition for f to have a double root is
a1 ∼−2
p
δ0 δ2 ϵ
1
4 ,
and its position is in that case given by
x ∼
r
δ0
δ2
ϵ
3
4 .
△
The following result provides a necessary condition for f having a multiple root when
no other root of f has the same order. The proof shows the ease with which one can work
with polynomials by studying the lifted Newton polygon.
Proposition 2.25. Let f ∈R{{ϵ}}[x] and assume x∗> 0 is a positive root with initial
exponent u0 and multiplicity m. If no other root of f has initial exponent u0 then initu0 f
has exactly m + 1 terms, and the line segment with slope −u0 of the lifted Newton polygon
contains m + 1 points with alternating sign and unit distance between them in the first
coordinate.
1More specifically one would determine the A-discriminant (see [9]), which relates the discriminant to
the support of a polynomial.
21
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
0
1
2
3
4
5
n
-1/2
0
1/2
1
3/2
,
+
!
+
!
!
+
!
Figure 2.4: Signed lifted Newton polygon at a double root.
Proof. By the fundamental theorem of algebra, if the polynomial f has a root x∗of
multiplicity m then f can be decomposed by f(x) = (x −x∗)m g(x), where g(x∗) ̸= 0,
i.e. x∗is not a root of g. Moreover, the assumption that f has no other root with initial
exponent u0 is equivalent to g not having such a root. We let f∗(x) = (x −x∗)m, then by
the binomial theorem we can expand f∗by
f∗(x) =
m
X
k=0
 
n
k
!
(−x∗)m−k xk .
Expressing the root by its Puiseux expansion, and truncating the higher order terms, then
˜f∗can be written as
˜f∗(x) =
m
X
k=0
 
n
k
!
(−x0)m−k ϵu0 (m−k) xk .
We notice that the point configuration of ˜f∗consists of m + 1 points
 k, u0 (m −k)

for k = 0, . . . , m, with alternating sign, and which lie on a single line of slope −u0 and
intercept u0 m. Thus initu0 ˜f∗has m + 1 terms with alternating signs.
We now have to show that this line segment is an edge of ˆN ˜f, whereby it would be an
edge of ˆN f. Multiplying ˜f∗by any non-zero function will copy the lifted support of ˜f∗and
translate the copies in different directions, as all the points in the lifted support of g can
be thought of as vectors translating all the points of ˆ
A ˜f∗to produce the lifted support of
˜f. As g has no root with initial exponent u0 then the lifted Newton polygon of g has no
edges of slope −u0, and thus by translating the copies of the single line segment of ˆN ˜f∗
in different directions, and taking the lower convex hull, then exactly one of these copies
will be an edge of ˆN ˜f. This concludes the proof.
■
A similar result can be obtained without the assumption that no other root has the
same initial exponent. We state it as a conjecture as we have not entirely completed the
proof.
22
==PAGE:30==
2.1.
PREPARATIONS AND DEPARTURE
Conjecture 2.26. Given f ∈R{{ϵ}}[x] with lifted Newton polygon ˆN f, and assume x∗> 0
is a positive root with initial exponent u0 and multiplicity m. Then ˆN f has an edge with
slope −u0 which contains at least m+1 point with at least m alternating signs in its points.
Moreover initu0 f has at least m sign alternations and a positive root x∗
0 of multiplicity m
which is the initial coeﬀicient of x∗.
Proof. If there are no other root with initial exponent u0 then we are in the case assumed
in Proposition 2.25 and we are done. So we assume otherwise, and consider the case where
f can be decomposed to irreducible components by
f(x) =
 x −x0 ϵu0m  xn −y0 ϵn u0
,
for some y0 ∈R∗. Expanding this expression using the binomial theorem we get
initu0 f(x) =
 xn −y0 ϵn u0
m
X
k=0
m
k

(−x0)m−k ϵm−k xk .
Now, expanding this expression and collecting the monomial terms in x we get
f(x) =
n−1
X
k=0
m
k

(−1)m−k+1 y0 xm−k
0
ϵ(m−k+n) u0 xk
+
m
X
k=n
 m
k −n

(−x0)n −
m
k

y0

(−x0)m−k ϵ(m−k+n) u0 xk
+
m+n
X
k=m+1
 m
k −n

(−1)m−k+n xm−k+n
0
ϵ(m−k+n) u0 xk .
We notice that the the points

k, (m −k + n) u0

are collinear, as the second coordinate
of the points are linear in k with negative slope u0, i.e. u0 is the initial exponent, which is
what we wanted. Now, the expression of f has three sums where the first and the third
have alternating signs as we have assumed x0 is positive. Thus it is only in the second sum
that a monomial term can vanish, and it exists if and only if m ≥n, and in that case the
sum has m −n + 1 terms. The first and last sums have n terms each. If we first consider
the case m < n, then we can conclude that the initial form of f has at least m+n−1 sign
alternations, and thus we are done. Thus we only consider the reverse case and consider
the middle sum. A term in the middle sum vanishes if and only if
 m
k −n
m
k
−1
(−x0)n −y0 = 0 ,
for some k = k0, which has a unique solution for y0. Thus at most one monomial term
of f can vanish. In that case, on each side of the monomial of degree k that vanishes the
signs will be alternating, possibly in reverse direction.
If no term vanishes then both the first and the third sum have at least n −1 sign alter-
nations, and the second has at least m −n, whereby the total number of sign alternations
are m + n −1. Thus we only need to consider cases n ≤2.
23
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
Now we consider the case where the term vanishes and consider first the case of n being
even. Then both the first and the third sum have n sign alternations. The second sum
has at least m −n −2 sign alternations, as we consider the case where there are an odd
number of terms on either side of the term that vanishes, and that there are not any other
sign alternations between the terms k and k + 1 for k ∈{n −1, m} or between the two
terms on either side of the vanishing term. Thus in total f has at least m + n −2 sign
alternations, and thus we only need to consider the case n = 2 as n is assumed to be even.
Now we consider the case of n being odd. Then both the first and the third sum have
an odd number of terms, whereby the number of sign alternations in each is n −1. The
second sum has again at least m −n −2 sign alternations, and thus in total f has at least
m + n −4 sign alternations, and thus we only need to consider the cases n ∈{1, 3, 5} as
n is assumed to be odd.
Now we just need to consider the cases n ∈{1, 2, 3, 5} with either m odd or even, and
consider the second sum has a vanishing term and how it is alternating.
■
Example 2.27. We consider the polynomial f(x) = (x −x0 ϵu0)2 (x3 −y0 ϵ3 u0), which by
design has two positive roots with initial exponent u0, where one is a double root with
initial coeﬀicient x0 and the other is a simple root with initial coeﬀicient
3√y0. Thus we
expect that the lifted Newton polygon has a line segment with at least three sign alterna-
tions. The lifted support of this polynomial consists of the six points

k, −k u0 +5 u0

for
k = 0, . . . , 5, which is indeed a single line segment with slope −u0. One can easily collect
the terms of the polynomial and notice that the sequence of signs is (−, +, −, +, −, +),
and thus there are five sign alternations on the line segment, which is two more than the
lower bound. This shows why Conjecture 2.26 is necessarily a lower bound.
△
Thus, when an edge of the lifted Newton polygon contains multiple points we cannot
conclude the exact number of positive roots, or their multiplicity. However we can derive a
rule similar to Descartes’ rule on the number of roots with a given initial exponent, given
that the conjecture is correct.
Corollary 2.28. The number of positive roots of f that have initial exponent u0 is at most
equal to the number of sign alternations of initu0 f, counting multiplicity.
2.2
Explorations Along the Way
Now we increase the number of dimensions and consider bivariate polynomials and the
curves that they define, i.e. the set of points where the polynomial vanish. We let FPn
denote the projective space over the field F, i.e. the compactification of F with points
at infinity.
e.g. any pair of distinct lines in RP2 will always intersect in exactly one
point. This can be generalized to the following statement on any pair of algebraic curves,
which similar to the fundamental theorem of algebra, relates the number of solutions of
24
==PAGE:32==
2.2.
EXPLORATIONS ALONG THE WAY
polynomial systems to the degrees.
Theorem 2.29 (Bezout’s Theorem). Let f, g ∈C[x, y].
If f and g have no common
component then the system f(x, y) = g(x, y) = 0 has exactly deg(f) · deg(g) isolated
solutions in CP2, counting multiplicity.
Remark 2.30. In the case where f and g have a common component there would be a
curve of solutions, which are therefore not isolated. In that case – and if the common
component is known – one could divide out the component and use Bezout’s theorem on
this reduced system.
As with the fundamental theorem of algebra, the number of isolated real solutions
can be much lower than Bezout’s bound. But unlike the fundamental theorem, Bezout’s
theorem can directly be generalized to higher dimensions as the number of complex isolated
solutions generally is the product of the degrees of the polynomials.
2.2.1
Intersections of Curves and Bernstein’s Theorem
The degree of a bivariate polynomial is defined as the total degree, i.e. the maximum of the
sum of the exponents of each monomial. We again write bivariate polynomials in some
field F as a sum of K non-zero terms,
f(x, y) =
K
X
k=1
ak xnk ymk ,
where ak ∈F. The vectors (nk, mk) ∈N02 are called exponent vectors of the monomial
terms. Then the degree of monomial k is then defined as nk +mk, while for the polynomial
we have deg f = max{nk + mk}.
Although not strictly necessary, we can again order the monomials such that the degrees
are in ascending order. However, multiple monomials can now have the same degree, which
define the homogeneous components within f. Thus to get a well-defined monomial order
we traverse each homogeneous component (set of monomials with the same total degree)
such that nk < nk+1 and mk > mk+1. This is commonly called a graded lexicographic
order. Similar to the univariate case, we can then write deg f = nK + mK.
Considering first F = C, we can determine the (unlifted) Newton polygon of f similarly
to how we determined the lifted Newton polygon of a univariate polynomial in the field
of Puiseux series. The common use of the Newton-Puiseux method is in the study of
singularities (i.e. points where the Jacobian is singular), as the Newton polygon of a
bivariate polynomial can be used to determine the branches at the origin of the algebraic
curve defined by the polynomial. This is similar to the invariant sets obtained through
the blow-up method for degenerate equilibrium points in dynamical systems.
In fact,
the Newton polygon is often used in the blow-up method to determine the most suitable
transformation to decrease the number of repeated blow-ups required, and the method
likewise has its origins in algebraic geometry.
25
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
However, we will not restrict the attention to only the origin, and thus we consider the
whole polygon, not only its lower boundary. Thereby we can determine the asymptotic
structure of the curve in all of projective space, i.e. we can determine the points of the curve
at infinity. This will be shown more explicitly later. The following definition provides a
way to determine finite solutions of a system.
Definition 2.31 (Minkowski sum). Given two point sets P and Q in RN, the Minkowski
sum of P and Q is the set of each point in P added to each point in Q. I.e.
P + Q =
n
p + q | p ∈P, q ∈Q
o
.
Remark 2.32. The Minkowski sum of the Newton polygons of f and g is equivalent to
the Newton polygon of the product of the two. Note that the solutions of the system
f(x, y) = g(x, y) = 0 is equivalent to the solutions of f · g = 0.
The mixed area between two Newton polygons is the area of their Minkowski sum
subtracted by the areas of each polygon. i.e. it is given by
areamixed(Nf, Ng) = area(Nf + Ng) −area(Nf) −area(Ng) .
In 1975 Bernstein proved the following theorem, providing a sharp bound on the number
of solutions of algebraic equations, which is generally attained, i.e. as long as there are no
tangencies. The bound is often referred to as the BKK bound, after the three researchers
Bernstein, Khovanskii and Kushnirenko, who worked on similar problems.
Theorem 2.33 (Bernstein’s Theorem). Let f, g ∈C[x, y]. If f and g have no common
component then number of isolated solutions of the system f(x, y) = g(x, y) = 0 in (C∗)2
is exactly equal to the mixed area of N f and N g.
Remark 2.34. If f and g do have a common component then the number of isolated
solutions is strictly less than this number. Note also that this theorem also holds in higher
dimensions, where areas are replaced by higher dimensional volumes.
In [18] Huber and Sturmfels developed a method, and algorithm, for determining all
isolated solutions of multivariate polynomial equations with complex coeﬀicients by first
changing all parameters of the polynomials f and g, by a deformation called a toric
deformation, which essentially is to consider the polynomials in the field of Puiseux series
with the given coeﬀicients as initial coeﬀicients. The Minkowski sum of the lifted support
of the two polynomials is then computed, and then the lower boundary of the convex hull of
the Minkowski sum is projected down to the plane, whereby one gets what is called a mixed
subdivision. The initial exponents must be chosen suﬀiciently generic such that all the
faces on the lower convex hull of the Minkowski sum are either triangles or quadrilaterals
without any points on their boundaries, whereby the inward pointing normal vectors of the
quadrilaterals will determine the initial exponents of all solutions. As all faces are generic
quadrilaterals, the initial forms of f and g are binomials, whereby the initial coeﬀicients
26
==PAGE:34==
2.2.
EXPLORATIONS ALONG THE WAY
are unique. The sum of the areas of the quadrilaterals is equal to the mixed area, which
is the basis of the proof. Then one can use a continuation method to trace the solutions
from from ϵ = 0 to ϵ = 1. This is also described in the proof of Bernstein’s theorem given
in [41, Section 3.4].
Example 2.35. We consider the system given by
f(x, y) = a1 + a2 y + a3 x ,
(2.5)
g(x, y) = b1 + b2 y3 + b3 x3 + b4 x3 y3 ,
where ak ∼δk ϵαk and bj ∼σj ϵβj, which is similar (although not equivalent) to deforming
each coeﬀicient. We have to choose the initial coeﬀicients suﬀiciently generic. First we
choose β4 = 1 and the rest equal to zero. The subdivisions of the Newton polygons of
f and g are shown in Figure 2.5 (top left and bottom left, respectively).
The mixed
subdivision is shown in the top right figure, where the sum of the initial exponents that
has created this point is denoted over the point. The box has an unbroken boundary when
it is on the lower convex hull of the Minkowski sum, and a broken boundary when above
it.
We notice that even though the faces are triangles and quadrilaterals there are points
on the boundaries, and thus the choice of initial exponents is not suﬀiciently generic. The
figure in the bottom right corner shows the subdivision when we have chosen β1 = −1
2
and β2 = −1. There are three triangles and two quadrilaterals, and all are generic. To
0
1
2
3
0
1
,1
,2
,3
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
-1
-2
-3
-4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
,1 + -1
,1 + -2
,1 + -3
,1 + -4
,2 + -1
,2 + -2
,2 + -3
,2 + -4
,3 + -1
,3 + -2
,3 + -3
,3 + -4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
,1 + -1
,1 + -2
,1 + -3
,1 + -4
,2 + -1
,2 + -2
,2 + -3
,2 + -4
,3 + -1
,3 + -2
,3 + -3
,3 + -4
Figure 2.5: The subdivisions of two Newton polygons (left) and their mixed subdivision
for different values of the initial coeﬀicients of system (2.5).
27
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
determine the initial exponents of the solutions one can determining an inward pointing
normal vector to the quadrilaterals in the lifted Newton polyhedron.
The quadrilaterals both have area 3, and thus the mixed area is 6. We can see this
relation between the mixed area and the quadrilaterals by noticing that the triangles are
translations of the triangles of the subdivisions of f and g. Using Bernstein’s theorem, we
can conclude that there is exactly 6 isolated solutions in (C∗)2, as f and g do not have a
common component.
△
Remark 2.36. Newton polygons can be generalized to Newton polytopes for the general
case. These have been used to generalize the Newton-Puiseux method by McDonald, in
[27] and [26], to determine Puiseux series expansions of multivariate algebraic equations.
In the former he showed how to write one variable as a Puiseux series of the others given
an equation, which he generalized in the latter to provide Puiseux series expansions for
M variables in terms of N others given M equations in M + N variables.
Although Bernstein’s theorem provides a much better bound on the number of isolated
complex solutions than Bezout’s theorem, we still seek more information on the number
of real or positive roots.
2.2.2
Isolated Roots of Real Polynomial Systems.
In 1980 Khovanskii found a bound on the number of isolated positive solutions for poly-
nomial systems of any number of variables N which depends only on N and the number
of distinct monomials K. This is significant as this is the first of such bounds.
Theorem 2.37 (Khovanskii). Let f be a system of N polynomials in N variables with K
distinct monomials. Then the number of isolated roots of f in RN
+ is bounded above by
2K(K−1)/2 (N + 1)K .
In 1970 – before Bernstein’s theorem and the bound by Khovanskii – Kouchnirenko
conjectured that the number of isolated real solutions of a polynomial system of N poly-
nomials in N variables, is at most equal to (K1 −1) · · · (KN −1), where K1, . . . , KN are
the number of terms of the polynomials, respectively. This conjecture was disproven in
2002 by Haas, who found the following simple counterexample of two trinomial equations
y2 b + (1 + ϵ) xb −(1 + ϵ) x = 0 ,
(2.6)
x2 b + (1 + ϵ) yb −(1 + ϵ) y = 0 ,
which for ϵ = 0.1 has five isolated positive solutions when b ≥53, while Kouchnirenko’s
bound would predict at most four.
Our own numerical experiments show that when
lowering ϵ one would need to increase b to obtain all five solutions.
Notice that the
counterexample is presented as a polynomial system in the field of Puiseux series. We will
consider this system again in section 2.3.
28
==PAGE:36==
2.2.
EXPLORATIONS ALONG THE WAY
In 2002 Li, Rojas and Wang [24] proved that the maximum number of isolated positive
solutions of a general trinomial systems in two variables is exactly five, using the coun-
terexample of Kouchnirenko’s conjecture by Haas to provide the lower bound. They also
found a more general upper bound for systems with one trinomial and a polynomial with
K terms.
Theorem 2.38 (Li, Rojas, Wang). Let f be a real trinomial and g be a real polynomial
with K terms, both allowed to have monomials with real exponent vectors.
Then the
maximum number of isolated positive roots (and the maximum number of singular points)
of the system (f, g) is at most 2K −2 for K ≥4, while for K = 3 it is exactly five.
This result is especially useful in the study of bivariate polynomial systems in the field
of Puiseux series, as each polynomial in the initial form system generally has three terms.
The results even hold for generalized polynomials with real exponents, and they showed
that Descartes’ rule also hold for such generalized systems.
This leads us nicely into the topic of the next sections of a method to study real algebraic
curves, which provides the foundation of tropical geometry. A similar conjecture to the one
stated by Kouchnirenko was justified using that method. The conjecture was however also
disproven with a simple counterexample by Li and Wang, who we mentioned before, and
Haas even gave a second simpler counterexample in the same paper where he presented
the counterexample to Kouchnirenko’s conjecture.
2.2.3
Patchworking Real Curves and Viro’s Method
In 1980, Viro developed a method – termed patchworking – to determine the topology of
algebraic curves in the field of Puiseux series for ϵ suﬀiciently small, and to construct curves
with prescribed topology. The idea is to consider the signed subdivision of the Newton
polygon of a polynomial f defining the curve, and the subdivision must be a triangulation.
One can consider the other quadrants by determining the signed subdivisions for the
polynomials f(−x, y), f(x, −y) and f(−x, −y), respectively.
Then one draws a curve
between all pairs of alternating edges that share the same triangle.
Figure 2.6 shows Viro’s method on the polynomial g from Example 2.35 in all quadrants,
for a specific choice of the signs. The red lines are the alternating edges of the subdivisions,
and the blue polynomial chains are topologically equivalent to the connected components
of the real algebraic curve defined by g.
29
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
Figure 2.6: Demonstration of Viro’s method on the polynomial g from Example 2.35.
The method is widely regarded as the most powerful tool in the study of real algebraic
curves and their topological structure, and has been used to construct algebraic curves
with many ovals, which is relevant for the quest to solve the first part of Hilbert’s sixteenth
problem. Viro’s method can be generalized to hypersurfaces (see e.g. [44]), and in 1994
Sturmfels extended the method to determine transversal intersections between real curves
(or hypersurfaces more generally). This was done using mixed subdivisions, whereby the
transversal intersections of the curves occur when the quadrilateral is alternating, i.e. the
vertices of a quadrilateral of the mixed subdivision has both signs from both polynomials,
whereby the configuration of the signs is (+, +), (+, −), (−, +), (−, −). In this case the
initial form is a binomial system with a unique positive solution. This is essentially the
multivariate case of Theorem 2.21, which we presented earlier.
2.2.4
Multivariate Descartes’ Rule and Itenberg and Roy’s Conjecture
The extended version of Viro’s method was used by Itenberg and Roy [19] in 1996 to count
the number of transversal intersections possible for polynomials in the field of Puiseux
series for ϵ suﬀiciently small.
They conjectured that the maximal number of isolated
solutions of a polynomial system with a given support – in an open quadrant – would be
equal to the maximal number of alternating quadrilaterals possible for all generic choices of
the initial exponents. They presented a way to count all the alternating quadrilaterals for
a specific system, and then one could determine all possible possible subdivisions (which
they showed was computable), and determine the maximum. This would however require
some computation, so they showed that if K is the maximum number of monomials in
each polynomial of the system, then the maximum number of alternating quadrilaterals
would be
  1
2 K (K −1)
N. This would provide a simple multivariate version of Descartes’
rule.
However, this conjecture was shown to be false in 1998 by Li and Wang [23], by showing a
30
==PAGE:38==
2.2.
EXPLORATIONS ALONG THE WAY
simple counter example. We have already seen the system that they presented, as we used
it in Example 2.35. They showed that this system has three positive solutions for a specific
set of coeﬀicients, while – as we saw – the maximum number of alternating quadrilaterals
is two. As alluded to previously, Haas gave a counterexample for the conjecture of Itenberg
and Roy, in the same paper as his counterexample for Kouchnirenko’s [15]. We will consider
this example to show why the extended Viro’s method cannot determine the number of
roots.
Example 2.39. We consider the system given by
f(x, y) = x + y −a ,
(2.7)
g(x, y) = x2 + y2 −b .
When a = 2.1 and b = 4 this system has 2 positive solutions. The Newton polygons of
this system are similar triangles, and, the maximum number of alternating quadrilaterals
is one. We can analyze this system exactly and determine the location of the solutions.
Thus we isolate y in the equation for f and insert the expression in the equation for g,
whereby we get a simple quadratic univariate equation given by
x2 + (a −x)2 −b = 0 .
The solutions are
x∗
± = 1
2

a ±
p
2 b −a2

.
For these solutions to be real we must have b > 1
2 a2. We notice that x∗
+ is positive when
it is real. Thus we consider x∗
−> 0, which is satisfied b < a2. We also have to consider the
values of y±. We have y± = a −x±, and we notice that x∗
−= a −x∗
+, whereby y± > 0 is
satisfied when x∗
−> 0, which we already have determined the parameter values for. Thus
we can conclude that the solutions are both positive when
1
2 a2 < b < a2 .
We notice that the boundaries are the same order of magnitude, which is the reason why
the extended Viro’s method cannot distinguish them, as they occur at the same value of
the initial exponent of a. In Figure 2.7 we have shown the values of x+ (red curves) and
x−(blue curves) when a = ϵ−α and b = ϵ−1, for different values of ϵ. The black curve
is the bifurcation curve of the double-root. We notice that for small ϵ and small α the
solutions are far from each other. However, when increasing α, and keeping ϵ fixed, the
negative root will become positive and then disappear in a very short interval close to
α = 1
2, which is what we expected from the analysis. For larger ϵ (fixed) the root x∗
−will
stay positive for longer before becoming complex.
△
31
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
Figure 2.7: Value of the roots of Haas counter example plotted against the order of a for
different value of ϵ.
2.3
Reaching the Tropics
Tropical geometry is mainly concerned with algebraically closed fields, although some have
been seeking to use it for real algebraic geometry. See e.g. [43] where Viro uses the concept
of hyperfields for real tropical geometry, or [5] which uses tropical geometry to show that
Viro’s method produces real algebraic curves with the maximal number of inflection points.
In particular, tropical geometry is the study of fields with a valuation, and indeed, the
field of Puiseux series has a valuation which is essentially mapping the Puiseux series to
its initial exponent, i.e. we have
val(x) = u ,
and
val(ak) = αk .
Thus tropical geometry can be – and is indeed – used for the study of Puiseux series. We
refer to [8] and [25] for general references on tropical geometry. See also [41, Chapter 9]
where tropical geometry is related to algebraic geometry.
2.3.1
Tropical Curves and Their Intersections
The main object of concern in tropical geometry is the tropical curve – or tropical hyper-
surface more generally – which is determined using the tropical polynomial. The tropical
polynomials are the piecewise-linear functions Fmin defined previously. However, one can
instead use the maximum by considering the transformation ϵ = ω−1, where ω is then a
large parameter. We prefer using ω and max as we believe it is more intuitive. We there-
fore consider parameters on the form ak ∼δk ωαk, which can still be thought of as Puiseux
series when considering ω suﬀiciently large. All the results from the previous sections still
32
==PAGE:40==
2.3.
REACHING THE TROPICS
hold, however, one should consider the upper convex hull of the lifted support rather than
the lower one, and interchange min with max, and ϵ with ω.
Thus a bivariate tropical polynomial is given by
Fmax(u, v) = max
k {αk + nk u + mk v} .
The tropical curve is then the set of points where the maximum is attained at least twice.
This can be quantified by the initial index function, which in two dimensions is given by
Mf(u, v) = arg max
k
Fk(u, v) ,
where Fk are the tropical monomials. The tropical curve is exactly the points (u, v) where
|Mf(u, v)| ≥2. Usually in tropical geometry one would define the tropical curve as a
weighted graph, where the weights are determined by the distance between the points of
the dual subdivisions. This is however not relevant in this thesis, as we only consider real
tropical curves.
We have already used these constructs previously in relation with the Newton polygons,
subdivisions and initial forms. Thus there is a deep connection between the tropical curve
and the subdivision of the Newton polygon. More specifically, they are dual graphs in
the sense that vertices of one correspond to faces of the other, while edges correspond to
edges. The edges of the subdivisions are perpendicular to the edges of the tropical curve
and the vertices correspond to the polygonal regions that are closed by the edges of the
tropical curve.
Figure 2.8 shows the tropical curve of f (red) and g (blue) of system (2.5), together
with the signed subdivisions (left), for the choice of signs chosen by Li and Wang. On
the right we have shown both tropical curves whereby we see their intersections. The
intersections in (u, v)-space give the initial exponents of the solutions (x, y) of the system.
The broken edges correspond to edges between vertices of the support which are labelled
with the same sign, while the unbroken edges constitude the real tropical curve.
0
1
0
1
!
+
!
-1
0
1.5
-1
0
1.5
-1
-0.17 0
0.33
1.5
u
-1
0
0.17
0.67
1.5
v
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
!
+
!
+
-1
-0.17
0.33
1.5
-1
0.17
0.67
1.5
Figure 2.8: Signed subdivisions and tropical curves of system (2.5).
33
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
The real tropical curve is topologically equivalent to the curve constructed by Viro’s
method. Notice e.g. the similarities between the blue curve in this figure and the blue
curve in the first quadrant of Figure 2.6. Moreover, the mixed subdivision of two poly-
nomials is dual to the graph created by the union of the tropical curves the polynomials
(recall Figure 2.5). We notice that the two intersections of the complex tropical curves
correspond to the quadrilaterals in the mixed subdivision. However, only one of them
is an intersection between the real tropical curves, which then in turn correspond to an
alternating quadrilateral.
Unbounded edges of a tropical curve extend to infinity. However, the edges in a direc-
tion (ru, rv) with ru < 0 and rv < 0 will intersect the origin. This is obvious as they
correspond to edges of the Newton polygon which are used to determine the branches of
the singularities using the Newton-Puiseux method. In the case when ru > 0 or rv > 0 the
edge will go to infinity. In case one is zero and the other is negative then it will intersect
an axis of the positive quadrant. We will say that an unbounded edge has asymptote
(ru, rv) if this is its direction vector.
2.3.2
Tangential Intersections and Tropical Modifications
Usually in tropical geometry one considers all intersections as these provide the initial
exponents of all solutions of the system. However, we are only interested in the positive
solutions. That being said, there are cases where one cannot determine the position – or
even the number – of positive solutions. This can be seen by considering Example 2.35
where we demonstrated Bernstein’s theorem, specifically the case where the mixed subdi-
vision was not suﬀiciently generic.
Example 2.40 (Continuation of Example 2.35). We let ϵ = ω−1 whereby the coeﬀicients
are on the form ak ∼δk ω−αk and bj ∼σj ω−βj for k = 1, 2, 3 and j = 1, 2, 3, 4. We let
β2 be unknown, and let β1 = 1
2 β2. Then we can consider small perturbations around the
degenerate case by drawing the tropical curves for β2 ∈

−1
2, 0, 1
2
	
. This is shown in
Figure 2.9. The left figure is the case from before, with one positive solution, while the
middle figure shows the degenerate case. For β2 > 0 (right) the real tropical curves do
not intersect, in the positive quadrant at least. In the tangential intersection we cannot
see the number or position of the intersections. However, we know that it is possible for
there to be three intersections, as this was the counterexample of Li and Wang mentioned
earlier.
△
The problem of tangential intersections can be handled by so-called tropical modifica-
tions (see e.g. [5] or [6]). These are used to reveal hidden details of the tropical curves
and their intersections, as both the structure, and the types of intersections, can change
according to the embedding of the curves, contrary to classical geometry. In other words,
transforming the variables of the polynomial can change the topological structure of the
tropical curve. We will only use on aspect of tropical modifications, as we are only inter-
34
==PAGE:42==
2.3.
REACHING THE TROPICS
-1
-0.17
0
0.33
1.5
-1
0
0.17
0.67
1.5
-2 = -0.5
-1
0
0.33
1.5
-1
0
0.33
1.5
-2 = 0
-1
0
0.17
0.33
1.5
-1
-0.17
0
1.5
-2 = 0.5
Figure 2.9: Perturbation around a tangential intersection (middle) between the tropical
curves of system (2.5).
ested in determining the location and number of intersections, as opposed to the topolog-
ical properties of the curve.
To do a tropical modification along a curve, say the curve of f, one would usually let
z = f(x, y) be a new variable, and then isolate one of the original variables, say y, in
this equation thereby obtaining y = h(x, z) for some function h. One would then insert it
in the expression for g, i.e. g
 x, h(x, z)

, and tropicalize the polynomial. An unbounded
edge of the tropical curve of this equation in the negative direction of the valuation of z
provides the initial exponent u of x at a solution to the system. This is because the value
of u is constant on the unbounded edge, and taking z →∞corresponds to our original
system. However, we do not have to consider the two-dimensional space, as we can just
set z = 0 immediately when all we want to know is the position of the roots. Thus we
only need to consider
g
 x, h(x)

= 0 ,
where y = h(x) is determined by isolating y in f.
We consider the counterexample
from Haas again and show that we can indeed determine the number of solutions using
tropicalization and this principle.
Example 2.41 (Continuation of Example 2.39). We consider system (2.7) with b = ω and
a ∼δ ωα. In Figure 2.10 we have shown the signed subdivisions and real tropical curves
of f and g in the top and bottom row, respectively. The right figure shows both tropical
curves for α = 1. The real tropical curves do not intersect in this case. The position of
the vertex of f is given by (u, v) = (α, α) while the position of the vertex of g is given
by (u, v) = (1
2, 1
2). Thus the two tropical curves intersect tangentially when α = 1
2, which
is the same order of magnitude we found in Example 2.39, but they will not intersect
otherwise.
However, the conjecture of Itenberg and Roy asked one to consider the initial exponents
of all monomials to be variable, whereby we would have to consider the changes that
can occur when changing six parameters. In this simple example it is easy to see that
35
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
0
1
2
0
1
2
+
+
!
-2
1
2
-2
1
2
-2
0.5
1
2
u
-2
0.5
1
2
v
0
1
2
0
1
2
+
+
!
-2
0.5
2
-2
0.5
2
Figure 2.10: Signed subdivisions and tropical curves of the counterexample by Haas.
changing the position of one of the real tropical curves can at most produce one transversal
intersection, which we expected as this was also determined by Haas.
Thus the two
intersections must occur at α = 1
2.
Now we eliminate y in f (in accordance with the method of tropical modification) and
insert the expression in g. We had already done in the initial example, but we write the
expression on standard form
g(x, a −x) = a2 −b −2 a x + 2 x2 .
We consider the constant term and write a by its Puiseux series when the initial exponent
is 1
2. We only consider the first two terms of the Puiseux series of a, i.e. we let
a ∼δ0 ω
1
2 + δ1 ωα1 ,
We then have
a2 −b ∼(δ2
0 −1) ω + 2 δ0 δ1 ωα1+ 1
2 + δ2
1 ω2 α1 ,
Choosing δ0 = 1 we get that the valuation of the constant term is
val(a2 −b) = max{α1 + 1
2, 2 α1} .
The maximum is attained by α1 + 1
2 when α1 < 1
2, which is necessarily the case as it must
be strictly less than the exponent of the first term of a. Thus the truncated polynomial is
given by
˜g(x, a −x) = 2 δ0 δ1 ωα1+ 1
2 −2 ω
1
2 x + 2 x2 .
The corresponding tropical polynomial is given by
Gmax(u) = max

α1 + 1
2, 1
2 + u, 2 u
	
.
36
==PAGE:44==
2.3.
REACHING THE TROPICS
The roots of the tropical polynomial can be found by equating the tropical monomials
that have different signs of their initial coeﬀicients, i.e. we have
u = α1 ,
and
u = 1
2 .
We notice that the position of one of the roots is now of the order of α1, i.e. the sec-
ond exponent of the Puiseux series of a, while the second position is constantly u = 1
2.
Thus we have separated the two solutions in x, and we can then separate them in y by
doing the tropical modification for the y-variable.
However, because of the symmetry
between x and y we must have an equivalent case for y. Thus the solutions are given
by (x, y) =

O
 ωα1
, O
 ω
1
2 
and (x, y) =

O
 ω
1
2 
, O
 ωα1
. As the intersections are
transversal, we can conclude that the perturbed system has exactly two solutions when
a ∼ω
1
2 + δ1 ωα1, for all δ1 = O(1), α1 < 1
2 and ω suﬀiciently large.
△
2.3.3
On Positive Solutions and Multivariate Descartes’ Rule
As a final note, before reaching our destination, we consider again the problem of deter-
mining the maximum number of positive solutions, i.e. generalizing Descartes’ rule to the
multivariate case. As we saw in the previous section the counterexample to Itenberg and
Roy’s conjecture presented by Haas can be resolved by the principle of tropical modifica-
tions. However, these are transformations of the system and therefore diﬀicult to make
general statements about.
We consider now the counterexample to Kouchnirenko’s conjecture by Haas, which is
given in system (2.6). Figure 2.11 shows the signed subdivisions of this system (left) and
the tropical curves (middle) for a small ϵ. The right figure shows a perturbation of the
tropical curves such that they intersect transversely in three points. It is easy to see that
this is the maximum number of transversal intersections of these tropical curves. However,
0
b
2b
3b
4b
0
b
2b
3b
4b
+
+
!
0
b
2b
3b
4b
0
b
2b
3b
4b
+
+
!
Figure 2.11: Signed Subdivisions (left) and real tropical curves (middle) of the counterex-
ample for Kouchnirenko’s conjecture shown in system (2.6).
The right figure shows a
perturbation of the tropical curves where they have three transversal intersections.
37
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 2.
A JOURNEY FROM ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY TO TROPICAL DYNAMICS
Haas showed that this system has five intersection points when ϵ = 0.1 for all b ≥53, and
as we mentioned earlier, our numerical explorations indicate that one must increase b when
decreasing ϵ for this number of positive roots to occur, and thus they do not exist in the
tropical limit.
Now, recall Theorem 2.38, which states that the maximum number of positive roots of a
planar trinomial system is exactly five. We could speculate that this property of trinomial
systems would provide an upper bound for general systems when the initial form at all
intersections are at most trinomial. One could also speculate that the maximum number
of intersections is reached when this is the case. Perhaps this could even be generalized
to higher dimensions. This will be discussed further in chapter 7.
38
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3
Extending the Framework of
Tropical Dynamical Systems
Now we have finally reached the field of tropical dynamical systems. We will initially
consider two-dimensional systems, but on vector form, whereby it is naturally generalize
to higher dimensional systems.
3.1
The Flow in the Tropical Limit
We consider systems on the form
˙x = f(x, y) ,
˙y = g(x, y) ,
where f, g ∈R{{ω}}[x, y], i.e. f and g are polynomials in the field of Puiseux series depend-
ing on a large parameter ω1. To determine the tropical limit we make the transformation
(x, y) =
 x0 ωu, y0 ωv) for new variables u, v ∈R, and constants x0, y0 ∈R∗, whereby we
only consider x, y ∈R∗. The system in the new variables is given by
˙u =
1
x0 ln ω ω−u f(x0 ωu, y0 ωv) ,
˙v =
1
y0 ln ω ω−v g(x0 ωu, y0 ωv) .
We notice that now each polynomial is multiplied by a power of ω. This changes the
exponent vectors, by shifting the exponent vectors of f and g by (−1, 0) and (0, −1),
respectively. We can write this polynomial on vector form using u = (u, v) and
f =

1
x0 ω−u f, 1
y0 ω−v g

,
whereby we have
˙u =
1
ln(ω) f(x0 ωu) ,
(3.1)
1In previous works that the present author has been involved in (i.e. [20] and [36]) the parameters of the
polynomials were on the form ak = δk eαk/ε, however, it is easy to interchange between the two notations
using ω = e1/ε.
39
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3.
EXTENDING THE FRAMEWORK OF TROPICAL DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
with ωu being an element-wise exponentiation. The polynomial vector field can be written
on the form
f(x0 ωu) =
K
X
k=1
ak x0ηk ωηk⊤u ,
where ak ∈R{{ω}}N are vectors with elements in the field of Puiseux series, and
ηk ∈(Af −e1) ∪(Ag −e2) are the exponent vectors in the support of f, which is the union
of the support of f and g shifted by (−1, 0) and (0, −1), respectively. This generalizes
naturally for higher dimensions. We let exponentiation of vectors by vectors denote multi-
index notation, i.e. in the bivariate case we have x0ηk = x0ηk,1 y0ηk,2. We let v⊤denote the
transpose of v, whereby v⊤w denotes the inner product and v w⊤denotes the outer product.
We let αk be the initial exponent of ak, i.e. the largest initial exponent of the elements of
the vector. We introduce the following definition that generalizes initial coeﬀicients.
Definition 3.1. Let a ∈R{{ω}}N be a vector of Puiseux series with initial exponent α.
The initial flow vector of a is the vector d ∈RN, given by
d = lim
ω→∞a ω−α .
We define tropical polynomials and monomials similarly as before, i.e. Fk(u) = αk+ηk⊤u
are tropical monomials, and Fmax(u) = maxk Fk(u) is the tropical polynomial. The initial
index function is also the same as before, i.e. it is given by M(u) = arg max
k
Fk(u).
Definition 3.2. Let f ∈R{{ω}}N[x] be a vector field with K initial flow vectors dk for
k = 1, . . . , K. The initial form of the vector field f at u ∈R is the polynomial initu f, given
by
initu f(x) =
X
k∈M(u)
dk xηk .
We consider the transformed dynamical system again and re-parametrize the time vari-
able, such that
u′ =
ln ω
K
P
k=1
ωFk(u)
˙u ,
(3.2)
with (·)′ denoting differentiation with respect to the new time variable. Now we can finally
determine the tropicalization of the vector field.
Theorem 3.3. The system (3.1), in the reparametrized time variable given by (3.2), has
the asymptotic limit
u′ =
1
|M(u)| initu f(x0)
for
ω →∞.
40
==PAGE:48==
3.2.
THE PIECEWISE-CONSTANT SYSTEM
Proof. The system in the new time variable is given by
u′ =
K
P
k=1
ak ω−αk x0ηk ωFk(u)
K
P
k=1
ωFk(u)
.
We let rk ∈R{{ω}}N be all the terms in ak except for the initial term, i.e. ak = dk ωαk +rk.
By extending the fraction by ω−Fk(u) we have
u′ =
K
P
k=1
(dk + rk ω−αk) x0ηk ωFk(u)−Fmax(u)
K
P
k=1
ωFk(u)−Fmax(u)
.
We collect the terms that are constant with respect to ω in the numerator and denominator,
respectively.
u′ =
P
k∈M(u)
dk x0ηk +
P
k∈M(u)
rk ω−αk x0ηk +
P
k/∈M(u)
(dk + rk ω−αk) x0ηk ωFk(u)−Fmax(u)
P
k∈M(u)
1 +
P
k/∈M(u)
ωFk(u)−Fmax(u)
.
In the limit ω →∞all but the first sum in the numerator and denominator, respectively,
will vanish. The result follows from the definition of initu f.
■
For most points u the initial form of f is a monomial, which are exactly the points not
on the tropical hypersurface.
Corollary 3.4. Let u ∈RN be a point where M(u) = {k}. Then we have
u′ = dk x0ηk
for
ω →∞.
Remark 3.5. This result is proven in [20, Lemma 3.3] using slightly different notation,
without considering initial forms as in Theorem 3.3.
The above result is the justification behind tropicalization of dynamical systems. We
notice that the flow is constant in all domains bounded by the tropical curve (or tropical
hypersurface in the general case), and in each domain it is given by the initial flow vector
of the tropical monomial that attains the maximum in the domain. However, for points
on the tropical curve the asymptotic limit in Theorem 3.3 does not provide a unique flow,
as the flow can have different directions according to how x0 is chosen. We can resolve this
problem as one commonly does in piecewise-smooth systems, using differential inclusion.
3.2
The Piecewise-Constant System
Following [20, Definition 3.7 and 3.17], we define the flow of all points u ∈RN by differential
inclusion (see e.g. [10] for its definition and use in general piecewise-smooth systems). We
41
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3.
EXTENDING THE FRAMEWORK OF TROPICAL DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
first need some notation. For a set I ⊂NN we let dI denote the set
dI = conv

dk | k ∈I
	
.
We can use this for the general case as the flow of the tropical system is defined by dM(u)
when 0 /∈dM(u). The other case (i.e. 0 ∈dM(u)) occurs if and only if there are at least
two initial flow vectors that are parallel and opposite to each other, i.e. we have
0 ∈dM(u)
⇔
∃j, k ∈M(u) :
dj ∥dk
and
dj⊤dk < 0
In that case trajectories will be able to move in directions perpendicular to the span of
dM(u). Therefore we let Du denote the N ×
M(u)
 matrix with the initial flow vectors at
u as columns, i.e.
Du = (dk)k∈M(u) .
We let P be the projection onto the orthogonal complement of span
 dM(u)

, i.e.
Pu = I −Du (D⊤
u Du)−1 D⊤
u .
Definition 3.6 (Tropical Vector Field). Let f ∈R{{ω}}N[x] be a vector field in N dimen-
sions with K initial flow vectors dk, and initial index function M. The tropicalization of
f is the set valued function trop f , given recursively by
trop f (u) = dM(u) ∪



∅
0 /∈dM(u)
trop Puf (u)
0 ∈dM(u)
,
for u ∈RN. The set valued function trop f is called a tropical vector field.
Remark 3.7. Note that if dM(u) spans all of RN then trop Puf (u) = ∅, and thus the
recursion will always terminate.
We can now define the tropicalization of a dynamical system ˙x = x ⊙f(x), where ⊙
denotes elementwise multiplication.
Definition 3.8 (Tropical Dynamical System). Given a vector field f ∈R{{ω}}N in N
variables with K initial flow vectors dk and initial index function M. The tropicalization
of the system ˙x = x ⊙f(x) for x ∈RN
+ is the piecewise-constant system, given by
u′ ∈trop f (u) ,
u ∈RN .
This system is called a tropical dynamical system.
Remark 3.9. For piecewise-smooth systems the existence of solutions is not trivial. In [20]
the existence of solutions of tropical dynamical systems was established (see Theorem 4.1
in the reference), however our definition is slightly different from the one in [20], because
of our definition of trop f . This should not pose a problem.
42
==PAGE:50==
3.2.
THE PIECEWISE-CONSTANT SYSTEM
Remark 3.10. Note also that uniqueness of solutions through a point is lost for piecewise-
smooth systems. See [20, Section 15] for a discussion on pathological trajectories that are
possible in tropical dynamical systems because of the use of differential inclusion. Thus
we always keep in mind the smooth perturbed system and its possible dynamics given the
dynamics of the tropical system.
Borrowing terminology from piecewise-smooth systems we define domains and switching
manifolds of the tropical system.
Definition 3.11 (Domains). Let trop f be the tropicalization of a vector field f with
exponent vectors ηk, initial flow vectors dk for k = 1, . . . , K, and initial index function M.
Let Rk be the set of points u where M(u) = {k}. If Rk is an open subset of RN, then it
is called a domain of the tropical dynamical system u′ ∈trop f (u).
Definition 3.12 (Switching Manifold). Let trop f be the tropicalization of a vector field f
with initial flow vectors dk for k = 1, . . . , K, and initial index function M. Let Ejk be the
set of points u where M(u) = {j, k}. If Ejk is a codimension-1 manifold, then it is called
a switching manifold of the tropical dynamical system u′ ∈trop f (u). In that case let wjk
be a normal vector to Ejk, and let cjk = (dj⊤wjk) (dk⊤wjk). Then we make the following
distinctions:
1. If dj ∥dk and dj⊤dk < 0 then it is called a critical manifold.
2. If cjk ≤0 then it is called a sliding manifold.
3. Otherwise, if cjk > 0 then it is called a crossing manifold.
Remark 3.13. The critical manifolds are exactly those where 0 ∈dM(u), whereby we
need to also consider the tropical vector field of the orthogonal complement when dM(u)
does not span all of RN. This is similar to critical manifolds of slow-fast systems which
is the reason we borrow the term. See [20, Section 15] for a discussion on relating the
critical manifolds and sliding manifolds of the tropical system to locally invariant manifolds
of the perturbed system. In that reference critical manifolds are called nullcline sliding
manifolds.
We state the explicit expression of a normal vector to a switching manifold with its
direction.
Proposition 3.14. Let Ejk be a switching manifold. Then the normal vector to Ejk that
points away from Rj and towards Rk, is given by
wjk = ηk −ηj .
We use this for distinguishing between attracting and repelling switching manifolds.
Definition 3.15 (Transversality and Stability). Let Ejk be a critical manifold or sliding
manifold of a tropical system, and let wjk = ηk −ηj, where ηj, ηk are the exponent vectors
43
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3.
EXTENDING THE FRAMEWORK OF TROPICAL DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
that define Ejk. Furthermore, let dj, dk be the corresponding initial flow vectors, and let
cj = dj⊤wjk and ck = dk⊤wjk. Then we make the following distinctions:
1. If cj ck < 0 then it is said to be transversal.
2. Otherwise, if cj ck = 0, it is said to be tangential.
Moreover, if Ejk is transversal, then we make the following distinctions:
1. If cj > 0 (or equivalently ck < 0), then it is said to be attracting.
2. Otherwise, if cj < 0 (or equivalently ck > 0), then it is said to be repelling.
3.3
Nullclines, Equilibria and Cycles
We now define equivalents to common structures in dynamical systems for tropical systems.
Definition 3.16 (Tropical Nullclines). Let trop f be the tropical vector field of a tropical
dynamical system. The tropical curve of the i-th equation in f is called the tropical nullcline
in the direction of xi.
Definition 3.17 (Equilibrium). Let trop f be the tropical vector field of a tropical dynam-
ical system. If u ∈RN is a transversal intersection of all tropical nullclines of the system,
then u is said to be an equilibrium of the tropical system.
Remark 3.18. Note that in case of a tangential intersection between the nullclines, by
the definition of a tropical system, all points of the intersection are equilibria. However,
we resolve this problem by using the tropical modification of the coordinates, which can
be considered a new tropicalization.
Definition 3.19 (Cycles). Assume that a tropical system has a periodic orbit. If it only
contains points on crossing manifolds, then it is called a crossing cycle. If it also contains
points on tangential sliding manifolds, it is called a tangential-sliding cycle. Otherwise,
if it contains a point on a transversal sliding manifold or a transversal critical manifold
then it is called a transversal-sliding cycle. If there are no other periodic orbits in an open
neighborhood of the points on the cycle, then it is additionally called a limit cycle.
Note that not all crossing cycles or sliding cycles are limit cycles. This is currently
determined on a case-by-case basis, by checking if there are other cycles in an open neigh-
borhood.
Definition 3.20 (Stability of Sliding Cycles). Assume that a tropical system has a sliding
cycle. The sliding cycle is said to be stable, if all the sliding manifolds that it intersects are
attracting, and unstable if all are repelling. If it intersects both attracting and repelling
ones then it is called a canard cycle.
For crossing cycles we need to consider the Poincaré map as it is not attracted or repelled
by a switching manifold, as sliding cycles are.
44
==PAGE:52==
3.4.
TROPICALIZATION OF THE AUTOCATALATOR MODEL
Definition 3.21 (Stability of Crossing Cycles). Assume that a tropical system has a
crossing cycle, and let P be its Poincaré map with fixed point u∗. The crossing cycle is
said to be stable, if |P ′(u∗)| < 1, and unstable if |P ′(u∗)| > 1. If however |P ′(u∗)| = 1 then
it is said to be non-hyperbolic.
Both canard cycles and non-hyperbolic crossing cycles can be described as non-hyperbolic,
at least in the tropical sense. However, they could correspond to (hyperbolic) limit cycles
for the perturbed system.
3.4
Tropicalization of the Autocatalator Model
In this section we consider an example of a slow-fast system that has been analyzed in [14]
using geometric singular perturbation theory. This was also the example considering in
both [20] and [36] for a tropical dynamical system. However, we reuse this example with
our slightly different notation and terminology for the sake of familiarity.
The autocatalator model considered in [14] is given by
˙x = ϵ (µ−x−x y2) ,
˙y = −y + x + x y ,
where 0 < ϵ ≪1 is a small parameter, and µ > 0. Thus we let ϵ = ω−1 and µ ∼δ ωα.
The truncated transformed system is then given by
ln(ω) ˙u = δ ωα−1−u −ω−1 −ω−1+2 v ,
ln(ω) ˙v = −1 + ωu−v + ωu .
In vector form we have
ln(ω) ˙u =
"
δ ωα−1
0
#
ω−u +
"
−ω−1
−1
#
+
"
0
1
#
ωu−v +
"
0
1
#
ωu +
"
−ω−1
0
#
ω2 v ,
where the monomials are in graded lexicographical order. In [36] we found that a stable
sliding cycle exists for 0 < α < 1
2, corresponding to O(1) < µ < O
 ω
1
2 
, thus we consider
α = 1
4.
In Figure 3.1 (left) we have shown the lifted support and its upper convex hull together
with the subdivision of the Newton polygon induced by it. In the right figure we have
shown the graphs of the corresponding tropical monomials, where the graph of the tropical
polynomial is all that is visible from above. The points in the lifted support and the graphs
of the tropical monomials are colored according to their initial flow vectors. Dark (light)
blue denotes a flow vector in the positive (negative) x-direction, respectively, while red
(orange) denotes a flow vector in the positive (negative) y-direction, respectively. Notice
that the exponent vector (0, 0) in the support has two lifted points (planes), but only the
one with the largest initial exponent is visible from above.
45
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3.
EXTENDING THE FRAMEWORK OF TROPICAL DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
Figure 3.1: The lifted support of the autocatalator model and its upper convex hull (left),
and the graphs of the corresponding tropical monomials (right).
Figure 3.2 (bottom) shows the labelled subdivisions of the vector field (left), x-nullcline
(middle) and y-nullcline (right), labelled by the initial flow, with their tropical curves
above. Notice that the lifted point that is hidden in the subdivision of the vector field is
visible in the subdivision of the x-nullcline.
In Figure 3.3 we have shown the tropical vector field (left), and the global tropical phase
portrait2 (right) of the system for x, y ≥0. Consider first the tropical vector field. The
switching manifolds are the thick line segments, with crossing on the broken segments and
sliding on the unbroken ones. The critical manifolds are the thick colored line segments,
where the color corresponds to the color of the domain determining its flow. The tropical x-
and y-nullclines are the unbroken edges of the thin blue and red line segments, respectively.
Consider now the tropical phase portrait. We notice how the unstable manifold (green)
of a saddle at infinity (magenta) approaches a limit cycle (in a tropical sense) around the
unstable equilibrium (purple). The thick black lines are the trajectories on the switching
manifolds and the boundary at infinity, while the thin black lines are the departure and
arrival separatrices of the vertices of the tropical curve, i.e. the trajectories that intersect
the vertices either in forward or backward time, respectively (see also [20, Section 10]).
The fast parts of the trajectories are denoted by double arrows, while the slow parts are
denoted by single arrows colored according to the direction governing the flow on the
critical manifold.
Borrowing terminology from geometric singular perturbation theory we can call the
origin a jump point, as this is where trajectories leave the attracting critical manifold, and
”jump” either to another switching manifold or to infinity.
2The tropical phase portraits have been designed and drawn with the help of Jonas Sarantaris (the
brother of the second author).
46
==PAGE:54==
3.5.
TRAJECTORIES AND MAPS
-2
-0.75
-0.5
0
2
-1.5
-0.75
0
0.5
1.5
-2
0.25
2
-1.5
0
1.5
-2
0
2
-1.5
0
1.5
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
-1
0
1
-1
0
1
2
Figure 3.2: Labelled subdivisions of the autocatalator system (left) and of the equation
in the x-direction (middle), and y-direction (right).
-2.5
-0.75
-0.5
-0.25
0
0.25
0.5
-1.5
-0.75
0
0.25
0.5
1.2
Figure 3.3: Tropical vector field (left) of the autocatalator model, and its global tropical
phase portrait (right).
3.5
Trajectories and Maps
We let bu, bηk, bdk ∈RN+1 denote the homogeneous coordinates of u, ηk, dk, respectively.
They are given by
bu = (u1, . . . , uN, 1) ,
bdk = (dk,1, . . . , dk,N, 0) ,
bηk = (ηk,1, . . . , ηk,N, α) ,
We then let bwjk = bηk −bηj. The equation, in homogeneous coordinates, of the hyperplane
collinear with the facet of the tropical hypersurface between domains j and k is then given
47
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3.
EXTENDING THE FRAMEWORK OF TROPICAL DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
by
bwjk⊤bu = 0 .
Intersection points between the N + 1 tropical switching manifolds with indices in a
given set I = (i1, . . . , iN) can be determined by solving the equations bηk⊤bu = z, ∀k ∈I,
for the intersection point bpI = (u, z). This can be computed by constructing an auxiliary
matrix AI and an auxiliary vector aI, where
AI =


ηi1
⊤
−1
...
...
ηiN
⊤
−1

,
and
aI = (αi1, . . . , αi,2) .
Then we have
bpI = −AI−1 aI ,
We let pI ∈RN be the first N elements of bpI, i.e. the intersection we sought.
Note
that we will have z = Fmax(pI), as pI is an intersection point of the tropical switching
manifolds. Note that the N-th coordinate of bpI should be normalized before using it in
further computations.
Alternatively one can use non-homogeneous coordinates by constructing the matrix
WI =


wi1,i2
⊤
...
wi1,iN
⊤

,
whereby we have
pI = −WI−1 aI .
Now we consider determining the trajectories of tropical dynamical systems, which are
piecewise-linear curves and are therefore described by a sequence of points. We let I and
bI denote the N × N and (N + 1) × (N + 1) identity matrix, respectively.
Proposition 3.22. Let E12 be a tropical switching manifold on which the tropical mono-
mials F1, F2 attain the maximum. Furthermore, let d1 and d2 be the flow vectors corre-
sponding to the respective monomials, and let u1 ∈R1. If the first switching manifold that
the trajectory from u1 intersects is E12 then it will intersect it at the point u2, given by
u2 = (I −P) u1 −p ,
where P = d1 w12⊤
d1⊤w12
and p = α2 −α1
d1⊤w12
d1, or written in homogeneous coordinates, we have
bu2 = (bI −bP) bu1 ,
where bP =
bd1 bw12⊤
bd1⊤bw12
.
48
==PAGE:56==
3.5.
TRAJECTORIES AND MAPS
Proof. We will prove the result in homogeneous coordinates as the result for non-homogeneous
coordinates can be determined similarly, or can be derived from the homogeneous result.
The line through the point u1 can be parametrized by
bu = bu1 + s bd1 ,
for some parameter s ∈R. We insert the parametrization into the equation of the switching
manifold E12, i.e.
bw12⊤ bu1 + s bd1

= 0 .
Isolating s in the equation gives us
s = −bw12⊤bu1
bw12⊤bd1
.
We note that since we have assumed that the flow from u1 intersects E12, then d1 will
not be parallel to the tropical manifold, and thus the denominator of s does not vanish.
Inserting the expression of s in the parametrization gives us the intersection point, i.e.
bu2 = bu1 −bw12⊤bu1
bw12⊤bd1
bd1 ,
We want to collect terms of bu1, so we use the fact that bw12⊤bu1 is a scalar, whereby we
can move this expression to the right of bd1 and get
bu2 = bu1 −
bd1 bw12⊤
bd1⊤bw12
bu1 .
Now, bd1 bw12⊤is an (N + 1) × (N + 1) matrix, and thus, by collecting the terms of bu1, the
result follows.
■
We can use the above result to define flow maps Φjk that determine the intersection of
the forward trajectory of a point u in the closure of Rj with the hyperplane collinear with
the switching manifold Ejk. When using the map we of course have to make sure that the
trajectory from u does indeed map to the given switching manifold, i.e. that Φ(u) ∈Ejk.
We naturally generalize the transition map for homogeneous coordinates, denoted by bϕjk.
Even better, we can determine all outward pointing edges in the labelled subdivision
that are incident with the vertex ηj, and then for each edge determine the points that
the trajectory would map to, and then take the point with smallest distance. i.e. we can
determine a map Φj : Rj →∂Rj from a point u in the closure of the domain of j to
the point on its boundary that the trajectory from u intersects. We do however need to
consider the possibility of the trajectory to go to infinity. This occurs if and only if there
are no outward pointing edges incident with the vertex ηj, which is only possible if the
vertex is at the boundary of the Newton polytope. We let Cj denote the indices of the
endpoints of the outward pointing edges.
49
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 3.
EXTENDING THE FRAMEWORK OF TROPICAL DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
To determine such a map we first define a map Djk : Rj →R+ which determines the
distance between the point u and the hyperplane collinear with Ejk. From Proposition 3.22
we get the explicit expression in homogeneous coordinates
bDjk(bu) = −bwjk⊤bu
bwjk⊤bdj
.
We then let Dj denote the smallest distance, i.e.
Dj(u) = min
k∈Cj Djk(u) .
Note that we define min of the empty set to be min ∅= ∞to determine the trajectories
go to infinity.
Finally, we can determine the map Φj, i.e. we have
Φj(u) = u + Dj(u) dj .
Note that the flow maps for the backward trajectories can be determined similarly by
replacing dj with −dj and considering the inward pointing edges of the vertex in the
labelled subdivision.
Note however that the flow maps we have constructed from Proposition 3.22 are not
invertible, as all points in the N-dimensional domain are mapped to a hyperplane of
codimension one. Thus we seek to determine invertible transition maps that map points
from one switching manifold to another, across the domain in the direction of the flow
vector d. We state first a general result on the projection of a hyperplane onto another.
Lemma 3.23. Let w1, w2 ∈RN be the normal vectors of two hyperplanes E1 and E2, and
let a1, a2 ∈R satisfy wj⊤u + aj = 0 for all u ∈RN and j = {1, 2}. Let d ∈RN be vector
not parallel to w1 and w1. The points u2 ∈E2 that are projected by the vector d from a
point u1 ∈E1 are given by
u2 = (I −P12) u1 −p12 ,
where P12 = d (w1 + w2)⊤
d1⊤w2
and p12 = a1 + a2
d1⊤w2
d. Moreover, the transformation is invertible
and we have
u1 = (I −P21) u2 −p21 ,
where P21 = d (w1 + w2)⊤
d1⊤w1
and p21 = a1 + a2
d⊤w1
d.
Proof. In contrast with Proposition 3.22, for this proof we will consider non-homogeneous
coordinates only, and as before the proof for the other coordinates is similar or can be
derived. We know that u2 must be given by an aﬀine transformation of u1, whereby we
can write
u2 = A u1 + b ,
50
==PAGE:58==
3.5.
TRAJECTORIES AND MAPS
for some transformation matrix A and translation vector b. We also know that u2 lies on
a line from u1 in the direction of d1. Therefore we have
A u1 + b = u1 + s d ,
for some parameter s > 0. Collecting the linear terms gives us
(A −I) u1 + b = s d .
For this to hold generally the transformation (A −I) must map vectors to the span of d,
and b must also lie in the span of d, i.e. b = r d for some r ∈R. We thus obtain that
(A −I) is a projection matrix onto the span of d, and thereby it can be written on the
form
A −I = d1 q⊤,
for some q ∈RN. As the point u2 lies in E2 it will satisfy the equation w2⊤u2 + a2 = 0.
Inserting the expressions of A and b in this equation we have
w2⊤ I + d q⊤
u1 + r w2⊤d + a2 = 0 .
We also have that u1 must lie in E1, and thus satisfy the equation w1⊤u1 + a1 = 0, which
we can then add to the previous equation, whereby we get

w2⊤+ w2⊤d q⊤+ w1⊤
u1 + r w2⊤d + a2 + a1 = 0 .
Both the linear factor and the constant term must vanish for this to hold generally, whereby
we can isolate q = −w2+w1
d⊤w2 and r = −a2+a1
d⊤w2 . Now, to show that (I −P) is invertible and
determine the inverse we use the Sherman-Morrison formula (see e.g. [3]). We have that
a transformation on the form (I + d q) is invertible if and only if 1 + d⊤I q ̸= 0. We have
1 −d⊤w2 + w1
d⊤w2
̸= 0
⇒
d⊤w1 ̸= 0 .
As d and w1 are assumed to not be parallel, the transformation is invertible and we can
use the Sherman-Morrison formula to obtain
(I + d q)−1 = I−1 −I−1 d q⊤I−1
1 + d⊤I q
= I +
d

w2+w1
d⊤w2
⊤
1 −d⊤
w2+w1
d⊤w2
 ,
Now, extending the fraction by d⊤w2 we get the stated result. The expression for p21 can
be determined by considering the inverse transformation in homogeneous coordinates, i.e.
from the expression bu1 = (bI −bP21) bu2, which is on the same form as the expression for
bu2.
■
We can use this result to determine transition maps from one switching manifold to
another.
51
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 3.
EXTENDING THE FRAMEWORK OF TROPICAL DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
Corollary 3.24. Let E01 and E12 be tropical switching manifolds, and let d1 be the flow
vector in domain R1, and assume that w01 and w12 are not parallel with d1. Given a point
u1 ∈E01, if the first switching manifold that the trajectory from u1 intersects is E12 then
it will intersect it at the point u2, given by
u2 = (I −P012) u1 −p012 ,
where P012 = d1 w02⊤
d1⊤w12
and p012 = α2 −α0
d1⊤w12
d1. Moreover, the transformation is invertible
and we have
u1 = (I −P210) u2 −p210 ,
where P210 = d1 w02⊤
d1⊤w01
and p210 = α2 −α0
d1⊤w01
d1.
Proof. We use Lemma 3.23 with ak = αk −αk−1 and wk = wk−1,k for k ∈{1, 2}. The
result follows by noticing that w12 + w01 = w02.
■
In homogeneous coordinates the expressions are even simpler.
Corollary 3.25. Let E01 and E12 be tropical switching manifolds, and let bd1 be the flow
vector in domain R1, and assume that bd
⊤
1 bw01 > 0 and bd
⊤
1 bw12 > 0. The transition map
bT012 that takes points from E01 to E12 is given by
bT012(bu) = (bI −bP012) bu ,
where bP012 =
bd1 bw⊤
02
bd
⊤
1 bw12
. Moreover, the transition map is invertible and its inverse bT210 is
given by
bT210(bu) = (bI −bP210) bu2 ,
where bP210 =
bd1 bw⊤
02
bd
⊤
1 bw01
.
These maps will be used in the following sections, especially for determining global
bifurcation manifolds and return maps for crossing cycles and chaotic attractors.
Definition 3.26. Let C = (c0, . . . , cL) ∈NN, and let Ecj,cj+1 be L switching manifolds of
a tropical dynamical system, for j = 0, . . . , L −1. The sequence C, is called a crossing
sequence if Ecj,cj+1 are crossing manifolds for all j = 1, . . . , L −2 and the trajectory from
Ec0,c1 traverses the manifolds in the order given by C. Secondly, the crossing sequence is
said to be closed if EcL−1,cL = Ec0,c1. Finally, a closed crossing sequence is said to be cyclic,
if Ec0,c1 is a crossing manifold as well.
52
==PAGE:60==
3.5.
TRAJECTORIES AND MAPS
We can then define a transition map TC for a given crossing sequence C = (c0, . . . , cL).
The map takes a point u1 ∈Rc1 and map it to a point uL ∈RcL on the switching manifold
between the last two indices in C. Thus we have
TC(u) = TcL−2,cL−1,cL ◦· · · ◦Tc0,c1,c2(u) ,
and thus uL = TC(u1).
In homogeneous coordinates we simply have a product of L
matrices.
If we have a cyclic crossing sequence, then TC is the first return map – also called the
Poincaré map – of the tropical system from all points on Ec0,c1. As the map is linear we
can easily determine further iterates of the Poincaré map, as well as the fixed point when
it exists. The fixed point is given by
bu∗=
 bI −bAC
−1 b0 ,
where b0 = (0, . . . , 0, 1) and bAC is the system matrix of bTC. The fixed point exists when it
is contained in Ec0,c1, and bT(c0,...,cj,cj+1)(bu∗) ∈Ecj,cj+1 for all j = 1, . . . , L −1.
53
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Local Tropical Bifurcations
4.1
Saddle-Node Bifurcations of Tropical Systems
We will first consider different types of saddle-node bifurcations that can occur in tropical
systems. Many of the different types are not qualitatively different in the usual sense,
however, they can arise by different ways, i.e. either at an intersection of the tropical null-
clines, or by the emergence of a domain of the tropical system. Only the latter correspond
to a flip of the subdivision of the system, while the former corresponds to a flip of the
mixed subdivision, i.e. that of the Minkowski sum. More types are shown in appendix A.
4.1.1
A Prototype System
Figure 4.1 shows the labeled Newton polygon (left) of a tropical system with a saddle-node
bifurcation, and its two possible triangulations. The smooth system in u can be written
as
ln(ω) ˙u =
"
δ1 ωα1
−1
#
+
"
0
1
#
ωu−v +
"
−δ2 ωα2
0
#
ωu +
"
0
1
#
ωu+v .
(4.1)
This corresponds to the smooth system ˙x = f(x), with f given by
f(x, y) =
"
a1 x −a2 x2
−y + x + x y2
#
,
where a1 = δ1 ωα1 and a2 = δ2 ωα2. In the positive quadrant f has the two roots x∗
±, given
by
x∗
± =
 
a1
a2
, a2 ±
p
a2
2 −4 a2
1
2 a1
!
.
We notice that for a2 < 2 a1 the roots are complex, while for a2 ≥2 a1 they are real. Thus
the system has a saddle-node bifurcation at a2 = 2 a1 where the equilibrium is given by
x∗=
  1
2, 1

, i.e. it does not depend on a1 or a2. The analysis is simple as this is a simple
54
==PAGE:62==
4.1.
SADDLE-NODE BIFURCATIONS OF TROPICAL SYSTEMS
quadratic bivariate system, however in the general case one would need to use a theorem
such as [31, Thm. 4.2.1].
0
1
-1
0
1
/1 !,1
!1
0
1
!/2 !,2
0
0
1
0
1
-1
0
1
0
1
-1
0
1
Figure 4.1: Newton polygon of the system labelled by the flow vectors (left), and two of
its possible labelled subdivisions (middle and right).
4.1.2
Transversal Intersection of the Tropical Nullclines
We now consider the tropical system (4.1), and notice that the v-nullcline has a tropical
point at the origin, as all the coeﬀicients of the tropical polynomial are zero, and the
u-nullcline is given by u = α1 −α2. Thus, the u-nullcline intersect the tropical point when
α1 = α2. Figure 4.2 shows the vector field of the tropical system dual to the subdivisions
of Figure 4.1, where the vector fields in the top (bottom) row are dual to the middle (right)
subdivision, where α2 is fixed at α2 = −2 (α2 = 2), respectively. We notice that in both
cases a saddle-node bifurcation occurs at the origin for α1 = α2. The tropical system thus
provides the correct order of the bifurcation, as x∗= (O(1), O(1)) and a∗
2 = O(a1).
We also notice from Figure 4.2 that the two systems have slightly different behavior, as
the behavior of the trajectories are different. The first type, shown in the top row of Figure
fig. 4.2, is where an attracting critical manifold intersects a repelling one at a tropical point,
and a single edge of the tropical nullcline in the slow direction intersects the tropical point.
As the bifurcation parameter is increased or decreased the nullcline manifold will either
intersect both critical manifolds or neither of them, and thereby the bifurcation is robust
and is guaranteed to occur in the perturbed system for all ω suﬀiciently large.
The second type, shown in the bottom row of Figure 4.2, is where a single critical
manifold intersects the vertex of the tropical nullcline of the slow direction. It has two
edges on the same side of the critical manifold, which intersect the critical manifold on
one side of the bifurcation value and not on the other. The two types are essentially the
same system but for different values of α2. In the first type α2 is small, and in the second
type it is large.
55
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4.
LOCAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
-2
-1
0
2
-3
-1
0
1
3
,1 = -3
-2
0
2
-3
0
3
,1 = -2
-2
0
2
-3
0
3
,1 = -1
-2
-1
0
2
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
,1 = 1
-2
0
2
-3
-2
0
2
3
,1 = 2
-2
0
1
2
-3
-2
0
2
3
,1 = 3
Figure 4.2: Two similar types of saddle-node bifurcations in system (4.1).
A third type, in the same system, is shown in Figure 4.3. Here the value of α1 = 0
is fixed, whereby the flow vector of monomial (0, 0) is mixed. The mixed flow vector is
given by (δ1, −1), and can therefore also be varied. However, small perturbations on the
direction of the flow vector does not change the position of the equilibria or the bifurcation
value. In figure 4.4 we see that by changing both α1 and α2 by the same amount we can
transition from one type to the other. The transition will not be smooth at α1 = α2 = 0
if we only change the initial exponents, and thus when considering the initial coeﬀicient
we can transition smoothly from one type to the other.
-2
0
2
-3
0
3
,2 = -1
-2
0
2
-3
0
3
,2 = 0
-2
-1
0
2
-3
-1
0
1
3
,2 = 1
Figure 4.3: A saddle-node bifurcation with a mixed flow vector.
56
==PAGE:64==
4.1.
SADDLE-NODE BIFURCATIONS OF TROPICAL SYSTEMS
-3
0
3
-4
0
4
,1 = ,2 = -1
-3
0
3
-4
0
4
,1 = ,2 = 0
-3
0
3
-4
-1
0
1
4
,1 = ,2 = 1
Figure 4.4: Tropical vector fields for qualitatively different points on the bifurcation man-
ifold α1 −α2 = 0. The middle figure shows the vector field at the point between the two
types of saddle-node bifurcations.
4.1.3
Tangential Intersection of the Tropical Nullclines
Figure 4.5 shows two similar types of saddle-node bifurcations at a tangential intersection
of the tropical nullclines.
The saddle-node bifurcation occurs as a the two equilibria
become a line of equilibria in the tropical system.
Here the initial exponents of the
equilibria cannot be determined in the y-direction by the tropical parameters. Here one
could then transform the system, using the principle of tropical modifications, and obtain
a more precise bifurcation point as the initial term of the Puiseux series of a1 would cancel
out.
-3
-1
0
3
-4
-2
-1
1
2
4
,1 = -3
-3
0
3
-4
-1
1
4
,1 = -2
-3
0
3
-4
-1
1
4
,1 = -1
-3
-0.5
0
3
-4
-2
-1.5
-1
1
1.52
4
,1 = 1.5
-3
0
3
-4
-2
-1
1
2
4
,1 = 2
-3
0
1
3
-4
-2
-1
1
2
4
,1 = 3
Figure 4.5: Saddle-node bifurcations at a tangential intersection of the tropical nullclines.
57
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4.
LOCAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
4.1.4
Saddle-Focus Bifurcation
Figure 4.6 shows a planar saddle-focus bifurcation. A distinct tropical bifurcation, as the
smooth system will have a saddle-node bifurcation that happens very quickly for a large
ω.
-3
-1
0
3
-4
-3
-2
0
2
3
4
,1 = -1
-3
0
3
-4
-3
-2
0
2
3
4
,1 = 0
-3
0
1
3
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
,1 = 1
Figure 4.6: A (planar) saddle-focus bifurcation of the tropical system.
4.1.5
Determining Intersections of Tropical Curves from a Subdivision
As we saw in Figure 4.1, the saddle-node bifurcation was not captured in the labeled
subdivisions dual to the tropical curve of the system. However, we can use the mixed
subdivision to determine the bifurcation point as a flip.
Figure 4.7 shows the labeled
Newton polygon for the u- and v-polynomials (first two figures from the left) together
with their Minkowski sum (right). Notice that for clarity we have introduced βk, with
β1 = β2 = β3 = 0, to distinguish between the coeﬀicients of the respective tropical
monomials in the v-polynomial. Figure 4.8 shows how the subdivisions of the Minkowski
sum are changed in a flip at the bifurcation. The saddle-node bifurcation occurs in the
middle row at the value α1 = α2 = −2 for the bifurcation parameter α1.
0
1
-1
0
1
,1
,2
0
1
-1
0
1
-1
-2
-3
0
1
2
-1
0
1
,1 + -1
,1 + -2
,1 + -3
,2 + -1
,2 + -2
,2 + -3
Figure 4.7: Labeled Newton polygons for the u- and v-polynomials (first and second from
the left, respectively) labeled by their tropical coeﬀicients, as well as their Minkowski sum
(right).
58
==PAGE:66==
4.2.
HOPF BIFURCATIONS AND CANARD EXPLOSIONS
0
1
2
-1
0
1
!3 + 0
!3 + 0
!3 + 0
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
-4
1
-3
0
-2
-1
,1 = -3
2
1
0
-3
0
3
-4
0
4
0
1
2
-1
0
1
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
-4
1
-3
0
-2
-1
,1 = -2
2
1
0
-3
0
3
-4
0
4
0
1
2
-1
0
1
!1 + 0
!1 + 0
!1 + 0
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
!2 + 0
-4
-3
1
-2
0
-1
-1
,1 = -1
2
1
0
-3
0
3
-4
0
4
Figure 4.8: Labeled subdivisions (left column) and lifted point configurations (center
column) of the Minkowski sum of the tropical nullclines at a saddle-node bifurcation. The
right column shows the tropical u- and v-nullclines (blue and red, respectively).
4.2
Hopf Bifurcations and Canard Explosions
We consider two families of systems that can produce different types of hopf bifurcations.
The Newton polygon of the first system is shown in Figure 4.9 (left), which is given by
ln(ω) ˙u =
"
δ1 ωα1
1
#
ωu +
"
0
−1
#
ωv +
"
0
σ ωβ
#
ωu+v +
"
−δ2 ωα2
1
#
ωu+2 v .
(4.2)
In the original coordinates this corresponds to the system ˙x = f(x), with f given by
f(x, y) =
"
a1 x2 −a2 x2 y2
x y −y2 + b x y2 + x y3
#
,
where a1 = δ1 ωα1, a2 = δ2 ωα2, b = σ ωβ. In the positive quadrant f has a unique root x∗,
given by
x∗=
 
1
b+
√a1
a2 +
√a2
a1
,
q
a1
a2
!
.
The trace of the Jacobian at the equilibrium is given by a1−a2
a1+a2
q
a1
a2 , thus a Hopf bifurcation
occurs when a1 = a2.
59
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4.
LOCAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
Figure 4.9: Labeled Newton polygon for the full system (4.2) (left), for the equation in u
(middle), and for the equation in v (right).
4.2.1
Intersection of Nullclines
In figure 4.10 we see two types of Hopf bifurcations. The first is a canard explosion (top
row), as the nullcline of the slow direction moves from an attracting edge of the critical
manifold onto a repelling one. In this case we have α2 = −3. In the second (bottom row) a
vertex of the tropical nullcline of the slow direction intersects a tangential critical manifold
with a tropical focus, in this case α2 = 3. The case in the bottom row substantiates a
definition of stability for a tropical focus, where the angle of the edge of the nullcline with
the critical manifold determines the stability. More specifically, if the flow vectors of the
slow direction point toward the focus (i.e. the case in the left vector field) the focus is
stable, while if they point away (i.e. the case in the right vector field) it is unstable. In
this simple system both the canard explosion and the Hopf bifurcation are degenerate in
the sense that they do not create limit cycles.
-4
-0.5
0
2
-3
-0.5
0
3
,1 = -3
-4
0
2
-3
0
3
,1 = -2
-4
-0.5
0
2
-3
0
0.5
3
,1 = -1
-4
-1.5
-0.5
0
2
-3
-0.5
0
3
,1 = 1
-4
-2
0
2
-3
0
3
,1 = 2
-4
-2.5
-0.5
0
2
-3
0
0.5
3
,1 = 3
Figure 4.10: A canard explosion (top row) and a Hopf bifurcation (bottom row).
60
==PAGE:68==
4.2.
HOPF BIFURCATIONS AND CANARD EXPLOSIONS
The case in Figure 4.11 is similar but here we have β = 1
2. In this case the bifurcation
value cannot be determined in the initial exponent. However, the bifurcation will occur at
some point when the tropical x-nullcline is between the vertices of the tropical y-nullcline.
-5
-1
-0.5
1
-3
-1
-0.5
0.5
3
,1 = -5
-5
-0.5
1
-3
-0.5
0
0.5
3
,1 = -3
-5
-1
-0.5
1
-3
-0.5
0.5
1
3
,1 = -1
-5
-2
-1
-0.5
1
-3
-1
-0.5
0.5
3
,1 = 1
-5
-3
-0.5
1
-3
-0.5
0
0.5
3
,1 = 3
-5
-4
-1
-0.5
1
-3
-0.5
0.5
1
3
,1 = 5
Figure 4.11: A case of a Hopf bifurcation not determined by the initial exponents.
4.2.2
Mixed Flow Vectors and Poincare Maps
Figure 4.12 shows the Hopf bifurcation of system (4.2) with σ = α1 = α2 = 0 and
δ2 = 3 for different values of δ1. A trajectory (green) of the tropical system from the
crossing manifold v = 0 to itself, from u = 2, has been shown on the tropical vector field.
The distance between the two points is marked by a yellow line segment. At δ1 = 1 a
switching manifold changes its type from sliding to crossing. For δ1 < 3 the focus is still
stable. However, at δ1 = 3 the focus becomes a center as the distance vanishes and a
Hopf bifurcation occurs. Afterwards the equilibrium becomes an unstable focus for δ1 > 3.
Thus in this case the Hopf bifurcation occurs at a specific value of an initial coeﬀicient.
The bifurcation value can be determined by determining the Poincaré map. However,
in this simple case it is suﬀicient to notice the symmetry and the fact that δ2 = 3. Thus
we can conclude that the hopf bifurcation occurs for δ1 = δ2 as long as α1 = α2 and ω is
suﬀiciently large. In this simple case the Hopf bifurcation occurs exactly at these values
as we determined the exact bifurcation point to be a1 = a2. This is however a degenerate
Hopf bifurcation that does not produce a limit cycle.
In Figure 4.13 we have shown the tropical vector field of a system similar to the one
shown in Figure 4.12, i.e. system (4.2), but with an additional monomial −ω−2 y3 for the
equation in the y-direction. A trajectory from the endpoint of the sliding manifold is
shown in green, and the distance between this point and the point where the trajectory
hits the crossing manifold is shown in yellow. Again we have a Hopf bifurcation when
δ1 = δ2 = 3, however, this time a supercritical Hopf bifurcation occurs, where a stable
limit cycle exists when δ1 > δ2. Note that here there are periodic orbits inside the green
61
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4.
LOCAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
-3
0
2
3
-3
-1
0
1
3
/1 = 0.1
-3
0
2
3
-3
-1
0
1
3
/1 = 1
-3
0
2
3
-3
-1
0
1
3
/1 = 1.5
-3
0
2
3
-3
-1
0
1
3
/1 = 2.8
-3
0
2
3
-3
-1
0
1
3
/1 = 3
-3
0
2
3
-3
-1
0
1
3
/1 = 3.2
Figure 4.12: A Hopf bifurcation occurring in (4.2) by changing the initial coeﬀicient of a1
when its initial exponent is equal to the one of a2.
trajectory that we have shown. Thus we again have a canard cycle that grow infinitely
quickly in size, this time when increasing the initial coeﬀicient δ2, instead of the initial
exponent, which was the case previously. We notice that we can now control the size of
the limit cycle using δ2.
Figure 4.13: Supercritical Hopf bifurcation where the size of the limit cycle can be con-
trolled by the initial coeﬀicients of a1 and a2 when their initial exponents are equal.
62
==PAGE:70==
4.2.
HOPF BIFURCATIONS AND CANARD EXPLOSIONS
4.2.3
A Hopf Bifurcation with a Crossing Cycle
We consider now the system given by
˙x = x (a x −a x3 y3) ,
˙y = y (−y + x4 y2) ,
where a ∼ωα is our bifurcation parameter. Figure 4.14 shows the tropical vector field of
this system for values of α around a flip of an edge in the subdivision, in contrast to the
canard cycles we considered earlier. For α < 0 the equilibrium is an unstable node and
for α > 0 it is stable. We choose the indices in graded lexicographical order, i.e.
η1 = (0, 1, 0) ,
η2 = (1, 0, α) ,
η1 = (3, 3, α) ,
η1 = (4, 2, 0) ,
We consider now E24 as a Poincaré section and determine a Poincaré map with respect
to the u-variable of the cyclic sequence C = (2, 4, 3, 1, 2). We thus have
TC = T124 ◦T312 ◦T431 ◦T243 .
The equation of E24 is given by
3 u + 2 v −α = 0 ,
and the vertex at its endpoint is given by
p124 =
 −1
5 α, 4
5 α

.
The equilibrium of the tropical system is at the origin. The Poincaré map is thus given by
P(u) = 4
9 u −5
9 α ,
u ∈

−1
5 α, ∞

.
-7
-0.80
0.8
7
-7
-3.2
0
3.2
7
, = -4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
-7
0
7
-7
0
7
, = 0
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
-7
-2.4
0
2.4
7
-7
-1.6
0
1.6
7
, = 4
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
Figure 4.14: An unstable node (left). A center at a Hopf bifurcation (middle). A stable
node (right).
63
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 4.
LOCAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
This map has a fixed point at u = −α, which is stable as P ′(u) = 4
9 < 1. The fixed
point exists for all α < 0 as it is within the domain of P. Thus the tropical system has
a hyperbolic crossing cycle, whereby we can conclude that the perturbed system has a
supercritical Hopf bifurcation at a = O(1), with a stable limit cycle for all values of a > 0
below this point for all ω suﬀiciently large, and the limit cycle has amplitude O( 1
a). We
have also considered hyperbolic crossing cycles in [20].
4.2.4
Different Types of Cycles
Figure 4.15 shows a different type of Hopf bifurcation creating a cycle.
Here it is a
tangential-sliding cycle. However, we cannot immediately conclude that there is a strong
contraction, and thus it could be that there is no limit cycle, or possibly that the limit
cycle is created and then destroyed immediately after for ω →∞.
-5
-0.330
0.5
2
-2
-1
0
0.67
2
, = -1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
-5
0
2
-2
0
2
, = 0
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
-5
-3
0
0.75
2
-2
-0.250
1
2
, = 1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
Figure 4.15: A stable node (left). A degenerate center at a Hopf bifurcation (middle). A
stable node (right).
We seek to tackle this problem by considering the following family of systems
˙x = x (a xn −a x4 y3) ,
(4.3)
˙y = y (−y + x5 y2) ,
with a ∼ωα, but now we have the exponent n ∈R as a parameter. Figure 4.16 shows
tropical vector fields and labelled subdivisions for α < 0 and different values of n. We
notice that for n ≤−5 trajectories approach the invariant x-axis, while for −5 < n < 0
there is a stable sliding cycle. For n ≥5 trajectories will go towards the boundary at
infinity.
We thus consider 0 < n < 5 and proceed as before. We choose the order of the indices
64
==PAGE:72==
4.2.
HOPF BIFURCATIONS AND CANARD EXPLOSIONS
to be fixed, such that
η1 = (0, 1, 0) ,
η2 = (n, 0, α) ,
η1 = (4, 3, α) ,
η1 = (5, 2, 0) .
The Poincaré section E24 is now given by
(5 −n) u + 2 v −α = 0 ,
and the vertex at its endpoint is given by
p124 =
 −
1
5+n α,
5
5+n α

.
The equilibrium of the tropical system is again at the origin. The Poincaré map is then
given by
P(u) =
2 n
10−2 n u −
2+n
10−2 n α ,
u ∈

−
1
5+n α, ∞

.
The fixed point is given by
u∗= −2+n
10−4 n α ,
which is well-defined when n ̸= 5
2. For the fixed point to be stable we must have that

2 n
10−2 n
 < 1 which is satisfied when n < 5
2. Note that at n = 5
2 there are still crossing
cycles, however, they are not isolated, and therefore not hyperbolic. We also require that
it is in the domain of P, i.e. u∗> −
1
5+n α, which is again satisfied (for α < 0) when
0 < n < 5
2. Thus we can conclude that the perturbed system has a supercritical Hopf
bifurcation at a = O(1) for all 0 < n < 5
2, with a stable limit cycle for all values of a > 0
below this point for all ω suﬀiciently large, and the limit cycle has amplitude O

( 1
a)
2+n
10−4 n

.
Thus we see that the system has a stable limit cycle for all −5 < n < 0 and 0 < n < 5
2,
whereby it is reasonable to conclude that the system also has a stable limit cycle for n = 0.
The same can be done for the system of Figure 4.15 (left), by again letting exponent vector
(0, 0) be variable in its first coordinate, i.e. be given by n, whereby we can determine, by
similar computations, that the family of systems has a stable sliding cycle for −2 < n < 0
and a stable crossing limit cycle for 0 < n < 2
5, and thus again conclude that for n = 0
the system has a stable tangential-sliding cycle.
n = -5
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
n = -1
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
n = 0
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
n = 1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
n = 5
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
Figure 4.16: Tropical vector fields and labelled subdivisions of system (4.3).
65
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 4.
LOCAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
4.2.5
Canard Explosions at Tangential Intersections
In this section we give an example of a chemical system where canard explosions have
been established – similar to the autocatalator system – but where the tropical nullclines
intersect tangentially. The system that we will consider is the templator system analysed
by Brøns in [4]. The system (after a reparametrization of time) is given by
˙x = (r −ku x2 −kT x2 y) (K + y) ,
˙y = (ku x2 + kT x2 y) (K + y) −q y .
The parameters considered in the paper were
kT = q = 1 ,
ku = ω−1 ,
K = 2 ω−1 ,
with ω = 100, and with r as the bifurcation parameter.
Brøns determined a canard
explosion at r ≈0.41 and another at r ≈0.97. We let r ∼δ ωα and let ω be a large
parameter, whereby we write the system on the form
˙x = x (2 δ ωα−1 x−1 + δ ωα x−1 y −2 ω−2 x −3 ω−1 x y −x y2) ,
˙y = y (−1 + 2 ω−2 x2 y−1 + 3 ω−1 x2 + x2 y) ,
where the tropicalization can be seen explicitly. Figure 4.17 shows the tropical vector fields
and labelled subdivisions near r = O(1), i.e. near α = 0. We see that for α < 0 the system
has a globally attracting node, while for α > 0 all trajectories escape to infinity along
an attracting critical manifold. For α = 0, however, an edge of each tropical nullcline
intersect tangentially, whereby we cannot see the bifurcations. This is to be expected as
both bifurcations occur at the same order of r. We thus use the principle from tropical
modifications and determine the position of the equilibrium by eliminating a variable.
-2
-1.5
-0.33
0
0.25
0.5
1
-5.5
-5
-1.5
-1
0
0.17
1
, = -0.5
-1
0
1
2
-1
0
1
2
-2
-1
0
0.5
1
-5.5
-4
-1
0
1
, = 0
-1
0
1
2
-1
0
1
2
-2
-0.5
0.17
0.5
0.75
1
-5.5
-3
-1
-0.33
0.17
1
, = 0.5
-1
0
1
2
-1
0
1
2
Figure 4.17: Tropical vector fields and labelled subdivisions of the templator system.
66
==PAGE:74==
4.2.
HOPF BIFURCATIONS AND CANARD EXPLOSIONS
Thus we consider the nullcine ˙y = 0, i.e.
(ku x2 + kT x2 y) (K + y) = q y .
We notice that the first factor of the left hand side also appears in the equation for the x-
direction. Thus we can simply isolate this factor and insert the expression in the equation,
whereby we have

r −
q y
K + y

(K + y) = 0 .
Now, to follow through on the tropical method (disregarding the simplicity of the exact
solution), we let q −r ∼σ ω−β and require β > 0. We then have
2 δ ω−1 −σ ω−β y = 0 ,
which has a tropical solution at v = −1 + β. Thus the v-value of the equilibrium increases
when increasing β. At v = 0 the tropical curve of the templator model has a four-valent
vertex, which is intersected by the equilibrium at β = 1. The equilibrium will be unstable
for β < 1 as it is on a repelling critical manifold of the tropical system having undergone
a canard explosion at β = 0, while for β > 1 it will become stable again as the critical
manifold is attracting.
We can now draw tropical phase portraits of the templator system, which are shown in
Figure 4.18. The two canard cycles are shown in the top-middle figure, and the bottom left.
The limit cycle exists between these two points. Concluding on the analysis we remark
that the system has canard explosions at r∗
1 ∼1 −σ∗
1 and r∗
2 ∼1 −σ∗
2 ω−1, for some σ∗
1
and σ∗
2 of order 1, for all ω suﬀiciently large. Using the numerical results determined by
Brøns we can determine the approximate values to be σ∗
1 ≈0.58 and σ∗
2 ≈3.24.
67
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 4.
LOCAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
Figure 4.18: Tropical phase portraits of the templator system. Top row (from left to right):
β > 0,
β = 0,
0 < β < 1. Bottom row: β = 1,
β > 1,
α > 0.
68
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 5
Global Tropical Bifurcations
5.1
Saddle Connections in One-Parameter Systems
In the previous chapter (as well as in [20]) we have shown examples of canard explosions
occurring in the tropicalized system at the same value of the initial exponent as the Hopf
bifurcation. Now we will construct an example where the two bifurcations are separate
in the tropicalized system, and the canard explosion occurs by a separatrix connection
between an attracting and a repelling sliding manifold.
5.1.1
An Unbounded Canard Explosion
We will use a system similar to the one shown in Figure 4.15 as base system as it has a Hopf
bifurcation where the amplitude can be controlled by the initial exponents. However, we
replace the tangential flow vector with a mixed vector to get an attracting sliding manifold.
We want a repelling sliding manifold that can connect to the orbit of the attracting one,
which is the case in a canard explosion. To achieve this we can extend the support of
the system with an point above the labelled Newton polygon of the base system with a
flow vector in the positive v-direction. To ensure that the new point does not alter the
subdivision of the base system we let its initial exponent be −1. The tropical vector field
and labelled Newton polygons of the resulting system are shown in Figure 5.1.
-0.5
-0.25
-0.17
-0.1
0
0.25
-0.25
0
0.2
0.33
0.5
0.75
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.1: Tropical vector field and labelled subdivisions of system (5.1).
69
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
We choose the initial exponent of monomial (1, 3) as the bifurcation parameter α. The
system is then given by
˙x = x (1 −a x y3) ,
(5.1)
˙y = y (1 −y + x2 y2 + ω−1 x2 y4) .
where a = O(ωα).
Proposition 5.1. The perturbed system (5.1) for x, y > 0 has a supercritical Hopf bifur-
cation at some point a = aHopf, where aHopf = O(ω0), for all ω suﬀiciently large, and the
limit cycle is created when a is decreased from the bifurcation value. The amplitude of
the limit cycle initially grows by the order of a−1 up until some point a = aCE given by
aCE = O
√
ω−1

, where a canard explosion occurs and the size of the limit cycle grows
unboundedly and much faster than O(a−1). The limit cycle is finally destroyed in a hetero-
clinic bifurcation at infinity at some point a = aHet, also at order O
√
ω−1

. The system
has no limit cycles outside the interval aHopf < a < aHet for ω suﬀiciently large.
The rest of this section will be dedicated to proving this result by analyzing the tropical
system. In Figure 5.2 we have shown all but one of the possible labelled subdivisions of
the system for varying values of α. We notice that the Hopf bifurcation occurs at α = 0
where the stable limit cycle is created when decreasing α. The attracting sliding manifold
will connect to the repelling one at α = −1
2, which is the bifurcation value of the canard
explosion. The subdivision we have omitted is not associated with a qualitatively different
phase portrait as it is the one created in the flip of the right-most subdivision in the
figure, and thus we are guaranteed that the behavior of the system for all a > 0, and ω
suﬀiciently large, is represented by these tropical vector fields. The bifurcation value at
the canard explosion is easily found by requiring that the endpoint of the repelling sliding
manifold, located at (u, v) =
 α + 1
2, 1
2

, has the same first coordinate as the endpoint of
the attracting manifold, which is located at the origin for all values of α.
The qualitatively different global tropical phase portraits of the positive quadrant for
α ∈
 −3
4, 0

are shown in Figure 5.3. Both axes are invariant, the origin is an unstable
node and the y-axis has a finite saddle at y = 1. There are four equilibria at infinity. The
one in the bottom-right corner is a simple infinite saddle as can be seen from the fact that
the flow vector of monomial (0, 0) will have a negative y-component for y < 0, and the flow
on the invariant x-axis is positive for all x > 0. The three on the upper boundary of the
phase portrait corresponds to a single degenerate equilibrium in Poincaré compactification,
as the initial flow vectors have directions counter clock-wise from the vector (1, 1). The
left and middle ones are saddles and the one to the right is a stable node.
The left-most phase portrait shows the system at the Hopf bifurcation (α = 0) and the
second from the left shows the small attracting limit cycle (green) which is created for
α < 0. The third from the left shows the canard explosion at α = −1
2, where the size
of the canard cycle in the perturbed system will become unbounded and is be destroyed
in a heteroclinic bifurcation when the unstable manifold of the saddle at (0, 1) connects
70
==PAGE:78==
5.1.
SADDLE CONNECTIONS IN ONE-PARAMETER SYSTEMS
-0.75
-0.25
0
0.13
0.75
0.85
-0.25
-0.13
0
0.5
1
, = 0.25
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
-0.75
-0.25
0
0.5
0.85
-0.25
0
0.5
1
, = 0
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
-0.75
-0.25
-0.17
-0.10
0.85
-0.25
0
0.2
0.33
0.5
1
, = -0.5
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
-0.75
-0.25
-0.15
0
0.85
-0.25
0
0.3
0.5
1
, = -0.75
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.2: Tropical vector fields and labelled subdivisions of system (5.1) for decreasing
values of α with distinct labelled subdivisions.
to the stable manifold of the infinite saddle with asymptote (−1, 1). At the heteroclinic
bifurcation a semi-stable separatrix cycle at infinity is created, between three of the saddles.
All trajectories inside the cycle approach it as they are repelled from the unstable node in
its interior, while all trajectories in a small neighborhood outside of it will move around
its boundary and approach the stable infinite node with asymptote (0, 1). The right-most
phase portrait shows the dynamics after the semi-stable separatrix cycle is destroyed,
where the stable equilibrium at infinity becomes a global attractor of the positive quadrant,
except for the points on the stable manifold (magenta).
Finally we determine the amplitude of the limit cycle for α ∈
 −1
2, 0

by consid-
ering the subdivision of the system shown in Figure 5.1 (second from the left).
The
endpoints of the critical manifold are the origin and the point at (u, v) =
  1
3 α, −2
3 α

,
which is the intersection of the domains of monomials (0, 1), (2, 2) and (1, 3).
We use
Proposition 3.22 to determine the point on the crossing manifold with normal vector
Figure 5.3: Tropical phase portraits of system (5.1). From left to right: (1) Degenerate
focus at the origin. (2) Limit cycle is created in a Hopf bifurcation. (3) Unbounded canard
cycles which end in a semi-stable separatrix cycle at infinity. (4) All trajectories escape to
infinity.
71
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
(−1, −2) where the origin is mapped to by the flow. We find that the flow map from
the domain of (2, 2) is given by Φ1(u, v) = (u, u −α), and the flow map from the next
domain (1, 3) is given by Φ2(u, v) = (−2 v −α, v). Thus, the composed transition map is
given by Φ2 ◦Φ1(u, v) = (−2 u + α, u −α), and thus the origin is mapped to the point
(u, v) = (α, −α). The amplitude of the limit cycle is the maximum distance between this
point and the origin, i.e. the amplitude is |α| for −1
2 < α < 0.
5.1.2
Homoclinic Bifurcations
Inspired by the slow-fast template system in our previous work [36] – which was used
to construct systems with many limit cycles –we construct the slow-fast tropical system
shown in Figure 5.4, which has a homoclinic orbit from the saddle at (u, v) = (1, 2) to itself,
as seen in the tropical vector field (left). The tropical y-nullcline is a critical manifold for
all points, and it will correspond to an s-shaped slow manifold of the slow-fast perturbed
system, in the vocabulary of singular perturbation theory.
-4
-3
-1
-0.33
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0.67
2
4
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
Figure 5.4: Tropical vector field and labelled subdivisions of system (5.2).
A system that has the specified labelled subdivisions is given by
˙x = x (−a ω−2 x y2 + ω−1 x2 y) ,
(5.2)
˙y = y (1 −ω2 y + ω2 x2 y2 −x2 y3) ,
where a > 0 is our bifurcation parameter of the perturbed system.
We consider the
initial term of the bifurcation parameter a ∼δ ωα, whereby the parameter α will be the
bifurcation parameter of the tropical system.
Proposition 5.2. The perturbed system (5.2) has a homoclinic bifurcation at a = aHom,1
and a = aHom,2 for all ω suﬀiciently large, where aHom, 1 = O
 ω0
and aHom, 2 = O
 ω2
,
respectively. Moreover, a stable limit cycle exists in the interval aHom, 1 < a < aHom, 2, and
the system has no limit cycles outside this interval in the positive quadrant for a < O
 ω3
and ω suﬀiciently large.
The rest of this section will be dedicated to proving this statement by analyzing the
tropical system. In Figure 5.5 we have shown the tropical vector fields for some values of α
around the bifurcation value. We let SB, SM, ST denote the bottom, middle and top edge
72
==PAGE:80==
5.1.
SADDLE CONNECTIONS IN ONE-PARAMETER SYSTEMS
of the critical manifold, respectively. Thus SM is repelling and the others are attracting.
The positions of the two saddles are given by pT = (α + 1, 2) and pB = (α −3, −2), and
the position of the two jump points are given by (u, v) = (1, −2) and (u, v) = (−1, 2).
We notice that for α < 0 the unstable manifold with direction (−1, 0) of the saddle at
pT will jump to SB and then back to ST , following the unstable manifold in the positive
u-direction to infinity as the first coordinate of pT is less than the first coordinate of the
jump point of SB.
A homoclinic orbit is created at α = 0 when the top saddle has the same first coordinate
as the jump point at u = 1. The homoclinic breaks up when α is increased, and a stable
limit cycle is created. At α = 2 the other saddle will produce a homoclinic orbit, whereby
the limit cycle is destroyed, again in a homoclinic bifurcation, and all trajectories will
escape from the positive quadrant.
The structure of the subdivision of the system is
preserved as long as the vertex (1, 2, α −2) in the lifted subdivision is below the edge
between the vertices (0, 1, 2) and (2, 3, 0).
This gives us the condition α < 3 for the
structure to be preserved. One could further analyze the system for α > 3, however, we
strongly expect that no limit cycles exist there, which we have convinced ourselves through
explorations of higher values of α. Proposition 5.2 follows from the observation that the
saddles and the cycle persist in an open neighborhood of the bifurcation points.
-5
-3.5
-1
-0.5
0.51
2
4
-4
-3
-2
1
2
4
, = -0.5
-5
-3
-1
-0.33
1
2
4
-4
-3
-2
0.67
2
4
, = 0
-5
-2
-1
0
1
2
4
-4
-3
-2
0
2
4
, = 1
-5
-1
0.33
1
2
3
4
-4
-3
-2
-0.67
2
4
, = 2
Figure 5.5: Tropical vector fields of (5.2) for different values of the initial exponent of a.
There are homoclinic orbits at α = 0 and α = 2.
As the system has two homoclinic bifurcations, we could be curious to know if it is
possible to choose one of the coeﬀicients in (5.2) as another parameter such that the
perturbed system has a codimension-2 heteroclinic bifurcation as the intersection of the
two bifurcation curves of the homoclinics. However, we notice from the geometry of the
tropical nullclines that this is not possible for the tropical system as SM and the tropical
x-nullcline are not symmetric around a vertical line through the unstable equilibrium
(the slopes are -2 and 1, respectively), which is a necessary condition in this case given
that the flow in the domains is vertical. However, even if they were symmetric, the fact
that the tropical x-nullcline only has one edge means that changing the parameter will
change the positions of both saddles, and thus we would not be certain that they would
intersect for all ω suﬀiciently large. That being said, it might be possible for the system
73
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
to have a codimension-2 heteroclinic bifurcation for some small value of ω. In the next
section we will use the system of the present section as a base system to construct a three-
parameter system which not only has such a codimension-2 heteroclinic bifurcation, but
has codimension-3 bifurcation points where such a bifurcation branches out.
5.2
Three-Dimensional Bifurcation Manifolds
We extend system (5.2) by adding two terms to the equation of ˙x such that the system has
the tropical vector field and labelled subdivisions shown in Figure 5.6. We have constructed
it such that is has a saddle-node bifurcation on SB simultaneous with a homoclinic on ST ,
and we then choose parameters of the slow direction such that we can control the position
of the equilibrium without destroying the structure.
The system is given by
˙x = x (c ω−3 y −b ω−4 x −a ω−2 x y2 + ω−1 x2 y) ,
(5.3)
˙y = y (1 −ω2 y + ω2 x2 y2 −x2 y3) ,
where we let β and γ be the initial exponents of b and c, respectively. In the figure we
have α = β = γ = 0.
-3
-1
-0.33
1
2
4
6
-9
-7
-3
-2
0
0.67
2
4
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
Figure 5.6: Tropical vector field (left) of system (5.3) and the labelled subdivisions of the
system (second from the left), the x-nullcline (third from the left) and y-nullcline (right).
We first determine the conditions where the critical manifold is preserved. We notice
from the equations of the system that we must have γ < 5, as the flow vector of monomial
(0, 1) would otherwise be mixed. For β we consider the labelled subdivision of the system
in Figure 5.6 (second from the left). The vertex η2 = (1, 0, β −4) in the support will
change the structure of the critical manifold when it is on the same plane as the vertices
η5 = (0, 0, 0), η6 = (0, 1, 2) and η7 = (2, 2, 2). A normal vector to the plane is then
w = (2, −4, 2). For the vertex η2 to lie on the plane through the three vertices it must
satisfy the equation w⊤(η1 −η2) = 0, which gives us β = 3. Thus the structure of the
critical manifold is preserved only if β < 3. In summary, we only consider the domain
of parameter space bounded by α < 3, β < 3 and γ < 5, where the condition for α was
determined in the previous section.
74
==PAGE:82==
5.2.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL BIFURCATION MANIFOLDS
5.2.1
A Saddle-Node Bifurcation on an Invariant Circle
Figure 5.7 shows a saddle-node bifurcation on an invariant circle (SNIC), in the tropical
system at β = 1
2 when β is varied and α = γ = 1. This bifurcation is considered global,
even though the saddle-node is local, as it occurs on a global invariant structure. For all
β < 1
2 the system has a stable limit cycle, which we conclude from the observation that
decreasing β will only move the lower part of the tropical x-nullcline further down, so
it will not change the qualitative dynamics of the tropical system. At β = 1
2 the limit
cycle becomes an invariant circle with infinite period, which is then subsequently destroyed
when β is increased further. The invariant circle (either a limit cycle or separatrix cycle)
will persist in the perturbed system for all a = O(ω), c = O(ω) and ω suﬀiciently large
– as the tropical system is suﬀiciently generic – and the bifurcation will occur at some
b = O(√ω).
-3
-1
-0.5
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2.5
-2
-0.50
2
4
- = 0
-3
-1
-0.5
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
-0.50
2
4
- = 0.5
-3
-1
-0.5
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
-1.5
-0.50
2
4
- = 1
Figure 5.7: Tropical vector fields of (5.3) at a saddle-node bifurcation on a limit cycle.
5.2.2
A Degenerate Homoclinic SNIC
To get a more complete picture of the global bifurcations we again consider the case
α = β = γ = 0, and vary each of the parameters individually. This is shown in Figure 5.8.
We notice that varying α will only change the position of the saddle, while varying either β
or γ will create a saddle-node bifurcation, which is a SNIC in the tropical system, or more
specifically a heteroclinic SNIC. However, now the system is not suﬀiciently generic, as
small perturbations will break the orbits and the SNIC is not guaranteed to persist in the
perturbed system. That being said, the perturbed system will either have a heteroclinic
SNIC, homoclinic SNIC, heteroclinic bifurcation or homoclinic bifurcation for β = 0 or
γ = 0. when the lower edges of the tropical x-nullcline intersect SB. Both the saddle and
the stable node are affected by β, while γ only affects the stable node.
75
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
-3
-1
-0.67
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
1
1.33
2
4
, = -1
-3
-1 -0.33
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
0.67
2
4
, = 0
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
2
4
, = 1
-3
-1 -0.33
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
0.67
2
4
- = -1
-3
-1 -0.33
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
0.67
2
4
- = 0
-3
-2
-1
-0.33
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0.67
2
4
- = 1
-3
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.33
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
-1.5
-0.5
0.67
2
4
. = -1
-3
-1 -0.33
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
0.67
2
4
. = 0
-3
-1
-0.5
-0.33
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2.5
-2
0.5
0.67
2
4
. = 1
Figure 5.8: Qualitatively different tropical vector fields of system (5.3) around the point
(α, β, γ) = (0, 0, 0).
Proposition 5.3. The tropicalization of system (5.3) has a saddle-node bifurcation on SB
at
γ = max
n
2 α −4, min{2 β, β + 2}
o
,
and the equilibria exist below this value. The saddle and the node are located at pB
s and
pB
n , respectively, and are given by
pB
s =

max{β −1, α −3}, −2

,
pB
n =
 min{γ −β −1, γ −α + 1}, −2

.
Moreover, the tropical system has a homoclinic bifurcation at β = 0 for all γ < 0.
Proof. When the lower edges of the tropical x-nullcline intersect SB, the saddle and the
node will be located at pB
s = (β −1, −2) and pB
n = (γ −β −1, −2), respectively. The
equilibria at these positions exist only when the first coordinate of the stable node is less
than the first coordinate of the saddle. Thus we obtain the necessary condition γ < 2 β
for their existence when the lower edges of the tropical x-nullcline intersect SB, and the
saddle-node bifurcation occurs when there is equality. However, we need to consider the
possibility that the structure of the tropical x-nullcline changes, i.e. a flip occurs in the
subdivision of the x-equation. At the flip the difference between two normal vectors of
76
==PAGE:84==
5.2.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL BIFURCATION MANIFOLDS
the planes spanned by the vertices in the lifted subdivision will vanish, thus we obtain the
condition γ > α + β −2 for the saddle-node bifurcation to occur on SB.
The upper edges of the tropical x-nullcline can also intersect SB, and in this case we
have pB
s = (α −3, −2) and pB
n = (γ −α + 1, −2). They are destroyed in a saddle-node
bifurcation when γ = 2 α −4, and they exist for γ below the bifurcation point. Thus we
have determined the piecewise-linear expressions of the locations of the equilibria when
they exist. The first coordinate of both the saddle and the node are given by their first
arguments when β ≥α −2. We also need to consider that they can leave SB through the
jump point at (1, −2). Thus we obtain the necessary condition max{β −2, α −4} < 0 for
the saddle, and min{γ−β−2, γ−α} < 0 for the node to be on SB. When the saddle leaves
SB it will move to SM at β = 2 for β > α −2, which is not associated with a bifurcation,
but when β < α−2 it will leave at α = 4 together with the unstable node in a saddle-node
bifurcation, which is however outside the region of consideration. Conversely, when the
stable node leaves there occurs a saddle-node bifurcation at γ = β +2 for β > α−2, while
it moves to SM at γ = α when β < α −2.
We can thus summarize that a saddle-node bifurcation occurs on SB when γ > α+β −2
and
1. γ = 2 β for β > α −2 and β < 2.
2. γ = β + 2 for β > α −2 and β > 2.
3. γ = 2 α −4 for β < α −2.
The first two expressions for γ can be collected to a single piecewise-linear condition
being the minimum of the two expressions, and it is easy to show that the last expression
for γ will be larger than this minimum for β < α −2 and smaller otherwise. We now
turn our attention to the homoclinic bifurcation. For the saddle at pB
s to be part of a
separatrix cycle (either as a homoclinic orbit or as two heteroclinic orbits), it must have
first coordinate u = −1, whereby we get the necessary condition β = 0 when β > α −2
and α = 2 otherwise. This concludes the proof.
■
We can use this result to sketch a bifurcation diagram in the (β, γ)-plane for some values
of α, currently unspecified. The bifurcation diagram is shown in Figure 5.9. The origin is a
codimension-2 bifurcation point which is the intersection homoclinic bifurcation (Hom), a
saddle-node bifurcation (SN), and a saddle-node bifurcation on an invariant circle (SNIC).
The limit cycle exists to the left of the curves for the homoclinic bifurcation and the
SNIC. This is however only for some plane through the parameter space, as we have not
considered the cases where the limit cycle is destroyed by a bifurcation on ST . This will
be the subject of the following section.
77
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
51V(d
HOM
Figure 5.9: Bifurcation diagram of the tropicalization of system (5.3) in the (β, γ)-plane.
5.2.3
A Saddle-Node Bifurcation on Canard Cycles
In Figure 5.10 we again vary the parameters individually, but this time around the point
(α, β, γ) = (0, 1, 2), which is the case in the vector fields in the middle column of the
figure. Here, the unstable equilibrium will become stable when varying either α or γ, and
a canard explosion occurs. Thus we notice that it is possible for the system to have a
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
2
4
, = -1
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
1
2
4
, = 0
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
2
4
, = 1
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
1
2
4
- = 0
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
1
2
4
- = 1
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
4
- = 2
-3
-1
-0.5
-0.33
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
-1.5
0.5
0.67
2
4
. = 1
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
1
2
4
. = 2
-3
-1
0
0.5
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2.5
-2
-1
1.52
4
. = 3
Figure 5.10: Qualitatively different tropical vector fields of system (5.3) around the point
(α, β, γ) = (0, 1, 2).
78
==PAGE:86==
5.2.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL BIFURCATION MANIFOLDS
canard explosion which is destroyed prematurely in a SNIC or a homoclinic bifurcation.
However, it is also possible for the system to have another saddle-node – this time on ST
– which can occur at the same time as the one on SB, as seen when (α, β, γ) = (−1, 1, 2).
Proposition 5.4. The tropicalization of system (5.3) has the bifurcation diagram shown
in Figure 5.11 when β is small.
Proof. We use Proposition 5.3 and continue the analysis by determining the positions of
the equilibria on ST and the conditions for their existence. Similar to the system (5.2) in a
previous section we again have that the intersection of the upper-right edge of the tropical
x-nullcline with ST can have a saddle located at pT
s = (α + 1, 2), and the upper-left edge
can have a stable node located at pT
n = (γ −α −3, 2).
However, we also need to consider if the bottom-left edge and right edges of the tropical
x-nullcline can intersect ST . In that case of the lower right edge, the position of pT
s would
be given by (β−5, 2), which can only occur if β > 4 (as the first coordinate should be larger
than −1), and this is outside the region of consideration. We notice from the geometry of
the tropical nullclines that it is not possible for the lower left edge to intersect ST without
the lower right one intersecting it, thus we can disregard both these cases.
Now we consider the stable node. It changes stability when it intersects the jump point
on the upper-most attracting critical manifold, which gives us the necessary condition
γ > α+2 for the node to be on the attracting critical manifold. A saddle-node bifurcation
occurs when the first coordinates of the saddle at pT
s and the node at pT
n are equal, which
gives us the necessary condition γ < 2 α + 4 for the existence of the equilibria and the
Figure 5.11: Bifurcation diagram of the tropicalization of system (5.3) in the (α, γ)-plane
for a small β.
79
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
saddle-node bifurcation occurs when there is equality.
When the node is unstable the position is given by the intersection of the edge of the
tropical x-nullcline with direction (−1, 1) or (1, 1), whereby we get two possible positions,
either pM
n =

α −γ + 1, −2 (α −γ + 1)

, or pM
n =

1
3 (α −1), −2
3 (α −1)

. We notice
the position of the unstable node is always given by the minimum of the two. The change
between the two positions is when they are equal, i.e. the first expression is attained when
γ > 2
3 (α + 2), and the other when the inequality is reversed. The unstable node will
change stability when it intersects one of the jump points, and thus it is unstable for
−1 < min{α −γ + 1, 1
3 (α −1)} < 1. Thus we get two curves for the Hopf bifurcation, and
the rest of the bifurcations can be analyzed in a similar manner as in Proposition 5.3.
■
5.2.4
A Three-Dimensional Bifurcation Diagram
Using the analysis from the previous sections all the bifurcation manifolds of the tropical
system in the three-dimensional parameter space are shown in Figure 5.12, where the
types of the bifurcation manifolds are shown in the legend below the figure. Moreover,
Figure 5.13 shows the bifurcation manifolds enclosing the region in parameter space where
the limit cycle exists. More specifically it exists between the blue, light green, dark green
and yellow surfaces.
The blue and light green surfaces intersect for α < 0, which we
have showed by the magenta surface, where the canard cycles that are destroyed before
reaching full size exist. This is also the case for the dark blue surface. The purple surface
is where there is a saddle-node bifurcation simultaneous with a Hopf bifurcation, where it
Figure 5.12: Codimension-1 bifurcation manifolds of the tropicalization of system (5.3) in
the region α < 3, β < 3 and γ < 5, viewed from different angles.
80
==PAGE:88==
5.2.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL BIFURCATION MANIFOLDS
Figure 5.13: Bifurcation manifolds enclosing the region where the tropical limit cycle
exists (light green, dark green, yellow and blue), and the surfaces where there are canard
cycles that get created and destroyed immediately for ω →∞(dark purple, magenta, and
possibly purple), viewed from different angles. The type of the bifurcation manifolds are
shown in the legend of Figure 5.12. The boundaries and surfaces extend for β, γ →−∞.
is not clear what occurs. The yellow surface in this figure is the SNIC, while in the before-
mentioned figure the yellow surface was the bifurcation manifold all cases of a saddle-node
bifurcation on the lower manifold, including the SNIC.
By considering all intersection between the codimension-1 bifurcation surfaces we can
determine the codimension-2 curves and the codimension-3 points. These are shown in
Figure 5.14, where the types of the bifurcation curves are shown in the legend below. We
notice that each codimension-3 points have five bifurcation curves branching out of it. The
tropical vector fields of the three codimension-3 points are shown in Figure 5.15.
At the point (0, 0, 0) the degenerate heteroclinic SNIC occurs, i.e. it is possible for the
system to have a heteroclinic separatrix cycle between a saddle and a saddle-node. From
this point five codimension-2 bifurcation curves branch out. The tropical vector fields of
these are shown in the top row of Figure 5.16, and the bottom one in the first column.
The codim-3 point is also the intersection between five of the bifurcation surfaces, namely
the saddle-node on SB, both homoclinics and both heteroclinic saddle connections. Each
homoclinic can be continued to a heteroclinic saddle-connection, as the difference is only
whether or not the limit cycle exists, as for both cases the unstable manifold is connected
to the stable manifold of either itself or the other saddle through the jump points.
At the codimension-3 point (0, 1, 2) it is possible for the system to have a canard sep-
aratrix cycle between a saddle and a saddle-node. From this point there are also five
codimension-2 bifurcation curves branching out, whose tropical vector fields are shown in
the middle row of Figure 5.16, and the top one in the first column.
81
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
At the codimension-3 point (−2, 0, 0) we have the degenerate case of a saddle-node
and a Hopf bifurcation occurring in the same point, and thus it is diﬀicult to determine
what occurs. This would require considering the next terms in the Puiseux series of the
parameters a, b and c. From this point there are also five codimension-2 bifurcation curves
branching out, whose tropical vector fields are shown in the middle row of Figure 5.16,
and the top one in the first column.
Figure 5.14: Codimension-3 bifurcation points (black) of the tropicalization of system
(5.3), and their twelve codimension-2 bifurcation curves.
-3
-1
-0.33
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
0.67
2
4
 (0, 0, 0)
-3
-1
0
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
0
1
2
4
 (0, 1, 2)
-3
-1
1
2
3
-4
-3
-2
2
4
 (-2, 0, 0)
Figure 5.15: The three codimension-3 bifurcations. Left: Degenerate heteroclinic SNIC.
Middle: SNIC and homoclinic in canard explosion. Right: Saddle-center to saddle-node
connection.
82
==PAGE:90==
5.3.
BIFURCATIONS DEPENDENT ON INITIAL COEFFICIENTS
(0, 0.5, 1)
(0, 0, -1)
(1, 0, 0)
(0, -1, -2)
(-1, 0.5, 1)
(1, 1.5, 3)
(0, 2, 2)
(0, 0, 2)
(-1, 0, 0)
(-2, 0, -1)
(-2, -1, -2)
(-1, 1, 2)
Figure 5.16: Tropical vector fields at the twelve codimension-2 bifurcations of system (5.3).
The order from left to right is the same as in the legend of Figure 5.14. The vector fields
in the first column are the three line segments in the bifurcation diagram, and the rest in
each row correspond to the rays of one codim-3 point.
5.3
Bifurcations Dependent on Initial Coeﬀicients
We now construct a system with a mixed flow vector, which is shown in Figure 5.17. A
system corresponding to these labelled subdivisions is given by
˙x = x (ω x y + a x3 y −x2 y3) ,
(5.4)
˙y = y (−1 + x y−1 + b x3 y) ,
where a ∼δ ωα and b ∼σ ωβ are our bifurcation parameters. At first we consider the case
σ = 1, β = 0.
Proposition 5.5. System (5.4) with σ = 1, β = 0 has a saddle-bifurcation of limit cycles
at some point a ∼7
5, where the limit cycles exist for the parameter a larger than this
value, for ω suﬀiciently large. The stable limit cycle increases to infinite amplitude and
period whereby it is destroyed in a heteroclinic bifurcation at a ∼2, by the creation of a
saddle-node at infinity. The unstable limit cycle is destroyed in a canard explosion at some
point a = O
 ω
7
5 
.
The proof of this will be the subject of the following sections. In the end of the sections
we will also consider σ and β as parameters to follow the bifurcation points in the parameter
space.
83
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
-4
-3
-0.5
-0.20
0.5
2
-2
-0.5
0
0.25
0.6
2
3
0
1
2
3
-1
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
-1
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
-1
0
1
2
3
Figure 5.17: Tropical vector field of system (5.4) and its labelled subdivisions.
5.3.1
Saddle-Node Bifurcation of Limit Cycles
In Figure 5.18 we have shown the qualitatively different tropical vector fields for all α ≤7
5,
as it is easy to see that there are no flips of the subdivision of the system for α < 0.
For α = 0 the flow vector in the domain of monomial (3, 1) is mixed, and it is given by
d = (δ, 1). For α > 0 the flow is in the positive u-direction, and the system has a unstable
limit cycle for 0 < α < 7
5. At α = 7
5 the unstable limit cycle is destroyed in a canard
explosion.
-3.5
-3
-0.5
-0.20
0.5
1
2
-2
-0.5
0
0.25
0.6
2
2.5
, = -1
-3.5
-3
-0.5
-0.20
0.5
2
-2
-0.5
0
0.25
0.6
2
2.5
, = 0
-3.5
-3
-0.5
-0.20
0.25
2
-2
-0.5
0
0.37
0.6
2
2.5
, = 0.5
-3.5
-3
-0.5
-0.20
2
-2
-0.5
0
0.6
2
2.5
, = 1.4
Figure 5.18: Qualitatively different tropical vector fields of system (5.4) for all α ≤7
5.
In Figure 5.19 we have shown all qualitatively different tropical vector fields for α ≥7
5
(top row), and the dual labelled subdivisions. The only flips of the subdivision for α > 7
5
is the edge-flip at α = 2 and the disappearance of the domain of monomial (1, 1) at α = 7.
It is easy to see that none of these flips change the dynamics of the system, and increasing
α further will not change the qualitative dynamics.
Now, we can observe that when α = 0 and the flow vector is mixed, the unstable
manifold of the saddle at the origin will hit the attracting critical manifold with the stable
equilibrium at increasingly higher values of v when increasing δ, until at some point it
will intersect the vertex at the endpoint of the critical point. This situation is shown
in Figure 5.20. In the left phase portrait we see that the unstable manifold (green) will
intersect itself in the tropical sense, after having moved up to the vertex and then down
the repelling sliding manifold, leaving it at increasingly lower values of v, and even moving
around the critical manifold again. It then moves up to the endpoint again, whereby now
the trajectory has nowhere to go, as it has trapped itself, thereby creating a semi-stable
84
==PAGE:92==
5.3.
BIFURCATIONS DEPENDENT ON INITIAL COEFFICIENTS
-4
-3
-0.5
-0.20
1
-4
-0.5
0
0.6
2
4
, = 1.4
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
4
-4
-3
-0.5
-0.290
1
-4
-0.5
0
0.75
0.86
2
4
, = 2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
4
-4
-3
-1.5
-1
-0.57
0
1
-4
-1.5
-1
0
0.5
1.25
1.712
4
, = 4
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
4
-4
-3
-1.75
-1
0
1
-4
-3
-1.75
0
2
3
4
, = 7
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.19: Qualitatively different tropical vector fields of system (5.4) for all α ≥7
5.
cycle (middle), which quickly separates, whereby the stable limit cycle (green) grows in one
part of the phase space, in the same manner as a canard cycle. In fact all periodic orbits
will in this case be canard cycles, by our definition of the term. Afterwards (right), the
size of the unstable limit cycle (magenta) decreases slightly when increasing δ, while the
stable limit cycle increases in size very quickly. The corresponding global phase portraits
of the perturbed system are sketched in Figure 5.21.
We will now determine the exact values of δ where the bifurcation occurs. We let ˆηk be
the exponent vectors of the lifted support for k = 1, . . . , 6. i.e. we have
ˆη1 = (1, 1, 1) ,
ˆη2 = (3, 1, α) ,
ˆη3 = (2, 3, 0) ,
ˆη4 = (0, 0, 0) ,
ˆη5 = (1, −1, 0) ,
ˆη6 = (3, 1, β) ,
where α = β = 0 in this case, however we will do the computations for all values of α, δ
and σ. We want the trajectory from the the vertex where the unstable manifold leaves
to hit the vertex at the endpoint of the attracting critical manifold. The position of the
first point is given by p125 =

1
2 (1 −α), −1
2

, while the position of the second is given
Figure 5.20: Tropical phase portraits of the saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles.
85
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
Figure 5.21: Global phase portrait of system (5.4) for ω suﬀiciently large, corresponding
to the tropical phase portraits in Figure 5.20.
by p134 = (−3, 2). We determine the transition map T523 from the crossing manifold E25,
to E23, as well as the transition map T234, from E23 to E34. The point on E34 where the
trajectory from p125 hits is given by
T234 ◦T523(p125) =
(3 α + 3) σ + 3 δ
4 δ −8 σ
, (−1 −α) σ −δ
2 δ −4 σ

.
Solving the equation T234 ◦T523(p125) = p134 we get
δ
σ = 7 −a
5
.
For α = 0 and σ = 1 we have δ = 7
5. Thus the saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles
occurs at a ∼7
5 for all ω suﬀiciently large.
5.3.2
Heteroclinic Saddle-Node Bifurcation at Infinity
Figure 5.22 (left) shows the tropical phase portraits of system (5.4) when increasing δ
beyond the value of the saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles. Increasing δ will increase
the size of the stable limit cycle until it becomes infinitely large as the flow vector becomes
parallel to the switching manifold, whereby the switching manifold becomes a sliding
manifold. This occurs when δ
σ = 2, and at that point a saddle-node bifurcation at infinity
is created which then forms a separatrix cycle with the two saddles, and the limit cycle
is destroyed as the unstable manifold of the saddle forms a heteroclinic orbit with the
saddle-node.
Increasing δ further will not change the qualitative dynamics, however, when increasing
α the unstable node will move down the attracting critical manifold until it hits the
endpoint where it changes stability. This shows the last fate of the unstable limit cycle,
which is destroyed at a = O
 ω
7
5 
. Thus it outlives its stable counterpart, which only
existed in the very narrow band of
7
5 < a < 2 for ω →∞.
Figure 5.23 shows the
corresponding global phase portraits of the perturbed system for ω suﬀiciently large.
86
==PAGE:94==
5.3.
BIFURCATIONS DEPENDENT ON INITIAL COEFFICIENTS
Figure 5.22: Tropical phase portraits of system (5.4) at a heteroclinic bifurcation at the
creation of a saddle-node at infinity (left and middle), and the destruction of the unstable
limit cycle at a canard explosions (right).
Figure 5.23: Global phase portrait of system (5.4) for ω suﬀiciently large, corresponding
to the tropical phase portraits in Figure 5.22.
5.3.3
Determining Two-Parameter Bifurcation Diagrams
Now we let β = α, i.e. a and b are of the same order, and let σ be a parameter. Figure 5.24
shows the qualitatively different vector fields for the system when the flow of monomial
(3, 1) is mixed, whereby we notice that we cannot connect the unstable manifold of the
saddle to the vertex at the endpoint for α < −3. This is also the case at some point in the
interval 2 < α < 7 as the vertex at p125 moves downwards and then the flow vector has
to be vertical at some point, and even increase its angle counter-clockwise, whereby we
would have δ ≤0. This breaks the assumption of α = β, and δ > 0, which would require
further analysis.
We analysis the situation as before, and determine the trajectory from p245 to the vertex
at p134, where p245 =
 −1
4 α, −1
4 α

. As the switching manifolds are the same we can use
the same transition maps as before. Thus we have
T234 ◦T523(p245) =
3 a (δ + 3 σ)
8 δ −16 σ , a (δ + 3 σ)
8 σ −4 δ

.
87
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 5.
GLOBAL TROPICAL BIFURCATIONS
-4.5
-3
-0.5
0.33
1.25
2
3
3.33
7
-1
-0.83
-0.5
0.33
1.25
2
3
, = -5
-4.5
-3
-0.5
0.33
0.75
2
6
-0.5
0.33
0.75
2
3
, = -3
-4.5
-3
-0.5
-0.20
0.5
4.5
-2.5
-0.5
0
0.25
0.6
2
3
, = 0
-4.5
-3
-1
-0.5
3.5
-2.75
-0.5
0.751
2
3
, = 2
-4.5
-3
-1.4
-1
-0.75
3
-1
-0.75
0
1
1.2
2
3
, = 3
-4.5
-3
-1.75
1
-3
-1.75
2
3
, = 7
Figure 5.24: Qualitatively different tropical vector fields of (5.4) for β = α.
Solving the equation T234 ◦T523(p245) = p134 we get
δ
σ = 16 −3 α
8 + α
.
The break down of the assumptions occurs when δ = 0, which occurs when α = 16
3 . We
use the expression from before to determine the bifurcation curve for all α, whereby we
have
δ
σ = min
7 −α
5
, 16 −3 α
8 + α

.
In Figure 5.25 we show the bifurcation diagrams with the ratio between the initial co-
eﬀicients of a and b (right) and its reciprocal (left) depending on their initial exponent
α. Notice that the saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles is given by a piecewise-smooth
-3
0
2
16/3
,
0
1
2
//<
-3
0
2
16/3
,
0
1/2
4
<//
Figure 5.25: Bifurcation diagram of the tropicalization of system (5.4). Red: Saddle-node
bifurcation of limit cycles. Blue: Heterclinic saddle-node at infinity.
88
==PAGE:96==
5.3.
BIFURCATIONS DEPENDENT ON INITIAL COEFFICIENTS
function, which this time is not linear, but a ratio of linear expressions in α. Recall that
the assumptions break down at δ = 0, which is shown as a broken line in the right figure.
The stable limit cycle exists for all values between the red, blue and black (broken) curve,
i.e. when
δ
σ > min
7 −α
5
, 16 −3 α
8 + α

and
0 < δ
σ < 2 .
Thus we have seen that we can determine the existence of a limit cycle as a relation
between the ratio of the initial coeﬀicients and the mutual initial exponent of two parame-
ters. We can conclude that the unstable limit cycle exists for 7
5 < α < 7 when a and b are
of the same order, while it exists for α < 7
5 when the order of a is larger than the order of
b, for ω suﬀiciently large.
89
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 6
Tropical Chaos
In [22, section 14.8] Kuehn constructs a chaotic slow-fast system similar to the Lorenz-
attractor. In the present chapter we will show how a chaotic perturbed system can be
constructed using the tropical approach.
6.1
Construction of a Tropical Rössler-Type Attractor
Chaos is characterized by stretching, folding and reinjection. This is the principle behind
chaotic maps such as Smale’s horseshoe map. Arguably, the simplest system of differential
equations exhibiting chaotic behavior is the Rössler system. In his 1977 paper [34] Rössler
showed a paper model of his attractor. Inspired by this we choose the support of the
system to be such that the structure of the switching manifolds can resemble this paper
model.
Thus we need an unstable equilibrium on a critical manifold, more specifically, a saddle-
focus. In the tropical system foci are not very easy to work with so we rather choose the
equilibrium to be an unstable node with crossing manifolds around it similar to the systems
considered in section 4.2.4. This creates similar behavior as a saddle-focus. We therefore
consider the following two-dimensional vector field, embedded in three dimensions.
f1(u) =


0
−1
0

ωv +


ω−1
2
0
0

ω2 u +


−ω−1
0
0

ωu+2 v +


0
ω−2
0

ω3 u+v .
(6.1)
The labelled subdivision of this system is shown in Figure 6.1 (left). We notice that it will
have crossing manifolds which will push trajectories away from the unstable node.
The second system we will construct essentially consists of a sliding cycle when projected
onto the (u, w)-plane. This can be seen from the labelled subdivision in Figure 6.1 (right),
which is essentially the same as in Figure 4.15, by replacing a flow vector with another
to get an attracting critical manifold, rather than one with tangential sliding. A system
90
==PAGE:98==
6.1.
CONSTRUCTION OF A TROPICAL RÖSSLER-TYPE ATTRACTOR
0
1
2
3
n
0
1
2
m
2
3
4
n
-1
0
1
2
l
Figure 6.1: Labelled subdivisions of systems (6.1) and (6.2) in the order left to right.
with this labelled subdivision is given by
f2(u) =


0
0
1

ω2 u+v−w +


0
0
−ω2

ω2 u+v +


0
0
ω−2

ω4 u+3 v+w +


−1
−σ
−ρ

ω3 u+2 v+2 w .
(6.2)
Adding these two systems the full system is then given by
ln(ω) ˙u = f1(u) + f2(u) ,
(6.3)
which, in the original coordinates, corresponds to a system given by
˙x =


x

ω−1
2 x2 −ω−1 x y2 −x3 y2 z2
y
 −y + ω−2 x3 y −b x3 y2 z2
z
 x2 y z−1 −ω2 x2 y + ω−2 x4 y3 z −c x3 y2 z2

,
where b ∼σ, c ∼ρ and ω ≫1. The Newton polygons of the full system – and each
direction separately – are shown in Figure 6.2.
-1
0
1
3
2
l
2
m
1
n
0
4
3
2
1
0
-1
0
3
1
l
2
2
m
1
n
0
4
3
2
1
0
-1
0
3
1
2
2
1
n
0
4
3
2
1
0
-1
0
3
1
2
2
1
n
0
4
3
2
1
0
Figure 6.2: The Newton polygons of system (6.3) and for each direction independently.
The magenta point denote the mixed initial flow vector.
91
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 6.
TROPICAL CHAOS
6.2
Structure of the Chaotic Attractor
In Figure 6.3 we see the tropical vector field (top) with a simulation of a trajectory (bot-
tom). The yellow faces are the critical manifolds, while the green (magenta) faces are the
attracting (repelling) sliding manifolds, respectively. Blue, red and green arrows denote
flow in the x, y and z direction, respectively, while magenta denotes a mixed vector. We
notice that the simulated attractor behaves very similar to what we would expect from
the structure of the tropical system. Figure 6.4 shows the tropical vector field and the
simulated attractor viewed from the positive w-axis. We notice that the trajectories that
move out from the attracting critical manifold are reinjected onto the critical manifold
at another location, which is given by a translation of the line segment from where the
trajectories ”jump” out.
-2.5
-2
3.5
0
0.25
0.5
3
2.5
w
2.75
3.5
2
v
-1
4.5
4
u
-2
-2.5
-3
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
(a) The tropical vector field of (6.3).
3.5
3
2.5
2
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
v
0
-0.5
0.25
0.5
w
0
u
2.75
-1
3.5
-2
-2.5
4
-3
4.5
(b) A simulated attractor on the tropical vector field.
Figure 6.3: The tropical vector field with and without a simulated chaotic attractor for
σ = 0, ρ = 1 and ω = 100.
92
==PAGE:100==
6.3.
TROPICAL RETURN MAPS
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
4
4.5
u
-3
-2.5
-2
-1
2
2.5
3
3.5
v
Figure 6.4: The simulated chaotic attractor for σ = 0 and ρ = 1 on the tropical vector
field, viewed from above.
6.3
Tropical Return Maps
We now analyze the tropical system by determining transition maps and return maps for
trajectories. In Figure 6.5 we have labelled each domain by its index as we use these for the
maps. The return maps are constructed by composing several transition maps, where we
let ◦denote composition. We let Tjk
S denote the map between the domains in a sequence
S reduced to the switching manifold Ejk.
Figure 6.5: Tropical structure with labelled domains.
93
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 6.
TROPICAL CHAOS
We seek to determine a Poincaré map H with Poincaré-section through the crossing
manifold E56
24 of the reduced flow onto the attracting critical manifold. We consider the
u-variable for the domain of the map, the others variables are then given by v = 3
2 −u
and w = −2. The endpoints of the crossing manifold are
p56
234 =
  5
6, 2
3, −2

and
p2456 =
 4, −5
2, −2

.
Thus the domain of H is u ∈
5
6, 4

. The sequence of domains traversed by trajectories
close to the saddle-focus is the cyclic sequence C1 = (2, 4, 3, 1, 2)56. The return map for
this sequence is given by
T56
C = T56
124 ◦T56
312 ◦T56
431 ◦T56
243 .
The one-dimensional map from the Poincaré section to itself with respect to the u-variable
is given by
T 56
C (u) = 4 u −2 .
This is the expression of H in the interval u ∈
5
6, 4
3

, where the maximum is the u-
coordinate of T56
34(p56
347), with p56
347 =
  4
3, 5
3, −2

. We notice that the return point of the
minimum of the domain is exactly the maximum, i.e. we also have
T 56
C
5
6

= 4
3 .
This is however a coincidence by the choice of initial exponents. The trajectory from p56
234
intersecting the Poincaré section twice is shown in Figure 6.6.
The points on the red
broken line segment are mapped by T56
C , while the points on the blue broken line segment
are reinjected.
Figure 6.6: A trajectory of the tropical system (unbroken red), and two pieces of the
Poincaré section (broken red and blue), where the Poincaré map is defined by two different
linear expressions of u.
94
==PAGE:102==
6.3.
TROPICAL RETURN MAPS
6.3.1
Reinjection and a Shilnikov Bifurcation
We now consider the map of the reinjection.
This is described by the closed crossing
sequence I = (2, 4, 7)56 ∪(5, 7, 8, 6), and thus the map is given by
TI = T865 ◦T786 ◦T578 ◦T56
247 .
The u-coordinate of this map – applied to points in the Poincaré section – is given by
TI(u) = u −
3
1 + 2 ρ + σ .
The equation of the reinjected line segment is given by
v + u −
6 ρ
1 + 2 ρ + σ = 0 .
The map applied to the endpoints of the Poincaré section gives
TI(p56
234) =
−5 + 4 σ + 8 ρ
3 + 3 σ + 6 ρ , 5 −4 σ + 10 ρ
3 + 3 σ + 6 ρ , −2

,
TI(p2456) =
1 + 4 σ + 8 ρ
1 + σ + 2 ρ , −1 −4 σ −2 ρ
1 + σ + 2 ρ
, −2

,
This line segment is shown in Figure 6.7(a) for σ = 0 and different values of ρ. For
this value of σ the v-coordinate of the endpoints of the line segment will be constant, and
thus changing ρ will only translate the line segment in the direction of u. However this
is not generally the case, and the translation is not even linear, although it is a ratio of
linear expressions. At ρ = 1 one of the crossing manifolds will become a tangential sliding
manifold, and then a transversal sliding manifold for ρ > 1. For all ρ ≥1 the reinjected
line will be identical. Figure 6.7(b) shows the line segment for ρ = 1
3 and different values
of σ.
From Figure 6.7(a) we notice that at some value of ρ the line segment has to intersect
the equilibrium, whereby the system will have a homoclinic orbit from a saddle-focus to
(a) σ = 0 and ρ ∈{0, 1
4, 2
4, 3
4, 1}.
(b) ρ = 1
3 and σ ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, 4}.
Figure 6.7: E56
24 mapped by TI onto E56 (blue) for one of the parameters fixed.
95
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 6.
TROPICAL CHAOS
itself, i.e. a Shilnikov bifurcation occurs (see chapter 1 where we introduced the Shilnikov
bifurcation and its significance). We are guaranteed that this homoclinic orbit exists for
some value of ρ for ω suﬀiciently small, whereby we can conclude that the perturbed
system does indeed have a chaotic attractor in the mathematically rigorous sense, at least
for the values where there is a homoclinic orbit.
The homoclinic orbit is shown in Figure 6.8 as a green trajectory. We now determine
the exact bifurcation point where the tropical system has a homoclinic orbit. We simply
need to determine the parameter values where the equilibrium intersects the reinjected
line segment, i.e. we need to solve the equation
TI(u) = p56
1234 ,
where p56
1234 =
  2
3, 7
12, −2

. The solution is
ρHom = 5
14 (σ + 1) ,
uHom = 8 σ + 29
12 (σ + 1) .
In the figure we have σ = 0 whereby ρHom =
5
14. The equilibrium has to be between the
endpoints of the reinjected line segment, whereby we get the condition −19
40 < σ < 13
8 .
Figure 6.8: Homoclinic orbit (green) at ρ = 5
14 when σ = 0.
6.3.2
A Boundary Crisis Bifurcation
We notice that when changing σ then at some point the trajectories will be reinjected onto
themselves, thereby creating limit cycles. This is shown in Figure 6.9, where the reinjected
line segment is shown as a broken red line segment between the line segments when σ = 1
and σ = 2. As this is the case for all trajectories that become reinjected then a cylinder
of periodic solutions is created in the tropical system. This is similar to tropical canard
96
==PAGE:104==
6.3.
TROPICAL RETURN MAPS
cycles, which for planar systems fill out an area, and thus the cylinder will not exist in
the perturbed system, except perhaps in case the system is Hamiltonian.
As the attractor intersects its own boundary this could be classified as a boundary crisis
bifurcation, which are known to occur in chaotic systems. We notice that if σ is increased
further the trajectory at the boundary will move away from the equilibrium, whereby the
attractor is destroyed. We now determine the exact bifurcation point of the boundary
crisis in the tropical system.
For the trajectory at the boundary of the attractor to intersect itself the reinjected point
must be on the trajectory from p56
347 to the Poincaré section. In this case the trajectory
is parallel to the u-axis, whereby we simply need to equate the v-coordinates of TC(p56
347)
and TI applied to this expression. We have
TC(p56
347) =
10
3 , −11
6 , −2

,
and
TI ◦TC(p56
347) =
1 + 10 σ + 20 ρ
3 + 3 σ + 6 ρ , −1 −10 σ −2 ρ
3 + 3 σ + 6 ρ , −2

,
and thus the boundary crisis occurs when
1 + 10 σ + 2 ρ
3 + 3 σ + 6 ρ = 11
6 ,
which is equivalent to
σBC = 1 + 2 ρ .
For the case shown in the figure we have σBC = 5
3.
Figure 6.9: Boundary crisis at σ = 5
3 when ρ = 1
3.
97
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 6.
TROPICAL CHAOS
6.3.3
The Piecewise-Linear Poincaré Map
We now show how to determine the full Poincaré map of the Poincaré section. The one-
dimensional Poincaré map H is the u-coordinate of the three-dimensional map H : E
56
24 →E
56
24,
given by
H(u) =



TC(u)
u ≤4
3
H56 ◦TI(u)
u ≥4
3
,
where H56 : E
56 →E
56 is a piecewise-linear flow map. Note that u ≤4
3 is equivalent to
u −p56
234
 ≤
T56
34(p56
347) −p56
234
 .
The piecewise-linear map H56 is determined based on which domain the point u is rein-
jected to, i.e. we have
H56(u) =















Φ56
24(u)
u ∈R2
T56
124 ◦Φ56
12(u)
u ∈R1
T56
124 ◦T56
312 ◦Φ56
31(u)
u ∈R3
H4(u)
u ∈R4
,
where H4 is a recursive map given by
H4(u) =



T124 ◦T312 ◦T431 ◦Φ56
43(u)
u ≤4
3
H4 ◦Φ56
47(u)
u ≥4
3
.
Notice the recursive argument in H4 when u ≥4
3. This is because now the reinjected
line segment is in the positive direction of the flow, whereby we have to reinject a certain
number of times before getting out, which occurs when u ≤4
3.
In figure 6.10 we have shown the piecewise-linear Poincaré map arising from the tropical
system for σ = 0 and ρ = 1
3. The Poincaré map is in this case given by
H(u) =









4 u −2
5
6 ≤u ≤4
3
−2 u + 6
4
3 ≤u ≤29
12
u −3
2
29
12 ≤u ≤4
.
Here H56 has only two piecewise-linear expressions as the reinjected line is only included
in two domains, i.e. the closure of R3 (green) and R2 (blue). We notice that there is a
high degree of expansion in the map, i.e.
H′(u)
 ≥1 for all u in the domain, which is
characteristic of chaotic maps. There is also folding because of the unimodular shape.
Figure 6.11 shows the Poincaré map of the tropical system (unbroken black) together
with simulations of the Poincaré map of the perturbed system for increasing values of ω
(green, blue, red, respectively). The identity is shown as a broken black line. We notice
98
==PAGE:106==
6.3.
TROPICAL RETURN MAPS
that the simulated Poincaré maps approach the tropical one, although there is a significant
distance for the middle line segment, even for high values of ω. This is likely because this
line segment corresponds to reinjection into the closure of R3, whereafter there is a high
degree of expansion, and therefore sensitivity.
Moreover, trajectories close to crossing
manifolds tend to deviate more from the tropical trajectory than those close to sliding
manifolds, which could also be a factor.
Figure 6.10: Poincaré map of the tropical system for ρ = 1
3.
0
1
2
3
4
un
0
1
2
3
4
un+1
Figure 6.11: Poincaré map of the tropical system for ρ = 1
3 (black) together with numerical
computations of the Poincaré map of the perturbed system for ω ∈{10, 100, 1000}.
99
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 6.
TROPICAL CHAOS
6.4
Simulations and Bifurcation Diagrams
Now we show some simulations to demonstrate the analysis we have made, and make
some observations on the similarities and differences between the attractor of the tropical
system and the one of the perturbed system.
6.4.1
Period-Doubling Toward the Tropical Limit
In figure 6.12 we have shown bifurcation diagrams of the attractor for ρ = 1
3 and increasing
values of ω. They show the intersection points of a trajectory with the Poincaré section
after some time to remove the initial transient behavior. We notice period-doubling bifur-
cations occurring when ω is small, followed by chaotic intervals and intermittency. A large
intermittency interval occurs around ω ≈6.5, whereby the system becomes chaotic again
around ω ≈8, and stays chaotic afterwards, with small intervals of intermittency. We
notice that the chaotic behavior is very uniform for high values of ω, which we expected as
we approach the tropical system, however, still with some short intermittency intervals.
(a)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
!
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
u
(b)
Figure 6.12: Bifurcation diagrams for ρ = 1
3 and increasing values of ω.
100
==PAGE:108==
6.4.
SIMULATIONS AND BIFURCATION DIAGRAMS
6.4.2
Period Incrementing Toward the Boundary Crisis
Now we seek to understand what occurs on the route to the boundary crisis bifurcation.
Figure 6.13 shows the bifurcation diagram for ρ =
1
3 and varying σ.
Notice that the
intermittency intervals have increasing period, i.e. the period is incremented.
Period
incrementing bifurcations of one-dimensional maps are described in [13].
This occurs
because the number of times the trajectory is reinjected before going around the saddle-
focus increases. The simulated attractor close to one of these intermittency intervals is
shown in Figure 6.14. We notice that the chaotic attractor before the intermittency is
almost a solid cylinder.
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
<
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
u
Figure 6.13: Period increments in the intermittency regions ω = 100.
< = 1.92
< = 1.93
< = 1.94
Figure 6.14: Simulations around a region of intermittency for ω = 100.
In Figure 6.15 we have shown the bifurcation diagram when increasing σ further. We
notice numerical break down around σ ≈2.3. Here trajectories are too time-consuming to
compute for our choice of duration on the simulation. We notice that around σ ≈2.42 the
trajectories escape the attractor, which is where the boundary crisis occurs. Figure 6.16
shows trajectories close to the boundary crisis, where the attractor before the bifurcation is
101
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 6.
TROPICAL CHAOS
almost a solid cylinder, but it gets more separated further away from where attractor inter-
sects the boundary. This was expected from the analysis of the tropical system, although
the numerical value is slightly higher than the tropical one, as we found σBC = 5
3 ≈1.67.
However, it is less than a factor two from the numerical one, for our choice of ω = 100,
which is fairly small. If we increase ω we would expect that the numerical bifurcation
point would be closer to the tropical one.
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
<
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
u
Figure 6.15: Bifurcation diagram for ω = 100 showing period incrementing of the inter-
mittency regions, followed by numerical break down in the region σ ∈[2.29, 2.42], followed
by a sudden change in the location of the attractor.
Figure 6.16: Simulations of a trajectory at the boundary crisis bifurcation for ω = 100.
102
==PAGE:110==
Chapter 7
Discussion and Conclusion
Relating the dynamics of the tropical system to the dynamics of its perturbed counterpart
obviously needs more mathematical rigor. We have sought to provide this through consid-
ering real algebraic geometry and its relation to tropical geometry, through the Newton
polygon and its signed subdivisions. All our results rely on the claim that if the tropical
system is ”suﬀiciently generic” then it provides the asymptotic structure of the perturbed
system – a claim that at least is true for algebraic equations. We have therefore sought
to circumvent the need to use geometric singular perturbation theory and the blow-up
method for this relation, although this was the approach we had proposed in [20] (see the
discussion section in that paper).
7.1
Equilibria and Intersections of Tropical Curves
The relation between the tropical system and perturbed is also relevant to the effort of
classification of tropical dynamical systems, which was the focus of [20].
However, if
the number of intersection of real tropical curves – and thereby equilibria of a tropical
dynamical system – does not bound the number of intersections of real algebraic curves
then we cannot expect that the other properties of tropical systems – such as number of
limit cycles – will be preserved.
Therefore, the fact that Itenberg and Roy’s conjecture was disproven is significant in this
regard (recall section 2.2.4). However, as we saw in section 2.3, the number of solutions
in the counterexample by Haas can be determined by a transformation of the algebraic
equations, using tropical modifications. The number of intersections can also be obtained
for the original counterexample by Li and Wang, which could lead to a revised conjecture,
based on tropical modifications, although it is diﬀicult to make a general statements about
it as the tropical modification is a transformation of the system, and thus typically changes
the support of the equations. One could instead propose a revised conjecture for bivariate
systems, based on the result by Li, Rojas and Wang (recall Theorem 2.38) who showed
that the number of roots of bivariate trinomial systems is at most five.
103
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 7.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Conjecture 7.1 (Revised Bivariate Itenberg and Roy’s Conjecture). The number of posi-
tive roots of a bivariate polynomial system is upper bounded by the maximum of ntv +5 ntg,
where ntv and ntg is the number of transversal and tangential intersections, respectively,
of the corresponding tropical curves, and the maximum is taken over all choices of initial
exponents such that all vertices of the tropical curves are three-valent.
Remark 7.2. Note that three-valent vertices of tropical curves correspond to triangles of
the dual subdivisions, thus an assumption of the conjecture is that the subdivisions should
be triangulations, which is also an assumption of the original conjecture by Itenberg and
Roy – and Viro’s method as well.
For the revised conjecture to be true the number of positive roots of the initial forms
added together must bound the number of roots in total. Many results on positive solutions
also hold for generalized polynomials with real exponent vectors, e.g. the before-mentioned
result by Li, Rojas and Wang. Thus we could expect the conjecture will also hold for such
systems.
As we saw in section 2.2.4, the counterexample by Haas of Itenberg and Roy’s conjecture
had two roots in (R∗)2, where one of them only became positive in an infinitely small
interval in the tropical limit, which we later showed was because of a tangential intersection.
However, the negative root was visible in the tropicalization of the polynomial in the
second quadrant, whereby we could hypothesize that the maximum number of transversal
intersections of the tropical curves in all quadrants would provide an upper bound, perhaps
even for roots in (R∗)N.
Conjecture 7.3 (General Revised Itenberg and Roy’s Conjecture). The maximum number
of isolated roots in (R∗)N of a polynomial system of N equations is upper bounded by the
maximum number of transversal intersections of the corresponding tropical hypersurfaces
in all orthants, where the maximum is taken over all choices of initial exponents such that
all vertices of the tropical hypersurfaces have valency N + 1. In particular, if K is the
maximum number of monomials in each polynomial, then an explicit bound is (K (K−1))N.
Remark 7.4. The explicit bound is the one implied by Itenberg and Roy’s conjecture (see
[19]).
In either case, the conjecture of Itenberg and Roy often provides a high lower bound
on the number of positive roots, which is typically is closer to the true maximum than
the current upper bounds, such as the theorems of Bezout and Khovanskii (Theorem 2.29
and Theorem 2.37, respectively). Thus the bound of Itenberg and Roy should not be
disregarded entirely, even if our revised conjectures should be shown to be false.
104
==PAGE:112==
7.2.
TROPICAL PHASE PORTRAITS AND AUTOMATIZATION
7.2
Tropical Phase Portraits and Automatization
In Theorem 3.3 we determined the asymptotic limit of a polynomial dynamical system
expressed by the initial form of the vector field.
This can be used to determine the
tropicalization of the other quadrants as well, and possibly determine the flow close to a
switching manifold in degenerate cases. We expect that the pathological trajectories that
are possible in tropical dynamical systems (because of the use of differential inclusion) can
be resolved using the initial form of the vector field. We have not considered this in the
present thesis, so we leave it for future research.
We expect that our definition of tropical vector fields in Definition 3.6 will be useful
for automatizing the tropicalization for computer implementation, similar to our explicit
expressions for the flow maps and transition maps, as we have consistently sought to use the
language of linear algebra. The maps proved helpful when analyzing the global bifurcations
in chapter 5 and chaotic attractors in chapter 6. We did not, however, make use of the
piecewise-linear flow maps Φj defined for each domain Rj, that determines the intersection
point of the trajectory with the boundary of the domain, i.e. by considering all switching
manifolds of the domain. This map would be relevant in an effort to automatizing the
analysis of tropical phase portraits.
The principle behind the classifications in [20] was that we only need to consider the
departure and arrival separatrices of the vertices of the tropical curve (i.e. the endpoints
of the switching manifolds), as well as the equilibria and crossing cycles.
These give
a global phase portrait of the tropical system, at least when the system is suﬀiciently
generic, which in that paper was determined using a definition of general position of the
invariant manifolds of the tropical system. We did not state, nor use, those definitions of
general position in the present thesis, as we considered each case individually, to check if
the system was indeed suﬀiciently generic.
7.3
Local bifurcations and Tangential Intersections
The local bifurcations studied in chapter 4 provided examples of tropical systems where
the results could be matched with the results obtained by traditional methods, thereby
demonstrating the veracity of tropicalization of perturbed dynamical systems. In the first
simple example of a Hopf bifurcation we could even determine the exact bifurcation point
using the initial flow vectors, as the Puiseux series of the bifurction point was exactly the
initial term, which – to be noted – is not generally the case.
We presented multiple different types of saddle-node bifurcations and Hopf bifurcations,
although the list is not claimed to be exhaustive. The objective was to present the variety
of different types of behavior even for local bifurcations. We determined three general
ways that local bifurcations can occur in tropical systems; (1) those that occur because of
the intersection of the tropical nullclines, (2) those that occur because of a change in the
105
==PAGE:113==
CHAPTER 7.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
direction of an initial flow vector, and (3) those that occur because of a flip in the labelled
subdivision of the Newton polygon of the system.
For saddle-node bifurcations the most common type is arguably the first one, but we
presented some types of the third in appendix A. However, all of the examples in the
appendix, except the first, are degenerate and would occur as the first type under a
small perturbation. For the saddle-node we did not observe examples of the second type,
although we presented an example with a mixed initial flow vector, but it did not determine
the bifurcation point. Thus we expect that this type is not possible for the saddle-node.
That being said, the initial flow vector can be determined using the initial form of the
vector field, and then use the traditional way of determining saddle-node bifurcations, i.e.
by considering the point where the initial form has a double-root, and ensure that the
saddle and the node become separate afterwards. The considerations in section 2.1.1 for
multiple roots of univariate polynomials could be relevant in this regard.
With regard to the Hopf bifurcation, however, all three types are typical and robust.
The first type can either create a canard cycle that grow infinitely quickly in size when
changing the initial exponent of the bifurcation parameter, or a cycle around a focus. The
second type can create a sliding cycle that also grow infinitely quickly in size, this time
when changing the initial coeﬀicient of a parameter. After the bifurcation point the size
of the limit cycle can be controlled by this initial coeﬀicient. The third type can create a
sliding cycle or crossing cycle that grows linearly in terms of the initial exponent of the
bifurcation parameter, and thus its size increases from zero at the bifurcation.
Lastly, we saw an example of a tangential intersection between the tropical nullclines
in the templator model, which was already shown to have two canard explosions in [4].
Using the principle from tropical modifications we could determine the position of the
equilibrium, and thereby determine the second term of the Puiseux series expansion of
the bifurcation point where the canard explosions became separated. Thus we saw that
tropicalization can be used even in cases where the tropical nullclines are tangential, and
one can determine the existence of canard cycles and relaxation cycles for a small interval
of a parameter, and not only when the initial exponents of bifurcation values are distinct,
which is usually the case.
We expect that one can determine further terms of the bifurcation parameter by a suit-
able transformation that eliminates the initial term of the parameter from the expression
of the vector field, whereby the new vector field could be tropicalized and then analyzed.
In the case of a canard explosion we would then expect to obtain a separation of the bi-
furcation manifolds of the canard explosion and the Hopf bifurcation, i.e. that they would
occur separately with respect to the initial exponent, similar to the example in section
5.1.1. Here we saw that it is possible for the Hopf bifurcation and the canard explosion to
occur at separate values of the initial exponents, however, the canard explosion and the
heteroclinic bifurcation at infinity occurred for the same value. This was also the case in
section 5.2, where the bifurcation surfaces of a canard explosion and a homoclinic bifur-
106
==PAGE:114==
7.4.
GLOBAL PHENOMENA AND CYCLES
cation in the tropical system were intersecting in part of the parameter space. However,
they separated and became boundaries of the three-dimensional region where the limit
cycle exists.
7.4
Global Phenomena and Cycles
Arguably, the most important novelty of tropical systems are the crossing manifolds that
arise from tropicalization of the perturbed system, as these do not have equivalents in
other methods. Perhaps one can liken them to the way the level curves of Hamiltonian
systems produce Poincaré maps which can then be perturbed, but there is no equivalent
in geometric singular perturbation theory. The crossing manifolds are the sources of many
intricate phenomena, such as limit cycles and chaotic attractors, which can be analyzed
using the maps. This is especially the case with the use of mixed initial flow vectors, where
the trajectories can be controlled to a much higher degree than with the initial exponents
exclusively, and thus bifurcations manifolds can be determined more accurately.
Both canard cycles and non-hyperbolic crossing cycles can be described as non-hyperbolic,
at least in the tropical sense. However, they could correspond to (hyperbolic) limit cycles
for the perturbed system. One could also consider adapting methods from Melnikov the-
ory, and construct similar functions to Melnikov functions for these cases, whereby the
non-isolated periodic orbits could be separated, especially in the case of non-hyperbolic
crossing cycles. This is expected as Melnikov theory also uses the periodic solutions of the
system in the limit to determine the separation for small perturbations. As the tropical sys-
tem is piecewise constant we expect the integrals of such functions would be fairly simple
to compute, as we could expect them to be piecewise linear functions. For canard cycles
one could consult the relevant literature in the field of geometric singular perturbation
theory, and possibly adapt some of the methods.
In section 5.2 we saw how simple it is to determine high-dimensional global bifurca-
tion manifolds of tropical systems, which essentially is possible to automatize for higher-
parameter systems. The intersections of the piecewise-linear bifurcation manifolds pro-
vided codimension-2 bifurcation curves, and they met in codimension-3 bifurcation points.
The analysis provided a polyhedral region where the limit cycle is guaranteed to exist,
as well as a region where it is guaranteed not to exist, something which is diﬀicult to
obtain using other methods. Even Melnikov theory and Fenichel theory have trouble with
multiple parameters, as there can still be nonlinearities that need to be analyzed using
those methods, especially for larger systems. However, tropicalization can easily be scaled
to arbitrary number of variables and parameters, thereby providing a method that can be
used more easily for analyzing mathematical models of physical systems which are often
much larger than the systems considered by mathematicians.
In section 5.3 we saw the first example of global bifurcations determined by the initial
coeﬀicient of a bifurcation parameter. A stable and an unstable limit cycle were created
107
==PAGE:115==
CHAPTER 7.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
in a saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles, whereby the stable limit cycle grew to infinite
amplitude and period at a homoclinic bifurcation by the creation of a saddle-node at in-
finity. Thus the stable limit cycle only existed in a very narrow interval of the bifurcation
parameter, while the unstable limit cycle persisted after the initial exponent of the bifur-
cation parameter was increased, and was finally destroyed in a canard explosion. Such an
analysis is however only possible for systems where the tropical system has mixed initial
flow vectors, which is not generally the case. However, in cases where it is possible to
construct such a system, or for modelling of dynamical systems, it is highly desirable to
have at least one mixed initial flow vector, as trajectories can then be controlled much
more precisely. This was also the main tool for determining bifurcations of the chaotic
attractor, and even obtaining a chaotic attractor similar to the Rössler attractor. At least
in our case this was essential for the construction of such an attractor.
7.5
Chaotic Attractors of Tropicalized Systems
In chapter 6 we saw the simplicity of constructing and analyzing tropical systems with
chaotic attractors. We only focused on one type of chaotic attractor, namely one similar
to the Rössler-attractor, however, we expect that one can construct many other types
of chaotic attractors. One interesting phenomenon that we expect could be determined
using tropicalization is the concept of hidden attractors, which are particularly diﬀicult
to determine the existence of, even with numerical methods. As the tropical dynamical
system provides a global phase portrait of the asymptotic behavior of the system then we
would expect that such attractors would be revealed.
The example of the chaotic attractor in the tropical system justifies a conjecture on the
existence of a chaotic attractor of a perturbed system.
Conjecture 7.5. If the tropicalization of a perturbed dynamical system has a chaotic
attractor in an open neighborhood of the parameters, then the perturbed system will have
a chaotic attractor for all ω suﬀiciently large.
Remark 7.6. For such a result, one would need to consider perturbations of the param-
eters, either in the initial coeﬀicients or the initial exponents. However, if changing the
initial coeﬀicients would significantly change the trajectories this is enough of a perturba-
tion, and one would not consider changing the initial exponents.
Thus, we expect that tropicalization can be developed to provide such a mathemati-
cally rigorous way to establish the presence of a chaotic attractor in perturbed dynamical
systems. This is generally very diﬀicult – as Smale’s fourteenth problem suggests – and
proving the existence of a Smale’s horseshoe is not possible for many systems. In the
positive case the conjecture above would then prove the existence of chaotic attractors in
many types of systems and for many parameter values. In the present thesis we at least
showed that one can rigorously prove the existence of a chaotic attractor in the system we
108
==PAGE:116==
7.6.
OUTLOOK
considered, as the tropical system has a Shilknikov bifurcation which will persist in the
perturbed system for ω suﬀiciently large.
With regard to the period incrementing in the intermittency intervals leading up to
a boundary crisis bifurcation we have not been able to find similar behavior of chaotic
systems in the literature. It does however require intricate control of the initial coeﬀicients
of the parameters, and a certain structure of the attractor for this behavior to occur.
We expect that the period increases to infinity at the bifurcation point as the windings
accumulate close the boundary of the attractor.
With regard to the chaotic Poincaré maps we only conducted a partial analysis, as
one could use the maps to determine other phenomena.
One example of bifurcations
of the tropical system that we did not consider are intermittencies, which in this case
would be type-V intermittencies, as the piecewise linear maps are non-differentiable in
the points between the domains.
These types of intermittencies are described in [16],
and are typically found in slow-fast systems. Similarly, we do not expect period-doubling
bifurcations to occur for the tropical system, however, one could image using the initial
flow vectors to gradually increase the slope of a line segment in the Poincaré map, which
would create similar behavior as the tent map. For the perturbed system this would then
create period-doubling bifurcations, which would occur in increasingly smaller intervals as
ω is increased.
7.6
Outlook
We make a general appeal for further research into both tropical dynamical systems and
real tropical geometry, as the research on tropical geometry has been dominated by the
study of algebraically closed fields. This could be relevant in many fields, particularly
optimization, to determine the number and asymptotic position of optimal solutions, which
could then be further refined using traditional methods. Many models of physical systems
have parameters with large differences in their orders of magnitude, where numerical
methods struggle, and analytical methods are too computationally heavy in the general
case.
Many results in real algebraic geometry – that have been obtained using Newton poly-
topes – also hold for generalized polynomials, i.e. polynomials with real exponent vectors.
We expect that this is the general case for results in tropical dynamical systems and real
tropical geometry as well. This could give more flexibility and be used to analyze a larger
class of systems, not only classical algebraic equations. Tropical geometry is already a
powerful tool for analyzing nonlinear algebraic equations, and we have sought to show its
utility for studying nonlinear ordinary differential equations. One could then expect that
it could be extended to the study of partial differential equations as well.
In the present thesis we have only considered two simple planar chemical systems, while
the rest of the examples were illustrative constructions.
Further study could include
109
==PAGE:117==
CHAPTER 7.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
applying tropicalization to mathematical models of physical systems, or other systems with
interesting dynamics that have already been studied using other methods. We expect that
tropicalization of dynamical systems can be a powerful tool in mathematical modelling of
physical systems, as the dynamics of the tropical system can be controlled by the initial
exponents of the parameter values, and even the initial coeﬀicients in certain cases. This
could provide a simple way to obtain parameter estimates, which is an essential part
of modelling. We have shown many system which were constructed with a prescribed
behavior in mind, which is also what made Viro’s method of patchworking popular.
The most pressing question is arguably how to transform the system to determine the
features that are hidden, i.e. to determine more terms of the Puiseux series expansions
of the bifurcation manifolds, such that they become separated. We expect that tropical
modifications could help answer this question, and possibly a transformation similar to
directional blow-up.
Concluding the thesis we note that tropicalization seems to be the natural language
of nonlinear equations. It preserves only the dominant terms that govern the behavior
of the system, thereby revealing the important features. This could be relevant in many
fields of mathematics where the main obstacle is nonlinearities and large differences in the
orders of magnitude of the parameters, which is prevalent in mathematical models of the
technologies we rely on and of the world we live in.
110
==PAGE:118==
Bibliography
[1]
Alain Albouy and Yanning Fu. “Some remarks about Descartes’ rule of signs”. In:
Elemente der Mathematik 69.4 (Oct. 19, 2014), pp. 186–194. issn: 0013-6018, 1420-
8962. doi: 10.4171/em/262. url: https://ems.press/doi/10.4171/em/262
(visited on 05/03/2025).
[2]
María Jesús Álvarez, Antoni Ferragut, and Xavier Jarque. “A SURVEY ON THE
BLOW UP TECHNIQUE”. In: International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos 21.11
(Nov. 2011), pp. 3103–3118. issn: 0218-1274, 1793-6551. doi: 10.1142/S0218127411030416.
url: https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S0218127411030416
(visited on 05/17/2025).
[3]
M. S. Bartlett. “An Inverse Matrix Adjustment Arising in Discriminant Analysis”.
In: The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 22.1 (Mar. 1951), pp. 107–111. issn: 0003-
4851. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729698. url: http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.
aoms/1177729698 (visited on 05/31/2025).
[4]
Morten Brøns. “Canard explosion of limit cycles in templator models of self-replication
mechanisms”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 134.14 (Apr. 14, 2011). Publisher:
AIP Publishing. issn: 0021-9606, 1089-7690. doi: 10.1063/1.3577998. url: https:
//pubs.aip.org/jcp/article/134/14/144105/189183/Canard-explosion-of-
limit-cycles-in-templator (visited on 05/23/2025).
[5]
Erwan Brugallé and Lucia López De Medrano. “INFLECTION POINTS OF REAL
AND TROPICAL PLANE CURVES”. In: Journal of Singularities (2012). issn:
19492006. doi: 10 . 5427 / jsing . 2012 . 4e. url: http : / / www . journalofsing .
org/volume4/article5.html (visited on 06/07/2025).
[6]
Erwan Brugallé et al. Brief introduction to tropical geometry. Feb. 20, 2015. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1502.05950. arXiv: 1502.05950[math]. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1502.05950 (visited on 06/09/2025).
[7]
Aurélien Desoeuvres, Peter Szmolyan, and Ovidiu Radulescu. “Qualitative Dynamics
of Chemical Reaction Networks: An Investigation Using Partial Tropical Equilibra-
tions”. In: Computational Methods in Systems Biology. Ed. by Ion Petre and Andrei
Păun. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 61–85. isbn: 978-3-031-
15034-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-15034-0_4.
[8]
Erwan Brugallé and Kristin Shaw. “A Bit of Tropical Geometry”. In: The American
Mathematical Monthly 121.7 (2014), p. 563. issn: 00029890. doi: 10.4169/amer.
111
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
math.monthly.121.07.563. url: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.
4169/amer.math.monthly.121.07.563 (visited on 03/27/2025).
[9]
Israel M. Gelfand, Mikhail M. Kapranov, and Andrei V. Zelevinsky. Discriminants,
Resultants, and Multidimensional Determinants. Boston, MA: Birkhäuser Boston,
1994. isbn: 978-0-8176-4770-4 978-0-8176-4771-1. doi: 10.1007/978-0-8176-4771-
1. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-0-8176-4771-1 (visited on
03/20/2025).
[10]
Paul Glendinning and Mike R. Jeffrey. An Introduction to Piecewise Smooth Dynam-
ics. Ed. by Elena Bossolini, J. Tomàs Lázaro, and Josep M. Olm. Advanced Courses
in Mathematics - CRM Barcelona. ISSN: 2297-0304, 2297-0312. Cham: Springer In-
ternational Publishing, 2019. isbn: 978-3-030-23688-5 978-3-030-23689-2. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-030-23689-2. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-
030-23689-2 (visited on 05/23/2025).
[11]
Sergey Gonchenko et al. “Leonid Shilnikov and mathematical theory of dynamical
chaos”. In: Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 32.1 (Jan. 1,
2022), p. 010402. issn: 1054-1500, 1089-7682. doi: 10.1063/5.0080836. url: https:
//pubs.aip.org/cha/article/32/1/010402/2835571/Leonid-Shilnikov-and-
mathematical-theory-of (visited on 06/08/2025).
[12]
David J. Grabiner. “Descartes’ Rule of Signs: Another Construction”. In: The Amer-
ican Mathematical Monthly 106.9 (Nov. 1999), pp. 854–856. issn: 0002-9890, 1930-
0972. doi: 10.1080/00029890.1999.12005131. url: https://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/full/10.1080/00029890.1999.12005131 (visited on 05/03/2025).
[13]
Albert Granados, Lluís Alsedà, and Maciej Krupa. “The Period Adding and Incre-
menting Bifurcations: From Rotation Theory to Applications”. In: SIAM Review 59.2
(Jan. 2017), pp. 225–292. issn: 0036-1445, 1095-7200. doi: 10.1137/140996598. url:
https://epubs.siam.org/doi/10.1137/140996598 (visited on 06/08/2025).
[14]
Ilona Gucwa et al. “Geometric singular perturbation analysis of an autocatalator
model”. In: Discrete & Continuous Dynamical Systems - S 2.4 (2009). Publisher:
American Institute of Mathematical Sciences (AIMS), pp. 783–806. issn: 1937-1179.
doi: 10.3934/dcdss.2009.2.783. url: http://aimsciences.org//article/doi/
10.3934/dcdss.2009.2.783 (visited on 05/23/2025).
[15]
Bertrand Haas. “A Simple Counterexample to Kouchnirenko’s Conjecture”. In: Beiträge
zur Algebra und Geometrie 43.1 (2002), pp. 1–8.
[16]
Da-Ren He et al. “Type V intermittency”. In: Physics Letters A 171.1 (Nov. 1992).
Publisher: Elsevier BV, pp. 61–65. issn: 0375-9601. doi: 10.1016/0375-9601(92)
90133-7. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0375960192901337
(visited on 05/23/2025).
[17]
Philip Holmes. “Nonlinear oscillations and the smale horseshoe map”. In: American
Mathematical Society. Proceedings of Symposia in Applied Mathematics 39 (1989),
pp. 81–88. doi: 10.1090/psapm/039.
112
==PAGE:120==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[18]
Birkett Huber and Bernd Sturmfels. “A Polyhedral Method for Solving Sparse Poly-
nomial Systems”. In: Mathematics of Computation 64.212 (1995), pp. 1541–1555.
[19]
Ilia Itenberg and Marie-Francoise Roy. “Multivariate Descartes’ rule”. In: Beiträge
zur Algebra und Geometrie 37.2 (1996), pp. 337–346.
[20]
K. U. Kristiansen and A. H. Sarantaris. On a tropicalization of planar polynomial
ODEs with finitely many structurally stable phase portraits. Feb. 24, 2025. doi: 10.
48550/arXiv.2305.18002.
[21]
Kristian Uldall Kristiansen. “A Review of Multiple-Time-Scale Dynamics: Funda-
mental Phenomena and Mathematical Methods”. In: Multiplicity of Time Scales in
Complex Systems. Ed. by Bernhelm Booß-Bavnbek et al. Series Title: Mathematics
Online First Collections. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, pp. 309–363.
isbn: 978-3-031-45104-1 978-3-031-45105-8. doi: 10.1007/16618_2023_75. url:
https://link.springer.com/10.1007/16618_2023_75 (visited on 06/08/2025).
[22]
Christian Kuehn. Multiple Time Scale Dynamics. Applied mathematical sciences
191. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015. isbn: 978-3-319-12316-5.
[23]
T.Y. Li and Xiaoshen Wang. “On multivariate Descartes’ rule – a counterexample”.
In: Beiträge zur Algebra und Geometrie 39.1 (1998), pp. 1–5.
[24]
Tien-Yien Li, J. Maurice Rojas, and Xiaoshen Wang. Counting Real Connected Com-
ponents of Trinomial Curve Intersections and m-nomial Hypersurfaces. Dec. 12,
2002. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.math/0212178. arXiv: math/0212178. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/math/0212178 (visited on 05/10/2025).
[25]
Diane Maclagan and Bernd Sturmfels. Introduction to Tropical Geometry. Google-
Books-ID: zFsoCAAAQBAJ. American Mathematical Soc., Apr. 15, 2015. 378 pp.
isbn: 978-0-8218-5198-2.
[26]
McDonald. “Fractional Power Series Solutions for Systems of Equations”. In: Discrete
& Computational Geometry 27.4 (Jan. 2002), pp. 501–529. issn: 0179-5376, 1432-
0444. doi: 10.1007/s00454-001-0077-0. url: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/s00454-001-0077-0 (visited on 06/12/2025).
[27]
John McDonald. “Fiber polytopes and fractional power series”. In: Journal of Pure
and Applied Algebra 104.2 (Oct. 1995), pp. 213–233. issn: 00224049. doi: 10.1016/
0022-4049(94)00129-5. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/0022404994001295 (visited on 06/12/2025).
[28]
D. M. Nielsen. “Tropical Geometry and Geometric Singular Perturbation Theory
with Applications in Biology”. (Supervised by Kristiansen, K. U.) Master’s Thesis.
Technical University of Denmark, 2022.
[29]
Vincent Noel et al. “Tropical Geometries and Dynamics of Biochemical Networks Ap-
plication to Hybrid Cell Cycle Models”. In: Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer
Science 284 (June 2012), pp. 75–91. issn: 15710661. doi: 10.1016/j.entcs.2012.
05.016. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1571066112000175
(visited on 06/07/2025).
113
==PAGE:121==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[30]
Vincent Noel et al. “Tropicalization and tropical equilibration of chemical reactions”.
In: Contemporary Mathematics. Ed. by G. Litvinov and S. Sergeev. Vol. 616. Prov-
idence, Rhode Island: American Mathematical Society, 2014, pp. 261–275. isbn:
978-0-8218-9496-5 978-1-4704-1684-3. doi: 10.1090/conm/616/12316. url: http:
//www.ams.org/conm/616 (visited on 06/07/2025).
[31]
Lawrence Perko. Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems. Springer Science &
Business Media, Nov. 21, 2013. 566 pp. isbn: 978-1-4613-0003-8.
[32]
S. Portisch. “A novel approach to dimension reduction in enzyme kinetics”. (Super-
vised by Szmolyan, P.) Diploma Thesis. Vienna University of Technology, 2017.
[33]
O. Radulescu, S. Vakulenko, and D. Grigoriev. “Model Reduction of Biochemical
Reactions Networks by Tropical Analysis Methods”. In: Mathematical Modelling of
Natural Phenomena 10.3 (2015). Ed. by D.C. Wunsch et al., pp. 124–138. issn:
0973-5348, 1760-6101. doi: 10.1051/mmnp/201510310. url: http://www.mmnp-
journal.org/10.1051/mmnp/201510310 (visited on 06/07/2025).
[34]
Otto E. Rössler. “Chaos in abstract kinetics: Two prototypes”. In: Bulletin of Math-
ematical Biology 39.2 (Mar. 1977), pp. 275–289. issn: 0007-4985, 1522-9602. doi:
10.1007/BF02462866. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF02462866
(visited on 06/08/2025).
[35]
Satya Swarup Samal et al. “Analysis of Reaction Network Systems Using Tropical
Geometry”. In: Computer Algebra in Scientific Computing. Ed. by Vladimir P. Gerdt
et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 424–439. isbn: 978-3-319-
24021-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24021-3_31.
[36]
A. H. Sarantaris. “Tropical dynamics: Dimension reduction and graph representation
of multi-scale polynomial systems”. (Supervised by Kristiansen, K. U.) Bachelor’s
Thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2021.
[37]
Michael Shub. “What is a Horseshoe?” In: Notices of the American Mathematical
Society 52.5 (2005), pp. 530–532. (Visited on 06/08/2025).
[38]
Steve Smale. “Mathematical problems for the next century”. In: The Mathematical
Intelligencer 20.2 (Mar. 1998), pp. 7–15. issn: 0343-6993. doi: 10.1007/BF03025291.
url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF03025291 (visited on 06/08/2025).
[39]
Steven H. Strogatz. Nonlinear dynamics and Chaos: with applications to physics,
biology, chemistry, and engineering. Studies in nonlinearity. Reading, Mass: Addison-
Wesley Pub, 1994. 498 pp. isbn: 978-0-201-54344-5.
[40]
Bernd Sturmfels. “Polynomial Equations and Convex Polytopes”. In: The American
Mathematical Monthly 105.10 (Dec. 1998), pp. 907–922. issn: 0002-9890, 1930-0972.
doi: 10.1080/00029890.1998.12004987. url: https://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/full/10.1080/00029890.1998.12004987 (visited on 03/20/2025).
[41]
Bernd Sturmfels. Solving Systems of Polynomial Equations. Vol. 97. CBMS Regional
Conference Series in Mathematics. American Mathematical Soc., 2002. 152 pp.
[42]
Warwick Tucker. “A Rigorous ODE Solver and Smale’s 14th Problem”. In: Founda-
tions of Computational Mathematics 2.1 (Jan. 2002), pp. 53–117. issn: 1615-3375.
114
==PAGE:122==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
doi: 10 . 1007 / s002080010018. url: http : / / link . springer . com / 10 . 1007 /
s002080010018 (visited on 04/03/2025).
[43]
O. Ya. Viro. “On basic concepts of tropical geometry”. In: Proceedings of the Steklov
Institute of Mathematics 273.1 (July 2011), pp. 252–282. issn: 0081-5438, 1531-8605.
doi: 10.1134/S0081543811040134. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1134/
S0081543811040134 (visited on 06/09/2025).
[44]
Oleg Viro. Patchworking real algebraic varieties. Nov. 13, 2006. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.math/0611382. arXiv: math/0611382. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/math/
0611382 (visited on 06/09/2025).
[45]
Oleg Viro. “From the sixteenth Hilbert problem to tropical geometry”. In: Japanese
Journal of Mathematics 3.2 (Dec. 2008), pp. 185–214. issn: 0289-2316, 1861-3624.
doi: 10.1007/s11537-008-0832-6. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s11537-008-0832-6 (visited on 06/09/2025).
[46]
Robert J. Walker. Algebraic curves. Nachdr. d. Ausg. Princeton 1950. Princeton
mathematical series 13. New York, Heidelberg, Berlin: Springer, 1978. 201 pp. isbn:
978-0-387-90361-3 978-3-540-90361-1.
115
==PAGE:123==
116
==PAGE:124==
A.1.
SADDLE-NODE BIFURCATIONS BY FLIPS OF THE SUBDIVISIONS
Appendix A
More Saddle-Node Bifurcations
A.1
Saddle-Node Bifurcations by Flips of the Subdivisions
(a)
(b)
Figure A.1: Structurally stable types. Emergence of a vertex on an edge of the subdivision.
117
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX A. MORE SADDLE-NODE BIFURCATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure A.2: Structurally unstable types. Emergence of a vertex in the interior of a face of
the subdivision, simultaneous with a tropical nullcline being above the point of emergence.
A.2
Codimension-2 Double Saddle-Node Bifurcation
One can construct a degenerate type of saddle-node bifurcation, where the tropical curves
of the tropical polynomials have intersecting tropical points, both with two edges, in
the compositions shown in Figure A.3. A corresponding Newton polygon and labelled
subdivisions are shown in A.4. This type of saddle-node bifurcation is degenerate as a
small perturbation could make one of the nullcline manifolds intersect the tropical point
of the other tropical curve, which would create two separate saddle-node bifurcations of
two different types.
118
==PAGE:126==
A.2.
CODIMENSION-2 DOUBLE SADDLE-NODE BIFURCATION
Figure A.3: A codimension-2 saddle-node bifurcation with two saddle-nodes occuring when
the system is perturbed.
Figure A.4: Newton polygon and labelled subdivisions for the vector fields in Figure A.3.
119
