==PAGE:1==
           DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Ferroresonance and switching 
impulses in utility scale photovoltaic 
solar parks
Author:
Erik Helmuth Rame
DTU Wind-M-9 24June 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0924
June 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Nenad Mijatovic
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Søren Zdrinka Nannestad 
European Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind and 
Energy Systems Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Erik Helmuth Rame
Title:
Ferroresonance and 
switching impulses in utility 
scale photovoltaic solar 
parks 
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Ferroresonance is a complex, non­linear phenomenon that can lead to severe overvolt­
ages and distorted waveforms in electrical power systems, posing significant risks to
equipment integrity and operational reliability. This thesis investigates the occurrence and
mitigation of ferroresonance in the context of large­scale photovoltaic (PV) solar parks,
focusing on the case of the Kassø installation—Scandinavia’s largest utility­scale solar
power plant. Following a catastrophic transformer failure suspected to be caused by fer­
roresonance, a detailed analysis and simulation­based investigation was undertaken us­
ing PSCAD. The study includes the development of accurate transformer and cable mod­
els, including a UMEC­based transformer model and frequency­dependent geometric ca­
ble representations. A variety of simulation scenarios were analyzed, including asymmet­
ric switching events and varying loading and network topologies. Key factors influencing
the onset and severity of ferroresonance were identified, such as transformer core charac­
teristics, cable capacitance, neutral grounding, and switching practices. The thesis also
evaluates several mitigation strategies, including passive damping, improved switching
procedures, and active loading practices. Simulation results confirm that under specific
conditions, ferroresonance can be initiated and sustained, leading to voltages exceed­
ing equipment ratings. The work concludes by offering practical design and operational
recommendations to reduce the risk of ferroresonance in future PV installations.
iv
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Together with my supervisors, whose patience and interest was unparalleled, I would like
to thank the following employees of European Energy A/S for all the help with software,
literature recommendations and insight to the energisation process of the photovoltaic in­
stallation that contributed greatly to the project:
Kaustubh Bhatnagar, Grid Integration Analyst
Christian R. Christensen, Chief of Electrical Engineering
Tibor Takarics, Senior Grid Integration Analyst
My parents and younger brother Anders, whose unwavering support was instrumental.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory of Ferroresonance
2
2.1
Varying Circuit Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Modes of Ferroresonance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Assessing the risk of Ferroresonance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Ferroresonant Circuit Topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Mitigation Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Theory of switching transients concerning ferroresonance
13
4
Simplified Ferroresonance Simulation
15
5
UMEC Transformer Model
19
6
Geometric Cable Model
21
6.1
30kV 150mm2 Cable Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.2
30kV 500mm2 Cable Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.3
30kV 2x500mm2 Cable Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7
POW Simulation
24
7.1
High­Level Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7.2
Risk Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7.3
Simulation Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
8
Simulation Results
29
8.1
Station 4 Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
8.2
2141m 150mm2 cable study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8.3
Comparison of Normalised Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8.4
Active Damping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
8.5
Phase Mirroring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
9
Further Work
44
Bibliography
45
A Appendix
47
A.1 Simplified Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.2 Additional UMEC Transformer characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
A.3 30 kV, 150mm2 geometric cable model sequence values . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.4 30 kV, 500mm2 geometric cable model sequence values . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.5 30 kV, 2x500mm2 geometric cable model sequence values
. . . . . . . . . 50
A.6 POW Simulations for Station 4 Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.7 POW Simulations for 150mm2 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
vii
==PAGE:8==
A.8 500mm2 Cable Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
viii
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
For over one hundred years, ferroresonance has been a known phenomenon plaguing
power engineers and electrical installers worldwide, and was first observed by the J.
Bethenod in 1907 [1]. The term ”Ferroresonance” was coined by P. Boucherot in 1920
[2], and has since been the subject of several studies. Ferroresonance is a complex,
non­linear resonance that can occur in power systems under specific conditions involving
non­linear inductive and highly capacitive components[3]. Unlike classical resonance, fer­
roresonance is characterized by its unpredictability, potential for over­voltages, and highly
distorted waveforms, which can lead to equipment damage, incorrect operation of protec­
tive equipment, and power quality issues. Understanding and mitigating ferroresonance
is therefore essential for power engineers tasked with designing and maintaining resilient
systems.
In the year 2021, construction of the largest utility­scale photovoltaic installation ever
planned in Scandinavia, the Kassø solar installation, began. Before June of 2022, a
catastrophic failure in one of the distribution transformers took place, and resulted in its
explosion. Studies conducted at the site by external experts highlighted the possibility
that it could have been caused by ferroresonance. After replacing all the distribution
transformers, no more explosions took place, though it became apparent that a much
deeper analysis of the distribution grid was needed, which culminated in the creation of
this project.
To aid in the analysis of the solar distribution grid, a high accuracy model of the it is
developed in the EMTP (ElectroMagnetic Transients Program) PSCAD and analysed at
length.
To qualify the reader’s understanding of the phenomenon, an introduction to ferroreso­
nance is provided in the next section.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory of Ferroresonance
Ferroresonance can be described as a non­linear oscillation between a saturable inductor
and a capacitance [3]. During a ferroresonant mode of operation in an electrical power
network, the voltages and currents will oscillate at a frequency close to the power fre­
quency (50 or 60 Hz), though with very large magnitudes and a high harmonic distortion.
It is caused by the network experiencing the magnetic saturation of an iron core inductor
(usually a transformer core), and is often initiated by asymmetric operation of the 3 phases.
Ferroresonance differs from linear resonance in that it is not limited to a single natural fre­
quency. Let us illustrate this on a typical series LC oscillator, where the impedance of
each passive component is linearly dependent on the frequency of the excitation:
(a)
Series
LC
Circuit Diagram
(b) Impedance response of Inductor, Capacitor, and Series LC
Figure 2.1: Series LC Circuit and its Impedance Response
The red and blue lines correspond to the impedance of the inductor and capacitor at vary­
ing frequencies. The green impedance illustrates the equivalent impedance of the series
LC circuit as seen by the source. We see that at resonance, the impedance drops sig­
nificantly[3], so assuming a frequency independent voltage source is used, we will see
a much higher current draw as well as an alignment of the current and voltage wave­
forms ­ i.e. the phase shift becomes very small. These statements hold for an oscillating
circuit experiencing a ferroresonance: the impedance is low, and the current draw is high.
It is not possible to make the above plot with a saturable inductor, as the saturating be­
haviour represents a nonlinearity that allows for multiple resonances to occur at the same
frequency. Additionally, since the typical component represented by the saturable induc­
tor is an iron­core transformer, further nonlinearity is introduced due to the hysteretic be­
havior of the core material. Therefore, a simplified IV­characteristic (with the transformer
characteristic represented as a Langevin function) at a given frequency can facilitate un­
derstanding how ferroresonance develops:
2
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: IV characteristic for Saturable inductor and Capacitor
The above image illustrates how at a single frequency, there can exist many solutions that
allow the system to operate in different modes[3].
• Point 2 corresponds to the normal operating point, which is where the system is
designed to operate. This is apparant from the fact that it is in the linear portion of
the saturable inductor characteristic. At this point, magnetic circuit equivalents can
be used to estimate the core behavior with relative accuracy.
• Point 1 represents the ferroresonant point of operation, and exists deep in the sat­
urated region of the inductor characteristic. Operating at this point in a transformer
will cause voltage and current oscillations to exceed electrical limits and heating that
can lead to thermal damage and explosions.
• Point 3 represents an unstable solution. Even though it is a mathematically correct
solution, if the system is operating at the unstable point and a small increase in
current occurs, the inductive voltage (due to nonlinear saturation) increases less
than the capacitive voltage, causing the system to shift toward the ferroresonant
state. If there is a small decrease in current, the inductive voltage decreases less
than the capacitive voltage, and the system shifts toward normal operation. In both
cases, the system cannot return to the unstable equilibrium point, as there is no
restoring force.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1
Varying Circuit Parameters
Now that we know why the ferroresonance can occur, it can be useful to observe how
changing the circuit parameters affect the resulting graphs.
2.1.1
Varying Source Voltage E
When varying the source voltage, we are essentially just changing the y­intercept of the
capacitor characteristic with 0 current flow. Thus, we observe the following change:
Figure 2.3: IV characteristics when changing source voltage
Note that E1 < E2 < E3 < E4, where E3 represents the critical source voltage Ec, at
which there are only two mathematical solutions. Source voltages above Ec allow only
the ferroresonant mode to exist as a solution, and below Ec there are 3 solutions (with
1 unstable point). This indicates that increasing the source voltage of a power system
exacerbates the risk of ferroresonance, as well as how destructive it is (small increases in
E lead to disproportionately larger currents). Thus, it is clear that operating a transformer
at lower E, and limiting the magnitude of transient overvoltages (TRVs) in the generator/­
cables reduces the risk and severity of ferroresonance.
2.1.2
Varying Capacitance C
When varying the capacitance, we are now changing the gradient of the capacitor char­
acteristic rather than it’s y­intercept with 0 current flow. Thus, we observe the following
change:
4
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.4: IV characteristics when changing capacitance
Note that C1 < C2 < C3 < C4, where C3 represents a critical capacitance Cc, at which
there are only two mathematical solutions. Capacitances below Cc guarantee ferroreso­
nance as it is the only stable solution, and above Cc there are 3 solutions (with 1 unstable
point). One can see that C4 is so large that it almost guarantees that only stable opera­
tion is possible. In the presented example, the saturation characteristic is estimated by a
sigmoid function, which does not account for the fact that even when saturated, the core
characteristic does not fully plateau on both sides. This is illustrated by the fact that the
air core reactance is nonzero ­ so each side of the ”real sigmoid” would still have a small
gradient, allowing for a very large capacitance to fully eliminate the risk of ferroresonance
under normal operating conditions.
With this in mind, note that increasing the capacitance also increases the magnitude of
the current and voltage at the ferroresonant point. So, should a ferroresonance be under­
way, the introduction of a new capacitance can significantly increase the risk of damage
to equipment. Additionally, the higher the capacitance, the larger the source voltage or
TRV must be to initiate a ferroresonance, as the vertical distance (voltage) between the
knee point and the capacitor characteristic increases as the capacitor value increases.
2.1.3
Varying Losses R
To understand the effect of increasing the resistive losses/damping of the system, we
must begin by including them in our Kirchoff’s Voltage Law (KVL) expression, with some
derivations:
Us = R · I + j · (XL(I) −Xc) · I
(2.1)
√
UL(I) −XC · I =
√
U2s −(R · I)2
(2.2)
Plotting the VI characteristics of the capacitor and inductor, as well as the absolute of their
difference (the left side of equation 2.2), yields the following:
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.5: The inductor and capacitor characteristics, and their difference
Overlaying the absolute of the difference with the right­hand side of equation 2.2 with
varying levels of circuit resistance to illustrate possible solutions yields:
Figure 2.6: The inductor and capacitor characteristics, and their difference
Note that R1 < R2 < R3 < R4, where R3 represents a critical resistance Rc, at which
there are only two mathematical solutions. Resistances above Rc guarantee normal op­
eration as it is the only solution, and above Rc there are 3 solutions (with 1 unstable point).
The leftmost intersection is the normal operating point, and the rightmost intersection is
the ferroresonant point. Thus, by increasing the circuit losses, we can reduce the likeli­
hood of developing a ferroresonance.
6
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Modes of Ferroresonance
Up to this point, ferroresonance has been referred to as a singular phenomenon of which
only a single type exists, though in reality, it is not a single mode that can easily be iden­
tified. There exist 4 distinct modes of ferroresonance, the first two being periodic, and
the others being aperiodic. The two periodic modes are known as ”Fundamental” and
”Sub­harmonic”, the others as ”Quasi­static” and ”Chaotic”. Whilst they are all caused by
a magnetic saturation causing the exchange of power between a magnetic and electric
field, they differ significantly in time and harmonic content. The following image, taken
from [1] shows some typical ferroresonant waveforms and their harmonic contents:
Figure 2.7: Modes of Ferroresonance
A fundamental ferroresonance (a) will have a strong fundamental component as well as
higher order harmonics. The sub­harmonic type (b) will consist of a strong fundamental
component as well as lower and often also higher­order harmonics (These higher­order
terms are omitted in the above graph, though due to the magnetic saturation are still very
much present). The quasi­static ferroresonant mode (c), which has distinct components,
will appear somewhat periodic when observed in time but contain both higher and lower
order harmonic components, where the fundamental component is not necessarily the
strongest ­ though often is. Chaotic ferroresonance, which all ferroresonant oscillations
start as during the transient initiation phase, is represented by a continuous spectrum with
peaks at frequencies that rarely correspond to the fundamental. They very rarely persist,
and most ferroresonances typically decay to a periodic mode after a few seconds.
2.3
Assessing the risk of Ferroresonance
On page 22 of [4], a rule­of­thumb equation describing the risk of experiencing a ferrores­
onance in voltage transformers if the connected zero­sequence capacitance expressed
as s kilometers of overhead lines is:
s < 42000
U2n
(2.3)
where Un is the system nominal voltage in kV, and s is the minimum length of overhead
line to avoid ferroresonance. This equation is only applicable to normal voltage trans­
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
7
==PAGE:16==
formers with the ratio Un
√
3 : 0.11
√
3 : 0.11
√
3 . However, the method by which this approximation
is achieved, or the assumptions it makes, are not presented. Since this project aims to
assess the risk of ferroresonance in distribution transformers, it is useful to attempt to
describe the boundary conditions for which ferroresonance can occur. To aid in formulat­
ing these, a later section describing the significance of point­on­wave on the initiation of
ferroresonance will be conducted.
Now that all the necessary tools for applying the proposed risk assessment strategy were
in place, it became helpful to understand the instantaneous conditions in the transformer
and cable that make the system more conducive to developing a ferroresonance. The
following factors are known to influence the evolution of ferroresonance:
1. Transformer core characteristics:
• Magnetization curve nonlinearity: The sharper the knee of the BH curve, the
more abrupt the saturation and the more likely ferroresonance is triggered
• Hysteresis: Through its effects on remanent flux and nonlinear magnetization,
influences both the initiation and persistence of ferroresonance. While not the
primary trigger, hysteretic losses reduce effective damping and can support
sustained resonance under marginal conditions.[3] (p. 88)
• Remanent Flux: The presence of residual magnetization at the instant of switch­
ing can excite a resonant mode.
2. System capacitance:
• Cable length: Long underground cables (common in utility scale PV installa­
tion) add significant capacitance that drive ferroresonance
• Bus capacitance/Capacitor banks: Can contribute to the total capacitive energy
storage
• Grading Capacitance: Having a large grading capacitance over the terminals
of the circuit breaker (CB) to regulate the voltage can actually contribute to
increased risk of experiencing ferroresonance
3. Source Voltage Magnitude and Frequency:
• Overvoltage: Even a modest 1.1 pu can cause an oscillaltion that pushes the
core into saturation
• Frequency: High frequency or harmonics can excite resonant modes
4. Loading Conditions:
• Asymmetric Loading: Unbalanced loading can both initiate and exacerbate the
risks of experiencing ferroresonance
• Light load: As this directly reduces damping, lighter loading increases the like­
lihood of sustaining ferroresonant oscillations
5. Switching Events and timing:
• Phase displacement of switching instants: (e.g. switching of a transformer at
a voltage zero­crossing)
8
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:17==
• Delayed phase reclosing: If the open breakers are not sufficiently quickly re­
closed w.r.t one another, the resulting asymmetry can give rise to a ferroreso­
nance
6. Neutral Grounding Configuration:
• Isolated or high­impedance neutral systems are much more prone to ferrores­
onance
• Solid grounding: Introduces damping by draining capacitive zero­sequence
currents.
7. Presence of Nonlinear or Time­Delayed Components:
• Saturable reactors, MOVs, or surge arresters can temporarily shift system dy­
namics, depending on their voltage­time response. [3]
• Their behavior can either suppress or trigger ferroresonant transients, and are
often challenging to implement correctly
We can see from the above list, that there are several factors that contribute to the initia­
tion and sustenance of a ferroresonance. Whilst several of these are intuitive, additional
attention will be paid to the loading conditions. According to [5], in distribution grids with
a strong grid connection (high short circuit ratio), one of the most common mechanisms
for initiating a ferroresonance is asymmetric loading, i.e. asymmetric circuit breaking. Be­
low we can see a simplified equivalent circuit of the distribution system and the resulting
ferroresonant circuit when circuit breaking is not coordinated correctly:
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
9
==PAGE:18==
2.4
Ferroresonant Circuit Topology
Equipped with the knowledge of what components are responsible for the existence of fer­
roresonance, we can observe the current path of a ferroresonance in an example equiva­
lent circuit. Below is a diagram taken from [6] showing the current path in a ferroresonant
circuit formed by a single phase closing:
Figure 2.8: Current path for a ferroresonance in different transformer grounding schemes
This illustrates why a delta connection is more susceptible to ferroresonance than a star
connection. The currents oscillating though the Y connection must pass through all the
winding impedances, so a greater capacitance to ground is needed to bring the natural
frequency of the resulting single­phase equivalent circuits to power frequency. The delta
connections ferroresonant current path travels through the same capacitances, but only
passes through a single winding impedance, resulting in a natural frequency much closer
to power frequency and thus increasing the sensetivity to ferroresonant excitation.
10
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:19==
2.5
Mitigation Strategies
The simplest solution that is most widely mentioned in literature is the introduction of
damping, in the form of a bleeder resistor. This is an effective way to limit the develop­
ment and onset of ferroresonance, though it comes at the price of losses. Implementing
increased damping is far from the only method available. The following tables detail the
mitigation strategies studied in this project (table 2.1, as well as other possibilities that will
not be explored (table 2.2:
Table 2.1: The applied ferroresonance mitigation strategies
Strategy
Design
Phase
Cost
Ease
Pros, Cons & References
Damping re­
sistors (Pas­
sive)
Commission­
ing / Retrofit
Low–
Moderate
Moderate
+
Provide
continuous
pas­
sive damping of ferroresonant
modes.
– Must be carefully sized; can
add losses. [1, 3, 7, 8]
Switching
practices
Operational
Very low
Easy
+ No hardware required ­ simple
procedural fix.
– Depends on operator disci­
pline; single­phase switching still
common. [1, 3, 4, 9]
Loading
practices
(Active)
Commission­
ing / Retrofit
Low
Easy
+ Low­cost, high damping effect.
– Requires planning to main­
tain load during low­demand pe­
riods. [1, 3, 4, 8]
Cable / Net­
work layout
Design
/
Planning
Variable
N/A
+ Reduces capacitive coupling
and LC resonance risk and dif­
ficult / expensive to reconfigure
after installation. [1, 3, 7]
These measures are amongst the simplest to implement on an existing utility­scale pho­
tovoltaic installation. They provide a good balance between cost, ease of implementation
and performance. A particularly attractive damping mitigation is the connection of a zero
sequence damping resistor, as this introduces no losses during normal, symmetric oper­
ation ­ but can only be done if the transformer already has a tertiary open delta winding.
With regards to the network design, a particular consideration of the cable layout will be
observed ­ namely the ordering of phases within dual­trefoil cable groups, as this influ­
ences the inter­phase magnetic and capacitive coupling.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
11
==PAGE:20==
Table 2.2: The avoided ferroresonance mitigation strategies
Strategy
Design
Phase
Cost
Ease
Pros, Cons & References
Transformer
design
Design / Pro­
curement
High
N/A
+
Three­legged
cores
and
high­loss designs reduce risk
inherently.
– Non ∆­Y transformers have
higher
insulation
costs
and
aren’t galvanically isolated[1, 3,
8]
Protection
and Monitor­
ing
Commission­
ing / Retrofit
Moderate
Moderate
+ Enables early detection, data
logging, and alarms.
– Passive; cannot interrupt reso­
nance directly. [1, 3, 10, 11]
Grounding
system
Design / Pro­
curement
Moderate–
High
N/A
+ Solid grounding minimizes fer­
roresonance risk.
– Resonant grounding requires
tuning
­ Solid grounding increases fault
current. [1, 3, 7, 10]
MOVs
(surge
ar­
resters)
Commission­
ing / Retrofit
Moderate
Difficult
+
Clamp
transient
overvolt­
ages and absorb energy during
switching.
– Susceptible to degradation
or
failure
under
sustained
ferroresonance,
adds
further
non­linearity [1, 3, 10, 12]
From the above, we can see that several of the avoided measures can only realistically
be implemented in the design phase ­ limiting their applicability to existing installations.
This, as well as their costs and particular drawbacks provide the basis for exclusion from
study in this project.
12
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:21==
3
Theory of switching transients
concerning ferroresonance
To understand how switching transients relate to the initiation of ferroresonance, it is nec­
essary to understand what they are and the underlying mechanisms that cause them.
Switching transients in power systems refer to sudden, short­duration disturbances that
occur when elements such as circuit breakers, disconnect switches, or protective relays
alter the topology or operating state of the network. These transients are characterized by
rapid changes in voltage and current, driven by the system’s inherent inductance and ca­
pacitance interacting in response to abrupt changes in circuit conditions. The frequency
content of switching transients is typically broad, often containing components at both
fundamental and higher harmonic frequencies. Switching transients arise in various sce­
narios, including capacitor bank switching, transformer energization/de­energization, fault
clearing, and reclosing operations.
The amplitude and frequency of these transients
depend on the point on the voltage waveform at which switching occurs, the system
impedance, and the characteristics of connected equipment.
If we assume we have an inductive load that is suddenly disconnected, due to the induc­
tance and sudden, sharp drop from non­zero to zero current in a short time, a large tran­
sient recovery voltage will appear at the terminals. Any parasitic capacitances connected
to this inductance will then begin to oscillate the energy contained in this sudden burst
between the the magnetic and electric fields involved, but will typically decay very quickly
due to the short time constant in an LC circuit with a very small capacitance. Therefore,
should we wish to avoid generating a large transient recovery voltage, we must make
sure the current is very low when the switching operation takes place, the resulting drop
in current is much less sharp and will therefore not generate such a large transient over­
voltage. However, in the case of ferroresonant circuits, the reality of switch timing is more
complex. Switching at the current zero­crossing in this ”still” mostly inductive grid (Not yet
saturated) will introduce a DC on the interrupted phase that will take up to several cycles
to decay. Should a sufficient potential across phases develop before this DC can decay
to a safe level, the resulting voltage difference can also cause the core to saturate and
initiate a ferroresonance.
However, if this hypothetical inductance is replaced with a saturable inductance, and the
capacitance connected is relatively large, then the frequency of the decay can dramat­
ically increase. The non­linear behaviour in our case (a utility­scale photovoltaic distri­
bution grid) arises primarily due to the saturable magnetic characteristic of transformer
cores, where the inductance varies significantly with flux level. When the core saturates,
the effective inductance (and thereby the winding reactances) decreases sharply, allowing
higher currents to flow and facilitating energy exchange between inductive and capacitive
elements at other frequencies than the system frequency (Though in the case of ferrores­
onance, these other frequencies are typically very close to the power frequency).
In the instant that the inductance falls and the current draw spikes, a large amount of
electrical energy flows into the transformer core and begins to oscillate between the trans­
former and cable. This exchange in energy causes the voltage to spike again, and thus
allowing more energy to be drawn by the core. Should the natural frequency of the circuit
approach the power frequency, then this ferroresonance can be sustained and catas­
trophic failure can become a serious risk.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
13
==PAGE:22==
To help facilitate understanding of this mechanism, let us observe the following figure,
taken from [3];
Figure 3.1: The different stages of an oscillation in a ferroresonant circuit
When the circuit is initially closed, the capacitor begins to discharge into the inductor, but
the energy transfer is slow due to the high magnetizing inductance before core satura­
tion. As the magnetic core saturates, the inductance sharply decreases, causing a rapid
discharge of the capacitor into the inductor and initiating high­frequency oscillations. Fara­
day’s Law can be used used to analyse the energy exchange via flux linkage, showing how
voltage and current waveforms interact over time. The oscillation frequency is influenced
by several factors, including the inductor’s non­linear characteristics, the initial charge on
the capacitor, and the system’s stray capacitances. Losses in the circuit—from resistive
elements—can dampen the oscillations and decrease their frequency unless compen­
sated by energy from the source. As these losses will dissipate some energy as heat,
each subsequent oscillation’s frequency will fall due to the lower voltage taking longer to
charge the inductance until saturation. This causes the strange oscillations seen in figure
4.2 after t = 3s, where once the source is disconnected the damping causes the decaying
voltage to oscillate progressively slower, whilst still causing the core to saturate (observe
the same period in figure 4.3).
If the natural ferroresonant frequency calculated from the circuit components differs from
the source frequency, it can result in either fundamental mode oscillations (if the natural
frequency is higher) or sub­harmonic modes (if the natural frequency is lower). However,
should the natural frequency of the circuit differ more significantly, the ferroresonance
can remain quasi­static or chaotic for a longer period without ”locking” into a periodic
oscillation.
14
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:23==
4
Simplified Ferroresonance Simulation
As mentioned in the theory, a sustained ferroresonance requires the presence of a voltage
source. In a utility­scale photovoltaic installation, this can be one of two candidates: either
the external grid connected to the installation through the point of connection (POC), or
the solar inverters on the low­voltage (LV) side. For both cases, the other source must
be disconnected or have low load to eliminate significant damping. Due to the typical
energisation sequence of these plants—where the POC is energized first, followed by the
high­voltage (HV), medium­voltage (MV), and finally the LV section—a grid­fed ferrores­
onance is considerably more likely. Such a scenario is often associated with normal op­
erating procedures like plant energisation or de­energisation. In contrast, an inverter­fed
ferroresonance would typically require abnormal conditions such as asymmetric loading,
load rejection, or faulting.
Though it is theoretically possible for inverters to act as a source for ferroresonance,
in practice this is highly unlikely. The cabling between the inverter and the distribution
transformer is typically very short to minimize Ohmic losses (as the voltage is low here),
resulting in significantly reduced cable capacitance. This makes it difficult to achieve the
conditions necessary for ferroresonance. Additionally, most inverters have a substantial
inductance at their output to smooth their internally switched voltage into a usable 50 Hz
sinusoidal waveform. This inductance would require much greater cable capacitance to
lower the natural frequency into a range where ferroresonance could occur. Furthermore,
the vast majority of commercially available solar inverters are grid­following rather than
grid­forming, meaning they rely on the presence of an external voltage reference and are
not designed to sustain voltage independently. The energisation process is also typically
initiated from the grid side first, while de­energisation occurs from the inverter side. At low
load, inverters also operate with lower efficiency, introducing internal damping that further
reduces the likelihood of ferroresonant conditions. For all these reasons, this study will
focus exclusively on grid­fed ferroresonance.
If we observe the distribution grid of a typical utility­scale photovoltaic installation, there
are some typical components that we expect to see. Going from the POC to the grid, we
would expect to see:
• High voltage cables or overhead lines (To transport large amounts of energy at high
voltage with very low losses, they will be inductive in nature)
• A power transformer (Stepping up the voltage from MV to HV)
• MV cables (MV for minimizing losses in the distribution grid)
• Distribution transformers
• LV cables that connect the inverters to the distribution transformer
However, since ferroresonance is a highly localized phenomenon, this project will not
consider the influence of the power transformer on the behaviour of the grid. It is sufficient
to study the interaction of the distribution transformer with the MV cables, as these are
the components most likely to interact during ferroresonance. This is a product of the
MV cables’ significant capacitance (due to their length) and the fact that the distribution
transformer is connected to these cables in a delta configuration.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
15
==PAGE:24==
In this section, we will observe a model of the Kassø installation that aims to show whether
there is a risk of experiencing a ferroresonance during switching, in conditions conducive
to initiating a ferroresonance. To do this, a simplified model is used that implements
the cables as a simple capacitance to ground and the transformer is modelled as a basic
model, with a Jiles­Atherton based approximation of the BH curve. This model would allow
the author to determine whether the system layout was capable of initiating ferroresonant
oscillations. Below is a snapshot of the model as seen in the PSCAD schematic.
Figure 4.1: The Simplified Model
The transformer characteristics are listed in the appendix A.1. In general, very low losses
are assumed (notice that the loading is set to 0.5% of the transformer nominal), and the
nominal flux density used to construct the Jiles­Atherton approximation of the BH curve
is taken from the datasheet of the real distribution transformer used at Kassø that ex­
perienced the catastrophic failure. As it is an off­load tap changing transformer, we can
assume no taps. Even if the transformer was on­load tap changing, the typical time con­
stant for these tap changes is a few seconds, which, as we will see later, is enough time
for a ferroresonance to begin and cause damage to equipment. Therefore, it is typically
sufficient to observe the transformer without tap changers, which is anyway not supported
by the more complex transformer models in PSCAD.
Figure 4.2: The primary and secondary phase voltages and currents observed on the
distribution transformer
Assuming a cable­to­ground capacitance of 10 µF—which corresponds to a cable length
of several kilometers—we observe that when the breaker opens only phase A at 0.5 sec­
onds, the primary­side voltage on phase A begins to oscillate heavily, reaching peak val­
ues close to 150 kV. Given that the MV cables have an insulation limit of 170 kV line­to­
16
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:25==
line, this poses a serious risk of exceeding both insulation and thermal limits, potentially
causing damage to the cables and the transformer. The occurrence of ferroresonance is
confirmed by examining the interphase flux density, as shown in Figure 4.3;
Figure 4.3: The flux between phases in the 10µF case ­ in pu
We see that the flux densities between phase A and B, and phase A and C, are deeply
saturated, confirming the presence of ferroresonance. Additionally, a load rejection (at 1.5
seconds, when current flowing to the load drops to 0) is not an effective means of halting
these non­linear oscillations. We can assess the mode of ferroresonance by looking at
the frequency content of the voltages ­ displayed on figure 4.4, as mentioned in the theory
of ferroresonance. There is evidence of a quasi­static mode that decays to a fundamental
mode just before the load rejection.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.4: The frequency content of phase A during the observed ferroresonance
Increasing this value to 15µF, we see that this severe overvoltage is eliminated, in line
with the theory that for a high enough capacitance the ferroresonance is either entirely
eliminated or significantly reduced. Whether this holds for all possible initial conditions is
difficult to prove, though the resulting waveforms are shown in appendix A.1 and A.2.
18
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:27==
5
UMEC Transformer Model
After the preliminary simulations produced the expected response, it became necessary
to model the transformer more accurately. Until now, a simple transformer using just
winding resistances, leakage inductances, a magnetizing branch and a parallel nonlinear
inductance (for modelling saturation) was used. As several simulations would have to be
conducted later, it was deemed valuable to make a more realistic representation now, to
apply the POW analysis and risk assessment to.
To do this, a choice had to be made on the transformer models available in PSCAD to be
applied. The choice was between a duality­based model (i.e. gyrator­based, that uses
both nodal equations like the basic model, as well as magnetic dual­variables), or a unified
magnetic equivalent circuit (UMEC) transformer model (state­space/hybrid based). Whilst
both present more accurate representations of zero­sequence, mutual coupling effects,
inrush currents as well as providing greater numerical stability, the UMEC equivalent has
the most robust handling of deep saturation effects and the highest numerical stability.
This comes at a cost of increased computational complexity, but since it was relatively
easy to apply and the author had access to sufficient computational resources, the UMEC
was ultimately chosen.
Unlike the other models in PSCAD that use methods such as Jiles­Atherton or Preisach
models to approximate a BH curve based on some real­world or numerical constants, the
UMEC model requires the user to directly input an IV curve. The magnetic characteristic
curves of the actual transformers were available to the author, and 10 points (with a focus
on those near the knee point) were chosen to represent the magnetic behaviour. The
resulting graphs are shown in figure 5.1;
Figure 5.1: The original and applied magnetic characteristic curves
The red points represent the points chosen for the 10­point approximation. On the induc­
tion plot, the connecting lines are displayed to show the slight change the approximation
introduces. Points in the linear region are just that ­ linear, so behaviour in this region can
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
19
==PAGE:28==
be approximated with just a few points. The saturated region is also mostly linear, with
a constant permeability corresponding to that of air. In the transitional region between
these two (the region in close proximity to the knee point), the relationship between ap­
plied voltage and magnetizing current is highly nonlinear, and thus requires more points to
accurately reconstruct the approximated characteristic. As the initiation and propagation
of ferroresonance is highly dependent on the core flux, having an approximation that de­
viates as little as possible from the actual IV characteristic will reconstruct a more realistic
behaviour.
The UMEC transformer models other settings are presented in appendix A.2.
20
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:29==
6
Geometric Cable Model
As mentioned on page 104 and 117 of [3], to capture all of the phase interactions within
the cable, a full frequency­dependent geometric cable model must be applied[5]. This en­
sures the most realistic simulation of all the electromagnetic interactions within the cable.
To facilitate an accurate model of the medium voltage cables in the installation, PSCAD’s
cable design component wizard was applied. A geometric cable model was then devel­
oped for each of the 30kV cables ­ those between the distribution transformer and MV
switchgear, as well as the one between the MV switchgear and the power transformer.
6.1
30kV 150mm2 Cable Model
PSCAD does not support modelling pipe­type cables with a non­circular cross section.
The cables used in the Kassø installation have both a triangular cross section and an
asymmetric metallic screen below the outer sheath (Copper wires sheath bonded by a
helical strip of copper tape). As such, any attempt to model the real cable would result in
sequence values that deviate from the expected values provided by the cable manufac­
turer. To illustrate some of the differences, we can observe the 3D renditions below:
(a) Original 30kV Cable model
(b) My applied 30kV Cable Model
Figure 6.1: The actual vs. my own 30kV cable models
In the above figures we can clearly see the difference in cross section, though how I chose
to handle the difference in metallic sheath distribution is more subtle. I took the equivalent
cross­sectional area of the copper wires and tape, and equated that to the cross sectional
area of a pipe surrounding the semi­conductive tape. This inevitably also makes the cable
slightly thinner than the real cable, as well as more symmetric ­ pushing the zero sequence
values towards the positive sequence values. This lead to the following differences in the
sequence values (at 50Hz):
Parameter
Datasheet
PSCAD
% Deviation of PSCAD
R1 (Ωkm−1)
2.06E­1
1.88E­1
­8.90%
X1 (Ωkm−1)
1.64E­1
8.99E­2
­45.29%
B1 (S km−1)
6.09E­5
4.75E­5
­22.04%
R0 (Ωkm−1)
5.52E­1
8.67E­1
57.10%
X0 (Ωkm−1)
6.81E­1
4.12E­1
­39.51%
B0 (S km−1)
X
2.69E­5
N/A
Table 6.1: Comparison of the 150mm2 cables electrical parameters between Datasheet
and PSCAD
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
21
==PAGE:30==
Keep in mind, that the values found in PSCAD are also long­line corrected, whereas
the datasheet values are likely a per­km π equivalent that only maintains a sufficiently
small error at small lengths. This correction introduces a change that is so small that it
doesn’t have more than a 0.01% impact on any of the constants, though this is due to
the approximately 2km long line. At higher lengths, the error becomes non­negligible.
Additionally, the datasheet does not provide any zero sequence capacitance, a value that
is hugely consequential to the evolution of ferroresonance. The zero sequence resistance
I modelled is almost 60% higher than the datasheet value, and this is due to the change in
geometry of the metallic screen (A change I will call ”circularization” from now on ­ observe
the 3rd layer from the left of both cables on the 3D rendition). Since the screen has been
made thinner and it’s surface area reduced (As well as the rounding of it rather than the
triangular shape that has a much lower average distance to the conductors), we do expect
this result. Additionally, since the asymmetrical flux leakage has been reduced by the
circularization of the outer sheath, we observe the non­negligible decrease in sequence
reactance components. So the circularization has decreased the sheath’s surface area,
decreased the sheath thickness, increased the mean return path length, increased the
average distance between the sheath and the conductors, and reduced asymmetrical
flux leakage. All of these are in tune with the changes seen in the sequence components.
The sequence values are presented in appendix A.3.
6.2
30kV 500mm2 Cable Model
As was done with the above 150mm2 cable, a similar geometric cable was made of the
500mm2 cable. In the Kassø installation, a dual­trefoil configuration of these cables was
used, with a spacing of 225mm between trefoil groups. As of these cables have circular
cross sections, fewer modifications have to be made to implement a functional replica.
The main difference between the modelled 500mm2 cable and the one displayed in the
datasheet is the fact that the real copper sheath consists of several conductors and tape,
which again, were simply aggregated into a single conductive layer with an identical cross­
sectional area to the datasheet value (77mm2). Additionally, the Kassø installation exclu­
sively uses paired trefoil configurations. However, for the single trefoil configuration the
following sequence parameters are achieved for a single kilometre of cabling:
Parameter
Datasheet
PSCAD
% Deviation of PSCAD
R1 (Ωkm−1)
6.05E­2
9.25E­2
52.84%
X1 (Ωkm−1)
1.03E­1
2.11E­1
104.37%
B1 (S km−1)
9.61E­5
1.58E­4
64.44%
R0 (Ωkm−1)
4.73E­1
4.29E­1
10.33%
X0 (Ωkm−1)
6.05E­1
2.08E­1
­65.60%
B0 (S km−1)
X
1.58E­4
N/A
Table 6.2: Comparison of the 500mm2 cables electrical parameters between Datasheet
and PSCAD
The differences are more extreme, and the reason why is not entirely clear. The changes
to the geometric cable model due to the circularization led to a sharper increase in resis­
tance, as expected ­ though the significantly higher inductance is suspected to be caused
by a reduction to the geometric mean radius, though the magnitude of the difference sug­
gests that something else is amiss. Late in the project it became apparent that I had
misread the sheath metal as copper, when it is in fact aluminium. This doesn’t entirely
22
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:31==
explain the difference either, though since the model was already applied in several sim­
ulations, it was kept as is.
The sequence values are presented in appendix A.4.
6.3
30kV 2x500mm2 Cable Model
Continuing from the single trefoil 500mm2 cable model, a geometric model was applied of
the dual trefoil configuration with phase mirroring (the case resulting in the weakest ca­
pacitive coupling between the trefoil groups), and a single kilometer yielded the following
results:
Parameter
PSCAD
R1 (Ωkm−1)
9.35E­2
X1 (Ωkm−1)
2.09E­1
B1 (S km−1)
1.58E­4
R0 (Ωkm−1)
3.18E­1
X0 (Ωkm−1)
2.20E­1
B0 (S km−1)
1.58E­4
Table 6.3: The sequence values for each trefoil circuit, output by the geometric cable
model in PSCAD
We see a minute deviation from the single trefoil configuration, though it is very small.
Should one fail to correctly mirror the phase configuration between trefoils, the sequence
parameters would differ much more greatly. Incorrect phase mirroring would increase the
positive sequence due to a drop in the partial cancellation of magnetic fields. It would
also greatly increase the zero sequence inductance, as during asymmetry there would be
lower opposing field cancellation. Lastly, the zero sequence capacitance would also rise
from incorrect mirroring, as the effective mutual capacitive coupling between conductors
in the adjacent trefoils would be increased.
The sequence values are presented in appendix A.5.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
23
==PAGE:32==
7
POW Simulation
To assess the risk of developing a ferroresonance, it became necessary to find a suit­
able method of quantifying the risk of developing a ferroresonance. Rather than using
the boundary calculation based on formula 2.3, which not only applies to transformers
with a very specific winding ratio but also does not present the assumed variables, a new
method is applied. By running several POW (point­on­wave) simulations, we can assess
which points on the wave where a switching transient appears can initiate a ferroreso­
nance. To do this, it was necessary to find some representative variables that could help
assess whether a ferroresonance has occurred. To do this, some high level logic was
implemented, explained further below. The following screenshot of the PSCAD canvas
displays the advanced model, complete with the UMEC transformer and both geometric
cable models.
7.1
High­Level Logic
Figure 7.1: The UMEC model, with both 30kV cable types shown
7.1.1
Measurement Variables
Above we can see the model of the individual components of the distribution network. We
have a very realistic transformer and cable model, with a strong grid connected and a very
low load on the LV, star­connected side. Some variables that could represent important
indicators of whether a ferroresonance had occurred during a particular simulation had to
be chosen. The variables I chose were the maximum observed primary and secondary
phase voltages, as well as their 3 phase RMS’s and those of the primary and secondary
currents, and the maximum core flux in each phase. Below I explain why:
• Maximum primary and secondary phase voltages: To assess whether the voltage
exceeds the insulation thresholds of the LV and MV sides.
• 3 phase primary/secondary RMS voltage to see if the above voltage is the max
(transient case) or if the ferroresonance surpasses it (indicates that power draw is
extremely high).
• 3 phase primary/secondary RMS current to ensure that the current draw is high,
indicates a ferroresonance has occurred.
• Flux density in each leg of the core of the transformer ­ surpasses knee point flux
density if a ferroresonance has occurred.
These were implemented in PSCAD as follows:
24
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:33==
Figure 7.2: The measured signals
Whilst several of these variables can spike during normal operation, the combined image
these variables provide helps qualify at face value whether the modelled distribution grid
has experienced a ferroresonance. However, their timing is very consequential in painting
this picture, so a variety of gating signals were used to control when these measurements
are taken.
7.1.2
Gating
The simulations performed have a particular order within which events are timed. The ob­
served time is separated into 4 regions, the settling time, the transient period, the steady­
state and the decay. During the settling time, the system is allowed to reach a normal
operating steady­state that has very low loading but is rather unspectacular, and lasts
approximately half a second (To allow the strong grid connection ample time to approach
steady state). The transient period lasts just over one second, and contains the initial
chaotic ferroresonance and subsequent large TOV (Transient Overvoltage) that can pose
a threat to insulation voltage limits. The steady­state period is where the ferroresonance
can settle to a typically periodic steady­state ­ but will not necessarily do so. If a periodic
steady state is excited, we will see a large current draw, and the last second will indi­
cate the point at which the current path is fully interrupted. During each of these distinct
periods, ferroresonance plays an important role in the observed waveforms. Should a
ferroresonance occur, the TOV will be large ­ larger than the transient observed during
the opening of a typical inductive circuit (Usually not more than 2.5 pu), and RMS voltages
in the steady state period will also be high. Flux density during the steady state period
will be well above the knee point of the BH curve, indicating a deep magnetic saturation.
Another indication of ferroresonance one can glean from the time signals comes from the
decay period, where the magnetic fields will collapse and oscillate with a rapidly falling
frequency. To control the timing of when measurements are being taken, gating signals
are used and timed as follows:
• Transient Period (0.6s ≤t ≤tdecay) →Max(V p/sA/B/C, V sA/B/C)
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
25
==PAGE:34==
• Steady­State Period (1.7s ≤t ≤tdecay) →Max(V p/sRMS, Ip/sRMS, BA/B/C)
Figure 7.3: The gating signals
Above we can see how the gating signals are generated using comparators and simulation
time as a variable.
7.1.3
Zero Crossing Detection
When doing a POW analysis, we typically do not change anything about the system lay­
out, just the signal timing. In that context, it would not be necessary to closely monitor the
timing of the transient initiation to do a POW analysis, we can just vary the POW from 0 to
T (Wave period,
1
50Hz = 0.02s = 20ms in our system), and see how many points resulted
in evidence of a ferroresonance. The higher the granulation of the wave, the higher the
accuracy of the results. However, should one wish to change the system layout or com­
ponent sizes between runs, this would start changing the times at which waveforms cross,
thus rendering it difficult to compare the effect of incrementing system variables when this
causes other aspects of the model to change as well. To mitigate this issue and make sim­
ulations more comparable, a rising­zero­crossing detector was implemented. The value it
provides is that regardless of how your incrementation affects waveform timing, the mag­
netic conditions within the core are as close as they can be during the initiation of the
transient between runs. I implemented this as follows:
Figure 7.4: The rising­zero­crossing detector
By comparing the sign of the waveform being monitored before and after a single time
step, we get a rising zero crossing detector with an accuracy of 1 time step ­ which across
all the simulations used in this paper is 1µs. Using this rising zero crossing ”flag”, we
can make sure that all POW studies begin at the same point­on­wave between different
simulations.
7.2
Risk Assessment
Now that all the necessary tools for applying the proposed risk assessment strategy are
in place, it became helpful to understand the instantaneous conditions in the transformer
and cable that make the system more conducive to developing a ferroresonance. The
following factors are known to influence the evolution of ferroresonance:
1. Transformer core characteristics:
26
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:35==
• Magnetization curve nonlinearity: The sharper the knee of the BH curve, the
more abrupt the saturation and the more likely ferroresonance is triggered
• Hysteresis: Through its effects on remanent flux and nonlinear magnetization,
influences both the initiation and persistence of ferroresonance. While not the
primary trigger, hysteretic losses reduce effective damping and can support
sustained resonance under marginal conditions.
• Remanent Flux: The presence of residual magnetization at the instant of switch­
ing can excite a resonant mode.
2. System capacitance:
• Cable length: Long underground cables (common in utility scale PV installa­
tion) add significant capacitance that drive ferroresonance
• Bus capacitance/Capacitor banks: Can contribute to the total capacitive energy
storage
• Grading Capacitance: Having a large grading capacitance over the terminals
of the circuit breaker to regulate the voltage can actually contribute to increased
risk of experiencing ferroresonance
3. Source Voltage Magnitude and Frequency:
• Overvoltage: Even a modest 1.1 pu can cause an oscillaltion that pushes the
core into saturation
• Frequency: High frequency or harmonics can excite resonant modes
4. Loading Conditions:
• Asymmetric Loading: Unbalanced loading can both initiate and exacerbate the
risks of experiencing ferroresonance
• Light load: As this directly reduces damping, lighter loading increases the like­
lihood of sustaining ferroresonant oscillations
5. Switching Events and timing:
• Phase displacement of switching instants: (e.g. switching of a transformer at
a voltage zero­crossing)
• Delayed phase reclosing: If the open breakers are not sufficiently quickly re­
closed w.r.t one another, the resulting asymmetry can give rise to a ferroreso­
nance
6. Neutral Grounding Configuration:
• Isolated or high­impedance neutral systems are much more prone to ferrores­
onance
• Solid grounding: Introduces damping by draining capacitive zero­sequence
currents.
7. Presence of Nonlinear or Time­Delayed Components:
• Saturable reactors, MOVs, or surge arresters can temporarily shift system dy­
namics, depending on their voltage­time response.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
27
==PAGE:36==
• Their behavior can either suppress or trigger ferroresonant transients, and are
often challenging to implement correctly
We can see from the above list, that there are several factors that contribute to the ini­
tiation and sustenance of a ferroresonance. Whilst several of these are intuitive based
on the , additional attention will be paid to the loading conditions. According to [5], in
distribution grids with a strong grid connection (high short circuit ratio), one of the most
common mechanism initiating a ferroresonance is asymmetric loading, i.e. asymmetric
circuit breaking. Below we can see a simplified equivalent circuit of the distribution system
and the resulting ferroresonant circuit when circuit breaking is not coordinated correctly:
7.3
Simulation Predictions
To help minimize the necessary number of future simulations, it was decided that POW
simulations for all possible asymmetric loading conditions would be performed. These
would help elucidate the relationship between the POW of the initiation of the switching
transient and the resulting ferroresonance ­ if it is induced. However, preliminary expec­
tations are good to have, and this is what I expect:
Since the timing of a transient excitation is known to be impactful to the resulting tempo­
rary overvoltage (TOV)’s magnitude and the amount of inrush current, it is by extension
consequential to the initiation mechanisms of ferroresonance. We know that the high­
est TOV produced during the sudden disconnection of an inductive circuit is during the
zero crossing of the voltage, when the inductive current is at it’s maximum. Since this will
cause the steepest decline of the current from 1 pu to 0, it will have the highest dI/dt, and
thereby generate a large overvoltage (Due to the relationship between the voltage and
change in current of an inductor). Since the distribution grid is still mostly inductive, it is a
fair assumption that switching during one of the zero crossing of the disconnected phases
will yield the greatest chance of initiation.
For a single phase opening event, the worst time to switch will likely be near the voltage
zero­crossing, and for the 2 phase case it will likely be a combination of a large TRV caus­
ing saturation at voltage zero­crossing (current peak) and a DC offset causing saturation
between phases.
28
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:37==
8
Simulation Results
8.1
Station 4 Case Study
To observe the interactions of the most accurate transformer models with the geometric
cable model of the 500mm2 cable, a case study of station 4, one of the dozen or so stations
connecting the distribution transformers to the power transformer. It is of particular interest
as it has more than 2 km of this MV cabling between the MV switchgear and the power
transformer. Since the cable between the switchgear and the distribution transformer (the
150mm2 cable) is only 10 meters long, it was ignored because it has a very small influence
and would require a very small time step to model accurately.
The current model would be capable of modelling the local transient behaviour with a sig­
nificantly higher accuracy than earlier permitted. To then assess the risk of initiating a fer­
roresonance, the methodology using POW simulations was implemented. To capture all
possible extremes (zero crossings and plateaus) of all phases, at least 12 equally spaced
points on a single phase were chosen. Where specified, more or less points are used,
though 12 points should suffice in describing the relationship between the instantaneous
winding voltages/currents and the resulting boundaries for ferroresonant oscillation.
To help minimize the necessary number of future simulations, it was decided that POW
simulations for all possible asymmetric loading conditions would be performed. These
would help elucidate the relationship between the POW of the initiation of the switching
transient and the resulting ferroresonance ­ if it is induced. Since the timing of a tran­
sient excitation is known to be impactful to the resulting temporary overvoltage (TOV)’s
magnitude and the amount of DC inrush current, it is by extension consequential to the
initiation of ferroresonance. We know that the highest TOV produced during the sudden
disconnection of an inductive circuit is during the zero crossing of the voltage, when the
inductive current is at it’s maximum.
The more deeply saturated the core becomes, the higher the resulting TOV will be, as
a deeper saturation results in a larger exchange of energy between the inductive and
capacitive components. This is will become evident just below, where higher overvoltages
are coupled with higher maximum flux densities.
Below are the maximum MV­side overvoltages and the maximum flux of each phase (flux
measured 1.1 seconds after the circuit breakers open) achieved after CB opening at the
respective times on the voltage waveforms.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 8.1: Max. MV side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A whilst
transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure 8.2: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Above we see that the single phase opening causes a significant ferroresonance during
the rising portion of the voltage waveform ­ when the current is in the positive half wave.
In this case the transient line to line primary voltages reach a maximum value of almost
3.5 pu (about 100 kV l­l). Whilst not enough to violate the voltage limits of the line, it
can cause significant heating of the transformer windings and the cables. Below we can
observe the cases where two phases are opened:
30
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:39==
Figure 8.3: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+C
whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure 8.4: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+B
whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
From the above results, we can clearly see that the A+B (1 inner and 1 outer limb phase)
causes the largest TOV’s (over 4 pu ­ about 128 kV l­l) as well as what POW a transient
initiation causes these severe oscillations. Here, it becomes clear that the highest mag­
netic saturation is reached when several phases are broken. Additionally, these graphs
illustrate that only the A+B case resulted in sustained ferroresonance at all POW of initia­
tion. This is indicative that, for any given level of loading, assessing the risk of developing
a ferroresonance can be done by studying this particular loading configuration. This acts
as the first step in the risk assessment. To then discern the minimum loading necessary to
limit the propagation time of ferroresonance, the same POW analysis can be done whilst
incrementing the loading. Below are the responses observed with a load of 0.5% of the
transformer nominal:
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 8.5: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure 8.6: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure 8.7: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+C
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
32
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:41==
Figure 8.8: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+B
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Here we can see that, again, the A+B case presents the most significant overvoltages and
core saturation. With this confirmation, we can use the POW of opening phases A+B to
find the minimum loading necessary to excite a ferroresonance. This was done by finding
the minimum loading necessary to limit core saturation to 2 periods (and thereby limit
overvoltage and only saturate for a single ferroresonant cycle (p 30) of [3]). This yielded
the following relationship between minimum loading and cable lengths:
Figure 8.9: Minimum loading for varied lengths of the 500mm2 cable to prevent ferrores­
onance
In addition to the measured points, a graph showing a suggested relationship between
the applied load and the cable length is presented. The points below 5 km have greater
granulation as these are lengths that are used in the Kassø installation. The proposed
formula is presented here:
Pload = −0.285 · e−2.71·10−4·l + 0.3
(8.1)
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
33
==PAGE:42==
Where l is the length of the 500mm2 cable connected to the 30kV side of the transformer.
This relationship provides a small headroom of for the minimum loading. To confirm that
this load level is sufficient for all cases, a final POW study is conducted in all loading
configurations on the actual length of cabling used in station 4, as well as some other
representative cases (1500m, 2500m and 5000m):
With a 1500m cable, the relationship yields;
Pload = −0.285 · e−2.71·10−4·1500 + 0.30 ≈0.1102pu ≈485kW
485kW ≈1.32Ω@ 0.8kV
This process is repeated inserting the corresponding loading into the PSCAD model and
checking that no POW of any switching action causes a ferroresonance. Below are the
results of the 1500m case:
Figure 8.10: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A with 0.1102 pu loading
Figure 8.11: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B with 0.1102 pu loading
34
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:43==
Figure 8.12: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+C with 0.1102 pu
loading
Figure 8.13: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+B with 0.1102 pu
loading
The 2500m and 5000m cases can be found in appendix A.47 to A.54, and show that
the proposed length to loading relationship outputs correct values of minimum loading at
higher cable lengths.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
35
==PAGE:44==
8.2
2141m 150mm2 cable study
The same process was then conducted with the 150mm2 cable, at an equal length to the
last case study as to compare behaviour. We start by identifying which POW of the loading
configurations results in a ferroresonance, below are the cases for 0.5% load, which can
be compared to the 500mm2 case;
Figure 8.14: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure 8.15: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
36
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:45==
Figure 8.16: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+C
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure 8.17: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+B
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
The rest of the POW analyses can be found in appendix A.23 to A.42. Once again, the
results along with observing the evolution in time showed that the ferroresonance per­
sisted for it’s longest on the A+B broken case. However, in comparison to the results
presented in figures 8.5 to 8.8, we can see that this cable is significantly less likely to
initiate a ferroresonance, and the observed transients peak much lower than in the case
of the 500mm2 cable. Using the knowledge of the POW most likely to initiate a ferroreso­
nance, we can now find the boundary values. The following graph outlines the relationship
between cable length and minimum loading, along with a suggested empirical expression:
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 8.18: Minimum loading for varied lengths of the 150mm2 cable to prevent ferrores­
onance
We see that there is an x­intercept, which seems accurate, as at 250m of cables, I was
unable to excite a ferroresonant mode ­ indicating the capacitance is too low to initiate a
ferroresonance. Below the empirical relationship is displayed:
Pload = −7.133 · 10−4 · e−7.977·10−4·l + 6.119 · 10−3
(8.2)
Where l is the length of the 500mm2 cable connected to the 30kV side of the transformer.
This relationship provides a small headroom for the minimum loading, such that minimum
loading is never undershot. To confirm that this load level is sufficient for all cases, a final
POW study is conducted in all loading configurations on the actual length of cabling used
in station 4, as well as some other representative cases (1500m, 2500m and 5000m):
With a 2000m cable, the relationship yields;
Pload = −7.133 · 10−4 · e−7.977·10−4·2000 + 6.119 · 10−3 ≈4.67 · 10−3pu ≈20.6kW
20.6kW ≈31.07Ω@ 0.8kV
We can then perform the final sanity check POW to ensure that the above expression
does represent loading at the specified cable lengths that will damp out all possible fer­
roresonances. The case of breaking phase A+B on a 2000m long cable was chosen to
investigate this:
38
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:47==
Figure 8.19: The observed voltages on the primary and core flux
We can see that whilst there is no evidence of a sustained ferroresonance, the over­
voltages observed when switching just prior to the peak of phase A caused a small fer­
roresonance. I erroneously chose the points immediately after phase B peaks as my
only qualifier for the necessary damping, which is obvious since they experience a very
small overvoltage that narrowly avoids exciting more significant oscillations. Additionally,
since the margin here is so small (observe how small the normalised values are on the
axes of figure ??), my small buffer proved to be too small. This is easily remedied by re­
determining the boundaries using the same method, and the correct ”worst­case” POW
of transient initiation:
Figure 8.20: Correct minimum loading for varied lengths of the 150mm2 cable to prevent
ferroresonance
Pload = −1.3 · 10−2 · e−53.81·2000 + 1.339 · 10−2 ≈6.29 · 10−3pu ≈27.7kW
27.7kW ≈23.11Ω@ 0.8kV
And the sanity check of breaking phase A+B on a 2000m long cable:
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
39
==PAGE:48==
8.3
Comparison of Normalised Components
To compare the response of the two cable models, we can normalise the zero sequence
susceptance of each cable (output by PSCAD) and compare how the minimum loading for
each cable compares. This can be compared to equation 2.3 (note that the prerequisite
transformation ratio Un : 0.11 : 0.11 listed in [4] is more than four times the distribution
transformer’s ratio (about Un : 0.026)).
Here are the plots displaying the minimum loading as a function of the cable’s zero se­
quence susceptance, where both are normalised to the nominal power rating of the ditri­
bution transformer:
Figure 8.21: Minimum loading vs zero sequence susceptance of the 500mm2 cable to
prevent ferroresonance
Figure 8.22: Minimum loading vs zero sequence susceptance of the 150mm2 cable to
prevent ferroresonance
Plotting the obtained curves together, we get the following:
40
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:49==
Figure 8.23: The two curves empirically generated to limit ferroresonance by applying
damping
Whilst they look much more similar close up, plotting both over a full range of zero se­
quence susceptances shows very different responses. With the 150mm2 cable having
a much lower susceptance, it also requires significantly less damping to eliminate fer­
roresonances (though one must be cautious extrapolating an empirical model that was
developed with such small values of susceptance to significantly higher ones). Further
simulations would elucidate more, though due to the limited applicability in the real world
it was left for future endeavours.
8.4
Active Damping
To ensure that the boundary values for the minimum loading can be used as an active
damping measure, we can conduct a POW analysis where a high value of cable length
and low level of loading is chosen, and a ferroresonance is induced using the timing
shown in the numerous POW analyses already performed. By injecting the load specified
by equation 8.1 during the onset of ferroresonance, we can assess how effective the
proposed values are for eliminating a ferroresonance that has already begun. To make the
assessment, we can observe the 500mm2 cable at 2141 metres (The station 4 case) and
5000 meters ­ with an initial loading of 0.1% to guarantee the initiation of ferroresonance.
Below we see the application of 618 kW of load calculated from 8.1 for a 2141 meter long
500mm2 cable connected to the UMEC transformer:
Figure 8.24: Applying damping as an active measure on a 2km long line
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
41
==PAGE:50==
We can see that the effect of the increased damping is immediate and effective. The
ferroresonance is snuffed out within a single period, confirming that damping is just as
effective when it is introduced as when it is implemented passively. Below is the applica­
tion of a corresponding load calculated from equation 8.1 at 1.5 seconds during a severe
periodic ferroresonance caused by breaking phase A+B on a 5km long line:
Figure 8.25: Applying damping as an active measure on a very long line
8.5
Phase Mirroring
As mentioned earlier, the order of phases in adjacent trefoil configurations is very con­
sequential to the resulting zero sequence parameters. An example is shown below of a
case previously studied, namely the 0.5% loaded Station 4 case where phase A+B are
broken.
Figure 8.26: The effect of using an alternate phase order with greater magnetic and ca­
pacitive coupling between trefoil groups.
For reference, the original response is displayed below:
42
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:51==
Figure 8.27: The original response using correct phase ordering in the trefoils
This illustrates how the phase ordering can completely change the behaviour of the grid
­ and in almost every single case the observed behaviour will be more extreme as phase
symmetry only serves to increase the coupling between phases as well as introducing
increased parasitics.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
43
==PAGE:52==
9
Further Work
Much research remains to be done, to better understand the mechanisms that allow fer­
roresonance to propagate. Whilst EMTP simulation tools and empirical conclusions have
been used to formulate the boundaries found in this report, there do exist other methods
such as the use of Poincaré plots that serve as analytical tools for identifying the modes
of ferroresonance.
Additionally, whilst all the components modelled are highly accurate, there are still other
factors that can heavily influence the behviour that are not included, for example the har­
monic filters that are connected tot he distribution grid at the PtX facility. Non­linear filters
can have both a positive and a negative influence on the likelihood of developing a severe
ferroresonance.
Lastly, whilst an approach to assessing the risk is heavily discussed in this project, ad­
ditional tools such as dynamic systems modelling tools and real world measurements of
e.g. the grading capacitance over the terminals of the circuit breakers would be a very
useful set of tools to help minimize the amount of time spent conducting long EMT sim­
ulations with minute time steps. The grading capacitance provides a potential path for a
series ferroresonance to develop.
44
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Sa’ad Haji Bini et al. “Analytical prediction of initiation of ferroresonance modes”.
eng. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1529.3 (2020), p. 032087. ISSN:
17426588, 17426596. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1529/3/032087.
[2]
Paul Boucherot. “Existence de deux régimes en ferro­résonance”. In: Revue Générale
de l’Électricité VIII.24 (Dec. 1920), pp. 827–828.
[3]
CIGRÉ Working Group C4.307. Resonance and Ferroresonance in Power Net­
works. Technical Brochure No. 569. Paris, France: CIGRÉ, Feb. 2014. ISBN: 978­
2­85873­264­7.
[4]
Rusck. “Ferro­resonance in voltage­transformers”. und. In: Asea Journal 30.1­2
(1957), pp. 20–22. ISSN: 00012459.
[5]
Filipe Faria da Silva and Claus Leth Bak. Electromagnetic Transients in Power Ca­
bles. Springer­Verlag London, 2013. ISBN: 978­1­4471­5235­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-
1-4471-5236-1.
[6]
Alexandre B. Nassif et al. “Managing Ferroresonance Overvoltages in Distribution
Systems”. eng. In: 2019 Ieee Canadian Conference of Electrical and Computer En­
gineering, Ccece 2019 (2019). ISSN: 08407789, 25767046. DOI: 10.1109/CCECE.
2019.8861797.
[7]
T. Shijin et al. “Calculation and Simulating Experiment on Effectiveness of Anti­
Ferroresonance Methods for 10kV Transmission Line”. In: Proceedings of the 20th
International Symposium on High Voltage Engineering (ISH). ISH. Aug. 2017.
[8]
Y.L. Saenko and A.S. Popov. “Investigated ferroresonance processes without ground
fault”. In: Journal of Electrical Engineering 2020 (2020), pp. 55–62.
[9]
C. Kieny, G. Le Roy, and A. Sbai. “Ferroresonance study using Galerkin method with
pseudo­arclength continuation method”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery.
Vol. 6. 4. 1991, pp. 1841–1847.
[10]
L. Gerardo and D. V. Coury. “Resonance and Ferroresonance in Power Networks:
Phenomena and Protection”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 173 (2019),
pp. 73–81. DOI: 10.1016/j.epsr.2019.04.015.
[11]
M. H. Nazari, A. Gholami, and S. M. Shahrtash. “Diagnosis of Ferroresonance
Events in Power Systems Using Time­Frequency Analysis”. In: IET Generation,
Transmission & Distribution 12.4 (2018), pp. 960–967. DOI: 10.1049/iet-gtd.2017.
0709.
[12]
A. Author. “Managing ferroresonance overvoltages in distribution systems”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery 22.3 (2007), pp. 1752–1760.
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
A.1
Simplified Case
Parameter
Value
Rated Power
4400 kVA
Base Operation Frequency
50.0 Hz
Winding #1 Type
∆
Winding #2 Type
Y
Delta Lags or Leads Y
Leads
Positive Sequence Leakage Reactance
0.04 pu
Ideal Transformer Model
No
Eddy Current Losses
0.002 pu
Copper Losses
0.02 pu
Tap Changer on Winding
None
Saturation Enabled
Yes
Place Saturation on Winding
Middle
Hysteresis
Jiles_Atherton
Inrush Delay Time Constant
1.0 s
Time to Release Flux Clipping
0.1 s
Air Core Reactance
0.2 pu
Magnetizing Current
1.6 %
Knee Voltage
1.2 pu
Remanent Flux Core 1
0.0 pu
Remanent Flux Core 2
0.0 pu
Remanent Flux Core 3
0.0 pu
Loop Width
10
Nominal Flux Density
1.415 T
Magnetic Material
default
Table A.1: Simple 3 Phase 2 Winding Transformer Characteristics
Figure A.1: The primary and secondary phase voltages and currents observed on the
distribution transformer
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.2: The flux between phases in the 10µF case
A.2
Additional UMEC Transformer characteristics
Table A.2: Transformer Characteristics
Parameter
Value
Transformer Core Construction
Three­limb
Transformer MVA
4.4 [MVA]
Primary Voltage (Line­Line, RMS)
30.4 [kV]
Secondary Voltage (Line­Line, RMS)
0.8 [kV]
Winding #1 Type
Delta
Winding #2 Type
Y
Delta Lags or Leads Y
Leads
Base Operation Frequency
50.0 [Hz]
Leakage Reactance
0.09 [pu]
No Load Losses
0.000602 [pu]
Copper Losses
0.00884 [pu]
Model Saturation?
Yes
Tap Changer Winding
None
48
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:57==
A.3
30 kV, 150mm2 geometric cable model sequence values
Sequence Type
Parameter
Symbol
Unit
Value
Positive Seq (Corrected)
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000893540510
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.000427987157
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.00997969417
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.207088867
Zero Seq (Corrected)
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.00412867806
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.00196111205
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.00564261239
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.589537037
Positive Seq
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000893541779
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.000427986129
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.00997969067
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.207088655
Zero Seq
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.00412869326
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.00196109960
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.00564260723
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.589535437
A.4
30 kV, 500mm2 geometric cable model sequence values
Sequence Type
Parameter
Symbol
Unit
Value
Positive Seq (Corrected)
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000440193513
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.00100571395
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332035221
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.174038431
Zero Seq (Corrected)
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.00225339991
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.000990929121
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332035194
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.172754447
Positive Seq
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000440198430
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.00100571846
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332034300
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.174039062
Zero Seq
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.00225342453
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.000990906355
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332034300
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.172752695
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
49
==PAGE:58==
A.5
30 kV, 2x500mm2 geometric cable model sequence values
Sequence Type
Parameter
Symbol
Unit
Value
Pos Seq (Corrected) ­ Ckt 1
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000445181169
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.000996595085
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332035212
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.173247629
Zero Seq (Corrected) ­ Ckt 1
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.00151310825
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.00104536397
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332035249
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.177435971
Pos Seq (Corrected) ­ Ckt 2
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000445181169
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.000996595088
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332035212
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.173247629
Zero Seq (Corrected) ­ Ckt 2
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.00151310825
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.00104536397
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332035249
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.177435971
Zero Seq Mutual (Corrected)
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000851253133
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
­0.00027500231
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.000000025893
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.000000000
Pos Seq ­ Ckt 1
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000445186097
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.000996599465
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332034300
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.173248247
Zero Seq ­ Ckt 1
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.00151312312
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.00104535370
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332034300
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.177435353
Pos Seq ­ Ckt 2
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000445186098
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.000996599468
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332034300
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.173248248
Zero Seq ­ Ckt 2
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.00151312312
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
0.00104535370
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.0332034300
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.177435353
Zero Seq Mutual
Resistance
Rsq
[pu]
0.000851258306
Reactance
Xsq
[pu]
­0.000275019769
Susceptance
Bsq
[pu]
0.000000000
Surge Impedance
Zcsq
[pu]
0.000000000
50
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:59==
A.6
POW Simulations for Station 4 Model
Below are the results of the POW simulations conducted on the complete model of the
station 4 distribution grid with 2141m of the 500mm2 cable, at varying loading levels and
load configurations:
A.6.1
Outer Phase (A) broken
Figure A.3: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure A.4: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.5: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 1%
Figure A.6: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 5%
Figure A.7: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 10%
52
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:61==
A.6.2
Inner Phase (B) broken
Figure A.8: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure A.9: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure A.10: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 1%
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.11: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 5%
Figure A.12: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 10%
54
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:63==
A.6.3
Outer Phases (A+C) broken
Figure A.13: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure A.14: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure A.15: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 1%
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.16: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 5%
Figure A.17: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 10%
56
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:65==
A.6.4
Mixed Phases (A+B) broken
Figure A.18: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure A.19: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure A.20: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 1%
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.21: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 5%
Figure A.22: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 10%
58
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:67==
A.7
POW Simulations for 150mm2 Model
Below are the results of the POW simulations conducted on the complete model of the
distribution grid with 2141m of the 150mm2 cable, at varying loading levels and load con­
figurations:
A.7.1
Outer Phase (A) broken
Figure A.23: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure A.24: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.25: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 1%
Figure A.26: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 5%
Figure A.27: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A
whilst transformer loaded 10%
60
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:69==
A.7.2
Inner Phase (B) broken
Figure A.28: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure A.29: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure A.30: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 1%
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.31: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 5%
Figure A.32: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B
whilst transformer loaded 10%
62
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:71==
A.7.3
Outer Phases (A+C) broken
Figure A.33: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure A.34: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure A.35: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 1%
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.36: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 5%
Figure A.37: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+C whilst transformer loaded 10%
64
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:73==
A.7.4
Mixed Phases (A+B) broken
Figure A.38: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 0.1%
Figure A.39: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 0.5%
Figure A.40: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 1%
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.41: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 5%
Figure A.42: Max. primary side voltages and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phases
A+B whilst transformer loaded 10%
66
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:75==
A.8
500mm2 Cable Relationship
The demonstrations of sufficient loading to dampen all ferroresonances according to equa­
tion 8.1:
Pload = −0.285 · e−2.71·10−4·1500 + 0.30 ≈0.1102pu ≈485kW
A.8.1
1500m
Figure A.43: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A with 0.1102 pu loading
Figure A.44: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B with 0.1102 pu loading
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.45: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+C with 0.1102 pu
loading
Figure A.46: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+B with 0.1102 pu
loading
68
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:77==
A.8.2
2500m
Pload = −0.285 · e−2.71·10−4·2500 + 0.30 ≈0.1553pu ≈855kW
Figure A.47: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A with 0.1553 pu
loading
Figure A.48: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B with 0.1553 pu
loading
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.49: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+C with 0.1553 pu
loading
Figure A.50: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+B with 0.1553 pu
loading
A.8.3
5000m
Pload = −0.285 · e−2.71·10−4·5000 + 0.30 ≈0.2265pu ≈1000kW
70
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.51: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A with 0.2265 pu
loading
Figure A.52: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase B with 0.2265 pu
loading
Figure A.53: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+C with 0.2265 pu
loading
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.54: Max. Vp and core fluxes vs. POW of opening phase A+B with 0.2265 pu
loading
72
Ferroresonance and switching impulses in utility scale photovoltaic solar parks
