==PAGE:1==
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
Identifying vulnerable and obsolete Operational
Technology (OT) systems
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
Identifying vulnerable and obsolete Operational Technology (OT) systems
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Mathias Axel Anguita Andersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build­
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Cybersecurity, Depart­
ment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Den­
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and
Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science.
Mathias Axel Anguita Andersen ­ s194575
Signature
Date
ii
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
2/7/2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With the increasing digitalisation of Operational Technology (OT) included in the fourth
industrial revolution, more and more devices in Industrial Control Systems (ICS) are being
connected to the internet. This rapid increase in connectivity is exposing systems that
were not designed for internet connectivity to public networks and therefore providing
new attack surfaces on critical infrastructure. This thesis aims to shed light on this issue
by identifying exposed ICS devices through internet­wide IPv4 scans. These scans were
performed using the tools ZMap and ZGrab while other tools such as Shodan were used
for data enrichment. Throughout this thesis ZGrab was extended with four new modules
created for banner grabbing the four industrial protocols EtherNet/IP, HART­IP, IEC 60870­
5­104 and OPC Classic. Two full scans were performed using the developed modules and
the results were analysed to determine the extent of the exposure. In total 13,858 systems
were identified of which 12,608 likely represented real ICS devices. Based on standard
OT architecture models all of these devices could be classified as misconfigures as they
should not be openly reachable on the internet. Furthermore, other vulnerability factors
were also identified for a large group of the devices, such as devices being obsolete or
discontinued, exposing real­time process data or access likely with elevated privileges.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my gratitude to
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, for his valuable insight and expertise, his guidance throughout this
thesis, and for proposing this project.
Ricardo Maria Yaben Lopezosa, PhD Student, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, for his insights, the valuable discussions, and his continuous help and
encouragement throughout the process.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends, especially my girlfriend Rasmine.
iv
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Operational Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Operational Technology Protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Internet­Wide Scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Related Work
16
4
Methodology
18
4.1
Scanning Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Testing Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Classifying Vulnerable and Misconfigured Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Implementation
23
5.1
EtherNet/IP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
HART­IP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
IEC 60870­5­104 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
OPC DA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Results & Analysis
30
6.1
EtherNet/IP Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2
Hart IP results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.3
IEC 104 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.4
OPC DA results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7
Discussion
44
7.1
Key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
48
A Code Snippets
55
A.1 Ethernet/IP module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 HART­IP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.3 IEC104
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With the increasing demand for connectivity, more and more devices are being developed
to support the capability to connect to the internet. This trend is also present in industrial
and critical infrastructure systems such as waterworks, power plants, pipelines, chemi­
cal plants and manufacturing plants. This technical surge has been coined as the fourth
industrial revolution or Industry 4.0, which fundamentally can be described as the combi­
nation of digital or computing technologies with physical systems [1].
Enabling connectivity in Industrial Control Systems (ICS) such as Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems used in Operational Technology (OT) has, for the last
10­15 years been the next step for the industrial sector [2]. However, incorrectly imple­
menting the increased connectivity of these systems has expanded the attack surfaces
on the world’s critical infrastructure by exposing systems and devices to the internet that
should not be reachable. This has enabled malicious actors to target more systems which
has caused a rise in attacks against critical infrastructure. In a report done by the Inter­
national Energy Agency (IEA) the number of weekly cyberattacks on selected industries
in the years 2020­2022 was shown. This showed that attacks on utilities, including critical
gas and electricity infrastructure, had doubled from 2020 to 2022 [3] as seen in figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: IEA (2023), Average number of weekly cyberattacks per organisation in se­
lected industries. Graph from [4].
This thesis aims to research and analyse the exposure of devices used in critical infras­
tructure environments to determine whether they are vulnerable, misconfigured, or ob­
solete. ICS rely on a range of specialised communication protocols to operate, and it is
through these protocols that devices can be identified and assessed. This thesis focuses
on four protocols used in operational technology: Ethernet/IP, HART­IP, IEC 60870­5­104
(IEC104), and OPC Classic.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
1
==PAGE:10==
To conduct this analysis, internet­wide scans will be performed using a combination of the
scanning tools ZMap [5] and ZGrab [6]. Furthermore, external sources such as Shodan [7]
will be used to enrich the collected data with additional context and metadata. As part of
this work, new protocol specific modules for ZGrab will be developed for each of the four
targeted protocols. These modules are essential for enabling application layer identifica­
tion and data collection from devices exposed on the internet and will serve as the primary
source of data for this research.
The data collected will be analysed and classified for each protocol individually. This
analysis will focus on protocol specific parameters that indicate device exposure, potential
misconfigurations, and signs of vulnerability or obsolescence. The goal is to provide a
clearer understanding of the current state of ICS device exposure on the internet and to
highlight security risks associated with these critical systems.
The outline of the thesis is as follows: Chapter 2 provides the background on OT and
the structure of ICS, including SCADA and Distributed Control Systems (DCS). It also
introduces the background and technical details of the protocols analysed in this thesis.
Chapter 3 presents related work on OT scanning, highlighting existing approaches and
their results. Chapter 4 describes the methodology, including the scanning approach,
the development of ZGrab extensions for each protocol, the testing environment, criteria
for identifying vulnerable or misconfigured OT devices, and the ethical considerations of
this research. Chapter 5 covers the implementation of the ZGrab modules. Chapter 6
presents and analyses the results of the internet­wide scans, including classification of
the findings. Chapter 7 provides the discussion, summarizing key findings, addressing
limitations, and proposing future work. Finally, Chapter 8 concludes the thesis.
2
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
OT and internet­wide scanning are both comprehensive topics. While this thesis does
not aim to explain every detail, this chapter provides a brief overview of the most relevant
information needed for the work done in this thesis. It begins with an introduction to OT,
followed by a look at the OT protocols selected for this study and an outline of internet­
wide scanning.
2.1
Operational Technology
OT is a term that encapsulates the different devices and components used to control
and manage industrial­scale operations. These devices are crucial for monitoring and
managing industrial systems to ensure availability.
OT can be described as a series of subsystems such as Industrial Control Systems (ICS),
Building Automation System (BAS), Physical Security System etc. However in this thesis
the focus will be on ICS. ICS itself consists of different systems such as Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) and Distributed Control Systems (DCS).
Figure 2.1: Relations of OT subsystems.
2.1.1
SCADA
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition, commonly referred to as SCADA, consists of
both hardware and software components and is used to monitor, control and automate
industrial and infrastructure processes, specifically across large scale geographically dis­
tributed environments [8]. SCADA is usually described into five main components: the
Master Terminal Unit (MTU), Remote Terminal Unit(s) (RTU), Human Machine Interface
(HMI), Historian and the communication link.
• Master Terminal Unit: The MTU is the central monitoring and control device. It can
consist of one or more servers and collects data from RTUs and issues command
signals to manage their operations.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
3
==PAGE:12==
• Remote Terminal Unit: RTUs or substations act as clients to the MTU in a SCADA
systems. They are typically connected to sensors and actuators, collecting real­time
data which is then transmitted to the MTU for monitoring and control.
• Human Machine Interface: The HMI is the interface between SCADA hardware
and software components. It presents real­time data collected by the system in a
graphical and human­readable format, allowing operators to monitor system status.
Additionally, it provides the interface to control the system.
• Historian: The Historian is a specialized database that records time­stamped data
and events from the SCADA system. It logs all process data and communications
between the MTU and RTUs, enabling traceability and report generation. The His­
torian can be integrated into the main SCADA server or deployed on a separate
dedicated server for scalability and performance.
• Communication Network: The communication network is the link that provides
communication services between the different components in the SCADA network.
This communication can be both wired and wireless depending on the specific sys­
tem and its specification.[9]
A SCADA system, incorporating the five main components described above, can be seen
illustrated in figure 2.2. This diagram provides a visual overview of how these components
interact within the overall architecture.
Figure 2.2: SCADA system diagram. [10]
SCADA systems have been in use since the 1960s, evolving significantly over the decades.
While the core architecture still revolves around the five main components described
above, additional components and structural changes have been introduced to meet mod­
4
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:13==
ern demands. This has led to the development of four distinct generations of SCADA
systems [10]:
1. Monolithic SCADA
2. Distributed SCADA
3. Networked SCADA
4. Internet­of­Things SCADA
Monolithic SCADA Systems
The monolithic SCADA system is the earliest version of the SCADA architecture. This was
created before distributed systems and networking between multiple systems. This archi­
tecture was based on one SCADA MTU controlling one or more RTUs. These systems
operated in isolation, with limited scalability and minimal integration capabilities [10].
Figure 2.3: Monolithic SCADA architecture. [10]
Distributed SCADA
The Distributed SCADA architecture is based on the capability of internetworking. Here
multiple stations of operations are connected by a central bus using Local Area Network
(LAN). These stations can then share data in real time. The stations of operation have
each their task, some would act as communication servers to the RTUs using Wide Area
Networks (WAN), while others would act as an HMI. This division increases the reliability
of the system since there is no single master server running all the processes. Also, in
case of failure of one station, a different station would possibly be able to take over its
respective responsibility [10].
Figure 2.4: Distributed SCADA architecture. [10]
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
5
==PAGE:14==
Networked SCADA
The networked SCADA architecture, like the distributed model, wanted to distribute the
processes to multiple servers. However, the big difference was that it used Internet Pro­
tocol (IP) rather than proprietary communication protocols for networking. This would
make the integration of larger­scale operations easier as well as enhancing performance
by having multiple servers running in parallel. Here the MTU is connected to RTUs over
WAN using IP while other SCADA components are connected using ethernet [10].
Figure 2.5: Networked SCADA architecture. [10]
Internet­of­Things SCADA
The IoT­based SCADA architecture is the most recent generation and has been the pri­
mary focus of development over the past decade. The rise of cloud computing has sig­
nificantly expanded the capabilities and efficiency of SCADA systems while also reducing
implementation costs. Notably the increased implementation of remote access over net­
works has allowed larger systems to be managed by fewer operators [10].
Figure 2.6: Iot SCADA architecture. [10]
The development from monolithic to IoT architecture has brought new possibilities for
system management and maintenance, however the same increased connectivity that
enables remote control has opened a once closed network. This has provided new attack
surfaces for adversaries to explore. While modern SCADA systems can be secured with
correct configuration, these systems can be, and often are, very complex which makes
it easy to make mistake during configurations that will lead to vulnerabilities that can be
exploited.
6
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:15==
2.1.2
DCS
Distributed Control System (DCS) is a type of ICS system designed to automate and
manage complex industrial processes. While DCS shares some similarities with SCADA
and uses components like HMIs and RTUs, these components are typically integrated
and used differently [11]. DCS is primarily focused on real­time control and automation
of low­level, continuous processes with minimal human intervention. In contrast, SCADA
is geared toward high­level supervisory control and data acquisition, often across geo­
graphically distributed assets [12].
The implementation and configuration of a DCS can vary across industries and individual
plants. However, it can generally be defined as a control system where automation and
control functions are distributed across multiple process areas, all connected through a
unified control platform. The idea is to have the advantaged of centralized control while
retaining the functions of localized control [11].
Figure 2.7: DCS diagram.[13]
In figure 2.7 a simple overview of how a DCS can be structured is shown. The local con­
trol nodes contain the devices responsible for managing plant processes. They operate
control loops that automate different tasks based on data collected from sensors. This
data is processed by the local control units, which then issue commands to actuators or
other control elements. The supervisory computer makes sure the system runs safely and
efficiently. They receive information from the local controllers which is used to make sure
the processes function correctly. The supervisory computers are then all connected to
a coordinating computer this enables connections between different facilities. This com­
puter may link to computers that manage production schedules, to ensure that the entire
production process is synchronized and runs efficiently [13].
Like SCADA, DCS has evolved over the years into more open systems, allowing devices
from different manufacturers to interoperate across various platforms and architectures.
Most importantly for this thesis, modern DCS implementations increasingly incorporate
internet connectivity to enable remote control and data transmission, but also provides
openings for malicious actors to previously closed networks [12].
2.2
Operational Technology Protocols
The protocols used in operational technology are the main focus of this thesis. These
protocols enable communication between devices within ICS, as well as with external
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
7
==PAGE:16==
systems. This section will outline and describe the specific protocols selected for this
project.
2.2.1
EtherNet/IP
EtherNet/IP (Ethernet Industrial Protocol) is an industrial communication protocol used for
various industrial systems such as SCADA. It was introduced in 2000 [14] by Rockwell
Automation and Open DeviceNet Vendors Association, now known as ODVA Inc. and
was developed due to the emerging demand for Ethernet based networks for control ap­
plications [15]. The EtherNet/IP protocol is built to encapsulate the Common Industrial
Protocol (CIP) to work over TCP/IP and UDP/IP.
OSI Layer
EtherNet/IP Protocol Component
Application
CIP (Common Industrial Protocol)
Presentation
CIP
Session
CIP
Transport
TCP/UDP
Network
IP
Data Link
Ethernet
Physical
Ethernet
Table 2.1: OSI Model for EtherNet/IP. [16]
On the OSI model EtherNet/IP uses CIP for the application, presentation and session
layers, TCP/IP for the transport and network layers and Ethernet for the data link and
physical layer [16, 17]. Since EtherNet/IP is completely based on Ethernet, with TCP to
UDP all CIP messages sent over the network are Ethernet frames. The structure of these
frames can be seen in figure 2.8. Here, the encapsulation header and encapsulation
data, highlighted with orange, are the parts of the message defined by the EtherNet/IP
specification, containing the commands and associated data used in communication.
Figure 2.8: Ethernet Frame structure of EtherNet/IP message.[16]
The encapsulation header is 24 bytes and formatted in the following way:
• Command (Two bytes): Describes which command the messages represent.
• Length (Two bytes): The length of the additional data
• Session Handle (Four bytes): Used for the session identification if a session has
been established.
• Response Status (Four bytes): Used for a status code that indicates whether the
receiver was able to execute the requested encapsulation command.
8
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:17==
• Sender Context (Eight bytes): Used by the sender to send a value the receiver
will return unmodified. Can be used to match responses with requests.
• Options(Four bytes): Reserved for future use. Does not have a defined function
in standard EtherNet/IP communication.
Figure 2.9: EtherNet/IP encapsulation structure.[16]
The Encapsulation data whose size is defined in the length field, contains the command­
specific data. Not all commands require this field thus this field may be empty, but can
contain data up to 65511 bytes. The complete structure of the encapsulation as described,
can be seen in figure 2.9 [17, 16].
2.2.2
HART­IP
HART­IP was developed to extend the HART (Highway Addressable Remote Transducer)
protocol into Ethernet and IP­based networks. Originally introduced in the 1980s, HART
has received multiple updates over the years. In 2007, WirelessHART was released to
support wireless communication, followed by the introduction of HART­IP in 2012 [18]. A
significant update to the HART­IP specification was published in 2020, introducing manda­
tory security features such as TLS [19], however this project will be working with the ver­
sion released in 2012.
OSI Layer
HART­IP Protocol Component
Application
HART
Presentation
­
Session
­
Transport
TCP/UDP
Network
IP
Data Link
Ethernet
Physical
Ethernet
Table 2.2: OSI Model for HART­IP. [20]
Table 2.2 displays the OSI model for HART­IP and as shown five layers are used. HART
commands and data are used in the application layer. The transport layer uses either
TCP or UDP, while the network layer relies on IP. The data link and physical layer uses
Ethernet [20].
A HART­IP message, called a HART­IP PDU (Protocol Data Unit), consists of two main
components. The HART­IP Header and the HART message. The structure of the HART­
IP PDU can be seen shown in figure 2.10.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.10: HART­IP PDU structure. [20]
The HART­IP Header consists of eight bytes that has the following fields:
• Version (One byte): The version field is used to describe the version of the protocol.
• Message Type (One byte): Describes the type of the message. There are three
different types, request, response and NAK. Request is typically used by a client to
start a transaction where a server issues a response. The NAK type is used for an
example when a server cannot create any more sessions.
• Message ID (One byte): The Message ID field defines the function of the HART­IP
message and can take one of four possible values: 0 for session initiation, 1 for
session close, 2 for keep­alive, and 3 for HART passthrough messages. The first
three IDs are used to manage the session between the client and server, while the
fourth ID is used to transmit actual HART commands.
• Status (One byte): The status field is used to indicate the status of the HART­IP
message, such as success, session expired and invalid request.
• Sequence number (Two bytes): Unique identification number to match requests
with responses.
• Byte count (Two bytes): describes the number of bytes of the message, including
the message header.
As shown in figure 2.10 the size and structure of the HART message depends on what
command is being sent. However, the first byte is always the command number to deter­
mine which command is being sent [20].
2.2.3
IEC 60870­5­104
The IEC 60870­5 series is a set of standards developed by the International Electrotech­
nical Commission. These standards were created to define protocols for telecontrol and
supervisory control systems, primarily intended for the electrical and power industries, but
they are not limited to these industries [21]. The initial parts of the standard were published
in 1988, with ongoing development over the following 12 years. The specifications IEC
60870­5­1 to IEC 60870­5­5 form the core transmission protocol definitions, while com­
panion standards, including IEC 60870­5­101 (IEC101) to IEC 60870­5­104 (IEC104),
define specific application­level protocols [22].
IEC101, introduced in 1995, was the first of these specific protocols. It was designed
for telecontrol applications over geographically wide systems using low­bandwidth serial
communication. IEC104, released in 2000, builds upon IEC101 by utilizing TCP/IP­based
networking, while preserving the application functions and data models defined in IEC101
[21].
10
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:19==
OSI Layer
IEC 60870­5­104 Protocol Component
Application
IEC104 (IEC101)
Presentation
­
Session
­
Transport
TCP
Network
IP
Data Link
Ethernet
Physical
Ethernet
Table 2.3: OSI Model for IEC 104. [22]
The protocol stack of IEC101 was originally designed using a reduced OSI model called
Enhanced Performance Architecture (EPA), which included three OSI layers: Application,
Data Link and Physical layer. It also added a user process layer on top of the application
layer to describe application functions. With the development of IEC104 two more layers
of the OSI model were included, these were the Transport layer for TCP and the Network
layer for IP [22, 23]. In table 2.3 the OSI model for IEC104 is shown for overview and
comparison with the other protocols. While not shown in the table, IEC104 is still described
using the User Process layer defined in the IEC 60870­5­5 standard.
IEC104 uses Application Protocol Data Unit (APDU) messages to communicate between
control units and field devices. The APDU consists of two main components: the Ap­
plication Control Information (APCI) and the Application Service Data Unit (ASDU). The
structure of the APDU can be seen in figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: IEC 104 APDU structure.[23]
The APCI has the following structure:
• Start Byte (One byte): Start byte to indicate the start of the APDU has value 0x68.
• Length (One byte): Describing the length of the APDU excluding the Start byte and
the length byte. It covers the length of the Control Fields and, if present, the ASDU.
• Control fields (4x One Byte): The four control fields are used to describe what
type of APDU is sent and its structure.
After the APCI, the ASDU follows. The ASDU is the part of the message that contains the
actual process data, including measurements, status information, and control commands.
It is utilized by the control unit to monitor and control the power system [23, 24].
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
11
==PAGE:20==
As mentioned in the APCI structure, an APDU does not always include an ASDU. These
APDUs are used for controlling and acknowledging messages. The structure of the APDU
depends on its frame type, of which there are three defined in IEC104: U­frames, S­frames
and I­frames [23].
• U­frames: Unnumbered Control Frames are used for connection management such
as starting, stopping, or testing the connection. They have a fixed length of six bytes:
one start byte, one length byte, and four control bytes. U­frames do not include an
ASDU.
• S­frames: Supervisory Frames used for acknowledging up to five received I­frames.
Follows, the same structure as U­frames(start byte, length byte and four control
bytes).
• I­frames: Information Frames are used for actual data transfer. They include both
the APCI (start byte, length byte, and four control bytes) and the ASDU, which con­
tains the process data such as sensor readings, status information, or control com­
mands.
Figure 2.12: APDU frame structures.[23]
Figure 2.12 shows the structure of the different control fields of each frame. Here, the
send sequence number and receive sequence number, each 15 bits, are used to ensure
reliable, ordered delivery by tracking which messages have been sent and acknowledged.
The right­most bits of the first control field determine the frame type. In the case of a U­
frame, the TESTFR, STOPDT, or STARTDT indicators specify the function of the frame. Note
that only one of these functions can be active at a time [23].
2.2.4
OPC DA
OLE for Process Control or Open Process Control, better known as OPC is a series of
standards described by the OPC Foundation. These specifications were defined to enable
further connectivity in industrial automation. The standard has been developed over the
years and includes three main protocols OPC Classic, OPC XI and OPC UA. OPC Classic
is the term used for the first three specifications released: OPC Data Access (DA), OPC
Alarms and Events (AE) and OPC Historical Data Access (HDA). OPC DA released in
12
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:21==
1996 was developed to allow vendors create client/server software that would provide
access to real­time process data [25, 26].
OPC DA was originally developed to address the Device Driver Problem. Before its intro­
duction, each vendor and manufacturer had to create proprietary driver libraries for their
hardware, which often lacked the interoperability and coverage needed by end users.
OPC DA solved this by standardizing data exchange between data sources, like Pro­
grammable Logic Controllers (PLC), and client applications, enabling generalized and
vendor­neutral communication [27].
OSI Layer
OPC DA Protocol Component
Application
COM/DCOM
Presentation
­
Session
RPC
Transport
TCP*
Network
IP*
Data Link
Ethernet
Physical
Ethernet
Table 2.4: OSI Model for OPC DA [28]
OPC DA is based on Microsoft’s Component Object Model (COM) and Distributed Com­
ponent Object Model (DCOM) technologies, which enable communication between OPC
clients and servers. This tight integration with COM/DCOM means that OPC DA is inher­
ently bound to the Windows operating system, making its communication model signifi­
cantly different from previously described protocols.
When the OPC client and server are located on the same host, COM is used for local
communication. In this setup, COM objects are instantiated for both the client and server,
each identified by a Globally Unique Identifier (GUID), which ensures object­level access
and discovery within the system. When the client and server reside on separate hosts,
DCOM is used to enable remote communication. DCOM relies on Microsoft’s Remote
Procedure Call (MSRPC) as the transport mechanism. RPC operates over TCP/IP, typi­
cally initiating communication via TCP port 135. The RPC endpoint mapper on this port
then dynamically allocates additional high­numbered ports for further data exchange be­
tween the client and server [29, 28].
Unlike many industrial protocols that rely on transmitting structured data packets with
predefined layouts, OPC DA uses a method based communication model. Once a con­
nection is established between the client and server, either locally via COM or remotely
via DCOM, the client interacts with the server by invoking standardized methods defined
by the OPC DA specification. For example, the client may use AddItems() to subscribe
to specific data points or ReadData() to retrieve real­time process values. These method
calls are executed through COM interfaces rather than by exchanging fixed­format mes­
sages. This abstraction provides flexibility and hides the underlying data representation
but also introduces complexity [30].
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
13
==PAGE:22==
2.3
Internet­Wide Scanning
Internet­wide scanning is a technique used to identify open ports across the internet. This
technique is employed by both security researchers and malicious actors to discover vul­
nerable network infrastructure and hosts [31, 32]. Over the past 15 years, the field has
seen significant advancements. Particularly with the release of tools like ZMap [5] and
Masscan [33] in 2013, which enabled scanning of the entire IPv4 space within minutes
rather than months [31].
After the release of these scanning tools, research in the field accelerated rapidly, result­
ing in hundreds of studies that used these tools to uncover protocol vulnerabilities, collect
digital certificates, and measure the exposure of insecure IoT and ICS devices [34]. The
development of complementary tools such as ZGrab [6], which enables detailed applica­
tion layer fingerprinting, as well as large scale scanning platforms like Censys [35] and
Shodan [7], that provides search engines with scan results, have further expanded the
scope and impact of Internet­wide scanning research.
While the majority of Internet­wide scanning research has focused on the IPv4 address
space, there is an increasing amount of research exploring methods for scanning within
the vastly larger IPv6 space. One such effort is 6Sense, a tool designed to reduce the
IPv6 address space using reinforcement learning techniques [36]. However, this thesis
will only focus on Internet­wide scanning in the IPv4 address space.
2.3.1
ZMap
ZMap is an open­source network scanner developed to perform fast Internet­wide scans
of the IPv4 address space. Introduced by Durumeric et al. [5] in 2013, ZMap was de­
signed to overcome the limitations of traditional scanning tools like Nmap [37], which are
significantly slower and less optimized for large scale studies.
Unlike traditional scanners that keep track of each probe and wait for responses before
sending the next, ZMap uses a stateless design. This means it can send probes as fast
as the network allows, without maintaining a connection or waiting for replies. To avoid
scanning IP addresses in order and getting blocked by firewalls, ZMap uses a mathe­
matical method to generate a pseudo­random permutation of the IPv4 address space.
This helps distribute probes evenly and reduces the chance of detection. To further in­
crease efficiency, ZMap separates the sending and receiving stages of scanning. Probe
packets are sent without waiting for responses, while incoming responses are captured
asynchronously using raw sockets and matched based on header fields like destination
port and sequence number.
ZMap supports scanning across a variety of protocols, including TCP SYN, ICMP Echo
Request, and UDP. However, for this project, only the TCP SYN scan module is used.
Figure 2.13 illustrates the process of a TCP SYN scan targeting a remote host with an
open port. In this case, the host responds with a SYN­ACK packet, indicating that the
port is open. If the port were closed, the host would instead respond with a RST (reset)
packet.
14
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.13: ZMap TCP SYN ACK scan on target with open port.
2.3.2
ZGrab
ZGrab is an open­source application layer scanner developed to complement ZMap by
providing deeper insights into services running on open ports. It was introduced by Du­
rumeric et al. in 2015 as part of the Censys platform, which aims to provide a search
engine for Internet­wide scan data [35].
Unlike ZMap, which performs lightweight, high speed scanning at the transport layer,
ZGrab establishes full TCP connections and performs protocol specific handshakes. This
allows it to retrieve detailed metadata from services such as web servers, mail servers,
and ICS.
Although ZGrab can be used individually it is often used in combination with ZMap. ZMap
is run first to identify hosts with responsive ports and then ZGrab takes these IPs and
ports as input and queries them to gather application layer data. When it was released,
the scanner supported a wide range of protocols including HTTP, HTTPS, SMTP, FTP,
SSH, Telnet, and several industrial protocols. It outputs results in JSON format, which
makes it easy to process, analyze, or integrate with other systems [35]. Furthermore, it
was designed with a modular architecture, allowing researchers and developers to easily
implement new protocol modules and therefore enable further development and research
in the field.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
15
==PAGE:24==
3
Related Work
This chapter explores previous research on OT security and methods used to identify vul­
nerable devices. While extensive work has been done on analysing the security of OT
systems and their architecture, this chapter will focus specifically on studies related to OT
scanning and the results from this research.
Myers, Foo, and Radke (2015) [38] compared the internet­wide scanning tools ZMap,
Masscan and Unicornscan and their properties based on the taxonomy presented in the
paper, which included Scan Method, Packet Transmission, Randomisation, Distributed
Scanning, Black/Whitelisting, Scanning Speed, Speed Limiting and Modularity. The paper
also presented a scanning framework that consists of four parts with the main interest
of identifying ICS devices. Scanning policy, which provided guidelines for prerequisites
before initiating internet­wide scans like requesting ethics approvals. Primary Scan to
identify a broader range of hosts, can be done on e.g. a port or multiple ports. Secondary
Scan to further identify the initial hosts found during the primary scan. Here, they proposed
scanning web server port TCP/80, Simple Network Management Protocol port TCP/161,
Telnet port TCP/23 and File Transfer Protocol port TCP/21 as these protocols commonly
interact with ICS devices for managing, accessing and downloading/uploading files. Final
step of the framework is Scan Analysis, which analyses the results of the scans.
In the work done by Gasser et al. (2017) [39] comprehensive research of the BACnet
protocol and devices using this protocol was done. The BACnet protocol is a commu­
nication protocol used by building automation devices. A series of internet­wide scans
using ZMap was performed to discover openly accessible BACnet devices. During their
research, they discovered over 16k BACnet devices of which over 14k were vulnerable
to the Denial­of­Service attack known as an amplification attack.
Ashley et al.(2022) [40] investigated different Attack Surface management (ASM) tools
including Shodan, Censys and BinaryEdge to identify OT devices open on the inter­
net. They created search queries for relevant ICS building automation vendors as well
as communication protocols: BACnet, CODESYS, DNP3, EtherCAT, EtherNet/IP, Lon­
Works, Modbus, Fox, Omron, ProConOS, PROFINET, Siemens S7, SIMATIC. The search
queries were replicated between the different ASM tools to compare the results and the
results were also used to create classifications of the exposures using digital signatures
to categorize devices into types (PLC, RTU, HMI and SCADA). For the vendor­specific
queries, they found that Censys returned the most amount of banners in total with Shodan
coming in second and BinaryEdge third. For the protocol specific queries, BinaryEdge re­
turned the most banners while Shodan returned second most and Censys third most.
Mirian et al.(2016) [41] researched vulnerable ICS devices by implementing five well­
known SCADA communication protocols in ZMap to conduct internet­wide scans. The
five protocols chosen were Modbus, BACnet, DNP3, Siemens S7 and Tridium Fox. After
multiple scans, they were able to complete protocol handshakes for 27.7k devices using
Modbus, 12.8k devices using BACnet, 515 devices using DNP3, 2292 using Siemens S7
and 27k using Tridium Fox. In total, they identified over 60k publicly accessible devices.
However, they note that some of these are likely to be honeypots. In their research they
also set up a series of honeypots and a large network telescope to identify who was scan­
16
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:25==
ning for ICS devices. Here, they found that ICS scanning was dominated by academic
institutions and security firms.
A similar study was conducted by Xu et al. (2018) [42], who also analyzed the five pro­
tocols: Modbus, BACnet, DNP3, Siemens S7, and Tridium Fox. However, instead of
performing active internet­wide scans, they used open data provided by Censys. The
dataset spanned a two­year period (2015–2017) and included between 91 and 108 scans
for each protocol. In total, they found 68K devices on the internet and observed that the
number of devices had steadily increased over the two­year period.
The research done by Dahlmanns et al. (2020) [43] focuses on the more modern OPC
UA protocol that comes designed with security in mind.
In their research, they per­
form internet­wide scans on the IPv4 address space using ZMap and ZGrab2.
Here
they found that of all 1114 exposed OPC UA deployments 92% are misconfigured. 26%
had completely disabled communication security, 25% made use of deprecated crypto­
graphic primitives, 35% had an incorrect application of secure configurations and 44% of
all servers allowed unauthenticated users to read and write values and execute function­
ality on industrial devices.
In continuation of researching secure configuration of protocols used in OT Dahlmanns
et al. (2022) [44] did research on the use of TLS both on traditional industrial protocols
retrofitted with TLS and more modern protocols designed to use TLS. Based on internet­
wide scans using ZMap and ZGrab2 on ten (I)IoT protocols: Modbus, DNP3, IEC 104, Eth­
erNet/IP, Siemens S7, Tridium Fox, AMQP, OPC UA, MQTT and CoAP, they found that
only 6.5% of 967551 deployments use TLS for communication protection. Furthermore,
they revealed that 42% of the TLS­enabled deployments were configured insecurely.
In the research done by Feng et al. (2016) [45] they developed their own algorithm for
scanning the IPv4 address space in order to identify ICS devices. Incorporated in said
algorithm was a check whether a host was a honeypot or not. This check was made
using a probability model trained offline to improve the detection accuracy. For their re­
search, they analyzed 17 different communication protocols commonly found in ICS and
conducted Internet­wide scans on these protocols. During their research period, they
performed eight scans, the final of which included all 17 protocols, and found 141,008
devices.
In the work of Yaben et al. (2024) [46] they examined the cyber security issues of both
IoT and OT devices by performing internet­wide scans using ZMap, ZGrab and combining
their datasets with data from Shodan and Censys. In their research, they examined eight
communication protocols used in IoT and OT: MQTT, CoAP, XMPP, Modbus, OPC UA,
RTPS, DNP3 and BACnet. Of the more than 1 million addresses they identified, 675,896
appeared vulnerable or misconfigured. In addition, 7,424 of the addresses had been
reported at least once and some of them appeared to be infected with Mirai variants,
which is a known botnet [47].
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
17
==PAGE:26==
4
Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodology used to investigate the exposure of the chosen
industrial communication protocols across the internet. It will describe the scanning ap­
proach adopted, the testing environment and the classification of vulnerable devices. Fi­
nally, ethical considerations are addressed to ensure good research practices.
4.1
Scanning Approach
For conducting the internet­wide scans, ZMap and ZGrab were selected as the primary
tools. As described earlier, these tools were chosen because they complement each
other, enabling efficient scalable scanning with flexible configuration and extensibility.
ZMap is used to perform high speed TCP SYN scans to identify hosts with open ports
potentially running ICS protocols in the IPv4 address space. Afterwards, ZGrab was used
to initiate full protocol handshakes and perform banner grabbing at the application layer.
ZGrab was also chosen for its modular design, which simplifies the development and inte­
gration of custom protocol modules. As part of this thesis, four new ZGrab modules were
implemented to support protocols not available: EtherNet/IP, HART­IP, IEC104, and OPC
DA.
4.1.1
Extension of ZGrab
As mentioned above, ZGrab was extended with support for the four industrial communi­
cation protocols examined in this thesis. This subsection provides a brief overview of how
ZGrab was adapted to support each protocol, focusing on the integration approach and
probe logic at a high level. Detailed implementation and protocol specific behaviours will
be presented in the subsequent implementation chapter.
Ethernet/IP
To develop the module for the Ethernet/IP protocol ZGrab’s implementation of TCP was
used. The scanner opens a TCP connection with the target host, afterwards the probe
sends EtherNet/IP messages constructed directly within the module according to the Eth­
ernet/IP documentation and specification [17, 16]. Specifically, ListIdentity, ListServices
and RegisterSession commands are sent to retrieve information about the target system
and to determine whether the target permits session initiation for CIP communication.
HART­IP
For developing the HART­IP protocol module ZGrab’s TCP implementation is used to
open a TCP connection with the target. Next, the scanner sends structured HART­IP mes­
sages [20] as raw data over the connection. The scanner first sends a SessionInitiate
message to determine whether it is possible to establish an unauthenticated session. If
the session initiation succeeds, a ReadUniqueIdentifier message is sent to retrieve ba­
sic system information, such as the manufacturer ID and device type.
IEC104
Like the Ethern/IP and HART­IP module the IEC104 module uses the ZGrab TCP im­
plementation to open a TCP connection with the identified host. When the TCP con­
nection has been established the probe sends the specification messages StartDT and
GeneralInterrogation command [23]. StartDT is sent to initiate data transfer, if the host
responds successfully, it indicates that it is ready to process further IEC104 commands.
Following this, the GeneralInterrogation command is sent to request the current state of
the system. A successful GI response may include both system information and real­time
process data. This process data can reveal information object addresses and associated
values.
18
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:27==
OPC DA
Initially, the approach for the OPC DA module was intended to follow the same pattern as
the other three protocol modules. However, this proved infeasible due to the architecture
of OPC DA. OPC DA relies on Microsoft’s COM/DCOM framework, which introduces two
major challenges for integration with the ZGrab scanner. Firstly, while DCOM communica­
tion uses TCP, it does so through Microsoft’s RPC service, which begins communication
on port 135 and then dynamically allocates additional ports for ongoing communication.
Implementing a full OPC DA handshake would therefore require precise emulation of the
RPC negotiation and DCOM message structure, which is non­trivial. Furthermore, since
port 135 is used broadly by many other Windows services unrelated to OPC DA, scan­
ning it would result in significant bloat, as ZMap would detect many hosts that are not
running OPC DA, making it inefficient to identify actual targets. Secondly, as described
in section 2.2.4 OPC DA does not communicate by sending structured data packets but
by using specification defined method calls. This adds another layer of abstraction, which
further complicates the implementation of a ZGrab module for this protocol.
Because of the common challenges COM/DCOM introduce when connecting remote OPC
servers and clients, particularly over WAN and the internet, both manufacturers and other
third parties have developed so called OPC Tunnellers. These tools provide a bridge be­
tween OPC clients and servers enabling communication over standard TCP/IP networks.
Therefore, the implementation of the ZGrab module was based on the communication
behaviour of the Matrikon OPC Tunneller [48]. There is no official public documenta­
tion detailing how the Matrikon OPC Tunneller structures its communication messages.
Therefore, Wireshark [49] was used to capture and analyse the network traffic generated
during the connection process between an OPC DA client and an OPC DA server via the
Matrikon OPC Tunneller. The observed communication was reverse engineered for the
implementation of the ZGrab module. Specifically, the client sends an initial connection
request to the tunneller on the host, followed by a get servers message to retrieve a list
of OPC servers running on the host system.
4.2
Testing Environment
Since scanning of ICS protocols is aimed at identifying open and insecure industrial sys­
tems and critical infrastructure, testing in a controlled environment is needed before per­
forming internet­wide scans. This is done to ensure that the probe behaves as expected
and does not perform any actions that could affect the functionality of the systems or cause
any outages. An overview of the testing environment can be seen in figure 4.1. The en­
vironment consisted of a host machine running a series of virtual machines, one for each
server, excluding OPC DA, and one to perform the scanning. Due to the Windows spe­
cific requirements of OPC DA, a separate Windows machine was used to host the OPC
DA server. Wireshark was installed on each machine hosting a server and configured to
capture network traffic on the respective protocol’s TCP port.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: Overview of testing environment.
Ideally one would test against official implementations of the different protocols. However,
due to the proprietary and commercial nature of implemented servers and clients, this is
not always possible. In the following subsections, the test setup for each of the protocols
will be described.
4.2.1
Ethernet/IP
To test the implementation of the EtherNet/IP probe, OpENer [50] was used. OpENer is
an open­source implementation of the EtherNet/IP protocol stack, based on the official
specifications published by ODVA. Developed in C, it is designed to run on both Windows
and Linux systems. For this testing environment, OpENer was deployed on a Linux based
virtual machine, simulating an EtherNet/IP device.
4.2.2
HART­IP
Testing the HART­IP probe required additional steps compared to the EtherNet/IP probe.
The FieldComm Group provides an official HART­IP Developer Kit [51], which includes
both a HART­IP server and client implementation. However, the provided HART­IP Server
was designed for a Raspberry Pi with an AD/DA expansion board, which was not available
for this project. Despite this, The HART­IP server was still set up on a Linux virtual machine
allowing successful testing of the SessionInitiate message to verify basic connectivity.
After the initial exchange the server would enter a device bricked state, preventing testing
of further HART­IP commands.
To test the subsequent commands sent by the probe after a successful initial connection
request, a mock HART­IP server was implemented in Python. While this approach in­
troduces the risk of confirmation bias towards the developed probe additional validation
steps were taken. Wireshark was used to capture and analyse network traffic, ensuring
that the exchanged messages were correctly identified as HART­IP. Beyond Wireshark’s
automatic protocol recognition, the packet payloads were manually inspected to verify
that they adhered to the expected structure and followed the HART­IP specification. This
mock server was also run on the Linux virtual machine.
20
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:29==
4.2.3
IEC104
When testing the IEC104 module, the Python library c104 [52] was used. This library
is designed to simulate SCADA systems and RTUs communicating using the IEC104
protocol. An example server provided on the library’s GitHub repository [53] was set up
and run on a Linux virtual machine.
4.2.4
OPC DA
For testing the OPC DA probe, Matrikon OPC Simulation Server [54] was used. This
server was installed and run on a Windows machine. As described in 4.1.1, the Matrikon
OPC tunneller was used to provide a remote connection to the OPC DA server. Therefore,
the tunneller is also set up on the Windows machine, as it is the communication interface
used by the OPC DA probe.
4.3
Classifying Vulnerable and Misconfigured Devices
Operational technology systems are not meant to be publicly discoverable on the internet,
since they are used in critical infrastructure and can lead to physical harm if their function­
ality is affected. To tackle the issue of computerized enterprise architecture the Purdue
Enterprise Reference Architecture model was created [55]. This has been the basis for
OT architecture and has been developed further into standards such as [56] which have
been the guidelines when creating network segmentation.
Figure 4.2: ICS Purdue Model architecture. Figure from [57]
As seen in figure 4.2 ICS devices should operate in the control zone, where there are four
levels. These levels should be closed off and only limited communication between levels
two and three should reach the enterprise zone through the DMZ [57]. Therefore any ICS
devices identified by our scans are by default misconfigured as they should not be openly
reachable on the internet.
However, in the results section there will also be reviewed other factors that might identify
the devices as being further vulnerable depending on the specific protocol.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
21
==PAGE:30==
4.4
Ethical Considerations
Since the purpose of this thesis is to identify open and potentially vulnerable ICS devices
through internet­wide scanning, certain precautions must be taken before conducting any
scans. This is crucial for two main reasons: firstly, we do not own the scanned devices,
and more importantly, ICS devices are often part of critical infrastructure, including water
facilities and power plants.
If the probes developed in this project were to unintentionally affect the functionality of
such devices, it could lead to outages or even hazardous outcomes. Therefore, the de­
velopment was focused on ensuring that no control commands capable of influencing
device behaviour were sent. Additionally, all modules were thoroughly tested in a con­
trolled environment to verify that they behaved as expected.
When conducting the scans we followed the guidelines for good internet citizenship out­
lined by Durumeric et al. [34]. We ensured it was possible to identify the origin and
purpose of the scans and provided clear ways of opting out. All scans were carried out in
coordination with DTU IT on a designated server, with the necessary permissions granted
to perform these activities. Furthermore, a blacklist was used to exclude networks and
hosts that did not wish to be scanned, such as military networks and organisations that
had previously opted out of other scans conducted at DTU. In addition, for systems iden­
tified in Denmark as publicly exposed, actions for ethical disclosure were taken. Relevant
parties were contacted to responsibly inform them about the presence of vulnerable or
misconfigured devices.
22
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:31==
5
Implementation
This chapter describes the extensions made to the ZGrab scanner as part of this project.
ZGrab was extended to support scanning for each of the industrial protocols investigated
in this thesis. The following sections present the implementation details and internal work­
ings of each custom protocol module developed: EtherNet/IP, HART­IP, IEC104, and OPC
DA.
Each protocol module was developed from scratch, following the general structure used
by existing ZGrab protocol modules. For each protocol, a dedicated folder was created
containing two primary files: scanner.go and ’protocol’.go (e.g. iec104.go). The scan­
ner.go file implements the interfaces required by ZGrab to define and run a valid protocol
probe. The protocol.go file contains protocol specific logic such as message structure and
encoding/decoding.
As described in 4.1.1 all the new developed modules make use of ZGrab’s TCP imple­
mentation to connect to the identified targets. Therefore, the focus when developing the
modules was on creating correctly formatted protocol messages and handling of the re­
sponses.
5.1
EtherNet/IP
The EtherNet/IP messages were implemented in the ethernetip.go file based on the struc­
ture defined in section 2.2.1.
The implementation can be found in Appendix A.1.
A
EtherNetIPMessage struct was defined to represent the overall EtherNet/IP message
structure. Using this, predefined variables were created for each of the messages to
be sent: ListIdentityRequest, ListServicesRequest, and RegisterSession. Each of
these variables includes the appropriate command identifier and associated data. Due
to the chosen format for representing the protocol messages in the code, the messages
needed to be converted into raw byte format before they could be written to the TCP con­
nection with the target. This was done using the method convertEtherNetIPCommandToByte.
After the message has been converted, it can be written to the TCP connection, and the
scanner can wait for the corresponding response.
The module follows the procedure outlined below. It starts by attempting to open a TCP
connection to the target on port 44818. If the host accepts the connection, the first mes­
sage, ListIdentityRequest, is sent. The response is then read, and the module at­
tempts to decode it before storing the extracted information in a JSON object for inclusion
in the result output. A method is used to parse the response specific to the ListIdentity
message. This method attempts to extract values from the known structure of the Addi­
tional Data section, including the Vendor ID, Product Code, Identity Status, Serial Number,
and Product Name.
To validate the responses from devices, the response to the ListIdentityRequest is first
examined by checking whether the first 24 bytes match the expected EtherNet/IP header
structure described in section 2.2.1. If the header matches the specified format, the mod­
ule proceeds to send the subsequent commands. Otherwise, the response is logged as
an error with the message ”incorrect response header.”
After the validation of the ListIdentityRequest response, the ListServicesRequest
is sent. Similar to the ListIdentityRequest response, the received response is read
and decoded according to its known structure, which includes the fields: Service, Type
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
23
==PAGE:32==
ID, Length, Protocol Version, Capability Flags, and Service Name. While the responses
are tried to be decoded, the module still saves all the raw data in case of unexpected
behaviour and responses.
The two commands, ListIdentityRequest and ListServiceRequest, do not require a
registered session, unlike most CIP commands typically used to monitor and control ICS
devices. Although the module does not send any CIP control commands, it attempts to
register a session using the RegisterSession command after the two discovery com­
mands have been sent. This step is intended to test whether it is possible to initiate an
unauthorized session with the target for potential further command exchange. If success­
ful, the target will respond with a SessionHandle that could be used in future communica­
tions. The communication procedure between the module and server is shown in figure
5.1.
Figure 5.1: Sequence diagram of the communication between EtherNet/IP module and
server
The module only validates the response to the ListIdentityRequest, as a correct re­
sponse to this command confirms that the target device uses the EtherNet/IP protocol.
The responses to the two subsequent commands are recorded regardless of their valid­
ity, as they may still provide useful insights into the device’s behaviour.
As mentioned in section 4.2, Wireshark was used to verify that the modules sent correctly
formatted commands and behaved as expected. Figure 5.2 shows the communication
between the EtherNet/IP module and the test server, where Wireshark correctly identifies
both the protocol and the specific commands.
24
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.2: Wireshark capture of the communication between the EtherNet/IP probe and
test server.
5.2
HART­IP
The HART­IP messages structure implemented in the hartip.go file is based on the details
given in section 2.2.2. The implementation of the messages can be found in Appendix
A.3, where the HARTIPMessage struct defines the overall message format. Using this
struct, several variables were created to represent specific HART­IP messages, such as
SessionInitiateRequest. Some HART­IP message constants are also defined for use
in the message variables.
Similar to the EtherNet/IP implementation, the use of a struct to define HART­IP mes­
sages requires a method to convert these objects into bytes before they can be written
to the TCP connection. One thing to note is that the Byte Count field is not set in the
predefined message variables. Instead, it is dynamically calculated and assigned within
the conversion function to ensure that the length accurately reflects the final size of the
message payload.
The module starts by attempting to open a TCP connection to the target on port 5094. After
the host accepts the connection, the module starts by sending a SessionInitiateRequest.
This HART­IP message is used to initiate a communication session with the target. If the
target is a valid HART­IP server, it will respond with a session ID. This indicates that the
connection was accepted and that a session has been successfully established for further
communication. While a session ID is returned, this is not used by the client to construct
further messages. HART­IP servers require a session to be active to process further com­
mands, however the session IDs themselves are not used in the commands. The session
is implicitly tied to the TCP connection between the client and the server.
Much like in the EtherNet/IP module, the initial response is validated by checking whether
the first eight bytes conform to the HART­IP header format described in section 2.2.2. If
the response to the SessionInitiateRequest is valid, the module proceeds with further
communication.
After the validation and a session has been initiated, the module sends a ReadUniqueIdentifier
(Command 0) message. This PDU retrieves information such manufacturer ID and de­
vice type, but can differ depending on the device. Following the Command 0 response,
the module closes the connection to the target. The sequence diagram for the HART­IP
module communication can be seen in figure 5.3.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.3: Sequence diagram of the communication between HART­IP module and
server.
This communication stream was also captured using Wireshark to verify the correct be­
haviour of the module, as shown in figure 5.4, where the HART­IP protocol and the com­
mands are identified. Additionally, the Wireshark Wiki provides sample captures [58] of
various protocols, including HART­IP, which were used to compare with the communica­
tion generated by the implemented HART­IP module.
Figure 5.4: Wireshark capture of the communication between the HART­IP probe and test
server.
5.3
IEC 60870­5­104
A simpler approach was used for the implementation of the IEC104 messages. Instead of
defining the different fields described in section 2.2.3, the messages were defined in byte
format. This simplified the process of sending the messages as no conversion method
was needed, which removed the risk of conversion errors. While it reduces the amount
of code needed in the module it does however make it less visible how the messages
are structured and what data is defined by each byte. The messages can be seen imple­
mented in Appendix A.5.
The sequence diagram illustrating the communication procedure of the IEC 104 mod­
ule is shown in Figure 5.5. The module starts by attempting to connect to the target
on TCP port 2404. If the connection is successful, the module sends a StartDT Acti­
vation message, which signals a request to initiate data transfer between the client and
server. While no explicit session ID is used, the server responds with a StartDT con­
firmation message if it accepts the request. This indicates that the server is ready to
handle further communication. Like in HART­IP, the client does not use an identifier,
but the StartDT exchange is required before additional commands can be transmitted.
The StartDT confirmation message is also used by the module to validate the device re­
sponse, as it follows a fixed format. After receiving the StartDT confirmation, the module
26
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:35==
sends a GeneralInterrogation command to gather further information about the target
device. The response to this command can vary significantly depending on the device
and system. However, any valid response indicates that the system supports monitoring
via data transfer commands..
Figure 5.5: Sequence diagram of the communication between IEC104 module and server.
This communication was also captured using Wireshark and can be seen in figure 5.6
where the protocol and the commands sent by the module are identified. The capture
was also compared with an IEC104 sample capture provided by Wireshark Wiki.
Figure 5.6: Wireshark capture of the communication between the IEC104 probe and test
server.
5.4
OPC DA
The implementation process for the OPC DA Module was different to the other modules.
As explained in section 4.1.1 implementing the messages structure similarly to the other
protocols was unsuccessful and the approach was to reverse engineer the Matrikon OPC
Tunneller. Like it was described earlier Wireshark was used to capture the tunneller net­
work traffic between an OPC DA client and server and this communication can be seen
in figure 5.7.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.7: Wireshark capture of Matrikon OPC Tunneller communication.
This communication capture revealed that multiple messages were exchanged between
the client and server to establish a connection with the Matrikon OPC Tunneller and to
retrieve the list of OPC DA servers on the host machine.
From these messages, it was identified that the interesting responses were those seen in
capture number 101 and 109. Message 101 was a response from the server with the mes­
sage Connection Accepted. This meant that one or more of the previous messages sent
by the client were used for initiating the connection and that there was a clear connection
accepted response. The response observed in message 109 contained the hostname and
listed the available OPC servers on the host, which was the key information of interest for
this thesis.
The next step was to determine which messages the module needed to send to retrieve
these responses. Through trial and error, it was discovered that only two messages were
required. These two messages can be seen implemented in listing 5.1.
1
...
2
var ProbeConnectionRequest = []byte{0x12, 0x34, 0x0, 0x0,
3
0x0, 0x3c, 0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0x3, 0xab, 0xcd,
4
0x0, 0x4, 0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0x5, 0x57,
5
0x0, 0x49, 0x0, 0x4e, 0x0, 0x33, 0x0, 0x32,
6
0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0xc, 0x4f, 0x0, 0x50, 0x0,
7
0x43, 0x0, 0x54, 0x0, 0x75, 0x0, 0x6e, 0x0, 0x6e,
8
0x0, 0x65, 0x0, 0x6c, 0x0, 0x6c, 0x0, 0x65, 0x0, 0x72, 0x0,
9
0xde, 0xad}
10
11
var GetServers = []byte{0x12, 0x34, 0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0x12, 0x0, 0x0, 0x80, 0x4,
12
0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0x0, 0xab, 0xcd, 0xde, 0xad}
13
...
Listing 5.1: Implementation of Matrikon OPC Tunneller messages
After the messages to be sent had been identified, the OPC DA module followed the same
procedure as the other modules. It starts by attempting to open a TCP connection with the
target on port 21379. After a successful TCP connection has been established the module
will send the ProbeConnectionRequest. If the target uses Matrikon OPC tunneller without
security configurations, it will respond with a connection accepted message. This means
that the module is now connected to the Matrikon OPC Tunneller on the host machine
and that it can now send further messages. Before sending the GetServers message the
module validates the ProbeConnectionRequest response. Unlike the other implemented
modules, this validation cannot rely on documented formats or standardized responses.
28
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:37==
However, analysis of captured messages in Wireshark revealed that all messages began
with the same four bytes: 0x12, 0x34, 0x00, 0x00. This pattern was therefore used
to validate responses from the target device. After the initial response is validated the
module then sends the GetServers message which retrieves available OPC servers on
the host. The sequence diagram for the OPC DA module is shown illustrated in figure
5.8.
Figure 5.8: Sequence diagram of the communication between the OPCDA module and
server.
The Wireshark capture of the communication between the OPC DA module and the test
server can be seen in Figure 5.9. It shows that fewer messages are being exchanged
compared to the real client communication seen in 5.7, but that it still retrieves the key
server information in message number 144.
Figure 5.9: Wireshark capture of the communication between the OPCDA probe and test
server.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
29
==PAGE:38==
6
Results & Analysis
In this chapter, the findings from our scans conducted using ZMap and the newly imple­
mented ZGrab modules are presented and analysed. The results for each protocol will
be presented in its own section, where the details of the results and the methods used
to identify potentially vulnerable devices are discussed. We received a total of 13,858
responses classified as valid protocol responses and in table 6.1 the distribution between
the different protocols is shown. These numbers are necessarily not real ICS devices, but
this will be determined in the following sections.
Protocol
Valid Responses
EtherNet/IP
6,192
HART­IP
9
IEC 104
7,622
OPC DA
35
Total
13,858
Table 6.1: Protocol Response Counts
6.1
EtherNet/IP Results
The scans returned 6,192 valid EtherNet/IP protocol responses, of these only 24 re­
sponses were empty containing no information. These empty responses could be un­
configured simulators or low­interaction honeypots and therefore these responses were
discarded. 17 of these were also tagged by shodan as honeypots and 52 other devices
were also tagged by Shodan as honeypots. Therefore 76 devices were discarded from
the results.
The 6,116 remaining devices were distributed between 72 countries. The top five being
the USA with 4,338 devices, Canada with 543, South Korea with 179, Taiwan with 152,
and Spain with 116. This strong prevalence in North America aligns with the fact that
EtherNet/IP, as mentioned in section 2.2.1, was developed by the American company
Rockwell Automation, and is currently maintained by ODVA, which is also an American
organisation. While the large majority of devices are in the US, devices were identified
across the world. This can be seen in figure 6.1, which shows the device concentration
by country.
30
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.1: World map showing Ethernet/IP device concentrations by country, with device
counts transformed to base­10 logarithmic scale for better visual comparison.
The ListIdentityRequest command returns a product name for each device. Our scans
identified 308 unique product names across the 6,116 devices. While some devices re­
ported custom or generic names that make identification difficult, the majority returned
recognizable and identifiable product names. Based on the product names further analy­
sis were made to identify the discovered devices in order to better classify them. Starting
with the identification of the manufacturers, 31 different manufacturers were identified.
As expected the vast majority of the devices was produced by Rockwell Automation with
89,67% (5,484) of the discovered devices.
Figure 6.2: Amount of devices discovered produced by Rockwell Automation.
The remaining 632 devices was distributed between the other 30 manufacturers. Figure
6.3 shows the top ten manufacturers, excluding Rockwell and the number of devices
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
31
==PAGE:40==
identified for each manufacturer. Only in 83 of the 6116 devices the manufacturer went
unidentified.
Figure 6.3: Top ten device manufacturers excluding Rockwell Automation.
Together with the manufacturer information, the device types of the scanned devices were
analysed. A total of 17 different device types were identified, with PLCs comprising the
majority 94.49% (5,779) of all observed devices.
Figure 6.4: Amount of PLC devices.
The majority being PLCs is expected, as they are the most widely deployed devices in
ICS environments due to their versatility and ability to perform a wide range of automation
tasks. However, our scans also revealed the presence of other ICS device types. The
top ten device types, excluding PLCs, are presented along with their respective counts in
Figure 6.5. Of the 6,116 devices observed, only 84 could not be conclusively identified.
To improve the quality of the results, devices with responses that did not match known
ICS product signatures were further investigated using Shodan. This analysis revealed
that 22 were associated with universities. While a university affiliation does not neces­
sarily indicate that a device is not an ICS system, the inability to identify the product type
32
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:41==
strongly suggests these devices are likely used for research or teaching purposes. This
assumption is further supported by the fact that some of these university devices had
hostnames or identifiers explicitly referencing educational use.
Figure 6.5: Top ten device types excluding PLC.
PLC, HMIs, Gateways, Energy Meters, etc. are all devices that as described in section 4.3
are part of levels one and two in the Purdue model. These devices should therefore not
be reachable from external networks. To further assess the potential vulnerability of the
devices, the RegisterSession command was used to determine whether it was possible
to initiate a session. All 6,116 devices responded positively, successfully accepting ses­
sion registration. However, due to the risk of unintentionally affecting live industrial sys­
tems, the scans were limited to this preliminary step and did not attempt to execute CIP
commands or retrieve data. While EtherNet/IP lacks built­in security by default, later en­
hancements, such as CIP Security, introduce TLS/DTLS protection. If CIP Security had
been enabled, these devices would have rejected unauthenticated session registration
attempts [59].
Having identified the device type and manufacturer for the majority of devices, classifying
their life cycle status could be done. This classification helps assess whether the devices
are obsolete and therefore potentially more vulnerable. Given that Rockwell Automation
was by far the most prevalent manufacturer, their product life cycle terminology [60] was
adopted for consistency. To maintain a uniform analysis, the life cycle statuses of de­
vices from other manufacturers, despite using different wording, were translated into the
corresponding stages defined by Rockwell. Rockwell classifies their devices into four dif­
ferent stages: Active, Active Mature, End of Life and Discontinued. Active devices are
the newest devices in their product category. Active Mature devices are devices that are
still supported however, they can be older devices and newer products or product families
exist. End of life devices are devices that have a discontinuation date publicly announced.
Discontinued devices are devices that are no longer manufactured or produced and there­
fore have no or limited support. In some cases, there are repair and exchange services
available. It is generally recommended to upgrade or replace discontinued/obsolete OT
systems. If that is not possible, these systems require careful and proactive management
to address potential risks [61].
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.6: Life Cycle status of identified devices.
In Figure 6.6, the distribution of device life cycle statuses is presented. A total of 2,196
devices were classified as Active, 2,399 as Active Mature, 1 as End of Life, and 1,390
as Discontinued. While a Discontinued status does not inherently indicate increased vul­
nerability, it does elevate risk due to the potential absence of vendor support, such as
security and firmware updates. Devices categorised as Active Mature are still officially
supported. However, they are older models that may have known vulnerabilities (CVEs)
and, if not updated, could present a higher security risk.
Although there is limited publicly available documentation regarding the release dates of
the various products, firmware release dates were used as a proxy to estimate the lifespan
of the identified devices where possible. Figure 6.7 illustrates the timelines based on the
release of firmware updates for the ten most frequently observed products. The starting
point of each line represents the earliest firmware revision document in which the device
is mentioned, while the endpoint corresponds to the latest available firmware release.
The number displayed at the centre of each line indicates how many instances of that
device were identified during the scan. Furthermore, the colour of each line reflects the
current product life cycle status. The firmware release documentation was retrieved from
Rockwell’s Compatibility and Downloads Center. [62]
34
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.7: Top ten EtherNet/IP products with firmware timeline.
During the analysis, it was discovered that some Rockwell Automation devices include
their firmware version within the product name field. This feature enabled the extraction
of firmware version information for 2,835 devices. Notably, approximately 73% of these
devices were identified as running firmware versions older than the latest available re­
lease, indicating a widespread issue with firmware updates among the deployed devices.
In table 6.2, a breakdown of the firmware version for the top ten products is presented, ex­
cluding the two 1769­Lxxx devices and the 2080­LC20­20QWB, as these did not provide
a firmware version.
Device Model
Firmware Version
5.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
11.00 12.00 14.00 15.00 16.00
1763­L16BWA B
8
10
8
42
16
24
48
­
47
Device Model
21.00 21.02 21.03 21.04 21.05 21.06 21.07
1766­L32AWA C
­
293
­
­
2
64
193
1766­L32BWA C
­
120
­
­
­
12
26
1766­L32BWAA C
­
80
­
2
­
32
43
1766­L32BXB C
­
113
­
1
­
5
35
1766­L32BXBA C
­
247
1
­
­
45
203
Table 6.2: Distribution of Firmware Versions Across Devices
The table showcasing the firmware versions shows that many devices are not running on
the latest firmware versions, and as previously mentioned, outdated firmware may expose
devices to CVEs, which could pose security risks. While not all devices revealed informa­
tion regarding the firmware version of the devices, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology’s (NIST) National Vulnerability Database (NVD) [63] was still used to identify
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
35
==PAGE:44==
possible vulnerabilities on the devices. This was done for all the product names, how­
ever for brevity, only the CVEs of the top ten products will be listed. These CVEs are
subsequently compared with the firmware versions presented in table 6.2.
Product Name
Status
Associated CVEs
1766­L32AWA C
Active Mature
CVE­2016­5645
1766­L32BXBA C
Active Mature
CVE­2016­5645
1769­L19ER­BB1B/A LOGIX5319ER
Active
–
1769­L33ER/A LOGIX5333ER
Active
–
1763­L16BWA B
Discontinued
CVE­2016­0868, CVE­2016­9334, CVE­
2016­9338, CVE­2017­7898, CVE­2017­
7899, CVE­2017­7901, CVE­2017­7902,
CVE­2017­7903, CVE­2017­7924
2080­LC20­20QWB
Active
–
1766­L32BWAA B
Active Mature
CVE­2016­5645, CVE­2017­7898, CVE­
2017­7899, CVE­2017­7901, CVE­2017­
7902, CVE­2017­7903
1766­L32BWA C
Active Mature
CVE­2016­5645
1766­L32BWAA C
Active Mature
CVE­2016­5645
1766­L32BXB C
Active Mature
CVE­2016­5645
Table 6.3: Top ten devices and their associated CVEs
The CVEs retrieved from the NVD are presented in Table 6.3. Notably, only for the Active
devices no associated CVEs where found. All other devices among the top ten exhibit one
or more known vulnerabilities. Since around 63% of the devices were classified as Active
Mature or Discontinued the majority of the devices have likely had known vulnerabilities.
Table 6.4 details the severity scores of these CVEs. Among them, only one is classified
as low severity, the remaining vulnerabilities are rated as high or critical. Furthermore,
every top­ten device with known vulnerabilities includes at least one CVE with a high or
critical severity rating.
Note that the CVEs were extracted from the NVD API using the product names. In some
cases, CVEs are listed under the product family rather than specific product numbers if all
models are affected. Consequently, it is possible that some CVEs may have been missed
during this process.
Comparing the CVEs with the discovered firmware versions of the top ten devices, none of
the 1766­xx series devices were affected by the identified vulnerabilities. This is because
the lowest firmware version detected for these devices was 21.02, which is not impacted
by the CVEs found. In contrast, the 1763­L16BWA B devices exhibited a wider range
of firmware versions, with most of them affected by multiple vulnerabilities. Notably, six
CVEs from 2017, all classified with critical severity, impacted even the latest firmware ver­
sion available for the 1763­L16BWA B. Additionally, devices running firmware version 15
or earlier were vulnerable to CVE­2016­0868, a remote code execution vulnerability that
presents a significant security risk. Furthermore, the 1763­L16BWA B was not discontin­
ued at the time of its last firmware release. Approximately five years passed between the
final firmware release and the device’s official discontinuation in April 2022.
36
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:45==
CVE ID
CVSS Score
Severity
CVE­2016­0868
9.8
Critical
CVE­2016­5645
7.3
High
CVE­2016­9334
7.3
High
CVE­2016­9338
2.7
Low
CVE­2017­7898
9.8
Critical
CVE­2017­7899
9.8
Critical
CVE­2017­7901
8.6
High
CVE­2017­7902
9.8
Critical
CVE­2017­7903
9.8
Critical
CVE­2017­7924
7.5
High
Table 6.4: CVE Severity and CVSS Scores for top ten Devices.
Finally, it is important to note that even devices which could not be successfully classified
remain relevant. These unclassified systems may still serve as potential entry points for
malicious actors targeting critical infrastructure. Despite not being able to classify them
through available scan data, some were linked to sensitive environments, including two
separate waterworks facilities, highlighting the security risks posed by industrial devices.
6.2
Hart IP results
As seen in table 6.1 nine different valid protocol responses were captured by our HART­IP
ZGrab module. None of the nine devices were tagged as honeypots by Shodan. Seven of
the devices were found in the US, and two of them in Thailand. Our scanner successfully
initiated a session with each devices and was able to deliver the HART­IP pass­through
command ReadUniqueIdentifier. All nine of the devices responded correctly to the
command, providing information such as Manufacturer ID, Expanded Device Type, Device
& Software Revisions, etc. Table 6.5 shows the device type and manufacturer for each
device, which were used for further identification. The device type and Manufacturer were
identified by using the Hart Common Tables Specification [64].
No.
Manufacturer
Expanded Device Type
1
FieldComm Group
Generic
2
Rosemount
Wireless Gateway
3
ProComSol, Ltd
HMUX­4­DS
4
Rosemount
Wireless Gateway
5
Rosemount
Wireless Gateway
6
Rosemount
Wireless Gateway
7
Rosemount
Wireless Gateway
8
Moore Industries
TRZ
9
Rosemount
Wireless Gateway
Table 6.5: Hart­IP devices and their Manufacturer and device type.
The first device reports its device type as Generic with the manufacturer listed as Field­
Comm Group, which strongly suggests that this is a simulated gateway or communication
stack instance, likely intended for testing, development, or demonstration purposes. This
indicates that the device is probably not part of a real ICS, and therefore unlikely to rep­
resent a vulnerable operational device.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
37
==PAGE:46==
The next device shares its device type and manufacturer with five other devices. How­
ever, each device has a unique device ID and displays different configurations, indicating
that they are genuine deployments. Emerson­Rosemount is well known for developing
devices used to monitor and control pressure, flow, temperature, and levels of gases
and liquids. Although the expanded device type in this case does not directly indicate a
specific product name, it can still be used to infer the device that has been discovered.
Rosemount offers a series of wireless gateways [65], with six models currently listed on
their website, the most prominent being the 14xx series. These gateways are used to
connect up to 100­400 devices, depending on the model, meaning that one compromised
gateway could potentially lead to the exposure of hundreds of devices. Notably, three of
these six wireless gateway models are listed as obsolete, which may have implications
for their security.
The third device type is the HMUX­4­DS Multiplexer, developed by ProComSol, Ltd [66].
This multiplexer is used to remotely access and configure up to four devices using HART­
IP. While the HMUX­4­DS is still available from some distributors, it has been removed
from ProComSol’s official website and is listed as discontinued by other distributors, indi­
cating that the device has likely been discontinued.
The final distinct device identified in our scans is the TRZ, developed by Moore Industries.
The TRZ is a smart HART temperature transmitter used for monitoring temperatures in
remote industrial systems. While the TRZ is no longer listed as an available product on
Moore Industries’ official website, documentation is still available, including operating in­
structions from 2021 [67]. Additionally, documentation dating back to 1998 was found
introducing the device, showing that the TRZ is not a modern product [68].
6.3
IEC 104 Results
Our IEC104 scans identified a total of 7,622 valid responses. Among these, 1,142 de­
vices were flagged as honeypots according to Shodan data and were excluded from fur­
ther analysis. This left 6,480 real world devices for investigation. These devices were
distributed across 58 countries, with the top five being: Turkey with 3,799, Russia with
1,176, South Korea with 296, Belarus with 287 and Egypt with 195. A world map with
IEC104 device concentrations across the world is shown in figure 6.8.
38
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.8: World map showing IEC104 device concentrations by country, with device
counts transformed to base­10 logarithmic scale for better visual comparison.
As described in section 5.3 the scanner validates the devices by receiving a correct
StartDT response therefore all the devices have initiated internal session for further com­
munication using the IEC104 protocol. This in itself is a security issue, as these devices
should not be reachable via public networks, nor should it be possible to initiate commu­
nication with them. According to the Purdue Model described in section 4.3, such devices
should be isolated within lower network layers and segmented from external access to
minimize exposure and reduce the attack surface. To retrieve more information and fur­
ther test the possibilities the general interrogation (GI) command was used. While the
responses from a GI command can vary depending on the device and system, it is ex­
pected to receive I­frames that contain information such as measurements and binary
values, for e.g. switches. This is also reflected in our results as 91.26% (6,916) of the re­
sponses were I­frames while the rest were U (5.23%, 396) and S­frames (3.51%, 266) as
seen in 6.9. Some devices responded with multiple frames, hence the number of frames
being larger than the number of devices.
The reason U and S frames were also received is likely due to the inherent way the ZGrab
IEC104 module interacts with devices. Among the U­frame responses, 382 were TestFR
messages, which are typically used to test the communication link and keep the session
alive. These are likely triggered by devices upon receiving a GI command after a period of
inactivity. The zgrab IEC104 module mistakenly interprets these frames as responses to
the GI command and subsequently closes the connection. Additionally, 14 of the U­frames
were StartDT messages. These suggest that the connection between the scanner and
the device was interrupted, and upon receiving the GI command, the devices attempted
to reestablish the communication session before responding. The S­frames received are
supervisory frames, which are likely used to acknowledge receipt of the GI command,
that, like the U­frames, are interpreted by the scanner as the GI response. As mentioned,
some devices responded with multiple frame types; this could be a S­frame followed by
an I­frame.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.9: Type of frames received in general interrogation responses.
Out of the 7,578 individual frames, 664 contained command rejections. Among these,
468 exhibited information indicative of proprietary protocol behaviour. In some cases,
devices responded with multiple frames, where certain frames were rejected while others
still provided system information. For the remaining devices, which did not exhibit such
patterns or did not return any further data, the rejections may be attributed to various
reasons. These include the device being in a busy or blocked state, a lack of support for
the GI command, or security configurations that restrict or deny specific command types.
One key way of classifying the responses to analyse the information retrieved is by using
the ASDU type. The ASDU type identifies the nature of the response and specifies the
kind of information it carries. In total, our results contained 31 distinct ASDU types. The
distribution of the ten most frequently observed types is illustrated in Figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: Top ten ASDU types.
40
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:49==
The many different response types are expected, as devices behave differently depending
on their type and implementation. The most frequently received response was M_EI_NA_1,
which indicates End of Initialisation. This ASDU type signifies that the device has suc­
cessfully completed its initialisation process. Some devices transmit this message as part
of the startup communication sequence, typically after the master initiates communication
using the StartDT command, followed by a GI request. Some device responses contained
additional I­frames with data after the End of Initialisation frame; however, most did not.
This is likely due to the current limitations in how the ZGrab module handles and captures
responses.
The second most common response type was the M_ME_TF_1 type. This ASDU is used
to transmit measured values along with a CP56Time2a timestamp, enabling accurate
time­logging of real­time data. A total of 1,826 individual frames with one or more mea­
surements, such as temperature, pressure, or similar process variables were received.
These responses show the possibility of retrieving monitoring data from real industrial or
critical systems.
The third most frequent ASDU type observed was C_IC_NA_1, which represents the GI
command. Of these, 662 responses were command rejections, indicated by a nega­
tive activation confirmation (ActCon_NEGA). The remaining responses served as pos­
itive command acknowledgements, confirming acceptance of the GI request. 83 of the
responses containing the C_IC_NA_1 type included multiple ASDU types within the same
message. Notably, in 14 of these cases, the C_IC_NA_1 was a negative confirmation,
yet the device still proceeded to provide additional data, indicating that partial processing
or non­standard behaviour may occur in some implementations.
These three ASDU types represent around 75% of the individual frames in the collected
responses. However, many other interesting responses were received. Among them were
three ASDU types, that carry binary ON/OFF data used by devices such as switches,
relays or breakers. These are M_SP_TB_1, M_SP_NA_1 and M_SP_TA_1. Table 6.6
shows the number of frames received for each type, including the number of ON and
OFF values extracted from the data.
ASDU Type
No. Frames
On
Off
M_SP_TB_1
615
819
2406
M_SP_NA_1
276
727
2831
M_SP_TA_1
1
0
14
Table 6.6: Summary of Single­Point Information ASDU Types
In total 3,295 frames with real­time data were received, containing 15,749 distinct infor­
mation objects (IOA) revealing information from ICS. An important thing to note is that at
the time of the scans, the IEC104 module was configured to record only the first 256 bytes
of each GI response. As a result, any responses exceeding this limit were truncated, and
287 such responses were identified as prematurely cut off. While this caused some data
loss, all complete and meaningful APDUs present before the cutoff were still captured and
retained for analysis.
6.4
OPC DA results
The OPC DA scan returned 35 valid responses, of which 20 were explicitly tagged as
honeypots by Shodan. An additional 12 were determined to be honeypots based on re­
sponse patterns, protocol deviations, and other metrics such as unusual open ports and
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
41
==PAGE:50==
service fingerprints. This leaves three devices that accepted the Matrikon OPC tunneller
handshake.
The first device, identified in Canada, returned only a single server in the server request.
This was the Matrikon OPC Simulation server [54] which is a well known simulation server
commonly used for testing OPC clients without requiring a connection to real industrial
devices. It is the same server that was used during the development and testing of our
ZGrab OPC DA module. Since no other OPC servers were exposed by this device, it
is highly likely that the system is being used solely for testing or development purposes
rather than controlling actual industrial equipment.
The second device, identified in Indonesia, returned two servers. It returned the testing
server as well, but more interestingly it returned a Cygnet OPC server. This is an OPC
DA server used for real­time SCADA communication. CygNet is a SCADA platform widely
deployed in the oil and gas industry for pipeline management, production monitoring, and
operational data gathering [69]. The OPC DA interface allows external clients to access
live process data from the CygNet system, which is critical for monitoring and controlling
industrial systems. The retrieval of the server means that the host machine is running
the Matrikon OPC Tunneller service which has accepted our connection, and that the
Cygnet OPC server is configured to being used with the tunneller. Because the Tunneller
operates as a Windows service running under a local administrator account on the host
machine, any successful connection inherits the privileges of that account. No credentials
or permissions are required from the remote client since the Tunneller acts as a local
COM/DCOM proxy on behalf of the remote connection.
The third and last device, discovered in Spain, returned 15 servers. These can seen in
table 6.7.
Server
Description
Matrikon.OPC.SiemensPLC.1
Siemens PLC OPC Server
Matrikon.OPC.Simulation.1
Simulation OPC Server
Matrikon.OPC.Universal.1
Universal PLC Server
OPC.SimaticNET.1
Siemens SIMATIC NET OPC Server
OPC.SimaticNET.DP.1
PROFIBUS­DP OPC Server
OPC.SimaticNET.PD.1
PROFIBUS­PD OPC Server
OPC.SimaticNet.AE.1
Alarm & Events OPC Server
OPC.SimaticNetAlarms.1
Alarms OPC Server
OPC.SimaticNetAlarmsSNMP.1
SNMP Alarms OPC Server
OPC.SimotionAlarms.1
SIMOTION Alarm OPC Server
OPCServer.WinCC.1
WinCC Process Data OPC Server
OPCServerAE.WinCC.1
WinCC Alarm & Events OPC Server
OPCServerHDA.WinCC.1
WinCC Historical Data Access Server
CCOPC.UAWrapper.1
WinCC OPC DA to UA
CCOPC.XMLWrapper.1
WinCC OPC XML­DA to DA
Table 6.7: List of OPC servers and their descriptions
The first three servers are servers developed by Matrikon. The simulation server, an
OPC server specifically for Siemens PLCs [70] and a Universal OPC server supporting
multiple different PLCs, including Siemens S7 series [71]. The remaining servers were
all OPC servers part of the Siemens SIMATIC NET OPC suite. This suite is designed
to provide OPC­based communication interfaces for SCADA, industrial automation, and
42
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:51==
process control systems. It enables real­time data exchange between Siemens PLCs,
DCS, and external clients, supporting operations such as monitoring, control, and data
acquisition within industrial environments.
Among these servers, there are four OPC DA servers: OPC.SimaticNET.1, OPCServer.­
WinCC.1, OPC.SimaticNET.DP.1 and OPC.SimaticNET.PD.1. The remaining servers im­
plement OPC HDA, OPC AE or are wrapper servers. As mentioned in section 2.2.4, OPC
HDA and OPC AE are distinct specifications. OPC HDA is designed for accessing histor­
ical process data stored over time, while OPC AE handles the communication of alarms,
events, and condition changes that occur on devices during runtime.
The OPC.SimaticNET.1 is a general OPC DA server designed for communication with
Siemens S7 series controllers, providing access to real­time process data [72]. OPC.Simatic­
NET.DP.1 and OPC.SimaticNET.PD.1 are OPC DA servers specifically tailored for in­
terfacing with the Profibus protocol.
OPC.SimaticNet.AE.1, OPC.SimaticNetAlarms.1,
OPC.SimaticNet­AlarmsSNMP.1, and OPC.SimotionAlarms.1 are used for alarm and event
handling [73]. These servers are responsible for delivering alarm notifications and event
messages within the OPC framework. Specifically, OPC.SimaticNetAlarmsSNMP.1 serves
as an SNMP­to­OPC bridge, converting SNMP alarms into OPC­based alarms that can be
used by the SCADA or HMI systems [74]. Similarly, OPC.SimotionAlarms.1 is an alarm
server designed for the Siemens SIMOTION motion control system, which is used for
controlling complex motion tasks in automation [75].
The last five servers in the table are part of the Siemens WinCC SCADA system, which
combines SCADA and HMI functionalities to enable real­time process monitoring, control,
and data visualisation [76]. WinCC allows operators to interact with industrial equipment
through graphical dashboards, monitor alarms, and access historical data for analysis.
The WinCC system consists of one OPC DA server, one OPC AE, one OPC HDA, one
OPC UA wrapper and an OPC XML wrapper.
This series of servers clearly indicates the architecture of a SCADA device specifically for
managing and monitoring Siemens automation devices. Furthermore, the device name,
present in the ZGrab module response, contained the keyword SCADA as well as the
company name. This company is an energy company, providing services in power gen­
eration, transmission, and distribution. This aligns with the use of Siemens automation
devices, which are widely deployed in the energy sector for process control, grid man­
agement, and operational automation [77].
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
43
==PAGE:52==
7
Discussion
In this chapter, the key findings from the results are reviewed and further discussed how
they reveal the exposure of devices used ICS. Next, some limitations identified during
the work on the thesis will be presented and finally possibilities for future work will be
described.
7.1
Key findings
The Ethernet/IP scans identified 6,116 devices, of which 6,032 could be classified as
specific ICS products. The most common product type was PLCs, accounting for 5,779
devices. Notably, 1,390 of the devices were marked as discontinued, and 2,399 were
labeled as Active Mature, indicating that the majority of exposed devices are either ob­
solete or ageing models for which newer replacements exist. Furthermore, the firmware
version of 2,835 devices was identified, of which around 73% were outdated. In line with
this, CVEs were identified for the top ten products. The findings revealed that multiple
devices belonging to one of the top ten product types were affected by several CVEs,
including six classified as critical severity. Additionally, some of these devices were vul­
nerable to a remote code execution vulnerability. The 84 devices that were not classified
as specific products are still important to consider. While 22 of these were identified as
educational devices associated with universities, some were still linked to sensitive ICS
environments, including two separate waterworks facilities. Additionally, we were able
to successfully initiate CIP sessions with all identified devices, indicating the potential for
further command execution or data exchange.
The HART­IP scans identified nine devices, of which eight were ICS devices. Among
these, three distinct device types were identified, each from a different manufacturer. Two
devices corresponded to specific products: a multiplexer and a temperature transmitter.
The multiplexer was marked as discontinued, and although the temperature transmitter
was not explicitly labelled as discontinued, introductory documentation from 1998 was
discovered, indicating that it is an outdated product. The most common device identified
was the Rosemount Wireless Gateway. While this was not matched to a specific model,
six possible models were identified, of which three are listed as obsolete. Notably, these
gateways are capable of connecting up to 100­400 field devices, meaning that the com­
promise of a single gateway could expose a large number of connected devices. The
information about these devices was obtained by successfully initiating a session and
then sending a HART pass­through command. The successful execution of this com­
mand indicates that further command execution is possible, representing a potentially
critical vulnerability.
The IEC104 scans identified 6,480 devices, all of which successfully accepted session
initiation. A GI command was sent to these devices to retrieve further information, result­
ing in a total of 7,578 IEC104 frames. Of these, only 664 were command rejections, while
3,295 frames contained real­time process data, exposing 15,749 individual Information
Object Addresses that reveal operational data from ICS environments.
Finally, the OPC DA scans identified three devices, two of which were confirmed to ex­
pose ICS environments. The first device exposed a Cygnet OPC Server, which is part
of a SCADA platform commonly used in the oil and gas industry. The second device
exposed 14 OPC servers, all of which were used for managing and monitoring Siemens
44
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:53==
devices. Additionally, this device was linked to an energy company, further highlighting
the sensitivity of the exposure. As described in section 4.1.1, the OPC DA scanner op­
erated by using the Matrikon OPC Tunneller to establish connections with the devices.
Due to the inherent way the Tunneller functions, the scanner effectively acts as the Tun­
neller service, operating under the privileges of the local administrator account that runs
the service. This represents a significant security concern, as it means that any success­
ful connection is made with administrative­level permissions, which greatly increases the
potential impact of a compromise.
As previously noted, none of these devices should be accessible from the public internet,
as exposing ICS devices represents a critical misconfiguration. However, the summary
of key findings above also demonstrates several additional indicators of vulnerability and
misconfiguration. We have shown that it is possible to successfully initiate sessions with
all identified devices. While in some cases no further commands for data retrieval or
execution were issued, a significant amount of identifying information was still obtained
from many devices. Furthermore, the results show that in certain cases it was possible to
retrieve real­time process data, as illustrated by the IEC104 protocol, where approximately
43% of the response frames contained ICS process data.
7.2
Limitations
One of the more significant limitations encountered during this thesis was the lack of open­
source environments for testing. While a few open­source projects exist that simulate
ICS devices for some of the targeted protocols, their functionality and documentation
were often limited or incomplete. This lack of reliable and fully­featured test environments
hindered the development and testing of the custom ZGrab modules, particularly when
trying to replicate realistic device behaviours or verify protocol interactions. If more open­
source environments were available, it would be significantly easier to test the security of
systems and devices, allowing researchers and practitioners to more effectively identify
where proactive security improvements are necessary to prevent ICS environments from
being exposed. Furthermore, the broader availability of such testing environments could
accelerate research efforts, enhancing the identification of security vulnerabilities in real­
world systems and contributing to the overall improvement of OT security.
In line with the previous limitation, another significant challenge relates to the nature of
many ICS protocols, such as those examined in this thesis. Documentation for these
protocols is often not freely available, with official standards and specifications typically
requiring purchase, sometimes at considerable cost. This restricted access to compre­
hensive documentation, which in turn made it more difficult to fully understand how pro­
tocol commands should be constructed and how devices are expected to behave. The
lack of openly accessible specifications presents a barrier not only to tool development
but also to broader security research within the ICS domain.
Another limitation was the restricted scanning window. Due to the time required for the
development of the scanning modules, combined with other factors that limited access to
the scanning server, it was only possible to perform scans towards the end of the project
timeline. As a result, the findings presented in this thesis are based on the results of two
full IPv4 scans. Conducting more frequent and periodic scans over an extended period
would be valuable for observing trends, determining whether additional devices could be
identified, and comparing how exposure changes over time.
Finally, since the scans were specifically targeted at ICS protocols, the development and
operation of the scanning modules were deliberately constrained. Given the inherent
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
45
==PAGE:54==
risks associated with interacting with operational ICS devices, such as the potential to
provoke unintended behaviour, disrupt processes, or even cause outages, a conserva­
tive approach was adopted throughout the development. As a result, the modules were
designed to minimise interaction, avoiding commands that could alter device states or
affect operations. Consequently, this approach limited the depth of information that could
be retrieved about the systems and devices.
7.3
Future Work
Further Extension of Modules
While the modules developed for this thesis have re­
trieved valuable information, they could be further extended to enhance their capabilities.
As just mentioned in section 7.2, it remains important to maintain a cautious approach
when selecting which commands to send in order to avoid the risk of causing unintended
disruptions. However, there are still commands that could be implemented to obtain ad­
ditional information from devices without risks. Furthermore, identifying additional ports
for scanning could reveal more devices, including extending the modules with UDP capa­
bility.
OPC Tunnellers
As showcased in this thesis with the OPC DA module, an alternative
approach can be taken when targeting ICS protocols. Instead of focusing solely on the
specific protocol, one can target proprietary software solutions used to tunnel communica­
tion between devices and systems. The Matrikon OPC Tunneller employed in this project
is just one example of this type of solution. For OPC Classic, other similar tunnelling prod­
ucts exist, such as KEPServerEX OPC Tunnel and Softing OPC Tunnel. Other legacy ICS
protocols might also have tunnelling solutions which could be targeted in the same way.
Research of other protocols
While this thesis has demonstrated the exposure of ICS
devices, the work was focused on only four protocols. Although related research has
examined other protocols, there are still many ICS protocols that remain underexplored in
this context. Future work could focus on expanding this research by developing additional
ZGrab modules for other ICS protocols, which would contribute to a more comprehensive
understanding of ICS exposure on the public internet.
46
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:55==
8
Conclusion
This thesis has demonstrated the significant exposure of ICS devices on the public inter­
net by focusing on the four industrial protocols: EtherNet/IP, HART­IP, IEC104, and OPC
DA. By developing new protocol specific modules for ZGrab and combining them with
ZMap and Shodan, it was possible to identify and classify exposed ICS devices. Through
two complete IPv4 scans, the research identified a total of 13,858 systems, of which 1,238
were determined as honeypots. This indicates that 12,608 devices likely represent gen­
uine ICS devices based on the scan data. The protocol responses from each device were
analysed and classified based on protocol specific parameters.
All the devices can be classified as misconfigured as they all accepted session initiation
for their respective protocols, and ICS devices should not be exposed to the public in­
ternet. Additionally, several other indicators of vulnerability were observed, including the
widespread use of obsolete or discontinued products, the exposure of real­time process
data, and in some cases, access through services likely running with elevated privileges,
significantly increasing the potential risk.
This thesis demonstrates that ICS exposure is a real and ongoing issue, with thousands
of devices vulnerable due to both technical misconfigurations and the inherent insecurity
of protocols never designed for internet facing deployment. These findings reinforce the
importance of network segmentation, proper device lifecycle management, and improved
defensive measures to reduce the attack surface of critical infrastructure.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
47
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
Abirami Raja Santhi and Padmakumar Muthuswamy. “Industry 5.0 or industry 4.0S?
Introduction to industry 4.0 and a peek into the prospective industry 5.0 technolo­
gies”. eng. In: International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing 17.2
(2023), pp. 947–979. ISSN: 19552505, 19552513. DOI: 10.1007/s12008-023-01217-
8.
[2]
Wenzheng Li and Hongdan Zhu. “Overview of Industrial Internet Technology Devel­
opment and Evolution”. In: 2021 IEEE 11th International Conference on Electronics
Information and Emergency Communication (ICEIEC)2021 IEEE 11th International
Conference on Electronics Information and Emergency Communication (ICEIEC).
2021, pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/ICEIEC51955.2021.9463725.
[3]
International Energy Agency. Cybersecurity: Is the power system lagging behind?
Accessed: 2025­02­04. 2023. URL: https://www.iea.org/commentaries/cybersecurity-
is-the-power-system-lagging-behind.
[4]
International Energy Agency (IEA). Average number of weekly cyberattacks per
organisation in selected industries, 2020­2022. https://www.iea.org/data- and-
statistics/charts/average-number-of-weekly-cyberattacks-per-organisation-in-selected-
industries-2020-2022. IEA, Paris. Licence: CC BY 4.0. 2023.
[5]
Zakir Durumeric, Eric Wustrow, and J. Alex Halderman. “ZMap: Fast internet­wide
scanning and its security applications”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 22nd Usenix
Security Symposium (2013), pp. 605–619.
[6]
ZMap Project. ZGrab2: Application­Layer Scanner. Accessed: 2025­02­05. URL:
https://github.com/zmap/zgrab2.
[7]
John Matherly. Shodan: The Search Engine for the Internet of Things. Accessed:
2025­02­05. URL: https://www.shodan.io/.
[8]
Geeta Yadav and Kolin Paul. “Architecture and security of SCADA systems: A re­
view”. In: International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 34 (2021), p. 100433.
ISSN: 1874­5482. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2021.100433. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1874548221000251.
[9]
A. Shahzad, S. Musa, A. Aborujilah, and M. Irfan. “THE SCADA REVIEW: SYS­
TEM COMPONENTS, ARCHITECTURE, PROTOCOLS AND FUTURE SECURITY
TRENDS”. In: American Journal of Applied Sciences 11 (June 2014), pp. 1418–
1425. DOI: 10.3844/ajassp.2014.1418.1425. URL: https://thescipub.com/abstract/
ajassp.2014.1418.1425.
[10]
Manar Alanazi, Abdun Mahmood, and Mohammad Jabed Morshed Chowdhury.
“SCADA vulnerabilities and attacks: A review of the state￿of￿the￿art and open
issues”. In: Computers Security 125 (2023), p. 103028. ISSN: 0167­4048. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.103028. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0167404822004205.
[11]
Saeid Mokhatab, William A. Poe, and John Y. Mak. “Chapter 20 ­ Gas Process­
ing Plant Automation”. In: Handbook of Natural Gas Transmission and Processing
(Fourth Edition). Ed. by Saeid Mokhatab, William A. Poe, and John Y. Mak. Fourth
Edition. Gulf Professional Publishing, 2019, pp. 615–642. ISBN: 978­0­12­815817­
3. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 815817 - 3 . 00020 - 4. URL: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128158173000204.
48
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:57==
[12]
“3 ­ System hierarchies and components”. In: Practical E­Manufacturing and Supply
Chain Management. Ed. by Gerhard Greeff and Ranjan Ghoshal. Oxford: Newnes,
2004, pp. 26–65. ISBN: 978­0­7506­6272­7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
075066272- 7/50006- 3. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780750662727500063.
[13]
Ian Sutton. “Chapter 6 ­ Instrumentation and Control”. In: Plant Design and Opera­
tions (Second Edition). Ed. by Ian Sutton. Second Edition. Gulf Professional Pub­
lishing, 2017, pp. 187–212. ISBN: 978­0­12­812883­1. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/B978-0-12-812883-1.00006-1. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780128128831000061.
[14]
Viktor Schiffer. The Common Industrial Protocol (CIP™) and the Family of CIP Net­
works. Tech. rep. PUB00123R1. Copyright © 2006–2016 ODVA, Inc. Ann Arbor,
MI, USA: ODVA, Inc., 2006. URL: https://www.odva.org.
[15]
Sheng Lu. “A new industrial protocol ­ EIP and its application”. eng. In: Lecture Notes
in Electrical Engineering 172.1 (2012), pp. 381–389. ISSN: 18761119, 18761100.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-31006-5_45.
[16]
Viktor Schiffer, David J. VanGompel, Raymond A. Romito, and Katherine Voss. The
Common Industrial Protocol (CIP™) and the Family of CIP Networks. Tech. rep.
PUB00123R1. On behalf of Rockwell Automation. Ann Arbor, MI, USA: ODVA, Inc.,
2016. URL: https://www.odva.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/PUB00123R1_
Common-Industrial_Protocol_and_Family_of_CIP_Networks.pdf.
[17]
Acromag, Inc. Introduction to EtherNet/IP™: Technical Reference – BusWorks®
9xxEN­6xxx / XT1xx2­000 Series 10/100MB Industrial Ethernet I/O Modules. Pub­
lication No. 8500747C. 30765 South Wixom Road, Wixom, MI 48393­2417, USA,
2020. URL: https://www.acromag.com.
[18]
FieldComm Group. HART­IP Brochure. Version 1.0. Accessed: 2025­05­13. 2020.
URL: https://www.fieldcommgroup.org/sites/default/files/imce_files/technology/
documents/HART-IP%20brochure%20r1.0.pdf.
[19]
FieldComm Group. HART­IP Technical Description. Tech. rep. AG10364. Version 1.0.
Document Number: AG10364, Version 1.0. FieldComm Group, 2023. URL: https:
//www.fieldcommgroup.org/sites/default/files/imce_files/technology/documents/
FCG%20AG10364%20%7B1.0%7D_HART-IP_Technical_Description.pdf (visited on
05/15/2025).
[20]
FieldComm Group. HART­IP Application Communication Analysis. Tech. rep. Ver­
sion 1.0. Accessed: May 14, 2025. FieldComm Group, 2021. URL: https://www.
fieldcommgroup.org/sites/default/files/imce_files/technology/documents/HART_IP_
%20Application_Communication_Analysis_r1.0.pdf (visited on 05/14/2025).
[21]
Gordon Clarke, Deon Reynders, and Edwin Wright. “7 ­ Preview of IEC 60870­5”.
In: Practical Modern SCADA Protocols. Ed. by Gordon Clarke, Deon Reynders,
and Edwin Wright. Oxford: Newnes, 2003, pp. 170–176. ISBN: 978­0­7506­5799­
0. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-075065799-0/50023-1. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780750657990500231.
[22]
Deon Reynders, Steve Mackay, Edwin Wright, and Steve Mackay. “10 ­ Fundamen­
tals of IEC 60870­5”. In: Practical Industrial Data Communications. Ed. by Deon
Reynders, Steve Mackay, Edwin Wright, and Steve Mackay. Oxford: Butterworth­
Heinemann, 2004, pp. 195–230. ISBN: 978­0­7506­6395­3. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-075066395-3/50015-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780750663953500152.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
49
==PAGE:58==
[23]
Petr Matoušek. Description and analysis of IEC 104 Protocol. Tech. rep. FIT­TR­
2017­12, Brno, 2017, p. 38. URL: https://www.fit.vut.cz/research/publication/
11570/.
[24]
Chih­Yuan Lin and Simin Nadjm­Tehrani. “Understanding IEC­60870­5­104 Traffic
Patterns in SCADA Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop on Cyber­
Physical System Security. CPSS ’18. Incheon, Republic of Korea: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2018, pp. 51–60. ISBN: 9781450357555. DOI: 10 . 1145 /
3198458.3198460. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3198458.3198460.
[25]
Magdi S. Mahmoud, Muhammad Sabih, and Moustafa Elshafei. “Using OPC tech­
nology to support the study of advanced process control”. In: ISA Transactions 55
(2015), pp. 155–167. ISSN: 0019­0578. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isatra.2014.
07.013. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001905781400247X.
[26]
OPC Foundation. History of the OPC Foundation. Accessed: 2025­05­19. n.d. URL:
https://opcfoundation.org/about/opc-foundation/history/.
[27]
Tony Paine. Understanding OPC: Open Connectivity via Open Standards. Accessed:
2025­05­19. PTC. URL: https://vertix.pe/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Understanding_
OPC_eBook.pdf.
[28]
Paul Hunkar. OPC UA vs OPC Classic. Accessed: 2025­05­19. DS Interoperability,
OPC Foundation, n.d. URL: https://www.dsinteroperability.com/OPCClassicVSUA.
pdf.
[29]
D. P. Zegzhda, M. O. Kalinin, and M. V. Levykin. “Actual Vulnerabilities of Industrial
Automation Protocols of an Open Platform Communications Series”. eng. In: Auto­
matic Control and Computer Sciences 53.8 (2019), pp. 972–979. ISSN: 1558108x,
01464116. DOI: 10.3103/S0146411619080339.
[30]
Zhao Xin Guo, Xing Quan Xie, and Zhi Gao Ni. “The application of OPC DA in factory
data acquisition”. In: 2012 IEEE International Conference on Computer Science and
Automation Engineering (CSAE). Vol. 2. 2012, pp. 209–212. DOI: 10.1109/CSAE.
2012.6272760.
[31]
Zakir Durumeric, Michael Bailey, and J. Alex Halderman. “An Internet­Wide View
of Internet­Wide Scanning”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Security Sympo­
sium (USENIX Security 14). San Diego, CA: USENIX Association, 2014, pp. 65–78.
ISBN: 978­1­931971­15­7. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity14/
technical-sessions/presentation/durumeric.
[32]
Aniket Anand, Michalis Kallitsis, Jackson Sippe, and Alberto Dainotti. Aggressive
Internet­Wide Scanners: Network Impact and Longitudinal Characterization. 2023.
arXiv: 2305.07193 [cs.NI]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07193.
[33]
Robert David Graham. Masscan: Mass IP port scanner. https://github.com/robertdavidgraham/
masscan. Accessed: 2025­05­19. 2013.
[34]
Zakir Durumeric, David Adrian, Peter Stephens, Eric Wustrow, and J. Alex Halder­
man. “Ten Years of ZMap”. In: arXiv abs/2406.15585 (2024). URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2406.15585.
[35]
Zakir Durumeric, David Adrian, Ariana Mirian, Michael Bailey, and J. Alex Halder­
man. “A Search Engine Backed by Internet­Wide Scanning”. In: Proceedings of the
22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. CCS
’15. Denver, Colorado, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2015, pp. 542–
553. ISBN: 9781450338325. DOI: 10.1145/2810103.2813703. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/2810103.2813703.
[36]
Grant Williams, Mert Erdemir, Amanda Hsu, Shraddha Bhat, Abhishek Bhaskar,
Frank Li, and Paul Pearce. “6Sense: Internet­Wide IPv6 Scanning and its Secu­
rity Applications”. In: 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24).
50
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:59==
Philadelphia, PA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2024, pp. 2281–2298. ISBN: 978­1­
939133­44­1. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity24/presentation/
williams.
[37]
Gordon Lyon. “Nmap Network Scanning: The Official Nmap Project Guide to Net­
work Discovery and Security Scanning”. In: Insecure.Org. 2009. URL: https://nmap.
org/book/.
[38]
David Myers, Ernest Foo, and Kenneth Radke. “Internet­wide scanning Taxonomy
and Framework”. eng. In: Conferences in Research and Practice in Information
Technology Series 161 (2015), pp. 61–65. ISSN: 14451336.
[39]
Oliver Gasser, Quirin Scheitle, Benedikt Rudolph, Carl Denis, Nadja Schricker, and
Georg Carle. “The Amplification Threat Posed by Publicly Reachable BACnet De­
vices”. und. In: Journal of Cyber Security and Mobility (2017). ISSN: 22454578,
22451439. DOI: 10.13052/2245-1439.614.
[40]
Travis Ashley, Sri Nikhil Gupta Gourisetti, Newton Brown, and Christopher Bone­
brake. “Aggregate attack surface management for network discovery of operational
technology”. In: Computers Security 123 (2022), p. 102939. ISSN: 0167­4048. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.102939. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0167404822003315.
[41]
Ariana Mirian, Zane Ma, David Adrian, Matthew Tischer, Thasphon Chuenchujit, Tim
Yardley, Robin Berthier, Joshua Mason, Zakir Durumeric, J. Alex Halderman, and
Michael Bailey. “An Internet­wide view of ICS devices”. eng. In: 2016 14th Annual
Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust, Pst 2016 (2016), p. 7906943. DOI: 10.
1109/PST.2016.7906943.
[42]
Wei Xu, Yaodong Tao, and Xin Guan. “The landscape of Industrial Control Sys­
tems (ICS) devices on the internet”. eng. In: 2018 International Conference on Cy­
ber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment, Cybersa 2018 (2018),
p. 8551422. DOI: 10.1109/CyberSA.2018.8551422.
[43]
Markus Dahlmanns, Johannes Lohmöller, Ina Berenice Fink, Jan Pennekamp, Klaus
Wehrle, and Martin Henze. “Easing the Conscience with OPC UA: An Internet­Wide
Study on Insecure Deployments”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm Sigcomm Inter­
net Measurement Conference, Imc (2020), pp. 101–110. DOI: 10.1145/3419394.
3423666.
[44]
Markus Dahlmanns, Johannes Lohmöller, Jan Pennekamp, Jörn Bodenhausen,
Klaus Wehrle, and Martin Henze. “Missed Opportunities: Measuring the Untapped
TLS Support in the Industrial Internet of Things”. eng. In: Asia Ccs 2022 ­ Proceed­
ings of the 2022 Acm Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(2022), pp. 252–266. DOI: 10.1145/3488932.3497762.
[45]
Xuan Feng, Qiang Li, Haining Wang, and Limin Sun. “Characterizing industrial con­
trol system devices on the Internet”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ International Conference
on Network Protocols, Icnp 2016­ (2016), p. 7784407. ISSN: 10921648, 26433303.
DOI: 10.1109/ICNP.2016.7784407.
[46]
Ricardo Yaben, Niels Lundsgaard, Jacob August, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis.
“Towards identifying neglected, obsolete, and abandoned IoT and OT devices”. eng.
In: Proceedings of the 8th Network Traffic Measurement and Analysis Conference
(tma Conference 2024) (2024), pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.23919/TMA62044.2024.10558996.
[47]
Manos Antonakakis, Tim April, Michael Bailey, Matt Bernhard, Elie Bursztein, Jaime
Cochran, Zakir Durumeric, J. Alex Halderman, Luca Invernizzi, Michalis Kallitsis,
Deepak Kumar, Chaz Lever, Zane Ma, Joshua Mason, Damian Menscher, Chad
Seaman, Nick Sullivan, Kurt Thomas, and Yi Zhou. “Understanding the Mirai Bot­
net”. In: 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17). Vancouver, BC:
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
51
==PAGE:60==
USENIX Association, Aug. 2017, pp. 1093–1110. ISBN: 978­1­931971­40­9. URL:
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity17/technical-sessions/presentation/
antonakakis.
[48]
Matrikon OPC. Matrikon OPC UA Tunneller. https://www.matrikonopc.com/opc-
ua/products/opc-ua-tunneller.aspx. Accessed: 2025­05­21.
[49]
Wireshark Foundation. Wireshark Protocol Analyzer. Accessed: 2025­05­21. 2024.
URL: https://www.wireshark.org.
[50]
EIPStackGroup. OpENer: Ethernet/IP™Adapter Stack. Accessed: 2025­05­26. 2023.
URL: https://github.com/EIPStackGroup/OpENer.
[51]
FieldCommGroup. HART­IP Developer Kit 1.2. Accessed: 2025­05­26. URL: https:
//github.com/FieldCommGroup/HART-IP-Developer-Kit?tab=readme-ov-file.
[52]
Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology FIT. Welcome to iec104­
python’s documentation! Accessed: 2025­05­27. URL: https://iec104-python.readthedocs.
io/latest/index.html.
[53]
Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology FIT. c104 github. Accessed:
2025­05­27. URL: https://github.com/Fraunhofer-FIT-DIEN/iec104-python/blob/
main/examples/simple_server.py.
[54]
Matrikon. MatrikonOPC Simulation Server. Accessed: 2025­05­26. URL: https://
www.matrikonopc.com/products/opc-drivers/opc-simulation-server.aspx.
[55]
TJ WILLIAMS. “THE PURDUE ENTERPRISE REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE”.
eng. In: Computers in Industry 24.2­3 (1994), pp. 141–158. ISSN: 01663615, 18726194.
DOI: 10.1016/0166-3615(94)90017-5.
[56]
ISA. ANSI/ISA­62443­1­1 (99.01.01)­2007: Security for Industrial Automation and
Control Systems Part 1­1: Terminology, Concepts, and Models. Standard. Part 1­1:
Terminology, Concepts, and Models. 2007.
[57]
Mauro Conti, Denis Donadel, and Federico Turrin. “A Survey on Industrial Con­
trol System Testbeds and Datasets for Security Research”. eng. In: Ieee Com­
munications Surveys and Tutorials 23.4 (2021), pp. 2248–2294. ISSN: 1553877x,
2373745x. DOI: 10.1109/COMST.2021.3094360.
[58]
Wireshark Foundation. WireShark Wiki, Sample Captures. Accessed: 2025­06­04.
URL: https://wiki.wireshark.org/SampleCaptures.
[59]
Brian Batke, Joakim Wiberg, and Dennis Dubé. “CIP Security Phase 1: Secure
Transport for EtherNet/IP”. In: ODVA 2015 Industry Conference & 17th Annual Meet­
ing. ODVA. Frisco, Texas, USA, 2015. URL: https://www.odva.org/library_proceedings/
cip-security-phase-1-secure-transport-for-ethernet-ip/.
[60]
Rockwell Automation. Product Lifecycle Status. Accessed: 2025­06­17. URL: https:
/ / www . rockwellautomation . com / en - us / support / product / product - compatibility -
migration/product-lifecycle-status.html.
[61]
Energy Institute. Guidance on Managing Obsolescence and Upgrading Industrial
Automation and Control Systems (IACS). 1st. Energy Institute, Feb. 2021. ISBN:
9781787252288. URL: https://www.energyinst.org/technical/publications/topics/
process-safety/guidance-on-managing-obsolescence-and-upgrading-industrial-automation-
and-control-systems-iacs.
[62]
Rockwell. Compatibility
Downloads Center. Accessed: 2025­07­01. URL: https:
//compatibility.rockwellautomation.com/Pages/Home.aspx.
[63]
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). National Vulnerability Database
(NVD). Accessed: 2025­06­17. 2024. URL: https://nvd.nist.gov/.
[64]
FieldComm Group. HART Common Tables Specification. Accessed: 2025­06­25.
Austin, TX, USA, 2022. URL: https://library.fieldcommgroup.org/20183/TS20183/
27.0/#page=1.
52
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:61==
[65]
Emerson. Emmerson Wireless Gateway product listings. Accessed: 2025­06­26.
2025. URL: https://www.emerson.com/catalog/SearchDisplay?storeId=20151&
catalogId=20051&langId=-1001&locale=da-dk&searchTerm=wireless%20gateway&
cmBusinessSegmentId=&wcsBusinessSegmentId=&cmFacetId=&cmTabSelected=1&
fetchFacets=true#facet:&partsFacet:&modelsFacet:&facetLimit:&searchTerm:wireless%
20gateway&partsSearchTerm:&modelsSearchTerm:&productBeginIndex:0&partsBeginIndex:
0&modelsBeginIndex:0&orderBy:&partsOrderBy:&modelsOrderBy:&pageView:grid&
minPrice:&maxPrice:&pageSize:&facetRange:&.
[66]
ProComSol Ltd. ProComSol HMUX­4­DS User Manual. Accessed: 2025­06­26. 2020.
URL: https://www.procomsol.com/files/10162/the_file/procomsol-hmux-4-ds-user-
manual.pdf.
[67]
Moore Industries. TRZ Installation Manual. Accessed: 2025­06­26. 2021. URL: https:
/ / www . miinet . com / images / pdf / manuals / TRZ _ Installation _ Manual _ Moore _
Industries.pdf.
[68]
Moore Industries. TRZ Smart HART Temperature Transmitter. Accessed: 2025­06­
26. 1998. URL: http://tmsolutions.co.kr/conv/pdf/TRZk.pdf.
[69]
Weatherford International. IoT / SCADA Platform — CygNet. Accessed: 2025­06­
26. 2025. URL: https://www.weatherford.com/products-and-services/production-and-
intervention/production-4-0/iot-scada-platform/.
[70]
Matrikon. Matrikon OPC Server for Siemens. Accessed: 2025­06­28. URL: https:
//www.matrikonopc.com/drivers/opc-siemens.aspx.
[71]
Matrikon. Matrikon OPC Universal PLC Server. Accessed: 2025­06­28. URL: https:
//www.matrikonopc.com/portal/downloads/data_sheets/MatrikonOPC_Universal_
PLC_Server_Datasheet.pdf.
[72]
Siemens. Programming a Simple OPC DA .NET Client with SIMATIC NET OPC
Data Control. Accessed: 2025­06­28. 2019. URL: https://cache.industry.siemens.
com/dl/files/779/21043779/att_5291/v3/21043779_opcdaconnector_doku_v1_1_e.
pdf.
[73]
Siemens. Individual Signaling System Based on OPC Alarm and Events with the
SIMATIC NET OPC Alarm and Event Server (COM/DCOM). Accessed: 2025­06­
28. 2011. URL: https://cache.industry.siemens.com/dl/files/467/26548467/att_
15751/v1/26548467_opc_ae_doku_v20_e.pdf.
[74]
Siemens. SIMATIC NET ­ Network management Diagnostics and configuration with
SNMP. Accessed: 2025­06­28. 2017. URL: https://support.industry.siemens.com/
cs/attachments/103949062/DH_SNMP_76.pdf.
[75]
Siemens. SIMOTION SCOUT SIMATIC NET (XP) for SIMOTION. Accessed: 2025­
06­28. 2009. URL: https://support.industry.siemens.com/cs/attachments/27001168/
SIMATIC_NET_XP_en_en-US.pdf.
[76]
Siemens. SCADA System SIMATIC WinCC ­ System Overview. Accessed: 2025­
06­28. URL: https://assets.new.siemens.com/siemens/assets/api/uuid:70cd7167-
050a-47d0-b6f5-a4e1aa02113e/iPdf-WinCC-Systemuebersicht-eng.pdf.
[77]
Siemens. Siemens Energy Products. Accessed: 2025­06­28. 2025. URL: https://
www.siemens.com/global/en/products/energy.html.
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:63==
A
Code Snippets
A.1
Ethernet/IP module
1
type EtherNetIPMessage struct {
2
Command
uint16
3
Length
uint16
4
SessionHandle
uint32
5
ResponseStatus uint32
6
SenderContext
[8]byte
7
Options
uint32
8
AdditionalData []byte
9
}
10
11
var (
12
ListIdentityRequest = EtherNetIPMessage{
13
Command:
0x0063,
14
Length:
0x0000,
15
SessionHandle:
0x00000000 ,
16
ResponseStatus: 0x00000000 ,
17
SenderContext:
[8]byte{},
18
Options:
0x00000000 ,
19
AdditionalData: nil,
20
}
21
22
ListServicesRequest = EtherNetIPMessage{
23
Command:
0x0004,
24
Length:
0x0000,
25
SessionHandle:
0x00000000 ,
26
ResponseStatus: 0x00000000 ,
27
SenderContext:
[8]byte{},
28
Options:
0x00000000 ,
29
AdditionalData: nil,
30
}
31
32
RegisterSession = EtherNetIPMessage{
33
Command:
0x0065,
34
Length:
0x0004,
35
SessionHandle:
0x00000000 ,
36
ResponseStatus: 0x00000000 ,
37
SenderContext:
[8]byte{},
38
Options:
0x00000000 ,
39
AdditionalData: []byte{0x01, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00},
40
}
41
)
Listing A.1: Go implementation of EtherNet/IP message structure
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
55
==PAGE:64==
1
2
func convertEtherNetIPCommandToByte(command EtherNetIPMessage) []byte {
3
buffer := make([]byte, 24+len(command.AdditionalData))
4
binary.LittleEndian.PutUint16(buffer[0:], command.Command)
5
binary.LittleEndian.PutUint16(buffer[2:], command.Length)
6
binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(buffer[4:], command.SessionHandle)
7
binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(buffer[8:], command.ResponseStatus)
8
copy(buffer[12:], command.SenderContext[:])
9
binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(buffer[20:], command.Options)
10
copy(buffer[24:], command.AdditionalData)
11
return buffer
12
}
Listing A.2: Method for converting EtherNet/IP message to raw byte.
56
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:65==
A.2
HART­IP
1
...
2
// HARTIPMessage represents a HART-IP Protocol Data Unit (PDU)
3
type HARTIPMessage struct {
4
Version
uint8
5
MessageType uint8
6
MessageID
uint8
7
Status
uint8
8
Sequence
uint16
9
ByteCount
uint16
10
Payload
[]byte
11
}
12
13
// Predefined HART-IP Message constants
14
const (
15
MessageIDSessionInitiate = 0
16
MessageIDSessionClose
= 1
17
MessageIDKeepAlive
= 2
18
MessageIDTokenPassPDU
= 3
19
)
20
21
// HARTIPMessage predefined request instances (payload -only bodies)
22
var (
23
SessionInitiateRequest = HARTIPMessage{
24
Version:
1,
25
MessageType: 0, //Request
26
MessageID:
MessageIDSessionInitiate ,
27
Status:
0,
28
Sequence:
0,
29
Payload:
[]byte{1, 0x00, 0x00, 0xEA, 0x60},
30
}
31
...
32
Command0Request = HARTIPMessage{
33
Version:
1,
34
MessageType: 0,
35
MessageID:
MessageIDTokenPassPDU ,
36
Status:
0,
37
Sequence:
0,
38
Payload:
[]byte{0x02, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x02}, // command 0
39
}
40
)
41
...
Listing A.3: Go implementation of HART­IP message structure
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
57
==PAGE:66==
1
2
func ConvertHARTIPMessageToByte(msg HARTIPMessage) []byte {
3
msg.ByteCount = uint16(8 + len(msg.Payload))
4
5
buffer := make([]byte, 8+len(msg.Payload))
6
7
buffer[0] = msg.Version
8
buffer[1] = (msg.MessageType & 0x0F) << 4
9
buffer[2] = msg.MessageID
10
buffer[3] = msg.Status
11
binary.BigEndian.PutUint16(buffer[4:], msg.Sequence)
12
binary.BigEndian.PutUint16(buffer[6:], msg.ByteCount)
13
copy(buffer[8:], msg.Payload)
14
15
return buffer
16
}
Listing A.4: Convertion method from HART­IP message object to byte.
A.3
IEC104
1
...
2
type IEC104APDU struct {
3
Data []byte
4
}
5
6
// Predefined IEC-104 APDUs
7
var (
8
StartDT
= IEC104APDU{Data: []byte{0x68, 0x04, 0x07, 0x00, 0x00,
0x00}}
9
StopDT
= IEC104APDU{Data: []byte{0x68, 0x04, 0x13, 0x00, 0x00,
0x00}}
10
TestFR
= IEC104APDU{Data: []byte{0x68, 0x04, 0x43, 0x00, 0x00,
0x00}}
11
GeneralInterrogation = IEC104APDU{Data: []byte{0x68, 0x0E, 0x01, 0x00, 0x00,
0x00, 0x64, 0x01, 0x06, 0x00, 0x01, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x14}}
12
)
13
...
Listing A.5: Implementation of IEC104 messages
58
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
==PAGE:67==
Cyber Security in Operational Technology
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
