==PAGE:1==
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirec-
tional Job and Candidate Matching
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By
Ion Chetraru
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5½ months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, with a specialization in Soft-
ware Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of the areas of statistics and Com-
puter Science.
Ion Chetraru - s204710
Signature
Date
ii
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The complexity of online recruitment requires innovative methods to efficiently match can-
didates with suitable job opportunities, addressing challenges such as data sparsity, mu-
tual interest requirements, and the need for explainability. This thesis explores a hybrid
recommender system designed for bidirectional job-candidate matching, using Hetero-
geneous Information Network (HIN) to model complex relationships between candidates,
jobs, skills, and other relevant entities.
A range of recommendation techniques, including path-based methods, embedding-based
approaches, metapath-based embeddings, and Graph Neural Networks (GNN), were sys-
tematically evaluated to identify optimal strategies for the recruitment domain. To com-
pensate for data sparsity, a multi-layered fallback mechanism was implemented, ensur-
ing robust recommendations even in cold-start scenarios. Moreover, an automated-path
discovery framework was developed to dynamically identify and weight semantic relation-
ships, enhancing recommendation quality and reducing manual effort.
Quantitative analysis, complemented by human-in-the-loop expert validation, demonstrated
that the proposed hybrid system significantly outperformed baseline models, providing ef-
fective, scalable, and explainable recommendations suitable for real-world deployment.
Future work includes refining the semantic enrichment of user profiles, exploring addi-
tional machine learning models for enhanced recommendation accuracy, and integrating
real-time user feedback mechanisms to continuously improve system adaptability and
effectiveness.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Associate Professor Andrea
Burattin, for his guidance, continuous support, and constructive feedback throughout the
course of the thesis. His expertise and encouragement were invaluable in shaping the
direction and quality of this work.
I also want to thank Kaspar Hansen and Mikkel Westermann from Excelerate for providing
access to real-world data and offering practical insights that grounded this research in the
complexities of real recruitment platforms. Their collaboration made it possible to explore
this project in a meaningful, applied context, and their openness and willingness to share
their time and knowledge truly enriched my understanding.
On a more personal note, I am grateful to my parents for their support and encouragement
during my studies and to my dear friend Abigail, whose presence and motivation helped
me remain focused and positive throughout this journey.
iv
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background & Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Background Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
State of the Art
9
2.1
Traditional Recommender Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Recommender Systems in Recruitment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Graph-based Recommender Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Evaluation Methods for Recommender Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Business Requirements and Problem Framing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Research Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Data Collection and Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Recommendation Evaluation Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Iterative Improvement Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Solution
17
4.1
Domain Model & Graph Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Ground Truth Approximation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Recommendation Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Fallback Mechanism for Sparse results in Path-based Recommender
. . . 25
4.5
Path Discovery in Path-based Recommender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.6
Explainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Implementation
29
5.1
Technology Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
System Architecture Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Software Design Principles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4
ETL Pipeline and Graph Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.5
API Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.6
Recommendation Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.7
Fallback Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.8
Auto-path ML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.9
Path-based recommendation explainer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.10 Deployment Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.11 Client SDK
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6
Experiments and Results
43
6.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
v
==PAGE:8==
6.2
Ground Truth Approximation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.3
Baseline Performance of Recommender Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.4
Path-based Recommender Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.5
Human Expert Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.6
Scalability Analysis of Neo4j Deployment on Azure VMs . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.7
Bidirectional Matching Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7
Discussion
55
8
Conclusion and Outlook
57
8.1
Future Work Directions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Bibliography
59
A Methodology
63
A.1 Justification of Recommendation Method Class Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . 63
B Implementation
66
B.1 MySQL Query used to extract Candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
B.2 Transformed Job object for ETL pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
B.3 Path-based recommendation explainer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
vi
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Recommender systems (RS or RecSys) are a type of information filtering tool that pro-
vides personalized suggestions to users to help them discover items of interest from a
larger list of possibilities. They have become a part of today’s digital ecosystems, being
widely used in domains such as e-commerce sites, streaming platforms, social networks,
and more. [1] These systems are shown to improve user engagement and satisfaction
while driving significant business value. For example, Amazon.com, being one of the
early adopters of large-scale recommendation engines, reportedly managed to increase
its online sales by 30% by using its recommender system. [2, 3]
1.1
Background & Motivation
Numerous methods, including content-based filtering, collaborative filtering, knowledge-
based methods, graph-based techniques, and hybrid models, have been developed as a
result of ongoing research in recommender systems. A more detailed overview of these
techniques is provided in Section 1.4.
The recruitment domain presents a unique and challenging application for recommender
systems, and it strongly encourages the use of complex and hybrid techniques. In online
recruitment platforms and professional networks, recommender systems are commonly
used in two main ways: to suggest relevant job opportunities to job seekers, and con-
versely, to recommend suitable candidates to recruiters or employers. This presents a
bidirectional recommendation problem, meaning that a successful outcome requires mu-
tual interest from both sides (the candidate and the recruiter). [4] Traditional one-sided
recommenders cannot directly handle this mutual matching requirement. Moreover, re-
cruitment data is sparse in terms of user feedback: job seekers make relatively few job
applications (each individual typically applies to or is hired for only some positions, unlike
the many movies a user might watch - movie domain). Once a person gets a job, they
usually stop job hunting for a period, so interaction data is limited. Likewise, a recruiter fills
a given position with a small number of hires and does not have infinite opportunities to
gather feedback on recommendations. Because of this, collaborative filtering approaches
are limited in recruitment, as they cannot learn reliable patterns from little interaction data.
[5] Instead, recruitment systems must rely heavily on rich content and profile data: each
candidate’s qualifications, skills, and work history, and each job’s requirements and at-
tributes, are important for determining fit. In practice, many job platforms use content-
based matching or manually crafted rules (a form of knowledge-based methods) to pair
candidates with jobs based on profile attributes.
Another consequence of the data sparsity is the motivation to use graph-based approaches
for recruitment. By modeling the domain as a network of interconnected entities (candi-
dates, jobs, skills, education, companies, etc.), a graph-based recommender can propa-
gate similarity signals through the network and uncover matches that are not immediately
obvious from one-to-one comparisons. Recent research has begun exploring heteroge-
neous graph models for job recommendation, showing that they can improve results in
cold-start scenarios by making use of the complex relationships in the data. [6] The re-
cruitment domain also differs from classic recommendation domains in that the decision
criteria are complex. A good match between a candidate and a job depends on numerous
factors (qualifications, experience, location, salary expectations, cultural fit), which may
not be captured by simple rating or click metrics. These characteristics make a strong
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
1
==PAGE:10==
case for hybrid recommender solutions in recruitment: a combination of content-based,
knowledge-based, and graph-based techniques can be employed to ensure that impor-
tant domain-specific factors are accounted for, while also attempting to generalize from
whatever limited behavioral data is available.
In summary, the unique challenges of reciprocal matching and data sparsity in recruitment
serve as the motivation to develop a custom, hybrid recommendation approach that can
effectively match jobs and candidates.
1.2
Problem Statement
The problem addressed in this thesis is the design of an efficient bidirectional recom-
mendation system for job and candidate matching. In other words, the goal is to build a
recommender system, within a unified framework, that can simultaneously recommend
the best-fitting jobs for a given candidate and the best-fitting candidates for a given job.
Achieving this is not simple due to a number of inherent challenges that exist in the re-
cruitment domain.
Sparse and Unlabeled Data.
A first major issue is the lack of explicit feedback and
ground-truth labels, which, unlike domains where users regularly rate items producing
rich interaction data, in recruitment, direct signals are limited to clicks and applications,
which are infrequent events, while negative preferences are not recorded at all. This
immediately raises the issue of a lack of labeled training data, making it difficult to train
supervised recommendation models, since there is little indication of which candidate-
job pairs are truly relevant. The data that does exist (resumes, job descriptions, etc.)
is largely unstructured or semi-structured text and attributes, which are hard to use as
labeled outcomes. Furthermore, the cold-start problem is often present, which happens
when new job postings and new candidates appear continuously, with no prior interactions
in the system, which makes it hard for traditional collaborative filtering systems to identify
communities of similar users or items. [6] The challenge is further intensified by the high
dimensionality and heterogeneity of the data involved, as each candidate and job posting
is typically described using a wide variety of features such as skills, experience, industry,
interests, etc., many of which may be rare, leading to a very sparse feature space. This
means that capturing a good candidate-job fit requires the use of domain-specific content
and auxiliary information on top of historical behavioral data.
Domain complexity and Mutual Matching.
The reciprocal nature of recruitment rec-
ommendations presents another fundamental challenge, since both parties must be satis-
fied by the recommendation: it is not enough that a job is relevant to a candidate, the can-
didate must also meet the job’s requirements and interest the employer. [4] This means
that many standard recommendation techniques can not be directly applied to the do-
main; the compatibility between two entities with potentially distinct feature spaces needs
to be modeled.
The evaluation of a reciprocal recommendation system is also more complex than in a
one-sided method. Although it can be naively evaluated by treating the recommended
as two one-sided recommendations, this overestimation is a known issue; treating each
side independently can double-count matches. [7] While appropriate evaluation metrics
should ideally consider the matching pair as the unit of success (e.g., mutual relevance
or stable matches), this thesis evaluates each direction separately — job-to-candidate
and candidate-to-job — using standard top-K metrics. Due to the lack of explicit two-
sided outcomes in the dataset, this is further complemented by human expert validation
2
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:11==
to assess mutual fit in practice Chapter 6.
Explainability and Trust.
Another challenge worth noting is the need for explainable
recommendations within the recruitment domain. Decisions about jobs and hiring have
significant consequences, and users are more likely to trust a recommender system if
it can provide understandable reasons for the suggestions. Unlike a music recommen-
dation where a user might accept a black-box suggestion, a recruiter will want to know
why a particular candidate was recommended. [8] This is highly related to the design
of the recommendation algorithm: methods that use explicit features can inherently offer
explanations, whereas complex models might need post-hoc explanation techniques.
In summary, the problem at hand is to build a two-way job/candidate recommendation
system that overcomes sparse data and a lack of labels, handles the complexity of mutual
matching with multiple criteria, and produces recommendations that are both effective and
explainable, all while exploring meaningful ways to evaluate methods in the absence of
ground truth data.
1.3
Objectives
To address the above challenges, this thesis sets the following objectives:
• Model complex relationships in the recruitment domain: use a flexible structure
that can capture candidates, jobs, skills, and their interactions.
• Handling lack of ground-truth data: formulate strategies to account for the sparse
and unlabeled data in this domain. The objective is to create a reasonable proxy
for training data that can be used to evaluate algorithms in the absence of a real
ground truth dataset. Part of this objective is also to critically assess the quality of
these generated labels and understand their limitations.
• Evaluate multiple recommendation methods: design and implement multiple
recommendation algorithms and empirically evaluate their performance on the job-
candidate matching task using consistent evaluation conditions to determine which
approach works best for reciprocal recommendations within the recruitment domain.
• Modular System Implementation: Build a modular recommendation system back-
end that integrates data processing, model execution, and result validation in a con-
sistent architecture. This involves the creation of a standalone component for each
major task of the recommender system. The goal is to facilitate iterative improve-
ment and extensibility, making it easier to add new data sources and algorithm vari-
ants to the system. Scalability for deployment in a real-world recruitment platform
is also ensured this way.
• Human-in-the-loop evaluation: validate recommendation quality through expert
feedback alongside quantitative metrics, enabling assessment of practical relevance,
interpretability, and system effectiveness beyond offline benchmarks.
1.4
Background Theory
To support the development and evaluation of the proposed system, this section intro-
duces the key concepts and methods behind recommender systems and graph-based
models that form the foundation of this work.
1.4.1
Recommender Systems Basics
A recommender system (RS) is an information-filtering system designed to predict user
preferences and suggest relevant items among large sets of possibilities. Recommender
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
3
==PAGE:12==
systems have become critical tools across numerous domains such as e-commerce, en-
tertainment, social networks, and recruitment. Broadly, recommender systems can be
categorized into three primary paradigms: content-based filtering, collaborative filtering,
and knowledge-based filtering. Hybrid recommender systems combine elements of these
approaches to make use of their complementary strengths. [9, 10]
Content-based filtering
Content-based filtering (CBF) generates recommendations by analyzing the similarity be-
tween items previously interacted with by the user and new candidate items, based on
explicit attributes or features [11]. In this approach, each item is described by a set of
features (keywords, categories, tags, etc.), and the user’s past liked or interacted items
are used to derive a list of preferences. The recommender system generates recommen-
dations by identifying new items that are most similar to the user’s profile. The similarity
is often calculated using methods such as cosine similarity, Jaccard similarity, or more
advanced text embeddings [10]. Formally, let u be a vector representing the user’s profile
and let xi be the feature vector of a candidate item i, then the content-based score for the
item i with respect to user u can be defined as:
score(u, i) = sim(u, xi),
where sim(·, ·) is a similarity function such as the cosine of the angle between vectors.
The system then recommends items with the highest similarity scores to the user.
For example, if a candidate has previously shown interest in software engineering jobs re-
quiring ”Python” and ”machine learning,” a CBF system will suggest similar roles matching
these attributes.
Collaborative filtering
Collaborative filtering (CF) makes recommendations based on user-item interaction pat-
terns, relying on the assumption that users who behaved similarly in the past (e.g., rating
similar items positively) will also agree on future preferences [12]. CF operates on the
user-item interaction matrix (e.g., historical ratings, clicks, purchases, or job applications)
to identify patterns across users and items. CF methods have two variants: user-based
and item-based. In user-based CF, the system finds a target user’s nearest neighbors
(other users with similar interaction patterns) and recommends items that those neigh-
bors like or interacted with, whereas, in item-based CF, the system identifies items that
have similar interaction patterns (i.e., are liked by many of the same users) and recom-
mends to the target user new items that are most similar to the ones that user has liked in
the past. For example, if candidate A and candidate B both liked similar job listings, a col-
laborative filtering approach may recommend candidate A jobs that candidate B recently
interacted with, assuming their preferences are aligned.
In both user-based and item-based CF, the similarity is a function that can be defined
in various ways, for example, by computing Pearson correlation or cosine similarity be-
tween the corresponding rows or columns of the interaction matrix. These techniques
are sometimes called memory-based CF. In addition to memory-based CF, there is also
model-based CF, which uses machine learning algorithms to learn latent data from the
patterns. An example of this is matrix factorization, where the user-item interaction matrix
R is approximated as the product of a user-factor matrix and item-factor matrix [10]. In a
simple matrix factorization model, each user u is associated with a latent vector, pu ∈Rd
and each item i is associated with a latent vector qi ∈Rd such that their dot product
gives the predicted affinity: ˆrui = p⊤
u qi. These latent factors are learned from the ob-
served user-item interactions (e.g., via optimization algorithms that minimize the error in
predicting known interactions).
4
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:13==
Knowledge-based filtering
Knowledge-based recommender systems rely on explicit domain knowledge, logical rules,
or constraint satisfaction techniques to make recommendations [13, 10]. Rather than
learning from user behavior, a knowledge-based system uses predefined knowledge about
how item attributes meet user requirements.
Two common styles of knowledge-based recommenders are constraint-based and case-
based systems. A constraint-based recommender treats recommendation as a filtering
problem: the user’s requirements (constraints) are obtained explicitly (e.g., through a form
or query interface), and the system returns only items that satisfy all those constraints.
For instance, in the recruitment domain, if an employer needs candidates with at least 5
years of experience and fluency in German, a constraint-based system would eliminate
any candidate who does not meet those criteria. On the other hand, a case-based rec-
ommender tries to find items analogous to a user’s needs by computing similarity with
past cases. The system might iteratively ask for the user’s preferences and then retrieve
a list of candidates or jobs that best match those preferences, possibly allowing the user
to provide feedback and refine the criteria in multiple rounds. This approach is similar to
how a human recruiter might operate: by comparing the requirements of a job opening
(the “case”) with attributes of available candidates and finding the closest matches based
on expertise and experience.
Hybrid recommender Systems
As mentioned earlier, hybrid recommenders combine two or more approaches (content-
based, collaborative, or knowledge-based) to use their complementary advantages and
minimize limitations [13, 10]. Hybridization strategies include:
• Weighted hybrid: Results from multiple methods are combined via weighted aggre-
gation.
• Switching hybrid: A specific method is selected dynamically based on context or
data availability.
• Mixed hybrid: Recommendations from different methods are merged into one uni-
fied ranking.
An example of a hybrid recommender in recruitment may first filter candidates by explicit
criteria (knowledge-based), then rank them according to behavioral similarity (collabora-
tive filtering), and further refine recommendations based on matching of skills and job
descriptions (content-based).
1.4.2
Graph-based Recommender Systems
Graph-based recommender systems model the recommendation problem using graph
structures, allowing the system to naturally represent and exploit complex relationships
between users, items, and auxiliary information. [14] In a graph model, we represent the
entities (users, jobs, skills, companies, etc.) as nodes, and relationships or interactions
between these entities as edges. For example, we can construct a graph G = (V, E)
where V is the set of nodes and E is the set of edges, such that each candidate, job, skill,
and other relevant concept is a node, and edges denote relationships like “candidate
applied for job”, “candidate has skill”, “job requires skill”, “candidate worked at company”,
etc. In the simplest scenario, if we only consider users and items, we get a bipartite
graph: let U be the set of user nodes and I be the set of item nodes, then an edge
(u, i) ∈E might indicate that user u interacted with item i. More generally, we can extend
this to a heterogeneous graph by including multiple node types and edge types. For
instance, in the recruitment domain, we can have nodes of type Candidate, Job, Skill,
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
5
==PAGE:14==
Company, Education, etc., and correspondingly edges of types like APPLIED_FOR (linking
a Candidate to a Job), HAS_SKILL (Candidate to Skill), REQUIRES_SKILL (Job to Skill),
WORKED_AT (Candidate to Company), and so on. This graph captures rich information
about the domain: for example, a candidate node connected to a skill node indicates the
candidate possesses that skill; a job node connected to the same skill node indicates that
skill is required by the job; thus, the candidate and job share a skill edge in common.
Graph Representation
Graph representations can be either homogeneous or heterogeneous. A homogeneous
graph contains only one type of node and one type of relation. An example might be an
item–item similarity graph where every node is a job posting and an edge connects two
jobs if they are similar (or a user–user graph in a social network). Homogeneous graphs
are simpler to work with, but cannot directly capture the complex nature of data in domains
like recruitment. A heterogeneous information network (HIN), on the other hand, contains
multiple node types and edge types. The recruitment graph described above is a HIN:
it has diverse entities and relations. Formally, one can define a HIN with a node type
mapping function ϕ : V →A and an edge type mapping ψ : E →R, where A is the set of
node types and R is the set of relation types [15]. In our example, ϕ(Alice) = Candidate if
Alice is a candidate node, ϕ(DataScientistJob) = Job for a job posting node, ϕ(Python) =
Skill for a skill node, etc. Likewise, ψ((Alice, DataScientistJob)) = APPLIED_FOR for
the edge denoting that Alice applied for that job, and ψ((DataScientistJob, Python)) =
REQUIRES_SKILL for the edge denoting that the job requires Python skill.
Neo4j and Graph Databases
To implement and work with graph-based data, specialized graph databases such as
Neo4j are often used. Neo4j is a popular graph database system that stores data in
nodes and relationships and is optimized for traversing these relationships quickly. It pro-
vides a declarative query language called Cypher, which allows users to query the graph
by specifying patterns of nodes and edges to match. In Cypher, queries are expressed
using patterns representing nodes: ( ), and edges: -[]->, whereas MATCH, WHERE, and
RETURN clauses are used to find patterns, filter patterns, and return output, respectively. As
a simple example, the following Cypher query finds all jobs that require the skill “Python”:
MATCH (j:Job)-[:REQUIRES_SKILL]->(s:Skill {name: 'Python'})
RETURN j.title, j.description
Neo4j also comes with built-in graph algorithms (like shortest path, PageRank, community
detection), which can be used to analyze the graph structure for recommendation insights
(e.g., finding clusters of similar candidates or jobs).
1.4.3
Graph-Based Recommendation Techniques
Beyond representing data as a graph, there are algorithmic techniques that learn from the
graph structure to produce recommendations. Two important families of such techniques
are graph embedding methods and graph neural networks.
Node Embeddings
Graph embedding methods aim to convert the nodes of a graph into vectors in a latent
space, such that the graph’s structural information is preserved in those vectors. In other
words, if two nodes are ”close” in the graph (i.e., they have many common neighbors or
are connected by multiple short paths), then the learning algorithm will try to place these
nodes close together in the embedding space. Once each node is represented as an
embedding, recommending items to a user can be done by finding item nodes whose
vectors are most similar to the user’s vector using similarity measures.
One approach in this category is node2vec [16], which performs biased random walks
6
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:15==
in the graph to generate node sequences that are later converted into embeddings by
using a skip-gram model. Specifically, node2vec performs truncated random walks from
each node and uses two parameters p and q to bias the walk between a breadth-first and
depth-first strategy. By tuning these parameters, the method is able to capture both local
neighbor relationships and more global structural roles of nodes.
While node2vec is designed for homogenous graphs, there are extensions for heteroge-
neous networks. One such method is MetaPath2Vec [17], which uses domain-specific
metapaths to create embeddings. A metapath is a sequence of node types that defines a
particular semantic relationship, for example, a simple metapath in the recruitment domain
could be Candidate →Skill →Job, meaning “candidates connected to jobs through
skills,” which highlights the relation of a candidate being qualified for a job via shared skills.
A longer metapath might be Candidate →Skill →Job →Skill →Candidate, which
connects candidates to other candidates via common skill requirements of jobs. MetaP-
ath2Vec works by first generating random walks that follow the specified metapath pattern
(instead of arbitrary walks). So, if we use the Candidate–Skill–Job–Skill–Candidate meta-
path, a walk might go: Candidate A →Skill X →Job Y →Skill Z →Candidate B, producing
a “sentence” A, X, Y, Z, B that respects the type sequence. These sequences are then
fed to a similar skip-gram embedding learning procedure. MetaPath2Vec thus ensures
that two nodes will be close in the embedding space if they are frequently connected by
the chosen semantic paths.
Graph Neural Networks (GNN)
Graph Neural Networks are a more recent and powerful class of models that apply neural
network principles directly to graph data [18, 19]. GNNs iteratively aggregate and trans-
form information from a node’s neighbors to learn a representation for each node that
captures both its features and its graph context.
In a GNN, each node starts with an initial feature vector, which is then updated through
multiple message-passing layers. In each layer, every node collects a message from
each of its neighbors. These messages are typically functions of the neighbor’s current
representation. The node then aggregates all the messages from its neighbors (by sum-
mation, averaging, or a more complex pooling operation) and combines this aggregated
message with its own current state to produce a new state, usually by applying a nonlinear
transformation like a neural network [20].
Two common GNN architectures are encountered within the field: GraphSage and Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN). In GraphSage, for each node v and for each layer k, we
compute:
h(k+1)
v
= σ
(
W (k) · CONCAT
(
h(k)
v , AGGu∈N(v)
(
h(k)
u
)))
where h(k)
v
is the feature vector of node v at layer k, N(v) is the set of neighbors of v,
AGG· is an aggregation function that combines the neighbor features (e.g., element-wise
mean or sum), ∥denotes concatenation, W (k) is a trainable weight matrix for layer k,
and σ is a nonlinear activation function (like ReLU). Intuitively, GraphSAGE takes the
average (or another aggregator) of the neighbor representations, concatenates it with the
node’s own representation, and passes it through a neural network layer to get the next
representation. [20] By doing this over K layers, each node’s final representation h(K)
v
will
contain information from nodes up to K hops away [18]. GraphSAGE is also known as
inductive, since once the aggregation function is learned, it can generate embeddings for
new nodes that were not in the training graph simply by looking at their neighbors. This
is particularly useful for evolving graphs.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
7
==PAGE:16==
GCN architecture takes a different approach to the aggregation process. Rather than
concatenating a node’s own features with an aggregate of neighbors, it directly computes
a weighted average of a node and its neighbors in one step of matrix operations. A single
GCN layer can be written as:
H(l+1) = σ
(
˜D−1
2 ˜A ˜D−1
2 H(l)W (l))
where H(l) is the matrix of all node representations at layer l (each row of H corresponds
to a node), W (l) is a weight matrix for layer l, and σ is an activation function. ˜A = A + I
is the adjacency matrix of the graph with self-connections added (so that each node is
also connected to itself), and ˜D is the diagonal degree matrix of ˜A. The term ˜D−1
2 ˜A ˜D−1
2
is a normalized adjacency matrix (it’s like taking an average of neighbors’ features rather
than a sum). Thus, the operation ˜D−1/2 ˜A ˜D−1/2H(l) produces a matrix where each node’s
feature vector is replaced by a weighted average of itself and its neighbors’ vectors from
the previous layer. Multiplying by W (l) and applying σ then gives the new representa-
tions. Stacking multiple GCN layers means each node’s representation draws from an
expanding neighborhood (2-hop neighbors, 3-hop neighbors, etc., with each additional
layer) [19].
Graph neural networks can be used for recommendations by training them to predict the
existence of edges in the user-item graph. The score of the output recommendations
is usually defined as a dot product between learned embedding representations of the
entities or by applying a learned function to the embedding.
1.5
Thesis structure
The remainder of the thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 reviews prior work on
recommender systems, with a focus on recruitment-specific applications, reciprocal rec-
ommendation techniques, and graph-based approaches. Chapter 3 outlines the research
methodology, including business requirements, data preparation, evaluation design, and
strategies for constructing proxy ground truth labels. Chapter 4 presents the concep-
tual solution, including domain modeling and the design of various recommendation al-
gorithms. Chapter 5 describes the technical implementation of the system, including the
ETL pipeline, backend architecture, and deployment setup. Chapter 6 presents the exper-
imental results, compares the performance of multiple recommendation strategies, and
evaluates fallback mechanisms and human validation. Chapter 7 discusses the findings,
limitations, and practical implications of the work. Chapter 8 concludes the thesis, sum-
marizing contributions and outlining future work directions.
8
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:17==
2
State of the Art
2.1
Traditional Recommender Systems
Traditional recommender systems such as collaborative filtering (CF), content-based fil-
tering (CBF), and hybrid models have been extensively applied across domains. While
their underlying principles are discussed in Section 1.4, this section focuses on how these
methods have been evaluated in the literature, their strengths and weaknesses in sparse
domains, and their relevance to job/candidate matching.
Content-based recommenders have long been used across different domains for items
with rich, descriptive attributes. Pazzani and Billsus [21] demonstrated that CBF meth-
ods could effectively use item attributes to handle new items without user interactions,
thus mitigating cold-start problems. However, despite good accuracy in sparse-data en-
vironments, these methods tend to suffer from low diversity due to over-specialization,
consistently recommending items very similar to those users previously interacted with.
Moreover, the quality of recommendations heavily depends on the quality and complete-
ness of item attributes [11].
Collaborative Filtering has traditionally been favored for its ability to discover patterns in
user-item interaction data, thus capturing relationships beyond just explicit item attributes.
Schafer et al. [12] surveyed user-based and item-based CF techniques, emphasizing their
strength in providing personalized and novel recommendations by learning user prefer-
ences from historical data. However, Adomavicius and Tuzhilin [9] identified fundamental
issues with CF, such as significant performance degradation under sparsity conditions
and a lack of capability to handle the cold-start problem effectively. Their review explicitly
highlighted the limitations of CF methods in scenarios with insufficient interaction data,
emphasizing the necessity for hybrid approaches in sparse domains.
Hybrid methods emerged primarily to overcome the limitations of the content-based or
collaborative approaches by integrating multiple recommendation strategies. Burke’s [13]
influential survey categorized hybrid recommenders into weighted, switching, and mixed
methods, among others. He showed that hybridization often leads to better recommen-
dation quality across diverse scenarios. Later research confirmed these observations:
for instance, Pazzani [21] successfully integrated collaborative and content-based sig-
nals, improving recommendations’ diversity and reducing the negative impact of sparse
user-item interactions. Similarly, Thannimalai and Zhang [22] developed a tourism rec-
ommender that combined collaborative and content-based filtering, significantly improving
precision and user satisfaction compared to either method alone.
Despite the clear advantages, hybrid systems require careful design and domain-specific
tuning, introducing complexity, particularly in data-sparse domains.
2.2
Recommender Systems in Recruitment
Recommender systems have increasingly become integral in the recruitment domain, ad-
dressing challenges of matching candidates with job postings effectively. While traditional
recommender methods have adapted to this area, recruitment-specific qualities demand
specialized approaches and hybrid methods.
Early research by Yi et al. [23] applied statistical language models to improve match-
ing between resumes and job descriptions. Their proposed Structured Relevance Model
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
9
==PAGE:18==
used semi-structured attributes, such as job titles, required skills, and work experience,
to infer suitable resume content for given job postings. A notable challenge identified
by Yi et al. was the vocabulary mismatch issue, which arises when candidates and em-
ployers describe identical skills or attributes using different terms. Their solution involved
learning from previously successful matches; for instance, associating ”SQL” or ”MySQL”
skills implicitly with roles like ”Database Administrator”, even if the job descriptions lacked
explicit mentions. Despite these advances, content-based methods in recruitment face
issues due to incomplete and inconsistent resume data. Yi et al. found that 23% of re-
sumes lacked critical information such as summary sections, limiting the recommendation
accuracy.
To improve semantic matching, researchers have incorporated domain knowledge through
ontologies and knowledge graphs. Ontology-based recommender systems map job and
candidate information to a structured taxonomy of skills, occupations, and qualifications.
Fazel-Zerandi & Fox [24] proposed a semantic matchmaking approach using an ontology
to find relevant matches that go beyond keyword overlap — for example, understanding
that a ”Software Developer” role requires programming skills could be indicated by various
certifications or related keywords, even if the resume wording differs.
Although collaborative filtering is widely successful in domains with abundant user-item
interactions, it implies unique challenges when applied to the recruitment domain due to
scarce explicit feedback. Malinowski et al. [25] tried this by exploiting implicit feedback,
such as application and interaction histories. Their method considered both job require-
ments and candidate preferences, providing valuable insights into reciprocal matching
requirements. Nevertheless, collaborative filtering methods are still found to suffer from
data sparsity, as job applications and clicks are infrequent compared to other interaction
data found in other domains, e.g., entertainment data.
Given the complexity and sparsity in recruitment datasets, research surveys show that
hybrid systems combining multiple recommendation strategies become more effective.
Al-Otaibi and Ykhlef [26] observed that methods such as content-based, collaborative
filtering, and knowledge-based are successfully combined to enhance recommendation
accuracy. Their review discusses that the hybrid approaches are especially useful in
recruitment because they combine different recommendation methods to handle multiple
factors simultaneously, such as candidate skills, job requirements, and other contextual
attributes, which single-method systems often fail to address effectively.
A systematic review by Freire and Castro [27] provided insights into new trends in re-
cruitment recommender systems using sophisticated machine learning techniques and
graph-based methods to address recruitment-specific challenges. Their review empha-
sized the necessity of modeling complex relational and structural information to handle
reciprocal recommendations effectively, pointing out critical areas that still require further
research, including data sparsity, the cold-start issue, and improving recommendation
explainability.
2.3
Graph-based Recommender Systems
Graph-based recommender systems have gained substantial attention due to their capac-
ity to model complex user-item interactions and auxiliary contextual relationships, there-
fore significantly enhancing recommendation performance.
Early foundational work by Huang et al. [14] demonstrated the efficacy of representing
recommendation problems through graph structures, particularly in digital library contexts.
10
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:19==
They showed that integrating user-item interactions into a graph-based unified represen-
tation substantially improved recommendation accuracy, clearly showing the potential
advantages of structural modeling. However, this early approach focused on relatively
simple user-item interaction, leaving open the question of how to exploit more complex,
heterogeneous relationships fully.
To further capture relational complexity in heterogeneous networks, Sun et al. [28] intro-
duced the concept of meta-paths and proposed the PathSim algorithm, which allows for an
efficient way of conducting top-K similarity searches based on meta-path definitions, sig-
nificantly enhancing the recommendation quality and interpretability in complex domains.
These meta-paths define meaningful sequences of relationships connecting nodes in a
heterogeneous information network, capturing semantically meaningful patterns. Never-
theless, the manual definition and selection of meta-paths introduced considerable depen-
dency on domain knowledge, creating scalability and automation challenges for dynamic
datasets or new domains.
To mitigate the scalability concerns of meta-path-based approaches, Dong et al. [17]
developed the metapath2vec algorithm, a scalable representation learning method for
heterogeneous networks. This algorithm uses random walks guided by predefined meta-
path schemas to learn low-dimensional embeddings of nodes in a graph. These embed-
dings encode both local and global structural information, making them highly effective for
recommendation tasks. While this method has shown scalability improvements, it still de-
pends on metapath selection, which needs domain expertise to define meaningful paths
adequately.
Recent advancements have also explored neural architectures for graph-based methods.
Wang et al. [29] provided a comprehensive survey on graph learning-based recommender
systems, highlighting recent innovations and the diversity of methodologies. The survey
shows that there are different methods that could inherently handle the sparsity and com-
plexity of recommender datasets through enhanced context representation and multi-hop
relationships modeling, particularly benefiting cold-start scenarios and domains with lim-
ited user-item interactions. Gao et al. (2022) [30] further demonstrated that GNN-based
recommender systems significantly enhance accuracy by propagating and aggregating
node features across local neighborhoods to produce rich contextual embeddings. How-
ever, as noted by Gao et al., GNN methods generally lack transparency and explainability,
limiting their utility in scenarios where recommendation interpretability is critical.
2.4
Evaluation Methods for Recommender Systems
Evaluating recommender systems is critical for measuring performance and comparing
algorithms.
Since the recommended system often deals with implicit data, the unobserved data could
be classified as either irrelevant or undiscovered by the user. This leads to a lack of clear
ground truth: we know the positives, but we cannot be sure about the negatives [31]. The
common practice is to assume that items that were not interacted with by a user are not of
interest and count them as negatives; however, this assumption can cause biased results
[31]. There are different ways that researchers handle this problem in evaluation. One
approach is to treat all unrated items as negatives. This approach is very strict and often
provides low precision, but it is easy to compute. Another approach is negative sampling,
where a set of uninvolved items is randomly sampled for each user to act as a ranking
pool, under the assumption that the user will likely not prefer those items over the ones
they interacted with [32]. This evaluation issue suggests that metrics like precision and
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
11
==PAGE:20==
recall must be interpreted with caution, since they often focus on the positive test data
[32]. To get a more reliable evaluation, online methods (A/B testing with real users) are
ideal, but in academic settings, offline metrics are the default with the understanding that
they act as an imperfect proxy [32].
Traditional metrics evaluate each user’s or item’s recommendations separately. How-
ever, in a bidirectional setting such as the recruitment domain, the effectiveness of the
recommender system cannot be fully captured by looking at one side only: for example,
evaluating Precision@K of job suggestions for a candidate ignores whether the employer
found those candidates suitable. Yang et al. argue that this ”overlooks the fact that the
ranking outcomes of both sides collectively influence the effectiveness of [an] RSS” [33].
In their research, they propose new metrics that can be used in reciprocal RS, focusing on
matching outcomes. These include measures of overall matching rate or coverage (how
many successful matches are made out of the possible pairs), bilateral satisfaction/stabil-
ity (similar to the stable marriage problem — ensuring that neither party would be better off
with different matches), and balance/fairness in rankings (ensuring one side’s preferences
do not completely dominate the matching) [33]. Using these metrics, evaluating real data
might involve checking, for instance, the fraction of recommendations that resulted in an
interview or an application. Such evaluation is challenging because it demands a dataset
with explicit two-sided outcomes, which are not always available [33].
2.5
Research Questions
The research is guided by the following questions:
• RQ1: How can weak or implicit signals be used to reliably approximate a ground
truth for validating recommendations in domains lacking explicit feedback?
• RQ2: Which recommendation algorithms are most effective for bidirectional job-
candidate matching in sparse and complex domains?
• RQ3: Can automated discovery of semantic relationship patterns in graph-based
models improve recommendation quality compared to manually defined heuristics?
• RQ4: What domain modeling approach best captures the complex relationships be-
tween jobs, candidates, and auxiliary entities in recruitment recommendation sys-
tems?
• RQ5: Which class of recommender systems is best suited to address functional
requirements typical to a recommender system in the recruitment domain?
12
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodological framework adopted to design, implement, and
evaluate a bidirectional recommender system for job and candidate matching. The ap-
proach follows the Design Science Research (DSR) paradigm, which emphasizes both
practical utility and scientific rigor of the developed solution.
The chapter begins by defining the business and functional requirements driving system
design, then describes the research approach, including data preprocessing, evaluation
methods, and iterative approaches used to refine the system. Each methodological com-
ponent is aligned with the domain-specific challenges identified earlier, ensuring that both
technical feasibility and practical effectiveness are addressed through the development
process.
3.1
Business Requirements and Problem Framing
The design of the recommender system was guided by a clear set of business require-
ments derived from both stakeholder expectations and practical limitations of the recruit-
ment domain. These requirements shaped the system architecture, modeling choices,
and evaluation strategies, ensuring that the final solution addresses real-world usability.
3.1.1
Functional Requirements
The following functional requirements (FRs) define the expected capabilities of the system
from a user and stakeholder perspective:
• [FR1] Minimum Recommendations: The system must guarantee a minimum num-
ber of recommendations for each user, even in sparse scenarios. This ensures
usability for cold-start users or edge cases.
• [FR2] Bidirectional Recommendations: The recommendation engine must sup-
port two-way matching: recommending jobs to candidates and candidates to re-
cruiters, reflecting the reciprocal nature of the recommendation system.
• [FR3] Incomplete Profiles: The system should be robust to missing or partial user
or item information, allowing it to generate recommendations even when certain
attributes are not available (e.g., work experience or interests).
• [FR4] Multi-Format Input Support: User and job data may include both structured
and unstructured fields; the system should be capable of preprocessing, extracting,
and normalizing these to form consistent representations.
• [FR5] Candidate Feature Integration: Recommendations must include diverse
attributes of candidates, including:
– Hard Skills, Soft Skills, and Interests (structured).
– Bio and Work Experience (free text).
– Employment Preferences (e.g., remote, full-time).
– Job clicks and applications.
• [FR6] Job Feature Integration: Recommendations must include diverse attributes
of a job posting, including:
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
13
==PAGE:22==
– Job Description (JSON-richtext).
– Employment Type, Interests, Required Hard/Soft Skills.
• [FR7] Diversity of Recommendations: The system should avoid excessive repe-
tition in recommendations, especially in those provided to a candidate.
• [FR8] Adaptive Learning: The recommendation logic should adapt over time based
on new data and user interaction.
3.1.2
Non-Functional Requirements
In addition to functional goals, the recommendation system must also meet the following
non-functional requirements (NFRs):
• [NFR1] Response Time: The system must return recommendations within 3 sec-
onds under normal traffic.
• [NFR2] Scalability and Elasticity: The architecture must support dynamic scaling.
• [NF3] Cost Predictability: The total cost of the system must be predictable.
To evaluate which recommender system class best satisfies the business requirements,
a comparative analysis was performed. Table 3.1 presents a mapping of each functional
requirement to key recommender system classes, highlighting where each approach suc-
ceeds or does not meet the requirement. As seen in the table, graph-based and hybrid
approaches provide the best support for the requirements, particularly in areas such as
bidirectional recommendation ([FR2]), handling incomplete profiles ([FR3]), and ensur-
ing recommendation diversity ([FR7]). This analysis provided a foundation for selecting
graph-based and hybrid models as the most suitable for the domain, given the require-
ments. A detailed justification for each mapping decision is provided in Appendix A.1.
ID
Content
based
Collab.
filtering
Knowledge
based
Graph
based
CARS
Hybrid
FR1






FR2






FR3






FR4






FR5






FR6






FR7






FR8






Table 3.1: Comparison of recommendation methods against functional requirements (
= full support,  = partial support,  = not supported)
3.2
Research Design
This thesis adopts a Design Science Research (DSR) methodology to develop and eval-
uate a recommender system in the recruitment domain.
The research process followed a structured, iterative cyclce consisting of the following
key stages:
14
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:23==
• Problem Analysis: Understanding the domain-specific challenges of recruitment
recommendation systems, including data sparsity, mutual matching, and explain-
ability.
• Data exploration and proxy ground truth construction: Due to a lack of labeled
data in the domain, different strategies were investigated to construct a pseudo-
ground truth using different recruitment-related signals.
• Algorithm Evaluation Framework: Multiple recommendation strategies were de-
signed and tested using standard offline evaluation metrics and validated through
both quantitative and human-in-the-loop assessments.
• Iterative refinement: The best-performing recommendation approach was selected
and refined through successive cycles of evaluation, improvement, and validation.
Each iteration aimed to incrementally improve system accuracy and coverage.
3.3
Data Collection and Preprocessing
The dataset used in the research was sourced from a real-world, normalized relational
database provided by a recruitment platform. It contains a mixture of structured fields
(e.g., skills, employment preferences) and unstructured text (e.g., job description, candi-
date bios), covering both candidate and job profiles, as well as user interactions such as
views and applications.
Given the domain’s complexity and data heterogeneity, a preprocessing phase was re-
quired to unify and normalize the data. This included:
• Cleaning and structuring semi-formatted text fields for analysis.
• Normalizing multilingual text fields.
The final output of this stage was a cleaned, consistent representation of entities and
relationships in the recruitment domain, which is used as a foundation for constructing a
graph-based data model, which is further explored in Chapter 4.
3.4
Recommendation Evaluation Framework
3.4.1
Evaluation Setting
The evaluation of the multiple recommendation systems was performed in different set-
tings, which can be characterized as follows:
• Quantitative evaluation:
Standard offline metrics were computed against a pre-
defined ground truth to measure recommendation accuracy. This setting simulates
the system’s ability to return relevant recommendations in the absence of real-time
user feedback.
• Human-in-the-loop evaluation:
A domain expert was asked to manually assess
and rank candidate-job and job-candidate pairs for a selected subset of items, which
were then compared with the system-generated rankings.
Moreover, irrelevant
matches can also be identified, which penalizes the system not only for incorrect
ranks but also for recommending unsuitable pairs.
3.4.2
Evaluation Metrics
The metrics used for evaluating the recommender systems were standard top-K ranking
metrics:
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
15
==PAGE:24==
• Precision@K: This metric measures the proportion of recommended items in the
top-K that are relevant.
Precision@K = |Relevant Items in Top-K|
K
• Recall@K: It measures the proportion of all relevant items that are included in the
top-K results:
Recall@K = |Relevant Items in Top-K|
|All Relevant Items|
• NDCG@K: This evaluates both relevance and ranking position by discounting lower-
ranked correct recommendations:
NDCG@K =
1
IDCG@K
K
∑
i=1
2reli −1
log2(i + 1)
where reli is the binary relevance of the item at rank i, and IDCG is the ideal (best-
case) DCG value.
These metrics were calculated for both recommendation directions — candidate-to-job
and job-to-candidate — to ensure balanced performance in the bidirectional matching sce-
nario. While these metrics offer valuable insights, they rely on approximated ground truth
labels in the case of the quantitative evaluation setting, which are inherently imperfect,
meaning that the results were interpreted with caution and supplemented by qualitative
evaluation.
3.5
Iterative Improvement Process
In the Design Science Research (DSR) methodology, the development of the recom-
mender system followed an iterative refinement cycle, where each cycle aimed to im-
prove the system based on evaluation outcomes, domain expert feedback, and observed
limitations in the recommendation accuracy. The process followed a three-step structure:
• Identify issues: Issues were identified through evaluation metrics or by domain
experts during human-in-the-loop validation.
• Fix issue: Based on observed issues, modifications were made to the system,
such as introducing improvement strategies, introducing more entities, and adjusting
model parameters.
• Re-evaluation: After each refinement, the system was re-evaluated using the same
metrics to ensure measurable improvement based on baselines, and comparisons
were made against the previous iteration to track performance gains.
This iterative approach allowed progressive development and improvement of the rec-
ommender’s effectiveness and ensured that the final solution addresses both functional
goals and domain expectations.
16
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:25==
4
Solution
This chapter presents the conceptual design of the proposed recommendation system,
with a focus on how recruitment data is modeled, labeled, and utilized to enable effective
bidirectional matching. It begins by introducing the domain model and graph schema that
capture the complex relationships among candidates, jobs, skills, and related entities.
Several strategies for generating ground truth labels are then described, and the chapter
continues to discuss the key recommendation algorithms used in the recommender sys-
tem and outlines a fallback mechanism for sparse scenarios. Finally, an automated path
discovery framework and an explainability approach are introduced to reduce reliance on
manual path definition and improve the interpretability of recommendations.
4.1
Domain Model & Graph Schema
The initial modeling of the recruitment domain was performed using a UML diagram, show-
ing key entities, their attributes, and relationships explicitly (see Figure 4.1). This UML dia-
gram provides a detailed overview of how entities such as Candidates, Jobs, Companies,
Skills, Interests, Languages, and Work Experiences interact within the recruitment
context.
The decision to represent the recruitment domain as a graph, and more specifically as a
Heterogeneous Information Network (HIN), was driven by both the structure of the data
and the business requirements outlined in Chapter 3. Most of the functional requirements,
such as [FR2] Bidirectional Recommendations, [FR3] Incomplete Profiles, and [FR7]
Diversity of Recommendations, are more effectively addressed through graph-based
modeling. Moreover, graph-based systems naturally support sparse and relational data,
making them well-suited for addressing [FR1] Minimum Recommendations and [FR8] Adaptive
Learning. From a data structure perspective, entities such as Candidates, Jobs, and
Skills have rich and complex relationships that are clearly captured by the UML and
provide a direct basis for modeling as nodes and edges within a graph database.
The detailed UML domain model was then transformed into a Heterogeneous Information
Network (HIN). This conversion involved defining each UML entity as a node type and
translating the relationships into explicit edges in the graph. The attributes of each en-
tity were also directly transformed into node properties within the HIN. The resulting HIN
schema in Figure 4.2 explicitly models diverse relationships crucial for recommendation:
• Candidates are explicitly linked to their Skills, Interests, and Languages.
• Jobs explicitly connected to required Skills, Languages, Interests, Employment Types,
and Location types.
• Interaction edges like applications and views linked Candidates and Jobs.
• Companies and Candidate work experiences explicitly connected to Industries.
To populate the graph, a structured ETL (Extract–Transform–Load) pipeline was designed
to convert recruitment platform data from a relational schema into the heterogeneous
graph format described above. The pipeline extracts data from a MySQL database, per-
forms necessary cleaning and normalization (including multilingual text fields), and loads
the resulting entities and relationships into a Neo4j graph database. This step ensures
the graph reflects the full structural complexity of the domain and serves as the foundation
for all recommendation algorithms.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: UML-based conceptual model illustrating the core entities in the recruitment
system
4.2
Ground Truth Approximation
As mentioned in Chapter 1, a reliable ground truth dataset is needed to evaluate a rec-
ommender system’s performance, which is often hard to obtain in the recruitment domain
because of complex data, relevance ambiguity, and imbalanced data. This section ex-
plores several strategies for approximating ground truth labels using various heuristics
and machine learning techniques.
As shown later in Chapter 6, the LLM-based approach resulted in the best balance be-
tween precision and recall and was used as the primary labeling strategy.
4.2.1
Implicit Feedback
This approach uses user interaction data, such as views and applications, as a proxy for
relevance. A user-item pair is labeled as relevant (1) if the user has shown strong interest
through repeated interactions. Otherwise, it is labeled as non-relevant (0). This can be
represented by the following formula:
yu,i =
{
1,
if vu,i > 2 ∨au,i = 1
0,
otherwise
where:
18
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.2: Heterogeneous Information Network (HIN) schema derived from the domain
model, representing entity types (e.g., Candidate, Job, Skill) and their semantic relation-
ships.
• vu,i: number of views by user u on item i
• au,i: number of applications by user u on item i
• yu,i: assigned relevance label for user-item pair
The repeated interactions signal is captured by the thresholds used in the formula for
the number of views and application status. The chosen thresholds for the view action
help mitigate noise and aim to capture stronger engagement signals, ruling out casual
browsing or accidental clicks.
Although scalable and easy to compute, this method lacks explicit negative feedback —
if a user has not interacted with an item, it does not necessarily mean that the item is not
relevant; it could also mean that the item was never visible to the user.
4.2.2
Heuristic Labeler
In this method, relevance is inferred from domain-specific similarity rules, such as overlap
in skills and interests between candidates and jobs. A pair is labeled as relevant if there
is strong user-item alignment in either skills or interests.
Skill Similarity:
SkillSimu,i = |Skillsu ∩Skillsi|
|Skillsi|
Interest Similarity:
InterestSimu,i = |Interestsu ∩Interestsi|
|Interestsi|
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
19
==PAGE:28==
The final label is assigned as:
yu,i =
{
1,
if SkillSimu,i ≥0.2 ∨InterestSimu,i ≥0.1
0,
otherwise
These thresholds were selected based on prior experimentation and domain expertise
to reflect a meaningful overlap without being too strict. Although the chosen similarity
thresholds may appear low, they reflect realistic user behavior in the recruitment context
— this may vary in different datasets within the same domain.
4.2.3
LLM-Based Labeler
To simulate human judgment at scale, a Large Language Model (LLM) was used to gen-
erate binary labels. For each user-item pair, a structured prompt was crafted using the
following context:
• Candidate information: including skills, interests, and bio.
• Job information: including title, required skills, interests, and full description.
• Direct binary relevance query: “Is this job relevant to this candidate? (0 = No, 1 =
Yes)”
The prompt was submitted to the GPT-4o-mini model with the following configuration:
• Temperature: 0 (to ensure deterministic and consistent output)
• System Prompt: “You are a job matching expert. Your task is to analyze the candi-
date and job fit and respond with ONLY a single digit: 0 (not relevant) or 1 (relevant).
DO NOT provide any explanation or additional text. ONLY respond with the digit 0
or 1.”
This approach offers a scalable, content-aware labeling strategy capable of capturing
semantic relationships that other methods may miss. Nevertheless, it lacks access to
user interactions and may struggle with edge cases.
4.2.4
Semi-Supervised Labeler
This method combines a small, manually labeled dataset with a machine learning model
to infer relevance on the entire dataset. The pipeline consists of the following stages:
Feature Extraction:
Each pair was represented using both structured and unstructured
fields, including:
• Textual: job title, description, candidate bio, and motivation.
• Structured: hard and soft skills, interests.
Text fields were encoded using a sentence transformer model; consequently, cosine sim-
ilarity scores were computed across the latent spaces of text, skills, and interests.
Model Training:
A LightGBM classifier was trained on the labeled dataset using the
computed similarity scores as features.
20
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:29==
Pseudo-Labeling:
The trained model was then used to predict labels for the remaining
unlabeled pairs. The following filtering rules were then applied:
yu,i =





1,
if P(yu,i = 1) ≥0.9
0,
if P(yu,i = 1) ≤0.1
discarded,
otherwise
where P(yu,i = 1) denotes the model’s predicted probability that the candidate–job pair
(u, i) is relevant.
This means that only confident predictions (probability ≥90% or ≤10%) were further
used in order to avoid contamination. The semi-supervised model is visually summarized
in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Architecture of the semi-supervised labeling approach, combining feature sim-
ilarity and LightGBM to infer relevance labels for candidate-job pairs.
4.3
Recommendation Algorithms
This section provides a conceptual overview of the key recommendation strategies used
during the development and evaluation of the system.
4.3.1
Path-based Recommendations
Path-based methods exploit the connectivity of the HIN by traversing predefined paths in
the graph that reflect domain-relevant semantics. To balance flexibility and explainability,
a composite path-based approach was implemented, allowing multiple semantic paths to
be combined into a unified scoring mechanism. Each composite path contributes a partial
score, and the final recommendation score is a weighted sum of these signals.
Example of composite paths:
Candidate →HAS_SKILL →Skill →REQUIRES_SKILL →Job
Candidate →HAS_INTEREST →Interest →REQUIRES_INTEREST →Job
Candidate →HAS_EXPERIENCE →WorkExperience →BELONGS_TO_INDUSTRY →Industry
←BELONGS_TO →Company ←BELONGS_TO →Job
Candidate →HAS_LANGUAGE →Language ←HAS_LANGUAGE ←Job
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
21
==PAGE:30==
Each path is evaluated through graph traversal, and a similarity score is derived based
on the number of matching paths or weighted edge frequency.
Scoring function:
For each candidate-job pair, a composite score was computed as:
Score(c, j) =
∑
p∈P
wp · |Ep(c, j)|
where:
• P is the set of selected composite paths.
• wp is the assigned (or learned) weight for path p.
• |Ep(c, j)| denotes the number of shared entities (e.g., common skills, interests, or
industries) identified along that path.
This allows the recommender to incorporate multiple dimensions of fit, such as skill align-
ment, interest similarity, industry relevance, or shared language preferences.
One of the key advantages of this approach is its ability to provide explainable results.
Since each path explicitly encodes a form of relevance (such as skill match or shared in-
terest), it is easy to trace a recommendation back to specific features that contributed
to it.
Additionally, the method is highly customizable in the sense that new domain-
specific paths can be added or reweighted without requiring a complete reengineering
of the model, making it adaptable to different use-cases. Composite paths also perform
well in cold-start scenarios, since they rely on structural and content-based signals rather
than behavioral history.
However, this method also has some limitations. One of the major limitations is that it
requires significant manual effort and domain knowledge to select, define, and tune ap-
propriate paths and their weights. Moreover, this method may fail to produce a sufficient
number of recommendations, since the scoring relies on the existence of instances of
paths in the graph, and it is possible that for certain candidates or jobs — particularly those
with sparse or incomplete profiles — the query returns fewer results than requested.
4.3.2
Embedding-based Recommendations
To capture more subtle patterns in the recruitment graph, an embedding-based approach
was designed. This method encodes all nodes in the graph into a shared vector space,
allowing the system to recommend candidates or jobs based on learned structural and
semantic similarity.
The approach uses unsupervised graph embeddings, based on the Node2Vec algorithm,
which learns a dense, low-dimensional representation for each node in the graph by sim-
ulating random walks and preserving local and global neighborhoods in the embedding
space. The assumption in this approach is that nodes that appear in similar structural
contexts (e.g., candidates with similar skills or job histories) will be mapped to nearby
points in the embedding space.
Once embeddings are learned, each node is associated with a fixed-length vector. Rec-
ommendations are then generated by computing the cosine similarity between the em-
beddings of candidates and jobs. For example, to recommend jobs to a given candidate,
the system calculates the similarity between that candidate’s embedding and all job em-
beddings, then returns the top-k jobs with the highest similarity scores. Formally, for a
22
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.4: Architecture of the embedding-based recommender using Node2Vec; en-
codes graph nodes into vector space for similarity-based candidate-job matching.
candidate c and a job j, the score is computed as:
Score(c, j) = cos(⃗ec · ⃗ej) =
⃗ec · ⃗ej
||⃗ec|| · ||⃗ej||
where ⃗ec and ⃗ej are the learned embeddings of the candidate and job, respectively.
A visual representation of this method can be seen in Figure 4.4.
To ensure meaningful and up-to-date embeddings, the system checks the embedding
status of all nodes and (re)computes embeddings whenever necessary – particularly after
data updates or structural changes in the graph.
One of the key advantages of this method is that embedding-based recommendations are
entirely data-driven and do not require manual work, allowing the capture of latent patterns
and structural similarity in user-job relationships in sparse scenarios. This approach is
also that once the embeddings are computed, recommendation computation reduces to
vector similarity calculations.
A major limitation of this approach is its lack of interpretability, since it is not possible
to directly explain why a job was recommended based on vector similarity. Additionally,
although the embeddings capture structure similarity, they are not guaranteed to reflect
all domain-specific semantics unless the graph itself is well-constructed and richly con-
nected.
4.3.3
Metapath-based Recommendations
Metapath-based recommendation methods focus on specific types of paths in a graph
that are expected to reflect relevance, allowing the system to learn patterns that are more
aligned with the structure and behavior found in the recruitment domain.
The metapath-based recommender uses an embedding approach based on the MetaP-
ath2Vec algorithm, which performs random walks on the graph, constrained to follow spe-
cific metapaths. These metapaths defined allowed sequences of node and relation types
that reflect relevance in the data. The walks generate sequences of nodes — metapath
instances — which are then used to train a skip-gram model that learns low-dimensional
embeddings for each node in the graph. Once trained, the recommender computes rele-
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
23
==PAGE:32==
vance scores between nodes by measuring the cosine similarity of their embeddings:
Score(c, j) = cos(⃗ec, ⃗ej)
where ⃗ec and ⃗ej are the embeddings of the candidates and job nodes, respectively. The
top-N most similar nodes are selected as recommendations.
One of the key advantages of this method is that it focuses on a structurally and seman-
tically relevant subspace of the graph, improving the alignment between the learned em-
beddings and domain-specific relevance patterns. This uncovers meaningful candidate-
job relationships, even when direct feature matches are limited.
The performance of this approach depends heavily on the selection of appropriate metap-
aths, and designing effective metapaths requires domain knowledge and empirical valida-
tion; a poor choice of metapath may have a bad influence on the recommendation quality.
Additionally, like the other embedding method, the learned representations are difficult to
interpret, and the reasons for recommendations are not transparent.
4.3.4
GNN-based Recommendations
Graph neural network models can be used to aggregate information across multi-hop,
heterogeneous neighborhoods, capturing both content and context. These adapt to the
structure of the graph while learning complex interaction signals directly from the data.
The GNN-based recommendation system is modeled as a supervised link prediction task
over a heterogeneous graph. The graph encodes candidates, jobs, and auxiliary entities
(e.g., skills, interests, companies) as node types, with semantic edges connecting them.
Each node is represented using a feature vector constructed from structured attributes
and sentence embeddings of unstructured text (e.g., bios, job descriptions).
To predict potential links (e.g., candidate applications to jobs), the system trains a hetero-
geneous GraphSAGE model to produce embeddings for each node. These node em-
beddings are passed to a neural link predictor that estimates the probability of an edge
between a given candidate-job pair. A visual overview of this method can be seen in
Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Supervised GNN-based recommendation architecture using heterogeneous
GraphSAGE for link prediction between candidates and jobs.
During training, application links are treated as positive samples, and an equal number
of negative samples (non-linked pairs) are generated to provide supervision. The model
is optimized using binary cross-entropy loss between predicted scores and binary labels.
After training, the system can generate recommendations by computing a score for all
possible candidate-job (or job-candidate) pairs and returning the top-ranked results.
24
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:33==
This method provides a flexible and data-driven way to learn from the graph’s structure
and node features simultaneously. It works well with sparse data by using indirect con-
nections and multi-hop neighborhood information.
One of the limitations of this approach is the complexity of the model, which makes the
model computationally intensive to train and evaluate, especially in large graphs. Another
limitation is that the learned embeddings and link predictions are not directly interpretable.
4.4
Fallback Mechanism for Sparse results in Path-based
Recommender
One of the main limitations of the path-based recommendation approach is that it depends
on the existence of semantically meaningful and sufficiently dense paths in the knowledge
graph, which, in practice, in scenarios with sparse candidate profiles, the recommender
may not be able to return a sufficient number of relevant results. This violates the [FR1]
Minimum Recommendations functional requirement (see Chapter 3), and poses a critical
usability issue, especially in cold-start scenarios.
To address this challenge, a fallback mechanism was introduced into the recommendation
pipeline, which ensures that if the primary recommendation strategy returns fewer than a
threshold number of results, alternative strategies are triggered to fill the recommendation
list. The fallback mechanism consists of a modular design, allowing the system to support
multiple fallback methods depending on the use case.
A high-level overview of this logic is illustrated in Figure 4.6, which shows how fallback
strategies are conditionally invoked based on the number of results returned from the main
recommender. The impact of fallback strategies on recall and coverage is evaluated in
Chapter 6.
Figure 4.6: Conditional logic diagram for the fallback mechanism, used to ensure mini-
mum recommendation count through popularity, CF, or random strategies.
The following strategies were implemented and evaluated:
Popularity-based Fallback
This strategy recommends the most popular items, based
on historical interactions such as views and applications. For example, when recommend-
ing jobs to candidates, it retrieves jobs that have received the most user engagement
across the platform.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
25
==PAGE:34==
Collaborative Filtering Fallback
This method applies a simple neighborhood-based
collaborative filtering approach. For candidate-to-job recommendations, it looks at jobs
applied to by similar candidates, and on the other side, it identifies candidates who applied
to similar jobs. While still limited by interaction sparsity, this approach is more personal-
ized than pure popularity and often recovers relevant results that the path-based method
cannot identify due to incomplete connections.
Random Fallback
This method samples random candidates or jobs not previously seen
or recommended, and it is especially useful for new users or jobs with no historical data
or graph edges.
The fallback logic is integrated as part of the main recommendation engine’s execution
flow. When a primary method returns fewer than the desired number of results, the system
incrementally invokes fallback strategies in a specific order until the required number of
results is met. The concept is similar to a recommender system hybrid with the switching
method. This enables flexible configuration and extension according to business needs.
To evaluate the impact of using a fallback mechanism with different fallback priorities on
recommendation performance, an experiment was conducted and is presented in Sec-
tion 6.4.2.
4.5
Path Discovery in Path-based Recommender
Defining paths by hand for the path-based recommender requires a domain expert, a pro-
cess that is time-consuming, and it is likely to miss non-obvious but semantically mean-
ingful connections. To overcome this, a data-driven composite path discovery framework
was implemented. The system automatically extracts candidate metapaths from the graph
schema, filters them based on structural constraints, and ranks them using supervised
learning with ground truth labels. The overall path discovery process is summarized in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Ranking-Based Composite Path Discovery
Require: Graph schema G, source label S, target label T, maximum path length L, num-
ber of top paths k
1: P ←GenerateMetapaths(G, S, T, L)
2: P ′ ←FilterPaths(P, ¬containsExcludedRelations)
3: Initialize empty list F
4: for each path p ∈P ′ do
5:
f ←ExtractSharedFeature(p)
6:
Append f to F
7: end for
8: fcontent ←ComputeContentSimilarity()
9: X ←MergeFeatures(F ∪{fcontent})
10: Xnorm, θ ←NormalizeFeatures(X)
11: Y, G ←LoadRankingLabelsAndGroups()
12: M ←TrainXGBoostRanker(Xnorm, Y, G)
13: W ←ExtractTopKFeatureImportances(M, k)
14: Q ←BuildWeightedQuery(P ′, W, θ)
15: CacheResult(Q, W, θ)
16: return Q
26
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:35==
Path Generation
A depth-limited depth-first search (DFS) is used to enumerate all valid metapaths between
a given source and target type (e.g., from Candidate to Job) from the schema graph, up
to a configurable length (depth limit). From these, only paths that contain a ”shared node”
(i.e., a direction switch in the path that implies a common intermediary entity) are selected,
as these indicate a similarity signal. Moreover, paths containing biasing relations like
HAS_APPLIED or HAS_VIEWED are explicitly excluded. Each resulting metapath is used to
generate a corresponding Cypher query, which collects all source-target pairs via the
path and identifies the shared entity.
Feature Extraction
For each metapath, the number of distinct shared entities traversed along that path is
computed as a feature per (source, target) pair. Additionally, a content-based feature is
included using cosine similarity between sentence embeddings of job descriptions and
candidate summaries.
Label Preparation
Training and ranking labels are derived from an LLM-labeled dataset, where job-candidate
pairs are labeled as relevant or not. The ranking dataset groups items per query source
(e.g., a candidate), enabling learning-to-rank.
Feature Normalization
To ensure balanced contribution across features during model training and scoring, values
are normalized using either min–max scaling or z-score standardization. These normal-
ization parameters are cached and later applied inside Cypher queries to replicate model
behavior at inference time.
Model Training and Path Selection
An XGBoost model with a rank:pairwise objective is trained to learn a relevance scoring
function. Feature importances (based on information gain) are extracted to rank and
select the top-k most predictive metapaths.
Query Generation
The selected features and their learned weights are translated into a single Cypher query
using an embedded scoring function. This query computes the final recommendation
score as a weighted sum of normalized feature values (including both structural and
content-based features).
Explanation Metadata
Each selected metapath is also enriched with metadata, such as the type of shared entity
and a human-readable explanation summary to support explainability.
This approach eliminates the need for manual feature engineering, improves the adapt-
ability of the system to new domains or changing schemas, and provides a data-driven
way to learn which types of graph-based relationships are most informative.
The effectiveness of this path discovery mechanism is further evaluated in Section 6.4.1,
where manually written paths are compared to the ones generated by the framework.
4.6
Explainability
An explainability mechanism was designed for the path-based recommender to increase
the transparency of the recommendations. This is supported bidirectionally, clarifying
the reasoning behind a recommendation and suggesting actionable insights for profile
improvement for both candidates and recruiters.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
27
==PAGE:36==
The path-based model relies on the composite paths that are used to generate the recom-
mendation, which can either be manually defined or automatically generated (see Sec-
tion 4.5). For each recommendation, the system identifies and returns the key features
that contributed to the recommendation scores, including shared entities such as skills, in-
terests, industries, and languages between the candidate and the job. In addition to these
features, the mechanism is also able to identify relevant missing features that would po-
tentially make the candidate/job stand out — for example, skills or interests that are com-
mon among other matched profiles but absent from the current one. This aims to help the
candidates understand how they could improve their profiles or what qualifications might
increase relevance for certain roles.
When a candidate or job profile lacks sufficient information, the system also generates
general-purpose feedback, which tells the user about the limitations of their profiles and
provides hints that would improve the recommendation quality.
28
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:37==
5
Implementation
This chapter outlines the implementation of the proposed solution for the recommendation
system, showing the full implementation pipeline from data retrieval to API deployment. It
starts by describing the technology stack, system architecture, and modular components,
including the ETL pipeline. The implementation of the recommendation engine and the
validation framework is then discussed, along with the deployment strategy based on
containerization.
5.1
Technology Stack
The implementation is built on a modular Python-based backend using FastAPI, which
supports asynchronous request handling, type-safe API definitions, and automatic gen-
eration of interactive documentation using the OpenAPI standard (accessible via /docs).
Pydantic is used together with FastAPI to support type validation and runtime data con-
sistency in the system.
The system integrates a MySQL as the original data source, containing structured recruitment-
related data. A dedicated ETL pipeline extracts and transforms this data before loading
it into a graph representation. The resulting knowledge graph is stored in Neo4j, a graph
database well-suited for heterogeneous data and optimized for fast relationship traversal
using the Cypher query language.
Text enrichment during transformation (e.g., language detection, translation) is handled
by lightweight NLP libraries such as langdetect and googletrans. Graph modeling and
algorithmic tasks rely on networkx and torch-geometric, while standard machine learn-
ing operations use NumPy, SciPy, Pandas, and PyTorch.
Asynchronous background operations, such as ETL execution and model training, are
managed using Celery and Redis, allowing for job queuing and scalable execution.
The entire system was containerized using Docker, ensuring consistent environment setup
and portability on any operating system.
5.2
System Architecture Overview
The designed recommendation system, illustrated in Figure 5.1, follows a modular, graph-
based approach to handle the complex and heterogeneous nature of the recruitment data.
The core architecture is composed of four primary components: an ETL Pipeline, a Rec-
ommender Module, a Validator, and an API Interface. These components are deployed
together as part of a single containerized application, ensuring consistency across envi-
ronments, ease of deployment, and reproducibility. The interaction of these components
enables data extraction and transformation, recommendation generation, and evaluation.
5.2.1
Module Breakdown
ETL Pipeline.
This component is responsible for extracting recruitment-related data
from a normalized MySQL database, transforming it into graph-compatible entities, and
loading it into a Neo4j graph database. It supports both scheduled (cron-based) and on-
demand execution, ensuring that the graph stays synchronized with the source data. It is
designed to handle structured and unstructured inputs, including enrichment through text
normalization and entity recognition.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.1: Modular system architecture for the recommendation engine, including ETL
pipeline, recommender module, API layer, and evaluation validator.
Recommender Module.
This is the core engine that supports multiple recommenda-
tion algorithms (as introduced in Chapter 4), including path-based, embedding-based,
metapath-based, and GNN-based methods. The module is extensible by design, where
each strategy inherits from a shared interface and can be registered independently. The
recommender also integrates fallback logic for handling sparse profiles (FR1), and explain-
ability for transparency (FR5–FR7).
Validator.
This is an internal module as part of the recommender system that is used to
compute evaluation metrics against predefined ground-truth datasets. It allows for entity-
specific evaluation of recommendation quality.
API Interface.
This component is used as an external access point to access core sys-
tem functionality, including ETL triggering and recommendation queries. The interface is
protected by an authentication layer to ensure secure access. Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3
show the operational flow of the API as sequence diagrams, how the ETL pipeline is
triggered, and how recommendations are queried, respectively.
5.3
Software Design Principles
The system is built around core software engineering design principles to ensure extensi-
bility, maintainability, and separation of concerns. These principles guided the implemen-
tation of the recommendation pipeline, API layer, fallback system, and graph interactions.
Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)
Each module in the system is responsible for a single, clearly defined functionality:
• The ETLPipeline handles data extraction, transformation, and loading into the graph.
• The Recommender Module contains logic for different algorithms.
• The FallbackStrategy manages recovery in sparse or cold-start scenarios.
• The API Interface is exclusively responsible for exposing system operations via
HTTP.
30
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.2: API call sequence for generating recommendations; illustrates interaction be-
tween client, API gateway, recommender module, and graph database.
This separation makes the codebase modular and easier to test and evolve independently.
Open/Closed Principle (OCP)
The recommender system is designed to be open for extension but closed for modification.
New algorithms can be introduced by subclassing the BaseRecommender interface without
altering existing logic. Similarly, new fallback strategies or explainers can be plugged in
via their own base interfaces.
For instance, the following classes inherit from the base strategy:
class PathBasedRecommender(BaseRecommender)
class EmbeddingBasedRecommender(BaseRecommender)
class GNNBasedRecommender(BaseRecommender)
Don’t Repeat Yourself (DRY)
The system emphasizes reusability via:
• Shared database connection utilities (create_connections())
• Abstract base classes (BaseRecommender, FallbackStrategy)
Code duplication is minimized, which reduces maintenance overhead.
Modularity & Extensibility
Each recommender and fallback strategy is defined as an independent class. This allows:
• Easy experimentation with new algorithms (e.g., adding transformer embeddings),
• Swappable recommendation pipelines via API parameters,
• Custom path configurations and explainers per deployment.
5.4
ETL Pipeline and Graph Construction
The ETL Pipeline is a module used to extract, transform, and load the data from the source
in the Neo4j instance.
Extracting the data
Since the original data source is a normalized MySQL database, complex queries were
used to collect and group the raw data. An example of such a query can be seen in
Appendix B.1. Once the data is collected in a list, it is passed on to the next step of the
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.3: API call sequence for triggering the ETL pipeline; shows asynchronous exe-
cution via Celery tasks and data flow into Neo4j.
pipeline. The extracted fields follow the entity-relationship schema defined in Figure 4.2,
with each major entity (e.g., Candidate, Job, Skill, Company) mapped to a node type in
the final graph structure.
Transforming the data
During transformation, entity attributes were cleaned and normalized (e.g., translating
free text to English, converting free text from JSON-like richtext into a string, and remov-
ing duplicates in skills and interests). Relationships among entities — such as candidates
applying to jobs or having specific skills — were mapped into graph semantics. For ex-
ample, if a candidate had multiple skills listed in the database, these were converted into
edges of the form:
(:Candidate)-[:HAS_SKILL]->(:Skill)
The full set of entity types and relationships can be found in Tables 6.1 and 6.2, respec-
tively.
The transformed data was collected in a list of objects that has the following type:
{
type: string; // "Entity"
32
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:41==
identifier: string;
properties?: Record<string, any>;
relationships?: {
[relationshipName: string]: Entity[];
};
}
Each object can have any depth, allowing for complex relationships.
In a later development phase, the Transform step of the ETL pipeline was extended with a
lightweight NLP enrichment module. This module extracted additional skills and interests
from unstructured text fields such as candidate bios, motivation texts, and job descriptions.
The goal was to retrieve additional domain-specific entities that are often omitted from
structural fields but present in free text form. To support this, a sentence transformer
model was used to encode domain text, and similarity scores were computed between text
segments and known entity vectors (skills, interests, industries) using cosine similarity.
Only entities with a similarity above a configurable threshold were retained. This allowed
semantically relevant attributes to be recovered, even when exact keyword matches were
missing from the raw text.
An example of how the transformed Job entity is created can be seen in Appendix B.2.
This list of transformed entities is then used as input for the last step of the ETL pipeline.
Loading the data
Once the main entities are transformed, they are loaded into the Neo4j instance. This
is done by recursively going through the entity relationships and running a Cypher query
to merge with the existing nodes and edges in the database. Currently, a full reload of
the graph is performed on each run of the ETL pipeline. However, the design allows for
future extensions with incremental updates by tracking record hashes or timestamps at
the extraction phase.
Automation
To ensure that the graph remains synchronized with updates from the source database,
the ETL pipeline is designed to automatically run on a scheduled basis. The ETL pipeline
is automatically executed via a CRON job configured to run every 24 hours (configurable),
ensuring that newly added candidates and jobs are incorporated into the graph regularly.
This keeps the recommendations in sync with the live data without manual intervention.
The CRON job executes a containerized script that initiates the ETL process using internal
services.
In addition to time-based automation, the pipeline can also be executed manually through
the exposed API endpoint (see next section), for on-demand updates, which are useful
when debugging or after significant data imports (e.g., first load).
5.5
API Interface
The API layer serves as the main entry point for external clients, providing a RESTful
interface for interacting with the recommender system. The documentation of the imple-
mented system can be accessed via GET /api/v1/docs. All API endpoints support error
handling, returning appropriate HTTP status codes and error messages, following HTTP
standards.
5.5.1
Design and Structure
The API is structured into modular subcomponents using FastAPI routers. The two pri-
mary modules are:
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
33
==PAGE:42==
• pipeline (src/api/routes/pipeline.py): Manages ETL pipeline triggers.
• recommender (src/api/routes/recommender.py): Provides endpoints for generating
job and candidate recommendations.
Each submodule is implemented as a FastAPI router and registered under the /api/v1/
namespace, ensuring versioning compatibility.
1
app.include_router(pipeline.router , dependencies=[Depends(verify_bearer_token)
])
2
app.include_router(recommender.router , dependencies=[Depends(
verify_bearer_token)])
5.5.2
Background Tasks
Some of the endpoints exposed to the user can trigger processes that take a longer time
to run (e.g., ETL pipeline). To prevent blocking the main application thread and ensure a
good user experience, these operations are handled asynchronously using a background
task queue.
The system uses Celery as the task queue manager, with Redis acting as the message
broker and result backend. When a background task is initiated, for example, via the
/api/v1/pipeline/etl/trigger endpoint, it is placed in a Celery queue and executed
independently of the main FastAPI process.
Each background task is defined as a Celery worker function and registered to the main
Celery instance. In this implementation, the celery instance is configured as part of the
celery module in src.core, and all the available celery tasks are defined in tasks using
the instance as a function decorator. An example of how a task is registered is shown:
1
@celery_app.task(name="run_etl_pipeline")
2
def run_etl_pipeline(clean: bool = False):
3
"""Run the ETL pipeline in the background."""
4
try:
5
from src.core.etl import ETLPipeline
6
7
config = DatabaseConfig.from_env()
8
sql_conn , neo4j_conn = create_connections(config)
9
10
pipeline = ETLPipeline(ETLConfig(sql_conn=sql_conn , neo4j_conn=
neo4j_conn))
11
asyncio.run(pipeline.run(clean))
12
except Exception as e:
13
# Log the error
14
print(f"ETL pipeline error: {str(e)}")
As a result, the task is registered within the Celery environment, and this can be triggered
simply by calling the delay method of the task.
1
# Start the Celery task
2
task = run_etl_pipeline.delay(clean)
3
return PipelineResponse(
4
status="started",
5
message="ETL pipeline triggered",
6
task_id=task.id,
7
)
34
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:43==
This returns a unique identifier for the task, which can later be used to check the status
of the running task:
1
task = run_etl_pipeline.AsyncResult(task_id)
2
status = task.status
3
message = task.info if task.info else "No message available"
4
return PipelineResponse(
5
status=status,
6
message=message ,
7
task_id=task_id ,
8
)
5.5.3
Authentication and Security
As shown in Figure 5.1, the API interface acts as a secure gateway to the system, enforc-
ing authentication to all incoming requests. This is implemented as a lightweight solution
based on the Bearer Token Authentication mechanism. This approach balances sim-
plicity and effectiveness, especially in the context of a single-tenant deployment, where
the system is accessed only by internal services within the company.
Authentication Scheme.
All client requests to the API must include an Authorization
header using the Bearer token format:
Authorization: Bearer <token>
The API token is generated using Python’s secrets.token_urlsafe() function, which
produces a cryptographically strong random token, suitable for authentication. This to-
ken is checked against the expected value loaded from a secure environment variable
at runtime. Invalid or missing tokens result in an immediate 401 Unauthorized HTTP
response. The token validation logic is integrated into the API’s middleware layer and is
invoked for all protected endpoints.
Rate Limiting.
To prevent brute-force attacks or repeated unauthorized access attempts,
failed authentication attempts are restricted by using rate limiting. More specifically, the
system restricts invalid authentication attempts to a maximum of five per minute per client
IP address. This is implemented using the slowapi rate-limiting library. Exceeding the
limit results in a 429 Too Many Requests error.
Key Management.
The API key is stored in an environment file (.env) and loaded at
runtime using a configuration management object. Tokens are intended for internal or
service-level access and can be rotated manually using a provided CLI script. For pro-
duction setups, rotation frequency depends on the organization’s internal security policy.
A CLI script is provided for the support of manual key rotations, which can be used as
follows:
$python -m src.api.auth.__init_
Your new API token:
yHoDpA5cZi9W6mGwEgZr-GMPcmtE_ZjPM4XFM090kE0
The generated token can then be copied into the environment file to replace the existing
key, as well as into the system that uses the recommender system.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
35
==PAGE:44==
5.5.4
Endpoints
A summary list of the implemented endpoints:
Endpoint
Method
Description
Auth
/api/v1/pipeline/
etl/trigger
POST
Manually trigger the ETL pipeline
(optionally cleans existing data)
Yes
/api/v1/pipeline/etl/
status/{task_id}
GET
Get current status of an ETL pipeline
task
Yes
/api/v1/recommender/
jobs/{candidate_id}
GET
Get personalized job recommenda-
tions for a candidate using a speci-
fied algorithm
Yes
/api/v1/recommender/
candidates/{job_id}
GET
Get recommended candidates for a
specific job posting using a selected
algorithm
Yes
/api/v1/recommender/
training/status/{task_id}
GET
Check the training progress of GNN
or Metapath2Vec models
Yes
/api/v1/docs
GET
Access the Swagger-generated in-
teractive API documentation
No
/health
GET
Lightweight health check endpoint to
verify service availability
No
Table 5.1: Summary of API Endpoints exposed by the Recommender System backend
5.5.5
Example API Usage
Below is an example of how a user might interact with the API to obtain job recommen-
dations for a candidate:
GET /api/v1/recommender/jobs/candidate123?limit=5&recommender_type=path_based
Authorization: Bearer <API_KEY>
5.6
Recommendation Service
The recommendation service is the core module responsible for generating job and candi-
date recommendations based on the selected algorithm. It is implemented as an abstract
interface BaseRecommender with multiple class instances encapsulating different recom-
mendation strategies.
Each recommender instance inherits the following interface:
1
2
class BaseRecommender(ABC):
3
def __init__(self, config: RecommenderConfig):
4
self.config = config
5
6
@abstractmethod
7
def recommend_to_candidate(self, candidate_id: str, top_n: int = 5) ->
List[Dict[str, Any]]:
8
9
@abstractmethod
10
def recommend_to_job(self, job_id: str, top_n: int = 5) -> List[Dict[str,
Any]]:
36
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:45==
The system currently supports multiple recommender types. The appropriate algorithm is
selected dynamically at runtime, based on the recommender_type parameter passed to
the API request.
This module is invoked via the API layer (see Figure 5.1), which delegates incoming re-
quests to the configured recommender, ensuring a clean separation of concerns between
logic and model execution.
5.7
Fallback Strategy
As discussed in Chapter 4, the fallback mechanism ensures full recommendation cover-
age in case of sparse profiles or cold-start entities. The fallback mechanism implemented
in the recommender system follows a modular, layered approach where secondary rec-
ommenders are invoked sequentially in a specific order, which is defined via a data class
FallbackOptions which has the following attributes:
1
@dataclass
2
class FallbackOptions:
3
collaborative: bool = False
4
popularity: bool = False
5
random: bool = False
6
weights: Optional[Dict[str, float]] = (
7
None
# e.g., {'collaborative': 0.5, 'random': 0.3, 'popularity': 0.2}
8
)
The logic of each fallback method is implemented by extending the FallbackStrategy
class, which has the following abstract method:
1
def recommend(
2
self, recommender , src_id: str, exclude_ids: set, top_n: int,
direction: str
3
) -> List[Dict]:
4
pass
The fallback logic is then integrated directly into the PathBasedRecommender class, which
at first checks the output size of the primary recommender (path-based), and if the number
of recommendations is less than the defined threshold (top_n), the fallback strategies
are applied incrementally until the quota is met. Since some of the fallback methods
can provide “unlimited” recommendations, weights are assigned to different strategies to
make sure a diverse recommendation list is returned.
5.8
Auto-path ML
The composite path discovery module was implemented as a standalone script and can
be run independently of the main application. Its output, which is a weighted list of paths,
is cached locally and reused in the recommendation system. This design supports peri-
odic retraining as new data becomes available, allowing the system to adapt to evolving
patterns in job-candidate relationships.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
37
==PAGE:46==
5.9
Path-based recommendation explainer
The core component, PathBasedExplainer, generates explanations by analyzing the
graph features that contributed to a recommendation. For each candidate-job pair, it
returns a structured explanation containing:
• Contributing factors such as shared skills, interests, industries, or languages.
• Weighted factor scores, derived from predefined/learned weights.
• Missing features, indicating skills or interests that commonly appear in matched
profiles but are absent from the current one.
• General suggestions, especially in cases where a profile lacks sufficient information.
The explainer works using precomputed feature_scores and enriches them with seman-
tic metadata, and dynamic Cypher queries are run to identify feature gaps using the graph
database.
The explanation logic is abstracted via a base interface (BaseExplainer) which allows
for future extensibility to other model types. Example of how the recommendation object
is returned by the API can be seen in Appendix B.3.
5.10
Deployment Setup
To ensure reproducibility, scalability, and ease of execution across different environments,
the entire recommender system is containerized using Docker and orchestrated through
a docker-compose configuration. This setup enables the deployment of all core services
— the API, background workers, and the ETL scheduler — as an isolated container.
5.10.1
Containerized Services
The core service defined in the docker-compose.yml file is the following:
• API Service (api): The main FastAPI application responsible for serving HTTP end-
points. It exposes port 8000 and mounts required configuration files and code direc-
tories as volumes. The service itself is build from a Dockerfile.
A Dockerfile is used to set up the environment for the API docker container. It starts
from a python:3.12-slim image and installs all necessary Python dependencies from
requirements.txt. As part of the setup, two cron jobs are also deployed, one for the ETL
pipeline and another for ground truth building. Finally, the main entry point is executed,
which uses Uvicorn to serve the FastAPI app.
5.10.2
Environment Configuration
Environment-specific variables, including database connection strings, secret keys, and
token configuration, are stored in a .env file. This ensures separation between code and
configuration and simplifies deployment in different environments (e.g., development vs
production).
5.10.3
Deployment Execution
To launch the system, the following command initializes all services:
docker-compose up --build
This builds and starts all containers, automatically setting up the environment for both
development and production.
38
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:47==
5.10.4
Continuous Integration and Deployment (CI/CD)
To maintain code quality, catch development issues early, and ensure reliable builds, a
continuous integration (CI) and continuous deployment (CD) pipeline was implemented
using GitHub Actions. This pipeline is automatically triggered on each push or pull_request
to the main and dev branches, as well as manually through the workflow_dispatch event.
The pipeline is structured into three sequential jobs:
• Linting: The first job performs static code analysis using flake8, configured to
catch syntax errors and common bugs (E9, F63, F7, F82). This ensures the Python
codebase maintains a minimal quality threshold.
• Testing: Executes unit and integration tests using pytest, with a cap on maximum
test failures (--maxfail=1) and warnings disabled for concise output. Dependen-
cies are cached using actions/cache to reduce installation times.
• Build and Deployment: Builds a Docker image of the API and deploys it to Azure
using Azure CLI and Container Instances. This step includes secure environment
injection using SpicyPizza/create-envfile and Azure container registry (ACR)
login.
The CI/CD workflow is defined in .github/workflows/ci-cd.yml, and a simplified schematic
is shown below:
1
on:
2
push:
3
branches: [main, dev]
4
pull_request:
5
branches: [main, dev]
6
workflow_dispatch:
7
8
jobs:
9
lint:
10
...
11
test:
12
...
13
build-and-deploy:
14
...
Once the linting and testing stages are successfully completed, the application is auto-
matically built and deployed, using the following steps:
• Generate a secure .env file using the SpicyPizza/create-envfile action, popu-
lated with secrets from GitHub Actions Secrets.
• Copies the .env file to a remote Azure VM using appleboy/scp-action.
• Connects to the same VM via SSH (using appleboy/ssh-action) and performs
the deployment: pulls the latest changes from the main branch, stops any running
containers, builds the latest Docker image, and finally starts the updated container
in detached mode.
This automated flow guarantees that the application is continuously integrated and reliably
deployed with minimal manual effort.
5.10.5
Testing Strategy
Automated tests are organized under the tests/ directory and cover multiple compo-
nents:
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
39
==PAGE:48==
• Integration Tests (tests/api): test end-to-end flows involving the API, database, and
recommender modules.
• Unit Tests (tests/core): validate core logic such as recommendations, validators,
and ETL pipeline execution.
Test execution is integrated into the CI pipeline and ensures that any code changes do
not introduce errors.
5.11
Client SDK
To simplify and standardize the interaction with the Recommender System API, a client
SDK was developed and published as an npm package. The SDK is developed in TypeScript
and offers type declarations that allow for compile-time safety and increased productivity.
The SDK aims to abstract the authentication and HTTP request handling, allowing the
consumption of the API with minimal code, quickly integrating into frontend or backend
applications. It encapsulates all communication logic with the API, including authentica-
tion headers and query parameter handling.
Package Structure.
The package is structured as follows:
recommender-api-client/
jest.config.js
package.json...............................Project metadata and dependencies
package-lock.json
README.md...............................Project overview and usage instructions
src/
index.ts...............................................Entry point of the SDK
RecommenderAPI.ts...........................Core API client implementation
types.ts..................................Shared TypeScript interfaces/types
test/.......................................................Unit/integration tests
RecommenderAPI.test.ts...................Test cases for RecommenderAPI
tsconfig.json
The main class, RecommenderAPI, provides two core methods:
• getJobRecommendations(): retrieves job recommendations for a given candidate.
• getCandidateRecommendations(): retrieves candidate recommendations for a given
job.
These methods internally use axios to communicate with the API and support optional
configuration parameters such as result limit and recommender type.
Example Usage.
Below is an example of how the SDK can be used in a real-world
application. It shows how the SDK handles token management, endpoint construction,
and response parsing, enabling developers to focus solely on application logic.
import { RecommenderAPI } from "@exceleratedk/recommender-api-client";
const recommender = new RecommenderAPI({
baseURL: "https://recommender.company.com",
token: "your_api_token_here"
});
40
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:49==
const jobs = await recommender.getJobRecommendations({
candidateId: "cand_1234",
limit: 5
});
console.log(jobs);
Publishing and Deployment
The SDK is automatically published to both npmjs.org1
and Github Packages 2 registries upon the creation of a new GitHub release. This is
achieved using GitHub Workflows; part of which is shown below:
on:
release:
types: [created]
jobs:
publish:
steps:
- name: Publish to npmjs.org
run: npm publish --access public
env:
NODE_AUTH_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.NPM_TOKEN }}
This automation workflow ensures that every version tagged in Git is automatically vali-
dated and deployed to the relevant registries, reducing manual work and errors.
1https://www.npmjs.com/package/@exceleratedk/recommender-api-client
2https://github.com/exceleratedk/recommender-api-client/pkgs/npm/recommender-api-client
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:51==
6
Experiments and Results
This chapter presents the empirical evaluation of the recommender system. The goal is to
assess its performance using both quantitative metrics and qualitative human validation.
The chapter starts by describing the experimental setup, outlines dataset properties, eval-
uates baseline and improved recommendation strategies, and analyzes scalability and
expert validation outcomes.
6.1
Experimental Setup
6.1.1
Dataset Overview
The dataset used throughout the experiments was sourced from a real-world recruitment
platform. It consists of a structured and semi-stuctured collection of candidates, job post-
ings, and auxiliary entities such as skills, interests, industries, and employment types.
For constructing the database, all the candidates and jobs were loaded together with their
corresponding entities and relationships; however, for evaluation purposes, only active
candidates were used. Active candidates in this context means that a candidate has
viewed at least one job since their account creation.
The resulting evaluation dataset consists of:
• 317 candidates
• 129 job posts
• 40894 candidate-job pairs
The graph schema derived from the recruitment domain was modeled as a Heteroge-
neous Information Network (HIN), comprising the entities and relationships shown in Ta-
bles 6.1 and 6.2. Degree statistics of the resulting graph (Table 6.3) show a sparsity
imbalance across entity types — with relatively low connectivity for candidate nodes com-
pared to shared entities like skills or interests. This sparsity confirms the necessity of
hybrid and graph-based recommendation approaches, as traditional CF methods would
not perform well under such conditions.
Entity Label
Description
Node Count
Candidate
Represents a person seeking jobs
2267
WorkExperience
Previous roles or experience entries
947
Skill
A specific skill (e.g., Python, Marketing)
543
Industry
Economic or business sector
122
Job
A job posting
129
Company
A business or employer
75
Interest
Topics or domains the candidate is interested in
17
EmploymentType
Full-time, part-time, etc.
10
LocationType
Remote, onsite, hybrid, etc.
3
Language
Spoken or required languages
2
Table 6.1: List of entities in the domain with corresponding node counts
6.1.2
Ground Truth Construction
Due to the lack of explicit positive and negative feedback, a reliable ground truth was ap-
proximated using multiple strategies (see Chapter 4). The quality of each labeling strategy
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
43
==PAGE:52==
From Entity
Relation
To Entity
Edge Count
Candidate
HAS_SKILL
Skill
2509
Candidate
HAS_INTEREST
Interest
2171
Candidate
HAS_EXPERIENCE
WorkExperience
947
Candidate
HAS_LANGUAGE
Language
143
Candidate
HAS_VIEWED
Job
262
Candidate
HAS_APPLIED
Job
174
WorkExperience
HAS_EMPLOYMENT_TYPE
EmploymentType
947
WorkExperience
HAS_LOCATION_TYPE
LocationType
947
WorkExperience
BELONGS_TO_INDUSTRY
Industry
947
Job
REQUIRES_SKILL
Skill
746
Job
REQUIRES_INTEREST
Interest
206
Job
HAS_LANGUAGE
Language
129
Job
HAS_EMPLOYMENT_TYPE
EmploymentType
129
Job
HAS_LOCATION_TYPE
LocationType
129
Job
BELONGS_TO_COMPANY
Company
129
Company
BELONGS_TO_INDUSTRY
Industry
74
Table 6.2: Entity-to-entity relationships in the Neo4j schema with corresponding edge
counts
was later evaluated against a manually labeled test set (see Section 6.2), with the LLM-
based approach selected as the primary evaluation baseline due to its high balance of
precision and recall.
6.1.3
Evaluation Protocol
Experiments were conducted in an offline setting using top-K recommendation metrics
calculated for both recommendation directions. Each model was evaluated using the
following metrics:
• Precision@10: Fraction of top-10 recommendations that are relevant.
• Recall@10: Fraction of all relevant items that appear in the top-10 list.
• NCDG@10: Rank-sensitive measure accounting for the position of relevant items.
In addition to these quantitative metrics, human-in-the-loop validation was also performed
(in two phases) for a subset of recommendations to evaluate model interpretability and
relevance from a domain expert perspective (see Section 6.5).
6.2
Ground Truth Approximation Results
Given the lack of explicit relevance labels in the recruitment dataset, four alternative
ground truth approximation strategies were evaluated: implicit feedback, heuristic match-
ing, large language model (LLM)-based labeling, and a semi-supervised learning pipeline.
Each method, previously described in detail in Chapters 3 and 4, was applied to the same
candidate-job pool and benchmarked against a manually annotated subset.
The results of this comparison are presented in Figure 6.1, which shows precision, recall,
and F1-score for each labeler relative to the human-labeled validation set. The LLM-
44
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:53==
Entity Label
Avg Degree
Min
Max
Median
Std Dev
LocationType
356.0
48
897
123
470.0
Interest
139.8
1
337
140
121.7
Language
132.0
101
163
132
43.8
EmploymentType
106.8
7
402
40
140.2
Job
15.5
7
39
15
6.8
Industry
8.4
1
95
4
12.8
Skill
6.0
1
131
2
11.6
WorkExperience
4.0
4
4
4
0.0
Candidate
3.3
1
37
1
5.1
Company
2.6
1
8
2
1.3
Table 6.3: Node degree statistics across entity types in the HIN. These statistics pro-
vide insights into how densely or sparsely connected each type of node is. For example,
LocationType and Interest nodes show significantly higher average degrees, indicat-
ing that they are shared among many other types. Conversely, Candidate nodes have
relatively low average and median degrees, reflecting the sparsity of user interaction or
attribute data.
based approach demonstrated the most balanced and consistent performance across
all three metrics, achieving a precision of 0.664, a recall of 0.918, and an F1-score of
0.771. The semi-supervised method followed closely in precision, but showed a slightly
reduced recall due to its conservative filtering of low-confidence predictions. In contrast,
the heuristic method tended to prioritize precision at the expense of coverage, while the
implicit feedback labeler showed higher recall but introduced considerable noise, as it
lacked a reliable negative signal.
Figure 6.1: Evaluation of labeling strategies (LLM-based, heuristic, semi-supervised, im-
plicit) using Precision, Recall, and F1-score against human-annotated ground truth.
Based on this evaluation, the LLM-generated labels were selected as the primary ground
truth for all subsequent experiments. This decision was informed not only by quantitative
metrics, but also by the LLM’s ability to semantically align candidates and job descriptions
beyond syntactic overlap — a property particularly important in a domain where relevance
often depends on nuanced and contextual interpretation.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
45
==PAGE:54==
6.3
Baseline Performance of Recommender Models
To establish a consistent benchmark, each of the four recommender system methods was
evaluated in its default configuration, without domain-specific tuning or improvements.
This provides a fair starting point for comparing the effects of later improvements pre-
sented in Section 6.4. The results, visualized in Figure 6.2, show the differences in how
each model performs under default settings.
While all models demonstrated reasonable performance on at least one metric, significant
differences were observed in their ranking quality. For example, models based on typed
semantic structures, such as the path-based and metapath-based recommenders, consis-
tently produced higher NDCG and precision scores, particularly when recommending jobs
to candidates. This suggests that structured domain knowledge embedded in the graph
contributes positively to ranking relevance. Conversely, the embedding-based model,
which operates purely on unsupervised graph walks, performed substantially worse, es-
pecially in recall and job-side metrics. These patterns highlight the importance of incorpo-
rating domain-aware signals in sparse graph environments, where surface-level similarity
may not be sufficient to drive meaningful recommendations.
6.4
Path-based Recommender Improvements
6.4.1
Path Selection and Automated Path Discovery
To evaluate and refine the performance of the path-based recommender, multiple seman-
tic path configurations were tested. These include both manually selected and automati-
cally discovered composite paths that define the traversal patterns used for candidate-job
scoring in the graph.
In the initial phase, two manually constructed path configurations were selected based
on domain knowledge: the first emphasizing shared skills, and the second combining
skills with shared interests and experience. A third configuration was generated through
an automated path discovery framework, which used schema traversal and supervised
learning to identify high-signal paths from the data (as described in Chapter 4).
The results of this comparative experiment are presented in Figure 6.3, where Path 1 and
Path 2 are the manual paths and Path 3 is the generated path. Across all three metrics,
the automatically generated path set (Path 3) consistently outperformed the manually
designed ones.
In terms of ranking quality, the automatically generated path achieved the highest NDCG
scores, reaching 0.828 on the candidate-to-job direction and 0.649 on the reverse direc-
tion. Precision results followed a similar trend, with Path 3 slightly outperforming Path
2 and significantly surpassing Path 1, which was more limited in scope. Importantly, re-
call also increased consistently with the generated path, suggesting that the discovered
path was able to capture a broader and more complete view of relevance — especially in
sparse or structurally diverse parts of the graph.
The results show the importance of the automated path discovery framework. These
automatically discovered paths contribute to both improved ranking accuracy and greater
coverage, highlighting their effectiveness in complementing and sometimes surpassing
expert-designed alternatives.
6.4.2
Fallback Strategy for Sparse Cases
As introduced in the solution design (Chapter 4), the fallback mechanism was developed
to address a key limitation of the path-based recommender: its reliance on the existence
of semantically meaningful paths in the graph. In practice, sparse candidate profiles or
46
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:55==
(a) NDCG@10 comparison across candidate and job recom-
mendation directions.
(b) Precision@10 comparison across candidate and job recom-
mendation directions.
(c) Recall@10 comparison across candidate and job recom-
mendation directions.
Figure 6.2: Baseline performance comparison across four recommender types (Path-
based, Embedding, Metapath2Vec, GNN) using NDCG@10, Precision@10, and Re-
call@10 for both candidate→job and job→candidate tasks.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
47
==PAGE:56==
(a) NDCG@10 comparison for different path configurations.
(b) Precision@10 comparison across path configurations for both direc-
tions.
(c) Recall@10 comparison, showing improved coverage using automati-
cally discovered paths.
Figure 6.3: Evaluation of manual vs. automated composite path configurations for the
path-based recommender; shows NDCG@10, Precision@10, and Recall@10 improve-
ments using discovered paths.
48
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:57==
recently added job postings often lack sufficient connections to return a complete set of
recommendations. To ensure robustness and usability, the system was extended with
a multi-level fallback mechanism. When the number of path-based results falls below a
predefined threshold, the recommender incrementally invokes backup strategies such as
popularity-based retrieval, collaborative filtering, and random sampling to fill the recom-
mendation list.
To evaluate the effectiveness of this mechanism, several fallback configurations were
tested and compared against the no-fallback baseline.
The performance metrics are
shown in Figure 6.4.
Across all variants, the fallback-enhanced system demonstrated a consistent and mea-
surable improvement in recall, especially in the candidate-to-job direction. While NDCG
and Precision metrics remained largely stable across different fallback combinations, the
addition of fallback strategies ensured a near 100% response rate and provided a robust-
ness layer without introducing significant degradation in ranking quality.
Interestingly, combinations that included popularity-based and collaborative filtering fall-
backs — particularly Popularity + Collaborative and All Fallbacks — resulted in
slightly higher NDCG scores compared to the base configuration. This indicates that fall-
back recommendations are not only used to fill quota gaps but can meaningfully enhance
overall ranking quality, especially in cases where the primary path-based method retrieves
limited or suboptimal results.
Most notably, the recall metrics showed a consistent uplift across all fallback-enabled con-
figurations, confirming that fallback logic effectively extends the model’s coverage with-
out harming top-ranked precision. This trade-off aligns with practical deployment goals,
where maintaining availability and responsiveness is critical, particularly for real-time ap-
plications on sparse or evolving graphs.
6.5
Human Expert Validation
To evaluate the performance of the recommender system in a better way, a human expert
was asked to assess the recommendation lists generated by the system. Each recom-
mendation list contained 5 items presented in randomized order. The recommender was
tested for both directions (candidate and job) individually using the same setup. Option-
ally, the human expert could also provide feedback per recommendation batch. Moreover,
the validation was done in two phases so that, using the feedback from the first phase,
new improvements are made to the recommender system, and the expert is asked to
re-evaluate.
The setup for the validation is summarized as follows:
• 25 job recommendations and 25 candidate recommendations.
• Each list has 5 items ranked in random order, which the expert ranked from most to
least relevant (1-5) or non-relevant (0).
• Metrics used: NDCG@5, Precision@5, Recall@5.
6.5.1
Phase 1
The results of the first evaluation round are summarized in Table 6.4. Based on the re-
sults, the candidate-to-job direction (candidates recommended for a job posting) clearly
outperforms the job-to-candidate one (jobs recommended to candidates) across all met-
rics. These values also align well with earlier evaluations of the recommender system
against the LLM-generated ground truth, suggesting that this direction is relatively stable
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) Precision@10 comparison across fallback strategy variants.
(b) NDCG@10 comparison across fallback strategy variants.
(c) Recall@10 comparison across fallback strategy variants.
Figure 6.4: Performance impact of fallback strategies (collaborative, popularity, random)
on the path-based recommender; highlights improvements in recall and robustness with-
out loss of precision.
50
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:59==
and effective (see Figure 6.2).
Evaluation Direction
Precision@5
Recall@5
NDCG@5
Candidate-to-Job
0.664
0.760
0.564
Job-to-Candidate
0.153
0.233
0.178
Table 6.4: Phase 1: Human Expert Evaluation Results
In contrast, the job-to-candidate direction produced weaker results. A large portion of
the recommended candidates were marked as entirely irrelevant, which significantly af-
fected the evaluation metrics. Based on the qualitative feedback provided by the expert,
it became evident that data sparsity played a major role in such a low metrics score.
Many candidate profiles lacked critical information such as skills, bios, or experience, of-
ten containing nothing more than a university or a study program. In such cases, the rec-
ommender defaulted to fallback strategies, frequently returning popular candidates that
lacked any specific relevance to the job in question.
Another piece of particular feedback made the discovery of a deeper issue: “This student
has a lot of content — I’m sure we have specific UX jobs on the platform, but they weren’t
among the jobs recommended.”. This indicates that even when the candidate data is rich,
the recommender may still fail to prioritize the most relevant recommendations. For exam-
ple, a student with generic soft skills like ”communication” and ”teamwork” may be ranked
higher than another candidate whose profile includes more specialized, job-specific skills
like ”UX”, simply due to scoring weight imbalance.
The candidate-to-job direction also received detailed feedback. While most results were
relevant, the expert mentioned that some job recommendations were overly broad, match-
ing nearly any candidate, or felt random despite the availability of better-fitting profiles.
Comments like “Not a single Law student here, I know we have them” or “This job has
such a broad range that it would fit everybody” suggest that the recommender tends to
find generally relevant matches rather than showing the most qualified options.
Preliminary Conclusions
The first phase of human validation confirmed that the rec-
ommender is able to identify relevance to a degree but often fails to distinguish between
optimal matches and purely relevant ones. Its ranking function tends to favor general
similarity over specificity, and fallback behavior in sparse-profile scenarios significantly
harms recommendation quality.
These observations motivate a series of improvements, which are addressed in the sec-
ond evaluation phase.
6.5.2
Phase 2
Following the insights from the first phase of human validation (Section 6.5.1), several im-
provements were implemented to address the key issues identified by the domain expert.
Specifically, two major enhancements contributed to the performance gains observed in
this phase:
1. Improved Path Discovery and Weighting:
The automated path discovery framework was extended to uncover more seman-
tically meaningful composite paths between candidates and jobs. In addition, the
path weighting mechanism was refined, enabling the system to assign greater value
to the most important features. This directly improved both the relevance and the
ranking of recommendations.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
51
==PAGE:60==
2. Improved Domain Enrichment:
The ETL pipeline was extended with more content extraction features, using natural
language processing to semantically match unstructured text to structured entities
from the domain, such as industries, interests, and skills. This was found to improve
recommendations for users with sparse structured data significantly.
To evaluate the impact of these changes, a second round of human validation was con-
ducted using the same methodology as Phase 1: 25 job-to-candidate and 25 candidate-
to-job recommendation queries, each generating a top-5 list that was manually ranked by
a domain expert. Items were either ranked (1-5) or marked as non-relevant.
The Phase 2 evaluation results are summarized below:
Evaluation Direction
Precision@5
Recall@5
NDCG@5
Candidate-to-Job
0.858
0.958
0.781
Job-to-Candidate
0.675
0.875
0.618
Table 6.5: Phase 2: Human Expert Validation Results
These results show substantial improvement over Phase 1 (Table 6.4). The candidate-
to-job direction now yields near-perfect recall, with high ranking quality (NDCG@5=0.78),
suggesting that the top matches are not only relevant but also correctly prioritized. The
job-to-candidate direction, which had previously suffered due to sparse candidate data,
also improved significantly, thanks to both the enhanced content enrichment and more
flexible path-based logic.
Qualitative feedback from the expert further validated these improvements. In contrast
to Phase 1, where many recommendations were flagged as too generic or irrelevant, the
updated system returned candidates and jobs that were more specifically aligned in terms
of skills, industry fit, and role expectations.
6.5.3
Summary
The evaluation demonstrates that the recommender system achieves strong performance
across multiple metrics and evaluation methods. The offline metrics confirm the effective-
ness of the graph-based ranking logic, while qualitative case studies illustrate the system’s
ability to retrieve relevant and diverse entities. Human validation in two phases confirmed
that the improvements made to path discovery, weighting, and domain enrichment led to
substantial gains in recommendation quality, particularly in the candidate-to-job direction.
These results form the basis for a broader discussion of system limitations, user impact,
and future improvements, as explored in the following chapter.
6.6
Scalability Analysis of Neo4j Deployment on Azure VMs
To evaluate the scalability of the graph-based recommendation system, an experiment
was performed to analyze how the graph database performs under increasing load. Since
the system’s performance is bounded by the capabilities of the Neo4j instance, two Azure
Virtual Machines were used with different hardware configurations: D2ads_v5 and D4ads_v5.
The main goal was to measure how average response time and system throughput scale
with the number of concurrent users, providing insights into the infrastructure limits and
optimal deployment setup.
Experimental setup
For the purpose of this experiment, a special experimental setup was used:
52
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:61==
• Database Engine: Neo4j Community Edition (same data).
• Deployment targets:
– D2ads_v5: 2vCPUs, 8 GiB RAM
– D4ads_v5: 4vCPUs, 16 GiB RAM
• Workload generator: A benchmarking script created concurrent API requests to the
recommender system.
• User workload levels: Tested with 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 concurrent users.
• Metrics collected:
– Average Response Time (ms) per request.
– Throughput (requests/second).
Results
As shown in Figure 6.5a, the system deployed on a D2ads_v5 shows a non-linear increase
in response time, exceeding 17 seconds at 100 users, which indicates severe contention
for resources under higher load. In contrast, D4ads_v5 maintained significantly better
performance, with average response times staying below 5 seconds across all tested
levels.
Figure 6.5b shows that D4ads_v5 achieves higher throughput consistently, peaking at 13.7
requests/sec. Meanwhile, D2ads_v5 throughput converges at around 4.6 requests/sec
and even declines at higher user levels, suggesting I/O bottlenecks and CPU saturation.
(a) Average Response Time vs. Concurrent
Users
(b) Throughput vs. Concurrent Users
Figure 6.5:
Scalability comparison of Neo4j deployments on different Azure VMs
(D2ads_v5 vs D4ads_v5). The D4ads_v5 instance consistently shows lower latency and
higher throughput under increasing concurrent load.
Discussion
These findings validate the hypothesis that the scalability of the recommendation sys-
tem is directly constrained by the performance of the Neo4j backend, particularly under
concurrent workloads. While the algorithmic complexity of the recommendation logic re-
mained fixed, the infrastructure’s ability to handle concurrent graph traversals depended
heavily on VM size.
The results suggest that D4ads_v5 is more suitable for production-scale deployments, of-
fering better latency and higher throughput under load, which aligns with the non-functional
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
53
==PAGE:62==
requirement [NFR2] from Chapter 3 and supports the deployment strategy described in
Section 5.10.
6.7
Bidirectional Matching Analysis
To evaluate whether the system supports mutual relevance between candidates and jobs,
we define a mutual score as the harmonic mean of two directional relevance scores:
(i) candidate-to-job and (ii) job-to-candidate. This formulation ensures that high mutual
scores are only achieved when both sides express strong interest, penalizing asymmetric
preferences.
We extract all candidate-job pairs that appear in both top-k recommendation lists, resulting
in a set of reciprocally ranked matches. Figure 6.6 shows a scatter plot for the normal-
ized directional scores on each axis, each point representing a mutually recommended
pair, with color and size reflecting the mutual score. The diagonal line indicates perfect
alignment, where the candidate and job rate each other equally. We observe a clear con-
centration of large, high-color points near the diagonal, especially in the upper part region,
indicating that the strongest mutual scores are a result of high ratings from each direction.
Lower mutual scores appear further from the diagonal and are both smaller and cooler in
color, reflecting weaker or unbalanced matches.
Figure 6.6: Scatter plot of normalized candidate-to-job and job-to-candidate scores for
mutually recommended pairs. Each point represents a match, with size and color reflect-
ing the mutual score. Points near the diagonal line indicate balanced reciprocal relevance.
This distribution suggests that the system is able to provide meaningful bidirectional matches,
particularly in cases where both profiles contain sufficient semantic information. More-
over, mutual matches tend to show strong overlap in key content-based features such as
skills and interests, which are reinforced by the composite paths used in the path-based
recommender.
54
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:63==
7
Discussion
The results obtained through experiments and human evaluations provide several insights
into the effectiveness of the hybrid recommendation system for bidirectional job and candi-
date matching. The implementation aimed to handle sparsity, support explainability, and
operate bidirectionally, and the outcomes demonstrate strengths and challenges across
these.
The path-based recommendation model consistently outperformed alternative approaches
across standard ranking metrics such as NDCG@10, Precision@10, and Recall@10.
This suggests that explicitly modeling relevance through semantically meaningful graph
paths based on domain-specific relationships like skills, interests, and industries is a highly
effective strategy in sparse and heterogeneous domains like recruitment platforms. In
contrast, the embedding-based methods failed to produce competitive results, since they
lacked the ability to encode the complex relationships and semantics needed to assess
a candidate-job fit correctly. GNN-based models performed somewhat better but were
limited by their high computational cost and low interpretability, which reduces their appli-
cability in domains where users need to understand the basis of a recommendation.
Explainability was a key design goal as well, and the system’s path-based explainer suc-
ceeded in mapping recommendation scores to interpretable factors such as shared skills
or interests. This supported not only transparency but also user feedback through sug-
gestions on missing features. Human expert validation highlighted this as a valuable
feature, particularly for use cases where candidates or recruiters require insight into how
to improve their profiles.
The fallback mechanism also proved necessary, and this is what makes the recommender
system a hybrid. In a cold-start or sparse-profile scenario, particularly when recommend-
ing candidates for a job, the primary recommendation system often returned too few re-
sults. The fallback strategies helped fix this issue and improved overall recall without
significantly harming precision and ranking quality. However, in some cases, fallback
recommendations were generic or poorly targeted, a fact that was also mentioned by the
human expert during validation.
Based on experiments, LLM-based ground truth labeling was found to produce the most
balanced results in terms of precision and recall and aligned well with human validation.
Its ability to simulate relevance judgments based on textual profile and job content allowed
for a scalable and relatively accurate proxy for explicit feedback, which is rarely available
in recruitment data.
While the modular design of the recommender supports horizontal scalability at the ser-
vice layer, the Neo4j graph database remains a central dependency whose performance
bounds overall system scalability. As shown in the scalability experiment, improvements
in Neo4j’s compute and memory resources directly translate into better responsiveness
and throughput. This reinforces the importance of infrastructure-aware scaling strategies,
including vertical scaling or eventual transition to clustered graph database deployments
for enterprise scenarios.
Nonetheless, the system has several limitations. First, the reliance on profile complete-
ness remains a bottleneck; candidates with minimal or poorly filled profiles lead to weak
recommendations, even with fallback logic. Second, while the LLM-based ground truth
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
55
==PAGE:64==
approximation performed well, it introduces potential bias and lacks transparency in its
decision-making process. Lastly, although the system was evaluated with real-world data
and expert validation, broader deployment would require further tuning, real-time testing,
and performance optimization for large-scale use.
Based on the experiments and results, each of the research questions that guided this
thesis can now be clearly addressed.
RQ1: How can weak or implicit signals be used to reliably approximate a ground
truth for validating recommendations in domains lacking explicit feedback?
This
thesis demonstrated that while simple heuristics and implicit behavioral signals (like views
and applications) can serve as rough proxies, they often suffer from low precision or
bias. The most effective strategy was the use of large language models (LLMs) to la-
bel candidate-job pairs based on profile and job content. By simulating expert reason-
ing through structured prompts, the LLM-based approach achieved the highest F1 score
(0.77) and aligned closely with human evaluation. This confirms that weak signals can be
strengthened through content-aware automated reasoning, especially when traditionally
labeled data is unavailable.
RQ2: Which recommendation algorithms are most effective for bidirectional job--
candidate matching in sparse and complex domains?
As discussed in this chapter
and proved by experiments, the path-based recommender with automatic path discovery
consistently outperformed all other methods across multiple evaluation metrics.
RQ3: Can automated discovery of semantic relationship patterns in graph-based
models improve recommendation quality compared to manually defined heuris-
tics?
Yes. The automated path discovery framework developed in this thesis signifi-
cantly outperformed the paths that were manually defined. By systematically exploring
the graph schema and using supervised learning to assign predictive weights to metap-
aths, the system was able to discover high-value relationship patterns that a human might
overlook.
RQ4: What domain modeling approach best captures the complex relationships
between jobs, candidates, and auxiliary entities in recruitment recommendation
systems?
The thesis showed that a heterogeneous information network (HIN) is par-
ticularly well-suited for modeling the recruitment domain. It enables the representation of
various types and relationships in a flexible, extensible way that supports both deep graph
reasoning and explainability.
RQ5: Which class of recommender systems is best suited to address functional re-
quirements typical to a recommender system in the recruitment domain?
The com-
parison in Table 3.1 demonstrated that only graph-based and hybrid recommenders fulfill
all core functional requirements of a recruitment recommender system. Among these,
the graph-based implementation provided high performance and the ability to work with
sparse scenarios, explainability, and bidirectionality. Therefore, based on both theoretical
alignment and experimental results, graph-based recommender systems are best suited
for addressing the functional requirements of recruitment platforms.
This chapter has summarized the results of the experiments performed in Chapter 6.
Strengths and limitations of the proposed recommendation approach were highlighted
and validated against the initial research objectives.
56
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:65==
8
Conclusion and Outlook
This thesis aimed to design and implement a recommendation system targeting the spe-
cific challenges of the recruitment domain, such as the need for bidirectional matching
and the sparsity of interaction data. The problem, as formulated in the early chapters, re-
quired a solution that could work effectively in the absence of rich feedback data, produce
recommendations in both directions, and offer interpretable results for both end users and
system designers.
Through the modeling of the recruitment domain as a heterogeneous information network
(HIN), the system was able to capture the complex relationships between candidates,
jobs, companies, and other contextual entities. This modeling choice proved to be highly
effective in satisfying the project’s functional and architectural goals, as it supported flexi-
bility, explainability, and performance across a wide range of recommendation scenarios.
A significant part of the work focused on developing and comparing multiple recommenda-
tion strategies within this graph-based framework, including path-based recommenders,
unsupervised embedding models, metapath-guided recommendations, and graph neu-
ral networks.
Among these, the path-based recommender consistently achieved the
strongest results in both offline metrics and later during human expert evaluation. This
method offers an intuitive and effective mechanism for capturing domain-specific rele-
vance patterns, especially when combined with the supervised path discovery framework,
introduced as part of the work.
The lack of explicit ground truth in recruitment systems was addressed through the de-
velopment of several proxy labeling strategies, including heuristic, interaction-based, and
machine learning-based approaches. As part of the experiments performed, LLMs proved
to be a robust solution, offering a good balance between scalability and alignment with
human judgment. The system also included fallback mechanisms, explainability modules,
and a modular architecture designed for real-world deployment and extension.
From a practical point of view, the project demonstrated that it is feasible to construct a
recommendation system that meets the requirements of bidirectional, sparse, and inter-
pretable recommendations in recruitment. Human-in-the-loop validation further confirmed
that the proposed solution is not only algorithmically sound but also practically relevant to
end users, including recruiters and candidates.
Several important insights have emerged over the course of the project. First, hybrid
systems, especially those equipped with rich structural representations, are better at han-
dling sparsity and cold-start scenarios than purely behavioral approaches. Second, while
advanced models like GNNs offer strong theoretical capabilities, simpler models (e.g.,
path-based recommenders) can outperform them when well-aligned with domain struc-
ture and user needs.
In conclusion, this project has produced a robust and extensible hybrid recommendation
system tailored to the demands of bidirectional job and candidate matching, and it con-
tributes both methodologically and architecturally to the design of smart recruitment sys-
tem tools. Nevertheless, there are still some opportunities to build upon this foundation.
The following section will outline several concrete directions for such future developments.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
57
==PAGE:66==
8.1
Future Work Directions
Future work may extend the system along the following dimensions:
Incremental Graph Updates and Real-Time Synchronization
The current implementation relies on a full reload of the graph during each ETL cycle. As
the system scales or integrates into platforms with frequent data updates, a more efficient
strategy would involve detecting and updating only changed or newly added entities. In-
corporating incremental ETL or event-driven pipelines would allow the graph to remain
synchronized with the source data in near-real time, reducing computational cost and
latency.
User Feedback for Adaptive Path Weighting
Although the system supports human-in-the-loop validation, user feedback is not yet di-
rectly integrated into the recommendation pipeline. Future iterations could incorporate
explicit relevance feedback (e.g., through user ratings or binary signals such as ”help-
ful“ or ”not relevant”) to reweight semantic paths or features adaptively. This would allow
the system to learn from its usage and personalize the recommendation logic over time,
leading to a self-adjusting model that aligns closely with real-world preferences.
Unsupervised Path Discovery
The current system uses supervised learning to identify the most predictive composite
paths in the graph. However, this approach depends on the availability and quality of the
approximated labels. A promising extension would be to use unsupervised techniques
to discover semantic paths, for example, using random walk techniques, attention-based
models, or contrastive learning on heterogeneous subgraphs. This would allow the sys-
tem to discover useful relationship patterns without relying on an approximated ground
truth dataset.
Personalized Explanation Generation
While the current explanation module provides transparency, future enhancements could
involve generating personalized, context-aware explanations specific to user roles and
preferences. For example, the system could highlight career growth opportunities for
candidates. This could be done using natural language generation models, and it would
significantly improve user trust and decision-making.
58
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Contributors to. information filtering system to predict users’ preferences. Feb. 2004.
url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recommender_system.
[2]
G Linden, B Smith, and J York. “Amazon.com recommendations: item-to-item col-
laborative filtering”. In: IEEE Internet Computing 7.1 (Jan. 2003), pp. 76–80. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/mic.2003.1167344. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/
document/1167344.
[3]
Nada Ghanem, Stephan Leitner, and Dietmar Jannach. “Balancing consumer and
business value of recommender systems: A simulation-based analysis”. In: Elec-
tronic Commerce Research and Applications 55 (Sept. 2022), p. 101195. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2022.101195. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.05952.
[4]
James Neve and Iván Palomares. “Hybrid Reciprocal Recommender Systems: In-
tegrating Item-to-User Principles in Reciprocal Recommendation”. In: Companion
Proceedings of the The Web Conference 2018 23 (Apr. 2020), pp. 848–853. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3366424.3383295. url: https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/
3366424.3383295.
[5]
Shuo Yang et al. “Combining content-based and collaborative filtering for job rec-
ommendation system: A cost-sensitive Statistical Relational Learning approach”.
In: Knowledge-Based Systems 136 (Nov. 2017), pp. 37–45. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.knosys.2017.08.017. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S095070511730374X.
[6]
Eric Behar et al. “Tackling cold start for Job recommendation with heterogeneous
graphs”. In: CEUR Workshop Proceedings 3490 (Sept. 2023). doi: https://hal.
science/hal-04250416. url: https://hal.science/hal-04250416/.
[7]
2024. url: https : / / arxiv . org / html / 2408 . 09748v1# : ~ : text = Despite % 20the %
20simplicity%20and%20popularity%2C, sided%20recommendations%20as%20two%
20successful.
[8]
Yongfeng Zhang and Xu Chen. “Explainable Recommendation: A Survey and New
Perspectives”. In: Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval (2020). doi: 10.
1561/1500000066.
[9]
Gediminas Adomavicius and Alexander Tuzhilin. “Toward the Next Generation of
Recommender Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-Art and Possible Extensions”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 17.6 (2005), pp. 734–
749. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2005.99.
[10]
Francesco Ricci, Lior Rokach, and Bracha Shapira. Recommender Systems Hand-
book. 3rd. Springer, 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2197-4.
[11]
Pasquale Lops, Marco de Gemmis, and Giovanni Semeraro. “Content-based Rec-
ommender Systems: State of the Art and Trends”. In: Recommender Systems Hand-
book. Springer, 2010, pp. 73–105. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-85820-3_3.
[12]
J. Ben Schafer et al. “Collaborative Filtering Recommender Systems”. In: The Adap-
tive Web. Springer, 2007, pp. 291–324. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-72079-9_9.
[13]
Robin Burke. “Hybrid Recommender Systems: Survey and Experiments”. In: User
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 12.4 (2002), pp. 331–370. doi: 10.1023/A:
1021240730564.
[14]
Zan Huang, Hsinchun Chen, and Daniel Zeng. “A graph-based recommender sys-
tem for digital library”. In: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference
on Digital Libraries. 2002, pp. 65–73. doi: 10.1145/544220.544231.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
59
==PAGE:68==
[15]
Chuan Shi et al. “Heterogeneous Information Network Embedding for Recommen-
dation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2019). doi:
10.1109/tkde.2018.2833443.
[16]
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for net-
works”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2016), pp. 855–864. doi: 10.1145/2939672.
2939754.
[17]
Yuxiao Dong, Nitesh V. Chawla, and Ananthram Swami. “metapath2vec: Scalable
representation learning for heterogeneous networks”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
2017, pp. 135–144. doi: 10.1145/3097983.3098036.
[18]
William L. Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. “Inductive representation learn-
ing on large graphs (GraphSAGE)”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. Vol. 30. 2017, pp. 1024–1034. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.02216.
[19]
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. “Semi-supervised classification with graph convo-
lutional networks”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
2017. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907.
[20]
Yassine Afoudi, Mohamed Lazaar, and Safae Hmaidi. “An enhanced recommender
system based on heterogeneous graph link prediction”. In: Engineering applications
of artificial intelligence (2023). doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2023.106553.
[21]
Michael J. Pazzani and Daniel Billsus. “Content-Based Recommendation Systems”.
In: The Adaptive Web. Springer, 2007, pp. 325–341. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-72079-
9_10.
[22]
Saravanan Thannimalai and Xiaohong Zhang. “A hybrid recommender system for
tourism recommendations”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 174 (2021), p. 114738.
doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114738.
[23]
Xing Yi, James Allan, and W. Bruce Croft. “Matching resumes and jobs based on
relevance models”. In: Proceedings of the 30th annual international ACM SIGIR
conference. 2007, pp. 809–810. doi: 10.1145/1277741.1277920.
[24]
Maryam Fazel-Zarandi and Mark S. Fox. “Semantic Matchmaking for Job Recruit-
ment: An Ontology-Based Hybrid Approach”. In: Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference. DOI missing. 2009.
[25]
Jochen Malinowski et al. “Matching People and Jobs: A Bilateral Recommendation
Approach”. In: Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (HICSS). 2006. doi: 10.1109/hicss.2006.266.
[26]
Shaha T. Al-Otaibi and Mourad Ykhlef. “A survey of job recommender systems”.
In: International Journal of the Physical Sciences 7.29 (2012), pp. 5127–5142. doi:
10.5897/IJPS12.482.
[27]
Mauricio Noris Freire and Leandro Nunes de Castro. “e-Recruitment recommender
systems: a systematic review”. In: Knowledge and Information Systems 63 (2021),
pp. 1–20. doi: 10.1007/s10115-020-01522-8.
[28]
Yizhou Sun et al. “PathSim: Meta Path-Based Top-K Similarity Search in Heteroge-
neous Information Networks”. In: Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment. Vol. 4. 11.
2011, pp. 992–1003. doi: 10.14778/3402707.3402736.
[29]
Shoujin Wang et al. “Graph Learning Based Recommender Systems: A Review”.
In: Proceedings of the 30th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI). 2021, pp. 4644–4652. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2021/630.
[30]
Chen Gao et al. “Graph Neural Networks for Recommender Systems: Challenges,
Methods, and Directions”. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM International Confer-
60
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:69==
ence on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM). 2022, pp. 1321–1323. doi: 10.
1145/3488560.3501396.
[31]
Eva Zangerle, Christine Bauer, and Alan Said. “Evaluating recommender systems:
Survey and perspectives”. In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 55.8 (2022), pp. 1–
38. doi: 10.1145/3533378. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3533378.
[32]
Asela Gunawardana and Guy Shani. “Evaluating Recommender Systems”. In: Rec-
ommender Systems Handbook. Ed. by Francesco Ricci, Lior Rokach, and Bracha
Shapira. 2nd. Springer, 2015, pp. 265–308. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-7637-6_8. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7637-6_8.
[33]
Shuo Yang et al. Reciprocal recommendation: A survey and outlook. 2024. arXiv:
2408.09748 [cs.IR]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.09748.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:71==
A
Methodology
A.1
Justification of Recommendation Method Class Mapping
This section elaborates on the reasoning behind the recommendation method evaluations
shown in Table 3.1. Each functional requirement is assessed individually, identifying how
different classes of recommender systems meet the desired capability.
FR1: Minimum Recommendations
• Content-based (): Can recommend items with similar features even in the absence
of user history, but struggles when profile attributes are missing or incomplete.
• Collaborative Filtering (): Performs poorly in cold-start scenarios, as it needs sim-
ilar users or items to exist. New candidates or jobs without interactions lead to few
or no results.
• Knowledge-based (): Uses explicit rules or filters, and works well without any
historical data by matching structured attributes directly.
• Graph-based (): Can traverse indirect paths in heterogeneous graphs, making
it effective even with partial profiles.
• Content-aware (CARS) (): Can incorporate external context (e.g., job location,
time) to augment missing profile info.
• Hybrid ():
FR2: Bidirectional Recommendations
• Content-based (): Typically models only one direction (user to item), and does not
account for mutual preference.
• Collaborative Filtering (): Designed for one-sided interactions and requires signifi-
cant adaptation for two-sided logic.
• Knowledge-based (): Allows explicit rule-based mirroring across entities (e.g.,
job must meet candidate criteria and vice versa).
• Graph-based (): Naturally supports bidirectional traversal through symmetric
graph paths.
• Content-aware (CARS) (): Can model symmetric relevance using contextual fac-
tors for both sides.
• Hybrid (): Supports flexible reciprocal logic by blending bidirectional content and
interaction signals.
FR3: Incomplete Profiles
• Content-based (): Can operate on partial profiles but quality declines with sparse
features.
• Collaborative Filtering (): Requires interaction history; fails completely in many
cold-start scenarios.
• Knowledge-based (): Can apply logic even with missing fields using fallbacks or
optional filters.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
63
==PAGE:72==
• Graph-based (): Supports inference through multi-hop relations, enabling rec-
ommendations from indirect associations.
• Content-aware (CARS) (): Can fill in contextual gaps (e.g., missing skill data)
using location or industry info.
• Hybrid (): Selectively uses the most robust method available when profile data
is incomplete.
FR4: Multi-Format Input Support
• Content-based (): Supports structured and unstructured data, but requires custom
feature engineering.
• Collaborative Filtering (): Ignores item or user features entirely; only relies on his-
torical interactions.
• Knowledge-based (): Good at handling structured logic, but struggles with free-
text inputs unless preprocessed.
• Graph-based (): Represents structured data via nodes/edges and incorporates
text through node embeddings.
• Content-aware (CARS) (): Primarily focused on structured contextual metadata;
less suited for raw text.
• Hybrid (): Combines structured modeling, rule-based logic, and text embeddings
effectively.
FR5: Candidate Feature Integration
• Content-based (): Uses known attributes but is limited in modeling implicit signals
or complex combinations.
• Collaborative Filtering (): Does not use profile attributes; depends entirely on in-
teraction history.
• Knowledge-based (): Rules can become complex when working with a large fea-
ture set.
• Graph-based (): Encodes a rich variety of structured relationships among candi-
date features.
• Content-aware (CARS) (): Uses selected candidate context (e.g., time, location),
but not full bios or interests.
• Hybrid (): Combines multiple signals (textual, graph, rule-based) for richer can-
didate representation.
FR6: Job Feature Integration
• Content-based (): Uses job descriptions and structured metadata effectively through
feature matching.
• Collaborative Filtering (): Does not use job content directly but may surface popular
items via behavior.
• Knowledge-based (): Encodes job rules easily, especially for structured job types
or qualifications.
• Graph-based (): Captures job relationships to companies, industries, or similar
skills.
64
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:73==
• Content-aware (CARS) (): Contextual metadata (e.g., job location) supports adap-
tation.
• Hybrid (): Integrates all available job-side data across representations for more
nuanced modeling.
FR7: Diversity of Recommendations
• Content-based (): Tends to return similar items to past preferences.
• Collaborative Filtering (): Prone to popularity bias and reinforcing similar items.
• Knowledge-based (): Can apply logic to inject diversity explicitly (e.g., sector
variety).
• Graph-based (): Enables exploration of diverse paths and entities for higher
variety.
• Content-aware (CARS) (): Can introduce variation through changing user context.
• Hybrid (): Integrates multiple perspectives to create more balanced, less repeti-
tive outputs.
FR8: Adaptive Learning
• Content-based (): Typically static unless retrained manually; no built-in feedback
loop.
• Collaborative Filtering (): Learns from new interactions over time but not from
profile updates.
• Knowledge-based (): Adaptable through dynamic rule updates or weighting mech-
anisms.
• Graph-based (): Supports retraining of embeddings and dynamic graph updates.
• Content-aware (CARS) (): Adapts based on evolving context, trends, or usage
patterns.
• Hybrid (): Uses multiple feedback inputs to continuously improve recommenda-
tions.
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
65
==PAGE:74==
B
Implementation
B.1
MySQL Query used to extract Candidates
1
SELECT
2
tb.studentId ,
3
GROUP_CONCAT(DISTINCT cs.name ORDER BY cs.name SEPARATOR '; ') AS
core_skills ,
4
GROUP_CONCAT(DISTINCT hs.name ORDER BY hs.name SEPARATOR '; ') AS
hard_skills ,
5
GROUP_CONCAT(DISTINCT pi.name ORDER BY pi.name SEPARATOR '; ') AS
interests ,
6
GROUP_CONCAT(DISTINCT scp.purpose SEPARATOR '; ') AS
connection_purposes ,
7
tb.bio,
8
tb.motivation ,
9
GROUP_CONCAT(DISTINCT sl.language ORDER BY sl.language SEPARATOR '; ')
AS languages
10
FROM student_talent_bios tb
11
LEFT JOIN student_core_skills scs ON tb.studentId = scs.studentId
12
LEFT JOIN core_skills cs ON scs.coreSkillId = cs.id
13
LEFT JOIN student_hard_skills shs ON tb.studentId = shs.studentId
14
LEFT JOIN hard_skills hs ON shs.hardSkillId = hs.id
15
LEFT JOIN student_interests si ON tb.studentId = si.studentId
16
LEFT JOIN professional_interests pi ON si.interestId = pi.id
17
LEFT JOIN student_connection_purposes scp ON tb.studentId = scp.studentId
18
LEFT JOIN student_work_experiences we ON tb.studentId = we.studentId
19
LEFT JOIN industries i ON we.industryId = i.id
20
LEFT JOIN student_languages sl ON tb.studentId = sl.studentId
21
GROUP BY tb.studentId;
B.2
Transformed Job object for ETL pipeline
transformed = {
"type": "Job",
"id": job.id,
"identifier": "id",
"properties": {
"title": job.name,
"description": job.description,
},
"relationships": {
"REQUIRES_SKILL": [
{
"type": "Skill",
"name": skill,
"identifier": "name",
"properties": {"type": "core"},
}
for skill in job.required_soft_skills
]
+ [
66
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:75==
{
"type": "Skill",
"name": skill,
"identifier": "name",
"properties": {"type": "hard"},
}
for skill in job.required_hard_skills
],
"REQUIRES_INTEREST": [
{
"type": "Interest",
"name": interest,
"identifier": "name",
}
for interest in job.interests
],
"HAS_LANGUAGE": [
{
"type": "Language",
"name": job.language.value,
"identifier": "name",
}
],
"HAS_LOCATION_TYPE": [
{
"type": "LocationType",
"name": job.location_type.name,
"identifier": "name",
}
],
"BELONGS_TO_COMPANY": [
{
"type": "Company",
"id": job.company.id,
"identifier": "id",
"properties": {
"name": job.company.name,
"description": job.company.description,
},
"relationships": {
"BELONGS_TO_INDUSTRY": (
[
{
"type": "Industry",
"name": job.company.industry.name,
"identifier": "name",
}
]
if job.company.industry.name
else []
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
67
==PAGE:76==
),
},
}
],
"HAS_EMPLOYMENT_TYPE": [
{
"type": "EmploymentType",
"name": job.employment_type.name,
"identifier": "name",
}
],
},
}
B.3
Path-based recommendation explainer
{
"recommendations": [
{
"candidateId": "c0c5f5a2-b2f0-4f4e-a568-4fd407d00307",
"score": 3.365991,
"explanation": {
"recommendation_id": "c0c5f5a2-b2f0-4f4e-a568-4fd407d00307",
"explanation_type": "path_based",
"factors": [
{
"factor_type": "language_match_weighted",
"factor_name": "Shared Language",
"factor_value": 1,
"factor_description": "Number of shared Languages (value: 1, weight:
-0.11600543892679258, contribution: -0.11600543892679258)",
"factor_weight": -0.11600543892679258
},
...
],
"total_score": 3.365991,
"explanation_summary": "Top match factors: Shared Skill (score: 8.0, weight:
0.22700447587000894), Shared Interest (score: 1.0, weight: 1.6659635724058688).",
"missing_features": [
{
"type": "missing_skill",
"name": "CAD",
"category": "skill",
"suggestion": "Consider adding CAD as a requirement to attract more
qualified candidates"
},
...
]
}
},
{
68
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
==PAGE:77==
"candidateId": "43c4143d-3f9c-402e-a724-6d201553827b",
"score": 3.276463,
"explanation": {
"recommendation_id": "43c4143d-3f9c-402e-a724-6d201553827b",
"explanation_type": "path_based",
"factors": [
{
"factor_type": "language_match_weighted",
"factor_name": "Shared Language",
"factor_value": 1,
"factor_description": "Number of shared Languages (value: 1, weight:
-0.11600543892679258, contribution: -0.11600543892679258)",
"factor_weight": -0.11600543892679258
},
...
],
"total_score": 3.276463,
"explanation_summary": "Top match factors: Shared Interest
(score: 1.0, weight: 1.6659635724058688), Shared Skill
(score: 7.0, weight: 0.22700447587000894).",
"missing_features": [
{
"type": "missing_skill",
"name": "Branding",
"category": "skill",
"suggestion": "Consider adding Branding as a requirement to attract
more qualified candidates"
},
...
]
}
}
],
"suggestions": [
"Add interest requirements to better match candidate preferences."
]
}
Hybrid Recommendation Methods for Bidirectional Job and Candidate Matching
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
