==PAGE:1==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining:
Security, Cross­organizational Access Control, and Quantitative Accountability
Hussein Dirani ­ Raihanullah Mehran
Master Thesis
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining:
Security and Access Control Across Organizations
Hussein Dirani
Master Thesis
==PAGE:3==
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
Security and Access Control Across Organizations
Master Thesis
August 2025
By
Hussein Dirani
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six and a half months at the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Computer Science
and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science and
process mining.
Hussein Dirani ­ s223518
Signature
08/08/2025
Date
ii
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Modern organizations increasingly rely on live digital data to understand and optimize
how their processes unfold in real time. Process mining offers a data­driven approach to
analyzing and improving such processes based on observed system behavior. As orga­
nizations seek real­time insights and distributed collaboration, streaming process mining
brings new opportunities but also introduces critical security challenges. Pipelines are
modular workflows that carry and transform data across systems. They must span orga­
nizational boundaries while preserving autonomy, confidentiality, and control over shared
resources.
This thesis contributes to the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) by in­
troducing a trust­aware access control framework that enables secure collaboration both
within and across organizations. It defines how independent peers can establish trust
and share resources selectively, while access is governed through structured roles and
permissions. These mechanisms support decentralized pipeline configuration without re­
liance on central control. The implementation focuses on the configuration phase, where
all access decisions are verified before execution, and cross­organizational access is
governed by explicit policies and recorded approvals.
By addressing the foundational challenges of access control and inter­organizational trust,
this thesis lays the groundwork for secure, collaborative streaming process mining. It
brings DAPM one step closer to enabling dynamic, cross­boundary pipelines without com­
promising autonomy or control.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ekkart Kindler, Associate Professor, DTU
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor, DTU
I want to sincerely thank my supervisors for their dedication and involvement throughout
this project. Their feedback during our weekly meetings helped me stay on track, ques­
tion my approach, and push for better results. They always made time for discussions,
followed up on my progress, and challenged me when it mattered.
The support and guidance I received played a big role in shaping both the thesis and how
I approached the work behind it. I truly appreciate their commitment from start to finish.
iv
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Process Mining Tools and Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Access Control and Trust
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Previous DAPM Work and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Problem Statement and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Research Methodology
9
3.1
Relevance Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Rigor Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Design Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
DAPM Pipeline Lifecycle and Security Considerations
12
4.1
DAPM Pipeline Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
Stages of the Pipeline Lifecycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Scenario: Cross­Organizational Collaboration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Security Implications in the Lifecycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Trust Framework for Collaboration
18
5.1
Legal and Contractual Agreements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.2
Governance Layer and Visibility Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.3
Handshake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
6
Access Control Model
21
6.1
Conceptual Access Control Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.2
Role­Based Access Control Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7
Pipeline Configuration Phase
28
7.1
Internal Configuration Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.2
External Access Requests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
8
Implementation
32
8.1
System Setup and Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
8.2
Trust Establishment and Handshake Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
8.3
Authentication and User Account Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
8.4
Role­Based Access Control (RBAC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8.5
Access Request and Asynchronous Approval Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
9
Evaluation and Outcomes
42
9.1
Architecture in Action: Trust and Access Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
v
==PAGE:8==
9.2
Security Coverage Across the Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
10 Discussion and Future Work
47
10.1 Reflection of Research Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
10.2 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
11 Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
A API Reference
54
vi
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Organizations rely on structured processes to achieve their goals, whether it is onboarding
employees, fulfilling orders, or responding to customer inquiries. These processes can
be formal and well­documented or informal and evolving. Regardless of their nature,
the increasing digitalization of services means that most processes leave behind digital
traces. Each time a user performs an action, edits a record, or triggers a system task, an
event is logged. These logs, known as event logs, provide a valuable window into how
processes are actually executed in practice [1].
Process mining is a field that leverages these digital traces to analyze and improve real­
world processes. It sits at the intersection of data mining and business process modeling.
Instead of relying on assumptions about how processes should work, process mining ex­
tracts insights directly from event data, allowing organizations to discover how processes
behave in reality, identify deviations or inefficiencies, and make evidence­based improve­
ments.
Process mining encompasses three core techniques. Discovery involves generating a
process model purely from event data, without any prior assumptions.
Conformance
checking compares observed behaviors against expected or predefined models to identify
deviations. Enhancement enriches existing process models with additional information to
improve their accuracy or usefulness [2].
Wikipedia offers a clear example. Each edit to an article is logged as an event, capturing
metadata such as the user, timestamp, page title, and size of the change1.While edits are
the most common type, other events like page creation or deletion are also recorded. On
the English Wikipedia alone, thousands of edits are made each day2, making it an ideal
candidate for studying live, collaborative editing behavior. Analyzing these events across
thousands of edits allows researchers to uncover how editing patterns evolve, identify
contributors who consistently enhance article quality, and determine when interventions
may be necessary to maintain consistency. For example, if early article categorization is
shown to attract more contributions and lead to higher­quality content, Wikipedia could
use that insight to improve its editorial guidelines, ultimately helping ensure more consis­
tent and trustworthy articles.
Traditional process mining techniques assume access to a complete and static event log,
data collected and stored before any analysis takes place. While this model has been
effective in many applications, it falls short in modern settings where data is generated
continuously, and insights are needed in real time. This is especially true for monitoring
scenarios, where organizations must observe processes as they happen and react quickly
to unexpected behavior. As digital systems become more dynamic and data volumes
grow, waiting for logs to accumulate before analyzing them introduces delays and limits
responsiveness.
This is where streaming process mining comes in. Also known as online process mining, it
focuses on analyzing live streams of event data rather than static logs. Instead of operat­
ing retrospectively, streaming process mining allows organizations to observe processes
as they unfold. This enables timely insights, early interventions, and adaptive process
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Page_history
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Time_Between_Edits
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
1
==PAGE:10==
optimization. For example, while traditional analysis might look at edits made over the
past month to identify problematic patterns, streaming process mining can flag unusual
editing behavior as it happens. This could include many anonymous users quickly chang­
ing the same article or a sudden spike in edits following a news event. These insights help
Wikipedia react faster to potential issues.
However, streaming process mining introduces a number of technical challenges. Algo­
rithms must operate on partial and evolving data, under constraints of memory, latency,
and throughput. Systems must be designed to process data continuously without cen­
tralized storage, since storing all streaming data in one place quickly becomes inefficient
and unmanageable. They must also be resilient to change and drift. These demands dif­
fer significantly from those of traditional process mining, requiring new infrastructure and
real­time processing strategies.
A common response to this technical complexity is the adoption of data pipelines. Pipelines
are modular systems that define how data flows through a sequence of processing steps;
from ingestion, to filtering, to analysis. In the context of process mining, pipelines allow
researchers to plug together data sources, operators, and visualization tools in a struc­
tured and repeatable way. They help manage complexity, encourage reuse, and can
scale across different use cases [3].
While pipelines offer structure and scalability, building them in practice often requires
access to tools, data, or algorithms owned by different teams, or even different organiza­
tions. In collaborative environments, researchers may want to incorporate a specialized
discovery algorithm developed externally, or analyze live data provided by a partner. How­
ever, enabling this kind of collaboration introduces critical challenges around permission
management, ownership boundaries, and the protection of sensitive data and intellectual
property.
In this thesis, we aim to contribute to the development of the Distributed Architecture for
Process Mining (DAPM), originally devised in the Process Dry Lab thesis [4] and later
refined in Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing of Data and Algorithms [5],
which also motivated the need for collaborative pipeline infrastructures. While these ef­
forts laid the foundation for a modular, distributed pipeline architecture.This year’s DAPM
projects, including the current thesis, extend the architecture to support real­time stream­
ing across organizational boundaries. Specifically, this thesis focuses on enhancing the
architecture with a security­aware access control model, enabling trust­based collabora­
tion between organizations.
This thesis is part of a broader collaboration involving four master’s projects, all working
toward a common goal: to design and model a Distributed Architecture for Process Min­
ing (DAPM) that supports secure, distributed streaming pipelines across organizational
boundaries. Each project addresses a different aspect of this vision. One project, con­
ducted by Christian Becke and Zou Yong Nan Klaassen, focuses on the conceptualization
and performance evaluation of distributed streaming pipelines, defining the architecture
and assessing its scalability in real­world conditions. Another project, carried out by Tama
Sarker and Reshma Zaman, addresses the ingestion and filtering of online streaming
data, including the anonymization of sensitive inputs and visualization of process min­
ing outcomes.A third project, by Raihanullah Mehran, concentrates on pipeline moni­
toring and misuse detection.The present thesis contributes by designing a trust­aware,
security­focused access control model to support secure collaboration across organiza­
tional boundariess. Together, these projects lay the groundwork for a robust and secure
architecture for collaborative streaming process mining.
2
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:11==
This thesis is structured as follows: Chapter 2 introduces the background, including the
state of the art and concludes with the research questions. Chapter 3 presents the re­
search methodology followed throughout the project. Chapter 4 describes the DAPM
pipeline lifecycle and the security considerations and sets the stage for the solution. Chap­
ter 5 introduces the trust framework, while Chapter 6 defines the access control model
used to govern resource access. Chapter 7 focuses on the configuration phase of a
pipeline, where individual components are selected, access permissions are checked,
and cross­organizational approvals are enforced. Chapter 8 describes the implementa­
tion details. Chapter 9 presents the outcomes and the evaluation of the system. Finally,
Chapter 10 discusses the results and future work, and Chapter 11 concludes the thesis.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
This chapter provides the necessary background on process mining, with a focus on ar­
chitectural and security considerations in collaborative environments. It begins with an
overview of prominent tools and frameworks, identifying architectural gaps that limit their
applicability in distributed settings. It then introduces core access control models and trust
mechanisms, analyzing their relevance to cross­organizational process mining pipelines.
The chapter concludes with a review of previous work on the Distributed Architecture for
Process Mining (DAPM), followed by the problem statement and research questions that
define the scope and direction of this thesis.
2.1
Process Mining Tools and Gaps
Process mining has matured through a variety of tools and frameworks that support the
analysis of event data. It has been applied across domains such as healthcare to opti­
mize patient pathways and reduce treatment delays [6], banking for detecting fraud and
compliance violations [7], and customer service, to identify bottlenecks in issue resolu­
tion workflows. These use cases highlight the practical value of understanding process
behavior from event data.
However, most existing tools assume centralized ownership, static input logs, and tightly
controlled environments. While effective in traditional settings, these assumptions limit
their use in modern, collaborative, and decentralized scenarios. In this section, we an­
alyze selected tools to understand how their design choices shape their applicability to
distributed and secure pipeline architectures.
ProM [8] is one of the earliest and most comprehensive platforms in the field. It provides a
large ecosystem of plug­ins for discovery, conformance checking, and enhancement, sup­
porting a broad range of academic and industrial use cases. However, ProM is a desktop
application that relies on complete event logs and centralized execution. Its architecture
does not support streaming data, and any kind of collaboration must be managed out­
side the tool. ProM’s monolithic structure and lack of built­in security mechanisms make
it unsuitable for dynamic, multi­party workflows.
PM4Py [9] addresses some of ProM’s limitations by offering a lightweight Python library
that supports the same core algorithms. It is well­suited for programmatic workflows and
can be embedded into larger systems. However, PM4Py is still designed around batch
processing. Streaming support is minimal, and access control is left entirely to the sur­
rounding infrastructure. While useful for prototyping and experimentation, PM4Py does
not offer the architectural support required for distributed or secure pipelines.
RapidProM [10] integrates ProM’s algorithms into the visual workflow engine of Rapid­
Miner [11], enabling users to build pipelines using a graphical interface. This lowers the
barrier for non­programmers, but the underlying assumptions remain the same: static
data, local execution, and single­user environments. Access control, sharing, and secu­
rity are handled externally, if at all.
PM4KNIME [12] offers a similar integration between process mining and KNIME [13],
another visual workflow platform. It benefits from KNIME’s modularity and extensibility,
but like RapidProM, it remains confined to static logs and does not address security or
collaboration needs.
4
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:13==
ClowdFlows [14] moves a step closer to collaborative settings by offering a cloud­based
environment for sharing workflows.
It supports integration with external services and
Python libraries, and allows users to build and execute workflows through a browser.
However, ClowdFlows is not specialized for process mining, and lacks support for confi­
dential or permission­controlled sharing. Workflows are visible to all users unless isolated
externally, making it unsuitable for privacy­sensitive applications.
Beamline [15] is one of the first frameworks explicitly designed for streaming process
mining. Built on Apache Flink, it supports online discovery, conformance checking, and
simulation. Beamline includes both a Java­based library for scalable deployment and
a Python variant for rapid prototyping. It represents a significant advance over batch­
oriented tools. However, Beamline assumes a trusted environment. It does not address
security, cross­organizational collaboration, or access control. capabilities that are es­
sential in real­world distributed settings.
Implications: Across all of these tools, two main limitations emerge. First, most tools
follow a monolithic or single­user model that assumes full access to all data and algo­
rithms. Second, even in streaming contexts, current frameworks do not support access
control or trust isolation between different organizations. These limitations motivate the
development of architectures that support secure, decentralized process mining pipelines,
capable of operating across organizational boundaries while preserving privacy, owner­
ship, and control.
2.2
Access Control and Trust
Modern collaborative systems, especially those spanning organizational boundaries, must
address not only functionality and scalability but also security and trust. In process min­
ing, where sensitive business data and proprietary algorithms may be shared or executed
collaboratively, ensuring proper access control is vital. This section explores key access
control models, their application in distributed environments, and relevant trust­enhancing
technologies such as federated identity and secure computation.
2.2.1
Access Control Strategies
Access control models define how permissions are assigned, enforced, and evaluated
across systems. In distributed process mining pipelines, access control is critical for en­
suring secure, flexible, and policy­compliant interactions. This section introduces several
widely used access control models and evaluates their suitability for cross­organizational
environments.
Discretionary Access Control (DAC): DAC is one of the earliest access control models,
where access decisions are governed by the resource owner. In DAC systems, users
can grant or revoke access to resources they control, usually via Access Control Lists
(ACLs). While DAC is simple and flexible in small, centralized environments, it suffers
from poor scalability and limited administrative oversight. It also lacks a principled way to
enforce organization­wide policies, leading to inconsistent permissions and greater risk
of accidental leaks or misconfigurations [16].
Role­Based Access Control (RBAC): RBAC introduces a structured model where per­
missions are associated with roles rather than individual users. Users are assigned roles
that reflect their job responsibilities, and each role encapsulates a predefined set of per­
missions. This approach greatly simplifies access management in large systems and
aligns well with organizational hierarchies. RBAC improves auditability and compliance
but is less flexible in dynamic or cross­boundary environments. It often leads to ”role
explosion,” where too many fine­grained roles are needed to handle specific cases [17].
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
5
==PAGE:14==
Attribute­Based Access Control (ABAC): ABAC evaluates access decisions dynami­
cally based on attributes associated with the user, resource, and context (e.g., location,
time). Unlike RBAC, which relies on static roles, ABAC policies can express complex and
fine­grained access rules. This makes ABAC well­suited for distributed and multi­tenant
systems where static mappings fall short. However, defining and maintaining attribute­
based policies is complex and computationally intensive, and it may introduce perfor­
mance penalties in high­throughput systems [18].
Token­Based Access Control (TBAC): TBAC uses cryptographically signed tokens,
such as JSON Web Tokens (JWTs), to encode access permissions. These tokens are self­
contained and can be validated at runtime without consulting a central authority. TBAC
is ideal for microservice architectures and decentralized environments where identity and
access must be verified quickly and independently. Its main challenges lie in secure is­
suance, revocation, and token lifecycle management. Mechanisms such as token expira­
tion, introspection endpoints, or blacklisting are often required to mitigate these risks [19].
Hybrid Models:
No single access model ideally balances flexibility, manageability,
and security in distributed settings.
As a result, many modern systems adopt hybrid
approaches that combine static role­based models (RBAC) with dynamic policy­based
mechanisms (ABAC or TBAC). For example, platforms like Kubernetes use RBAC role
bindings to enforce coarse­grained permissions, while delegating finer­grained, per­request
decisions to token­based or policy­driven mechanisms such as Open Policy Agent (OPA) [20].
Research in domains such as IoT and smart home systems supports this direction: hy­
brid RBAC–ABAC frameworks enhance both expressiveness and manageability, offering
fine­grained control without exploding role complexity [21]. In process mining pipeline
contexts, where roles remain stable internally and tokens may govern external delega­
tion, these hybrid strategies provide a balanced design space for secure, interoperable,
and low­overhead solutions.
2.2.2
Trust Models: Federated Identity and Secure Computation
In distributed process mining pipelines, participating entities often belong to different or­
ganizations, each with its own users, policies, and infrastructure. Enabling secure collab­
oration across these boundaries requires a trust model that supports identity verification,
access delegation, and data confidentiality across independent systems.
Federated Identity and Authorization: Federated identity systems such as Keycloak
[22] enable Single Sign­On (SSO) and cross­domain authentication by allowing multiple
identity providers to share user credentials and metadata. These systems are well­suited
for enterprise­scale infrastructures where centralized trust agreements and administrative
coordination are feasible. However, in decentralized environments,such as temporary re­
search collaborations or inter­organizational process mining pipelines, full federation can
be overkill. It introduces operational overhead, dependency on a common trust anchor,
and potential tight coupling between domains. While platforms like Keycloak support dele­
gation and fine­grained scopes [23], deploying and maintaining a federated infrastructure
may not be justified when trust boundaries shift frequently or when lightweight, peer­based
interaction is preferred.
Secure Multi­Party Computation (SMPC): SMPC is a cryptographic method that al­
lows multiple participants to collaborate without disclosing their private data. SecureML
demonstrate SMPC’s capability for secure collaborative computation in realistic settings
[24]. While it provides strong confidentiality and privacy guarantees, SMPC introduces
substantial computational overhead, cryptographic complexity, and engineering effort.
6
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:15==
SMPC remains challenging for practical deployment in typical process mining scenarios.
2.2.3
Implications:
While a wide range of access control and trust models exist, none fully satisfy the com­
bined requirements of flexibility, fine­grained policy enforcement, and scalability needed
for distributed process mining across organizational boundaries. Existing approaches ei­
ther assume a centralized trust anchor, introduce excessive operational overhead, or lack
the mechanisms to adapt to dynamic, runtime collaboration scenarios. This gap under­
scores the need for security models that preserve autonomy while enabling controlled,
cross­boundary interaction.
2.3
Previous DAPM Work and Limitations
The DAPM initiative has been shaped by a series of foundational works that address
different aspects of secure and distributed process mining. While these efforts collectively
establish the vision and architecture of DAPM, they also reveal several open challenges,
particularly regarding access control and trust across organizational boundaries, and in
supporting streaming data. This section traces the progression of key contributions.
The Process DryLab thesis [4] laid the foundation for DAPM by proposing a peer­to­peer
architecture that enabled researchers to share and execute process mining algorithms
without exposing their source code. The work demonstrated the feasibility of decentral­
ized algorithm reuse, but did not introduce any access control mechanisms, as its focus
was primarily on algorithm sharing in trusted academic settings.
Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing of Data and Algorithms [5] expanded
this vision by proposing a distributed architecture for constructing process mining pipelines
across organizations. It introduced a range of collaboration scenarios and emphasized
the need for protecting data and algorithm confidentiality via access control. The paper
clarified credential management requirements for such pipelines and highlighted how user
identities could be linked to specific resources. While an implementation was provided,
enforcement of access control policies at runtime remained outside the system’s scope.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining: User Management and Security [25] imple­
mented a hybrid access control framework combining Role­Based Access Control (RBAC)
and Attribute­Based Access Control (ABAC). RBAC handled coarse­grained roles like ad­
ministrators and normal users, while ABAC enabled fine­grained access at the repository
and resource level. The system allowed organizations to define access policies for opera­
tions such as upload, download, deploy, and delete over data and algorithms. However, it
lacked mechanisms for dynamic, cross­organizational trust. Features such as federated
identity, delegated authorization, and token­based verification were not included. Policies
were hardcoded and scoped to the local organization, limiting flexibility. In addition, all
DAPM­related works up to this point assumed static event logs. None of the implemen­
tations addressed streaming data or real­time process mining, leaving open the question
of how access control could operate under continuous, collaborative execution.
Based on the limitations we discovered, we formulate a problem statement in the following
section.
2.4
Problem Statement and Research Questions
While process mining has matured as a discipline, most existing tools and architectures
for distributed process mining assume static event logs, centralized execution, or tightly
controlled environments. As organizations increasingly collaborate across institutional
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
7
==PAGE:16==
boundaries and adopt streaming data practices, these assumptions become limiting. Ar­
chitectures must evolve to support dynamic data, decentralized ownership, and fine­
grained security without relying on centralized trust anchors or monolithic control mecha­
nisms.
Existing DAPM works have made progress in defining the foundational components of dis­
tributed pipelines. However, critical challenges remain unresolved, notably the absence
of trust negotiation between independent peers, limited support for dynamic and cross­
organizational access control, and a lack of runtime enforcement mechanisms that can
adapt to evolving collaboration contexts. Additionally, current implementations assume
static inputs and do not address how access control could extend to support real­time or
streaming scenarios.
Based on these open challenges, we formulate the following research questions that this
thesis aims to explore:
• RQ1: How can two or more organizations establish and maintain mutual trust to
securely collaborate within a distributed process mining pipeline?
• RQ2: How can access control be modeled and enforced at runtime, across and
within organizations, to ensure secure usage of pipeline components in accordance
with defined policies?
• RQ3: What architectural principles and mechanisms enable secure, decentralized
coordination among peers in DAPM?
• RQ4: How can the proposed trust and access control mechanisms support the tran­
sition toward streaming process mining pipelines?
In the next chapter, we outline the research methodology employed to address these
questions, following a design science framework.
8
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:17==
3
Research Methodology
This thesis adopts the Design Science Research (DSR) framework as its methodological
foundation, guided by the model proposed by Hevner [26]. While DSR was not explicitly
chosen at the outset, the project organically aligned with its three primary cycles. Ele­
ments of Agile Development [27] were also naturally integrated to accommodate evolving
requirements, inter­group coordination, and continuous refinement.
The work is part of a broader collaborative effort involving multiple master’s theses, all
contributing to the design of a secure, distributed streaming pipeline for the Distributed
Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM). The focus of this thesis centers on the design
and implementation of access control mechanisms and the trust model that governs inter­
organizational collaboration.
Coordination with concurrent thesis teams, particularly the work of Christian Becke and
Zou Klaassen [28], was important to ensure a consistent and compatible overall architec­
ture. With input from supervisors, the pipeline was conceptually divided into three lifecycle
phases, as described in Chapter 4, and although different groups addressed distinct con­
cerns within or across these phases, alignment was necessary to maintain coherence in
design and enable integration across the broader DAPM framework. Weekly meetings
with supervisors and cross­group discussions provided iterative feedback, shaping the
evolving design and supporting methodological consistency throughout the thesis pro­
cess.
The remainder of this chapter outlines how the work progressed across the three DSR
cycles, starting with problem scoping and requirement identification (Relevance), ground­
ing the design in prior work and supervisor insights (Rigor), and culminating in an iterative
development and implementation process (Design). Evaluation was conducted through
concrete usage scenarios and analysis of the implemented system, as described in Chap­
ter 9.
3.1
Relevance Cycle
The relevance cycle of this thesis began with a collaborative framing of the Distributed
Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) initiative, where multiple master’s theses were
coordinated under a shared objective: to support secure, distributed, and streaming pro­
cess mining across organizational boundaries. The initial scope of this thesis, security for
inter­organizational collaboration, was shaped early through discussions with supervisors
and fellow project teams.
While the formal pipeline lifecycle structure was defined later, an early draft of the stream­
ing pipeline shown in Figure 3.1 was collaboratively created by the thesis groups with the
help of supervisors and served as a shared conceptual foundation. It helped identify tech­
nical components and map security threats and privacy risks across each step. Although
the visual details in the diagram may be difficult to read in print, explicit security risks
per component are elaborated later in Chapter 4, which provides a more detailed view of
threat modeling in the architecture.
This thesis initially began as a joint project between two students, addressing the broader
security needs of the DAPM system. Midway through the process, the team split, and the
focus of this thesis was refined to target the access control model and the trust framework
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
9
==PAGE:18==
for secure inter­organizational collaboration. Runtime security concerns were handled in
the parallel thesis. This refined scope remained highly relevant to the overall architectural
integrity of DAPM and addressed specific risks highlighted during early­stage discussions.
Figure 3.1: Collaboratively created early draft of the DAPM streaming pipeline. It served
as a reference for defining scopes and identifying component­level risks.
3.2
Rigor Cycle
The rigor cycle grounded this thesis in relevant academic and technical knowledge. Dur­
ing the early stages, an exploratory literature review was conducted, covering academic
research, prior DAPM theses, and architectural references. This broad review helped
identify recurring terminology, key challenges, and common access control approaches.
Based on insights from this phase, the search was refined into a more systematic process
using targeted keywords and structured queries. Both relevant and non­relevant findings
were documented to clarify the boundaries of the design space. Literature on hybrid
access control models, decentralized trust, and secure process mining provided critical
context for shaping the system architecture and validating design choices throughout the
project.
3.3
Design Cycle
The design cycle represents how this thesis evolved from planning to implementation
through an iterative process involving feedback, adaptation, and coordination with broader
project teams. The following subsections reflect the concrete steps and collaborative
routines that supported the development work.
3.3.1
Project Planning and Milestones
At the start of the project, a high­level roadmap was prepared using a Gantt­style format,
co­developed with supervisors. Milestones were set to guide progress and establish when
specific deliverables or features would be completed. These plans included a shared
understanding of responsibilities within the initial team formation. After the project split,
the milestones were revised to reflect the narrowed scope. Despite the adjustments, the
planning structure helped maintain accountability and continuity.
3.3.2
Weekly Meetings and Collaborative Feedback
Weekly coordination meetings were held throughout the thesis period. These included
joint sessions involving all DAPM thesis teams and supervisors, where ongoing work was
10
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:19==
presented, challenges were discussed, and next steps were agreed upon. These meet­
ings ensured regular feedback, maintained architectural alignment across teams, and
helped refine shared goals.
In addition to these group meetings, the thesis teams also held informal online sessions
to coordinate progress, share updates, and resolve implementation­level issues.
Before the team split, implementation and design decisions were discussed jointly with
my teammate. Afterward, individual work continued but remained synchronized with the
broader group through these regular meetings. These sessions were essential for refining
system requirements, ensuring alignment across pipeline phases, and receiving technical
and conceptual feedback.
3.3.3
Technology Stack and Adaptation
The backend system was developed in Java using the Spring Boot framework, chosen
for its modular architecture, security annotations, and seamless integration with relational
databases. PostgreSQL was used as the persistent data store for each organizational
instance, supporting isolated user and resource management.
To enable deployment across multiple organizations, the system was containerized us­
ing Docker, with environment­specific values passed through docker­compose. Each in­
stance operated in an isolated container backed by its own PostgreSQL service, ensuring
strict data separation.
Swagger was integrated for documenting and testing the REST APIs, which served as
the system’s primary interface in the absence of a frontend.
For trust management, the project initially explored Keycloak as a federated identity provider.
Due to configuration complexity and limited flexibility in lightweight peer scenarios, it was
replaced by a decentralized trust model based on cryptographic key exchange. Inter­
organizational communication was secured through signed JWTs, verified using pre­shared
public keys, enabling secure collaboration without relying on centralized identity infrastruc­
ture.
3.3.4
Iterative Development and Git Collaboration
Development progressed in weekly iterations, with each feature scoped individually, im­
plemented in stages, and refined based on feedback. This structure supported flexibility
and continuous adaptation throughout the project.
GitHub was used for version control and collaborative development. In the early stages,
work on access control and related prototype features was merged into a shared “secu­
rity” branch maintained with my teammate. After the team split, I continued development
on a dedicated branch while continuing the same review and incremental development
practices.1,
1https://github.com/DAPM-Thesis/dapm-thesis/tree/dapm-security-service
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
11
==PAGE:20==
4
DAPM Pipeline Lifecycle and Security
Considerations
In this chapter, we introduce the core concept of the DAPM pipeline, describing its key
components and the stages that make up its lifecycle. We then present a representative
scenario that serves as a running example throughout the remainder of this work, and
outline the main security threats that may arise during inter­organizational collaboration.
4.1
DAPM Pipeline Overview
The conceptual description of pipeline components presented in this section is based on
the concurrent thesis by Christian Becke and Zou [28], who developed the DAPM pipeline
model. Their work outlines the structure and semantics of the pipeline’s key building
blocks, which are summarized here to support the scenario and mechanisms discussed
in the following chapters.
A DAPM pipeline is composed of two core elements: Processing Elements (PEs) and
Channels. Processing elements represent individual steps that execute operations such
as data generation, transformation, or storage. They are connected via unidirectional
channels that transmit messages from one step to the next, as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The simplest possible pipeline containing two processing elements connected
by one channel.
12
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.2: Symbols used to represent components. (adapted from [28])
Each processing element can be classified as a Source, Operator, or Sink which together
form a pipeline. 4.3:
• A Source initiates the data stream, typically retrieving data from external systems
(e.g., APIs).
• An Operator processes incoming messages using a specified algorithm, such as
filtering, mining, or merging.
• A Sink acts as a final destination of the data within the pipeline. It may pass data to
external systems, e.g. storing results in a database.
Figure 4.3: A pipeline with three processing elements
4.2
Stages of the Pipeline Lifecycle
The DAPM pipeline follows a structured life cycle that governs how a pipeline is defined,
authorized, and executed. As conceptualized by all DAPM groups.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.4: Pipeline life cycle stages. (adapted from [28])
The life cycle consists of three key stages:
• Assembly: In this stage, a user composes the pipeline by selecting and connecting
Processing Element Templates (PETemplates) into a valid structure using channels.
PETemplates are resources, reusable design­time representations (e.g., name, de­
scription, input/output types) provided by organizations without including the actual
algorithm or implementation. During assembly, a user can view their own organi­
zation’s PETemplates and any external ones explicitly made visible to their organi­
zation. The rules governing such visibility are discussed in Chapter 5. This stage
defines the pipeline’s intended behavior and its organizational dependencies. Vali­
dation of structural correctness is out of scope for this thesis and was addressed in
the concurrent work by Becke and Klaassen [28].
• Configuration: Once assembled and validated, the pipeline enters a configuration
phase during which the user must obtain permission to use each referenced pro­
cessing element. This stage becomes particularly important when the pipeline in­
cludes external components, as access decisions must respect each organization’s
autonomy and policy. Execution can only proceed once all required approvals are
granted. The detailed mechanics of access control and configuration, including role­
based authorization and cross­organizational coordination, are explored thoroughly
in Chapters 6 and 7.
• Execution: After successful configuration, the pipeline can be executed by autho­
rized users. Data flows through the pipeline according to its defined structure. While
execution involves runtime processing, monitoring, and potential termination due to
system constraints (e.g., revoked permissions), the implementation of this phase is
outside the scope of this thesis.
This structured life cycle helps ensure a clear separation of responsibilities over cross­
organizational collaboration.
4.3
Scenario: Cross­Organizational Collaboration
To ground the discussion in a realistic setting, we present a fictional but representative
example involving two academic institutions. The scenario reflects the types of collab­
oration and trust­related concerns that emerge when building process mining pipelines
across organizational boundaries.
14
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:23==
A group of researchers at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) are developing
a streaming process mining pipeline that ingests live data from a public source, such
as Wikipedia’s event stream. Their goal is to analyze user behavior as it happens
and extract behavioral insights in near real time. Instead of working with complete
logs, the system continuously processes incoming events and updates its analysis
based on the latest data. DTU is responsible for building the overall pipeline using
locally available components.
However, one key element is missing: a discovery operator capable of transforming
filtered event data into behavioral models on the fly. This operator is developed and
maintained by the IT University of Copenhagen (ITU). While ITU permits reuse of the
operator under certain conditions, DTU must first submit an access request, which
must be approved by ITU before the operator can be incorporated into any pipeline
configuration.
Meanwhile, DTU’s internal research team includes users with varying responsibilities.
Some are involved in administrative tasks, such as managing research resources or
overseeing access policies. Others are engaged in process mining projects, includ­
ing designing pipelines and analyzing data as it flows through those pipelines.
This setup introduces a twofold challenge: enforcing internal access control within DTU
and securely coordinating access to partner­owned components across organizational
boundaries.
To visually illustrate this pipeline scenario, Figure 4.5 shows a simplified example where
DTU owns the data source and sink, and the discovery component is hosted by ITU. The
pipeline spans both institutions, with data flowing from DTU to ITU and back.
Figure 4.5: Cross­organizational pipeline between DTU and ITU.
4.4
Security Implications in the Lifecycle
Although the pipeline lifecycle appears straightforward, comprising assembly, configu­
ration, and execution, it introduces significant security considerations, especially when
applied across organizational boundaries. In DAPM, where there is no central authority
and each party controls its own infrastructure, collaboration must be carefully managed
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
15
==PAGE:24==
to ensure safety, trust, and accountability.
In information security, four principles form the foundation of secure system design: con­
fidentiality, integrity, authentication, and authorization. These principles are commonly
referenced in international standards such as ISO/IEC 27001 and are crucial for protect­
ing data and regulating access in distributed settings [29]. When applied to the pipeline
lifecycle in DAPM, especially in cross­organizational scenarios, each of these principles
surfaces in distinct ways:
Confidentiality: Organizations may expose sensitive algorithms, configuration settings,
or live process data when contributing resources to a pipeline. For example, ITU might
permit the use of a proprietary discovery operator but choose not to reveal its internal
workings. Without clear confidentiality guarantees, such components cannot be safely
reused.
Integrity: Tampering with pipeline structure, streaming data, or system logs, whether by
accident or through malicious intent, can compromise results and disrupt trust between
parties. For example, if the channel between DTU’s source component and ITU’s discov­
ery operator is altered or injected with incorrect data, the resulting behavioral model may
no longer reflect real user activity. This applies to the actual event data being processed,
which must remain intact to preserve the validity of the analysis.
Authentication: Since no global identity provider exists in DAPM, each organization must
validate the legitimacy of external access requests. This requires decentralized authenti­
cation mechanisms that can verify the origin and integrity of inter­organizational interac­
tions. For example, when DTU submits a request to use ITU’s discovery operator, ITU
must verify that the request is genuine and originates from a trusted DTU identity.
Authorization: Verifying identity is not sufficient, each action must also be explicitly au­
thorized based on the user’s role, the context of the project, and the ownership of the
involved resources. For example, an authenticated DTU Researcher may view internal
processing elements but lack the permissions to request access to external ones. Like­
wise, ITU administrators should only approve requests for resources they manage. More
details on the authorization model are provided in Chapter 6.
Figure 4.6 complements the discussion above by visually organizing common threats in
DAPM pipelines according to the four foundational security principles. Each item reflects
a concrete risk that may arise during the pipeline lifecycle. These threats represent realis­
tic vulnerabilities in cross­organizational settings like the DTU–ITU scenario, where data
and pipeline components are shared and each organization enforces its own roles and
permissions within independently managed infrastructure.
16
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.6: Overview of DAPM Security Goals and Related Threats
These challenges cannot be solved with informal agreements alone. DAPM must embed
security into its lifecycle through a layered design of trust policies, role­based access
control, and protected collaboration protocols.
The next chapters introduce the mechanisms that support this design. Chapter 5 presents
a conceptual trust framework that defines how organizations establish mutual confidence.
Chapter 6 introduces the access control model used to govern permissions. Chapter 7
details how these models are enforced during the pipeline configuration process.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
17
==PAGE:26==
5
Trust Framework for Collaboration
In a decentralized architecture like DAPM, technical interoperability is not enough, orga­
nizations must also trust that partners will use shared resources appropriately. This trust
cannot be assumed; it must be structured through formal mechanisms. In the absence of
a central authority, DAPM relies on a layered framework that governs how trust is estab­
lished, managed, and verified across independent entities.
This chapter introduces the three conceptual layers of that trust model. At the legal level,
contracts and agreements define responsibilities and boundaries.
At the governance
level, organizations control visibility and sharing policies for their resources. Finally, at
the technical level, a handshake protocol verifies organizational identities and filters re­
source discovery according to those policies.
These layers collectively ensure that collaboration remains secure, auditable, and scal­
able, even in the absence of central control.
5.1
Legal and Contractual Agreements
In cross­organizational systems like DAPM, trust must begin before any technical ex­
change occurs. While encryption and access control protect resources at runtime, they
must be grounded in formal agreements that define what can be shared, under which
conditions, and with what responsibilities.
These agreements are typically established at the organizational level (e.g., between DTU
and ITU) and are handled by legal or administrative representatives from each organiza­
tion. Responsibilities for ensuring compliance, such as respecting access restrictions or
adhering to data­use policies may be delegated to project­level leads who oversee actual
collaboration.
These agreements typically take the form of:
• Data­Sharing Agreements (DSA) that define the scope of collaboration, permitted
data types, and intended use [30].
• Non­Disclosure Agreements (NDA) that safeguard sensitive algorithms or internal
process data, setting clear boundaries for confidentiality.
• Service­Level Agreements (SLA) that specify availability guarantees, response
times, and accountability measures in case of breach.
This legal foundation supports the technical mechanisms that follow. It ensures that or­
ganizational collaboration is bounded, auditable, and legally enforceable, even before a
single token or resource is exchanged.
5.2
Governance Layer and Visibility Control
While legal contracts provide a foundational basis for trust, day­to­day control over cross­
organizational collaboration in DAPM is governed by policy­level mechanisms. These
mechanisms define what each partner can see and do, ensuring that collaboration re­
mains auditable, controlled, and aligned with prior agreements. This includes maintaining
audit trails, to track who accessed what, and provenance information to trace the origin
of shared components or data.
18
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:27==
A central element of this governance layer is visibility control, which refers to the ability of
an organization to selectively expose specific Processing Element Templates to external
partners. Visibility is not global; it is configured on a per­template basis and scoped to
designated organizations. This design enables manageable, scalable collaboration while
avoiding the complexity of per­project or per­user policy management. For example, ITU
may choose to expose a PETemplate such as discover_pe only to DTU, allowing selective
sharing while maintaining organizational autonomy.
Importantly, visibility only affects whether a PETemplate appears in the partner organiza­
tion’s design interface. Instantiating and executing a processing element in a pipeline still
requires formal access approval, discussed in Chapter 7.
While our current model allows any administrator to manage visibility, more granular gov­
ernance roles could be introduced in future iterations. For instance, roles like visibility
manager or audit officer could be responsible for managing which resources are shared,
maintaining visibility logs, and ensuring compliance with organizational policies. These
governance roles and how they fit into the broader access control model are discussed in
further detail in Chapter 6.
Together, visibility control and organization­level governance form the second layer of the
trust framework. They enable transparent, selective, and scalable collaboration across
partners without requiring centralized control or constant negotiation.
5.3
Handshake
Once legal agreements and governance rules are in place, DAPM must establish trust at
runtime between participating organizations. This process, referred to as the handshake,
ensures that only verified partners can access shared resources and that their access
aligns with agreed visibility and governance policies.
The handshake enables two organizations, such as DTU and ITU, to establish mutual
trust in an automated way. When a DTU user begins designing a pipeline and attempts
to discover Processing Elements Templates from ITU, the platform triggers a behind­the­
scenes trust verification. DTU proves its organizational identity by including an identity
token issued by its DAPM service, and ITU responds with a list of visible resources fil­
tered according to the current visibility policy. Although the handshake operates at the
organizational level, it is ultimately triggered by a specific user, whose role and project de­
termine whether initiating the handshake is permitted under local access control policies.
This is a synchronous exchange, ensuring that visibility information is received immedi­
ately before pipeline design continues. The process is secure and limited in scope: no
sensitive internal data is exposed, and no user credentials are directly transmitted. The
handshake only allows eligible users from verified organizations to discover templates
that have been explicitly made visible. Actual usage of these resources still requires a
separate access request and approval, as detailed in Chapter 7.
Figure 8.3 illustrates this process at a high level, with DTU and ITU each acting as full
organizational peers. The underlying implementation involves DAPM services, which ex­
change signed requests and responses to verify trust. Full technical details appear in
Chapter 8.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.1: DAPM Organizational Handshake for PETemplates Discovery
This runtime mechanism forms the technical layer of the trust framework, reinforcing gov­
ernance decisions and enabling decentralized but verifiable collaboration across indepen­
dent organizations.
5.4
Summary
This chapter outlined the three conceptual layers that form the foundation of trust in DAPM
collaborations: legal agreements that define responsibilities, governance policies that reg­
ulate resource visibility, and technical handshakes that verify organizational identity and
enforce visibility policies at runtime. Together, these layers enable decentralized collabo­
ration while ensuring that trust is explicit, enforceable, and verifiable. With this foundation
in place, we now turn to how access is formally modeled and enforced through structured
roles and permissions in the access control model (Chapter 7).
20
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:29==
6
Access Control Model
Access control determines who can perform which actions on which resources, and un­
der what conditions. In DAPM, a decentralized, multi­organizational system for process
mining, it governs how organizations and users collaborate on shared assets such as
pipelines and processing elements, while preserving autonomy and security boundaries.
Unlike traditional systems with centralized control, DAPM involves multiple independent
organizations, each with their own users, policies, and sensitive resources. Access con­
trol must therefore be enforced locally within organizations and carefully coordinated
across organizational lines. The goal is to enable secure, flexible collaboration without
compromising ownership or overexposing internal assets.
This chapter introduces the conceptual access control model used in our DAPM imple­
mentation. It defines the core entities and relationships that support both internal en­
forcement and controlled cross­organizational sharing. Access rights are structured using
Role­Based Access Control (RBAC), grounded in domain­relevant roles and permissions.
Cross­organizational collaboration builds on scoped visibility (introduced in the previous
chapter) and is enforced through explicit access requests. These concepts are illustrated
through a running example in the next section.
6.1
Conceptual Access Control Model
This section presents the conceptual access control model that supports secure collabo­
ration within and across organizational boundaries in DAPM. It defines the core entities
and relationships used to enforce permissions at both the organizational and project lev­
els. While most enforcement occurs locally within a single organization, the model also
supports controlled cross­organizational collaboration through mechanisms such as ac­
cess requests.
By distinguishing between static organizational roles (e.g., administrative responsibilities)
and dynamic project roles that reflect collaborative tasks in pipeline development, the
model enables flexible yet controlled access to resources. This conceptual foundation
supports fine­grained authorization while maintaining scalability, modularity, and trust­
worthy coordination. The key entities and their relationships are illustrated later in this
section (Figure 6.3).
To ground the model in a concrete scenario, we now revisit the Wikipedia pipeline project
introduced in Chapter 4. The following example demonstrates how organizational roles,
project roles, visibility rules, and access requests interact in practice across DTU and ITU.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
21
==PAGE:30==
Running Example
At Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU), Anna, an organizational administrator, sets
up a new research project called stream_insights, aiming to analyze live behavioral
patterns from Wikipedia event data. She registers two users, Alice and Bob, and
assigns Alice the role of Leader and Bob the role of Researcher within the project.
During pipeline design, the team uses Processing Element Templates (PETem­
plates), which include both internal DTU components and externally shared tem­
plates exposed by partner organizations through visibility settings.
In this case, Alice assembles a pipeline that incorporates discover_pe, an external
PETemplate owned by the IT University of Copenhagen (ITU). Although the template
appears in her design interface due to ITU’s visibility configuration, she is not yet
authorized to use it.
Once the pipeline is assembled, it enters the configuration phase. At this stage, Al­
ice’s project­level permissions are checked. Since discover_pe is externally owned,
she must initiate an access request. Only administrators from ITU, such as Charlie,
can approve this request. Once approved, the pipeline is authorized and ready for
execution.
This example shows how organizational roles (e.g., Anna’s admin role) and project­level
roles (e.g., Alice’s Leader role) interact to enforce fine­grained access control in both
internal and cross­organizational scenarios.
Figure 6.1 illustrates the internal administrative flow within an organization. In this case,
an admin at DTU creates the project stream_insights and assigns project roles to in­
ternal users. Figure 6.2 visualizes the pipeline design and configuration phase within the
project. Here, Alice assembles a pipeline using PETemplates. When including the ex­
ternal discover_pe from ITU, an access request must be issued and approved by ITU’s
admin before the pipeline can proceed.
Figure 6.1: Creating a project and assigning roles in DTU
22
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:31==
Figure 6.2: Designing a pipeline and requesting access for external PETemplate
6.1.1
Diagram Overview
Figure 6.3 illustrates the full access control model used in DAPM. It captures the relation­
ships between users, roles, permissions, projects, pipelines, and cross­organizational
access requests.
Each of these entities and their interactions will be explained in the following subsections
Figure 6.3: Access Control Diagram
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
23
==PAGE:32==
6.1.2
Organization­Level Entities
Organization
An organization in DAPM represents an independent entity, such as an educational insti­
tution or company, that participates in the distributed architecture. Each organization acts
as both an administrative and collaborative unit: it owns its local users, manages internal
resources like processing element templates, and enforces access policies independently
from other organizations.
DAPM is fundamentally decentralized, with no global authority managing collaboration or
access control. Organizations therefore play a central role as trust anchors and policy
enforcers. Their interactions with other organizations are based on mutual agreements,
not on hierarchy.
Each organization also maintains its own internal role system and decides which users
can perform what actions at the organizational level. In the case study introduced earlier,
organizations such as Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU) or ITU would each operate
as independent peers in the DAPM platform.
User
A user is a physical person who interacts with the DAPM platform through their associated
organization. All users must be registered under a specific organization; standalone users
are not supported in our model. This design simplifies access control enforcement and
ensures that trust relationships are always scoped to known organizational contexts.
Users perform various actions such as creating projects, designing pipelines, or initiating
access requests. Each user has one organizational role (explained next under Organi­
zational Roles) and may additionally participate in multiple projects through project­level
roles. In our example scenario, Alice, Bob, and Charlie are users working at different
organizations and collaborating on a shared process mining pipeline.
Organizational Roles and Permissions
Organizational roles (OrgRoles) define what a user is allowed to do at the organization
level. In our current model, we define two static roles:
Admin: has broad administrative privileges such as registering users, creating projects,
and assigning roles.
Member: has limited permissions, typically restricted to reading internal resources such
as Processing Element Templates and exploring external ones that have been made visi­
ble by partner organizations. Other types of resources may exist but fall outside the scope
of this thesis
Permissions are expressed in domain­specific terms that reflect the DAPM context (e.g.,
CREATE_PROJECT, READ_RESOURCE, MANAGE_VISIBILITY), rather than generic actions. Each
OrgRole is mapped to one or more OrgPermissions, forming the core of the role­based
access control policy at this level.
OrgRole
OrgPermission
Admin
CREATE_PROJECT, ASSIGN_ROLE, DELETE_PROJECT
Member
READ_PETEMPLATE
Table 6.1: Roles and Permissions
24
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:33==
6.1.3
Project­Level Entities
Project
A project in DAPM represents a collaborative unit within an organization, focused on the
design and execution of a specific process mining pipeline. Each project is owned by a
single organization and contains a set of users assigned with specific roles.
The original design considered supporting federated projects, where users from multiple
organizations could collaborate within the same project context. However, due to time
constraints and the complexity of managing identity federation, trust relationships, and
cross­domain policy enforcement, the current implementation adopts a simplified model:
projects are strictly internal, and only users from the owning organization can participate
directly.
Cross­organizational collaboration is still supported through access­controlled sharing of
Processing Element Templates and the use of explicit access requests.
Projects remain the context in which pipelines are organized, permissions are scoped,
and access is enforced. A user may participate in multiple internal projects, each with a
different role and level of access.
Project Roles and Role Assignments
Each project defines a set of project roles (e.g., Leader, Researcher), which through their
associated permissions determine what users are allowed to do within that context. These
roles act as flexible labels and do not carry fixed behavior on their own; instead, they are
mapped to project­specific permissions. Role assignments are made dynamically per
project. While the full set of roles is initialized centrally within the organization, each
project selects only the ones it needs via a dedicated endpoint, ensuring reuse across the
organization while preserving project­level flexibility.
The UserRoleAssignment entity links a user to a project and a project role. This enables
fine­grained access within each project, independent of the user’s organization­level role.
Username
Project Name
Project Role
Alice
stream_insights
Leader
Bob
stream_insights
Researcher
Table 6.2: Project User Roles
Project Permissions
Project­level roles are mapped to specific ProjectPermissions, which are domain­specific
actions related to pipeline configuration and collaboration. These include actions such
as CONFIGURE_PIPELINE, CREATE_PIPELINE, or ASSIGN_PROJECT_ROLES. While a common
set of permissions is predefined, the system design allows for introducing new ones with­
out modifying the access control model. Permissions are not bound to specific resources,
but rather scoped at the project level.
This model supports flexibility: multiple roles can share the same permissions, and a
single permission can be linked to multiple roles across projects.
Project Name
Project Role
Project Permission
stream_insights
Leader
CONFIGURE_PIPELINE
stream_insights
Researcher
CREATE_PIPELINE
Table 6.3: Project Roles and Permissions
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
25
==PAGE:34==
Processing Element Templates
Processing Element Templates (PETemplates) are reusable computational blueprints used
during pipeline assembly. Each template defines expected inputs, outputs, and behavior,
and is owned by an organization.
In our model, PETemplates are resources that can be referenced in multiple pipelines and
across different projects. Their use is subject to access control: internal templates can
be configured directly by authorized project users, while external templates may require
an access request.
Pipeline
A pipeline in DAPM is a composition of processing elements and communication channels
that defines a complete process mining workflow. Each pipeline is created within the
context of a specific project and is governed by project­level roles and permissions.
Pipelines are core entities: they are owned by an organization, created by a user, and
managed through defined access rights. For example, users with the CONFIGURE_PIPELINE
permission can prepare and adjust the pipeline for execution, while others may have re­
stricted access.
Pipelines may contain both local and partner­owned processing elements. The inclu­
sion of external Processing Element Templates requires additional authorization, enforced
through the access request mechanism.
Once a pipeline is configured and ready to be executed, the system supports assigning
it a dedicated execution role (e.g., PipelineExecutionRole). While this mechanism was
implemented, it is not included in the conceptual model (Figure 6.3) because the work on
securing pipeline execution was scoped out by the other DAPM team. This leaves room
for future work to decide whether to use separate execution roles or have pipelines inherit
the permissions of the triggering user. One benefit of the role­based approach is that
pipelines can operate independently of user sessions, enabling more robust automation.
Access Request
Access requests represent the mechanism for negotiating cross­organizational resource
usage in the DAPM ecosystem. When a project involves processing elements (PETem­
plates) owned by external partner organizations, direct access is not permitted by default;
an explicit request must be made to obtain authorization.
Each access request formally captures the intent to use an external resource, the identity
of the requesting user and organization, the context in which the resource is to be used,
namely within a specific pipeline that is part of a project. Once approved, the resource
becomes accessible to authorized users within the requesting project, depending on their
assigned roles and permissions.
Conceptually, access requests establish a trust boundary and ensure that usage deci­
sions remain under the control of the owning organization. This provides a controlled and
auditable way to share resources across organizational boundaries.
More technical details and lifecycle handling of access requests are described in the fol­
lowing chapters.
6.2
Role­Based Access Control Strategy
To support secure and scalable collaboration across multiple organizations, our access
control model adopts a Role­Based Access Control (RBAC) strategy. Instead of assigning
26
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:35==
permissions directly to individual users, RBAC introduces a layer of abstraction where
roles serve as intermediaries between users and permissions. Users are granted roles,
and roles are associated with domain­specific permissions.
This abstraction provides three key benefits in the DAPM context:
• Simplified Management: Roles group related permissions into meaningful units,
making it easier for administrators to assign responsibilities without micromanaging
individual privileges. For example, at DTU, Anna assigns Alice the Leader role and
Bob the Researcher role without configuring each permission individually.
• Flexibility Across Levels: By applying RBAC at both the organization level (with
static roles like Admin and Member) and the project level (with dynamic roles like
Leader or Researcher), the model separates global administrative control from project­
specific collaboration. This allows each level to define its own scope of authority
while working together in a coordinated way.
• Delegation and Scalability: Project­level roles enable distributed control by al­
lowing responsibilities to be delegated from organizational administrators to trusted
project members. For example, a user with the Leader role can assign roles to
others in the same project, reducing administrative bottlenecks while preserving se­
curity boundaries.
While more expressive models like Attribute­Based Access Control (ABAC) allow for poli­
cies based on conditions such as time, resource attributes, or user metadata, they often
increase complexity and overhead. For our goals in DAPM, RBAC provides a practical
balance: it is expressive enough to capture necessary access logic and simple enough
to implement and reason about.
The result is a clear, maintainable, and extensible strategy that aligns with DAPM’s de­
centralized architecture and the domain­specific workflows it supports. Nevertheless, the
architecture remains open to future extension with attribute­based policies if the need
arises. Chapter 8 details how this RBAC model is implemented and enforced in practice.
6.3
Summary
This chapter introduced the conceptual access control model adopted in DAPM, built
on a Role­Based Access Control (RBAC) foundation. The model distinguishes between
organizational­level access for broad administrative operations and project­level access
for fine­grained collaboration on process mining pipelines. Roles at both levels connect
users, organizations, projects, and key resources such as pipelines and processing ele­
ment templates. Mechanisms like access requests and scoped visibility further support
secure, cross­organizational collaboration.
The next chapter builds on this foundation by detailing how these rules are enforced during
pipeline configuration phase.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
27
==PAGE:36==
7
Pipeline Configuration Phase
After a pipeline is assembled, the configuration phase ensures that all security, access,
and policy requirements are satisfied before execution begins. This phase is especially
important when pipelines span organizational boundaries and include components not
owned by the configuring organization. This chapter explains how authorization is en­
forced during configuration, including internal permission checks and the access request
process used to authorize external PETemplates.
7.1
Internal Configuration Checks
Configuration begins by verifying that the user attempting to configure a pipeline is au­
thorized to do so. Specifically, the system checks whether the user is assigned to the
relevant project and holds a role that permits configuration actions. These checks rely on
the role­based access control (RBAC) model introduced in Chapter 6.
If we revisit the running example from that chapter: in the stream_insights project, Alice
is assigned the Leader role. According to the project’s RBAC mapping, this role grants
the CONFIGURE_PIPELINE permission, allowing her to proceed with configuring pipelines
composed entirely of internal PETemplates available within the project.
If the user does not meet these conditions, either by lacking project membership or holding
a role without the required permission, the system stops the configuration and returns an
appropriate authorization error.
After internal validation, the pipeline is further inspected to determine whether it includes
any external PETemplates. If so, an additional authorization phase is triggered to coordi­
nate approval across organizational boundaries.
The technical realization of these permission checks, including how roles are resolved,
how tokens are handled, and how access is verified at runtime, is described in detail in
Chapter 8.
7.2
External Access Requests
When a pipeline includes PETemplates owned by partner organizations, additional autho­
rization is required before execution. As discussed in Chapter 5, visibility alone does not
grant usage rights. Each external component must be explicitly approved by the owning
organization through a formal access request process.
This section outlines how external resources are negotiated, authorized, and integrated
during configuration, including how requests are initiated, communicated across organi­
zations, and approved.
7.2.1
Request Initiation and Structure
As part of the configuration process, the system automatically detects any PETemplates in
the pipeline that are externally owned and lack prior authorization. It presents these com­
ponents to the user along with their owning organizations. However, initiating the access
request is a manual step: only users assigned a role that grants the ACCESS_REQUEST_PE
permission are allowed to submit a request. In doing so, the user must also provide cer­
tain parameters, such as the intended duration of use or execution limits. This approach
ensures flexibility while preventing unauthorized or excessive access requests.
28
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:37==
Each access request includes the following fields:
• The identifier of the PETemplate being requested
• The identity of the requesting user and organization
• Contextual information: target pipeline
• Usage constraints (e.g., number of executions, expiration)
• A signed identity token
• a callback URL (webhook) for receiving asynchronous responses
The identity token is implemented as a signed JWT, which serves as a digital signature
asserting the requester’s identity and organizational affiliation. This enables the receiving
organization to validate the authenticity and integrity of the request without relying on
an active session. Technical details on token generation, structure, and validation are
provided in Chapter 8.
7.2.2
Asynchronous Communication and Webhook Notifications
Once the access request is submitted, it is delivered to the owner organization’s peer API.
Because approvals require manual review by an administrator, responses are handled
asynchronously. The requester is notified of the outcome through a webhook URL, which
is provided as part of the request.
The webhook callback includes the request ID, the final status (e.g., APPROVED or REJECTED),
and associated metadata such as the final decision and relevant identifiers. While the
mechanism lays the groundwork for issuing usage tokens upon approval, the details of
such tokens are considered outside the scope of this thesis.
This mechanism avoids continuous polling and allows each organization to process re­
quests on its own schedule. In addition to webhook­based notifications, request status is
tracked locally to support traceability.
Cross­organizational communication is mediated through the respective Client and Peer
APIs of each organization, enabling secure and decoupled coordination.
Figure 7.1 illustrates the high­level flow of an external access request initiated during
pipeline configuration. It shows how a user at DTU requests access to a PETemplate
owned by ITU, and how the request is processed across organizational boundaries.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 7.1: High­level Access Request Flow for External PETemplates
7.2.3
Access Request Approval and Lifecycle States
When an access request is approved, the requester’s system updates the existing request
record to reflect its approved status. This approved record serves as the authorization for
using the external PETemplate under the conditions set by the owning organization, such
as duration or allowed number of executions.
Each access request progresses through a simple lifecycle:
Status
Description
PENDING
Request has been submitted and is awaiting a
decision by the owner organization
APPROVED
Authorized;request record stored locally.
REJECTED
Denied; the pipeline cannot proceed with this
external component.
To complement the tabular overview, Figure 7.2 visualizes the access request lifecycle as
a state machine. It also highlights optional transitions such as expiration and retry, which
are not currently implemented but supported in the design for future extensibility. These
extensions aim to prevent pipelines from remaining indefinitely in an unresolved state and
to support escalation workflows when access is denied.
30
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:39==
Figure 7.2: Access Request Lifecycle
If any required access request is rejected, configuration is blocked until an alternative
component is selected or the requester submits a new access request with updated pa­
rameters. Once all approvals are in place, the pipeline is considered fully configured and
eligible for execution.
7.3
Summary
This chapter explained how the configuration phase ensures that a pipeline is authorized
to move from design to execution. Internally, the system enforces project­level permis­
sions by verifying user roles. For externally owned components, access must be re­
quested through a structured process involving signed identity tokens, cross­organizational
API communication, and asynchronous webhook notifications. Once approved, the ac­
cess request record is updated locally to reflect its approved status. These mechanisms
ensure that cross­organizational collaboration in DAPM remains secure, auditable, and
aligned with each organization’s access policies.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
31
==PAGE:40==
8
Implementation
This chapter describes how the conceptual design introduced in earlier chapters has been
technically realized. It presents the main components and implementation decisions of
the DAPM prototype, including system architecture, trust establishment, authentication,
and role­based access control.
The full source code of the prototype, including the security-service implementation
described in this chapter, is available at: https://github.com/DAPM-Thesis/dapm-thesis/
tree/dapm-security-service
8.1
System Setup and Architecture
To support the organizational isolation principle described in Section 6.1.2, the DAPM sys­
tem is designed to run in isolated environments. Each organization runs its own instance
of the application in a dedicated Docker container. These instances operate indepen­
dently but communicate securely via peer APIs to support cross­organizational collabo­
ration.
Container­specific behavior is controlled through environment variables defined in the
docker-compose.yml file. These variables configure each instance with organization­
specific values such as database connection settings, organizational identifiers, and cryp­
tographic keys. Although both environments use the same codebase, this configuration
enables runtime isolation and organizational autonomy, which is essential for enforcing
independent security boundaries and fault isolation.
To orchestrate the full setup, Docker Compose launches containers for each organization
alongside their respective PostgreSQL databases. Figure 8.1 shows the running environ­
ment on Docker Desktop, with OrgA and OrgB operating in parallel, each backed by its
own service and persistent storage.
Figure 8.1: Docker containers for OrgA and OrgB deployed in isolated environments.
Internally, each organization maintains its own PostgreSQL database. This reflects the
conceptual model introduced in Chapter 6, ensuring strict data isolation, individual life­
cycle management, and role­based access enforcement. Figure 8.2 presents the Entity­
Relationship diagram representing the shared data model deployed independently in each
organization’s environment.
32
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:41==
Figure 8.2: Entity­Relationship Diagram used by each organization.
8.2
Trust Establishment and Handshake Mechanism
To support secure collaboration across organizations, DAPM uses a peer­to­peer hand­
shake to verify organizational trust at runtime. This is the implementation of the runtime
handshake described in Section 5.3 .
The handshake is triggered automatically during pipeline design, specifically when a user
invokes the GET /available-pe-templates endpoint. This backend call initiates a peer­
to­peer exchange to retrieve externally visible PETemplates. For example, when a user
from OrgA makes this request, OrgA’s DAPM instance sends a signed HTTP request
to OrgB’s peer API. This request includes a short­lived JWT, signed with OrgA’s private
RSA key, which asserts OrgA’s identity and contains metadata such as issuance time and
intended use for initiating the handshake.
1 {
2
"header": {
3
"alg": "RS256"
4
},
5
"payload": {
6
"iss": "OrgA",
7
"sub": "handshake",
8
"iat": 1753441829,
9
"exp": 1753442129
10
}
11 }
Listing 8.1: Decoded JWT header and payload used in the handshake from OrgA
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
33
==PAGE:42==
Upon receiving the request, OrgB verifies the signature using OrgA’s preconfigured pub­
lic key. If the token is valid and OrgA is authorized to view certain templates based on
existing visibility rules, OrgB responds synchronously with a filtered list of visible Process­
ing Element Templates. This exchange enables seamless pipeline design while ensuring
organizational access control is enforced.
This exchange is strictly organizational in scope. The handshake does not expose user
credentials or sensitive internal data. While the initiating action originates from a user, the
trust is established between organizations. Figure 8.3 illustrates the overall flow of this
process.
Figure 8.3: Peer­to­peer handshake mechanism for secure discovery across organiza­
tions.
After successful verification, the responding organization signs its own token and returns
it alongside the resource list. The initiating peer verifies this second token and caches the
result locally for future use, avoiding repeated handshake calls until keys are rotated or
visibility settings change.
Each DAPM instance manages its own cryptographic key pair. Private keys are used to
sign outgoing handshake tokens, while the corresponding public keys are used to verify in­
coming requests from peer organizations. These keys are currently stored in .properties
files as part of the development configuration. However, in production environments, se­
cure secret management tools such as Vault or Kubernetes Secrets should be used to
34
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:43==
store keys safely, and periodic rotation should be enforced.
The following configuration snippet shows how OrgA loads its own private key and the
public keys of trusted peers from the application.properties file:
1
org.security.key -algorithm=RSA
2
org.keys.OrgA= -----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----...
3
org.keys.OrgB= -----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----...
4
org.private -key=-----BEGIN PRIVATE KEY-----...
Listing 8.2: Sample cryptographic key configuration for OrgA
This decentralized key setup eliminates the need for a centralized certificate authority, but
places full responsibility for secure key distribution on each organization.
8.3
Authentication and User Account Management
DAPM employs a stateless authentication model based on JSON Web Tokens (JWT),
where each request must include a valid, signed token to access protected endpoints.
This model eliminates the need for server­side session tracking and simplifies scalability
across peer instances. All user accounts are scoped to their respective organizations,
and access is regulated through both organization­level and project­level roles.
The authentication mechanism is implemented via a dedicated AuthenticationController,
which exposes three core endpoints summarized in Table 8.1.
Method
Endpoint
Function
POST
/api/auth/register
Register new user
POST
/api/auth/authenticate
Login and issue JWT
POST
/api/auth/change­password
Update password
Table 8.1: Authentication endpoints exposed by the DAPM API
The /register endpoint allows authenticated administrators to register new users by
submitting a unique username, email address, password, and an organizational role (e.g.,
MEMBER, ADMIN). Passwords are sent as plain strings in the JSON request body and are
securely hashed by the backend before being stored in the database
To log in, a user submits their credentials to the /authenticate endpoint. Upon success­
ful authentication, the server issues a signed JWT containing claims such as the user’s
identity, organization affiliation, and assigned role. The token is cryptographically signed
using the HMAC SHA­256 algorithm with a secret key. This differs from peer­to­peer
tokens (e.g., handshake or access requests), which use RSA­based signing to enable
cross­organization trust.
As in other components of the system, the token must be included in the Authorization
header using the Bearer scheme. Since no frontend interface is implemented in the pro­
totype, users interact directly with the REST API. The Swagger UI provides a manual
authorization modal (Figure 8.4) where the JWT can be pasted after login. This enables
testing of protected endpoints based on the current user’s claims.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 8.4: Manual token insertion in Swagger UI after authentication.
An example decoded token payload is shown below:
1 {
2
"organizationId": "3430e05b-3b59-48c2-ae8a-22a9a9232f18",
3
"orgRole": "MEMBER",
4
"organizationName": "OrgA",
5
"sub": "Tom",
6
"iat": 1753453303,
7
"exp": 1753454743
8 }
Listing 8.3: Decoded JWT payload for authenticated user
The /change-password endpoint is accessible only to authenticated users. It enables
them to update their credentials, further supporting secure account self­management.
All other endpoints within the platform are protected using Spring Security. The /authenticate
endpoint is the only publicly accessible route; all others require a valid JWT. Access en­
forcement throughout the platform relies on claims extracted from the token and evaluated
by Spring Security at both organizational and project levels.
A complete list of REST API endpoints implemented in the DAPM prototype is provided
in Appendix A. The endpoints are grouped by controller. Each group includes a summary
table with some examples.
8.4
Role­Based Access Control (RBAC)
DAPM enforces access control at two distinct levels: organization­wide and project­specific.
These layers align with the conceptual RBAC model defined in Chapter 6 and are re­
alized through stateless JWT­based authorization and fine­grained permission mapping.
The implementation leverages Spring Security’s @PreAuthorize annotations and dynamic
authority expressions to protect API endpoints.
8.4.1
Organizational­Level RBAC
Organizational roles as defined in Section 6.1.2, determine what a user is permitted to
do across their organization, independent of any specific project. These permissions are
centrally managed in the security-service and resolved into granted authorities during
login by the CustomUserDetailsService.
When a user authenticates, their organizational role (e.g., MEMBER, ADMIN) is used to query
the OrgPermissionRepository, which maps the role to its corresponding permission set.
These permission values are then converted into Spring Security authorities so they can
36
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:45==
be enforced by Spring’s declarative access control mechanism. This conversion is neces­
sary because Spring Security enforces authorization through the concept of ”authorities”,
and checks access using annotations @PreAuthorize("hasAuthority('PERMISSION_NAME')").
For example, an ADMIN user might receive authorities such as:
CREATE_PROJECT , ASSIGN_PROJECT_ROLES
These are embedded in the user’s JWT and verified on each request. Table 8.2 summa­
rizes selected endpoints protected by organizational­level permissions.
Endpoint
Method
Required Authority
/api/projects/create
POST
CREATE_PROJECT
/api/projects/name/assign­role
PUT
ASSIGN_PROJECT_ROLES
/api/user­role­assignments/assign
POST
ASSIGN_USER_ROLE
Table 8.2: Endpoints protected by organization­level roles
Users with the MEMBER role typically receive a minimal set of permissions, such as viewing
Processes Elements Templates. These base permissions are assigned by default and
are evaluated during request handling based on the JWT claims.
8.4.2
Project­Level RBAC
Project­level RBAC, as defined in 6.1.3, enables fine­grained access control within spe­
cific projects. Unlike organizational roles, which apply system­wide, project roles are as­
signed per user per project via the UserRoleAssignment entity. This allows a user to hold
different roles across multiple projects (e.g., TECHNICIAN in Project A and RESEARCHER in
Project B), each granting distinct capabilities.
As with organizational roles, project roles are resolved into authorities during login by
the CustomUserDetailsService. It queries the user’s project­specific assignments and
associated ProjectRolePermissions, converting them into Spring Security authorities
using the pattern:
ACTION:ProjectName
This format allows the system to enforce both the permitted action and the relevant project
context in a single authority string. For example, a user assigned the TECHNICIAN role in
the GreenTech project might receive the authority CONFIGURE_PIPELINE:GreenTech
Permission checks follow two approaches, depending on how the project context is avail­
able:
• Static project­based permissions via @PreAuthorize: When the project name is
directly available in the request (e.g., via path variable), access can be controlled
using Spring Security’s expression language. For example:
1
@PreAuthorize("hasAuthority('READ_PIPELINES:GreenTech')")
This enforces that the user holds the required authority within the specified project.
• Dynamic project inference using a custom evaluator: In cases where the re­
quest references a resource (such as a pipeline) but does not explicitly include the
project name, the controller delegates access control to a custom component such
as PipelineAccessEvaluator. This component:
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
37
==PAGE:46==
– Fetches the resource (e.g., pipeline by name)
– and identifies the associated project
– Constructs the required permission (e.g., CONFIGURE_PIPELINE:GreenTech)
– Verifies the user’s authority against their JWT claims
This approach is implemented as:
1
@PreAuthorize("@pipelineAccessEvaluator.hasPermission(#
pipelineName , authentication , 'CONFIGURE_PIPELINE')")
2
public ConfigureValidationDto validatePipeline(@PathVariable
String pipelineName) {
3
...
4
}
Listing 8.4: dynamic project­level access evaluator
Selected endpoints protected by project­level permissions are summarized in Table 8.3.
Endpoint
Method
Access Control Strategy
/api/pipeline/design
POST
Dynamic evaluator on pipeline name
/api/configure­pipeline/name/validate
GET
Dynamic evaluator on pipeline name
/api/client/pipeline­processingElement/request
POST
Dynamic evaluator on request target
/api/projects/projectName/update
PUT
Static @PreAuthorize("...:projectName")
Table 8.3: Endpoints protected by project­level roles
This layered mechanism ensures users can only act within the scope of their project­
specific responsibilities, while keeping access enforcement tightly aligned with the plat­
form’s role­based access control design.
8.5
Access Request and Asynchronous Approval Flow
As introduced in Chapter 7, when a user attempts to configure a pipeline that includes a
PETemplate owned by an external organization, they must first obtain explicit permission
from the owning party. This is implemented in DAPM through an asynchronous access
request flow between peer instances.
The flow begins when a user initiates a pipeline configuration attempt that references an
external PE. This action triggers a validation process to check if the necessary access is
already granted or still pending.
This scenario is shown in Figure 8.5, which complements the running example from Chap­
ter 6: Alice from OrgA (DTU) attempts to configure a pipeline referencing pe_discovery,
owned by OrgB (ITU).
Initial Access Validation:
When a user invokes the pipeline validation endpoint, the
backend method validatePipelineAccess(pipelineId) checks whether the user has
permission to invoke each referenced PE. If a PE is owned by the local organization and
the user’s role is valid, access is granted. Otherwise, access is denied.
In the case of an external PE with no preapproved access, the system detects the missing
permission and responds with a structured JSON error:
38
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:47==
1 {
2
"status": "INVALID",
3
"missingPermissions": [
4
{
5
"templateName": "pe_discovery",
6
"organizationName": "OrgB"
7
}
8
]
9 }
Listing 8.5: Permission validation failure
Figure 8.5: Implementation­level sequence for pipeline configuration and access check
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
39
==PAGE:48==
Submitting the Access Request :
Upon receiving the INVALID response, the user
sends a POST request to /api/client/pipeline-processingElement/request with the
missing PE details, pipeline name, and a callback webhook URL for receiving future up­
dates:
1 {
2
"processingElement": "pe_discovery",
3
"pipelineName": "test",
4
"requestedExecutionCount": 5,
5
"requestedDurationHours": 24,
6
"webhookUrl": "http://orga:8080/api/client/pipeline -
processingElement/webhook"
7 }
Listing 8.6: Access request payload
Internally, the system enriches this request with an embedded identity token. This token
is a signed JWT generated internally and scoped to the requesting user and organization.
It is appended to the request payload before being forwarded to the peer system:
1 {
2
"sub": "alice",
3
"organizationName": "OrgA",
4
"iat": 1721993023,
5
"exp": 1722083023
6 }
Listing 8.7: Token payload example
Although DAPM uses JWTs across different flows, each token type carries only the claims
required for its specific function and is signed using an appropriate algorithm to reflect its
trust boundary.
Figure 8.6 illustrates how the access request is submitted, enriched with a token, and
forwarded to the peer organization, where it is validated and stored for review.
Figure 8.6: Implementation­level flow of access request submission and token verification
.
40
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:49==
Processing at the Receiving Organization :
ITU receives the request at its peer con­
troller endpoint. It verifies the JWT token using its local public key, ensuring that the
token was indeed issued by OrgA (DTU). If the token is valid, the request is stored lo­
cally in OrgB’s DAPM Database with a PENDING status, awaiting administrative review. A
minimal acknowledgment is returned to DTU:
1 {
2
"requestId": "47919073-d69c-472f-8557-bbbe63a079bd",
3
"requestStatus": "PENDING"
4 }
Listing 8.8: Acknowledgment from ITU
Approval and Webhook Notification :
An administrator at ITU reviews pending re­
quests. Upon approval, the admin can apply constraints such as duration and allowed
execution count.These constraints correspond to the parameters provided in the access
request structure described in Chapter 7. Once approved, a signed webhook message is
posted back to DTU’s callback URL to notify them of the result:
1 {
2
"requestId": "47919073-d69c-472f-8557-bbbe63a079bd",
3
"requestStatus": "APPROVED"
4 }
Listing 8.9: Updated Status after reviewing
Although the current implementation leaves the token field empty, the architecture sup­
ports embedding an access token in the webhook response. This token could later be
used during pipeline execution to prove access authorization for protected PEs.
Controller Overview :
The access request flow is implemented across three main con­
trollers (detailed in Appendix A):
• PipelineProcessingElementRequestClientController at OrgA(DTU); initiates ac­
cess requests and receives webhook responses.
• PipelineProcessingElementPeerController at OrgB(ITU); handles inbound peer
requests and stores them after token validation.
• PEResponseController; provides admin endpoints at OrgB(ITU) for reviewing and
either approving or rejecting requests.
This decentralized approval mechanism aligns with DAPM’s multiorganizational architec­
ture, enabling secure collaboration without shared infrastructure or polling overhead.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
41
==PAGE:50==
9
Evaluation and Outcomes
This chapter evaluates the DAPM prototype to determine how effectively it realizes the
design principles and security goals introduced in earlier chapters. It focuses on key
areas such as architectural integrity, enforcement of access control policies, support for
cross­organizational collaboration, and resilience against common security threats.
Each section examines whether the implementation aligns with its intended design, iden­
tifies any limitations encountered during testing, and reflects on how these outcomes con­
tribute to the system’s intended purpose.
9.1
Architecture in Action: Trust and Access Enforcement
The following subsections assess three core aspects of the system’s architecture: trust
establishment, permission enforcement, and cross­organizational approval handling.
9.1.1
Trust Establishment and Organizational Handshake
The implemented trust mechanism enables mutual authentication between organizations
via a peer­to­peer handshake protocol. This is triggered during pipeline design, specifi­
cally when a user invokes the GET /available-pe-templates endpoint to list available
internal and external PETemplates.
The system generates a short­lived JWT, signed
with the initiating peer’s private RSA key, which the receiving instance verifies using the
sender’s public key. If valid, it responds with a signed list of visible resources. Both peers
cache tokens for efficiency, completing a symmetric, stateless trust handshake.
This mechanism meets the goals outlined in Chapter 5: it avoids centralized trust anchors,
relies solely on local key configurations, and scopes trust at the organizational level. From
a verification perspective, the implementation behaves as intended: token exchange and
validation follow the defined specification, and access is correctly filtered by local policy.
From a performance and design perspective, the decision to implement the handshake as
a synchronous request was well­suited to the task. Unlike other federated systems that
choose to use asynchronous patterns to accommodate long­running workflows or registry
synchronizations, DAPM’s handshake simply validates a JWT and queries a filtered list of
templates which are both lightweight operations. As a result, the full round­trip completes
in a matter of milliseconds. Figure 9.1 shows a real trace from Swagger, where the request
was completed in 163 ms. This confirms that a synchronous model using a standard
HTTP 200 response is sufficient and avoids unnecessary architectural complexity.
Figure 9.1: Example response time for the GET /available-pe-templates endpoint.
However, some limitations persist. Token expiration is supported via short­lived JWTs,
but revocation mechanisms (e.g., blacklisting) are not implemented, which could impact
long­term trust agility. In addition, static key configurations may limit scalability or dynamic
onboarding in larger networks. Despite these constraints, the mechanism successfully
enforces organizational trust boundaries and enables secure, efficient resource discovery
across peers, confirming its suitability for DAPM’s decentralized architecture.
42
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:51==
9.1.2
Enforcing Role­Based Permission
Access control in DAPM was evaluated based on the conceptual RBAC model introduced
in Chapter 6 and its technical realization in Chapter 8. The evaluation considers whether
permissions were correctly enforced across both organizational and project levels and
whether the model supports decentralized collaboration in practice.
The access control mechanisms behave as intended. Organizational roles such as Admin
is mapped to permissions like CREATE_PROJECT, enforced using Spring Security annota­
tions such as @PreAuthorize("hasAuthority('CREATE_PROJECT')").Project roles (e.g.,
Leader, Researcher) are included in the user’s JWT and interpreted at runtime to en­
force permissions such as CONFIGURE_PIPELINE:ProjectX. The system resolves these
permissions dynamically based on the user’s role within each project context.
This behavior was confirmed through functional testing of endpoints listed in Tables 8.2
and 8.3, where unauthorized users attempting to access restricted endpoints received
401 responses. For instance, Figure 9.2 shows a rejected configuration attempt by a
user lacking the necessary project­level permission.
Figure 9.2: Example of denied access due to insufficient project­level permissions.
The model also proved effective in supporting decentralized collaboration. Project­level
roles allowed fine­grained control over who could design or configure pipelines within a
specific organizational context. At the same time, organizational roles separated adminis­
trative tasks such as user registration. These layers help enforce security boundaries and
ensure that each user operates within a defined context. Cross­organizational scenarios,
such as referencing external PETemplates, were supported by requiring access requests,
keeping usage under the control of the owning organization.
Nevertheless, the RBAC model has some limitations. Projects are restricted to a single
organization, and external users cannot be granted project­specific roles. Permissions
are statically bound to roles, and the system lacks support for dynamic or context­aware
policies (e.g., time­based access). Furthermore, the lack of token revocation means that
users who change roles may retain outdated permissions until their token naturally ex­
pires.
Despite these limitations, the current RBAC model offers a practical and extensible foun­
dation for access control in decentralized environments. It supports scoped collaboration
and integrates cleanly with DAPM’s decentralized architecture.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
43
==PAGE:52==
9.1.3
Runtime Access Approval and Configuration Logic
Cross­organizational access in DAPM is negotiated during pipeline configuration through
explicit access requests. This mechanism ensures that Processing Elements (PEs) owned
by external organizations are only used with proper authorization. This evaluation as­
sesses whether the approval logic behaves as intended when pipelines include unautho­
rized external components, and whether it enforces access boundaries effectively.
Unauthorized usage was correctly identified during testing. When a pipeline referenced an
external PETemplate without prior approval, the backend responded with a structured error
indicating the missing permission. This response included the name of the unauthorized
PE and its owning organization. As shown in 8.5, a user from OrgA attempted to configure
a pipeline containing pe_discovery from OrgB.
After the submission and aproval of the access request by the peer organization, the user
retried the pipeline validation process. As shown in Figure 9.3, the system returned a
200 OK status and a ‘VALID‘ outcome, confirming that all permissions had been resolved.
This indicates that the pipeline was successfully configured, and that peer­level access
control was enforced as intended.
Figure 9.3: Validation response after approval where the pipeline now passes all access
checks.
While webhook notifications are supported by the architecture for asynchronous updates,
this feature was not included in the validation due to testing constraints.
The overall flow reliably upheld DAPM’s decentralized trust model. Identity tokens embed­
ded in requests ensured authenticity, and peer­to­peer communication removed the need
for centralized mediation or polling. However, the lifecycle handling 7.2 remains basic:
there is no automatic grant expiration, retry logic, or feedback for webhook failures.
Despite these limitations, the implementation successfully enforced ownership bound­
aries and enabled secure, auditable sharing of components. By requiring explicit approval
for external resources, DAPM reinforces intentional, policy­driven collaboration across or­
ganizations.
9.2
Security Coverage Across the Pipeline
This section evaluates the extent to which DAPM addresses the security threats outlined
in 4.6, which were grouped around four core principles: confidentiality, integrity, authen­
tication, and authorization.
44
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:53==
Confidentiality is preserved during cross­organizational collaboration by limiting access
to the internal logic of Processing Elements (PEs). External components are referenced
but not executed or disclosed during configuration, ensuring that organizational resources
are not exposed prematurely. Although execution is outside the scope of this thesis, the
current design prevents accidental leakage of sensitive logic or data through discovery
and configuration flows.
Integrity of the pipeline structure is enforced during configuration. Only authorized users
can assemble or submit pipelines, and any attempt to include unauthorized components
results in a validation error. Since execution is not supported, runtime data integrity was
not evaluated. However, within the configuration phase, component resolution and per­
mission validation effectively block unauthorized changes.
Authentication and trust are established through signed JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) ex­
changed during both the handshake (for discovery) and access request (for configuration).
Organizational identity is cryptographically verified, eliminating reliance on a central au­
thority. Tokens are short­lived and scoped, reducing their usefulness if intercepted. While
this limits potential misuse, stronger replay protection such as token binding or one­time­
use tokens may be needed.
Authorization is enforced through a layered role­based model that governs both internal
access and external approvals. Project­level roles determine who can configure pipelines,
while cross­organizational access requires explicit approval via asynchronous requests.
This prevents privilege escalation and ensures that component usage always reflects an
auditable, policy­based decision.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 9.4: Implemented mechanisms addressing DAPM security risks identified in Chap­
ter 4.
As illustrated in Figure 9.4, while the current implementation effectively mitigates the core
threats identified in Chapter 4, some gaps remain as clarified above. Despite these con­
straints, DAPM provides a solid foundation for secure, distributed collaboration by ad­
dressing security risks directly at each stage of the pipeline lifecycle.
46
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:55==
10
Discussion and Future Work
10.1
Reflection of Research Questions
This section reflects on the results of the thesis by answering the research questions
defined in Chapter 2.
RQ1: How can two or more organizations establish and maintain mutual trust to
securely collaborate within a distributed process mining pipeline?
DAPM conceptualizes trust as a layered construct, spanning legal agreements, gover­
nance policies, and technical protocols, as introduced in Chapter 5. While the legal and
governance layers define organizational responsibilities and visibility rules, this thesis fo­
cused primarily on implementing the technical layer, specifically, runtime identity verifica­
tion and resource discovery through a peer­to­peer handshake.
The implemented handshake mechanism demonstrates that organizational trust can be
established without relying on centralized infrastructure. Each peer generates and vali­
dates signed tokens to initiate secure communication, fulfilling the core goals of mutual au­
thentication and resource visibility. In practice, this mechanism performed reliably during
testing: token exchange and verification succeeded consistently when two organizations
interacted, and each respected its own visibility policies.
While the current solution works well in small­scale settings, its reliance on static key
configurations could limit scalability as more organizations join the network. Adding new
peers would require manual distribution of public keys, which may become error­prone in
larger ecosystems. Additionally, although the tokens include expiration logic to prevent
misuse, advanced attacks such as replay or manipulation were not fully tested in this
thesis and remain a topic for future hardening.
Nonetheless, within the defined scope, the solution effectively enables peer­to­peer trust
establishment and enforces security boundaries without centralized dependencies. This
answers RQ1 affirmatively, showing that secure collaboration can be achieved through
lightweight cryptographic protocols and organizational autonomy.
RQ2:How can access control be modeled and enforced at runtime, across and
within organizations, to ensure secure usage of pipeline components in accor­
dance with defined policies?
DAPM’s access control architecture successfully enforces fine­grained permissions through
a two­layered RBAC model, combining organizational and project­level scopes that are
interpreted dynamically at runtime.
The same enforcement logic applies across organizational boundaries. External Pro­
cessing Elements (PEs) cannot be used by default; instead, explicit approval from the
owning organization is required before a pipeline referencing them can be validated. This
approach ensures that sensitive resources remain under the full control of their owners,
even when visible to external peers. The model reliably enforced policy boundaries in
practice, ensuring external resources were only used after explicit approval
However, the model favors simplicity over flexibility. All roles and permissions are statically
defined, and there is no support for time­based or condition­aware rules. The lack of
federated project roles forces collaboration to occur through separate access requests,
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
47
==PAGE:56==
which can slow coordination. While these constraints did not undermine security, they
limited the fluidity of collaboration in more complex scenarios.
These trade­offs were acceptable within the scope of this thesis, and the current model
provides a robust foundation for decentralized authorization. Future extensions, such as
dynamic access logic or federated project roles, are discussed separately in Section 10.2,
and would help broaden the applicability of DAPM’s access control beyond its current
boundaries.
RQ3: What architectural principles and mechanisms enable secure, decentralized
coordination among peers in DAPM?
This research question shifts the focus from who has access (RQ2) or how trust is es­
tablished (RQ1) to how autonomous systems can coordinate securely without centralized
control. The DAPM architecture demonstrates that such coordination is achievable by
embracing peer independence, stateless communication, and strict policy locality.
Central to this design is a decentralized access validation mechanism: each organization
exposes its own API, independently verifies signed JWTs, and enforces its own sharing
policies. There is no shared controller, global registry, or policy broker, which avoids sin­
gle points of failure and reinforces each peer’s autonomy. Collaboration emerges through
clearly scoped interactions, where each peer responds only to signed, well­formed re­
quests and limits access to explicitly visible or approved resources. This ensures coordi­
nation remains secure, auditable, and organizationally bounded.
Visibility filtering plays a particularly important role. Even before a component can be
requested, it must first be discoverable. By selectively exposing PETemplates to trusted
peers, organizations reduce the attack surface and simplify downstream approval flows.
This mechanism reinforces decentralized governance, allowing peers to opt in to collab­
oration without sacrificing autonomy.
JWTs support this architecture by enabling stateless, verifiable communication. Because
tokens carry embedded identity and context, peers do not need to maintain session state
or consult external authorities to validate requests. This supports scalability, reduces
coordination overhead, and ensures that policy enforcement remains local.
Importantly, DAPM’s architecture treats configuration as a distinct, policy­driven phase.
Before execution even begins, the system validates all permissions, both internal and
external. This boundary between design­time validation and future execution supports
predictable, secure coordination, and aligns with the principles of least privilege and ex­
plicit delegation.
While the system does not yet support dynamic negotiation, federated project scopes, or
streaming coordination, the current architecture lays a solid foundation for these exten­
sions. As noted in Section 10.2, future iterations may explore more flexible mechanisms
without departing from the system’s decentralized core.
Overall, DAPM demonstrates that secure, decentralized coordination can be realized
through clear separation of responsibilities, local enforcement of policies, and minimal
yet robust peer interactions. These principles answer RQ3 clearly and show that com­
plex collaboration does not require centralized mediation, only well­designed architectural
boundaries and trust­aware communication.
48
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:57==
RQ4: How can the proposed trust and access control mechanisms support the
transition toward streaming process mining pipelines?
Although this thesis addressed mostly the configuration phase, several design decisions
were made with streaming execution in mind. By enforcing trust and access control en­
tirely before execution begins, the architecture aligns well with the demands of streaming
pipelines, where actions must be triggered without delay.
The use of short­lived, signed JWTs verified locally by each peer eliminates the need for
centralized validation services during execution. This allows components in a streaming
pipeline to authenticate and authorize each other on the fly, without round­trips to an
external authority. The introduction of a dedicated PipelineExecutionRole also provides
a future mechanism for controlling whether pipelines act on behalf of the initiating user or
as autonomous entities during runtime.
While streaming coordination was not implemented in the prototype, these mechanisms
already meet part of the requirement: they remove runtime bottlenecks, preserve peer au­
tonomy, and maintain policy enforcement locally. However, the absence of an execution­
phase policy model, token lifecycle management tuned for continuous operation, and
runtime negotiation protocols means that the RQ is only partially answered at present.
As noted in Section 10.2, these gaps can be addressed without altering the core trust
and access model, making the transition to secure, decentralized streaming pipelines a
natural next step.
10.2
Future Work
Scaling Trust Management and Peer Integration : Currently, organizational keys are
statically configured, and trust is established manually. As the network of peers grows,
maintaining this becomes impractical. Future versions of DAPM could publish public keys
via a JWKS endpoint (e.g., /.well-known/jwks.json) to allow automatic key discovery.
Rotating keys periodically would improve resilience, with failed signature validation trig­
gering a new handshake to re­establish trust. These steps would make trust more dy­
namic and better aligned with long­term, multi­party collaboration.
Extending Access Control to the Execution Phase : Currently, all access checks are
scoped to pipeline configuration. While execution tokens and placeholder roles (e.g.,
PipelineExecutionRole) were introduced in the codebase, full enforcement at runtime
was not in scope. Future work should explore how pipelines inherit or are assigned scoped
execution roles, allowing them to operate independently of the triggering user. This would
enable stronger automation and ensure that execution is governed by security policies,
not just those checked during configuration.
Supporting Federated Projects and Cross­Organizational Roles : Projects in the cur­
rent design are confined to a single organization, which limits collaboration in scenarios
where multiple parties contribute to the same pipeline. Future extensions could enable
federated projects, where external users are explicitly invited and assigned roles within a
shared context. This would reduce approval overhead and simplify access governance
across teams. Although some backend support was implemented for external users and
roles, this direction was paused due to time constraints and remains a promising area for
development.
Enhancing the User Interface for Access Control Management : Configuration and
access control flows are currently driven through JSON requests and backend endpoints.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
49
==PAGE:58==
To make the system accessible beyond technical users, future work could introduce a
graphical interface for user management, role assignment, and access approvals. This
would streamline collaboration and allow administrators to manage permissions without
relying on infrastructure­level interactions.
Towards Integrated Security Across the DAPM System : This thesis was part of a
larger effort to realize a fully distributed architecture for process mining. While each thesis
focused on a distinct subsystem, they remain only loosely integrated. Future work should
focus on bridging these boundaries to enable end­to­end functionality, from secure data
ingestion to runtime enforcement and monitoring. This would require harmonizing inter­
faces and establishing shared protocols for interaction between components. Only then
can DAPM realize its full vision as a cohesive platform for secure, decentralized streaming
process mining.
50
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:59==
11
Conclusion
This thesis addressed the growing need for secure, decentralized collaboration in stream­
ing process mining by designing and implementing a robust access control model within
the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM). As organizations increasingly op­
erate across boundaries and handle continuous event data, supporting real­time pipelines
without centralized control becomes a critical challenge.
A key contribution of this work lies in the design and implementation of a two­layered
access control model, enforced dynamically at runtime.
By separating organizational
and project­level permissions, and encoding these roles into signed tokens, the system
ensures that access decisions remain both secure and context­sensitive. Crucially, ac­
cess checks are delegated to individual peers, each enforcing their own policies based
on locally verified claims, establishing a practical, auditable foundation for decentralized
pipeline governance.
In addition, the architecture promotes autonomy and resilience by avoiding global reg­
istries or shared trust anchors. Collaboration is scoped, discoverable, and explicitly ap­
proved, enabling clear governance without compromising scalability. The configuration
phase was treated as a distinct boundary, where all access decisions are resolved be­
fore execution begins. This separation is especially important as DAPM evolves toward
real­time and streaming scenarios.
While execution­time enforcement and federated project support remain open areas for
development, this thesis delivers a concrete foundation for secure pipeline design across
organizations. The work demonstrates that careful architectural separation between trust,
governance, and enforcement is not only feasible but essential for building scalable, de­
centralized process mining infrastructures.
Future extensions, outlined in Chapter 10, can build directly on these foundations to en­
able runtime enforcement, federated project roles, and integrated security across the en­
tire DAPM ecosystem. In this way, the results of this thesis contribute to the broader vision
of collaborative, secure, and streaming­aware process mining pipelines.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
51
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[1]
Wil M.P. van der Aalst. Process Mining: Data Science in Action. Springer, 2016.
[2]
Wil M. van der Aalst. Process Mining: Discovery, Conformance and Enhancement
of Business Processes. Springer, 2011. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-19345-3.
[3]
Tyler Akidau, Slava Chernyak, and Reuven Lax. “Streaming systems: the what,
where, when, and how of large­scale data processing”. In: Communications of the
ACM 59.2 (2016), pp. 58–66.
[4]
Nicholas Dyhre and Sebastian Vestrup. Process Dry Lab. 2023.
[5]
Andrea Burattin, Ekkart Kindler, and Sebastian Vestrup. Process Mining Pipelines
with Controlled Sharing of Data and Algorithms. 2024.
[6]
R. S. Mans, W. M. P. van der Aalst, and R. J. B. Vanwersch. “Process mining tech­
niques: an application to stroke care”. In: Studies in Health Technology and Infor­
matics 210 (2015), pp. 573–577.
[7]
Niclas Rieke, Jochen De Weerdt, and Jan Mendling. “Improving Fraud Prediction
Using Process Mining and Deep Learning”. In: Decision Support Systems 139 (2020),
p. 113421. DOI: 10.1016/j.dss.2020.113421.
[8]
Boudewijn F. Van Dongen et al. “The ProM framework: A new era in process min­
ing tool support”. In: Applications and Theory of Petri Nets 2005. Springer, 2005,
pp. 444–454.
[9]
Alessandro Berti, Sebastiaan van Zelst, and Daniel Schuster. “PM4Py: A process
mining library for Python”. In: Software Impacts 17 (2023), p. 100556.
[10]
Wil M. P. van der Aalst, Alfredo Bolt, and Sebastiaan J. van Zelst. “RapidProM:
Mine Your Processes and Not Just Your Data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03740
(2017).
[11]
Nopparoot Kitcharoen, Nuntawat Attasena, and Vilas Wuwongse. “RapidMiner frame­
work for manufacturing data analysis on the cloud”. In: 10th International Joint Con­
ference on Computer Science and Software Engineering (JCSSE). IEEE, 2013,
pp. 149–154.
[12]
Humam Kourani, Saimon Wadhwania, and Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “PM4KNIME:
Process mining meets the KNIME analytics platform”. In: ICPM Doctoral Consor­
tium/Demo. 2022, pp. 65–69.
[13]
Michael R. Berthold et al. “KNIME — the Konstanz Information Miner: Version 2.0
and Beyond”. In: ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 11.1 (2009), pp. 26–31.
[14]
Janez Kranjc, Marko Grobelnik, and Dunja Mladenic. “ClowdFlows: Online work­
flows for distributed big data mining”. In: Future Generation Computer Systems 68
(2017), pp. 38–58.
[15]
Andrea Burattin. “Beamline: A comprehensive toolkit for research and development
of streaming process mining”. In: Software Impacts 17 (2023), p. 100551.
[16]
Nastaran Farhadi Ghalati et al. “Access Control Models”. In: ResearchGate (2021).
Available at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/356948823_Access_Control_
Models.
[17]
Ravi S. Sandhu et al. “Role­Based Access Control Models”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE Computer Society Symposium on Research in Security and Privacy. Ac­
cessed: 2025­07­28. IEEE, 1996, pp. 279–283. DOI: 10.1109/SECPRI.1996.502675.
[18]
Vincent C. Hu, David Ferraiolo, and Rick Kuhn. Guide to Attribute Based Access
Control (ABAC) Definition and Considerations. Tech. rep. NIST Special Publication
800­162. Accessed: 2025­07­28. National Institute of Standards and Technology
52
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:61==
(NIST), 2013. URL: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.
800-162.pdf.
[19]
Dejan Lukic. Revoke Access Using a JWT Blacklist. Supertokens blog. Accessed:
2025­07­15. 2024. URL: https://supertokens.com/blog/revoking-access-with-a-jwt-
blacklist.
[20]
Evan Schiff and Radu Sion. “Enhancing Kubernetes Access Control via Policy­as­
Code and Dynamic Attributes”. In: Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Intl. Conf. on
Cloud Engineering (IC2E). 2020, pp. 86–93. DOI: 10.1109/IC2E48712.2020.00020.
[21]
Syed Ameer Abbas et al. “A Hybrid Access Control Model for Smart Home Environ­
ments Based on RBAC and ABAC”. In: Applied Sciences 13.10 (2023). Accessed:
2025­07­28, p. 6070. DOI: 10.3390/app13106070.
[22]
Red Hat. Keycloak Server Administration Guide. https://www.keycloak.org/docs/
latest/server_admin/. Accessed: 2025­07­28. 2023.
[23]
Red Hat. Keycloak Authorization Services Guide. https://www.keycloak.org/docs/
latest/authorization_services/. Accessed: 2025­07­28. 2023.
[24]
Payman Mohassel and Yupeng Zhang. “SecureML: A System for Scalable Privacy­
Preserving Machine Learning”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP). Accessed: 2025­07­28. IEEE, 2017, pp. 19–38. DOI: 10.1109/SP.
2017.12.
[25]
Yao Xiao. “Distributed Architecture for Process Mining User Management and Se­
curity”. Master’s thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[26]
Alan Hevner. “A Three Cycle View of Design Science Research”. In: Scandinavian
Journal of Information Systems 19.2 (2007), p. 4.
[27]
Laurie Williams and Alistair Cockburn. “Agile software development: it’s about feed­
back and change”. In: Computer 36.6 (2003), pp. 39–43. ISSN: 0018­9162. DOI:
10.1109/MC.2003.1204373.
[28]
Christian Becke and Zou Yong Nan Klaassen. Conceptualization of the DAPM Pipeline
Architecture. Concurrent Master’s Thesis. 2025.
[29]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO/IEC 27001:2022 – Information
security, cybersecurity and privacy protection — Information security management
systems — Requirements. https://www.iso.org/standard/82875.html. Accessed:
2025­07­11. 2022.
[30]
Iubenda. Data Sharing Agreement: What You Should Know as a Business. Ac­
cessed: 2025­07­15. 2024. URL: https://www.iubenda.com/en/help/131208-data-
sharing-agreement-what-you-should-know-as-a-business.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
53
==PAGE:62==
A
API Reference
This appendix provides a structured overview of the RESTful API endpoints implemented
in the DAPM prototype. The endpoints are grouped by controller. Each section includes
a summary table listing available routes, methods, and short descriptions, along with se­
lected examples that illustrate the expected request format and response structure.
AuthenticationController
This controller handles all user authentication­related actions, including user registration,
login (token issuance), and password changes.
Method
Endpoint
Description
POST
/api/auth/register
Registers a new user (admin only)
POST
/api/auth/authenticate
Authenticates a user and returns a JWT token
POST
/api/auth/change­password
Updates the password for a logged­in user
Table A.1: Endpoints in AuthenticationController
Example: POST /api/auth/authenticate
Description: Authenticates an existing user and returns a signed JWT token.
Sample Request:
{
"username": "anna",
"password": "dapm"
}
Sample Response:
{
"token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9..."
}
Note: The user ”anna” is initialized by default and used for administrative tasks such as
registering other users.
ProjectController
This controller handles operations related to project management, including creating, up­
dating, retrieving, assigning roles to, and deleting projects.
Method
Endpoint
Description
POST
/api/projects/create
Create a new project
PUT
/api/projects/{name}/assign­role
Assign a role to a project
PUT
/api/projects/{name}/update
Update project details
GET
/api/projects
Retrieve all projects for the organization
GET
/api/projects/{name}
Retrieve a specific project’s details
DELETE
/api/projects/{name}
Delete a project by name
Table A.2: Endpoints in ProjectController
54
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:63==
Example: POST /api/projects/create
Description: Creates a new project using a unique name.
Sample Request:
{
"name": "test"
}
Sample Response:
{
"id": "edaedb9f-7827-427f-a3a1-081194d94a38",
"name": "test",
"organizationName": "OrgA",
"roles": []
}
Note: Initially, the project is created with no roles. Roles can be assigned later using the
/assign-role endpoint.
ProjectRolePermissionController
This controller manages role­based permissions at the project level. It allows assigning
specific actions (like configuring pipelines) to roles, retrieving assigned permissions, and
removing them when needed.
Method
Endpoint
Description
GET
/api/project­role­permissions
Get all permissions for a specific project
POST
/api/project­role­permissions
Assign a new permission to a role in a projec
GET
/api/project­role­permissions/role/{roleName}
Get all permissions for a specific role
DELETE
/api/project­role­permissions/{id}
Remove a permission by its ID
Table A.3: Endpoints in ProjectRolePermissionController
Example: GET /api/project­role­permissions
Description: Retrieves all role­permission mappings assigned within a project.
Query Parameter:
projectName=test
Sample Response:
[
{
"projectName": "test",
"roleName": "leader",
"action": "CONFIGURE_PIPELINE"
}
]
UserRoleAssignmentController
This controller is responsible for assigning users to specific roles within a given project.
Role assignments determine the actions a user can perform based on previously defined
project­role permissions.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
55
==PAGE:64==
Method
Endpoint
Description
POST
/api/user­role­assignments/assign
Assign a user to a specific role within a project
Table A.4: Endpoint in UserRoleAssignmentController
Example: POST /api/user­role­assignments/assign
Description: Assigns a user to a role in a given project.
Request Body:
{
"username": "test",
"role": "leader",
"project": "test"
}
Response:
{
"username": "test",
"role": "leader",
"project": "test"
}
PETemplateController
This controller manages Processing Element Templates, which represent reusable com­
putational components. These endpoints allow CRUD operations on PETemplates.
Method
Endpoint
Description
GET
/api/processingElements
List all available PETs
GET
/api/processingElements/{id}
Retrieve PET by ID
POST
/api/processingElements
Create a new PET
PUT
/api/processingElements/{id}
Update an existing PET
DELETE
/api/processingElements/{id}
Delete a PET by ID
Table A.5: Endpoints in PETemplateController
Example: GET /api/processingElements
Description: Retrieves a list of all available Processing Element Templates owned by the
organization the authenticated user belongs to.
Response:
[
{
"id": "55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555",
"templateId": "pe_filter",
"ownerOrganization": "OrgA",
"inputs": [],
"outputs": []
},
{
56
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:65==
"id": "66666666-6666-6666-6666-666666666666",
"templateId": "pe_filter",
"ownerOrganization": "OrgA",
"inputs": [],
"outputs": []
}
]
Note: he above Processing Element Templates are initialized by default for testing pur­
poses.
PipelineDesignController
This controller enables users to design computational pipelines by assembling visible Pro­
cessing Element Templates. It supports viewing available templates and creating a new
pipeline.
Method
Endpoint
Description
GET
/api/pipeline/design/available­pe­templates
Retrieve PETs visible to the organization (in­
ternal and external)
POST
/api/pipeline/design
Submit a pipeline design configuration
Table A.6: Endpoints in PipelineDesignController
Example: GET /api/pipeline/design/available­pe­templates
Description: Returns all Processing Element Templates that are visible to the current or­
ganization, including both internal templates and external templates explicitly made visible
by peer organizations.
Response:
[
{
"id": "55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555",
"templateId": "pe_filter",
"ownerOrganization": "OrgA",
"inputs": [],
"outputs": []
},
{
"id": "66666666-6666-6666-6666-666666666666",
"templateId": "pe_filter",
"ownerOrganization": "OrgA",
"inputs": [],
"outputs": []
},
{
"id": "77777777-7777-7777-7777-777777777777",
"templateId": "pe_discovery",
"ownerOrganization": "OrgB",
"inputs": ["Event"],
"outputs": ["Model"]
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
57
==PAGE:66==
}
]
ConfigurePipelineController
This controller is responsible for validating a pipeline configuration by checking if the cur­
rent user has sufficient permissions to access all Processing Elements included in a given
pipeline.
Method
Endpoint
Description
GET
/api/configure­pipeline/{pipelineName}/validate
Check if the user has permission to configure
the specified pipeline
Table A.7: Endpoint in ConfigurePipelineController
Example: GET /api/configure­pipeline/{pipelineName}/validate
Description: Checks whether the current user has the required permissions to configure
all Processing Elements used in the specified pipeline.
Path Parameter:
pipelineName = test
Sample Response:
{
"status": "INVALID",
"missingPermissions": [
{
"templateName": "pe_discovery",
"organizationName": "OrgB"
}
]
}
PipelineProcessingElementRequestClientController
This controller supports submitting access requests, tracking their status, receiving web­
hook updates, and retrieving request details.
Method
Endpoint
Description
POST
/api/client/pipeline­processingElement/request
Submit a request to access a specific PE
POST
/api/client/pipeline­processingElement/webhook
receiving URL callback
GET
/api/client/pipeline­processingElement/{id}/status
Check status of a specific PE request
GET
/api/client/pipeline­processingElement/{id}/details
Retrieve detailed access request
Table A.8: Endpoints in PipelineProcessingElementRequestClientController
Example: POST /api/client/pipeline­processingElement/request
Description: Submits a request to access a given Processing Element within a specified
pipeline. The request can include execution count and duration preferences.
Request Body:
58
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:67==
{
"processingElement": "pe_discovery",
"pipelineName": "test",
"requestedExecutionCount": 5,
"requestedDurationHours": 24
}
Sample Response:
{
"requestId": "47919073-d69c-472f-8557-bbbe63a079bd",
"requestStatus": "PENDING"
}
PEResponseController
This controller handles the approval workflow for incoming requests. It allows authorized
users to approve, reject, list, or inspect the status of incoming PE execution requests.
Method
Endpoint
Description
POST
/api/pipeline­processingElements­requests/approve
Approve a pending PE request
POST
/api/pipeline­processingElements­requests/reject
Reject a pending PE request
GET
/api/pipeline­processingElements­requests
Retrieve all PE requests
GET
/api/pipeline­processingElements­requests/{id}
View the details of a specific reques
ID
Table A.9: Endpoints in PEResponseController
Example: GET /api/pipeline­processingElements­requests
Description: Retrieves a list of incoming requests addressed to the organization. These
requests must be manually approved or rejected.
Sample Response:
[
{
"requestId": "requestID",
"processingElement": "string",
"pipelineName": "string",
"requesterUsername": "string",
"webhookUrl": "string",
"status": "PENDING"
}
]
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:69==
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
A
Heartbeat­Based
Liveness
and
Reaction
Framework
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
A Heartbeat­Based Liveness and Reaction Framework
Master Thesis
August 08, 2025
By
Raihanullah Mehran
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:72==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has knowledge in the areas of software engineering and
process mining.
Raihanullah Mehran ­ s233837
Signature
Date
08 August 2025
ii
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:73==
Abstract
This thesis designs and implements a decentralized fault­tolerance framework for the Dis­
tributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM), in which streaming pipelines span inde­
pendently managed organizations. In the baseline system, the crash of a single Process­
ing Element (PE)1 can silently propagate stale results, waste computational resources,
and erode trust.
The proposed approach embeds two components into every PE: a
HeartbeatManager and a ReactionHandler.
The HeartbeatManager executes a peer­to­peer liveness protocol by publishing and sub­
scribing to dedicated Kafka heartbeat topics; each heartbeat message is intentionally
minimal, containing only the instanceId and a timestamp. Liveness is evaluated locally
using configurable timing parameters (send interval, check interval, and timeout) with safe
defaults. Upon detecting a suspected failure, the ReactionHandler enforces a pipeline­
level policy selected at assembly time: Notify Only, Terminate Entire Pipeline, or Keep
Running Partial Pipeline (terminate only affected dependents while continuing indepen­
dent subgraphs).
Merge operators support per­input criticality—critical by default and optional when explic­
itly marked—allowing optional input loss to degrade outputs without violating correctness,
while critical input loss triggers a policy­consistent shutdown. The Pipeline Builder com­
putes heartbeat topics and subscriptions for each PE and dispatches timing and policy
parameters accordingly.
The framework is validated through a Wikipedia­style streaming scenario and an end­to­
end prototype, demonstrating timely crash detection, prevention of stale outputs, and con­
tainment strategies that reduce wasted computation while preserving the cross­organizational,
loosely coupled nature of DAPM.
Artifact availability.
Source code and materials are available at https://github.com/
DAPM-Thesis/dapm-thesis/tree/heartbeat-reaction-level2 (branch heartbeat-reaction-level2).
1Throughout this thesis, “PE” refers to a PE instance.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
iii
==PAGE:74==
Acknowledgements
I am deeply grateful to my supervisors, Professor Andrea Burattin and Professor Ekkart
Kindler, for their guidance, patience, and steady support throughout this thesis. Their
weekly meetings, sharp feedback, and thoughtful questions pushed the work in the right
direction and helped me grow as a researcher and engineer.
This work was carried out within the broader DAPM effort. I thank my collaborators and
peers for many helpful discussions and for sharing code, ideas, and time. In particular,
I am thankful to Hussein Dirani for our early joint work that later evolved into the com­
plementary access­control track, and to the rest of the DAPM team for their insights and
encouragement.
Above all, I dedicate this thesis to my dad, Dr. Nimatullah Safi, whose encouragement
and example shaped both this work and the person behind it.
iv
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:75==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Related Work
3
2.1
Foundations of Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Fault Tolerance in Distributed Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
State of the Art in Failure Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Positioning This Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Concurrent Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Problem Statement and Research Questions
9
3.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Scope and Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Research Methodology
11
4.1
Phase 1: Problem Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Phase 2: Solution Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Phase 3: Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.4
Tools and Technology Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.5
Agile Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.6
Weekly Meetings as an Agile Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5
Design of a Fault­Tolerance Mechanism
15
5.1
Purpose and Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.2
Design Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.3
The Baseline DAPM Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.4
The Wikipedia Failure Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.5
Architectural Overview of the Fault Tolerance Framework
. . . . . . . . . . 24
5.6
Design Evolution and Rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.7
Liveness Detection: The Heartbeat Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.8
Failure Reaction and Propagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.9
Observability: Notifications and Fault Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.10 Summary of Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Implementation
41
6.1
Integrating Fault Tolerance into the Processing Element . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Extending the PipelineBuilder for Fault Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.3
Implementing the HeartbeatManager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.4
Implementing the ReactionHandler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.5
Implementing the Notification Service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.6
Structured Logging & Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
v
==PAGE:76==
7
Evaluation and Outcomes
57
7.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.2
Experiment 1: Validation of LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE . . . . . . 58
7.3
Experiment 2: Validation of LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.4
Experiment 3: Validation of LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE . . . 60
7.5
Experiment 4: Validation of Optional Inputs at Merges . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8
Discussion
63
8.1
Interpretation of Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8.2
Answering the Research Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8.3
Implications and Contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
8.4
Limitations and Threats to Validity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
8.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
9
Conclusion and Future Work
65
9.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
9.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Bibliography
67
A Glossary
71
B Appendix
75
vi
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:77==
1
Introduction
Organizations increasingly rely on process mining to analyze event data and understand
how work really flows. [1]
Classical approaches mine historical logs; however, many operational decisions are time­
sensitive, shifting attention to streaming process mining, which reasons over live event
streams to surface issues as they happen. [2] [3]
For example, on a platform like Wikipedia, a streaming pipeline could flag non­compliant
edits at the moment they occur using Wikimedia’s EventStreams1 feed together with real­
time scoring services such as ORES[4].
To operationalize this, teams build data pipelines2—modular graphs that move and trans­
form data across a series of processing steps.
Standing up such pipelines across organizational boundaries is hard: beyond throughput
and correctness, there are concerns around security, privacy, and operability—hence the
rise of privacy­preserving and federated techniques (e.g., abstraction, event­log sanitiza­
tion, and secure multi­party computation). [5] [6] [7]
The Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM)[8] project addresses these con­
cerns by enabling streaming process­mining pipelines to run across organizations. Prior
work established the distributed execution substrate and demonstrated high throughput.
Yet distribution introduces a critical risk: failure. This thesis focuses on crash failures—
when a DAPM Processing Element (PE)3 abruptly and permanently stops. Even a single
crash can cause:
• Incorrect or stale results: Downstream PEs may continue without required inputs,
producing misleading outputs (e.g., an outdated process model).
• Resource waste: Healthy PEs keep computing even if no one consumes their out­
puts.
• Silent data loss: Records intended for the failed PE never reach sinks, degrading
analysis quality.
• Erosion of trust: Operators lose confidence when the system’s behavior is opaque
or unpredictable under failure.
This thesis’s work designs, implements, and evaluates a configurable fault­tolerance frame­
work for DAPM that embeds liveness detection and reaction directly inside every PE,
avoiding any central coordinator. The framework introduces:
1. Robust liveness detection via a k­consecutive­misses model. Each PE mon­
itors its neighbors and declares failure only after k consecutive verification checks
see no fresh heartbeat (default k = 3), following an initial grace period. This yields
predictable detection bounds while filtering transient jitter.
2. Policy­driven reactions with optional­input semantics. A pipeline­wide policy
selects between: notify­only, full cascading shutdown, or partial continuation. Merge
1https://wikitech.wikimedia.org/wiki/Event_Platform/EventStreams_HTTP_Service
2https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/data-pipeline
3Throughout this thesis, “PE” refers to a PE instance.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
1
==PAGE:78==
inputs can be marked optional; once declared failed they are silenced (no repeated
alerts) until recovery heartbeats arrive.
3. Operational observability. The system emits human­readable logs alongside struc­
tured JSON and low­cardinality metrics, enabling clear timelines, dashboards, and
cross­organizational alerting.
Together, these mechanisms turn PE failures from silent hazards into observable, policy­
controlled events, improving reliability and operator trust.
Report structure.
This report proceeds from context to design, then to implementation
and evaluation, and closes with discussion and future work:
• Chapter 2 provides background on DAPM and on fault tolerance / failure detection.
• Chapter 3 states the problem and research questions.
• Chapter 4 outlines the methodology for design, implementation, and evaluation.
• Chapter 5 details the conceptual design of the fault­tolerance framework.
• Chapter 6 describes the technical implementation (including the k­miss model, optional­
input silencing, and observability).
• Chapter 7 evaluates the solution under simulated failure scenarios.
• Chapter 8 discusses results and answers the research questions.
• Chapter 9 concludes and outlines directions for future work.
2
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:79==
2
Background and Related Work
This chapter provides the foundational context for the thesis. It begins by exploring the
evolution of process mining from traditional to streaming applications, establishing the
need for an architecture like DAPM. It then details the DAPM pipeline model and its core
components. With this foundation in place, the chapter introduces the principles of fault
tolerance in distributed systems, surveys the state of the art in failure detection, and con­
cludes by identifying the specific research gap in the DAPM framework that this thesis
addresses.
2.1
Foundations of Process Mining
2.1.1
From Traditional to Streaming Process Mining
Process mining analyzes digital traces of activities—known as event logs—to discover,
check conformance, and enhance process models. Traditionally, these techniques op­
erate on static, historical logs in an offline manner. However, as modern systems gen­
erate data continuously, the need for real­time process intelligence has spurred the rise
of streaming process mining (also referred to as online process mining)—methods for
capturing and analyzing events as they occur rather than from a complete log [9].
Streaming process mining enables near–real­time insights, supporting immediate discov­
ery, conformance checking, and enhancement. For instance, Burattin [2] frames stream­
ing process mining precisely as “processing a stream of data (as opposed to a finite event
log)” to extract timely and relevant process information. Furthermore, Vidgof et al. [9]
highlight that streaming scenarios bring in constraints—especially limited computational
resources and memory—that render traditional techniques infeasible, necessitating ap­
proaches like sliding windows, hybrid methods, and pre­computation.
2.1.2
Challenges in Modern Process Mining
While powerful, streaming process mining introduces significant technical and organiza­
tional challenges that must be addressed for it to be effective in real­world settings. These
challenges move beyond traditional offline analysis and require a new perspective on data,
infrastructure, and collaboration [10].
A primary set of challenges stems from the inherent nature of event streams. Unlike finite,
ordered event logs, real­world streams are often unbounded and imperfect. Algorithms
must be designed for continuous operation with constraints on memory and latency [11].
Furthermore, in distributed environments where data is aggregated from various cloud­
and on­premise systems, events frequently arrive out of order, which can invalidate the
results of conformance checking methods that expect a strict chronological sequence [12].
This is a significant departure from “streamified” event logs—static logs artificially replayed
as a stream—and reflects the reality of modern IT landscapes [10].
Data quality and retention present another major hurdle. A Delphi study involving 40 in­
ternational experts confirmed that poor data quality and complex data preparation remain
two of the most pressing challenges for process mining in organizations [13]. In a stream­
ing context, this is compounded by memory limitations. Indefinitely storing all observed
events for every ongoing case is often infeasible and inconsistent with privacy regulations
like GDPR, which mandate minimal data retention [14]. This necessity to forget old events
can lead to the “missing­prefix problem,” where future events from a forgotten case are
incorrectly treated as starting a new, non­conformant process instance [14].
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
3
==PAGE:80==
Finally, the need to collaborate across organizational boundaries—sharing proprietary
data or specialized algorithms—raises significant concerns about security, privacy, and
intellectual property. Experts identify constraining data access barriers and the lack of
interdisciplinary and cross­functional teams as major organizational challenges [13]. Es­
tablishing a framework that is not only technically robust but also secure and accessible
is therefore essential for the successful adoption of streaming process mining.
2.2
The Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM)
The DAPM project was created to provide a framework that simplifies the creation, valida­
tion, and execution of streaming process mining pipelines, particularly in cross­organizational
settings.
2.2.1
The DAPM Pipeline Model
A DAPM pipeline is conceptualized as a distributed architecture composed of two core
components: Processing Elements (PEs) and Channels.
Processing Elements (PEs).
Processing Elements represent the individual steps that
operate on the data stream. They are categorized into three types:
• Source: Initiates the data stream, often by pulling data from an external system
such as an API.
• Operator: Receives input, applies a transformation or algorithm (e.g., filtering or
mining), and produces output.
• Sink: Acts as the final destination for data within the pipeline, for example, by storing
results in a file or sending them to a visualization tool.
Channels.
Channels are unidirectional connectors that transmit messages between PEs,
enabling data to flow sequentially from one element to the next. This modular design
allows pipelines to be constructed by connecting PEs that may be hosted by different,
independent organizations—ensuring that proprietary algorithms and data remain within
their trusted boundaries.
2.3
Fault Tolerance in Distributed Systems
While distributing a pipeline architecture provides flexibility and scalability, it also intro­
duces a critical vulnerability: the potential for component failure.
2.3.1
The Nature of Failures
In fault­tolerant computing, key terms have distinct meanings:
• Fault: A defect in the system, such as a software bug or hardware issue.
• Error: The manifestation of a fault, resulting in an incorrect internal state.
• Failure: The externally observable deviation of a component from its expected be­
havior, occurring when an error propagates to the component’s interface.
Systems are designed to be fault­tolerant so that the presence of a fault does not lead to
a system failure [15]. This thesis focuses on detecting and reacting to the crash­failure
(or fail­stop) model, in which a PE instance abruptly and permanently halts its execution.
4
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:81==
2.3.2
The Goal of Fault Tolerance
Fault tolerance is the property that enables a system to continue operating correctly even
in the event of one or more component failures. The primary goal is to prevent the failure
of an individual component—such as a PE—from causing the entire system to fail, thereby
ensuring the reliability and integrity of the pipeline.
2.4
State of the Art in Failure Detection
To tolerate failures, a system must first be able to detect them. This is the role of a failure
detector.
2.4.1
Heartbeat Mechanisms
The most widely adopted pattern for implementing a failure detector is the heartbeat mech­
anism. As defined by Lee et al.[16],
“A heartbeat is a periodic signal generated by hardware or software to indicate
the liveness of the sender. In general, the sender periodically sends a heart­
beat. When the receiver does not receive a heartbeat within a given period
(timeout), the sender is determined to have failed” [16].
This pattern was chosen for the DAPM framework for several key reasons:
• Simplicity and familiarity: Heartbeating is a well­understood and widely adopted
pattern for liveness detection in distributed systems, used by major cloud providers
such as Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud.
• Decoupling: A PE broadcasting its liveness does not need to know who is monitor­
ing it, and a listener can monitor a heartbeat without needing deep insight into the
internal state of the sender. This loose coupling is essential for DAPM’s modular
design.
The relevance of heartbeat­style monitoring is continually reinforced in recent research.
In cloud computing environments, monitors regularly ping virtual machines, and a missed
heartbeat can trigger migration of jobs to a healthy machine [15]. Deng et al. (2024)
demonstrated that regularly sampled per­machine metrics—functioning as fine­grained
heartbeats—enabled their system to spot a faulty host in a large­scale GPU cluster and
trigger mitigation in just 3.6 seconds [17]. Similarly, Gandhi et al. (2024) use heartbeats
sent to a central manager to detect component failures in resilient training pipelines for
large deep neural networks [18].
2.4.2
Fault Tolerance in Existing Streaming Frameworks
Mature stream processing frameworks have well­established fault tolerance models. For
example, the Beamline framework[19]—designed for streaming process mining—is built
on Apache Flink[20] and leverages its checkpointing and distributed snapshot mecha­
nisms to ensure data is not lost and processing can resume correctly after a failure.
While these frameworks provide robust fault tolerance for tasks running within their own
ecosystem, DAPM’s cross­organizational, independently managed PEs require a custom,
application­level solution for health monitoring and coordination.
2.5
Positioning This Work
2.5.1
The Research Gap in DAPM
This thesis builds directly upon the foundational work of Becke and Klaassen, who suc­
cessfully conceptualized and implemented the execution of high­throughput streaming
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
5
==PAGE:82==
pipelines within the DAPM framework. However, their work, along with other concurrent
theses, did not implement a mechanism for handling failures. They explicitly recognized
the need for monitoring and even contributed to the initial design of a heartbeat protocol,
but a concrete solution was not put in place. This leaves a critical gap: without a way to
detect and react to PE crashes, the DAPM framework lacks the robustness required for
practical, long­running applications.
2.5.2
Contribution of This Thesis
This thesis fills that gap. It takes the executable pipeline model from the foundational
work as its starting point and builds the missing reliability layer. The primary contribution
of this project is the design, implementation, and evaluation of a configurable, heartbeat­
based fault tolerance framework that makes the DAPM architecture robust and viable for
real­world deployment.
2.6
Concurrent Work
This thesis was developed alongside three other Master’s theses that collectively advance
the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM). The projects share a common
conceptual substrate but focus on different layers of the stack. Importantly, the secu­
rity/monitoring effort was originally co­initiated by the author (Raihanullah Mehran) and
Hussein Dirani, and later split by scope: Dirani continued with cross­organizational ac­
cess control, while this thesis focused on heartbeat­based fault detection and reaction.
DAPM: Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data (Tama Sarker,
Reshma Zaman)
This work delivers:
• Connectors for live event streams (e.g., Wikipedia RecentChanges),
• Filtering operators,
• An anonymization protocol so data can safely cross organizational boundaries,
• Basic visualization components.
This thesis reuses their ingestion and filtering capabilities (e.g., EventSource, LanguageFilter)
and treats anonymization as an upstream guarantee. The data model defined in their work
is not modified here.
DAPM: Security, Cross­organizational Access Control, and Quantitative
Accountability Framework (Hussein Dirani)
This project defines:
• A trust framework and enforcement mechanisms for who may deploy, publish, and
subscribe across organizations,
• Governance­level accountability and operator dashboards.
As noted, Dirani and the author started this track jointly before dividing responsibilities.
Dirani’s thesis covers access control and security policy enforcement, while this work fo­
cuses on in­band operational monitoring inside each Processing Element (PE) via heart­
beats, timeouts, and policy­driven reactions.
Integration points include:
• Policy/notifications: This thesis emits structured health events and operator noti­
fications that Dirani’s governance layer can ingest.
6
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:83==
• Separation of concerns: Topic ACLs, credentials, and authorization remain out of
scope here and are handled in Dirani’s work. This design assumes the necessary
permissions already exist.
DAPM: Conceptualization and Performance Analysis of an Online Data
Streaming Pipeline (Christian Becke, Zou Yong Nan Klaassen)
This is the baseline on which all the theses build, providing:
• The formal pipeline model (Sources, Operators, Sinks),
• Channels and input ports,
• The cross­organizational execution model and pipeline life cycle (assembly, config­
uration, execution),
• A reference implementation and performance evaluation.
This thesis extends that baseline by introducing:
• Fault­tolerance semantics,
• Peer­to­peer heartbeat exchange,
• Timeout verification strategies,
• Per­merge input criticality,
• Decentralized reaction policies that prevent stale outputs and reduce wasted com­
putation.
Scope Boundaries
• Not covered here: Access control/credentials for cross­org topics and management
endpoints (Dirani).
• Not covered here: New source connectors and anonymization (Sarker & Zaman).
• Covered here: Decentralized liveness detection (heartbeats), local verification strate­
gies, pipeline­level fault­tolerance policies, per­merge criticality, and structured health
notifications, all aligned with the baseline DAPM model (Becke & Klaassen).
Together, the four theses are complementary: ingestion/anonymization provides safe
data, access control provides governed collaboration, the baseline thesis provides the
distributed substrate, and this thesis adds reliable execution through decentralized failure
detection and principled reactions—ensuring that pipeline results remain trustworthy and
resources are not wasted when components fail.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
7
==PAGE:84==
8
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:85==
3
Problem Statement and Research
Questions
The foundational work on the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) estab­
lished that high­performance, cross­organizational streaming pipelines are feasible [8].
However, this work focused on the successful execution of pipelines and did not address
how the system should handle component failures [8]. This omission represents a critical
gap, as reliability is essential for any system intended for practical, long­running applica­
tions.
3.1
Problem Statement
The core problem this thesis addresses is the absence of a fault tolerance mechanism
within the DAPM framework.
In the current system, when a Processing Element (PE) instance suffers a crash failure—
that is, it abruptly and permanently stops working—there is no way to automatically detect
or react to this event. This single point of failure can trigger a cascade of negative conse­
quences that undermine the pipeline’s integrity and usefulness:
• Incorrect Results and Stale Data: Healthy downstream components may continue
to display the last data they received, presenting users with an outdated view of the
process that they might mistakenly assume is current.
• Wasted Computational Resources: Other PEs in the pipeline remain active, con­
suming CPU and memory while processing data that will never be used by the failed
component.
• Data Incompleteness: The final output of the pipeline becomes incomplete, as data
from the failed branch is silently lost.
• Loss of Trust: Ultimately, these issues erode user confidence in the reliability and
accuracy of the system’s results.
To be a viable and trustworthy platform, DAPM requires a robust mechanism to handle
PE crashes in a predictable and configurable way.
3.2
Research Questions
The goal of this thesis is to solve this problem by designing, implementing, and evaluating
a fault tolerance framework for DAPM. This work is guided by the user requirements and
is framed by a primary research question:
How can a configurable fault tolerance mechanism be designed and integrated
into the DAPM architecture to reliably detect and react to the crash failure of
a Processing Element instance?
To answer this question, the project is broken down into three focused sub­questions that
directly correspond to the end­user needs:
RQ1: How can the crash failure of a PE instance be detected in a timely and efficient
manner within the DAPM architecture?
(This question is driven by the pipeline operator’s need to be notified when a failure
occurs and to be able to configure the detection parameters.)
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
9
==PAGE:86==
RQ2: How can the system’s reaction to a detected failure be made configurable to support
different user­defined strategies, such as terminating the entire pipeline versus only
the affected segments?
(This question addresses the data analyst’s need for different responses to preserve
data integrity, depending on the specific use case.)
RQ3: How can the failure of one PE be propagated to trigger coordinated actions in other
dependent PEs within the pipeline?
(This question addresses the underlying technical challenge of orchestrating a system­
wide response, which is essential for implementing the configurable strategies in
RQ2.)
3.3
Scope and Delimitations
This thesis focuses on detecting and reacting to crash failures. It does not address more
complex failure modes like Byzantine faults (an arbitrary fault that occurs during the exe­
cution of an algorithm by a distributed system[21]) or network partitions. The solution op­
erates at the application level, providing liveness detection and reaction logic; it does not
handle low­level infrastructure recovery (e.g., automatically restarting a crashed PE). The
reactive strategies implemented serve as a proof of concept for the configurable frame­
work.
10
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:87==
4
Research Methodology
This thesis aims to design, implement, and evaluate a novel technical artifact—a fault
tolerance framework—to solve a practical problem within the Distributed Architecture for
Process Mining (DAPM). To guide this process, the research is structured according to
the Design Science Research (DSR) methodology. DSR in software engineering involves
the dual activities of designing an artifact to improve a problem context and empirically
investigating the artifact’s performance within that context [22]. This approach is highly
suitable for this project, as the primary contribution is a tangible, problem­solving artifact.
This chapter outlines how the DSR methodology was applied. We follow a structured
research process adapted from the literature [23], which organizes the work into three
distinct phases: (1) Problem Identification, (2) Solution Design, and (3) Evaluation. This
process ensures that the research is both relevant to real­world needs and scientifically
rigorous.
4.1
Phase 1: Problem Identification
The initial phase of the research focused on identifying and motivating the problem. This
corresponds to the ”Relevance Cycle” in other DSR models, where the practical objectives
of the research are clarified.
• Literature Research: The process began with a thorough review of the foundational
DAPM thesis by Becke and Klaassen. Their work successfully demonstrated the
execution of high­performance streaming pipelines but explicitly noted that fault tol­
erance was not addressed. This analysis of the state of the art revealed a clear and
significant research gap.
• Problem Refinement: The general problem of ”lacking fault tolerance” was refined
by analyzing a concrete failure scenario (the crash of a PE in a Wikipedia analysis
pipeline) and decomposing its consequences into specific issues: incorrect results,
wasted resources, data incompleteness, and a lack of trust. This step ensured that
the problem was well­understood before any solution was designed.
4.2
Phase 2: Solution Design
The second phase, ”Solution Design,” is the core engineering activity where the artifact
is constructed. This phase was guided by an iterative approach, reflecting the principles
of agility in information systems development. Agility in this context is not merely about
following a specific named method (like Scrum), but about the “continual readiness... to
rapidly or inherently create change, proactively or reactively embrace change, and learn
from change” [24]. This principle was applied through an incremental development pro­
cess.
• Artifact Design: The design process began with a minimal viable artifact: a basic
liveness detection mechanism based on a heartbeat protocol.
• Iterative Refinement: This initial design was then incrementally enhanced through
a series of development cycles. Each cycle added new functionality based on the
user requirements, such as the configurable multi­level reaction strategies and the
logic for propagating failure notifications across the pipeline. This iterative process
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
11
==PAGE:88==
allowed for continuous learning and refinement, ensuring the final design was robust
and well­aligned with the project’s objectives.
4.3
Phase 3: Evaluation
The final phase of the research process is the rigorous evaluation of the designed artifact.
The goal of this phase is to verify that the artifact effectively solves the identified problem
and to validate its performance.
• Refine Hypotheses: The high­level research questions were broken down into spe­
cific, testable hypotheses concerning the framework’s performance. For example:
“Can the framework detect a PE crash within a specified time threshold?”
and
“Does the ’terminate affected segment’ strategy successfully stop only the depen­
dent PEs?”
• Laboratory Experiment: A series of controlled experiments were conducted in a
laboratory setting. This involved deploying a concrete DAPM pipeline, simulating
PE crash failures, and systematically measuring the framework’s response. This
quantitative evaluation provided empirical data on the artifact’s detection latency,
the correctness of its reactive strategies, and its performance overhead.
• Summarize Results: The results from these experiments, detailed in Chapter 7, are
used to answer the research questions and provide a validated assessment of the
artifact’s capabilities and limitations.
4.4
Tools and Technology Selection
The implementation of the fault tolerance framework was built upon the technology stack
established in the foundational DAPM project. The selection of these technologies was
driven by the need for a robust, scalable, and distributed system.
Java and Spring Boot
The core services for each DAPM organization are built using Java, a high­level, object­
oriented language known for its platform independence (“write once, run anywhere”),
which is essential for a distributed system1. The Spring Boot framework was chosen
to simplify the creation of stand­alone, production­grade microservices. Its features, such
as embedded web servers and automatic configuration, significantly reduce development
overhead and allow for the rapid creation of the modular services that represent each
organization in the DAPM ecosystem [25].
Apache Kafka
Communication between the distributed Processing Elements (PEs) in a pipeline is han­
dled by Apache Kafka. Kafka is a distributed event streaming platform designed for high­
throughput, fault­tolerant, and scalable real­time data feeds [26]. It operates on a publish­
subscribe model where client applications called producers write event records to logical
categories called topics. Other applications, called consumers, can then subscribe to
these topics to read and process the events.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_(programming_language)
12
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:89==
Figure 4.1:
High­level architecture of Apache Kafka.
Adapted from https://www.
cloudkarafka.com/blog/part1-kafka-for-beginners-what-is-apache-kafka.html
This architecture is fundamental to the flexibility of DAPM because it completely decouples
the PEs; a producer PE does not need to know which or how many consumer PEs are
listening. Kafka runs as a cluster of brokers, with each topic divided into partitions. Each
partition is replicated across brokers for fault tolerance and parallelism. If one broker fails,
another replica can take over as leader, ensuring high availability.
Figure 4.2: Partitions in Kafka Topic. Adapted from https://kafka.apache.org/intro
Docker
Each component of the DAPM system, including each organization’s services and the
Kafka brokers, is containerized using Docker. Docker is an open platform that packages
an application and all its dependencies into a standardized, executable unit called a con­
tainer [27]. Containers run in isolated environments, ensuring that an application behaves
the same way regardless of where it is deployed.
Docker uses a client­server architecture. The Docker client communicates with the Docker
daemon, which handles the building, running, and distribution of containers. Docker con­
tainers are defined by Dockerfiles and built into images, which are then used to spin up
isolated, reproducible environments ideal for microservice deployments in DAPM.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
13
==PAGE:90==
4.5
Agile Development
The Agile Development methodology played a key role in the design and development
phase of this study. Agile methodologies emerged to address the uncertainty inherent in
software development by prioritizing collaborative development, customer involvement,
and an acceptance of changing requirements [28]. This project adopted an iterative and
incremental approach, with each cycle including requirements analysis, design, imple­
mentation, and testing.
The primary advantage of this approach is its flexibility and efficiency. Through frequent
iterations, we were able to respond quickly to new insights and technical challenges that
arose during development. For example, the initial design for the failure propagation
mechanism was refined several times based on early implementation experiments. This
aligns with the core agile principle of accommodating change at any stage of the devel­
opment process. Furthermore, agile development encourages close collaboration and
communication, which improves efficiency and quality [28].
4.6
Weekly Meetings as an Agile Practice
Throughout the project, we organized weekly meetings with supervisors and members of
the concurrent DAPM project groups. This practice served as a key agile mechanism,
similar to an iterative review or sprint planning meeting. During these meetings, each
group presented progress, discussed challenges, and planned the work for the upcoming
week.
These meetings were crucial for ensuring consistency in our goals and designs, especially
in the early and middle stages of the project. Through regular communication, we could
ensure that the design of the fault tolerance framework remained compatible with the
evolving pipeline architecture being developed by the other teams. Later in the project,
these meetings were instrumental in finalizing which features would be integrated and
demonstrated in the final prototype.
In addition to these large group meetings, our team held internal meetings to address
specific technical challenges and refine the implementation details of the fault tolerance
framework. These frequent feedback loops were essential for adjusting the project’s di­
rection and ensuring that our individual work remained aligned with the overall project
goals.
4.7
Summary
In this chapter, we outlined the methodological framework that guided our research. The
project was grounded in the Design Science Research paradigm, which provided a sys­
tematic structure for addressing a practical problem, designing an innovative solution,
and rigorously evaluating the results. We detailed the key tools and technologies that
formed the technical foundation for our implementation. Within the design and develop­
ment phase, we adopted principles from Agile Development, using an iterative approach
that emphasized flexibility, continuous improvement, and responsiveness to change. This
methodology was supported by regular weekly meetings that facilitated collaboration and
ensured alignment across the concurrent project teams. In summary, the combination of
Design Science and Agile principles provided an effective and robust methodology for this
research and development project.
14
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:91==
5
Design of a Fault­Tolerance Mechanism
5.1
Purpose and Scope
This chapter presents the conceptual design of a decentralized fault­tolerance framework
for the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM). The goal is to make DAPM
pipelines reliable in the presence of crash (fail­stop) faults by (1) detecting liveness loss
of Processing Elements (PEs)1 and (2) reacting according to operator policy so that users
are not misled by stale or partial results and resources are not wasted.
The chapter proceeds as follows:
1. It briefly recaps the baseline DAPM model (PEs, channels, ports, Kafka­based com­
munication) to frame where fault­tolerance logic plugs in.
2. It introduces a concrete Wikipedia pipeline failure to ground requirements in a real­
istic setting.
3. It states user­facing requirements distilled as explicit user stories (operator, analyst,
budget owner).
4. It details the decentralized architecture: a Heartbeat Manager and a Reaction Han­
dler embedded in every PE instance, their responsibilities, timing parameters, and
the policies that govern reactions and cascades.
This chapter does not describe code, experimental procedures, or answers to the re­
search questions. Those come later.
5.2
Design Assumptions
The design makes the following assumptions and explicitly declares several non­goals
and constraints to limit scope. These are important to interpret the guarantees and the
evaluation.
5.2.1
Messaging Substrate and Network
• Kafka availability. The Kafka cluster (brokers, topics, controller) remains opera­
tional during a pipeline run. We do not design for broker or topic failure, partition
reassignments that make topics temporarily unavailable, or ACL errors.
• Delivery characteristics. Kafka provides durable, ordered, at­least­once delivery
per partition. Heartbeat messages are small and frequent; occasional network jitter
or short pauses may delay them, so detection must be robust to delay and short
bursts of loss.
• Topic isolation. Each pipeline/PE pair uses dedicated heartbeat topics; consumer
groups are unique per PE instance so that monitoring state is not shared or interfered
with across pipelines.
5.2.2
Time and Clocks
• Time base. Each heartbeat contains the sender’s instance ID and the sender’s
timestamp. Liveness checks compare that timestamp against the receiver’s current
time.
1Throughout this thesis, “PE” refers to a PE instance.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
15
==PAGE:92==
• Clock skew. We assume bounded clock skew between organizations (e.g., NTP­
synchronized, from sub­second to a few seconds). The chosen timeout (see timing
later in the chapter) must exceed expected send interval + worst­case network delay
+ clock skew to avoid false positives.
• Alternative mitigation (design note). If synchronization cannot be ensured, the
receiver can alternatively treat the receive time as the last heartbeat time; this trades
sender­clock accuracy for robustness. (Our implementation uses the sender times­
tamp; the assumption above applies.)
5.2.3
Failure Model
• Fail­stop only. A failed PE halts processing and communication permanently (crash
or kill). It does not behave arbitrarily (no Byzantine behavior), and it does not recover
without an explicit operator action.
• Single­fault focus. The design detects multiple independent failures, but policy
evaluation and examples focus on one failing PE at a time; cascades are a deliberate
reaction, not simultaneous random failures.
5.2.4
Security and Tenancy
• Minimal heartbeat payload. Heartbeats carry no business data—only the PE in­
stance ID and a timestamp—so cross­organizational monitoring reveals availability
but not domain data.
• Least­privilege subscriptions. Each PE subscribes only to immediate neighbor
heartbeat topics (upstream producers and downstream consumers) relevant to its
own execution graph.
5.2.5
Operational Configuration
Definition (Merge). A merge is any operator or sink with two or more input ports that
produces a single outbound result by aligning, comparing, or aggregating those inputs.
Each port is bound to exactly one Kafka topic and declares its message type. The Mean–
Join–Best–Save sink (see Figure 5.4) is a concrete merge: it has two Metrics inputs
(English and Russian) and emits a single stream of combined scores.
• Policy control. The operator selects one fault­tolerance policy at pipeline start (e.g.,
notify only; terminate entire pipeline; keep partial pipeline running). The choice is
global for consistency, but enforcement is local in each PE’s ReactionHandler upon
a heartbeat timeout.
• Input criticality. At merges, each upstream input is marked critical (default) or
optional. If only optional inputs go silent, the merge may continue in a degraded
mode; if any critical input goes silent, the merge treats this as a fault and applies the
policy above.
Note. All inputs are monitored for heartbeats; the critical/optional flag only affects the
reaction, not the detection. This per­port semantics mirrors multi­input consumers such
as the “miner comparator” pattern described by Burattin et al.[29]
The “miner comparator” (from Burattin et al. [29]) is a merge­style operator that doesn’t
mine a model itself; instead, it consumes multiple mined models produced in parallel—
typically the outputs of different miners or different parameterisations of the same miner—
and evaluates them on shared quality criteria (e.g., fitness, precision, generalisation, sim­
plicity). Based on these scores, it selects a single “best” model or emits a ranked report.
In other words, it aligns the incoming model streams on a common evaluation task and
16
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:93==
aggregates the results into one outbound decision/artifact. Conceptually, it fits our def­
inition of a merge: multiple input ports (one per candidate model/topic), one outbound
result.
5.2.6
Observability and Notifications
• Best­effort notifications. When a fault is detected, a pipeline notification is emit­
ted with: pipeline ID, detecting PE instance, peer direction (upstream/downstream),
silent topics, configured topics, policy, and timestamp. Notification delivery is best­
effort; it does not block safety actions.
5.2.7
Non­goals and Constraints
• No broker­level HA design. Handling Kafka outages (broker loss, ISR shrink to
zero, controller failover pathologies) is out of scope.
• No automatic self­healing. The design does not restart failed PEs, reschedule
them, or replace them with replicas. It detects and reacts (notify/stop/terminate) but
does not repair.
• No state checkpointing or exactly­once end­to­end. We do not implement application­
level checkpoints, replay, or transactional sinks to reconstruct consistent state post­
failure.
• No backpressure design. We do not change data flow or rate control beyond
stopping or resuming processing based on policy.
• No data correctness under Byzantine faults. If a PE emits incorrect data while
“alive,” heartbeats will not catch it; detecting semantic faults is out of scope.
5.3
The Baseline DAPM Architecture
The fault tolerance framework presented in this thesis is an extension of the Distributed
Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) conceptualized and implemented in the foun­
dational thesis project [8]. That work provides the foundation for executing streaming
process mining pipelines across multiple, independent organizations.
5.3.1
Pipeline Definition
A DAPM pipeline is a distributed composition of processing steps that perform tasks such
as data ingestion, transformation, mining, evaluation, and persistence. A key principle is
federated execution: each processing step can run in an environment owned by a distinct
organization. This preserves data sovereignty and intellectual property—specialized op­
erators can be offered and consumed across organizational boundaries without exposing
internal implementations [8]. In figure 5.1, the conceptual model shows an overview of all
the pipeline components.
5.3.2
Pipeline Components
The architecture consists of two core building blocks: Processing Elements (PEs) and
Channels. PEs implement the logic; Channels carry typed messages between PEs.
Processing Elements (PEs)
PEs are categorized by their role in the dataflow:
• Source: entry point of the pipeline. It ingests external data (e.g., a streaming API)
and publishes it into the pipeline. A Source produces but does not consume pipeline
messages.
• Operator: intermediate step. It consumes one or more input streams, applies a
transformation/algorithm (e.g., filtering, mining, joining, model comparison), and
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
17
==PAGE:94==
produces exactly one output stream. Operators must have one or more input ports
and a single output channel for type safety and predictable topology [8].
• Sink: terminal step. It consumes a stream and forwards results to an external sys­
tem (file, database, visualization). A Sink has input port(s) but no pipeline output.
Multi­input “merge” operators.
DAPM allows Operators (and some Sinks) with mul­
tiple input ports that merge logically related streams. A merge operator consumes two
or more upstream channels, aligns or aggregates their items under an explicit policy,
and emits a single outbound result. Examples include a “mean­join” sink that logs joint
metrics only when contributions from all inputs are present, and the miner comparator
pattern, which ingests multiple candidate process models and selects/ranks them using
shared quality criteria [29]. In both cases, each input port is bound to exactly one up­
stream Channel; port semantics (e.g., “critical” vs. “optional”) are defined at configuration
time and used later by the fault­tolerance logic.
Channels and Communication
PEs are connected by unidirectional Channels implemented as Apache Kafka topics. This
choice underpins cross­organizational operation:
• Decoupling: producers publish without knowing consumer identities or locations;
consumers subscribe independently. This loose coupling supports independent de­
ployment, upgrades, and fault isolation across organizations [8].
• Broadcast: a single topic can have multiple subscribers, enabling fan­out to parallel
branches (e.g., the same events feeding both discovery and conformance check­
ing).
• Typed streams and ports: each input port subscribes to exactly one topic, and each
Operator/Sink declares the message type it consumes. This one­to­one binding per
port keeps heterogeneous streams separate (e.g., English vs. Russian edits) and
avoids cross­talk.
An input port is therefore the designated entry on a PE for one specific stream. A PE may
expose multiple ports; each port has its own subscription and role (e.g., “English metrics”,
“Russian metrics”), which is crucial for both merge semantics and later failure handling.
18
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:95==
Figure 5.1: Conceptual model of a pipeline’s components. Adapted from [8].
A DAPM Pipeline comprises at least two Processing Elements. Operator and Sink require
one or more Input Ports for receiving data. Source and Operator publish to exactly one
Channel, while an Input Port subscribes to exactly one Channel, modeling the publish–
subscribe relation that governs pipeline execution.[8]
In a healthy pipeline, data flows from Sources, through Operators, to Sinks. When the
pipeline spans multiple organizations, PEs communicate via Kafka topics as in Figure 5.2:
an Event Source in OrgA publishes events; a Heuristics Miner in OrgB consumes those
events and publishes PetriNets; and a PetriNet Sink in OrgA visualizes them. The elon­
gated hexagons denote topics; message types are shown above each topic2. This back­
bone enables seamless exchange while preserving each organization’s autonomy[8].
Figure 5.2: Cross­organizational DAPM pipeline. PEs in different organizations commu­
nicate via Kafka topics.
2https://www.dreamstime.com/label-arrow-image371969085
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
19
==PAGE:96==
5.3.3
Pipeline Life Cycle
DAPM’s life cycle comprises Assembly, Configuration, and Execution[8] (Figure5.3):
• Assembly: users compose and validate the topology (types, ports, channels). The
result is a formal pipeline definition.
• Configuration: cross­organizational permissions are requested and granted; run­
time parameters (e.g., operator settings) are set.
• Execution: authorized users start the pipeline; data flows over topics among in­
dependently hosted PEs. The fault­tolerance framework introduced in this thesis
operates primarily in this stage, monitoring liveness and enforcing policy. Execution
can be terminated by the user, which cleanly shuts down all pipeline components.
5.3.4
Pipeline Construction
Once all required permissions are obtained in the configuration phase, the pipeline con­
struction process begins. This is coordinated by the PipelineBuilder helper class, which
issues HTTP requests to the endpoints of the organizations responsible for the necessary
processing element templates. To ensure organized management, the PipelineBuilder
employs a directed graph representation, capturing the pipeline’s structure through pro­
cessing element references and their associated channel connections [8].
5.4
The Wikipedia Failure Scenario
To ground the design of the fault tolerance framework in a practical context, this section
introduces a concrete failure scenario. This example illustrates the specific problems
that arise when a Processing Element (PE) crashes and serves as a running reference
throughout the design chapter. By analyzing the consequences of such a failure, we can
derive the specific requirements that the proposed solution must address.
The pipeline in this scenario is designed to perform real­time process mining on the stream
of recent changes from Wikipedia. As shown in Figure 5.4 (JSON representation of this
pipeline could be found in the Appendix), a Source ingests all change events and dis­
tributes them to two parallel Filter Operators, one for English­language edits and one
for Russian. The filtered streams are then analyzed independently. The English stream
is used for both process discovery (with a HeuristicsMiner) and conformance checking
(with a BehavioralPatternsCC). The Russian stream is used exclusively for conformance
checking. The results from both conformance checking branches are then merged by a
final Sink.
We now examine the consequences when a single component—the English Filter PE
instance—experiences a crash failure.
Figure 5.4: The Wikipedia analysis pipeline with a simulated crash failure of the ”English
Filter” PE.
20
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:97==
Figure 5.3: Activity diagram showing assembly, configuration, and execution. Adapted
from [8].
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
21
==PAGE:98==
Impact on Process Discovery
The HeuristicsMiner PE, which consumes events from the English Filter, no longer re­
ceives input. Consequently, it stops discovering new process models and ceases to pub­
lish output to the PetriNetVisualizerSink. The sink continues to display the last success­
fully received model—if any—or nothing at all. This yields three immediate problems:
• Incorrect results (stale data): An outdated model remains visible and may be misin­
terpreted as current.
• Wasted resources: Both HeuristicsMiner and PetriNetVisualizerSink remain active,
consuming CPU/memory while waiting for input that will never arrive.
• Erosion of trust: Lack of updates undermines user confidence in the correctness
and freshness of the visualization.
Impact on Conformance Checking (per­language branches)
The English BehavioralPatternsCC PE also halts its output because its upstream English
stream has failed. The Russian branch (Russian Filter →BehavioralPatternsCC) contin­
ues to process events and produce metrics. This asymmetry creates the following issues:
• Partial progress with no value: Metrics from the Russian branch exist but cannot be
consumed where an AND­style merge is expected downstream.
• Wasted resources: The Russian branch keeps computing results that may be dis­
carded at the merge (see below).
• Operator uncertainty: Without clear fault signaling, it is non­obvious whether silence
is due to low activity or an upstream failure.
Impact on Aggregation at the Merge (MeanJoinSaveSink)
The MeanJoinSaveSink is configured to log aggregated scores only when it has a con­
tribution from both inputs (English and Russian), i.e., an effective AND­merge. With the
English metrics missing, the sink never logs combined scores:
• Data incompleteness: The primary goal—recording aggregated conformance scores—
is not achieved; time series in scores.txt exhibits a gap.
• Downstream waste: Although the Russian branch continues to produce metrics,
the merge’s AND­semantics prevent any output, making the ongoing computation
effectively useless.
• Lack of trust: Absence of new entries may be perceived as a system malfunction or
inconsistency, further eroding confidence in pipeline reliability.
Overall, a single fail­stop crash in the English Filter propagates into stale results in the
discovery branch, silent failure in the English conformance branch, and starvation at
the merge. The combination of wasted computation, missing aggregates, and ambigu­
ous symptoms highlights the need for explicit failure detection, operator notification, and
policy­driven reactions to prevent stale outputs and resource waste.
5.4.1
Design Requirements
The cascading problems illustrated in the failure scenario highlight the need for a ro­
bust fault tolerance mechanism that can meet the diverse needs of the system’s various
users. These needs are captured in the following user stories, which serve as the primary
requirements guiding the design of the fault tolerance framework.
Pipeline Operator:
22
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:99==
The pipeline operator is responsible for the technical management and monitoring of the
pipeline’s execution. Their requirements focus on observability and control over the sys­
tem’s health and configuration.
• R1 — Failure notification.
Story: “As a pipeline operator, I need to be notified if any PE instance in the pipeline
fails so I can investigate.”
1. When a PE stops sending heartbeats for longer than its configured time­
out, its direct neighbors emit a failure event that contains: pipeline ID, PE
ID, role (source/operator/sink), neighbor direction (upstream/downstream),
timestamp, and observed heartbeat metrics (last­seen time, miss count).
2. The failure event is visible in operator logs and published to a health/ops
channel (e.g., a dedicated Kafka topic) so downstream tooling can sub­
scribe.
3. Duplicate notifications for the same incident are rate­limited (e.g., first event
immediate, then periodic summaries).
• R2 — Heartbeat configuration with safe defaults.
Story: “As a pipeline operator, I want to specify the heartbeat configuration (send
interval, check interval, timeout). If no configuration is provided, a default should be
used.”
1. Config supports at least: sendInterval, checkInterval, missThreshold
(or timeout = missThreshold × sendInterval).
2. Defaults apply per­PE if any field is omitted; partial overrides are allowed.
3. Effective configuration is logged at PE start so operators can audit what is
actually in force.
• R3 — Input criticality at merges (per­port).
Story: “As a pipeline operator, I want to specify if an input for a merge operator is
critical for processing or not. The fault must still be detected if any input goes down.”
1. Each merge input port has a critical=true|false flag (default: true).
2. Fault detection runs for all ports regardless of criticality; detection events
identify the failing port.
3. When one or more critical ports time out, the merge declares itself faulted
and triggers its Reaction Handler (policy­dependent termination or pause).
4. When only optional ports time out, the merge continues and marks outputs
as degraded (adds a provenance/quality tag) until the port recovers.
Data Analyst / Consumer:
The data analyst is the end­user of the pipeline’s output. Their primary concern is the
integrity and trustworthiness of the results. Their requirements reflect a preference for no
data over incorrect or misleading data.
• R4 — Fail­closed option (terminate­all).
Story: “As a data analyst, I need to trust the results. If a PE fails, I’d rather terminate
the whole pipeline than be provided with incorrect or stale data.”
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
23
==PAGE:100==
1. A pipeline­level policy terminateAllOnCriticalFailure can be selected
at start.
2. On first critical failure anywhere, every PE’s Reaction Handler transitions
to TERMINATING, stops heartbeats, and acknowledges completion; the ex­
ecution service marks the pipeline FAILED.
3. No further user­visible outputs are produced after the failure time (prevents
stale results).
• R5 — Partial­continue option (fail­open on independent subgraphs).
Story: “As a data analyst, if a PE fails, I’d rather the affected part of the pipeline
terminate than the whole pipeline, so that non­dependent parts can continue to run.”
Budget Owner / Administrator:
The budget owner is responsible for the financial oversight of the pipeline’s operation.
Their primary concern is ensuring that computational resources are not wasted on unpro­
ductive tasks.
• R6 — Avoid useless work.
Story: “As a budget owner, I don’t want to pay for computational resources that are
doing useless work due to an upstream or downstream PE failure.”
5.5
Architectural Overview of the Fault Tolerance Framework
To address the requirements for reliability and trustworthiness, a fault tolerance framework
is integrated directly into the DAPM core. Rather than relying on a central supervisor, the
monitoring and reaction logic is embedded in every Processing Element (PE)3, yielding a
decentralized, self­monitoring pipeline.
Assembly­time policy and defaults. The fault­tolerance policy is selected during the
assembly stage and applies uniformly to the pipeline. If no policy is specified, the default
is NOTIFY ONLY (discussed later in this chapter). At the same time, the user may mark
merge inputs as optional; all unspecified inputs remain critical by default. This metadata
is persisted in the validated pipeline and drives both configuration and runtime behavior.
Builder­driven configuration. After validation, the PipelineBuilder instantiates the PE
instances and computes the heartbeat topology:
• Publish topics per PE instance. For a PE with instance id ⟨instanceId⟩: Opera­
tors and Sinks publish upstream­facing heartbeats to hb-upstream-⟨instanceId⟩;
Sources and Operators publish downstream­facing heartbeats to hb-downstream-⟨instanceId⟩.
• Subscribe sets per PE. For each upstream neighbor (Source/Operator), subscribe
to that neighbor’s hb-downstream-; for each downstream neighbor (Operator/Sink),
subscribe to that neighbor’s hb-upstream-. For merges, subscriptions are tracked
per input port.
• Optionality at merges. Using the assembly­time flags, the builder identifies which
upstream topics for each merge are optional; all others are critical.
The builder then dispatches to each PE: (i) a HeartbeatTopicConfig (publish topics; up­
stream/downstream subscription lists; optional­upstream set) and (ii) an OperationalParamsRequest
with the pipelineId, selected FaultToleranceLevel, the pipeline owner’s organization
3Throughout this thesis, “PE” refers to a PE instance.
24
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:101==
URL for notifications, and the resolved HeartbeatTimingConfig. Timing is resolved from
user input with safe defaults and sanity checks; if the user only sets a timeout, the builder
derives send/check intervals; if nothing is provided, defaults are used (discussed later
in this chapter). The timing config also carries a missesThreshold (default 3) and an
initialGracePeriodMs to absorb startup transients.
Heartbeat Manager. Inside each PE, a HeartbeatManager (a) ensures its own publish
topics exist, (b) periodically publishes heartbeats, and (c) subscribes to neighbor topics to
track the last seen timestamp per topic. Each heartbeat is a minimal message that con­
tains only instanceId and timestamp. After a finite grace period, the manager performs
liveness checks at the configured cadence using per­topic consecutive­miss counters:
• Upstream liveness (per port). For each monitored upstream topic, if now−lastSeen >
timeoutMs during a check, the topic’s miss counter is incremented; otherwise it is re­
set to zero. A critical upstream failure is declared when any critical upstream topic
reaches missesThreshold consecutive misses. If only optional topics reach the
threshold, the PE continues in degraded mode and may silence those optional topics
(unsubscribe them) to prevent repeated alarms; recovery (a fresh timely heartbeat)
resets counters and is logged.
• Downstream liveness (per policy). Downstream timeliness is evaluated from the
same counters. For NOTIFY ONLY and TERMINATE ENTIRE PIPELINE, all config­
ured downstream topics must remain timely (i.e., none may reach missesThreshold);
for KEEP RUNNING PARTIAL PIPELINE, it suffices that at least one downstream
topic remains timely (a failure is declared only if all downstream topics reach the
threshold).
Reaction Handler. When the HeartbeatManager declares a liveness failure (on the k­th
consecutive miss where k = missesThreshold), it invokes the PE’s ReactionHandler,
which applies the selected policy locally:
• NOTIFY ONLY. Emit a notification to the pipeline owner’s organization endpoint; the
PE continues operating.
• TERMINATE ENTIRE PIPELINE. The PE terminates itself on detected failure; as
neighbors time out on the PE’s heartbeats, termination propagates across the graph.
• KEEP RUNNING PARTIAL PIPELINE. The PE terminates only if the failed upstream
is critical; otherwise it continues in degraded mode (and may silence optional up­
streams that have exceeded the threshold).
Global effects (e.g., full shutdown) emerge from these local decisions propagating through
the pipeline.
Failure propagation, containment, and cleanup. Because monitoring is local and sym­
metric, there is no single point of failure in the monitoring plane. A crashed PE causes its
neighbors to exceed their consecutive­miss thresholds and react according to policy; un­
der partial continuation, only the affected connected component halts while independent
subgraphs keep running. In all policies, operators must not silently produce stale outputs
after a critical upstream failure; they must either terminate, pause, or explicitly continue
in a documented degraded mode. Upon termination, a PE stops its HeartbeatManager,
closes Kafka clients, and attempts to delete its own heartbeat publish topics and dedicated
heartbeat consumer group to avoid resource leakage.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
25
==PAGE:102==
Figure 5.5: Class diagram of the decentralized fault tolerance framework. Each PE in­
stance runs its own Heartbeat Manager and Reaction Handler, monitoring its direct neigh­
bors via dedicated heartbeat topics. For detailed class diagram see diagrams in Appendix
B.1 B.2
Heartbeats can flow peer­to­peer across organizational boundaries: a PE in OrgA pub­
lishes to hb-downstream-<instanceID>/hb-upstream-<instanceID>, which a neighbor­
ing PE in OrgB consumes. If the OrgA PE crashes, the OrgB HeartbeatManager will
observe consecutive misses and, upon reaching the configured threshold, trigger its local
ReactionHandler, executing the configured response. This separation of concerns—
detect in the Heartbeat Manager, decide/act in the Reaction Handler—enables resilient
and auditable behavior without central coordination.
5.6
Design Evolution and Rationale
This section documents how the fault­tolerance design evolved from an initial single­
timeout trigger to the current consecutive­timeouts model with per­topic miss counters,
and explains the rationale behind related changes to verification semantics, logging, and
observability.
5.6.1
Legacy Design: Single­Timeout Trigger
In the initial design, a monitored peer was declared failed as soon as a single liveness
check observed now−lastSeen > timeoutMs. This made detection very fast in the steady
state but brittle under benign transients. During PE shutdown and Kafka housekeeping
(topic deletion/recreation, consumer group leave/join, brief leadership changes), receivers
could momentarily see:
• metadata errors (unknown topic or partition, leader not available, inconsistent topic
id),
• brief gaps while partitions rebalance,
• heartbeats that are in­flight while the sender is terminating cleanly.
Treating the first late observation as a failure produced false positives and noisy logs
(timeout bursts that immediately “self­healed” on the next heartbeat).
5.6.2
Current Design: Consecutive Misses with Per­Topic Counters
The framework now requires k consecutive late observations on a monitored topic before
declaring failure, where k = missesThreshold (default k = 3). Each topic maintains a
26
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:103==
counter that increments when a check finds now −lastSeen > timeoutMs and resets to
zero on a timely heartbeat. A failure is declared exactly when a counter reaches k.
Rationale.
Consecutive­miss hysteresis filters out transient broker/consumer artifacts
and coordinated shutdown sequences while preserving rapid, deterministic failure detec­
tion in genuine crash scenarios.
Detection latency.
Under periodic checks, the time­to­detect (TTD) is bounded by
TTD ∈[timeoutMs, timeoutMs + (k −1) · checkIntervalMs + checkIntervalMs] ,
i.e., between one timeout and roughly k checks after the first late observation (plus at
most one check granularity). This makes the latency explicit and tunable.
5.6.3
Verification Semantics Revisited
The shift to per­topic counters led to a precise restatement of upstream/downstream rules:
• Upstream (per input port). A critical upstream failure is declared when any critical
upstream topic reaches k consecutive misses. Optional inputs may reach k without
forcing termination; the PE continues in degraded mode.
• Downstream (policy­dependent). For NOTIFY ONLY and TERMINATE ENTIRE
PIPELINE, all downstream topics must remain below k misses; any topic reaching
k triggers failure. For KEEP RUNNING PARTIAL PIPELINE, the PE fails only if all
downstream topics reach k (i.e., no active consumers remain).
5.6.4
Optional­Input Silencing and Recovery
To avoid alert storms, optional upstream topics that hit k may be silenced: their counters
and last­seen timestamps are retained for diagnostics, but they stop contributing to failure
decisions until a documented re­subscription point (e.g., pipeline restart) or administrative
action. If a timely heartbeat is later observed (e.g., before silencing takes effect), counters
reset and the incident is auto­resolved.
5.6.5
Incident Lifecycle and Debounced Logging
The HeartbeatManager now models liveness as a small state machine:
OK →SUSPECT(n/k) →FAILED →RESOLVED.
Logs are transition­driven to prevent spam:
• First late observation per topic: enter SUSPECT and log “miss 1/k”.
• Counter increments: log only on n ∈{1, k} and periodic summaries; intermediate
increments are rate­limited.
• Threshold reached: single FAILED log + notification.
• First timely heartbeat after failure/suspect: RESOLVED log, counters reset; optional
per­incident summary includes total misses and time­to­recover.
5.6.6
Observability Enhancements
Notifications and internal metrics now include:
• per­topic consecutive­miss counts and whether the topic is critical/optional,
• the full set of monitored topics for that direction and the silent subset at failure time,
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
27
==PAGE:104==
• TTD (ms) and, on recovery, TTR (ms),
• counts of timeouts hit, recoveries, and silenced topics.
These additions make incidents auditable and comparable across runs.
5.6.7
Compatibility and Migration
The legacy behavior is preserved by configuration with missesThreshold = 1. All docu­
mentation and defaults now target the k = 3 model; the k = 1 mode remains for experi­
ments and ablation studies. No changes are required to application PEs beyond adopting
the updated HeartbeatTimingConfig (which now carries missesThreshold and the grace
period).
5.6.8
Trade­offs
The consecutive­misses design exchanges a small, explicit increase in TTD for a sub­
stantial reduction in false positives and log noise, more stable failure propagation, and
clearer operator­facing telemetry. Because k, timeoutMs, and checkIntervalMs are con­
figurable, operators can tune sensitivity to match workload and infrastructure character­
istics.
5.7
Liveness Detection: The Heartbeat Protocol
The foundation of the fault tolerance framework is its ability to reliably detect when a
Processing Element (PE) instance has crashed. To achieve this, the design employs a
heartbeat protocol—a well­established and widely adopted pattern for liveness detection
in distributed systems. This method was selected for its simplicity, low overhead, and
ability to decouple monitoring logic from the core data processing of the PEs.
In this decentralized architecture, every PE instance is responsible for both announcing
its own liveness and monitoring the health of its immediate neighbors. This functionality is
encapsulated within the HeartbeatManager component running inside each PE instance.
5.7.1
The Heartbeat Protocol Explained
The protocol operates through a continuous, peer­to­peer exchange of “I’m alive” mes­
sages over dedicated Kafka topics. Its operation consists of the following steps:
• Sending Heartbeats: Each PE instance’s HeartbeatManager periodically sends a
Heartbeat message. This is a lightweight object containing:
– The unique instanceID of the sender.
– A timestamp indicating when the message was created.
These fields enable receivers to identify the source of the heartbeat and verify its
freshness.
• Heartbeat Topics: To maintain directional liveness signals:
– PEs that produce output (Sources and Operators) publish heartbeats to a ded­
icated topic named hb-downstream-<instanceID>.
– PEs that consume input (Operators and Sinks) publish heartbeats to a dedi­
cated topic named hb-upstream-<instanceID>.
This separation ensures that a PE can signal its health independently to both up­
stream producers and downstream consumers.
28
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:105==
Figure 5.6: Sequence diagram of the heartbeat protocol, sending heartbeat message
• Monitoring Neighbors: During startup, the PipelineBuilder provides each PE
instance with a HeartbeatTopicConfig, which specifies the exact heartbeat topics
of its immediate neighbors. For example, an Operator will subscribe to:
– The hb-downstream-<instanceID> topic of its producer.
– The hb-upstream-<instanceID> topic of its consumer.
• Consecutive­Miss Timeout Mechanism (current design): The HeartbeatManager
continuously consumes messages from subscribed topics and records the last re­
ceived timestamp for each. At a fixed cadence, it checks per topic whether
now −lastSeen > timeoutMs.
If true, the topic’s consecutive­miss counter is incremented; otherwise it is reset
to zero. A peer (or input port) is declared failed only when the counter reaches
k = missesThreshold (default k = 3). Upon declaration, the manager immediately
invokes its local ReactionHandler to execute the configured response.
On diagrams. Figures 5.6 and 5.7 were authored for the legacy single­timeout view; they
remain valid for message flow and component interactions. The decision rule inside the
liveness check is now: declare failure only after k consecutive late observations (default
k = 3) once the initial grace period has elapsed (see. Figure 5.8).
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
29
==PAGE:106==
Figure 5.7: Sequence diagram of the heartbeat protocol, monitoring, and failure detection
upon timeout
5.7.2
Configurable Timing Parameters
To ensure flexibility across different network conditions and pipeline workloads, the heart­
beat protocol exposes user­configurable timing parameters that directly control the sen­
sitivity of liveness detection.
Primary parameters
• sendIntervalMs – How often a PE sends heartbeat messages. Lower values in­
crease detection speed but generate more traffic.
• checkIntervalMs – How often the HeartbeatManager evaluates monitored topics.
• timeoutMs – Maximum allowed silence before a check counts as a miss for that
topic.
• missesThreshold (k) – Number of consecutive misses required to declare failure
(default k = 3).
• initialGracePeriodMs – A startup grace period during which misses do not accrue;
this absorbs initialization jitter and early rebalances.
Configuration workflow
During pipeline assembly, the operator may provide a heartbeatTimingConfig
object in the pipeline JSON ((see Appendix B, Listing B.1)). This can be:
• Full configuration – All parameters explicitly defined.
• Partial – One or more parameters provided; the system derives the rest.
30
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:107==
Figure 5.8: Updated liveness monitoring sequence. Heartbeats are sent periodically; the
monitor polls and increments a per­topic miss counter whenever the inter­arrival exceeds
sendIntervalMs. A failure is declared only after k consecutive misses (default k = 3)
following the initial grace period, and the counter resets on the next heartbeat (recovery).
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
31
==PAGE:108==
• None – The system uses safe defaults.
Parameter resolution logic
The PipelineBuilder resolves final values with the fol­
lowing precedence:
1. Safe defaults: If no configuration is provided, defaults are applied (e.g., sendIntervalMs
= 30004, timeoutMs = 450005).
2. User­driven derivation: If only timeoutMs is provided, the system infers:
• sendIntervalMs =
 timeoutMs
3

,
• checkIntervalMs =
 timeoutMs
2

,
• missesThreshold defaults to 3.
This lets users specify only the failure­detection threshold.
3. Explicit overrides: Any explicitly set parameter takes precedence over defaults
and derived values.
Sanity checks
After resolution, validation rules prevent unsafe settings:
• Enforce timeoutMs > sendIntervalMs6.
• Clamp checkIntervalMs to a reasonable band (e.g., [sendIntervalMs/2, timeoutMs]).
• If violations are detected, values are adjusted to safe bounds and a warning is
logged.
Initial grace period
The system computes initialGracePeriodMs as a function of
pipeline size and expected startup cost; during this window, misses are ignored and
counters remain at zero, preventing premature timeouts while Kafka topics and consumer
groups settle.
5.7.3
Operational Semantics and Timing Analysis
Per­topic counters and policy rules
Each monitored topic maintains a consecutive­
miss counter. On each check:
late := (now −lastSeen) > timeoutMs,
counter ←
(
0
if ¬late
counter + 1
if late
A failure is declared when counter ≥k. For upstream verification, any critical input reach­
ing k triggers failure; optional inputs reaching k may be treated as degraded mode. For
downstream verification, NOTIFY ONLY and TERMINATE ENTIRE PIPELINE fail if any
downstream topic reaches k; KEEP RUNNING PARTIAL PIPELINE fails only if all down­
stream topics reach k.
Detection­time bounds
Let k = missesThreshold and ∆= checkIntervalMs. After a
peer becomes silent, the time­to­detect (TTD) satisfies
TTD ∈[timeoutMs, timeoutMs + (k −1) · ∆+ ∆] ,
i.e., at least one timeout, plus up to k check periods for the counters to reach k (bounded
by scheduling granularity).
4https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/installation/configuration/consumer-configs.html
5https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/installation/configuration/consumer-configs.html
6https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/installation/configuration/consumer-configs.html
32
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:109==
Worked example
With timeoutMs = 10,000, ∆= checkIntervalMs = 5,000, and k =
3:
TTD ∈[10 s, 10 s + 2 · 5 s + 5 s] = [10 s, 25 s].
This matches the practical behavior observed during controlled shutdowns and transient
broker events: first miss at ≈10 s, declaration at the third consecutive miss ≈25 s after
silence.
5.7.4
Logging and Recovery Semantics
Event­driven, debounced logs
To avoid log spam while preserving observability, log­
ging is transition­driven:
• First late observation on a topic: log “timeout miss 1/k” and enter SUSPECT.
• Intermediate misses 2, . . . , k −1: rate­limited logs; optional periodic summaries (ev­
ery N checks) with “miss n/k” across topics.
• Declaration (k/k): single “CRITICAL: declaring failure” log with the silent topics set
and policy context; notification is emitted.
• Silencing optional inputs (if enabled): log once per topic when it transitions to si­
lenced state, including re­arm conditions.
Recovery
On receipt of a timely heartbeat after a suspect or failed state:
• counters reset to zero,
• a single “RECOVERED” log is emitted with time­to­recover (TTR) and total misses
for the incident,
• if the topic was silenced, it remains silenced until the documented re­arm point (e.g.,
restart or admin action); otherwise monitoring continues normally.
Operator­facing context
Notifications and internal metrics include: per­topic counters
at declaration, whether the topic is critical/optional, the full monitored set and silent subset,
TTD (ms), and cumulative counts of timeouts hit, recoveries, and silenced topics. This
enables post­incident analysis and stable comparisons across runs.
5.8
Failure Reaction and Propagation
Detecting a failure is only the first step; the system must then react in a predictable and
useful way. A single, hardcoded reaction is insufficient for the diverse needs of DAPM
users, as a data analyst may prioritize data integrity while a pipeline operator might prefer
to keep non­critical parts of a pipeline running.
To address these varied requirements, the framework implements a multi­level fault toler­
ance model. During pipeline assembly, the user selects a single FaultToleranceLevel
that governs how every PE instance in the pipeline reacts to a detected failure. This logic
is encapsulated within the ReactionHandler component inside each PE instance. When
a HeartbeatManager detects a failure according to the k­consecutive­miss rule (§5.7.3),
it invokes its local ReactionHandler, which then executes actions according to the con­
figured level.
Core Actions: Notification and Termination
Before detailing the levels, it is important
to define two core actions that are part of the reaction process:
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
33
==PAGE:110==
Figure 5.9: Sequence diagram of heartbeat channels configuration (message­flow un­
changed; the decision rule now uses k consecutive misses).
34
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:111==
• Notification: In all cases where a failure is declared (i.e., a monitored topic reaches
missesThreshold = k consecutive timeouts), a PipelineNotification is sent.
This notification is delivered to two key stakeholders:
1. The organization that owns the pipeline (the “pipeline operator”).
2. The organization that owns the PE instance that detected the fault.
This ensures that all relevant parties are aware of the failure and its context (silent
topics, critical/optional flags, and time­to­detect), as described in §5.7.4.
• Termination: When a PE instance terminates, it undergoes a controlled shutdown.
It immediately stops processing incoming data messages and ceases all output,
including both data and its own heartbeats. It also cleans up its dedicated heartbeat­
related Kafka resources (topics and consumer groups). The main data channels are
left intact, but the PE instance becomes permanently inactive for the remainder of
the pipeline’s life.
Trigger semantics (summary)
A declaration occurs when, for a monitored topic, now−
lastSeen > timeoutMs holds for k = missesThreshold consecutive checks. Upstream
checks are evaluated per input port; downstream checks are evaluated over the set of
consumers with policy­specific aggregation (ANY vs. ALL).
Level 1: Notify Only (LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY)
This is the most passive strategy, designed
for operators who require observability but prefer to handle interventions manually.
Action: When a PE instance declares a neighbor failed (upstream or downstream) ac­
cording to the k­miss rule, its ReactionHandler sends a notification and continues normal
operation. No automatic termination is performed, even if inputs or consumers are miss­
ing. Optional inputs may still be silenced per configuration to reduce noise, but the PE
remains active (see §5.7.4).
Level 2: Terminate Entire Pipeline (LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE)
This is the
strictest, “fail­safe” strategy, designed to guarantee data integrity by preventing the pos­
sibility of stale or incomplete results.
Action: Upon declaring a failure (either any upstream input or any downstream con­
sumer), the PE sends a notification and immediately initiates its own termination. Be­
cause it has terminated, it stops sending heartbeats. Its neighbors will, in turn, eventually
reach k consecutive misses on this PE’s topics and terminate themselves. This creates
a cascading shutdown that quickly stops all PE instances across the entire pipeline.
Level 3: Keep Running Partial Pipeline (LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE)
This
is the most sophisticated strategy, designed to maximize pipeline availability and minimize
wasted resources by isolating the failure to only the affected parts of the pipeline. The
reaction at this level is governed by the following propagation rules.
Downstream cascade (necessary­consumer rule).
If a PE instance declares all of
its downstream consumers failed (each has reached k misses), it becomes an orphan.
The ReactionHandler terminates the PE to avoid wasted computation. If at least one
downstream consumer remains timely (its counter is below k), the PE continues running.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
35
==PAGE:112==
Upstream back­propagation (critical­input rule).
If a PE instance declares a critical
upstream input failed (the input port’s monitored topic reaches k misses), it terminates.
If only optional inputs are declared failed, the PE continues in degraded mode; optional
inputs may be silenced to suppress further timeout logs until re­armed, as described in
§5.7.4.
Containment and cascade timing
Because declarations require k consecutive misses,
propagation between neighbors is naturally debounced. The time­to­detect bounds de­
rived in §5.7.3 apply at each hop. Consequently, a single PE’s termination cleanly prop­
agates downstream (consumers lose all inputs and terminate) while back­propagating
upstream only when necessary (all consumers lost or a critical input failed), thereby con­
taining faults to the minimal affected subgraph.
Illustrative example
In the Wikipedia scenario (see Figure 5.4):
• If the HeuristicsMiner crashes, its downstream PetriNetVisualizerSink will de­
clare it failed after k consecutive misses and terminate. The EnglishFilter keeps
running because it still has an active consumer (BehavioralPatternsCC); no up­
stream critical input is lost.
• If the Source fails, all PEs will eventually declare upstream failure after k consecutive
misses, producing a full cascade (Level 2) or a contained but widespread shutdown
(Level 3), since all branches ultimately depend on the source.
This logic satisfies the data analyst who wants to preserve independent branches and
the budget owner who wants to stop paying for useless computation, while ensuring that
failure decisions are stable and auditable due to the k­consecutive­miss rule and the struc­
tured notifications (§5.7.4).
5.9
Observability: Notifications and Fault Context
A core requirement of the fault tolerance framework is to provide observability into the
health of the pipeline. The design achieves this through a robust notification system that
informs operators of failures in a timely and detailed manner. This mechanism ensures
that even when the system takes automated recovery actions, a human operator is always
made aware of the event for investigation.
The notification system is designed as a service that spans across the distributed compo­
nents of the framework and is tightly integrated with the k­consecutive­miss declaration
rule (see §5.7.3) and the structured logging defined in §5.7.4.
Fault Context Creation
When a HeartbeatManager within a PE instance declares a
failure (i.e., a monitored topic reaches missesThreshold = k consecutive timeouts), it
does not simply signal a generic timeout. Instead, it creates a FaultContext object that
captures both what failed and why it was declared now. The context includes:
• affectedPeerDirection: The direction of the failed neighbor relative to the detecting
PE (i.e., UPSTREAM_PRODUCER or DOWNSTREAM_CONSUMER).
• silentMonitoredTopics: The set of monitored heartbeat topics that have reached
k consecutive misses at declaration time.
• allConfiguredTopicsForDirection: The complete set of heartbeat topics config­
ured for that direction (to show, e.g., “1 of 3 upstream producers are silent”).
36
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:113==
• criticalitySnapshot: For upstream inputs, a per­topic classification (critical vs.
optional) at declaration time.
• timingSnapshot: The values sendIntervalMs, checkIntervalMs, timeoutMs, and
missesThreshold used for the decision (the effective configuration after derivation
and validation).
• counters: For each silent topic: current consecutive misses, lastSeen timestamp,
firstMissObservedAt for this declaration window, and the PE’s rolling counters (e.g.,
total checks, total timeouts observed, total declared failures, total recoveries, total
resets).
• strategySnapshot: The verification strategy used for the direction (e.g., ANY_DOWNSTREAM,
ALL_DOWNSTREAM, ALL_UPSTREAM), including the strategy’s aggregation semantics.
• detectionBoundsMs: A computed lower/upper bound on time­to­detect based on
§5.7.3 (captures the check cadence effect).
• failureCorrelationId: A stable identifier for this declaration episode; reused by sub­
sequent follow­up events (e.g., silencing and recovery).
Notification Generation
The ReactionHandler, upon receiving the FaultContext, pro­
duces a detailed PipelineNotification that is suitable for both dashboards and auto­
mated responders. The notification includes:
• Pipeline and PE identifiers (pipeline ID, detecting PE instance ID, organization).
• eventType: e.g., HEARTBEAT_TIMEOUT_ON_UPSTREAM_TOPIC or HEARTBEAT_TIMEOUT_ON_DOWNSTREA
• humanMessage: A concise, human­readable description of what failed and along
which topics.
• policyDecision: The FaultToleranceLevel and the resolved action taken (termi­
nate / continue degraded / notify only).
• context: The full FaultContext as summarized above (silent topics, all configured
topics, criticality, timing snapshot, counters, strategy, detection bounds, correlation
id).
• silencingState: For optional inputs, whether the topic has been temporarily si­
lenced to prevent repeated alert storms until re­armed (see §5.7.4).
Notification Dispatch
The ReactionHandler uses the PipelineNotificationService
to dispatch notifications via HTTP POST to the pipeline owner’s organization and the de­
tecting PE owner’s organization (/pipeline/notification). To ensure operational ro­
bustness:
• The service uses idempotent delivery keyed by failureCorrelationId and event
type to avoid duplicate incident records.
• Transient failures are retried with bounded backoff. Delivery outcomes (success/­
failure) are logged together with the correlation id for auditability.
Storage and Retrieval
The pipeline­owner organization’s NotificationController per­
sists notifications in a PipelineNotificationRepository indexed by {pipelineId, event­
Type, correlationId, timestamp}. Operators can reconstruct the full lifecycle of an incident
by querying the sequence:
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
37
==PAGE:114==
1. MISS_N_OF_K (structured logs; see §5.7.4),
2. DECLARED_FAILED (notification with failureCorrelationId),
3. Optional SILENCED (topic temporarily muted if optional and configured),
4. RECOVERED (when a timely heartbeat arrives and counters reset).
This timeline supports post­mortems and SLA7 reporting (e.g., time­to­detect, time­to­
recover, and repeated flaps per topic).
Reliability Benefit
By coupling structured logs, debounced declarations (k­consecutive­
miss rule), rich context in notifications, and durable storage, the framework provides an
auditable, noise­resistant observability path.
Operators can see exactly which topics
failed, under what configuration, how long detection took, what reaction policy was ap­
plied, whether optional inputs were silenced, and when the system recovered—all without
central coordination.
5.10
Summary of Design
This chapter presented the conceptual design of a decentralized fault­tolerance frame­
work for DAPM. Instead of a central supervisor, every Processing Element (PE) em­
beds a HeartbeatManager (detect) and a ReactionHandler (decide/act), yielding a self­
monitoring pipeline.
At the core is a peer­to­peer heartbeat protocol over dedicated Kafka topics (hb-upstream-*
/ hb-downstream-*). At assembly time, the builder computes the heartbeat topology, clas­
sifies merge inputs as critical or optional, and resolves timing parameters with safe de­
faults and sanity checks. The effective configuration includes sendIntervalMs, checkIntervalMs,
timeoutMs, missesThreshold (k), and an initialGracePeriodMs to absorb startup tran­
sients (see §5.7.2).
Liveness is evaluated with verification strategies that aggregate per­topic freshness (ALL_UPSTREAM,
ANY_DOWNSTREAM, ALL_DOWNSTREAM), combined with a k­consecutive­miss rule: a topic
must be late in k consecutive checks before the PE declares its peer failed. This de­
bounces network or scheduling noise. The resulting time­to­detect is bounded as ana­
lyzed in §5.7.3; upon recovery (a timely heartbeat after a declaration), counters reset and
optional topics can be re­armed.
When a declaration occurs, the ReactionHandler applies the pipeline’s selected FaultToleranceLevel:
1. Notify Only: emit a structured notification and continue;
2. Terminate Entire Pipeline: local termination propagates through timeouts to stop
the whole graph;
3. Keep Running Partial Pipeline: contain the failure to affected components; termi­
nate only when critical upstreams fail or when a PE becomes an orphan (no down­
stream consumers).
Propagation therefore follows data dependencies: downstream cascade on lost inputs,
and upstream back­propagation to prevent wasted work.
Observability is first­class: structured logs record misses, declarations, silencing, and re­
coveries; notifications carry a rich FaultContext (topics, criticality, strategy, timing snap­
7https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service-level_agreement
38
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:115==
shot, counters, detection bounds) keyed by a failureCorrelationId and are durably
stored by the pipeline owner for audit, SLA reporting, and post­mortems (see §5.7.4).
Collectively, these choices—local detection, debounced declarations, configurable timing
with startup grace, strategy­aware aggregation, policy­driven reaction, and rich observability—
deliver reliability, data integrity, and resource efficiency while preserving the autonomy of
each PE.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
39
==PAGE:116==
40
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:117==
6
Implementation
This chapter describes the technical implementation of the conceptual design presented
in Chapter 5. It details how the fault tolerance framework was realized in Java using the
Spring Boot framework and integrated into the existing DAPM codebase. The goal is to
provide a clear explanation of the key classes, their responsibilities, and the logic that
enables the system to detect and react to failures.
The implementation follows the decentralized architecture outlined in the design, where
monitoring and reaction logic are embedded within each Processing Element (PE) in­
stance. In this implementation, liveness detection uses a k­consecutive­misses model
(default k = 3): each monitored neighbor is declared failed only after k consecutive heart­
beat checks find no new heartbeat for that neighbor. This improves robustness against
transient jitter while preserving prompt detection (see Chapter 5 for the timing analysis).
The complete implementation described in this chapter is available at https://github.com/
DAPM-Thesis/dapm-thesis/tree/heartbeat-reaction-level2 (branch heartbeat-reaction-level2),
built on top of the upstream DAPM repository.
6.1
Integrating Fault Tolerance into the Processing Element
The implementation of the decentralized fault­tolerance framework begins with its inte­
gration into the abstract ProcessingElement class, which serves as the foundation for all
pipeline components (Source, Operator, and Sink). By extending this base class to act
as the central container for monitoring and reaction logic, the design ensures that every
Processing Element (PE) instance, regardless of its specific type, inherits the required
fault­tolerance capabilities.
Core Fields
To support this functionality, several key fields were introduced into the ProcessingElement
class:
• heartbeatManager — reference to the HeartbeatManager instance, responsible for
sending and monitoring heartbeats.
• reactionHandler — reference to the ReactionHandler interface, which encapsu­
lates the failure reaction logic.
• pipelineFaultToleranceLevel — instance of the FaultToleranceLevel enum,
specifying the pipeline­wide reaction policy.
• internalHeartbeatTopicConfig — configuration object containing the Kafka topic
names for sending and receiving heartbeats.
• heartbeatTimingConfig — configuration object holding the resolved timing param­
eters for the heartbeat protocol. It now includes:
– sendIntervalMs, checkIntervalMs, timeoutMs (kept for backward compati­
bility and observability),
– initialGracePeriodMs (startup grace),
– missesThreshold (number of consecutive missed checks required to declare
failure; default = 3).
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
41
==PAGE:118==
Two­Phase Configuration Process
The setup of these components is orchestrated by the PipelineBuilder through a two­
phase configuration process. This enables the centralized PipelineBuilder to inject the
required distributed configuration into each independent PE instance before the pipeline
starts.
Phase 1 — Topic Configuration
As shown in Algorithm ??, the PipelineBuilder de­
termines the exact set of heartbeat topics each PE instance must publish to and sub­
scribe to, based on the pipeline’s topology. It then makes a REST call to the PE in­
stance’s /pipelineBuilder/heartbeat/instance/{instanceID} endpoint, invoking the
configureHeartbeatTopics method to set the internalHeartbeatTopicConfig.
Algorithm: AssignHeartbeatTopics
1: function AssignHeartbeatTopics(pipeline)
2:
DG ←pipeline.getDirectedGraph()
3:
if pipeline.getProcessingElements().isEmpty() then
4:
return
5:
end if
6:
for all (instanceId, peRef) in pipeline.getProcessingElements() do
7:
cfg ←new HeartbeatTopicConfig()
▷1) Assign own publish topics (depends on PE kind)
8:
if peRef.isOperator() or peRef.isSink() then
9:
cfg.upstreamHeartbeatPublishTopic ←"hb-upstream-" + instanceId
10:
end if
11:
if peRef.isSource() or peRef.isOperator() then
12:
cfg.downstreamHeartbeatPublishTopic ←"hb-downstream-" + instanceId
13:
end if
▷2) Build subscription set for upstream neighbors
14:
upSubs ←empty LIST
15:
for all upRef in DG.getUpstream(peRef) do
16:
upId ←pipeline.getInstanceID(upRef)
17:
if upId = null then
18:
continue
19:
end if
20:
if upRef.isSource() or upRef.isOperator() then
21:
upSubs.add("hb-downstream-" + upId)
22:
end if
23:
end for
24:
cfg.upstreamNeighborHeartbeatTopicsToSubscribeTo ←upSubs
▷3) Build subscription set for downstream neighbors
25:
downSubs ←empty LIST
26:
for all downRef in DG.getDownStream(peRef) do
27:
downId ←pipeline.getInstanceID(downRef)
28:
if downId = null then
29:
continue
30:
end if
31:
if downRef.isOperator() or downRef.isSink() then
32:
downSubs.add("hb-upstream-" + downId)
33:
end if
34:
end for
42
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:119==
35:
cfg.downstreamNeighborHeartbeatTopicsToSubscribeTo ←downSubs
▷4) Mark optional upstream topics (merge semantics)
36:
opt ←empty SET
37:
for all channel in pipeline.getChannels() do
38:
for all subscriber in channel.getSubscribers() do
39:
if subscriber.element = peRef and subscriber.isOptional() then
40:
prodId ←pipeline.getInstanceID(channel.getPublisher())
41:
if prodId ̸= null then
42:
opt.add("hb-downstream-" + prodId)
43:
end if
44:
end if
45:
end for
46:
end for
47:
cfg.optionalUpstreamNeighborTopics ←opt
▷5) Dispatch config to the PE
48:
url ←peRef.organizationHostURL + "/pipelineBuilder/heartbeat/instance/"
+ instanceId
49:
body ←Json(cfg)
50:
resp ←webClient.PUT(url, body)
51:
if resp = null or not resp.status().is2xxSuccessful() then
52:
raise "Failed to configure Phase 1 heartbeat for " + instanceId
53:
end if
54:
end for
55:
return
56: end function
Phase 2 — Operational Parameter Configuration
Phase 2 consists of two tightly cou­
pled routines. First, Algorithm 2 (ResolveHeartbeatTimingsAndThresholds) derives the
effective heartbeat timings from the user’s (possibly partial) inputs and the system de­
faults, applying sanity constraints and computing both the startup grace period and the
missesThreshold. Second, Algorithm 1 (SetOperationalParametersOnPEs) uses that re­
solved configuration together with the pipeline’s chosen fault–tolerance policy to dispatch
a per–instance OperationalParamsRequest via a REST PUT to /pipelineBuilder/instance/{instance
On receipt, each PE invokes setOperationalParameters, stores the parameters (pipeline
ID, fault–tolerance level, organization host URL, heartbeat timings including missesThreshold
and initialGracePeriodMs), and instantiates a DefaultReactionHandler, initializing it
with the local PE reference and notification context. Any unsuccessful PUT aborts the
routine (as in the implementation), whereas successful calls ensure all PEs advertise a
consistent detection configuration before execution begins.
Lifecycle Integration
The lifecycle of the fault­tolerance mechanism is tied directly to the PE instance’s lifecy­
cle. The abstract start() and terminate() methods—implemented by concrete Source,
Operator, and Sink classes—are responsible for starting and stopping the heartbeatManager.
The base terminate() method in ProcessingElement ensures that heartbeatManager.stop()
is always called, preventing orphaned monitoring processes.
Summary
By embedding these components and configuration methods directly into the abstract
ProcessingElement, fault tolerance becomes a core, inherited capability of every com­
ponent in the DAPM ecosystem. This guarantees consistent monitoring and reaction logic
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
43
==PAGE:120==
Algorithm 1 SetOperationalParametersOnPEs
Input: pipeline
Output: Operational parameters set on all PEs in the pipeline
1: LOG “Setting operational parameters for pipeline {pipeline.id}”
▷1) Resolve heartbeat timings (final config, includes missesThreshold)
2: defaults ←HeartbeatTimingConfig.getDefaults()
▷defaults include
missesThreshold=3
3: finalHB ←ResolveHeartbeatTimingsAndThresholds(pipeline.getUserDefinedHeartbeatConfig(),
size(pipeline.getProcessingElements()), defaults)
▷2) For each PE instance, build and send the parameters
4: for all (instanceId, peRef) in pipeline.getProcessingElements() do
5:
params ←OperationalParamsRequest( pipelineID = pipeline.getPipelineID(),
faultToleranceLevel = pipeline.getFaultToleranceLevel(),
organizationHostURL =
peRef.getOrganizationHostURL(), heartbeatTimingConfig = finalHB )
6:
url ←peRef.getOrganizationHostURL() + "/pipelineBuilder/instance/" + in­
stanceId + "/operational-params"
7:
LOG
“Sending
to
PE
{peRef.templateID}
({instanceId}­
{peRef.instanceNumber}):
PipelineID={pipeline.id},
FTLevel={pipeline.ftLevel},
Misses={finalHB.missesThreshold}”
8:
resp ←webClient.PUT(url, JSON(params))
9:
if resp = null or not resp.status().is2xxSuccessful() then
10:
throw "Failed to set operational params for " + instanceId
11:
end if
12: end for
13: LOG “Operational parameters set for all PEs in pipeline {pipeline.id}”
44
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:121==
Algorithm 2 ResolveHeartbeatTimingsAndThresholds
1: function ResolveHeartbeatTimingsAndThresholds(userInput, numPEs, defaults)
2:
timeout ←defaults.timeoutMs
3:
send ←defaults.sendIntervalMs
4:
check ←defaults.checkIntervalMs
5:
grace ←defaults.initialGracePeriodMs
6:
misses ←defaults.missesThreshold
▷default = 3
7:
if userInput ̸= null then
8:
if userInput.missesThreshold ̸= null then
9:
misses ←max(1, userInput.missesThreshold)
10:
end if
11:
if userInput.timeoutMs ̸= null then
12:
timeout ←max(10000, userInput.timeoutMs)
▷enforce minimum 10s
13:
end if
14:
if userInput.sendIntervalMs = null and userInput.timeoutMs ̸= null then
15:
send ←floor(timeout / max(2, misses)) ▷roughly misses · send ≈timeout
16:
end if
17:
if userInput.checkIntervalMs = null then
18:
check ←floor(send / 2)
▷check at least twice per send by default
19:
end if
20:
if userInput.sendIntervalMs ̸= null then
21:
send ←userInput.sendIntervalMs
22:
end if
23:
if userInput.checkIntervalMs ̸= null then
24:
check ←userInput.checkIntervalMs
25:
end if
26:
if userInput.initialGracePeriodMs ̸= null then
27:
grace ←max(0, userInput.initialGracePeriodMs)
28:
end if
29:
end if
▷Compute grace if not explicitly set (depends on pipeline size)
30:
if grace = defaults.initialGracePeriodMs then
31:
grace ←30000
32:
if numPEs > 2 then
33:
grace ←grace + (numPEs ­ 5) * 3000
34:
end if
35:
end if
36:
if send < 100 then
37:
send ←100
38:
end if
39:
if check < 50 then
40:
check ←50
41:
end if
42:
if check > send then
43:
check ←floor(send / 2)
44:
end if
45:
if misses < 1 then
46:
misses ←1
47:
end if
48:
if timeout ≤send × misses then
49:
timeout ←send × misses
50:
end if
51:
return HeartbeatTimingConfig(sendIntervalMs = send, checkIntervalMs = check,
timeoutMs = timeout, initialGracePeriodMs = grace, missesThreshold = misses)
52: end function
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
45
==PAGE:122==
across all pipeline elements, without additional implementation effort in derived classes.
6.2
Extending the PipelineBuilder for Fault Tolerance
The PipelineBuilder orchestrates the fault­tolerance bootstrap across all Processing
Elements (PEs). It performs two idempotent phases: (i) heartbeat topic orchestration
(who publishes where and who subscribes to what), and (ii) dispatching the resolved
timing/policy configuration so each PE can start with a consistent liveness model. In the
updated implementation, the builder also propagates two new parameters that realize the
3­consecutive­misses model: missesThreshold and initialGracePeriodMs.
6.2.1
Heartbeat Topic Orchestration
This phase is implemented by configureHeartbeats(pipeline) and corresponds to Al­
gorithm ??. For each PE instance, the builder:
1. Traverses the pipeline’s directed graph to discover immediate upstream producers
and downstream consumers.
2. Assigns publish topics using the established directional convention: hb-upstream-⟨instanceID⟩
(signals to producers) and hb-downstream-⟨instanceID⟩(signals to consumers).
3. Builds subscription sets: subscribe to each upstream neighbor’s hb-downstream-*
and each downstream neighbor’s hb-upstream-*. For merges, subscriptions are
tracked per input port.
4. Marks optional inputs at merges: upstream topics flagged optional at assembly
time are carried into HeartbeatTopicConfig.optionalUpstreamNeighborTopics.
5. Dispatches the computed HeartbeatTopicConfig to each PE via PUT /pipelineBuilder/heartbeat/in
The operation is retriable and side­effect free on repeated calls.
Scalability note.
This design increases topic count (two heartbeat topics per producing
PE). Based on the analysis in the foundational thesis[8], a ZooKeeper­based Kafka cluster
can conservatively support hundreds of thousands of topics1. With an average pipeline
of 12 PEs (11 producers), this is about 33 topics per pipeline (11 data + 22 heartbeat),
suggesting capacity for >7,500 concurrent pipelines. With KRaft mode2, the practical
topic limit is expected to increase further.
6.2.2
Dispatching Timing and Policy Configuration
This phase is implemented by setOperationalParametersOnPEs(pipeline) (Algorithm 1).
It first calls ResolveHeartbeatTimingsAndThresholds (Algorithm 2) to derive the effective
heartbeat configuration from user input and defaults. The resolved object now includes:
• sendIntervalMs, checkIntervalMs, timeoutMs (kept for compatibility/observabil­
ity),
• initialGracePeriodMs (startup grace) and
• missesThreshold (default = 3 for 3 consecutive misses).
The builder then dispatches an OperationalParamsRequest to /pipelineBuilder/instance/{instanceID}/o
for every PE, carrying:
1. the pipeline ID,
1https://developer.confluent.io/faq/apache-kafka/topics-in-kafka/
2https://developer.confluent.io/learn/kraft/
46
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:123==
2. the selected FaultToleranceLevel, and
3. the resolved HeartbeatTimingConfig (including the new fields).
PEs persist these parameters via setOperationalParameters(...)
and (re)initialize
their DefaultReactionHandler accordingly. Any non­2xx response aborts the routine
to avoid skewed configurations across instances.
6.2.3
Parameter Resolution Details
(ResolveHeartbeatTimingsAndThresholds)
Algorithm 2 implements the precedence and normalization logic used system­wide. The
goals are (i) preserve backward compatibility for pipelines that specified only a time­
out, (ii) make the k­miss model (missesThreshold) first­class, and (iii) ensure safe, self­
consistent timing tuples.
Precedence.
1. Explicit missesThreshold (if provided) overrides the default (≥1).
2. Explicit timeoutMs (if provided) is honored (with a minimum floor, e.g., 10 s for
safety).
3. Derived intervals. If sendIntervalMs is absent and a timeout is present, set sendIntervalMs ≈
j
timeoutMs
max(2,missesThreshold)
k
. If checkIntervalMs is absent, set checkIntervalMs ≈
 sendIntervalMs
2

to check at least twice per send by default.
4. Explicit sendIntervalMs/checkIntervalMs always override derived values.
5. initialGracePeriodMs may be provided explicitly; otherwise it is computed from
pipeline size as in the prior implementation (see Algorithm 2).
Sanity checks and normalization.
• Clamp very small values: e.g., sendIntervalMs ≥100 ms, checkIntervalMs ≥50
ms.
• Ensure checkIntervalMs ≤
 sendIntervalMs
2

by default; if violated, reduce checkIntervalMs.
• Normalize a compatibility timeoutMs if needed so that timeoutMs ≥sendIntervalMs×
missesThreshold. This keeps logs, metrics, and UIs meaningful for older deploy­
ments that still reason about timeouts.
What PEs actually do with these values.
At runtime, each HeartbeatManager (i) sched­
ules sends at sendIntervalMs, (ii) polls and verifies liveness at checkIntervalMs, and
(iii) declares a neighbor failed after missesThreshold consecutive checks find no new
heartbeat (post initialGracePeriodMs). The timeoutMs remains as a reported/derived
figure for compatibility and operator intuition; detection is governed by the misses counter.
Example.
If a user specifies only timeoutMs = 9,000 ms and leaves everything else
empty, with defaults missesThreshold = 3, the resolver yields approximately:
sendIntervalMs ≈3000,
checkIntervalMs ≈1500,
timeoutMs = 9000,
missesThreshold = 3.
In steady state, a failure is declared after ≈three missed sends (subject to checkIntervalMs
scheduling and clock skew), matching the intent of the legacy timeout while providing jitter
tolerance.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
47
==PAGE:124==
6.3
Implementing the HeartbeatManager
The HeartbeatManager class is the execution engine of the liveness detection protocol.
An instance of this class runs within every ProcessingElement (PE) and is responsible
for the entire heartbeat lifecycle: sending liveness signals, monitoring neighbors, and trig­
gering a reaction upon suspected failure. The implementation now uses a k­consecutive­
misses model (with missesThreshold, default k = 3) plus a per­topic state machine that
supports optional­input silencing and explicit recovery detection.
6.3.1
Initialization
The HeartbeatManager is instantiated by its parent ProcessingElement during the start()
lifecycle phase. Its constructor receives the context/configuration injected by the PipelineBuilder:
• A reference to the owning ProcessingElement.
• The brokerUrl for the Kafka cluster.
• The HeartbeatTopicConfig (publish topics; upstream/downstream subscription sets;
optional­upstream set).
• The resolved HeartbeatTimingConfig: sendIntervalMs, checkIntervalMs, timeoutMs
(kept for compatibility/observability), missesThreshold, and initialGracePeriodMs.
• A reference to the ReactionHandler.
At initialization the manager:
1. Creates a dedicated Kafka Producer and Consumer and a unique heartbeatConsumerGroupId.
2. Ensures publish topics exist via AdminClient.
3. Builds a per­topic status table (see §6.3.2) for all monitored topics, marking which
are optional.
4. Selects a HeartbeatVerificationStrategy for downstream checks based on FaultToleranceLevel:
AllDownstreamTopicsActiveStrategy (strict) or AnyDownstreamVerificationStrategy
(flexible).
6.3.2
Heartbeat Miss Tracking & Per­Topic State Machine
To make the k­misses semantics explicit and avoid log/notification storms, each sub­
scribed heartbeat topic is tracked with a lightweight state object:
TopicStatus{ lastSeenTs, consecutiveMisses, isOptional, state }
The state field is one of:
STARTUP_GRACE Monitoring is deferred until initialGracePeriodMs elapses.
ACTIVE Heartbeats are being received in time; consecutiveMisses = 0.
SUSPECT One or more misses have been observed, but consecutiveMisses < missesThreshold.
DECLARED_FAILED The k­miss threshold has been reached and a failure was de­
clared.
SILENCED (optional inputs only) After declaration, further misses do not retrigger notifi­
cations/reactions until a heartbeat arrives again.
48
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:125==
Transitions.
• STARTUP_GRACE →ACTIVE: when the grace window expires (global timer) or
upon first heartbeat arrival.
• ACTIVE →SUSPECT: when now −lastSeenTs > sendIntervalMs at a check.
• SUSPECT →ACTIVE: upon receiving a heartbeat (reset counter).
• SUSPECT →DECLARED_FAILED: when consecutiveMisses reaches missesThreshold.
• DECLARED_FAILED →SILENCED (optional only): after notifying/handling, the
topic is silenced to prevent repeat notifications.
• DECLARED_FAILED or SILENCED →ACTIVE (recovery): upon receiving the
next heartbeat; counters reset and a recovery log is emitted.
Miss counting rule.
At each verification tick, for a topic not in STARTUP_GRACE:
if (now −lastSeenTs) > sendIntervalMs ⇒consecutiveMisses += 1;
else ⇒consecutiveMisses ←0.
A declaration occurs when consecutiveMisses ≥missesThreshold.
6.3.3
Core Logic and Scheduled Tasks
The manager uses a ScheduledExecutorService to run two tasks in parallel: one for
sending and one for monitoring.
Sending task.
Scheduled every sendIntervalMs. If the owning PE is available, emit a
Heartbeat{instanceId,timestamp} on each configured publish topic.
Monitoring task (poll­and­check loop).
Scheduled every checkIntervalMs:
1. Poll. consumer.poll(...) and, for each received record, update the correspond­
ing topic’s lastSeenTs; if the topic was SUSPECT/DECLARED_FAILED/SILENCED, reset
consecutiveMisses and transition to ACTIVE, emitting a single recovery log/metric.
2. Grace gate. If global initialGracePeriodMs has not elapsed, skip verification (top­
ics remain in STARTUP_GRACE).
3. Verify upstream per­port. For each upstream topic:
• If SILENCED and no new heartbeat, skip (do not increment misses).
• Otherwise, apply the miss counting rule. When a declaration is due:
(a) Build a FaultContext capturing direction, silent topics, and full configured
set.
(b) Invoke reactionHandler.processLivenessFailure(faultContext, isOptional).
(c) If optional: mark topic SILENCED (no further notifications until recovery).
(d) If critical: the reaction may terminate the PE; the loop exits naturally on
shutdown.
4. Verify downstream (policy­aware). Compute downstream liveness via the config­
ured HeartbeatVerificationStrategy, which treats ACTIVE topics as alive. If pol­
icy requires and no downstream is alive, raise a downstream failure via ReactionHandler.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
49
==PAGE:126==
5. Logging/metrics. Emit:
• debug­level miss increments (topic, missCount, sinceTs),
• info­level declaration events (direction, optional/critical, k used),
• info­level recovery events (topic, downtimeMs),
• gauges for lastSeenTs and consecutiveMisses.
Compatibility with timeoutMs.
Although failure detection is governed by missesThreshold
and sendIntervalMs, the manager still computes an equivalent timeout bT = missesThreshold×
sendIntervalMs for logs/metrics to keep dashboards and older tooling meaningful.
6.3.4
Termination and Cleanup
When the owning PE terminates, HeartbeatManager.stop():
1. Cancels scheduled tasks and awaits executor shutdown.
2. Closes the Kafka producer and consumer.
3. Deletes the PE’s heartbeat topics and the unique heartbeat consumer group via
AdminClient.
4. Clears the per­topic status table to release memory.
This prevents resource leaks (orphaned topics/consumer groups) and ensures clean restart
semantics.
6.3.5
Summary
The updated HeartbeatManager implements k­consecutive­misses detection with per­
topic state, optional­input silencing to avoid notification storms, and explicit recovery tran­
sitions. It preserves backward­compatible observability via timeoutMs while making de­
tection more robust to jitter. Policy­aware downstream verification and precise logging/­
metrics provide clear, auditable behavior aligned with the design’s decentralized fault­
tolerance goals.
6.4
Implementing the ReactionHandler
The ReactionHandler executes the pipeline’s configured fault­tolerance policy when a
liveness failure is declared. The implementation follows the Strategy pattern: a ReactionHandler
interface defines the contract, and DefaultReactionHandler provides the concrete be­
havior. A handler instance is created and initialized in each PE during setOperationalParameters(...)
with: a reference to the parent ProcessingElement, the pipelineId, the selected FaultToleranceLevel,
and a PipelineNotificationService.
6.4.1
Processing a Liveness Failure
The entry point is:
processLivenessFailure(FaultContext ctx, boolean isOptional)
This method is invoked by the HeartbeatManager once per declaration event (i.e., when
the per­topic state reaches DECLARED_FAILED after k consecutive misses). The FaultContext
includes, among others, the local PE identity, the affected direction (UPSTREAM_PRODUCER
or DOWNSTREAM_CONSUMER), the set of silent topics, and the complete configured set for
that direction. The handler’s responsibilities are:
50
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:127==
1. Compose a detailed notification. The payload contains: pipelineId, detecting
instanceId, direction, list of silent topics, list of all configured topics, the configured
k (missesThreshold), and the equivalent detection window bT = missesThreshold×
sendIntervalMs for operator­facing observability.
2. Decide and act based on policy. The handler evaluates currentFaultToleranceLevel
and the isOptional flag (only meaningful for upstream failures at merge inputs).
3. Idempotency and re­entrancy. The HeartbeatManager already de­duplicates via
per­topic state (SILENCED for optional inputs and termination for critical paths). The
handler therefore treats repeated invocations for the same declaration as idempo­
tent (no additional side effects if the PE is already terminating/terminated).
For clarity and auditability, the handler logs three kinds of events: (1) Declaration (policy,
direction, k, topics), (2) Action (continue/terminate), and (3) Recovery (emitted by the
manager when heartbeats resume).
Algorithm 3 ProcessLivenessFailure (DefaultReactionHandler)
1: procedure processLivenessFailure(ctx, isOptional)
2:
notif ←buildNotification(ctx, missesThreshold, sendIntervalMs)
3:
notificationService.send(notif)
4:
if currentFTLevel = LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY then
5:
return
▷observe only; keep running
6:
else if currentFTLevel = LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE then
7:
processingElement.terminate
8:
return
9:
else if currentFTLevel = LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE then
10:
if not isOptional then
11:
processingElement.terminate
12:
else
13:
return
▷optional input: continue in degraded mode
14:
end if
15:
end if
16: end procedure
6.4.2
Implementation of Reaction Levels
Level 1: Notify Only (LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY).
The handler always sends a PipelineNotification
and returns. The PE continues running even if inputs/outputs are unavailable. This level
provides observability without automation and is useful during testing or when external,
human­in­the­loop remediation is desired.
Level 2: Terminate Entire Pipeline (LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE).
After send­
ing the notification, the handler immediately calls processingElement.terminate(). Be­
cause heartbeats cease after termination, neighbors detect failure and also terminate,
creating a rapid, graph­wide shutdown. This guarantees strict data­integrity semantics by
avoiding partial or stale results.
Level 3: Keep Running Partial Pipeline (LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE).
The handler first sends a notification, then:
• Upstream failures. If the failed input is critical (!isOptional), the handler termi­
nates the PE, allowing the failure to propagate downstream and stopping useless
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
51
==PAGE:128==
work. If the input is optional (isOptional), the PE keeps running in a documented
degraded mode. Subsequent misses on that optional input are silenced by the
HeartbeatManager until recovery, preventing repeated alerts.
• Downstream failures. The handler is invoked when policy­aware downstream ver­
ification (strict “all alive” vs. flexible “any alive”) fails. In both cases the action is
termination, which also propagates back­pressure to upstream producers, prevent­
ing orphan computation.
Discussion. This structure cleanly maps the conceptual model to code. The ReactionHandler
remains policy­focused and side­effect oriented (notify/terminate), while the HeartbeatManager
owns detection cadence, per­topic state (ACTIVE/SUSPECT/DECLARED_FAILED/SILENCED),
and recovery. The separation ensures predictable, auditable behavior, avoids notification
storms, and supports safe extension (e.g., adding a future auto­restart policy) without
touching the detection core.
6.5
Implementing the Notification Service
A core requirement of the fault­tolerance framework is observability: operators must learn
what failed, where, and under which thresholds it was declared. The implementation pro­
vides this via a small, distributed notification service with three parts: a sender embedded
in each PE, a receiver exposed by each organization, and an in­memory store for audit
and retrieval. Notifications are emitted on three events: declaration (after k consecutive
misses), silencing (optional input suppressed), and recovery (heartbeats resume).
6.5.1
DefaultPipelineNotificationService (Sender)
This service is injected into the ReactionHandler and called by the HeartbeatManager/ReactionHandler
when a liveness event occurs.
• Payload. The sender constructs a PipelineNotification that contains:
– pipelineId, detectingInstanceId, detectingPeKind
– eventType ∈{DECLARED_FAILED, SILENCED_OPTIONAL, RECOVERED}
– direction ∈{UPSTREAM_PRODUCER, DOWNSTREAM_CONSUMER}
– silentTopics (the subset that missed), allConfiguredTopics (for context)
– missesThreshold (k), sendIntervalMs, checkIntervalMs, timeoutMs, initialGracePeriodMs
– firstMissTs, declarationTs (or recoveredTs)
– isOptional (for upstream­port events), policy (current FaultToleranceLevel)
– eventId (stable hash of {pipelineId, detectingInstanceId, direction, topic­
id, firstMissTs}) for idempotency.
• Dispatch. The service serializes the payload to JSON and sends an HTTP POST
to the organization’s /pipeline/notification endpoint. Non­2xx responses are
logged; the detection flow does not block or retry indefinitely (best­effort, bounded­
time send).
• Idempotency. Re­emitting the same declaration is avoided at the source by the
manager’s per­topic state machine; the eventId allows the receiver to deduplicate
if necessary.
52
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:129==
6.5.2
NotificationController (Receiver)
Each organization exposes a REST controller to accept and serve notifications.
• Endpoints.
– POST /pipeline/notification — Accepts a single PipelineNotification.
– GET /{pipelineId}/notifications — Returns notifications for a pipeline.
– GET /notifications/all — Returns all notifications.
• Validation and dedup. The controller validates required fields (IDs, eventType,
timing parameters). If eventId already exists, the request is accepted but ignored
(idempotent).
• Classification. eventType drives downstream handling: operators can quickly dis­
tinguish first­time DECLARED_FAILED from SILENCED_OPTIONAL (degraded but intended)
and RECOVERED.
6.5.3
PipelineNotificationRepository (Store)
The repository offers simple, thread­safe, in­memory persistence (sufficient for prototype
evaluation and testing).
• Indexes.
– byPipelineId: Map<pipelineId, List<Notification>>
– all: List<Notification> (append­only)
– eventIds: Set<String> for fast deduplication.
• Concurrency. ConcurrentHashMap for maps and CopyOnWriteArrayList for lists
ensure safe, low­contention writes under moderate load.
• Retention. Configurable in­process retention (e.g., max items per pipeline or time­
based eviction). For production, this layer can be swapped with a durable store
without changing controller contracts.
Operational Notes.
• One declaration per topic per outage. Thanks to the manager’s per­topic state
machine (ACTIVE →SUSPECT →DECLARED_FAILED; optional inputs may tran­
sition to SILENCED), only the first declaration is notified. Recovery emits exactly
one RECOVERED.
• Policy awareness. The payload includes policy so operators can correlate actions
(e.g., termination vs. degraded continuation) with observed events.
• Auditable timing. Including missesThreshold, sendIntervalMs, and timestamps
(firstMissTs, declarationTs) allows reconstructing the detection window used
when the decision was made.
6.6
Structured Logging & Metrics
To make liveness behavior observable by both humans and machines, we add structured
JSON logs and low–cardinality metrics without removing the existing human–readable
lines (e.g., the “[HB SEND]/[HB RECV]/ANY­policy miss 1/3” entries shown above). The
legacy lines remain the primary console signal during development; structured logs/met­
rics power dashboards, alerts, and postmortems.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
53
==PAGE:130==
Goals and Coexistence
• Machine­parsable: One JSON object per event (“logfmt”) with stable field names
and types.
• Low cardinality: Metrics aggregate by pipelineId, peName, direction, and policy;
high­cardinality keys (e.g., topic) stay in logs, not in metric labels.
• Zero­friction: Structured JSON is emitted alongside legacy lines under the same
log level; can be toggled via configuration.
Event Taxonomy
We standardize on the following event type values: HB_SEND, HB_RECV, LIVENESS_CHECK,
MISS_STREAK_INC, DECLARED_FAILED, SILENCED_OPTIONAL, RECOVERED, REACTION_APPLIED,
NOTIFICATION_SENT.
Minimal schema (per log line):
• ts, level, logger, thread
• pipelineId, orgId, peName, instanceId
• type (from taxonomy), direction ∈{UPSTREAM, DOWNSTREAM}
• topic (string; log­only, not a metric label)
• policy (fault­tolerance level), optionalInput (bool when relevant)
• missStreak, missesThreshold, timeoutMs, checkIntervalMs, sendIntervalMs, initialGracePeriodMs
• state ∈{TIMELY, LATE, DECLARED}
• cause.instanceId (neighbor that triggered the event), neighborCount (per direc­
tion)
Examples (legacy →structured)
# Legacy:
[HB SEND] HeuristicsMiner ... Sent heartbeat to DOWNSTREAM topic hb-downstream-Instance-8b5e
# Structured JSON (same event):
{"ts":"2025-08-15T13:04:07.758+02:00","level":"INFO","type":"HB_SEND",
"pipelineId":"<pid>","orgId":"orgB","peName":"HeuristicsMiner",
"instanceId":"Instance-8b5ea366-188c-492d-9dfb-577a2ef4ac22",
"direction":"DOWNSTREAM","topic":"hb-downstream-Instance-8b5ea366-...",
"sendIntervalMs":3000}
# Legacy:
[HB DOWNSTREAM] ... ANY-policy all-silent miss 1/3 (all 1 downstream topics are late).
# Structured JSON:
{"ts":"2025-08-15T13:04:07.139+02:00","level":"INFO","type":"MISS_STREAK_INC",
"pipelineId":"<pid>","orgId":"orgB","peName":"HeuristicsMiner",
"instanceId":"Instance-8b5ea366-188c-492d-9dfb-577a2ef4ac22",
"direction":"DOWNSTREAM","policy":"ANY","state":"LATE",
"missStreak":1,"missesThreshold":3,"neighborCount":1}
# Legacy:
[HB DOWNSTREAM] ... ANY-policy recovered (some downstream timely again). Reset aggregate mis
54
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:131==
# Structured JSON:
{"ts":"2025-08-15T13:04:12.146+02:00","level":"INFO","type":"RECOVERED",
"pipelineId":"<pid>","orgId":"orgB","peName":"HeuristicsMiner",
"instanceId":"Instance-8b5ea366-188c-492d-9dfb-577a2ef4ac22",
"direction":"DOWNSTREAM","policy":"ANY",
"prevMissStreak":1,"missStreak":0,"state":"TIMELY"}
Metrics (Micrometer/Prometheus style)
Counters (monotonic):
• hb_send_total{pipelineId,peName,direction}
• hb_recv_total{pipelineId,peName,direction}
• hb_miss_total{pipelineId,peName,direction}
(increment on
MISS_STREAK_INC)
• hb_declared_total{pipelineId,peName,direction,optional}
(on
DECLARED_FAILED)
• hb_silenced_total{pipelineId,peName}
(on SILENCED_OPTIONAL)
• hb_recovered_total{pipelineId,peName,direction}
(on RECOVERED)
• reaction_applied_total{pipelineId,peName,policy}
(on REACTION_APPLIED)
• notification_sent_total{pipelineId,peName}
(on NOTIFICATION_SENT)
Gauges (instantaneous):
• hb_miss_streak_current{pipelineId,peName,direction} (per­direction streak;
no topic label)
• hb_neighbors_configured{pipelineId,peName,direction}
Histograms/Timers (SLIs):
• hb_detection_latency_seconds{pipelineId,peName,direction} Time from the
first late check in a streak to DECLARED_FAILED.
• hb_recovery_latency_seconds{pipelineId,peName,direction} Time from dec­
laration to RECOVERED.
• hb_interarrival_seconds{pipelineId,peName,direction} Observed heartbeat
inter­arrival on receive paths.
Configuration info (static):
• hb_config_info{pipelineId,peName,policy,missesThreshold,timeoutMs,checkIntervalMs,
= 1
Event→Metric Mapping (selected)
• HB_SEND →inc(hb_send_total{…}).
• HB_RECV →inc(hb_recv_total{…}), observe(hb_interarrival_seconds).
• MISS_STREAK_INC →inc(hb_miss_total), set(hb_miss_streak_current).
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
55
==PAGE:132==
• DECLARED_FAILED →inc(hb_declared_total{...,optional}), stop/start timer for
hb_detection_latency.
• RECOVERED →inc(hb_recovered_total), observe hb_recovery_latency, reset streak
gauge to 0.
• SILENCED_OPTIONAL →inc(hb_silenced_total).
• REACTION_APPLIED →inc(reaction_applied_total{...,policy}).
• NOTIFICATION_SENT →inc(notification_sent_total).
Operational Guidance
• Levels: HB_SEND/HB_RECV/RECOVERED at INFO; MISS_STREAK_INC at INFO; DECLARED_FAILED
and REACTION_APPLIED at WARN (or ERROR if termination).
• Correlation: Include cause.instanceId to connect failure declarations with the
affected neighbor and subsequent reaction/notification events.
• Cardinality hygiene: Do not use topic or raw instanceId as metric labels; keep
them in logs only. Prefer aggregate labels (pipeline, PE, direction, policy).
• Toggles: Feature flags allow enabling JSON logs and metrics independently; de­
faults are conservative (off) to preserve legacy behavior.
6.7
Summary
This chapter presented the concrete realization of the decentralized fault­tolerance frame­
work in the DAPM codebase. The core capability is embedded in every ProcessingElement,
which now owns a HeartbeatManager for liveness detection and a policy­driven ReactionHandler
for failure response.
Implementation­wise, the PipelineBuilder performs two idempotent phases before ex­
ecution: (i) heartbeat topic orchestration (publish/subscribe sets, optional­input flags per
merge port), and (ii) dispatch of the resolved operational parameters. The latter includes
both legacy timing fields (sendIntervalMs, checkIntervalMs, timeoutMs) and the new
initialGracePeriodMs and missesThreshold, which together implement the k­consecutive­
misses model (default k = 3) analyzed in Chapter 5.
Within each PE, the HeartbeatManager sends heartbeats, polls neighbors, and evalu­
ates liveness via a per­topic state machine (ACTIVE →SUSPECT →DECLARED_FAILED with
SILENCED for optional inputs) that prevents alert storms and cleanly marks recovery upon
the next heartbeat. Downstream verification remains policy­aware (“all alive” vs. “any
alive”), while upstream checks are per port and respect optionality.
On declaration, the ReactionHandler applies one of three policies—LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY,
LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE, or LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE—and
always emits a detailed PipelineNotification. A lightweight notification service (sender,
receiver, in­memory store) provides an auditable trail of DECLARED_FAILED, SILENCED_OPTIONAL,
and RECOVERED events.
Finally, structured JSON logs and low­cardinality metrics were added alongside the exist­
ing human­readable lines, enabling dashboards and alerts without disrupting developer
ergonomics. Collectively, these implementations deliver a robust, auditable, and con­
figurable fault­tolerance layer that matches the design goals and improves resilience to
transient jitter, while preserving backward­compatible observability through the legacy
timeout semantics.
56
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:133==
7
Evaluation and Outcomes
This chapter empirically evaluates the decentralized fault­tolerance framework designed
and implemented in this thesis. The primary goal is to validate that the solution reliably
detects and reacts to Processing Element (PE) crash failures according to the configured
policies.
To achieve this, a series of controlled experiments were designed to test the framework
under realistic conditions. This chapter details the results of these experiments, analyzing
the system’s behavior and log outputs to directly answer the research questions posed in
Section 3.2.
7.1
Experimental Setup
To ensure that the experimental results are valid and reproducible, the following setup
was used for all tests.
7.1.1
Testbed Pipeline and Environment
The experiment was conducted using the Wikipedia analysis pipeline detailed in Sec­
tion 5.4. The pipeline, consisting of eight PE instances distributed across two concep­
tual organizations (OrgA and OrgB), was deployed in a containerized environment using
Docker. Each organization and PE instance ran in its own Docker container, communi­
cating via a shared Apache Kafka cluster also running in Docker. This setup effectively
simulates a distributed, cross­organizational deployment.
7.1.2
System Specifications
The experiments were executed on a single machine with the following specifications:
• Processor: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7­10875H CPU @ 2.30GHz
• Installed RAM: 16.0 GB
• Operating System: Windows 11 Home, 64­bit, x64­based processor
• Software Versions:
– Docker Desktop: 4.41.2 (Engine Version 28.1.1)
– Java SDK: OpenJDK 21.0.5
– Apache Kafka: 7.9.1 (Confluent Platform)
7.1.3
Heartbeat Timing Configuration
The fault­tolerance framework was configured with the following timing parameters:
• Send Interval: 3,000 ms
• Liveness Check Interval: 5,000 ms
• Heartbeat Timeout Threshold: 10,000 ms
• Initial Grace Period: 30,000 ms
This configuration means that each PE sends a heartbeat every 3 seconds, checks on its
neighbors every 5 seconds, and declares a neighbor as failed if it has been silent for 10
seconds.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
57
==PAGE:134==
7.1.4
Failure Simulation
A PE crash failure was simulated by manually invoking the:
/pipelineExecution/terminate/instance/{instanceID}
REST endpoint for a running PE instance. This action triggers the terminate() method,
which immediately stops heartbeat producers and data processing, accurately simulating
an abrupt process halt from the perspective of its neighbors.
7.2
Experiment 1: Validation of
LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE
This experiment validates the framework’s ability to enforce the strictest fault­tolerance
policy, where the failure of any single PE leads to the orderly shutdown of the entire
pipeline.
7.2.1
Goal
The goal is to verify that upon the failure of a single PE, the framework can:
1. Detect the liveness failure in a timely manner (Validating RQ1).
2. Correctly apply the LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE policy (Validating RQ2).
3. Reliably propagate the termination command across all PEs in the pipeline through
a cascading shutdown (Validating RQ3).
7.2.2
Method
1. The Wikipedia pipeline was deployed with faultToleranceLevel set to LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPEL
2. The pipeline was allowed to run for several minutes to stabilize and pass the initial
grace period.
3. At 22:54:11.638, a failure was simulated by manually terminating the English LanguageFilter
PE (Instance b89ce1ec...) in OrgA.
4. The logs from both OrgA and OrgB were collected and analyzed to reconstruct the
sequence of events.
7.2.3
Results and Analysis
The experiment confirmed that the framework behaved exactly as designed.
Timeliness of Liveness Detection (Validating RQ1)
• Failure Event: English LanguageFilter terminated at 22:54:11.638.
• First Detection (Upstream): EventSource in OrgA detected failure at 22:54:17.211.
• Detection Latency: 5.573 seconds.
• First Detection (Downstream): HeuristicsMiner in OrgB detected failure at 22:54:17.530.
• Detection Latency: 5.892 seconds.
These results align with the configured LIVENESS_CHECK_INTERVAL_MS of 5,000 ms. The
detection occurred during the first liveness check after the PE went silent and is well within
the HEARTBEAT_TIMEOUT_MS of 10,000 ms, confirming timeliness and predictability.
Cascading Failure Propagation (Validating RQ2 & RQ3)
The logs reveal an orderly cascading shutdown:
• Initiating Event (T+0.0s): English LanguageFilter terminated.
58
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:135==
• First Wave (T+5.6s to T+6.0s): Direct neighbors detect timeout and initiate termi­
nation.
22:54:17.211 [HB MANAGER FAULT] EventSource...: Downstream liveness check FAILED.
22:54:17.212 [REACTION HANDLER LVL2] EventSource...:
Terminating entire pipeline due to fault with DOWNSTREAM_CONSUMER peers.
• Notification: EventSource dispatched a notification before termination:
22:54:17.250 [NOTIFICATION CTRL] Received notification:
Type=HEARTBEAT_TIMEOUT_ON_DOWNSTREAM_TOPIC...
• Second Wave (T+15.7s): Russian LanguageFilter detects failure of EventSource:
22:54:27.378 [REACTION HANDLER LVL2] LanguageFilter...:
Terminating entire pipeline due to fault with UPSTREAM_PRODUCER peers.
• Final Termination (T+27.1s): Russian BehaviouralPatternsConformance shuts
down.
7.2.4
Conclusion
The results unequivocally validate the functionality of the LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE
policy.
The framework detected the failure within configured bounds and executed a
predictable, cascading shutdown across all components. This confirms compliance with
RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3 for a fail­safe operational strategy.
7.3
Experiment 2: Validation of LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY
This experiment tests the most passive fault­tolerance policy, designed for observability
without automated intervention.
7.3.1
Goal
To verify that when a PE fails, its neighbors will:
1. Detect the failure within the expected timeframe (Validating RQ1).
2. Send a detailed notification to the pipeline owner (Validating RQ2).
3. Remain operational without terminating (Validating RQ3).
7.3.2
Method
1. The Wikipedia pipeline was deployed with faultToleranceLevel set to LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY.
2. After the pipeline stabilized, the English LanguageFilter PE (Instance a2c4ee7f...)
was terminated at 23:58:56.541.
3. System logs were monitored, the notification endpoint was queried, and the opera­
tional state of all other PEs was observed.
7.3.3
Results and Analysis
The experiment confirmed that the LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY policy executed correctly.
Failure Detection and Reaction
Upon termination of the English LanguageFilter, its neighbors detected the heartbeat
loss within the expected time frame.
• The EventSource PE detected the failure after approximately 8.5 seconds.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
59
==PAGE:136==
• Instead of terminating, the ReactionHandler identified the configured policy and
performed only the notification action, as shown below:
23:59:05.048 [HB MANAGER FAULT] EventSource...:
Downstream liveness check FAILED.
23:59:05.049 [REACTION HANDLER] EventSource...:
Processing liveness failure...
Configured Level: LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY
23:59:05.081 [REACTION HANDLER] EventSource...:
Notification sent for DOWNSTREAM_CONSUMER fault.
PE continues operation.
• Similarly, the downstream HeuristicsMiner in OrgB detected the failure after 8.3
seconds and also continued operation after sending a notification.
• All other PEs in the pipeline remained active and continued sending and receiving
heartbeats to their healthy neighbors.
Notification Verification
The successful delivery of the alert was confirmed by the log of the notification controller,
which received the message sent from the EventSource:
23:59:05.072 [NOTIFICATION CTRL] Received notification:
Type=HEARTBEAT_TIMEOUT_ON_DOWNSTREAM_TOPIC...
7.3.4
Conclusion
This experiment successfully validates the LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY policy. The framework:
• Correctly detected the failure (RQ1).
• Reliably dispatched detailed notifications to the pipeline owner (RQ2).
• Took no automated termination actions, allowing all non­failed PEs to remain oper­
ational (RQ3).
This confirms the framework’s ability to support a purely monitoring­ and observability­
focused fault­tolerance strategy.
7.4
Experiment 3: Validation of
LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE
This experiment validates the most sophisticated policy, which aims to contain failures and
maximize pipeline uptime by isolating the fault to only the directly affected components.
7.4.1
Goal
To verify that a failure is:
1. Precisely contained to its dependent downstream branch (Validating RQ1 and RQ2).
2. Non­disruptive to independent branches, which should continue operating normally
(Validating RQ3).
7.4.2
Method
1. The Wikipedia pipeline was deployed with faultToleranceLevel set to LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_P
2. After stabilization, the HeuristicsMiner PE (Instance 11a67bb7...) in OrgB was
terminated at 00:11:54.237.
60
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:137==
3. Logs from both organizations were collected and analyzed, and the operational sta­
tus of all PEs was monitored throughout the experiment.
7.4.3
Results and Analysis
The experiment was a complete success, demonstrating the framework’s ability to perform
precise failure containment.
Downstream Failure Propagation
The only PE directly downstream from the HeuristicsMiner was the PetriNetSink.
• Failure Event: HeuristicsMiner terminated at 00:11:54.237.
• Detection: PetriNetSink detected the failure at 00:12:03.611.
• Detection Latency: 9.374 seconds, within the 10­second timeout.
• Reaction: PetriNetSink correctly identified the failure as critical and terminated
itself, as shown in the logs:
00:12:03.611 [REACTION HANDLER LVL3] PetriNetSink...:
Partial pipeline mode. Fault with UPSTREAM_PRODUCER peers.
00:12:03.660 [REACTION] Critical failure.
Terminating PE Instance-aca82776-e059-4513-9c6c-0ade3946bf8f
according to policy.
Upstream and Parallel Branch Stability
All other PEs in the pipeline remained fully operational:
• Upstream Producer: The English LanguageFilter detected the loss of its down­
stream consumer (HeuristicsMiner), but continued running since it still had an
active consumer (English BehaviouralPatternsConformance). The ”orphan pre­
vention” logic was therefore not triggered.
• Independent Branches: The Russian­language branch and the conformance­checking
branch remained unaffected, with continuous heartbeat and data processing activity
throughout the experiment.
7.4.4
Conclusion
This experiment successfully validates the LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE pol­
icy.
• The failure was perfectly contained: only the failed PE (HeuristicsMiner) and its
sole dependent (PetriNetSink) were terminated.
• All other PEs, including the failed component’s producer and all parallel branches,
remained active.
These results confirm the framework’s ability to maximize pipeline availability and mini­
mize resource waste by precisely isolating faults.
7.5
Experiment 4: Validation of Optional Inputs at Merges
This experiment specifically tests the isOptional flag, which provides fine­grained control
over failure handling at merge points.
7.5.1
Goal
To verify that a merge operator (MeanJoinSaver) continues to operate when a non­critical,
optional input fails, even when the pipeline policy would otherwise dictate termination.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
61
==PAGE:138==
7.5.2
Method
1. The pipeline configuration was modified to mark the English Metrics input to the
MeanJoinSaver as optional ("isOptional": true).
2. The pipeline was deployed with faultToleranceLevel set to LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE.
3. The first BehaviouralPatternsConformance PE (Instance 12656e70...), which pro­
duces the English metrics, was terminated at 00:24:59.678.
4. The logs for the MeanJoinSaver PE were analyzed to observe its reaction.
7.5.3
Results and Analysis
The results clearly demonstrate the correct implementation of the optional input feature.
The MeanJoinSaver PE successfully handled the failure of its optional input stream without
interruption.
Failure Event and Detection
• Failure Event: BehaviouralPatternsConformance PE terminated at 00:24:59.678.
• Detection: MeanJoinSaver (Instance 6d3d87b9...) detected the heartbeat loss at
00:25:08.596.
• Detection Latency: 8.918 seconds — well within the 10­second timeout, indicating
a successful detection.
Reaction and Continuation
The ReactionHandler correctly identified that the failed upstream producer was marked
as optional. Instead of terminating, it logged the event and continued operation:
00:25:11.521 [REACTION HANDLER] MeanJoinSaver...:
Processing liveness failure for UPSTREAM_PRODUCER peers.
Silent topics: [hb-downstream-Instance-12656e70-0d67-405e-9a04-3931cf496ffd].
00:25:12.108 [REACTION] Optional peer failure.
PE Instance-6d3d87b9-9298-460e-b6f3-1e863aa5855c will continue operation.
00:25:12.108 [HB MANAGER] Unsubscribing from failed optional topics:
[hb-downstream-Instance-12656e70-0d67-405e-9a04-3931cf496ffd]
The final log entry is particularly important, as it shows the HeartbeatManager intelligently
unsubscribing from the failed optional topic. This prevents a continuous loop of alerts for
a known, non­critical failure. Throughout this process, the MeanJoinSaver and the entire
Russian­language branch of the pipeline remained fully operational.
7.5.4
Conclusion
This experiment successfully validates the implementation of the optional input feature at
merge points. The framework correctly distinguished between critical and optional fail­
ures, allowing the MeanJoinSaver to continue processing data from its remaining healthy
input stream. This demonstrates a sophisticated level of control that enables pipeline
operators to design for graceful degradation, significantly enhancing the robustness and
practical utility of the DAPM framework.
62
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:139==
8
Discussion
This chapter interprets the experimental results presented in Chapter 7, discusses their
implications for the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM), and reflects on
the design choices, limitations, and future directions of this work. The goal is to synthesize
the findings and explicitly answer the research questions that have guided this thesis.
8.1
Interpretation of Findings
The experiments confirm that the decentralized fault­tolerance framework behaves as
designed under the updated k­consecutive­misses liveness model. Across scenarios,
the system reliably detected PE crash failures and executed the configured policy, while
tolerating transient jitter and avoiding alert storms on optional inputs.
8.1.1
Timeliness of Detection
Detection latencies closely matched the theoretical window derived in Chapter 5: if sendIntervalMs =
S, checkIntervalMs = C, and missesThreshold = k, then the time to declaration after
the first late check satisfies
k · S ≤Tdetect ≤k · S + C
(+ minor scheduling/network jitter),
after the initial grace period elapses. Empirically, observed latencies fell within this bound
and tracked configuration changes predictably (e.g., lowering S or k reduced Tdetect pro­
portionally).
This provides operators with an intuitive, controllable latency/robustness
trade­off.
8.1.2
Policy Enforcement and Optionality
All three FaultToleranceLevel policies were enforced correctly. Under LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_P
per­port optionality combined with silencing ensured that once an optional input was de­
clared failed, subsequent misses did not retrigger reactions or notifications until a heart­
beat was observed again. Recovery events were emitted exactly once per outage and
cleared the silenced state, matching the intended semantics.
8.1.3
Graceful Degradation and Recovery
The multi­input experiments (e.g., MeanJoinSaver) showed that PEs continued in a docu­
mented degraded mode when optional inputs failed, while still terminating on critical­input
failure. Recovery was reliably detected on first heartbeat arrival, with miss counters reset
and a single RECOVERED notification logged, yielding clean, auditable outage boundaries.
8.1.4
Observability and Operator Ergonomics
Structured JSON logs and low­cardinality metrics (Chapter 6) complemented the legacy
human­readable lines. In practice, operators could: (i) follow MISS_STREAK_INC →DECLARED_FAILED
→SILENCED_OPTIONAL/REACTION_APPLIED →RECOVERED as a coherent timeline, and (ii)
monitor gauges/counters for streaks, declarations, and recoveries without incurring high
label cardinality. This improved postmortem clarity and reduced noise.
8.2
Answering the Research Questions
RQ1: How can the crash failure of a PE instance be detected in a timely
and efficient manner?
A decentralized heartbeat protocol with a k­consecutive­misses rule provides timely, tun­
able detection. Lightweight messages and reuse of Kafka infrastructure keep overhead
low, while k, S, and C give operators direct control of sensitivity: smaller k or S yields
faster detection; larger values increase jitter tolerance.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
63
==PAGE:140==
RQ2: How can the system’s reaction to a detected failure be made
configurable?
A single pipeline­wide FaultToleranceLevel parameter, applied locally by each PE’s
ReactionHandler, was sufficient to switch among observe­only, full termination, and par­
tial continuation. Experiments showed that changing this value at assembly time pre­
dictably altered runtime behavior without code changes.
RQ3: How can the failure of one PE be propagated to trigger coordinated
actions in other dependent PEs?
Peer­to­peer monitoring naturally produced: (i) downstream cascades when producers
failed, and (ii) upstream containment via orphan prevention when consumers disap­
peared. These effects emerged from local decisions without a central coordinator, elimi­
nating single points of failure in the control plane.
8.3
Implications and Contributions
This work advances DAPM from a performant prototype to a more operationally robust
platform:
• Increased Trustworthiness. The k­miss model reduces false positives and pre­
vents silent stale outputs; recovery is explicit and auditable.
• Improved Resource Efficiency. Orphan prevention and policy­aware shutdown
stop useless computation and contain failures to affected subgraphs.
• Enhanced Operability. Unified notifications, structured logs, and metrics give op­
erators actionable, low­noise visibility across organizations.
8.4
Limitations and Threats to Validity
• Fault model. The approach targets fail­stop crashes; byzantine or slow/incorrect
behavior is out of scope.
• Timing assumptions. Bounds assume reasonably stable scheduling and network
conditions; severe jitter can widen Tdetect toward k · S + C.
• Scale. While topic counts scale in theory, extreme multi­tenant loads and cross­org
latencies were not exhaustively stress­tested.
• Operator configuration. Misconfigured k, S, C may yield overly slow or overly sen­
sitive detection; guardrails help but cannot replace tuning.
8.5
Future Work
• Adaptive thresholds. Auto­tune k and S based on observed inter­arrival/jitter pro­
files or SLOs.
• Auto­remediation. Add optional restart/failover policies and integration with con­
tainer orchestrators.
• Stronger durability. Replace the in­memory notification store with a durable back­
end and enrich event correlation across organizations.
• Extended fault models.
Detect performance regressions (slow producers/con­
sumers) and data­quality faults in addition to crashes.
64
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:141==
9
Conclusion and Future Work
9.1
Conclusion
This thesis addressed a critical reliability gap in the foundational Distributed Architecture
for Process Mining (DAPM): the lack of a principled response to crash failures of Process­
ing Element (PE) instances. Without fault tolerance, such failures risk silent data loss,
stale or incorrect results, and unnecessary compute spend—ultimately eroding operator
trust.
To close this gap, we designed, implemented, and evaluated a decentralized, heartbeat­
based framework that embeds monitoring and reaction logic directly inside every PE. The
final system introduces three core contributions:
1. Robust liveness detection via a k­consecutive­misses model. Each PE tracks
its neighbors with a per­topic state machine. A neighbor is declared failed only
after k consecutive verification checks observe no fresh heartbeat, after an initial
grace period. Operators can tune missesThreshold = k, sendIntervalMs, and
checkIntervalMs, yielding a predictable detection window k · sendIntervalMs ≤
Tdetect ≤k · sendIntervalMs + checkIntervalMs (post­grace). This preserves re­
sponsiveness while filtering transient jitter and network blips.
2. Policy­driven reactions with optional­input semantics. A single, pipeline­wide
FaultToleranceLevel lets operators choose among: observing only, full cascad­
ing termination, or partial continuation. At merge points, inputs may be marked
optional; once an optional input is declared failed it is silenced (no repeated alerts)
until a heartbeat is seen again, after which recovery is logged and normal monitoring
resumes.
3. Operational observability. The framework emits human­readable logs alongside
structured JSON and low­cardinality metrics, enabling clear timelines (MISS_STREAK_INC
→DECLARED_FAILED →SILENCED_OPTIONAL/REACTION_APPLIED →RECOVERED) and
straightforward dashboards/alerts across organizations.
The experimental evaluation in Chapter 7 confirmed the design’s behavior: detection la­
tencies matched the theoretical bounds; all three policies were enforced correctly; op­
tional inputs enabled graceful degradation without alert storms; and recovery was de­
tected exactly once per outage. Collectively, these results provide affirmative answers to
the research questions and elevate DAPM from a performant prototype to a more robust,
trustworthy platform for long­running, cross­organizational streaming pipelines.
9.2
Future Work
While the current framework establishes a practical baseline, several avenues can extend
its capability and maturity.
9.2.1
Scope and Delimitations
• Fault model. The focus is fail­stop crashes. Network partitions, gray failures, or
Byzantine behavior are out of scope and merit dedicated detection strategies (e.g.,
quorum­based or score­based health signals).
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
65
==PAGE:142==
• State and data recovery. The framework ensures safe failure semantics but does
not provide checkpointing, replay, or exactly­once processing. In­flight data at failure
time may be lost.
• Overhead quantification. Although heartbeats are lightweight, a formal study of
CPU/memory/network overhead under scale (multi­tenant, cross­org) remains fu­
ture work.
9.2.2
Automatic Recovery and Self­Healing
A natural next step is closed­loop remediation. Upon declaration, the system could trigger
an orchestrator (e.g., Kubernetes) to restart the failed PE. Achieving seamless resumption
requires integrating state checkpointing and input replay—potentially via log­compaction
topics or external state stores—to approach exactly­once semantics. Policy extensions
(e.g., auto­restart on first failure, escalate on repeated failures) can be layered without
altering the detection core.
9.2.3
Adaptive, SLO­Aware Detection
The current k, S, C parameters are static. Future work can make them adaptive: esti­
mate heartbeat inter­arrival and jitter online, then tune missesThreshold and intervals
to meet operator SLOs for detection latency and false­positive rate. Anomaly scoring of
inter­arrival times could augment binary liveness with early warnings about performance
regressions.
9.2.4
Enhanced Observability and Usability
Building a unified, user­facing dashboard would improve operational ergonomics: visu­
alize pipeline graphs, per­PE health, degraded modes, and outage timelines; correlate
declarations, reactions, and recoveries; and provide drill­down to structured logs. On the
backend, replacing the in­memory notification store with a durable system (e.g., a time­
series DB or log analytics stack) would strengthen auditability across organizations and
over longer retention periods.
9.2.5
Scaling and Multi­Tenancy
Further work should stress­test topic counts and cross­org latencies at larger scales, ex­
plore per­tenant rate limits for notifications, and evaluate placement/topology optimiza­
tions (e.g., batching or shared heartbeat channels where applicable) while preserving
per­port semantics and debuggability.
66
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:143==
Bibliography
[1]
Wil van der Aalst. “Data Science in Action”. In: Process Mining: Data Science in
Action. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016, pp. 3–23. isbn: 978­3­
662­49851­4. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4_1. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-662-49851-4_1.
[2]
Andrea Burattin. “Streaming Process Mining”. In: Process Mining Handbook. Ed. by
Wil M. P. van der Aalst and Josep Carmona. Cham: Springer International Publish­
ing, 2022, pp. 349–372. isbn: 978­3­031­08848­3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-08848-
3_11. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-08848-3_11.
[3]
S. J. van Zelst et al. “Online conformance checking: relating event streams to pro­
cess models using prefix­alignments”. In: International Journal of Data Science and
Analytics 8.3 (2019), pp. 269–284. issn: 2364­415X. doi: 10.1007/s41060-017-0078-
6. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s41060-017-0078-6.
[4]
Aaron Halfaker and R. Stuart Geiger. ORES: Lowering Barriers with Participatory
Machine Learning in Wikipedia. 2020. arXiv: 1909.05189 [cs.HC]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1909.05189.
[5]
Majid Rafiei and Wil M. P. Van Der Aalst. “An Abstraction­Based Approach for
Privacy­Aware Federated Process Mining”. In: IEEE Access 11 (2023), pp. 33697–
33714. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3263673.
[6]
Stephan A. Fahrenkrog­Petersen, Han van der Aa, and Matthias Weidlich. “Optimal
event log sanitization for privacy­preserving process mining”. In: Data Knowl. Eng.
145.C (May 2023). issn: 0169­023X. doi: 10.1016/j.datak.2023.102175. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.datak.2023.102175.
[7]
Gamal Elkoumy et al. “Secure Multi­party Computation for Inter­organizational Pro­
cess Mining”. In: Enterprise, Business­Process and Information Systems Modeling.
Ed. by Selmin Nurcan et al. Cham: Springer, 2020, pp. 166–181. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-030-49418-6_11. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49418-6_11.
[8]
Zou Yong Nan Klaassen. “A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining: Concep­
tualization and Performance Analysis of an Online Data Streaming Pipeline”. Su­
pervised by Ekkart Kindler and Andrea Burattin. Original title in Danish: En dis­
tribueret arkitektur til process mining: Konceptualisering og performance analyse
af en online data streaming pipeline. Master’s thesis. DTU Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, 2025. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
6886c018de25d30102c8b5b5.
[9]
Maxim Vidgof. “Towards Process Mining on Kafka Event Streams”. In: Proceedings
of the 16th ZEUS Workshop. Ed. by Steffen Böhm and Daniel Lübke. Vol. 3673.
CEUR Workshop Proceedings. Ulm, Germany: CEUR­WS.org, Feb. 2024, pp. 1–8.
url: https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3673/paper1.pdf.
[10]
Christian Imenkamp and Agnes Koschmider. “Streaming Process Mining over Real­
istic Event Streams”. In: EMISA 2025. Bonn: Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V., 2025,
pp. 67–72. doi: 10.18420/EMISA2025_09.
[11]
Georg Krempl et al. “Open challenges for data stream mining research”. In: SIGKDD
Explor. Newsl. 16.1 (Sept. 2014), pp. 1–10. issn: 1931­0145. doi: 10.1145/2674026.
2674028. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/2674026.2674028.
[12]
Kristo Raun. “Adaptive Out­of­Order Handling in Streaming Conformance Check­
ing”. Master’s thesis. Tartu, Estonia: University of Tartu, Oct. 2024. url: https://hdl.
handle.net/10062/105713.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
67
==PAGE:144==
[13]
Niels Martin et al. “Opportunities and Challenges for Process Mining in Organiza­
tions: Results of a Delphi Study”. In: Business & Information Systems Engineering
63 (2021), pp. 511–527. doi: 10.1007/s12599-021-00720-0. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s12599-021-00720-0.
[14]
Rashid Zaman, Marwan Hassani, and Boudewijn F. van Dongen. “Conformance
checking of process event streams with constraints on data retention”. In: Informa­
tion Systems 117 (2023), p. 102228. issn: 0306­4379. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.is.2023.102228. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306437923000649.
[15]
Mohit Kumar Gokhroo, Mahesh Chandra Govil, and Emmanuel S. Pilli. “Detecting
and mitigating faults in cloud computing environment”. In: 2017 3rd International
Conference on Computational Intelligence Communication Technology (CICT). 2017,
pp. 1–9. doi: 10.1109/CIACT.2017.7977362.
[16]
Yen­Lin Lee, Deron Liang, and Wei­Jen Wang. “Optimal Online Liveness Fault De­
tection for Multilayer Cloud Computing Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Depend­
able and Secure Computing 19.5 (2022), pp. 3464–3477. doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2021.
3100680.
[17]
Yangtao Deng et al. “Minder: Faulty Machine Detection for Large­scale Distributed
Model Training”. In: (Nov. 2024). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2411.01791.
[18]
Swapnil Gandhi et al. “ReCycle: Resilient Training of Large DNNs using Pipeline
Adaptation”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles. SOSP ’24. Austin, TX, USA: Association for Computing Ma­
chinery, 2024, pp. 211–228. isbn: 9798400712517. doi: 10.1145/3694715.3695960.
url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3694715.3695960.
[19]
Andrea Burattin. “Beamline: A Comprehensive Toolkit for Research and Develop­
ment of Streaming Process Mining”. In: Software Impacts 17 (2023), p. 100551. doi:
10.1016/j.simpa.2023.100551. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S266596382300088X.
[20]
Apache Flink. The Apache Software Foundation. url: https://flink.apache.org/ (vis­
ited on 08/08/2025).
[21]
M.A. Nasreen, Amal Ganesh, and C. Sunitha. “A Study on Byzantine Fault Toler­
ance Methods in Distributed Networks”. In: Procedia Computer Science 87 (2016).
Fourth International Conference on Recent Trends in Computer Science
Engi­
neering (ICRTCSE 2016), pp. 50–54. issn: 1877­0509. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.procs.2016.05.125. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1877050916304641.
[22]
Roel J. Wieringa. Design Science Methodology for Information Systems and Soft­
ware Engineering. 1st ed. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014. isbn: 978­3­662­43839­
8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-43839-8. url: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-
3-662-43839-8.
[23]
Philipp Offermann et al. “Outline of a design science research process”. In: Jan.
2009. doi: 10.1145/1555619.1555629.
[24]
Kieran Conboy. “Agility From First Principles: Reconstructing the Concept of Agility
in Information Systems Development”. In: Information Systems Research 20 (Sept.
2009). doi: 10.1287/isre.1090.0236.
[25]
Spring Projects. Spring Boot. [Online; accessed 5­August­2025]. 2024. url: https:
//spring.io/projects/spring-boot.
[26]
Apache Kafka. Apache Kafka Documentation. [Online; accessed 5­August­2025].
2024. url: https://kafka.apache.org/documentation.
68
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:145==
[27]
Docker Documentation. What is Docker? [Online; accessed 5­August­2025]. 2024.
url: https://docs.docker.com/get-started/docker-overview/.
[28]
Torgeir Dingsøyr et al. “A decade of agile methodologies: Towards explaining agile
software development”. In: Journal of Systems and Software 85.6 (2012). Special
Issue: Agile Development, pp. 1213–1221. issn: 0164­1212. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jss.2012.02.033. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0164121212000532.
[29]
Andrea Burattin et al. “Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing of Data
and Algorithms”. In: Business Process Management Workshops. Ed. by Katarzyna
Gdowska, María Teresa Gómez­López, and Jana­Rebecca Rehse. Cham: Springer
Nature Switzerland, 2025, pp. 357–369. isbn: 978­3­031­78666­2.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
69
==PAGE:146==
70
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:147==
A
Glossary
The following definitions cover terminology within DAPM. Therefore, ”pipeline” should be
interpreted as ”DAPM pipeline”, and similarly for the remaining definitions. [8]
Acyclicity: A pipeline­related property. A pipeline P is acyclic if and only if it contains no
path with at least two processing elements which has the same operator as both the head
and the tail.
Assembly Stage: The initial pipeline life cycle stage. In this stage, an organization as­
sembles a pipeline draft by selecting among processing elements that are accessible to
them and connecting them via channels. Accessibility is related to visibility, which is elab­
orated in the concurrent Dirani and Mehran thesis. The designing organization chooses
among the fetched elements. They choose configurations for their processing elements
where relevant. Configurations here does not refer to the configuration stage, but rather
to configurable template parameters. In the assembly stage, no processing element us­
age permissions are requested or granted. Throughout and at the end of assembly, it is
ensured that the specified processing elements and channels form a valid DAPM pipeline.
The configuration stage cannot begin before a valid pipeline has been formed (but not yet
built).
Channel: A unidirectional connector responsible for the transmission of messages be­
tween two or more processing element instances in a pipeline instance during execution.
A channel receives messages from exactly one publishing processing element, and for­
wards said messages to one or more subscribing processing elements. Specifically, the
subscribers receive messages from their port which is connected to the channel. A chan­
nel has an associated type. The messages sent over channels during execution must
have this type. No transformation or processing of messages happens in a channel. This
implies that the publisher to the channel must publish messages of the channel’s type,
and that subscribers must consume messages of that same type.
Complete Path: A path within a pipeline that is not a proper subpath of another path in
said pipeline.
Configuration (Processing Element): A processing element template can specify some
parameters for which assembling pipeline users can specify their own values. The param­
eters may or may not be optional; they can be optional if the template specifies default
values for them. the configurations from the assembly stage will then be reflected in the
template’s instance if the pipeline is built.
Configuration Stage: The configuration stage follows the assembly stage. In this stage,
usage permission requests are sent out to the organizations owning the processing ele­
ments in the assembled pipeline. At the end of the configuration stage, when all permis­
sions have been granted, the pipeline instance will be built by creating processing element
instances from the processing element templates and connecting them with channels ac­
cording to the assembly specification. This pipeline instance is thereby created and owned
by the organization that assembled its draft. With this, the execution stage begins. If the
permissions are not granted, the pipeline life cycle terminates and must start over.
Connectedness: Connectedness is a pipeline­related property. Let P be a pipeline con­
sisting of processing elements E and channels C. Then P is connected if and only if there
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
71
==PAGE:148==
exists no partition of E into nonempty A and B such that A and B are disjoint and for which
a channel in C goes from processing element a ￿A to b ￿B.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining | DAPM: A system that allows for the cre­
ation of process mining data pipelines distributed across one or more organizations. This
thesis’ pipelines are specifically for streaming process mining. DAPM facilitates coopera­
tion between organizations and allows the controlled sharing of resources such as miners
and data.
Egestion: The opposite of ingestion; when data exits a DAPM pipeline as a stream, e.g.
by being forwarded to a publicly available http endpoint.
Execution Stage: This stage follows the configuration stage. In the beginning of this
stage, the organization has a pipeline instance which is not yet running. The organization
can choose to start the pipeline at which point it starts running, i.e. messages start flowing
through the pipeline. During execution, the running pipeline may be stopped by its owning
organization; That is, the ingestion/generation is stopped in all sources.
Ingestion: When an external stream is entering a DAPM pipeline. The example Wikipedia
ingests recent change events in the source.
Instance (Processing Element): Whenever instances are mentioned in relation to a
pipeline or its constituents, we are referring to a specific ”realworld” pipeline, as opposed
to the abstract concept of a pipeline. That is, an instance of a pipeline is composed
of processing element instances connected by channel instances. A pipeline instance
is owned by an organization. A processing element stems from a processing element
template, and both of these are owned b the same organization but not necessarily the
same organization that owns the pipeline instance. A channel instance is hosted by the
(singular) organization who owns its producing processing element.
Life Cycle (Pipeline): There are 3 sequential stages to a pipeline’s life cycle: assembly,
configuration, and execution. Termination may happen at any point during the pipeline’s
life cycle.
Message: Data transported over channels and transformed/processed inside of process­
ing elements. Messages have well­defined formats supported by DAPM and only become
part of a pipeline when it is running, i.e. during the execution stage.
Operator: A processing element that both publishes and subscribes to channels within
a pipeline. A trivial operator may simply forward the messages it consumes (such an
operator would be of no practical use). All other operators than the trivial one will transform
or otherwise process their consumed messages. Every operator in a pipeline must be on
a complete path from a source to a sink. a mining operator specifically performs process
mining operations.
Organization: An organization has users that can assemble and (when possible) run
and/or terminate pipeline instances. They may have a repository containing DAPM re­
sources, and the organization may allocate computational resources for DAPM pipeline
instances.
Path: A pipeline path is analogous to the path concept for directed graphs; it is a se­
quence of processing elements where a channel connects each adjacent element such
that messages only flow in one direction: from the start of the sequence to the end of the
sequence.
72
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:149==
Pipeline Candidate: A pipeline that has been checked for syntactic correctness. It still
has to be validated topologically.
Pipeline instance: A set of instances of processing elements connected by channel
instances. A pipeline instance is owned by the organization that assembled it. Every
processing element instance within such a pipeline is owned by a potentially distinct or­
ganization. DAPM pipelines can thus be crossorganizational.
Pipeline Representation: A pipeline in JSON format resulting from a user assembling a
pipeline.
Port: The subscriber processing element constituent that connects to the incoming chan­
nel. Operators and Sinks contain one or more ports, and sources do not have any ports.
Each port in a processing element can only be connected to one pipeline channel.
Processing Element: The components of a pipeline that perform transformations or other
processing of messages flowing through said pipeline. A processing element can either
be a source, operator, or a sink. Instances of processing elements are created from
templates of the processing elements. Both the template and the instances it produces
are owned by the same organization. If deemed unambiguous, a processing element is
sometimes referred to simply as an ”element”.
Proper SubPath: Path A is a proper subpath of path B in pipeline P if and only if path A’s
processing element sequence is a proper subsequence of path B’s processing element
sequence.
Resource: A DAPM resource can be, but is not limited to, a processing element template,
data, streaming ingestion endpoints, or hardware. Resources can be visible to other orga­
nizations than the one owning them. This is elaborated in Dirani and Mehran’s concurrent
thesis.
Running (Pipeline): A pipeline can be running during the execution stage of a pipeline’s
life cycle. A pipeline is running when it has been started. So effectively, a running pipeline
ingests data or generates messages and messages flow through the pipeline.
Sink: A terminal or point of egestion within the pipeline. A sink cannot publish messages
to a channel within the pipeline that contains it; it is a final element of a pipeline. In
a running pipeline, messages and/or data may or may not be egested to somewhere
outside of the pipeline. We emphasize that a sink does not necessarily egest messages,
but could for instance simply consume the messages it receives and store them in a file.
Source: A point of data ingestion or message generation within a pipeline. All sources
within pipelines publish to a channel, and no source can subscribe to channels within their
pipeline.
Starting (Pipeline): A pipeline instance can be started in the beginning of the execution
stage. When an organization starts a pipeline instance, it opens the valves for ingestion/­
generation in all of its source processing element instances, effectively starting the flow
of the pipeline.
Template: Defines a processing element’s expected incoming message types, process­
ing steps, and/or published message type. A template is owned by an organization. It
is used to create instances of processing elements, potentially with varying configura­
tions. An example would be some mining operator which in a running pipeline consumes
petrinets and events, does conformance checking on these, and publishes alignments.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
73
==PAGE:150==
Templates are part of every stage of the pipeline life cycle. The instances created from
them are only part of the execution stage.
Termination: Termination has different meanings depending on the current stage in the
pipeline life cycle. In the assembly stage, it simply entails discarding the pipeline draft
or representation. In the execution stage it means to delete a pipeline instance and its
component processing element and channel instances. If the pipeline was running, its
processing halts immediately and then the pipeline instance is deleted.
Validated Pipeline: A valid pipeline that meets all the properties described in 4.4. This
pipeline will be passed on to the configuration stage.
74
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:151==
B
Appendix
Figure B.1: Class diagram of the core components of the fault tolerance system
Figure B.2: Class diagram of the core components of the fault tolerance system
Wikipedia Pipeline Representation in JSON
Figure B.3 shows the concrete pipeline diagram used for the Wikipedia processing sce­
nario. The JSON representation below is adapted from Christian’s thesis, with the follow­
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
75
==PAGE:152==
ing extensions introduced in this work:
• FaultToleranceLevel: Specifies the pipeline’s reaction strategy in case of a Pro­
cessing Element (PE) failure.
• Heartbeat Timing Configuration: Allows the user to configure heartbeat send in­
tervals.
• Optional Merge Inputs: Enables marking specific inputs as optional in merge com­
ponents.
Figure B.3: Wikipedia processing pipeline
JSON Representation:
1
{
2
"faultToleranceLevel": "LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE",
3
"heartbeatTimingConfig": [
4
"sendIntervalMs": 60000
5
],
6
"processing elements": [
7
{
8
"organizationID": "orgA",
9
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
10
"templateID": "EventSource",
11
"inputs": [],
12
"output": "Event",
13
"instanceNumber": 1,
14
"configuration": {}
15
},
16
{
17
"organizationID": "orgA",
18
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
19
"templateID": "LanguageFilter",
20
"inputs": ["Event"],
21
"output": "Event",
22
"instanceNumber": 1,
23
"configuration": { "language": "en" }
24
},
25
{
26
"organizationID": "orgA",
27
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
28
"templateID": "LanguageFilter",
29
"inputs": ["Event"],
30
"output": "Event",
31
"instanceNumber": 2,
32
"configuration": { "language": "ru" }
33
},
76
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:153==
34
{
35
"organizationID": "orgB",
36
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
37
"templateID": "HeuristicsMiner",
38
"inputs": ["Event"],
39
"output": "PetriNet",
40
"instanceNumber": 1,
41
"configuration": {}
42
},
43
{
44
"organizationID": "orgB",
45
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
46
"templateID": "BehaviouralPatternsConformance",
47
"inputs": ["Event"],
48
"output": "Metrics",
49
"instanceNumber": 1,
50
"configuration": {}
51
},
52
{
53
"organizationID": "orgB",
54
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
55
"templateID": "BehaviouralPatternsConformance",
56
"inputs": ["Event"],
57
"output": "Metrics",
58
"instanceNumber": 2,
59
"configuration": {}
60
},
61
{
62
"organizationID": "orgA",
63
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
64
"templateID": "PetriNetSink",
65
"inputs": ["PetriNet"],
66
"output": null,
67
"instanceNumber": 1,
68
"configuration": {}
69
},
70
{
71
"organizationID": "orgB",
72
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
73
"templateID": "MeanJoinSaver",
74
"inputs": ["Metrics", "Metrics"],
75
"output": null,
76
"instanceNumber": 1,
77
"configuration": {}
78
}
79
],
80
"channels": [
81
{
82
"publisher": {
83
"organizationID": "orgA",
84
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
85
"templateID": "EventSource",
86
"inputs": [],
87
"output": "Event",
88
"instanceNumber": 1,
89
"configuration": {}
90
},
91
"subscribers": [
92
{
93
"processing element": {
94
"organizationID": "orgA",
95
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
77
==PAGE:154==
96
"templateID": "LanguageFilter",
97
"inputs": ["Event"],
98
"output": "Event",
99
"instanceNumber": 1,
100
"configuration": { "language": "en" }
101
},
102
"portNumber": 1
103
},
104
{
105
"processing element": {
106
"organizationID": "orgA",
107
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
108
"templateID": "LanguageFilter",
109
"inputs": ["Event"],
110
"output": "Event",
111
"instanceNumber": 2,
112
"configuration": { "language": "ru" }
113
},
114
"portNumber": 1
115
}
116
]
117
},
118
{
119
"publisher": {
120
"organizationID": "orgA",
121
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
122
"templateID": "LanguageFilter",
123
"inputs": ["Event"],
124
"output": "Event",
125
"instanceNumber": 1,
126
"configuration": { "language": "en" }
127
},
128
"subscribers": [
129
{
130
"processing element": {
131
"organizationID": "orgB",
132
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
133
"templateID": "HeuristicsMiner",
134
"inputs": ["Event"],
135
"output": "PetriNet",
136
"instanceNumber": 1,
137
"configuration": {}
138
},
139
"portNumber": 1
140
},
141
{
142
"processing element": {
143
"organizationID": "orgB",
144
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
145
"templateID": "BehaviouralPatternsConformance",
146
"inputs": ["Event"],
147
"output": "Metrics",
148
"instanceNumber": 1,
149
"configuration": {}
150
},
151
"portNumber": 1
152
}
153
]
154
},
155
{
156
"publisher": {
157
"organizationID": "orgA",
78
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:155==
158
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
159
"templateID": "LanguageFilter",
160
"inputs": ["Event"],
161
"output": "Event",
162
"instanceNumber": 2,
163
"configuration": { "language": "ru" }
164
},
165
"subscribers": [
166
{
167
"processing element": {
168
"organizationID": "orgB",
169
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
170
"templateID": "BehaviouralPatternsConformance",
171
"inputs": ["Event"],
172
"output": "Metrics",
173
"instanceNumber": 2,
174
"configuration": {}
175
},
176
"portNumber": 1
177
}
178
]
179
},
180
{
181
"publisher": {
182
"organizationID": "orgB",
183
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
184
"templateID": "HeuristicsMiner",
185
"inputs": ["Event"],
186
"output": "PetriNet",
187
"instanceNumber": 1,
188
"configuration": {}
189
},
190
"subscribers": [
191
{
192
"processing element": {
193
"organizationID": "orgA",
194
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8082",
195
"templateID": "PetriNetSink",
196
"inputs": ["PetriNet"],
197
"output": null,
198
"instanceNumber": 1,
199
"configuration": {}
200
},
201
"portNumber": 1
202
}
203
]
204
},
205
{
206
"publisher": {
207
"organizationID": "orgB",
208
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
209
"templateID": "BehaviouralPatternsConformance",
210
"inputs": ["Event"],
211
"output": "Metrics",
212
"instanceNumber": 1,
213
"configuration": {}
214
},
215
"subscribers": [
216
{
217
"processing element": {
218
"organizationID": "orgB",
219
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
79
==PAGE:156==
220
"templateID": "MeanJoinSaver",
221
"inputs": ["Metrics", "Metrics"],
222
"output": null,
223
"instanceNumber": 1,
224
"configuration": {}
225
},
226
"portNumber": 1,
227
"isOptional": true
228
}
229
]
230
},
231
{
232
"publisher": {
233
"organizationID": "orgB",
234
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
235
"templateID": "BehaviouralPatternsConformance",
236
"inputs": ["Event"],
237
"output": "Metrics",
238
"instanceNumber": 2,
239
"configuration": {}
240
},
241
"subscribers": [
242
{
243
"processing element": {
244
"organizationID": "orgB",
245
"hostURL": "http://localhost:8083",
246
"templateID": "MeanJoinSaver",
247
"inputs": ["Metrics", "Metrics"],
248
"output": null,
249
"instanceNumber": 1,
250
"configuration": {}
251
},
252
"portNumber": 2
253
}
254
]
255
}
256
]
257
}
This appendix lists the JSON Schema used to validate pipeline drafts, including the fault­
tolerance configuration fields (faultToleranceLevel and heartbeatTimingConfig). The
value LEVEL_RESTART_FAILED_INSTANCE is reserved for future work and is not imple­
mented in this thesis (see Chapter 9).
1
{
2
"$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
3
"$id": "https://www.dapm.org/pipeline_draft_schema.json",
4
"title": "Pipeline Draft",
5
"type": "object",
6
"properties": {
7
"faultToleranceLevel": {
8
"description": "Defines the fault tolerance strategy for the entire
pipeline. If omitted , a default behavior (e.g.,
LEVEL_0_IGNORE_FAULTS) is assumed by the application.",
9
"type": "string",
10
"enum": [
11
"LEVEL_NOTIFY_ONLY",
12
"LEVEL_TERMINATE_ENTIRE_PIPELINE",
13
"LEVEL_KEEP_RUNNING_PARTIAL_PIPELINE",
14
"LEVEL_RESTART_FAILED_INSTANCE"
80
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:157==
15
]
16
},
17
"heartbeatTimingConfig": {
18
"type": "object",
19
"description": "Configuration for heartbeat timing. If only timeoutMs is
provided , other values are derived.",
20
"properties": {
21
"timeoutMs": {
22
"type": "integer",
23
"description": "Primary setting (ms). Max duration to wait for a
peer before considering it failed. Minimum 10000.",
24
"minimum": 10000
25
},
26
"sendIntervalMs": {
27
"type": "integer",
28
"description": "Optional override (ms). How often each PE sends a
heartbeat.",
29
"minimum": 3000
30
},
31
"checkIntervalMs": {
32
"type": "integer",
33
"description": "Optional override (ms). How often each PE checks
peer liveness.",
34
"minimum": 5000
35
},
36
"missesThreshold": {
37
"type": "integer",
38
"description": "Optional override. How many consecutive misses
before declaring a peer dead.",
39
"minimum": 3
40
}
41
},
42
"additionalProperties": false
43
},
44
"processing elements": {
45
"type": "array",
46
"items": {
47
"$ref": "https://www.dapm.org/processing_element_reference_schema.json
"
48
},
49
"minItems": 2,
50
"uniqueItems": true,
51
"allOf": [
52
{
53
"contains": {
54
"type": "object",
55
"properties": { "inputs": { "type": "array", "maxItems": 0 } }
56
},
57
"required": ["inputs"]
58
},
59
{
60
"contains": {
61
"type": "object",
62
"properties": { "output": { "type": "null" } }
63
},
64
"required": ["output"]
65
}
66
]
67
},
68
"channels": {
69
"type": "array",
70
"items": { "$ref": "https://www.dapm.org/channel_reference_schema.json"
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
81
==PAGE:158==
},
71
"minItems": 1,
72
"uniqueItems": true
73
}
74
},
75
"required": ["processing elements", "channels"],
76
"additionalProperties": false
77
}
Listing B.1: Pipeline Candidate JSON Schema (including fault­tolerance fields)
82
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:159==
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
83
==PAGE:160==
This thesis was written by Raihanullah Mehran in 2025 for the completion of the Master of Science
in Computer Science and Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It builds
upon the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) developed by Christian Becke and
Zou Yong Nan (Yonna) Klaassen, extending their work by designing and implementing a decentral­
ized fault­tolerance framework for cross­organizational streaming pipelines. It was challenging—but
a genuinely rewarding journey nonetheless :)
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
