==PAGE:1==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern
matching
Spring 2025
Ioannis Karras
Abstract
Join patterns are an underexplored approach for the programming of concurrent and
distributed systems. When applied to the actor model, join patterns offer the novel capability
of matching combinations of messages in the mailbox of an actor. Previous work by Philipp
Haller et al. in the paper “Fair Join Pattern Matching for Actors” (ECOOP 2024) explored
join patterns with conditional guards in an actor-based setting with a specification of fair and
deterministic matching semantics. Nevertheless, the question of time efficiency in fair join
pattern matching has remained underexplored. The stateful tree-based matching algorithm
of Haller et al. performs worse than an implementation that adapts the Rete algorithm to
the regular version of a join pattern matching benchmark, while outperforming on a variant
with heavy conditional guards, which take longer to evaluate. Nevertheless, conforming Rete
to the problem of join pattern matching requires heavy manual adaptation.
In this thesis, we enhance and optimize the stateful tree-based matching algorithm of
Haller et al. to achieve up to tenfold performance improvements on certain benchmarks,
approaching the performance of Rete on regular benchmarks while maintaining the advan-
tages of versatility and performance with heavy guards. We also enhance the benchmark
suite, adding new features and enhancing its extensibility and user-friendliness. We extend
the join pattern implementation with a less ambiguous syntax as well as dynamic pattern
switching. Finally, we present a new complex model use case for join patterns, showing their
applicability in a microservice web architecture.
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Join patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
The stateful tree-based matching algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.2
Size with guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.3
Complex Smart House . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.4
Simple Smart House . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.5
Bounded Buffer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
The boundary/break API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Optimizations
9
3.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Mutability and single traversal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Lazy ramification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Optimized loops
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.4
Multithreading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.5
Message filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.6
Replacing matching trees with arrays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.7
Cache-friendly data structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
MutableStatefulMatcher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
LazyMutableMatcher
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
WhileLazyMatcher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.4
EagerParallelMatcher, WhileEagerMatcher, and LazyParallelMatcher
21
3.2.5
FilteringWhileMatcher and FilteringParallelMatcher . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.6
ArrayWhileMatcher and ArrayParallelMatcher . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Overall evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1
Comparison between our algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.2
Comparison to Evrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Other attempted optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.1
Further memory optimizations for MessageIdxs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.2
In-place sorted merge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.3
PatternBins as a hash map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Benchmark suite improvements
35
4.1
Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Structure and extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Feature extensions
38
5.1
Operator syntax for joins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Dynamic pattern switching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.3
Example uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:3==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
6
Advanced example: Payment microservices
43
7
Conclusion
47
Appendices
49
A Commands used to run benchmarks
49
A.1 Simple Smart House . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2 Complex Smart House . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.3 Bounded Buffer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.4 Size and Size with guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.5 Baseline measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.6 “Other attempted optimizations” measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2
==PAGE:4==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
1
Introduction
The programming of concurrent and distributed systems notoriously introduces many complex-
ities not found in conventional sequential programming. Many programming paradigms have
been developed to tackle these challenges; one such paradigm that has received relatively less
attention is the paradigm of join patterns. One application of join patterns is in concurrent
actor-based message passing systems, where they provide a promising approach with various
benefits.
Actors were first introduced in [1].
Informally, the actor model is similar to the model of
object-oriented programming (OOP), but with the following key differences:
• Instead of objects, the main entity is the actor.
Like objects, actors store their own
encapsulated data. However, while a single thread of execution can affect multiple objects
in OOP, each actor instead has its own thread of execution. These threads of execution
do not necessarily correspond to platform threads; other execution models such as thread
pools may also be used to execute the actors.
• The system of communicating data between objects via methods is replaced with an
asynchronous message passing system. An actor sending a message to another actor does
not transfer execution to the other actor; the sender can continue without waiting for a
response. Every actor has a mailbox that stores all incoming messages.
Conventionally, an actor processes messages from its mailbox one at a time, in the order of
arrival. If the messages are typed, the actor can have a handler for each message type. The
introduction of join patterns allows actors to process multiple messages simultaneously and
handlers to be associated with specific combinations of message types. Recently, the paper “Fair
Join Pattern Matching for Actors” by Haller et al. [2] explored join patterns with conditional
guards in an actor-based setting. This is the most expressive conceptualization of join patterns
in the literature.
While previous implementations of join pattern matching for actors used
non-deterministic message matching semantics, Haller et al. contribute a novel specification of
fair and deterministic matching semantics. Fair semantics prioritize older messages over newer
ones, guaranteeing that any matchable message is eventually consumed. Deterministic semantics
ensure that message matching proceeds in a predictable and reliable manner. The authors also
present a stateful tree-based algorithm that performs message matching according to these
semantics, and prove the correctness of the algorithm with respect to the semantics.
They
implement this join pattern specification and algorithm in a Scala 3 library called JoinActors.
This library dispels the need to create a new programming language supporting join patterns
by enabling their definition in a simple and intuitive manner through Scala 3’s advanced macro
system. Moreover, it includes an original benchmarking suite, with benchmarks tailored to test
the nuances of join pattern matching.
Nevertheless, the performance of join pattern matching algorithms has been underexplored.
Haller et al. compare their stateful tree-based matching algorithm to an implementation that
adapts the Rete algorithm [3], using the Evrete library for Java,1 to a join pattern matching
benchmark. Evrete outperforms the tree-based algorithm on the regular version of the bench-
mark, but performs much worse on a variant with so-called heavy guards, conditional guards
that take a long time to evaluate. Besides, conforming Evrete to the problem of join pattern
matching requires a lot of manual adaptation. This conundrum leaves an open question: is
there a native algorithm for join pattern matching and an implementation thereof that per-
1https://www.evrete.org/
1
==PAGE:5==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
forms comparably to Evrete in regular benchmarks and also maintains superior performance
with heavy guards? In this thesis, we answer this question affirmatively, while building upon
the work of Haller et al.
In particular, the main contributions of this thesis are the following:
1. We apply various optimizations and new techniques to the stateful tree-based match-
ing algorithm. Some of these improvements are straightforward, while others are more
theoretically intriguing, but they all lead to substantial performance improvements. We
establish a new baseline that performs better in all cases, as well as various optimizations
on top of this baseline which are less generally applicable but provide even better perfor-
mance in specific cases. Some of our improvements include a more efficient lazy matching
algorithm, cache-friendly data structures, multithreaded execution, and an algorithm that
heuristically uses subexpressions of conditional guards to filter unmatchable messages.
These enhancements, described in Section 3, constitute the core of our contribution. As a
result of these advancements, we achieve performance approximately 10× over the original
algorithm on certain benchmarks and approaching that of Evrete on the benchmark where
Evrete vastly outperformed the predecessor implementation of Haller et al. Furthermore,
we maintain and expand the advantage of the tree-based algorithm on the variant with
heavy guards. We argue that these results, along with the fact that Evrete requires elab-
orate manual adaptation to solve the problem of join pattern matching, render our design
the solution of choice on most problem instances.
2. We comprehensively refactor the benchmark suite of the original implementation to make
it more feature-rich, extensible, and user-friendly. Section 4 describes this refactoring.
3. We modify the join pattern macro to support a new, less ambiguous syntax, as described
in Section 5.1.
4. We introduce support for dynamic pattern switching at runtime, enabling a range of
expressive use cases. We describe this in Section 5.2.
5. Lastly, we present a complex, real-world use case of join patterns, demonstrating their
advantages within a microservice architecture. We dicuss this case study in Section 6.
Our implementation is available in our fork of the JoinActors repository on Github at https:
//github.com/yaniskas/join-actors.
2
Background
In this section, we provide some background knowledge required to understand our work.
2.1
Join patterns
Join patterns are a concurrent programming paradigm originating from a formal model of
concurrency called join calculus [4]. Many implementations of join patterns have been created
in various programming languages, with widely varying semantics.
Some implementations,
like Polyphonic C# [5], use them in a synchronous concurrency context. Here, we focus on
asynchronous message passing systems, specifically applied to the actor model. In this context,
procedures are driven by messages arriving in the mailbox of an actor.
Join patterns enable a message passing system to match patterns to combinations (i.e., joins)
of messages in addition to single messages. These combinations may be defined as patterns in a
2
==PAGE:6==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
pattern matching construct similar to that found in many programming languages. Additionally,
these message passing systems are commonly extended with guards on the patterns, which
restrict possible matches to those satisfying certain conditions on the message payloads. Such
actor-based systems with conditional guards are explored in [6, 7, 8].
The predecessor paper by Haller et al. [2] gives a formal language specification for join patterns,
in which the join definition is the main language primitive. A join definition defines a list of join
patterns that may be used for matching, where one join pattern specifies a single combination of
messages that can be matched. If a join definition combines multiple join patterns, conflicts arise
between the patterns whenever more than one pattern can be matched. The main contribution
of the predecessor paper is in formalizing a fair and deterministic specification for join pattern
matching. It imposes an order on possible matches based on the age of the messages matched,
and predictably selects matches in a way that prioritizes older messages.
This formulation
differs from previous implementations, which were non-deterministic.
Formally, a join definition consists of a list of reaction rules of the form J ▷P. Here J is a join
pattern and P is a process associated with the rule, i.e., the code that is executed when the
pattern is matched. A join pattern consists of a sequence of the form c1(x) ∧c2(y) ∧... where
c1 and c2 are constructor patterns, corresponding to message types, and x and y are variables
that obtain the values of message payloads when the pattern is matched by incoming messages.
For example, if the messages c1(m1) and c2(m2) arrive in the actor’s mailbox, the pattern is
matched, x takes the value of m1, and y takes the value of m2. These variables can be referred to
in the reaction rule P. It is also possible for messages to have no payload or multiple payloads;
in each case the shape of the pattern needs to reflect the number of payloads. For instance,
c3() denotes a message with no payloads, and c4(a, b, c) a message with three payloads. When
messages are matched, they are removed from the mailbox and cannot be used in subsequent
matches: they are said to be consumed.
Haller et al. [2] implement their join pattern specification in a Scala library called JoinActors.
With this library, a join definition is written using the Scala syntax2 for partial functions,
i.e., functions defined only for certain argument values. Using the metaprogramming facilities
of Scala 3, the library implements a macro that changes the semantics of partial functions.
Namely, the macro transforms a partial function into a definition for a data structure that
contains information about the join definition. This data structure is then passed to a matching
algorithm, and the matching algorithm is used by an actor in a prototype actor framework.
Listing 1 shows an example of a join definition from [2] written in this library. This example
model a monitoring program that receives events from devices on a factory shop floor. The join
definition starts with the macro call receive on line 2. After this, the join patterns are given
using partial function syntax. This consists of a parameter, which is a reference to the actor
(ActorRef) (line 2), followed by an arrow, and then a list of the function cases, each defining
a single join pattern. The first pattern starts on line 3 with a case statement, followed by a
tuple of the constructor patterns that make up the join pattern on lines 3 and 4 (split across
two lines to enhance readability).
After the constructor patterns, there is a guard on line 4 starting with the if keyword. A guard
states a condition that should be met for the pattern to be matched; if no guard is desired, it
can be omitted. In this case, the guard states that the pattern can be matched when the actor
has in its mailbox a Fault message and a Fix message both referring to the same fault (fid1
== fid2).
2https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/book/fun-partial-functions.html
3
==PAGE:7==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
The guard is followed by an arrow => on line 4 and the code defining the reaction rule on lines
5 and 6. A reaction rule always ends with a returned value that tells the actor what to do next:
either Continue to continue matching, or Stop(v) to stop the actor, where v is the value to
return once the actor stops. In this case, the reaction rule updates some maintenance statistics
and then returns Continue to continue execution.
The Actor class has two type parameters: the type of message received and the type contained
within the Stop signal. In the example on line 1, this message type is set to Event and the return
type is set to Unit, a standard type in functional programming denoting no information. Since
the return type is Unit, the stop signal is parameterized with the unit value (). Finally, after
the partial function, the macro receives an algorithm (line 22) as an instance of an enumeration
type called MatchingAlgorithm.
1
def monitor() = Actor[Event, Unit] {
2
receive { (self: ActorRef[Event]) => {
3
case (Fault(_, fid1, _, ts1),
4
Fix(_, fid2, ts2)) if fid1 == fid2 =>
5
updateMaintenanceStats(ts1, ts2)
6
Continue
7
8
case (Fault(mid, fid1, descr, ts1),
9
Fault(_, fid2, _, ts2),
10
Fix(_, fid3, ts3)) if fid2 == fid3 && ts2 > ts1 + TEN_MIN =>
11
updateMaintenanceStats(ts2, ts3)
12
log(s"Fault ${fid1} ignored for ${(ts2 - ts1) / ONE_MIN} minutes")
13
self ! DelayedFault(mid, fid1, descr, ts1) // For later processing
14
Continue
15
16
case (DelayedFault(_, fid1, _, ts1),
17
Fix(_, fid2, ts2)) if fid1 == fid2 =>
18
updateMaintenanceStats(ts1, ts2)
19
Continue
20
21
case Shutdown() => Stop(())
22
}}(algorithm)
23
}
Listing 1: The factory shop floor example [2]
One of our contributions is to enable a new operator-based syntax for join pattern definitions.
Moreover, our addition of dynamic pattern switching requires explicitly providing type param-
eters to the receive macro. Therefore, the example would be written differently in the current
version of the library; Listing 2 shows the first few lines. Lines 3–4 show the new join syntax,
where instead of putting the constructor patterns in a tuple, we separate them with a custom
operator &:&. Line 2 shows the explicit parametrization of receive, where the type parameters
previously given to the actor are now given to receive and propagated to the actor by type
inference. We discuss our new syntax in Section 5.1, and the dynamic pattern switching feature
in 5.2. To avoid confusion, we use this new syntax in our code snippets henceforth.
4
==PAGE:8==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
1
def monitor() = Actor {
2
receive[Event, Unit] { (self: ActorRef[Event]) => {
3
case Fault(_, fid1, _, ts1)
4
&:& Fix(_, fid2, ts2) if fid1 == fid2 =>
5
updateMaintenanceStats(ts1, ts2)
6
Continue
7
...
8
}
Listing 2: The first part of the factory shop floor example given in the predecessor paper,
written with our new syntax
The JoinActors library defines two matching algorithms that can be used by actors. The first
is a brute-force algorithm implemented in the BruteForceMatcher class, which enumerates all
possible message combinations, finds all possible matches, and then searches for the fairest match
among these. The second is the aforementioned stateful tree-based algorithm, implemented
in the StatefulTreeBasedMatcher class, which improves upon the brute force algorithm by
storing partial matches for every message received; we describe this algorithm in detail in the
next section. Both matchers have corresponding cases in the MatchingAlgorithm enumeration.
The receive macro takes an instance of this enumeration and uses the corresponding class.
The library uses an extensible framework, allowing for new matching algorithms to easily be
implemented and plugged in. Both BruteForceMatcher and StatefulTreeBasedMatcher im-
plement the Matcher trait. Scala traits serve a role similar to that of interfaces in Java and other
object-oriented programming languages. A new matching algorithm can be added by creating a
new Matcher implementation, and then registering it in the MatchingAlgorithm enumeration.
In this thesis, we make full use of this extensible structure.
2.2
The stateful tree-based matching algorithm
In addition to formalizing the notion of fair matching, Haller et al. [2] specify and implement an
efficient stateful algorithm for computing matches. The principal data structure used by this
stateful matching algorithm is the matching tree.3 The paper provides a formal definition of
this data structure; here we summarize it in an informal, operational manner.
The nodes of a matching tree hold sets of natural numbers, where each number represents a
message index. The tree begins with a root node holding an empty set. When a new message
arrives, it is given an index, and this index is added to the matching tree in a process called
ramification. The message indices start at 1 and increment with every incoming message. When
a matching tree without restrictions (as explained below) is ramified with a new message index
i, every node in the tree gains a child, where this child is a copy of the parent node with the
number i added to its set. Children are ordered lexicographically with respect to the indices they
contain, in ascending order. Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of an initially empty matching
tree as the message indices 1, 2, and 3 are added to it.
Every join pattern in a join definition has its own matching tree, whose nodes represent either
full or partial matches for the corresponding join pattern. Therefore, the indices inside nodes
3The predecessor paper refers to this data structure with the terms mailbox tree, M-tree, and matching tree;
we opt for the term matching tree.
5
==PAGE:9==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 1: The evolution of an initially empty matching tree as the message indices 1, 2, and 3
are added to it
should correspond to messages that may be matched by the pattern. To that end, since a join
pattern consists of a limited number of constructor patterns, each with a specific type, some
restrictions are due on the ramification of a matching tree in the context of a join pattern.
When a new message of type T arrives and we ramify the tree, a node n is assigned a child
only if the number of messages of type T already represented in n is less than the number of
constructor patterns of type T in the join pattern. Thus, nodes are extended only until they
contain just enough messages of each type to match the join pattern: we refer to such nodes as
complete.
By themselves, matching trees are just a way of storing message combinations. However, their
usefulness derives from the fact that a depth-first, left-to-right traversal of all complete nodes
in a matching tree corresponds exactly to the fairness ordering of potential message matches.
Assuming no message guards, the first complete node returned by a depth-first, left-to-right
traversal of the matching tree yields the fairest match. However, if the pattern contains mul-
tiple constructor patterns of a particular type, we should also consider the permutation of the
messages being matched, i.e., which message of that type is assigned to which instance of that
constructor type in the pattern.
The fairness ranking of permutations is also specified and
implemented in [2]; we omit the details here.
When guards are involved, one needs to further examine every complete node to determine
which permutations satisfy the guard and select the fairest of these. If no such permutation
exists, one may move on to the next fairest complete node. If no complete node in the tree
yields a permutation that satisfies the guard, then a match cannot be produced by the pattern
associated with this tree. Once every matching tree is ramified, the algorithm picks the fairest
match that was yielded overall, thus yielding the fairest match that can be made by the join
definition.
One last detail that greatly increases the efficiency of the matching tree structure is the fact
that it can be pruned. Whenever messages are consumed, we can delete each node in the tree
that contains at least one index of a message that has been consumed. Since child nodes always
contain all the indices of their ancestors, all children of a deleted node can also be deleted. This
way, we can delete entire branches of the tree whenever a message is consumed. This pruning
procedure is performed on all matching trees after a match is produced.
Although the tree-based matching algorithm depends on the matching tree data structure,
this data structure is never created explicitly in the implementation. Instead, the nodes of
6
==PAGE:10==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
the matching tree are stored in a Scala TreeMap,4 which is implemented as a red-black tree.
Red-black trees are binary trees while matching trees are not, so this representation does not
correspond exactly to the theoretical view of a matching tree. For this representation to work,
the TreeMap uses a specially defined ordering on the nodes it stores, which ensures that the
iterator of the red-black tree yields nodes in the order they would be yielded by a depth-first,
left-to-right traversal of the matching tree, thereby maintaining the principal property of the
matching tree.
2.3
Benchmarks
The original implementation [2] includes a benchmark suite for testing matching algorithms.
In the following, we describe the benchmarks from the original suite which we ported to our
refactored suite.
2.3.1
Size
This is a simple benchmark that does not model any real use case, but simply tests the effect of
the size of join patterns on their evaluation speed. It uses six different join definitions containing
a pattern that varies in size between the different definitions. The pattern always matches a
join between pairwise different message types. For example, the first definition has the pattern
A(), the second A() &:& B(), the third A() &:& B() &:& C(), and so on.
There are two variants of this benchmark. In the first, the only messages sent to the actor are
the ones needed to match the join pattern, e.g. for the definition with size three this would be
a repeating sequence of A(), B() and C(). In the second, random noise messages that do not
contribute to matching the pattern are also interleaved. These noise messages cause permanent
growth of the matching tree, as they are never consumed.
2.3.2
Size with guards
This is a version of the Size benchmark where the messages have payloads, and the join pattern
has a guard that tests for equality of the payloads. For example, the definition with size three
now matches the pattern A(x) &:& B(y) &:& C(z), and the guard tests that x == y and y ==
z. Moreover, in addition to the variant where only matching messages are sent and the variant
where noise messages are interleaved, a third variant is provided. In this third variant, some
messages are sent that satisfy the pattern in terms of types, but which do not satisfy the guard.
These messages not only contribute to permanent growth of the matching tree, but they also
cause many failing guard evaluations to be run.
2.3.3
Complex Smart House
This benchmark simulates a few functions of a model smart house coordinator, inspired by [8].
It uses an actor with a join definition that has four patterns. The first three patterns each
match a join on three different statuses from different sensors in the house, and the patterns are
equipped with guards testing a complex condition on the payloads. The last pattern matches
a shutdown signal to stop the actor.
The messages sent consist of a sequence of matching
messages intercalated with randomly generated noise messages.
4https://scala-lang.org/api/3.x/scala/collection/immutable/TreeMap.html
7
==PAGE:11==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
2.3.4
Simple Smart House
This benchmark is a simplified version of Complex Smart House with two of its complex join
patterns removed, so that there is only one performance-critical join pattern. Moreover, no
random messages are sent. This benchmark sends a series of pairs of “prefix” messages, where
each pair contains the first two messages required to match the complex join pattern. After
the prefix messages, it sends a message that can complete the match with any of the previously
sent pairs.
2.3.5
Bounded Buffer
This benchmark implements a scenario where a bounded buffer stores messages generated by
producers and provides these messages to consumers, adapted from [9]. The bounded buffer
is implemented as an actor with join patterns, while the producers and consumers are simple
threads running a loop.
2.4
The boundary/break API
Here we describe a nontrivial feature of the standard library which we use in one of our opti-
mizations. The way we use this is described in Section 3.2.2.
Many programming languages include a break statement for breaking out of loops, but Scala
does not. Nevertheless, there are ways to achieve performant break semantics in Scala, and these
are included in the standard library. Prior to Scala 3, a break statement was provided by the
scala.util.control.Breaks API.5 However, in Scala 3 a superior alternative was introduced
in scala.util.boundary.6 In particular, this new API provides a more expression-oriented
version of the break statement similar to that found in the Rust programming language, where
a value can be returned along with the break.
To use this API, one must first define a scope using the boundary statement. Within this scope,
it is possible to use the break statement by itself. If it used this way, once the program reaches
the break, the program will skip to the next statement after the scope. This is similar to how
the break statement works in most C-like programming languages. Listing 3 shows this kind
of simple, imperative use of the API.
1
var i = 0
2
3
boundary:
4
while true:
5
i += 1
6
if (i == 4) then break
7
8
assert(i == 4)
Listing 3: A simple, imperative use of the boundary/break API
However, a break can also be parameterized with a value. This way, when the program reaches
the break, instead of simply skipping past the scope, it will make the whole scope assume
5https://www.scala-lang.org/api/3.x/scala/util/control/Breaks.html
6https://www.scala-lang.org/api/3.x/scala/util/boundary$.html
8
==PAGE:12==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
the value that was given to the break. To use this value, one needs to assign the boundary
expression to a variable. Listing 4 demonstrates this more complicated use of the API. Here,
we assign the variable j to the result of the boundary expression. When the variable i reaches
the value 4, the break statement is executed with the parameter 12. Since j is assigned to the
boundary expression, j assumes this value of 12.
1
var i = 0
2
3
val j = boundary:
4
while true:
5
i += 1
6
if (i == 4) then break(i*3)
7
8
assert(j == 12)
Listing 4: A more complex, expression-oriented use of the boundary/break API
3
Optimizations
The predecessor paper [2] focuses on creating a novel specification, while its implementation
of the stateful tree-based algorithm is intended as a proof of concept without much focus on
performance. Here, we implement many performance optimizations to the algorithm, resulting
in substantial experimental performance gains.
We begin in Section 3.1 by outlining the theoretical design of our optimizations. Then, in Section
3.2, we discuss our implementation of these optimizations and show the performance each
algorithm achieves compared to the previous one. In Section 3.3.1, we show the performance
improvements in all the benchmarks and present plots comparing all algorithms at once. The
Rete algorithm [3] solves a similar problem to the problem of fair join pattern matching, and
the predecessor paper compares the performance of its implementation to the highly optimized
implementation of Rete in the Evrete library for Java. In Section 3.3.2, we compare our most
performant new algorithms to Evrete and show that we achieve performance close to that of
Evrete. Finally, in Section 3.4 we talk about some attempted optimizations that did not yield
any consistent performance benefit.
We use the extensible structure of the existing library to implement our optimizations. For
every optimization other than the use of cache-friendly data structures (Section 3.1.7), we
create a new class implementing the Matcher trait and a new case of the MatchingAlgorithm
enumeration linked to this class. Some of our optimizations are cumulative, implemented by
extending the previous Matcher with the new optimization. However, as our later optimizations
are less generally applicable, we eschew this linear structure on some matchers. Figure 2 shows
the evolution tree of our optimizations, where each node stands for one of our new Matcher
implementations, and each edge is labeled with the optimization added from one matcher to
the next.
9
==PAGE:13==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 2: The evolution of our matcher implementations
3.1
Design
3.1.1
Mutability and single traversal
The first optimization we considered was mentioned in the “Future Work” section of the pre-
decessor paper, namely the seemingly low-hanging fruit of converting the matching tree data
structure from an immutable functional style to a mutable object-oriented style. This change
resulted in a slight, but mostly insubstantial, performance improvement. In the pursuit of a
more substantial improvement, we used IntelliJ’s profiling tool7 to examine the time spent in
each portion of the algorithm. Figure 3 shows a part of a typical flame graph of the existing
immutable algorithm on the Simple Smart House benchmark.
7https://www.jetbrains.com/pages/intellij-idea-profiler/
10
==PAGE:14==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 3: A flame graph of the original stateful tree-based algorithm on the Simple Smart
House benchmark
We noticed that over half of the runtime is spent in two separate traversals of the matching
tree: the updateMTree function and the findCompletePatterns function (seen on the 7th and
6th lines from the bottom of the flame graph). updateMTree ramifies the matching tree when
a new message arrives, adding new nodes containing the new message index wherever possible;
findCompletePatterns, called soon thereafter, searches the newly ramified tree to find complete
nodes, i.e., nodes where every pattern index has been assigned a message index and hence a
match can take place. We merged these two traversals into one: while ramifying the tree, we
check if new nodes being added have complete patterns, and if so, we report them. This change
yielded a substantial performance improvement. Thus, our first optimization consists of using
a mutable matching tree and traversing it only once.
3.1.2
Lazy ramification
The original implementation of the matching tree algorithm for fair join pattern matching
exhibits some laziness in its tree traversal, but not as much as it could, leading to performance
losses. When a new message arrives, the algorithm ramifies the entire matching tree. Then, it
obtains the complete nodes from the tree in sorted order of fairness. It searches these complete
nodes one by one for an optimal permutation of message indices that satisfies the guard of the
pattern. If it finds such a permutation, it stops the search and reports this permutation as the
fairest match for the pattern; if not, it moves on to the next complete node. Finally, it finds
the fairest match among all patterns.
The single-traversal optimization we discussed improves this by finding optimal matches while
ramifying the tree, but it still ramifies the entire tree before checking any complete node for
valid permutations, resulting in redundant computations. If we instead check for permutations
immediately after finding complete nodes, we can stop the ramification procedure whenever we
find a complete node that has a valid permutation. This approach is correct for two reasons.
Firstly, if we find a complete node with a valid permutation, we have in effect found the fairest
valid match for this pattern using the messages up to this point, and hence there is no need
to continue searching for a match. Secondly, the newly added message will not be used in any
future matches, as it is now guaranteed to be consumed, using either the valid match found in
the current matching tree or a match from another pattern if a fairer match is found. Thus,
all nodes containing the index of the message will be pruned once the overall fairest match is
found, so there is no point in continuing ramification and adding further nodes containing the
index.
11
==PAGE:15==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Our algorithm thus works as follows. We ramify the matching trees in order. While ramifying
a tree, if we construct a complete node, we check it for valid permutations satisfying the guard.
If we find such a permutation, we stop the ramification, report the node, and move on to the
next tree; if not, we continue the traversal. In either case, we do not add the complete node to
the tree, as it serves no purpose in any case. Once we have found the fairest match from each
tree, we find the fairest match overall and then prune the trees, as before. Figure 4 shows a
flow diagram of this algorithm.
Figure 4: A flow diagram showcasing the operation of the lazy tree-based algorithm
3.1.3
Optimized loops
All the tree-based algorithms up to this point have a performance-critical for loop that iterates
over the nodes of the matching tree and performs ramification. However, Scala’s implementa-
tion of for loops is quite inefficient, as it compiles them into a call to the foreach method
parameterized with a closure [10]. This results in a needless performance loss in our code.
Thankfully, Scala also has while loops, which are compiled similarly to loops in Java. Therefore,
we can use these to improve performance. The most interesting part of this optimization is in
the implementation details: in the corresponding implementation section, Section 3.2.3, we
describe how we achieve this improved performance without sacrificing code readability with
explicit while loops.
The hitherto discussed optimizations are generally applicable, so our implementations of these
optimizations build on top of each other. However, from this point onward, the optimizations are
less generally applicable, so the evolution of our matchers begins to branch, as Figure 2 shows.
Furthermore, some of the following optimizations are partially inspired by the performance
of the matcher implementing the optimizations up to now, called WhileLazyMatcher. All this
considered, we can think of WhileLazyMatcher as a new baseline. Figure 5 shows a flame graph
12
==PAGE:16==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
for the main apply method of this matcher, again on the Simple Smart House benchmark. We
use this flame graph to argue for some of our next optimizations.
Figure 5: A flame graph for WhileLazyMatcher on the Simple Smart House benchmark
3.1.4
Multithreading
All the algorithms up to this point have been single-threaded, whereas Evrete makes heavy use of
multithreading in its implementation of the Rete algorithm. Motivated by this, we investigated
how we could use multithreading to improve our performance. It is not trivial to reconcile the
previously discussed lazy ramification procedure with multithreading. Therefore, we first made
a parallel matching algorithm that does not make use of laziness. The algorithm still iterates
through the matching trees in sequence. However, to process each tree, it splits the tree into a
number of even partitions, and assigns one thread to each partition to fully ramify it. Then, it
analyzes the complete nodes reported from each partition.
After this, we focused on reconciling multithreading with laziness. Our lazy parallel algorithm
again splits the workload among multiple threads. However, this time, whenever one worker
thread finds a complete pattern, it finds valid permutations and checks the guard, as in the
singlethreaded lazy algorithm. If the guard can be satisfied, it reports this to the main thread.
The main thread waits for all the worker threads to finish in order of the portion of the tree
they are operating on. Namely, it first waits for the thread operating on the portion of the
tree that can yield the fairest matches, then the thread working on the portion with the next
fairest matches, and so on. If one worker thread reports a complete node, the main thread does
not wait for any subsequent worker threads, as these threads can only yield less fair matches.
Instead, it interrupts those subsequent worker threads and immediately uses the match that
was reported to it. Figure 6 shows a flow diagram of this lazy parallel algorithm.
3.1.5
Message filtering
The flame graph for WhileLazyMatcher in Figure 5 shows that the vast majority of the runtime
is spent on the updateTree method, which is used to ramify matching trees. From a theoretical
standpoint, given a large enough join pattern with only one message type, every new ramification
doubles the size of the matching tree. This results in exponential performance loss. Therefore,
the ability to avoid certain ramifications would greatly help the performance of the algorithm.
This motivated us to search for a method to avoid ramification whenever possible.
As mentioned previously, the Rete algorithm [3], implemented in the Evrete library for Java,
solves a very similar problem to the problem of join pattern matching. One intriguing character-
istic of the Rete algorithm is the possibility of attaching conditions directly to the facts/objects
(in our case, messages) before they are joined together. This allows for facts not satisfying a
condition to be filtered out before any attempt is made to combine them with any other facts.
13
==PAGE:17==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 6: A flow diagram showcasing the operation of the lazy parallel algorithm
In our case, a feature like this would allow us to skip tree ramification for certain messages,
with a very positive impact on performance.
We design an algorithm that analyzes the Boolean structure of guard expressions and extracts
conditions that can be applied directly to incoming messages. The algorithm checks for guards
that consist of a conjunction of Boolean subexpressions (for simplicity, we call these subex-
pressions clauses no matter their form). If a guard is a conjunction of clauses, the algorithm
checks which variables are bound in each clause, and which messages those variables come from.
Whenever a clause only uses payloads from one message type, and that message type only ap-
pears once in the pattern, the clause is reported as a filtering clause for that message type.
Thus, filtering clauses are clauses that can be made false by a single message, thereby making
the whole guard evaluate to false.
For example, consider the join pattern in Listing 5. The guard on line 3 consists of four clauses:
x > 1, y = z, x ≤y, and p = 1. The first clause, x > 1, only uses a variable bound in a message
pattern with type A, and the type A only appears once in the pattern. Therefore, x > 1 is a
filtering clause for messages of type A. The second clause, y = z, only uses variables from a
14
==PAGE:18==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
message pattern with type B, and B only appears once in the pattern. Therefore, y = z is also
a filtering clause, but this time for messages of type B. The third clause, x < y, uses variables
from two different message types, and is therefore not a filtering clause. Finally, the fourth
clause, p = 1, only uses one variable, and this variable is bound in a message pattern with type
C. However, the type C appears twice in the pattern, and so p = 1 is not a filtering clause.
1
receive[Msg, Unit] { _ => {
2
case A(x) &:& B(y, z) &:& C(p) &:& C(q)
3
if x > 1 && y == z && x <= y && p == 1 => ...
Listing 5: An example of a join pattern with filtering clauses
If we require that every variable in a clause comes from a single message in order for the clause to
be a filtering clause, this unfairly excludes externally defined variables and functions. Therefore,
we instead look at every combination of clause and single-occurence message type, and check
that no variable in the clause comes from any other message type. If this is true, then we report
the clause as a filtering clause for that message type.
We then make use of these filtering clauses in the matching algorithm. Whenever we receive
a message, we test it against the corresponding filtering clauses for that message type, if there
are any. If there is a clause which the message does not satisfy, we discard the message and
avoid a tree ramification.
3.1.6
Replacing matching trees with arrays
The flame graph for WhileLazyMatcher in Figure 5 shows a considerable amount time spent
on the addAll and pruneTree methods of the TreeMap type.
This TreeMap is a structure
implemented as a red-black tree that we use to represent matching trees, as previously discussed.
We reconsider this matching tree data structure with the aim of reducing the time spent on
these methods. The tree-based matching algorithm essentially consists of traversing through
all the nodes, and for each node potentially creating a new node. If the new node is complete,
it can be investigated for a match, and if not, it can be added to the tree while maintaining a
sorted order. No part of this algorithm specifically depends on the underlying data structure
being a tree.
In this optimization, we replace the matching tree with a sorted array. When we receive a new
message, we traverse this array, and build up a second array of nodes that should be added.
Then, we perform a sorted merge algorithm on these two arrays (the merge part of the mergesort
algorithm), using the same special node ordering that we normally use in the TreeMap. Adding
n nodes to a red-black tree of size n takes O(n log(n)) time, while performing a sorted merge
of two arrays of size n takes O(n) time. Therefore, this optimization decreases the theoretical
time complexity of the ramification procedure.
3.1.7
Cache-friendly data structures
Here we describe one last optimization which we implemented early on in the common code of
all matchers, and therefore cannot be said to build on top of any matcher.
Upon inspecting the flame graphs for some of our matching algorithms, we noticed that a lot of
time was spent modifying the MessageIdxs and PatternIdxs data structures. MessageIdxs is
15
==PAGE:19==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
the structure we use for storing the sets of message indices which make up a matching tree, as
explained in Section 2.2. PatternIdxs is similar, but it is used by the satellite data of matching
trees to store sets of constructor pattern indices.
Both of these types were originally type aliases for linked list data structures: more specifically,
MessageIdxs was defined as a Scala Queue8 and PatternIdxs was defined as a Scala List9. We
changed both of these definitions so that they are instead represented using the Scala ArraySeq
class,10 a simple immutable array structure. This yields two performance benefits:
1. Arrays are more cache-friendly than linked lists, as they abide by the principle of locality.
Therefore, less time is spent on memory fetch instructions when using them.
2. Scala is a JVM language, and the List and Queue classes in Scala can only hold ref-
erence types, similarly to collection classes in Java. When we create a List[Int] or a
Queue[Int], all integers that we store in them are first boxed to object types. This is
analogous to e.g. List<Integer> in Java. However, the ArraySeq class uses runtime
reflection to automatically specialize to whichever primitive type it is given. Therefore,
an ArraySeq[Int] is backed by an Array[Int], which corresponds to a Java int[], as
opposed to an Integer[]. This way, we both avoid allocating objects and we avoid fol-
lowing object pointers. Avoiding allocations improves performance by itself, but avoiding
pointer dereferences also improves performance as it follows the principle of locality.
This change of representation was done in the common code used by all matchers. Therefore, all
algorithms benefit from this optimization, and the main branch of the repository unfortunately
does not allow for comparison between the performance of the two data structure configurations.
However, we provide a repository branch called dev-baseline11 where the old implementation
can be tested on all algorithms.
3.2
Implementation
Here we discuss the details that we needed to consider to implement the optimizations, as well
as the performance improvement shown by each Matcher. For convenience, we replicate our
diagram showing the evolution of our matchers in Figure 7. We name the following subsections
after the matchers they describe. Namely:
• MutableStatefulMatcher is described in Section 3.2.1.
• LazyMutableMatcher is described in Section 3.2.2.
• WhileLazyMatcher is described in Section 3.2.3.
• WhileEagerMatcher, EagerParallelMatcher, and LazyParallelMatcher are described
in Section 3.2.4.
• FilteringWhileMatcher and FilteringParallelMatcher are described in Section 3.2.5.
• ArrayWhileMatcher and ArrayParallelMatcher are described in Section 3.2.6.
We use our new refactored benchmark suite for all benchmarks (described in detail in Section
4). For most of our comparisons between matchers, we use the Simple Smart House benchmark
8https://scala-lang.org/api/3.x/scala/collection/immutable/Queue.html
9https://scala-lang.org/api/3.x/scala/collection/immutable/List.html
10https://scala-lang.org/api/3.x/scala/collection/immutable/ArraySeq.html
11https://github.com/yaniskas/join-actors/tree/dev-baseline
16
==PAGE:20==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 7: The evolution of our matcher implementations (replicated from Figure 2)
described in Section 2.3.4, with the number of matches set to 25 and the maximum number of
prefix messages set to 20. We chose Simple Smart House because it is the most deterministic
benchmark that has a fully configurable length, and we found that its plots show the perfor-
mance improvements in our algorithms more clearly than the other benchmarks. We show the
commands used to run all of our benchmarks in Appendix A, and we provide these commands
in a file called report benchmarks.txt in the benchmarks project of the repository.
We run all our benchmarks on a computer with an Intel Core i7-10710U CPU and 16 GB of
RAM running Windows 10. We use Scala 3.6.3 and JDK 23 with the maximum heap size set
to 8 GB.
We begin by establishing a baseline against which we can compare our matchers. As we dis-
17
==PAGE:21==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
cussed in Section 3.1.7, our optimization related to cache-friendly data structures was performed
in the common code shared by all matchers, so all matchers benefit from it in the main branch of
the repository. Therefore, in order to create a baseline measurement, we use the dev-baseline
branch of the repository where this change is reverted, and run a benchmark on the existing
StatefulTreeBasedAlgorithm. Figure 8 shows a comparison between this baseline measure-
ment and the StatefulTreeBasedAlgorithm in the main branch of the repository, which in-
cludes the ArraySeq optimization. This way, we show the effect of the ArraySeq optimization
by itself. As can be seen, this optimization alone reduces the time spent on the last parameter
of the benchmark by approximately a third. Apart from this baseline measurement, all of our
benchmarks from here on out include the ArraySeq optimization.
Figure 8: A comparison of the current StatefulTreeBasedMatcher against the baseline
measurement (StatefulTreeBasedMatcher without the data structure optimization)
3.2.1
MutableStatefulMatcher
The MutableStatefulMatcher class is a version of the old StatefulTreeBasedMatcher with
the improvements discussed in section 3.1.1, namely the use of mutable data structures and
only traversing the matching tree once. This matcher ramifies the tree, and whenever it creates
a new node, it checks whether this node is complete. If so, it adds the node to a list. Once the
ramification is done, it returns this list of complete patterns for further processing.
Figure 9 shows the result of this optimization on the Simple Smart House benchmark. This
optimization results in approximately double performance on the last parameter of the bench-
mark.
3.2.2
LazyMutableMatcher
The LazyMutableMatcher class implements the optimization discussed in section 3.1.2, namely
lazy ramification of the matching tree.
When a node with complete patterns is found, we
immediately check for valid permutations that satisfy the guard. If the check is successful, we
stop the algorithm and report the fairest valid permutation. If not, we continue the traversal.
Either way, we do not add the complete node to the tree.
A nontrivial implementation detail of this optimization is how to achieve the stopping of the
algorithm once a valid permutation is found. One option would be the functional approach: im-
18
==PAGE:22==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 9: A comparison of MutableStatefulMatcher against StatefulTreeBasedMatcher on
the Simple Smart House benchmark
plementing the algorithm as a recursive function, and encoding the possibility of early stopping
in the return type of the function. However, this would introduce performance overhead, and we
had already committed to a performant mutable coding style with the previous optimization,
so we did not want to undo that work.
Instead, we decided to opt for the boundary/break API introduced in Section 2.4. The advanced
expression-oriented break statement defined by that API precisely matches our use case: we
want to provide a value exactly when we break out of the algorithm.
We wrap the main loop of our algorithm in a boundary expression, and we assign a value
with the Option type to this expression. If we find a valid match, we use break to provide
information about the match wrapped in the Some case of Option. We also include the None
case at the end of the boundary, and this is what the boundary evaluates to if no break is
encountered.
Figure 10 shows the effect of this optimization. While not as drastic as the effects of the cache-
friendly ArraySeq data structure or the single-traversal optimization, it is still substantial.
3.2.3
WhileLazyMatcher
The WhileLazyMatcher class implements the optimization discussed in Section 3.1.3, namely
optimized loops. By default, Scala for loops are compiled into a call to a foreach method with
a lambda function, which has a substantial performance impact. For example, a code snippet
like
for v <- coll do f(v)
is converted by the compiler into
coll.foreach(v => f(v))
Since Scala also offers while loops that are compiled more efficiently, we would like to use these
instead. However, we are able to avoid explicitly writing cumbersome while loops. Instead,
we make use of macros and the extensions to the type system in Scala 3 to write a conversion
19
==PAGE:23==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 10: A comparison of LazyMutableMatcher against MutableStatefulMatcher on the
Simple Smart House benchmark
method for collections that can turn for loops on that collection into while loops. This way,
there is very little impact on code readability. Our method is inspired by the discussion in [10],
as well as the suggestions in [11].
We define the conversion as a macro extension method called fast on the type IterableOnce.
IterableOnce is a standard library type which is the supertype of all collection types as well
as all iterators. Using this macro, a code snippet like
for v <- coll.fast do f(v)
is converted into
val it = coll.iterator; while it.hasNext do f(it.next())
The code we use to achieve this conversion is shown in Listing 6. We first define an opaque
type12 called FastIterable on line 1. This is an alias of IterableOnce, but since it is opaque,
it appears as a separate type outside of this file. On lines 3-7 we define an extension method
on FastIterable called foreach, which takes a function parameter and returns Unit. This
method signature allows it to be used as the implementation for a Scala for comprehension on
the FastIterable type. In this foreach method, we take the iterator of the IterableOnce
and use it in a while loop. We define this foreach method as an inline method13 with its
parameter also inline, thereby making it a simple macro. Finally, on lines 9-10, we define the
extension method fast on IterableOnce, which simply changes the static type of the object
calling the method into FastIterable.
When we use a for comprehension on a collection converted with the .fast method, the effect
is the following:
1. Scala sees that the for comprehension is used on a value of type FastIterable. Since
this type has a foreach method with a valid signature, the for comprehension is replaced
with a call to this foreach method.
12https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/book/types-opaque-types.html
13https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/guides/macros/inline.html
20
==PAGE:24==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
1
opaque type FastIterable[T] = IterableOnce[T]
2
3
extension[T] (self: FastIterable[T])
4
inline def foreach[U](inline f: T => U): Unit =
5
val it = self.iterator
6
while it.hasNext do
7
f(it.next())
8
9
extension[T] (self: IterableOnce[T])
10
def fast: FastIterable[T] = self
Listing 6: The FastIterable type and related methods we use to optimize for loops
2. Since the foreach method on FastIterable is a macro, its body is substituted into the
call site. Since the function parameter is also inline, its body is substituted into the
while loop coming from the foreach method.
3. Since FastIterable is an opaque type and thereby a type alias, it is erased and has no
effect on the generated bytecode.
Thus, the fact that FastIterable is an opaque type instead of a regular class, combined with
the fact that its foreach method is a macro, means that there is zero abstraction cost for using
this system instead of manually writing a while loop.
The effect of this optimization is shown in Figure 11. As can be seen, the runtime is decreased
by approximately a third on the last parameter.
Figure 11: A comparison of WhileLazyMatcher against LazyMutableMatcher on the Simple
Smart House benchmark
3.2.4
EagerParallelMatcher, WhileEagerMatcher, and LazyParallelMatcher
As discussed in section 3.1.4, we implement an eager multithreaded matching algorithm as well
as a lazy one. The eager version is found in the class EagerParallelMatcher. Here, we use
21
==PAGE:25==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Java’s Spliterator API14 to split the matching tree into N partitions, and then spawn one
thread to fully ramify on each partition, where N is a configurable parameter. In order to
have a fair comparison for this eager multithreaded algorithm, we also provide a singlethreaded
algorithm with optimized loops but without laziness in the class WhileEagerMatcher. Fig-
ure 12 shows a comparison between these two algorithms. In all our benchmarks concerning
multithreaded algorithms, here and in all subsequent plots, we configure the multithreaded al-
gorithms to use 8 threads. This is because the Spliterator class can only evenly split the tree
into multiples of 2, and the computer we use for the benchmarks has 6 cores. Therefore, 8 is
the smallest choice that evenly splits the tree while still allowing all CPU cores to be occupied.
As can be seen, parallelization does result in a performance improvement for the eager algorithm,
but it is a very slight improvement. We speculate that synchronization overhead plays a role in
this.
Figure 12: A comparison of EagerParallelMatcher against WhileEagerMatcher on the
Simple Smart House benchmark
We also implement the lazy multithreaded algorithm specified in Section 3.1.4 in the class
LazyParallelMatcher.
This algorithm again uses the Spliterator class to parallelize the
workload. However, this time, whenever one worker thread finds a complete pattern, it checks
if a match can be produced. If so, it reports this to the main thread. The main threads waits
for all the worker threads to finish in order of the portion of the tree they are operating on. If
one worker thread reports a complete node, the main thread interrupts all subsequent worker
threads and uses the match that was reported to it.
All synchronization in ParallelEagerMatcher is implemented using Scala’s Promise type. In
ParallelLazyMatcher, we make use of Java’s ExecutorService API to allow for thread inter-
ruptions. ExecutorService works with the Java Future class, so we use these for synchroniza-
tion instead of Scala promises.
Figure 13 shows a comparison between this lazy parallel matcher, the corresponding singlethreaded
matcher (WhileLazyMatcher), and the two matchers from the previous plot. The lazy algo-
rithm benefits more from parallelization than the eager algorithm, as the performance almost
doubles on the last parameter. However, as the computer running the benchmarks has 6 cores,
14https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/23/docs/api/java.base/java/util/Spliterator.html
22
==PAGE:26==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
the theoretical optimal speedup is much higher than this. This shows that synchronization
overhead still plays a major role.
Figure 13: A comparison of WhileEagerMatcher, EagerParallelMatcher,
WhileLazyMatcher, and LazyParallelMatcher on the Simple Smart House benchmark
3.2.5
FilteringWhileMatcher and FilteringParallelMatcher
The classes FilteringWhileMatcher and FilteringParallelMatcher implement the guard
filtering functionality discussed in Section 3.1.5 in a singlethreaded and multithreaded fashion
respectively. In order to implement this functionality, we expand on our use of the powerful
macro system in Scala 3. We enhance the receive macro with code that analyzes the abstract
syntax trees of pattern guards. We check for a Boolean structure consisting of a conjunction of
clauses, and then we analyze each clause to see where its variables come from. As previously
discussed, we look at every combination of clause and single-occurrence message type, and
report the clause as filtering if no variables in the clause come from any other message type.
Once we have identified the filtering clauses, we provide closures called filtering lambdas for all
the message types in the pattern. If filtering clauses exist, the lambda evaluates the conjunction
of the filtering clauses, whereas if there are no filtering clauses, the lambda simply returns true.
These lambdas act as tests that can be used by a matcher on all incoming messages. If a message
makes its corresponding filtering lambda evaluate to false, it can be discarded.
As an added note, it is worth mentioning that the method we use for detecting conjunctions
works for expressions returned from a macro. Therefore, one can avoid writing long expressions
in pattern guards by hiding them behind a simple macro implemented as an inline function
with inline arguments.
We provide two matcher implementations that use these filtering lambdas, one singlethreaded
and one multithreaded. FilteringWhileMatcher is a version of WhileLazyMatcher with filter-
ing functionality, and FilteringParallelMatcher is a version of LazyParallelMatcher with
filtering functionality. In both cases, whenever a new message arrives, the matcher tests the
message against the corresponding filtering lambda. If the lambda returns false, the message
is immediately discarded. The message is only considered for addition to the matching tree if
the lambda returns true. In all other respects, the matchers are identical to their non-filtering
23
==PAGE:27==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
counterparts.
So far we have been using the Simple Smart House benchmark for our comparisons; however,
this benchmark never uses messages that are rejected by a guard. In fact, the only benchmark
that uses such messages and has filtering clauses in its guards (as we have defined them) is
the Complex Smart House benchmark, described in Section 2.3.3. Therefore, this is the only
benchmark that benefits from these filtering algorithms. Figure 14 shows the performance of
these filtering algorithms on this benchmark compared to their non-filtering counterparts. Both
filtering algorithms vastly outperform the previous algorithms, with even the singlethreaded one
achieving performance approximately five times faster on the last parameter than the fastest
multithreaded algorithm, LazyParallelMatcher. This graph does not show the performance
difference between FilteringWhileMatcher and FilteringParallelMatcher, so we also run
a longer benchmark comparing these two matchers against each other; this is shown in Figure
15. We omit error bars in this plot due to the number of data points, to avoid cluttering it.
Similarly to our comparison between WhileLazyMatcher and LazyParallelMatcher, the par-
allel algorithm once again achieves approximately double the performance of the singlethreaded
one. Again, the commands used to run these benchmarks are provided in Appendix A.
Figure 14: A comparison of the filtering matching algorithms against their non-filtering
counterparts on the Complex Smart House benchmark
3.2.6
ArrayWhileMatcher and ArrayParallelMatcher
The classes ArrayWhileMatcher and ArrayParallelMatcher implement the optimization dis-
cussed in Section 3.1.6, namely replacing matching trees with arrays, in a singlethreaded and
multithreaded fashion respectively.
Due to the limited applicability of the filtering optimization, we do not include it in these
matchers. We build these array optimizations on top of the WhileLazyMatcher from Section
3.2.3 and the LazyParallelMatcher from Section 3.2.4. In ArrayWhileMatcher, we replace
the matching tree with an array that we maintain sorted. Every time we receive a new message,
we construct an array of additions by initializing an empty array with the same size as the
node array, and then populating it by ramifying the node array. Then, we create an array that
contains the original nodes merged with the nodes to be added. Finally, we set the array of
nodes to this merged array. In ArrayParallelMatcher, we again have a sorted array instead of
24
==PAGE:28==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 15: A comparison of the filtering matching algorithms against each other on a longer
version of the Complex Smart House benchmark
a tree. Like in LazyParallelMatcher, when we receive a new message, we use the Spliterator
API to split the array into partitions and spawn a worker thread to work on each partition. If
a worker reports a complete node, the main thread uses this and interrupts the other threads.
Otherwise, the worker threads build up new arrays of additions, and then the main thread
combines these into one array, and performs a sorted merge with the original node array. In
both matchers, we “prune” the array simply by creating a new array with the correct elements
removed.
ArrayWhileMatcher achieves better performance than WhileLazyMatcher on the Bounded
Buffer benchmark described in Section 2.3.5; this is shown in Figure 16. However, it achieves
similar performance on Complex Smart House, and worse performance on Simple Smart House.
Thus, this is another optimization that appears to have limited applicability.
Figure 16: A comparison of ArrayWhileMatcher against WhileLazyMatcher on the Bounded
Buffer benchmark
The main distinguishing feature between Simple Smart House and Bounded Buffer is that
25
==PAGE:29==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Simple Smart House allows the matching tree to grow indefinitely, while Bounded Buffer
does not. Therefore, we can speculate that the worse performance on Simple Smart House
is due to the large size of the ramifications that need to be performed. For every ramification,
ArrayWhileMatcher needs to allocate a large amount of space twice: once to store the nodes
that need to be added, and once to store the new merged array. Meanwhile, WhileLazyMatcher
allocates a dynamic array to store the nodes to be added, and then it can add nodes to the
tree with small allocations. On Bounded Buffer, messages are constantly both added and con-
sumed, so the array in ArrayWhileMatcher can stay small and benefit from memory locality.
Meanwhile, WhileLazyMatcher needs to constantly allocate many small memory locations with
no locality.
We also benchmark ArrayParallelMatcher. However, the Bounded Buffer benchmark, which
appears to be the only one that benefits from this array optimization, is inherently parallel, so
parallel algorithms perform very inconsistently on it. Therefore, ArrayParallelMatcher does
not perform visibly better than LazyParallelMatcher on any benchmark. Nevertheless, it still
performs better than ArrayWhileMatcher on other benchmarks; Figure 17 shows the results
on Simple Smart House, comparing both of the array-based matchers to both of the optimized
tree-based ones. ArrayParallelMatcher achieves performance quite close to that of the fastest
algorithm, LazyParallelMatcher. This is quite different from ArrayWhileMatcher, which is
considerably slower than its tree-based counterpart. We can expand on our hypothesis about
the performance of arrays to attempt to explain this difference. ArrayParallelMatcher splits
the workload of ramifying the matching array into 8 even chunks, where each chunk is operated
on by a thread. Each thread builds a new array of nodes to be added to the main array. It
is possible that the matching array is split into small enough pieces for the arrays of node
additions to benefit more from memory locality, thereby making the algorithm achieve better
performance.
Figure 17: A comparison of the two array-based matchers against their tree-based
counterparts on the Simple Smart House benchmark
26
==PAGE:30==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
3.3
Overall evaluation
3.3.1
Comparison between our algorithms
We now show plots comparing many of our algorithms at the same time on all of the benchmarks
in the new benchmark suite. We run all of our benchmarks with twenty repetitions for each
algorithm and each x-axis value. Some of the benchmarks have a lot of inherent randomness,
resulting in a lot of variation in results between repetitions. Therefore, to avoid clutter, we omit
error bars on some of our plots. All the benchmarks are described in Section 2.3.
As mentioned previously, we run all our benchmarks with the new benchmark suite, on a
computer with an Intel Core i7-10710U CPU and 16 GB of RAM running Windows 10. We
use Scala 3.6.3 and JDK 23 with the maximum heap size set to 8GB. We again provide all the
commands use to run these benchmarks in Appendix A.
Figure 18 shows the performance of most of the algorithms in the repository on the Simple
Smart House benchmark. We exclude the guard filtering algorithms, as this benchmark does not
include any filtering clauses. LazyParallelMatcher, the fastest matcher, achieves performance
around ten times faster than the baseline. Figure 19 shows a version of this plot that excludes the
baseline and the current version of StatefulTreeBasedMatcher for a more precise comparison.
Both of these plots gather the data that was shown previously in the Simple Smart House plots
in the Implementation section.
Figure 18: A comparison of the baseline against most of our optimizations on the Simple
Smart House benchmark
Figure 20 shows the performance of all the algorithms on the Complex Smart House benchmark.
This is the only benchmark that has filtering clauses, so it is the only one where we include
the filtering algorithms. The results here are quite different: it seems the algorithms can be
categorized into three groups based on their performance. All the singlethreaded algorithms
as well as EagerParallelMatcher have performance very similar to the baseline. Then, the
two parallel algorithms that do not make use of guard filters, LazyParallelAlgorithm and
ArrayParallelAlgorithm, perform over twice as well as the baseline on the last parameter.
Finally, the guard filtering algorithms show the best performance, around ten times faster than
27
==PAGE:31==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 19: A comparison of our optimized algorithms against each other on the Simple Smart
House benchmark
the baseline on the last parameter. We have previously shown a longer comparison between the
filtering algorithms on this benchmark, in Figure 15.
Figure 20: A comparison of the baseline against all of our optimizations on the Complex
Smart House benchmark
Figure 21 shows the performance of most of our algorithms on the Bounded Buffer benchmark.
Here the parallel algorithms have the worst performance by far. This is because this benchmark
spawns many threads to act as producers and consumers, so using a multithreaded matcher
negatively impacts performance as it leads to much more competition between threads. In an
ideal scenario, the bounded buffer as well as every producer and consumer would be running on
separate machines so that this is not an issue. Figure 22 shows the results from a longer version
of the benchmark excluding the multithreaded algorithms. Here the results are quite similar to
28
==PAGE:32==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
the Simple Smart House results. The notable differences are the following:
• LazyMutableMatcher has significantly better performance than WhileEagerMatcher
• WhileLazyMatcher does not appear to improve upon LazyMutableMatcher
• ArrayWhileMatcher has the best performance out of all the matchers, as previously dis-
cussed and analyzed. Its performance is almost five times faster than the baseline on the
last parameter.
Figure 21: A comparison of the baseline against most of our optimizations on the Bounded
Buffer benchmark
Figure 22: A comparison of the baseline against most of our singlethreaded algorithms on a
longer version of the Bounded Buffer benchmark
Our results on the “Size” and “Size with guards” benchmarks are much more noisy and do
not leave us with much useful information; however, we still show them for completeness in
29
==PAGE:33==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
Figure 23. We use a logarithmic scale for the last benchmark, which includes guards as well as
payloads which do not satisfy the guards. This is because the last measurement is significantly
higher than the previous ones. The last plot shows a strange vertical line at the beginning of
the LazyMutableMatcher data; this is because the first data point is 0 due to measurement
inaccuracies, and 0 cannot be represented on a logarithmic scale.
3.3.2
Comparison to Evrete
The predecessor paper compares its stateful tree-based algorithm to a Rete-based implementa-
tion using the Evrete library on the Simple Smart House benchmark. Rete is an algorithm used
in the domain of expert systems, and the problem solved by it has similarities to the problem
of join pattern matching. However, the problem solved is not the exact same, and a lot of
adaptation is needed to capture the semantics of fair join pattern matching. The predecessor
paper uses an implementation that is hard-coded to the Simple Smart House benchmark. The
most important difference between Evrete and the stateful tree-based matching algorithm is
that Evrete has no concept of fairness. Therefore, much like the brute-force algorithm, the
Evrete implementation exhaustively computes all possible matches, evaluates the guard for all
matches, and then finds the fairest among these.
We keep this Evrete-based Simple Smart House implementation mostly the same. However, we
equip it with the ability to generate the messages needed by the benchmark by itself, instead of
having to obtain them from the main benchmark suite. In addition, we give it a richer interface
similar to that of the refactored benchmark suite. Our repository with these changes can be
found at https://github.com/yaniskas/evrete-smarthouse
The predecessor paper runs two comparisons: one with the standard benchmark, and one with
the so-called “heavy guard” flag enabled. This flag artificially slows down the time taken to
evaluate the guard of the main pattern in the join definition, simulating a computationally in-
tensive guard. Since the Evrete implementation has to evaluate guards for all potential matches,
the heavy guards flag significantly diminishes the performance of Evrete. In the original results,
Evrete is over ten times faster on the variant without heavy guards, while the matching tree
algorithm is faster on the variant with heavy guards.
We first repeat the same Simple Smart House benchmark we have already conducted with
the Evrete-based implementation.
We compare the performance of Evrete to three algo-
rithms:
the baseline, our WhileLazyMatcher, which we consider a new baseline, and our
LazyParallelMatcher, which is our fastest algorithm on this benchmark. Figure 24a shows
the results. As can be seen, our optimized implementations are still slower than Evrete, but
they are much closer to the performance of Evrete than the baseline is. Figure 24b shows a
version of the same graph with the baseline excluded. Evrete performs approximately twice
as fast as LazyParallelMatcher on the last parameter, and around four times as fast as
WhileLazyMatcher.
We also run a version of the Simple Smart House benchmark with the heavy-guard flag given.
We make the benchmark much shorter, as Evrete takes a very long time to complete with this
flag set. Figure 25a shows the results, and 25b shows the results without the Evrete data.
As in the predecessor paper, the baseline vastly outperforms Evrete in this scenario. More-
over, WhileLazyAlgorithm and LazyParallelAlgorithm again perform much better than the
baseline. WhileLazyMatcher seems to slightly outperform LazyParallelMatcher; this is prob-
ably due to the short length of the benchmark increasing the relative effect of synchronization
overhead.
30
==PAGE:34==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
(a) Size
(b) Size with noise
(c) Size with guards
(d) Size with guards and noise
(e) Size with guards and non-satisfying payloads
Figure 23: A comparison of the baseline against most of our algorithms on the “Size” and
“Size with guards” benchmarks
3.4
Other attempted optimizations
Here we describe optimizations that we implemented and tested, but which did not lead to a
consistent measurable performance benefit.
31
==PAGE:35==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
(a) Baseline included
(b) Baseline not included
Figure 24: A comparison between the Evrete implementation, WhileLazyMatcher,
LazyParallelMatcher, and the baseline on the Simple Smart House benchmark
(a) Evrete included
(b) Evrete not included
Figure 25: A comparison between the Evrete implementation, WhileLazyMatcher,
LazyParallelMatcher, and the baseline on the Simple Smart House benchmark with heavy
guards
3.4.1
Further memory optimizations for MessageIdxs
Design
As previously mentioned, the flame graph of WhileLazyMatcher in Figure 5 shows
that the majority of its runtime is spent on the :+ method of ArraySeq. We introduced this
data structure in Section 3.1.7, where we used it to replace the linked list structures we were
using previously. The :+ method is used to create a copy of an ArraySeq with a new element
appended; we use this method every time we create a child node while ramifying a matching
tree. The implementation of :+ in ArraySeq simply creates a new ArraySeq that has the new
element added. This results in a lot of unnecessary duplication of data, since we never modify
nodes after they are created, and whenever we remove a node we also remove all of its children.
Therefore, with the aim of reducing the time spent on this copy-and-append operation, we try
to define a data structure that implements the operation efficiently.
We define a data structure which we call a growing array reference (GAR) that avoids this
unnecessary copying of data. A GAR always stores a reference to a dynamic array along with
a view length. We define the following main operations on this structure:
• Comparison: When comparing two GARs, we compare elements of the dynamic arrays,
but we only consider elements up to the view length.
• Construction: We can create a GAR with a collection of elements. The dynamic array
32
==PAGE:36==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
is set to contain these elements, and the view length is set to the length of the array.
• Copy-and-append (:+): When we call :+ on a newly constructed GAR, we do not copy
the array. Instead, we expand the dynamic array with this new element and return a
new GAR that refers to the same underlying array, but which has an incremented view
length. If we then call :+ on this new GAR, we repeat this process, and end up with three
references backed by a single array. In general, whenever we perform this operation on a
GAR with a view length that equals the length of the underlying array, we can perform
the operation this way. However, if we call :+ on a GAR with a view length that does
not equal the length of the underlying array, we necessarily create a copy of the array and
then append the new element to this copy, and return a GAR that is backed by this new
array.
The actual implementation requires methods implementing a few more operations, such as
obtaining iterators; we omit these for conciseness.
In general, such operations consider the
underlying array only up to the view length.
Implementation
The dev-growing-array-ref branch of the repository15 contains an imple-
mentation of this optimization. We define a class called GrowingIntArrayRef that implements
the GAR data structure, specialized for integers. We then redefine the MessageIdxs type alias
to this type. This makes it so all matching tree nodes are represented as GARs, so every time
we traverse a tree and call :+ to create a new child node, we use the special :+ implementation
of GARs that avoids memory allocations as much as possible.
Evaluation
Since we consider WhileLazyMatcher to be a new baseline, we test the regular
version of this matcher to the one on the dev-growing-array-ref branch that is affected by
this optimization. Figure 26 shows the results on the three main benchmarks. This change
results in slightly worse performance on all benchmarks. A reason for this may be that the
GAR data structure introduces a layer of indirection, which is not cache-friendly.
3.4.2
In-place sorted merge
Design
In Section 3.1.6, we described the concept that became the ArrayWhileMatcher in
Section 3.2.6. However, since it achieves worse performance on the Simple Smart House bench-
mark, we attempt to improve upon it. We try this by implementing a more memory-efficient
sorted merge algorithm that does not involve allocating a third array. This is possible to do
when the initial array has enough space allocated to hold all the new elements. We treat the
empty space at the end of the first array as the third array, and perform the sorted merge
backwards.
Implementation
The dev-buffer branch of the repository16 contains an implementation
of this optimization. The class BufferWhileMatcher implements an attempt to improve our
ArrayWhileMatcher by using a partially in-place algorithm. Here, we maintain an ArrayBuffer
of nodes. When we receive a new message, we again construct an array of additions. However,
instead of creating a third array, we expand the ArrayBuffer until it has enough space to hold
all the additions. This may result in a new memory allocation, but if there is already enough
space allocated for expansion, we avoid an allocation. Finally, we perform an in-place sorted
merge between the buffer and the array of additions.
15https://github.com/yaniskas/join-actors/tree/dev-growing-array-ref
16https://github.com/yaniskas/join-actors/tree/dev-buffer
33
==PAGE:37==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
(a) Simple Smart House
(b) Complex Smart House
(c) Bounded Buffer
Figure 26: A comparison of WhileLazyMatcher with the growing array reference change
against WhileLazyMatcher without it
Evaluation
This new matcher showed some promise in the Bounded Buffer benchmark, oc-
casionally outperforming ArrayWhileMatcher. However, we were not able to replicate these
results consistently. Figure 27 shows typical results from our three main benchmarks. The new
matcher achieves slightly worse performance on Simple Smart House, and approximately equal
performance on the other benchmarks.
3.4.3
PatternBins as a hash map
Design
The flame graph of WhileLazyMatcher in Figure 5 shows a considerable amount of
time spent on a get method. This is on the PatternBins data type, which is an alias for the
Scala TreeMap type. Here we store satellite information in the matching tree about the types
of the messages that have been partially matched.
The get method is simply the accessor
method for this map, taking a key and returning a value. In this considered optimization, we
tried to reduce the time spent on this get method. Until this point, we had used a TreeMap to
implement this type. This is a red-black tree map, with O(log(n)) access time. Hash maps, on
the other hand, have O(1) access time. Therefore, we simply redefined PatternIdxs to use a
Scala HashMap.
Implementation
The dev-hashmap branch of the repository17 contains an implementation
of this optimization. Thanks to PatternIdxs being a type alias, not much work was involved
in implementing this change. We just changed the alias definition, and refactored a few places
where the data structure is constructed.
17https://github.com/yaniskas/join-actors/tree/dev-hash-map
34
==PAGE:38==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
(a) Simple Smart House
(b) Complex Smart House
(c) Bounded Buffer
Figure 27: A comparison of BufferWhileMatcher against ArrayWhileMatcher
Evaluation
We again test the version of WhileLazyMatcher with this change to the one with-
out it. Figure 28 shows the results. We obtain slightly worse performance on all benchmarks.
This is a strange result, but it may be due to the computational cost incurred by computing
hash codes.
4
Benchmark suite improvements
The original JoinActors library came with a benchmark suite for evaluating the performance
of its join pattern implementations. We create an updated suite that addresses some problems
with the old suite and provides new functionalities.
The new suite contains the following
improvements:
• A more consistent interface to the different benchmarks
• More readable real-time output while the benchmark is running
• More convenient CSV file output of results
• Automatic generation of plots from results using the JFreeChart library,18 for quick eval-
uation of results
• Repetitions that are run sequentially instead of in parallel for more reliable results
• Warmup repetitions that are all run before the benchmark, instead of before every bench-
mark repetition
18https://www.jfree.org/jfreechart/
35
==PAGE:39==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
(a) Simple Smart House
(b) Complex Smart House
(c) Bounded Buffer
Figure 28: A comparison of WhileLazyMatcher with the PatternIdxs change against
WhileLazyMatcher without it
• The ability to specify which algorithms to use with a command-line parameter
• Default values for all parameters, to greatly simplify usage
• A more extensible software structure and unified running logic for all benchmarks, so
new benchmarks can be added and immediately benefit from most of the aforementioned
features
This new suite is found in the new benchmarks package within the benchmarks project in the
repository. The old benchmarks are still available in the old benchmarks package, but their
main method is disabled.
4.1
Interface
A detailed description of how to use the new benchmark suite can be found in the README file
of the benchmarks project in the repository. Here we mention some of the main aspects of the
interface, with a focus on the benefits they provide.
Every benchmark now has a main parameter, as well as zero or more configuration parameters.
The main parameter is a parameter that is varied between runs of the benchmark. Configuration
parameters, on the other hand, are set by the user and stay the same throughout a benchmark.
The range of the main parameter is specified with three command-line arguments: min-param,
max-param, and param-step. These are specified in the same way for each benchmark type,
providing a consistent interface. Configuration parameters are specific to each benchmark by
nature, so these are specified with different command-line arguments depending on the bench-
mark type. The repetitions argument specifies the number of repetitions to be run for each
36
==PAGE:40==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
main parameter value.
The algorithms command-line argument is used to specify a list of matching algorithms that
should be tested in the benchmark. The options include all the algorithms presented in Sec-
tion 3.2, as well as the StatefulTreeBasedAlgorithm and BruteForceAlgorithm from the
predecessor paper.
In the normal mode of operation, we run benchmarks by first iterating through the requested
algorithms. For each requested algorithm, we iterate through the requested main parameter
values, and for each parameter, we run the requested number of repetitions. The smoothen
command-line flag changes this order: we still iterate through algorithms first, but we then
iterate through repetitions, and then through main parameter values. The purpose of this is
to make random performance dips induced by the operating system less visible. By running
different parameter values in sequence, the effect of these performance dips becomes spread over
multiple parameter values, instead of being concentrated on one parameter value and turning
that data point into an outlier. This flag was used for all the benchmark results presented in
this thesis, as can be seen in Appendix A.
The CSV output includes the main parameter in the first column. Subsequent columns include
the results from each algorithm and each repetition, as well as the average and standard devi-
ation for each algorithm and main parameter value. The automatically generated performance
plots use the main parameter as the x-axis and the average performance as the y-axis. Figure
29 shows an example of a generated plot.
Figure 29: An example of a plot automatically generated by the new benchmark suite
4.2
Structure and extension
The new benchmark suite allows for easy and flexible extension with new benchmarks. Every
benchmark is a class implementing the Benchmark trait, with a companion object19 imple-
menting the BenchmarkFactory trait. Essentially, BenchmarkFactory only contains informa-
tion about the “archetype” of the benchmark, e.g. “Simple Smart House”. By providing a
BenchmarkFactory with a matching algorithm and the values of configuration parameters, one
19https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/book/domain-modeling-tools.html
37
==PAGE:41==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
can create an instance of the corresponding class implementing Benchmark. Benchmark contains
everything needed to run a concrete repetition of a benchmark except the value of the main
parameter, which is supplied as a method parameter.
Benchmark defines two methods: prepare and run. prepare takes a value of the main pa-
rameter and returns a generic type PassPrereqs. run then takes a PassPrereqs and runs the
benchmark, returning Unit. The benchmarks are run by first calling prepare, then starting
the timer, then calling run, and then stopping the timer. All preprocessing such as generating
messages should be done in prepare, and the data from the preprocessing should be passed
to run through the PassPrereqs type. We design it this way so that we can avoid wasting
benchmark time on preprocessing, while at the same time allowing for every benchmark type
to perform whatever preparations it needs before the timer starts.
BenchmarkFactory defines an apply method which takes the algorithm to use and an instance
of an abstract type20 Config, and returns an instance of another abstract type InstanceType.
InstanceType is meant to be set to the corresponding class implementing Benchmark. One
more abstract type is defined, PassPrereqs, which should be equal to the PassPrereqs type
in Benchmark. This is enforced: we restrict the abstract type InstanceType to subtypes of
Benchmark[PassPrereqs].
All of our implemented benchmarks are located in subpackages of the new benchmarks package.
Each subpackage contains:
1. a class implementing Benchmark with a companion object implementing BenchmarkFactory
2. a class providing the Config of the benchmark (if necessary)
3. all other utilities that are used by the benchmark class.
There is also a subpackage called mixin with a trait called MessageFeedBenchmark extending
Benchmark. This is a trait that includes an implementation of the run method in order to
refactor the most common type of benchmark, where a series of messages is fed to a single
actor.
Finally, the package contains a Main object defining the command-line interfaces to the bench-
marks, and a series of files containing utility functions for running the benchmarks and out-
putting results.
Therefore, to add a new benchmark, all one has to do is create a new class-object pair imple-
menting Benchmark and BenchmarkFactory, and register the benchmark in the Main object of
the package.
5
Feature extensions
5.1
Operator syntax for joins
The implementation from the predecessor paper uses a tuple-like syntax for join patterns. This
may be seen as confusing, as it may be misinterpreted as a pattern consisting of a tuple instead
of a join pattern. Therefore, as mentioned previously, we implement a new syntax for joins
using a custom operator written as &:&. Listing 7 shows a comparison between the old and new
syntax.
20https://docs.scala-lang.org/tour/abstract-type-members.html
38
==PAGE:42==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
1
// Old tuple syntax
2
receive { (_: ActorRef[Msg]) => {
3
case (A(), B(), C()) =>
4
println(s"I've received 3 messages: A, B and C :)")
5
Continue
6
...
7
8
// New operator syntax
9
receive { (_: ActorRef[Msg]) => {
10
case A() &:& B() &:& C() =>
11
println(s"I've received 3 messages: A, B and C :)")
12
Continue
13
...
Listing 7: A comparison between the old and new join syntax
We implement the operator as a Scala object that defines an unapply method, also known as
an extractor object.21 We enhance the receive macro with the ability to recognize when a
guard is using this syntax, and extract the constructor patterns in the correct order from the
abstract syntax tree.
Nevertheless, we maintain backwards compatibility with the old syntax for convenience. Both
syntaxes can be used interchangeably, as long as any single join pattern uses only one syntax.
5.2
Dynamic pattern switching
We enhance the JoinActors library with the ability for an actor to dynamically switch the
matcher and join definition it is using. Listing 8 shows a simple example of this feature in
use. Here, an actor starts with a matcher called matcher1. This matcher is defined on lines
6-9, while the actor is defined on line 11. This matcher has a single join pattern that takes
two messages of types M1 and M2. The right-hand side of this pattern indicates that the actor
should switch to a different matcher, matcher2. This second matcher is defined before the first
matcher on lines 1-4, so that the first matcher can refer to it. The second matcher has a join
pattern that takes a message of type M3, and the right-hand side of this stops the actor.
In this example we define the second matcher before the first so that the first can refer to the
second. However, this can be avoided using the lazy val declaration in Scala, which allows for
forward references. We demonstrate this later in Listing 13.
Our design and implementation allow for a lot of flexibility in how this feature is used; we
explore this in Section 5.2.3. We also expand the test suite of the original library to include
tests for this feature.
5.2.1
Design
An actor contains a matcher, and a matcher contains one matching tree for each join pattern.
These matching trees store all partial matches that are made on messages. In order to switch
21https://docs.scala-lang.org/tour/extractor-objects.html
39
==PAGE:43==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
1
val matcher2 =
2
receive[MsgPlain, Unit] { (_) => {
3
case M3() => Stop(())
4
}}(algorithm)
5
6
val matcher1 =
7
receive[MsgPlain, Boolean] { (_) => {
8
case M1() &:& M2() => Switch(matcher2)
9
}}(algorithm)
10
11
val actor = Actor(matcher1)
12
val (futureResult, actorRef) = actor.start()
13
14
actorRef ! M1()
15
actorRef ! M2()
16
actorRef ! M3()
Listing 8: A simple example of a dynamically switching pattern
join definition, the matching trees need to be changed so that they reflect the partial matches
that can be made with the new join definition.
Our switching process operates using the following simple algorithm. When the right-hand side
of a join pattern requests a pattern switch,
1. The actor extracts from the current matcher all messages that have already been matched.
2. The actor prepends to its own mailbox these messages that have already been matched.
3. The actor replaces its matcher.
4. The actor runs its new matcher on its mailbox.
In essence, we simply construct the new matching trees from scratch. By prepending to the
mailbox of the actor, we ensure that the new matcher is able to make use of all messages that
the old matcher has taken but not consumed. Notably, we do not make use of the structure of
the old matching trees to construct the new trees. Since the join definitions may be completely
different, the information in the old trees is not relevant to the new ones.
When the new matcher receives the mailbox with prepended messages, the matcher is free
to perform whatever actions it requires based on the prepended messages: this may include
stopping the actor, or even performing another switch. If another switch is performed, the
process is simply repeated, and a new layer of prepended messages is added to the mailbox.
This would have been much more difficult with a more complex algorithm, such as one making
use of a finite state machine to store the current join definition being used. By using a simple
algorithm, we allow for much flexibility in its use.
5.2.2
Implementation
The JoinActors library uses a type called Result as the “return” type of the right-hand side
of every join definition. This is a union type, and the old library has two cases for it: Continue,
40
==PAGE:44==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
to tell the actor to continue matching, and Stop, to tell the actor to return a result. We extend
the Result type with a third case, Switch. This case is parameterized with the instance of the
Matcher type that the user would like the actor to use. A small detail worth mentioning is that
we changed Result from a discriminated union type to an “ad-hoc” union, introduced in Scala
3.22 We did this to avoid problems related to type variance, since the Switch case introduces a
new invariant type variable.
The old library uses the Java collection type LinkedTransferQueue to implement actor mail-
boxes. This is an efficient concurrent data structure that is well suited to this use case, but unfor-
tunately it does not support the prepend operation that we need in our algorithm. We therefore
implement a wrapper over this collection type called PrependableLinkedTransferQueue. List-
ing 9 shows the full code of this class. This wrapper class stores a LinkedTransferQueue in a
field called delegate (line 2), as well as a Scala ArrayDeque in a field called prepends (line 3).
We define a put method (lines 5-6) which simply forwards to the put method of delegate. We
also define a method called prependAll (lines 8-9) which takes a collection and adds all of the
collection’s elements to prepends. Finally, we define a take method (lines 11-13): if prepends
is not empty, we take from prepends, and otherwise we take from delegate.
1
class PrependableLinkedTransferQueue[M]:
2
private val delegate = LinkedTransferQueue[M]()
3
private val prepends = mutable.ArrayDeque[M]()
4
5
def put(m: M): Unit =
6
delegate.put(m)
7
8
def prependAll(msgs: IterableOnce[M]): Unit =
9
prepends.prependAll(msgs)
10
11
def take(): M =
12
if prepends.nonEmpty then prepends.removeHead(false)
13
else delegate.take()
Listing 9: The code of the PrependableLinkedTransferQueue class
The accesses to the delegate field in the put and take methods are thread-safe, since the
LinkedTransferQueue class is thread-safe. On the other hand, the accesses to prepends in
take and prependAll are not thread-safe. Nevertheless, this does not cause any issues, as all
calls to take and prependAll are done in the thread running the actor.
We add code to the run method of the Actor class to handle the new Switch result type,
implementing our switching algorithm. Listing 10 shows the new run method, with the new
case on lines 6-11. On line 7 we make use of a new method we add to the Matcher trait called
storedMessages, which provides the messages that the matcher has taken from the mailbox
but not consumed.
22https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/book/types-union.html
41
==PAGE:45==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
1
@tailrec
2
private def run(promise: Promise[T]): Unit =
3
matcher(mailbox)(self) match
4
case Continue
=> run(promise)
5
case Stop(value) => promise.success(value)
6
case Switch(newMatcher) =>
7
val storedMessages = this.matcher.storedMessages
8
mailbox.prependAll(storedMessages)
9
10
this.matcher = newMatcher
11
run(promise)
Listing 10: The new run method in the Actor class
5.2.3
Example uses
We now demonstrate various interesting things that can be done with this dynamic pattern
switching feature. All of these examples are taken from the test suite of the repository, with
slight modifications.
As mentioned previously, when a matcher switch is performed, it is possible to perform a
second switch even while processing the backlog of messages created by the first switch. Listing
11 shows such an example. Here, three messages are sent to the actor: M1, M2, and M3, in that
order. The first matcher (lines 11-14) waits for the third message M3 and switches to the second
matcher. The second matcher (lines 6-9) takes the second message M2 from the backlog and
switches to the third matcher. The third matcher (lines 1-4) then takes the first message M1
from the backlog and stops execution.
Listing 12 shows an example similar to the last, but now with a join pattern in the second
matcher, showing how backlog messages can be joined together with new messages. The first
matcher (lines 6-9) waits for M2 and switches to the second matcher. The second matcher (lines
1-4) then waits for both M1, which it receives from the backlog, and M3, which it receives after
the switch happens.
It is also possible to switch to another matcher, and subsequently switch back to the first.
However, this requires both matchers to refer to each other, and so the matcher variables need
to be defined in a way that allows for forward references. The lazy val construct in Scala is
suitable for this purpose. Listing 13 shows such an example. The messages sent to the actor
are, as before, M1, M2, and M3. The first matcher (lines 1-5) consumes M1 and switches to the
second matcher. The second matcher (lines 7-10) then consumes M2 and switches back to the
first matcher. Finally, the first matcher consumes M3 and stops execution.
As a last example, we show how it is even possible to switch to a matcher received as the payload
of a message. Listing 14 demonstrates this. We define a matcher called matcherInPayload on
lines 1-4. We send two messages to the actor (lines 13-14): one containing matcherInPayload,
and one called MM1. The first matcher used by the actor (lines 6-9) waits for a message containing
a matcher in its payload. When it receives this, it switches to this matcher in the payload. The
matcher which we provide in the payload, matcherInPayload, then waits for the message MM1
and stops execution.
42
==PAGE:46==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
1
val matcher3 =
2
receive[MsgPlain, Unit] { (_) => {
3
case M1() => Stop(())
4
}}(algorithm)
5
6
val matcher2 =
7
receive[MsgPlain, Unit] { (_) => {
8
case M2() => Switch(matcher3)
9
}}(algorithm)
10
11
val matcher1 =
12
receive[MsgPlain, Unit] { (_) => {
13
case M3() => Switch(matcher2)
14
}}(algorithm)
15
16
val actor = Actor(matcher1)
17
val (futureResult, actorRef) = actor.start()
18
actorRef ! M1()
19
actorRef ! M2()
20
actorRef ! M3()
Listing 11: An example showcasing nested pattern switches
1
val matcher2 =
2
receive[MsgPlain, Unit] { (_) => {
3
case M1() &:& M3() => Stop(())
4
}}(algorithm)
5
6
val matcher1 =
7
receive[MsgPlain, Unit] { (_) => {
8
case M2() => Switch(matcher2)
9
}}(algorithm)
10
11
val actor = Actor(matcher1)
12
val (futureResult, actorRef) = actor.start()
13
actorRef ! M1()
14
actorRef ! M2()
15
actorRef ! M3()
Listing 12: An example showcasing a nested pattern switch with a join pattern
6
Advanced example: Payment microservices
In addition to the aforementioned use cases provided in the benchmark suite, we also implement
a more advanced model use case of a payment system with a microservice infrastructure. This
model payment system was originally created as part of a course project at DTU; [12] here we
reuse elements of its architecture in the context of join patterns.
43
==PAGE:47==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
1
lazy val matcher1: Matcher[MsgPlain, Result[MsgPlain, Unit]] =
2
receive[MsgPlain, Unit] { (_) => {
3
case M1() => Switch(matcher2)
4
case M3() => Stop(())
5
}}(algorithm)
6
7
lazy val matcher2: Matcher[MsgPlain, Result[MsgPlain, Unit]] =
8
receive[MsgPlain, Unit] { (_) => {
9
case M2() => Switch(matcher1)
10
}}(algorithm)
11
12
val actor = Actor(matcher1)
13
val (futureResult, actorRef) = actor.start()
14
actorRef ! M1()
15
actorRef ! M2()
16
actorRef ! M3()
Listing 13: An example showcasing an actor that switches between two matchers in both
directions
1
val matcherInPayload =
2
receive[MsgWithMatcher, Unit] { (_) => {
3
case MM1() => Stop(())
4
}}(algorithm)
5
6
val matcher1 =
7
receive[MsgWithMatcher, Unit] { (_) => {
8
case MMatcher(payloadMatcher) => Switch(payloadMatcher)
9
}}(algorithm)
10
11
val actor = Actor(matcher1)
12
val (futureResult, actorRef) = actor.start()
13
actorRef ! MMatcher(matcherInPayload)
14
actorRef ! MM1()
Listing 14: An example showcasing an actor that switches to a matcher contained in a
message payload
We model the backend of a payment service similar to MobilePay,23 where customers can make
requests to transfer money to a merchant. We implement each microservice as an actor, and all
communication between the microservices occurs through message passing. The microservices
match on these messages using join patterns to perform the appropriate tasks. Join patterns are
especially suited to the purpose of modeling microservices, as it is common for a microservice
to await multiple events before it performs an action. We have two instances of this in our
implementation.
23https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MobilePay
44
==PAGE:48==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
We model four microservices:
• Core service: This microservice receives payment requests from the outside and forwards
them appropriately.
• Account service: This microservice stores the account information of the payment
system. Given an account, it is able to validate whether the account exists.
• Token service: This microservice handles single-use tokens used to make payments. A
customer can request tokens to be generated, which the customer is then tasked with
storing. When a customer wants to make a payment, they need to provide a previously
generated token, and this is validated by the token service.
• Payment service: This microservice communicates with a bank to effectuate payment
requests.
We implement two idealized event flows through these microservices: one for customers request-
ing a token, and one for customers requesting a payment.
When a customer requests a token, the following process occurs in the system:
• An ExternalTokenGenerationRequest is sent to the core service. The core service gen-
erates a correlation ID, which will be attached to every event associated with this request.
It then sends a TokenGenerationRequested event with this correlation ID to the account
service and token service.
• When the account service receives TokenGenerationRequested, it sends CustomerValidated
to the token service.
• When the token service has both a TokenGenerationRequested and a CustomerValidated
in its mailbox with the same correlation ID, it sends TokenGenerated back to the core
service. This consumption of two events is implemented using a join pattern on the two
event types, with a guard testing for equal correlation IDs.
In a real implementation, an account ID would be associated with the token request, and a token
would be included in the TokenGenerated event and sent back to the customer. Moreover, the
account may be fake, in which case the account service would invalidate the account and the
user would receive an error message. We choose to omit these error cases for simplicity.
When a customer requests a payment, the following process occurs in the system:
• An ExternalPaymentRequest is sent to the core service. The core service again gen-
erates a correlation ID so that the flow of this request can be tracked. It then sends
a PaymentRequested event to the account service, the token service, and the payment
service.
• When the account service receives PaymentRequested, it sends MerchantValidated to
the payment service.
• When the token service receives PaymentRequested, it sends TokenConsumed to the ac-
count service.
• When the account service receives TokenConsumed, it sends CustomerValidated to the
payment service.
• When the payment service receives all three of PaymentRequested, MerchantValidated,
and CustomerValidated, all with the same correlation ID, it sends PaymentSucceeded
45
==PAGE:49==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
back to the core service.
Again, this consumption of multiple events with the same
correlation ID is implemented using a join pattern with a guard.
In a real implementation, the payment request would include e.g.
a sending account ID, a
receiving account ID, an amount, and authentication information.
In addition, any of the
validation steps could fail; we again omit these failure cases for simplicity.
To visualize these processes, Figure 30 shows a simplified event storming diagram24 for the
token request process, and Figure 31 shows one for the payment process.
Figure 30: An event storming diagram for the token generation process
Figure 31: An event storming diagram for the payment process
Listing 15 shows the most complex join pattern in our implementation of this model, namely
the one used by the payment service to wait for events from all three of the other microservices.
As mentioned previously, this is a join pattern with three constructor patterns, as well as a
guard that checks for equality of the correlation IDs.
1
val matcher = receive { selfRef => {
2
case PaymentRequested(id1)
3
&:& MerchantValidated(id2)
4
&:& CustomerValidated(id3)
5
if (id1 == id2) && (id2 == id3) =>
6
coreService.get ! PaymentSuceeded(id1)
7
8
Continue
9
...
Listing 15: The main join pattern in the payment service actor
We include our implementation of this payment service model as a runnable example in the
core package of the repository.
24https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event_storming
46
==PAGE:50==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
7
Conclusion
We investigated various avenues for optimizing the fair join pattern matching algorithm in
the JoinActors library.
In doing so, we established a significantly faster new baseline in
WhileLazyAlgorithm, as well as various more specific optimizations that lead to performance
improvements in certain situations. We overhauled the benchmark suite for fair join pattern
matching, making it more flexible and user-friendly, while also facilitating future extensions. We
improved the syntax for join patterns, and added the powerful new feature of dynamic pattern
switching. As a final complement, we also presented a new use case for join patterns, as a proof
of concept for how they can be applied to the common real-world use case of microservice web
architectures.
The work in this thesis and its predecessor paper raises multiple opportunities for future work:
1. We have focused on optimizing the stateful tree-based matching algorithm from the pre-
decessor paper. However, that paper also implements a brute-force matching algorithm
in the BruteForceMatcher class. This naive algorithm works better in certain scenarios,
so it may be beneficial to apply optimizations to this as well. In particular, the use of a
mutable coding style and the guard filtering optimization could easily be applied.
2. We have tackled the problem of parallelizing the stateful matching algorithm; while the
results show noticeable improvements in performance, we are still far from the optimal
speedup that could be achieved from parallelism.
One could investigate whether this
performance could be further improved by reducing the synchronization overhead.
3. We tried to explain the performance differences between our algorithms on our bench-
marks, but due to time and scope constraints, we have studied these differences elemen-
tarily. A further study could attempt to more systematically explain the performance
characteristics of these algorithms. This could be done either by more closely inspecting
the flame graphs, or by using other debugging tools such as Valgrind.25
4. Both this thesis and the predecessor paper use simple plots to compare the performance of
different matching algorithms. For a more informed comparison, one could also evaluate
the statistical significance of the difference in performance between algorithms.
5. Our guard filtering optimization (Sections 3.1.5, 3.2.5) achieves impressive results, but it
could still benefit from further development. For example, in the current implementation,
if a message is not discarded by the filter, the filtering clause is evaluated twice: once
for the filter, and once for the final guard check. This duplicate work could be avoided.
Furthermore, the concept of guard filters could be extended to overhaul the entire system
for checking guards. All clauses in a guard could be assigned to a subset of constructor
patterns in the join pattern, and evaluated whenever a partial match containing this subset
is made. This would significantly advance filtering, as clauses that refer to payloads from
multiple messages would also be used to remove messages from the matching tree early.
6. We tried to change the internal representation of the matching tree structure from a red-
black tree to an array in Sections 3.1.6 and 3.2.6, albeit with limited success. With further
focus on how to best represent the matching tree, it may be possible to identify a data
structure that performs better across all benchmarks.
7. In Section 3.4, we attempted certain optimizations that had theoretical backing, but
25https://valgrind.org/
47
==PAGE:51==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
did not lead to any empirical performance improvement. These could be reevaluated,
and perhaps a different implementation strategy could achieve the expected performance
improvements.
8. The implementation of pattern matching in the JoinActors library is quite limited, as it
does not support recursive matching of algebraic data types such as lists, tuples, unions,
etc. This has previously been explored in [13]. With a more advanced macro, it would be
possible to have e.g. a join pattern of the form
M1(x::xs) &:& M2((a, b, c)) if x == b
where the pattern within M1 deconstructs a list and that within M2 deconstructs a tuple.
9. The ability to specify a bound on the mailboxes of actors would increase the practical
usability of the library, as it would prevent matching trees from growing indefinitely.
10. Our guard filtering optimization was partially inspired by the Rete algorithm [3]. It may
be possible to develop further optimizations based on Rete or similar algorithms such as
TREAT [14] and LEAPS [15].
11. The predecessor paper proposed automatically switching the matching algorithm to suit
the input traffic. Now that we have developed a wealth of new matching algorithms, some
suited to highly specific settings, this idea appears even more appealing.
References
[1]
Gul Agha. Actors: a model of concurrent computation in distributed systems. MIT press,
1986.
[2]
Philipp Haller et al. “Fair Join Pattern Matching for Actors”. In: 38th European Confer-
ence on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP 2024). Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum
f¨ur Informatik. 2024, pp. 17–1.
[3]
Charles L Forgy. “Rete: A fast algorithm for the many pattern/many object pattern match
problem”. In: Readings in artificial intelligence and databases. Elsevier, 1989, pp. 547–559.
[4]
C´edric Fournet and Georges Gonthier. “The reflexive CHAM and the join-calculus”. In:
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT symposium on Principles of program-
ming languages. 1996, pp. 372–385.
[5]
Nick Benton, Luca Cardelli, and C´edric Fournet. “Modern concurrency abstractions for
C#”. In: ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS) 26.5
(2004), pp. 769–804.
[6]
Philipp Haller and Tom Van Cutsem. “Implementing joins using extensible pattern match-
ing”. In: Coordination Models and Languages: 10th International Conference, COORDI-
NATION 2008, Oslo, Norway, June 4-6, 2008. Proceedings 10. Springer. 2008, pp. 135–
152.
[7]
Hubert Plociniczak and Susan Eisenbach. “JErlang: Erlang with joins”. In: Coordination
Models and Languages: 12th International Conference, COORDINATION 2010, Amster-
dam, The Netherlands, June 7-9, 2010. Proceedings 12. Springer. 2010, pp. 61–75.
[8]
Humberto Rodriguez Avila, Joeri De Koster, and Wolfgang De Meuter. “Advanced Join
Patterns for the Actor Model based on CEP Techniques”. In: The Art, Science, and
Engineering of Programming 5.2 (2020), pp. 10–1.
48
==PAGE:52==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
[9]
Shams M Imam and Vivek Sarkar. “Savina-an actor benchmark suite: Enabling empir-
ical evaluation of actor libraries”. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on
Programming Based on Actors Agents & Decentralized Control. 2014, pp. 67–80.
[10]
Emit more efficient code for simple for-comprehensions. url: https://github.com/
scala/scala3/issues/8880 (visited on 06/24/2025).
[11]
C-style for loops in Scala 3. url: https://august.nagro.us/scala-for-loop.html
(visited on 06/24/2025).
[12]
Hadi Abdalla, Ioannis Karras, Arooj Chaudhry, Bence Gattyan, Mohamed Ali Resho,
Bozhi Lyu, Leonard Theisler, Andrei Popa. DTU Pay. https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/
02267. A project made for the DTU course Software Development of Web Services. 2025.
[13]
Qin Ma and Luc Maranget. “Compiling pattern matching in join-patterns”. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Concurrency Theory. Springer. 2004, pp. 417–431.
[14]
Daniel Paul Miranker. TREAT: a new and efficient match algorithm for AI production
systems. Columbia University, 1987.
[15]
Don Batory. The LEAPS algorithms. Univ., Department of Computer Sciences, 1994.
Appendices
A
Commands used to run benchmarks
A.1
Simple Smart House
The Simple Smart House benchmark in Figures 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, and 24 was run
with the following command:
benchmarks/run simple-smart-house --min-param 0 --max-param 20 --matches
25 --algorithms "stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable, while-lazy, while-eager,
eager-parallel, lazy-parallel, array-while, array-parallel" --repetitions 20
--warmup 5 --smoothen
The corresponding evrete-smarthouse command for the Evrete data was the following:
evrete-smarthouse --min-param 0 --max-param 20 --matches 25 --repetitions 20
--warmup 5
The shorter benchmark with heavy guards in Figure 25 was run with the following command:
benchmarks/run simple-smart-house --min-param 0 --param-step 1 --max-param
5 --matches 25 --algorithms "while-lazy, lazy-parallel" --repetitions 20
--warmup 2 --heavy-guard --smoothen
The corresponding evrete-smarthouse command for the Evrete data was the following:
evrete-smarthouse --min-param 0 --max-param 5 --matches 25 --repetitions 20
--warmup 2 --heavy-guard
A.2
Complex Smart House
The short Complex Smart House benchmark in Figures 14 and 20 was run with the following
command:
49
==PAGE:53==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
benchmarks/run complex-smart-house --min-param 0 --max-param 25 --matches
10 --algorithms "stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable, while-lazy, while-eager,
eager-parallel, lazy-parallel, array-while, array-parallel, filtering-while,
filtering-parallel" --repetitions 20 --warmup 5 --smoothen
The long Complex Smart House benchmark in Figure 15 was run with the following command:
benchmarks/run complex-smart-house --min-param 0 --max-param 100 --matches 10
--algorithms "filtering-while, filtering-parallel" --repetitions 20 --warmup 5
--smoothen"
A.3
Bounded Buffer
The short Bounded Buffer benchmark in Figure 21 was run with the following command:
benchmarks/run bounded-buffer --min-param 0 --max-param 20 --bufferBound
100 --count 100 --algorithms "stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable, while-lazy,
while-eager, eager-parallel, lazy-parallel, array-while, array-parallel"
--repetitions 20 --warmup 15 --smoothen
The long Bounded Buffer benchmark in Figures 16 and 22 was run with the following command:
benchmarks/run bounded-buffer --min-param 0 --max-param 50 --bufferBound
100 --count 100 --algorithms "stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable, while-lazy,
while-eager, array-while" --repetitions 20 --warmup 15 --smoothen
A.4
Size and Size with guards
The “Size” and “Size with guards” benchmarks in Figure 23 were run with the following com-
mands:
benchmarks/run size --min-param 1 --max-param 6 --matches 5000 --algorithms
"stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable, while-lazy, while-eager, eager-parallel,
lazy-parallel, array-while, array-parallel" --repetitions 20 --warmup 4
--smoothen
benchmarks/run size --min-param 1 --max-param 6 --matches 5000 --noise
--algorithms "stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable, while-lazy, while-eager,
eager-parallel, lazy-parallel, array-while, array-parallel" --repetitions 20
--warmup 4 --smoothen
benchmarks/run size-with-guards --min-param 1 --max-param 6 --matches 5000
--variant normal --algorithms "stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable, while-lazy,
while-eager, eager-parallel, lazy-parallel, array-while, array-parallel"
--repetitions 20 --warmup 4 --smoothen
benchmarks/run size-with-guards --min-param 1 --max-param 6 --matches 5000
--variant noisy --algorithms "stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable, while-lazy,
while-eager, eager-parallel, lazy-parallel, array-while, array-parallel"
--repetitions 20 --warmup 4 --smoothen
benchmarks/run size-with-guards --min-param 1 --max-param 6 --matches 4
--variant non-satisfying --algorithms "stateful, mutable, lazy-mutable,
50
==PAGE:54==
Optimizations and extensions for fair join pattern matching
while-lazy, while-eager, eager-parallel, lazy-parallel, array-while,
array-parallel" --repetitions 20 --warmup 4 --smoothen
A.5
Baseline measurements
All the baseline measurements were made on the dev-baseline branch of the repository using
the same commands, but with the --algorithms parameter set to stateful.
A.6
“Other attempted optimizations” measurements
The measurements for the “Other attempted optimizations” section (Section 3.4) were made
with similar commands on the dev-growing-array-ref, dev-buffer, and dev-hash-map
branches of the repository. On dev-growing-array-ref and dev-hash-map, the --algorithms
parameter was set to while-lazy, and the results were combined with the results from the
main benchmarks. On dev-buffer, the --algorithms parameter was set to array-while,
buffer-while, and only results from these runs were used to make the plots.
51
