==PAGE:1==
Assessing the Impact of an AI Platform
A User­Centered and Data­Driven Approach
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Assessing the Impact of an AI Platform
A User­Centered and Data­Driven Approach
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By
Valeria Morra
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build­
ing 321 room 132, DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the DTU Compute, Department of Ap­
plied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Valeria Morra ­ s232962
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Nowdays, artificial intelligence platforms are increasingly integrated into workplace envi­
ronments, promising to strengthen efficiency, streamline workflows, and optimize decision­
making. However, quantifying their actual impact remains a challenge, particularly when
assessing their effectiveness in supporting employees’ daily tasks. This study evaluates
a generative AI platform during a defined period, from February 17 to August 17, 2025,
following its introduction in The Company in September 2023. I choose a mixed­methods
approach combining qualitative interviews and quantitative surveys to investigates the
platform’s real­world value and usability within this specific context at this specific mo­
ment in time.
At the outset of this study, internal discussions at The Company revealed a strong enthu­
siasm for the AI platform, largely driven by the belief that it would make everyone’s work
easier. However, there was little clarity on how exactly it should be used or for which
specific tasks, its adoption appeared to be mostly exploratory. This reflects a broader
industry trend, where companies feel pressure to integrate generative AI without a clear
understanding of its return on investment (ROI) or long­term value.
My findings show that while employees are generally eager to use the tool, and perceive
improvements, its use still lacks strategic directions and organizational alignment. For AI
to be truly effective, it needs to be adapted not only to The Company’s broader goals but
also to the specific workflows of individual teams and employees.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank Per Bækgaard for always being there with feedback and guidance, and
for pushing me to think deeper and keep improving my work.
I’m also grateful to The Company, it has been such a rewarding experience to work with
you, and I’ve learned so much from being part of your team and everyday life.
And lastly, Asta, thank you for being such an inspiration.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Defining the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Dissertation Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Literature Search and Selection Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Final Problem Statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methodology
12
3.1
Epistemology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Research Paradigm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Logic of Inquiry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Research Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5
Research Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.6
Sampling Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.7
Qualitative data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.8
Quantitative data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results
22
4.1
Discover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Define . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Develop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Deliver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Discussion
47
6
Conclusion
54
Bibliography
57
A Appendix
60
A.1 Domain 10 overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.2 Interview Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.3 Comparing AI­Assisted Thematic Analysis and TF­IDF Clusters . . . . . . . 62
A.4 AI­Assisted Thematic Analysis Dialogue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.5 Open­Ended Survey Responses – AI Assistant Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . 75
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context and Motivation
Artificial intelligence is becoming more common in workplaces, with the promise of com­
pleting tasks faster and automating routine work. However, as AI technologies rapidly
evolve, their impact extends beyond technological advancement, encompassing strate­
gic, ethical, and regulatory dimensions. Organizations must ensure that AI tools contribute
to real productivity improvements rather than simply following industry trends.
Although my thesis focuses on understanding the impact of an internal AI platform, it is
part of a broader research agenda that aim to estimate the return on investment (ROI) of
AI in enterprise environments. While AI adoption promise great things, it also presents
notable challenges, particularly in demonstrating tangible ROI [1]. Quantifying AI’s actual
value in workplace settings remains difficult, as organizations often lack clear efficiency
metrics to measure its impact, and it is difficult to have baseline metrics to compare pre­
and post­ AI performance. This is further complicated by the growing discussions on
Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence (HCAI), an approach that emphasizes the role of
humans in AI development and use [2]. The introduction of AI regulations, such as the
European Union’s AI Act (AIA), represents a pivotal step in addressing ethical concerns,
but also introduces challenges for businesses in balancing compliance with innovation
[3].
The idea for this project first came to me back in 2023, when I started my Master’s degree
and began working at this particular industrial company. Around that time, they had just
launched their AI platform, so I pitched the idea for this project to my manager. Initially,
I planned to keep it as an internal initiative, but since the platform had only just been
released, it was not yet mature enough for the small group of testers. Fast forward two
years, I proposed it again, this time as my thesis, and it was met with much more support.
Other companies had started talking about similar challenges, and internally, after two
years we had reached much more maturity with the tool.
This study represents a crucial first step in a larger evaluation. By investigating how
employees interact with the AI platform, what tasks it supports, and how it fits into their
workflows, the research uncovers where value is currently created, and where friction
remains. Understanding which occupational skills are most engaged versus those that
are less supported offers early insight into the nature of human­AI collaboration. This lays
the groundwork for future efforts to quantify economic gains and calculate ROI.
1.2
Defining the Problem
The key contribution of this thesis is identifying which occupational skills are mostly in­
volved in human­AI interactions. My research question is:
Does AI actually make work more efficient, or does it create new problems that outweigh
its advantages?
In this context, an advantage refers to any improvement in workplace efficiency, produc­
tivity, or user satisfaction that employees of The Company attribute to the AI platform. A
problem, refers to any negative impact introduced by the AI platform. Many businesses
1
==PAGE:10==
assume that AI­driven solutions will lead to better performance, yet evidence supporting
these claims is limited.
To explore this, I have to ask how employees actually interact with the AI platform and
how useful do they perceive it to be? What specific efficiency gains emerge, if any, from
the use of the AI platform? Are tasks completed faster, do error rates decline, does it
really automate routine activities? Does the AI platform create new obstacles or complex­
ities, does it impose additional cognitive demands, usability challenges, or unforeseen
inefficiencies?
2
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Dissertation Outline
This section is an overview of the structure and logical flow of my thesis. The aim is
to guide the reader from the broadest contextual considerations down to the specific re­
search problem and methods I have applied.
In Section 2, I present a literature review to explore the current state of research on the
use of AI in workplace settings. The review is organized using a funnel structure to pro­
gressively narrow the focus and identify the specific research gap this dissertation wants
to address.
The first layer examines broader debates around the timing and control of digital technol­
ogy regulation. Technologies evolve rapidly but regulatory strategies are not fast enough,
and it is difficult to strike a balance between encourage innovation and protecting societal
interests. This tension is illustrated by well­known challenges such as the Collingridge
Dilemma [4] and the Pacing Problem [5].
The second layer focuses on the context in which this research takes place, starting from
The Company and then, narrowing it down to the specific department of interest, and
finally addressing the specific AI platform studied.
The third and final layer reviews existing literature on AI implementation in workplaces,
highlighting what has already been explored and where there are still gaps or open ques­
tions.
Figure 1.1: Funnel of Layers for Research Domain
Section 3 outlines the methodological choices that shaped this research, grounded in a
constructivist perspective [6] , where knowledge is co­constructed through interpretation.
I followed an abductive approach [7], I allowed insights from the data to guide the research
direction. The whole process was structured using the Double Diamond framework [8],
that supported a clear, iterative flow from exploration to delivery. I narrowed the scope
to a specific department of The Company, called Domain 10, which was the first to adopt
the AI platform and thus the most experienced with its use. I applied a non­probability
sampling strategy [9], selecting interview participants purposively, aiming for one person
per seniority level across the 12 teams and conducted eight interviews in total. In parallel,
I distributed a survey to all 108 members of the domain, achieving a total of 61 responses.
Interview data were analysed using a multi­phase thematic analysis, supported by Python
tools for coding, clustering, and affinity mapping followed by a structured AI­assisted anal­
3
==PAGE:12==
ysis [10]. Survey results were interpreted using standard usability and satisfaction metrics
(SUS and NPS).
Section 4 presents the findings from both qualitative and quantitative analysis. The results
reflect employee experiences and how they use the AI platform across different levels of
seniority.
After conducting the eight interviews, I could see common patterns emerge around coding
help, saving time, and creating content. A separate review of the transcripts using text
analysis tools also highlighted similar themes, including ease of use, how well the tool fits
into daily work, and levels of trust. These were further validated through an AI­assisted
thematic analysis based on Braun and Clarke’s framework [11], adapted by Goyanes [10].
Quantitative survey results (n=61, 59% response rate) showed an average System Us­
ability Scale (SUS) score of 68.01 meeting the usability benchmark but with notable vari­
ation. Segmenting results by seniority revealed differing perceptions: students reported
lower NPS and mixed enthusiasm, while engineers and senior staff valued the platform’s
usefulness despite usability challenges. The findings suggest that the platform supports
productivity but it requires refinement in areas such as trust, integration, and user experi­
ence.
I, then, use the discussion in Section 5 to reflect on the findings through the lens of the
research funnel introduced earlier. Starting from a broad organizational perspective and
narrowing down to individual experiences and tool­specific outcomes. By layering the
discussion in this way, I wanted to make sense of the data while highlighting both the
opportunities and the challenges observed throughout the study.
In addition to reflecting on the results, I also acknowledges the study’s limitations, dis­
cussing how these may influence the interpretation of the findings. Finally, I highlight the
broader relevance of the research and suggest directions for future studies that could
build on these insights.
I conclude the study in Section 6 synthesizing the insights from the results and discussion
sections to answer my main research question. This thesis wants to contributes to the field
of human­AI collaboration by showing when and how AI adoption can support, or hinder,
productivity in the workplace. It also points to areas where future research is needed, such
as measuring return on investment (ROI), understanding how adoption evolves over time,
and exploring how AI tools can be better designed to fit the needs of different employee
profiles.
4
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This section introduces the first layer of the research funnel 1.1 by looking at the rise of
internal AI tools in workplaces. Each part of the funnel will be unpacked throughout the
thesis, starting here with the general motivations and assumptions behind AI integration,
before narrowing down to the specific organizational and user­level perspectives.
Technological innovation has consistently shaped the evolution of societies, industries,
and economies throughout history. From the steam engine to the internet, each wave of
advancement has brought profound changes to how people work, communicate, and live.
Today, Artificial Intelligence represents the latest technological frontier, offering immense
potential. However, the rapid pace at which AI is evolving presents unique challenges,
particularly when it comes to managing its integration and assessing its true impact within
organizational settings [1] .
Unlike previous technological revolutions, that unfolded over decades, AI’s development
is characterized by its unprecedented speed, making it difficult for organizations to keep
pace, implement appropriate oversight, and measure effectiveness. This rapid pace of
change makes it even more important to take a close look at what’s being adopted, espe­
cially when big investments are made with the hope that it will genuinely make work run
more smoothly.
The challenge of controlling and evaluating an AI platform is not new to the discussions
on technological governance. David Collingridge’s Dilemma of Control [4] highlights the
paradox that arises when managing emerging technologies: in the early stages of de­
velopment, it is difficult to predict a technology’s full impact, making timely regulation
challenging. However, by the time the consequences of the technology become clear,
it is often too entrenched in societal and economic structures to be easily controlled or
modified. This dilemma is very relevant for AI, as its integration into workplaces precedes
a full understanding of its long­term implications, leaving organizations to struggle with its
benefits and limitations after adoption has already occurred.
Another big challenge is the Pacing Problem, the gap between how quickly technology
advances and how slowly rules, ethics, and everyday practices catch up. One reason
this gap has grown is Moore’s Law [12], which predicts that computing power will roughly
double every two years while becoming cheaper. The current pace of AI development is
surpassing even this long­standing trend, with advancements in machine learning models,
neural networks, and data processing occurring at unprecedented speeds. This acceler­
ating innovation intensifies the challenge for regulatory frameworks, which are traditionally
very slow to evolve. Many companies are bringing in this new technology faster than they
can set clear rules for how to use it. This can raise concerns about efficiency, data se­
curity, and ethics. Without clear measures, strong oversight, and good governance, they
risk running into inefficiencies, pushback from users, and unexpected problems.
As the idea of Human­Centered AI (HCAI) becomes more widely accepted, there’s a grow­
ing understanding that these systems should be built with people, not just technology, at
the center. HCAI calls for tools that boost productivity while supporting decision­making,
reducing unnecessary strain, and staying aligned with ethical and organizational values
[2]. Evaluating AI platforms, then, isn’t just about measuring technical performance, it’s
also about seeing how they fit into daily work, affect employee satisfaction, and con­
tribute to wider company goals. This thesis fills an important gap by providing a grounded,
5
==PAGE:14==
employee­focused look at an internal AI platform in real use. Rather than assuming that
adoption automatically means higher productivity, it examines how employees actually
experience the platform, offering a clearer picture of its value, its limits, and where it could
go next.
2.1
State of the art
In this section, I explore the second layer of the research funnel 1.1 by establishing the
specific organizational context in which the study took place.
This research was conducted in Copenhagen, Denmark, between February 17th and Au­
gust 17th, 2025, at a global company best known for its plastic construction toys. For
confidentiality, it will be referred to simply as The Company. In recent years, it has been
adding more digital technology to its products and services, as part of a wider move to­
ward tech­driven play and learning. In September 2023, The Company introduced an
internal AI platform that was initially rolled out within only one department, domain 10,
also referred as domain in this thesis.
The domain of interest, at the time of this research was composed of 103 employees di­
vided in 10 different teams with varying levels of seniority, ranging from student assistants
to director. In the appendix A.1 the reader can find an overview of the domain.
The general team responsibilities are the following:
• Infrastructure Operations Platform: Maintains the foundational aspects of The Com­
pany’s IT systems, ensuring that infrastructure is reliable, efficient, and scalable.
• Observability Platform: Integrated solution designed to enhance the operational vis­
ibility across the organization’s entire digital landscape.
• Container Platform: Responsible for building and managing containerization tech­
nologies that facilitate the deployment, orchestration, and scaling of applications.
• Compute Anywhere: Provides edge computing and storage capacity in all the data
centers, retail and office locations, co­location facilities, and factories.
• Cloud Enablement: Provide a comprehensive governance, best practices, and in­
novative solutions, while ensuring a secure and efficient multi­cloud environment.
• Developer Productivity: Designs and maintains internal tools and platforms aimed
at improving the efficiency and satisfaction of software developers promoting inner­
sourcing.
• Enterprise Transparency: Concentrates on data governance, enterprise analytics,
and ensuring smooth information flow across teams for better decision­making.
• Generative AI: Explores the potential of generative AI technologies and their appli­
cations across various domains within The Company.
• Developer Relations: Builds relationships with internal and external developers, cre­
ating feedback loops to improve technical platforms and align tools with user needs.
Despite its intended role as an assistive tool, the way employees interact with the AI plat­
form and the extent to which it fulfills its purpose remain open questions. Furthermore, the
diverse range of roles within the digital department means that employees likely engage
with the platform in different ways, with varying levels of expectations.
6
==PAGE:15==
2.1.1
The AI Platform
The AI Platform used in this research is a self­service, modular solution designed specif­
ically for industrial applications. It uses enterprise­grade models: GPT­4o, GPT­4 Turbo,
and DALL∙E 3 [13], which are accessed securely through private infrastructure to ensure
that data remains within The Company and is not shared with third parties.
The core architecture of the AI platform is structured around four main components:
• Client UI: A user­friendly web interface for interacting with the AI platform.
• AI Service: A logic layer that handles prompts, APIs, and reasoning processes.
• Data Ingestion: Managed through Databricks [14].
• Plugins: A flexible system for integrating approved third­party services and libraries.
The AI platform is hosted using a hybrid cloud setup across Microsoft Azure [15] and
Amazon Web Services (AWS) [16]. Its technical infrastructure includes:
• Compute: Containerized applications deployed through Azure Container Apps.
• Storage: File handling managed through Azure Blob Storage.
• AI Models: Integrated via OpenAI Service and AWS Bedrock [13, 16].
• Vector Database: Managed using Databricks VectorDB and Azure Cosmos DB [17].
• Chat History: Persisted in Cosmos DB using the SQL API.
• Back­End Code: Written in Python [18].
• Front­End Code: Developed using TypeScript [19].
Figure 2.1: The AI Platform
Currently, during the study period, users are engaging with the AI platform in distinct ways
based on their experience and goals. The Company divided them in different categories:
7
==PAGE:16==
• Explorers are just beginning their journey with the AI Platform, approaching it with
curiosity and a desire to learn through hands­on experimentation.
• Builders, on the other hand, are more confident and focused on quickly prototyping
and integrating the AI Platform features into existing tools. They’re driven by cre­
ativity and prefer practical resources that enable rapid experimentation, even if their
solutions aren’t yet production­ready.
• Operators are the most advanced users, working with platforms where AI features
need to meet enterprise­level standards. Their focus is on governance, security,
and scalability, and they look for solid frameworks and best practices to make sure
the integration is reliable and compliant.
Together, these groups reflect a spectrum of the current users of the AI Platform.
8
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Literature Search and Selection Process
To build the literature foundation for this thesis, I conducted a structured search using
DTU Findit in February and March 2025. For example, I used the Boolean search strings:
Impact AND of AND AI AND on AND the AND Workplace
The initial search on DTU Findit gave back 1,068 results. Due to the volume I sorted
the results by the database’s default ranking, which presumably balances factors such as
keyword relevance, citation frequency, though its internal algorithm is not publicly docu­
mented. From this sorted list, I screened the titles and abstracts of the top 50 entries.
Any papers that appeared directly relevant, particularly empirical studies on human–AI
interaction in workplace settings were selected for full­text review. Studies that were too
theoretical, outdated, or minimally aligned with the research focus were excluded.
Figure 2.2: Literature Search
Beyond database searches, some papers were recommended by colleagues or class­
mates, while others, such as those addressing the Pacing Problem or the Collingridge
Dilemma, were topics I had previously encountered in coursework and actively sought
out in academic sources. A full overview of how each literature source was identified,
including search strings and informal discovery methods, is provided in Appendix A.1.
This process resulted in a refined set of key papers that formed the basis for the literature
review. The goal was not to conduct a comprehensive systematic review but rather to
ensure relevance, diversity of perspective, and recentness in the selected works.
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3
Related work
In this section, I examine the third layer of the research funnel 1.1 by exploring how the AI
platform is actually used in practice in workplaces. Moving beyond adoption trends and
organizational context, this part of the thesis looks closely at existing literature on how
employees use AI tools, and what benefits and barriers are observed in practice, how
they perceive its usefulness, and what challenges arise in day­to­day interaction.
Previous research on the implementation of AI in workplaces has provided important in­
sights into both its benefits and challenges. These studies often utilize a mix of quantitative
and qualitative approaches, including case studies and surveys, to evaluate the practical
impact of AI technologies on employees and organizational workflows.
One prominent example of this approach is the OECD’s extensive case studies [20] and
surveys conducted across various sectors, including finance and manufacturing. Their
research involved structured interviews and questionnaires send to stakeholders such
as workers, managers, and union representatives in multiple countries. These studies
highlighted the diverse effects of AI, results shows that it frequently improves job quality
by automating tedious and repetitive tasks, which reduces workloads, improve employee
engagement and workplace safety. However, Milanez [21] also uncovered increased work
intensity, stress, and anxiety about job loss, reflecting the complexity of AI’s impact in real­
world settings.
In terms of employee behavior and interaction with AI, Qin, Qiu, Li, and Jiang [22] have
used quantitative analyses and structural equation modeling to explore how employee
perceptions of AI influence their proactive work behaviors. These studies demonstrate
that when employees see AI as integral to their roles and view interactions with AI posi­
tively, it significantly increases their motivation to engage proactively at work.
Additionally, Marguerita and Morgan [23] have emphasized the importance of clearly
defining and categorizing AI systems within workplace contexts, highlighting that orga­
nizations benefit significantly from understanding precisely what kind of AI technology
they adopt and how it fits into their workflows. OECD research stresses that categoriz­
ing AI tools based on their functionality and intended impact helps companies effectively
select and integrate AI into their operations. They argue that the successful integration
of AI in workplaces requires transparency, employee involvement, and targeted training.
Their findings suggest that when these factors are prioritized, employees show trust in AI
systems and report improvements in job satisfaction and productivity. Neglecting these
aspects often leads to confusion, resistance, and reduced adoption, undermining AI’s
potential benefits.
While these studies provide valuable high­level insights into how AI is reshaping work,
they often treat employees as a single, uniform group. What remains less explored are
the domain­specific and skill­based differences in how AI tools are adopted, trusted, or
resisted. This gap is especially relevant in diverse technical teams, where employees vary
widely in responsibilities, expertise, and expectations. By focusing on only one domain,
this study aims to contribute a more nuanced understanding of how internal AI tools are
experienced across different roles in The Company.
2.4
Final Problem Statement
The key contribution of this thesis is identifying which occupational skills are most com­
monly involved in human­AI interactions in a real­world digital work environment. This
research is guided by a central question:
10
==PAGE:19==
Does AI actually make work more efficient, or does it introduce new challenges
that outweigh its benefits?
Because this study takes a qualitative approach, efficiency and challenges are explored
through participants’ own accounts rather than through direct performance metrics. In­
sights are based on interviews and open­text survey responses, which were systemati­
cally reviewed and grouped into themes to highlight recurring patterns in how employees
weigh the benefits and drawbacks.
While AI platforms are becoming increasingly common in workplace tools, they are of­
ten adopted with the assumption that they will improve productivity and streamline tasks.
However, these assumptions are rarely examined from the perspective of everyday users
within specific work settings.
To explore this, the research is structured around this guiding sub­questions:
1. The Rise of Internal AI Tools in Workplaces: Why is the AI platform being adopted
so rapidly within the Company, and what underlying assumptions drive expectations
about its impact on productivity and the employee experience?
2. Research Context: How do employees within the domain of interest interact with
the AI platform, and what are their patterns of use, perceptions of usefulness, and
skill­based challenges?
3. AI in the Workplace: What specific benefits or inefficiencies arise from the platform’s
use? Are tasks completed faster, with fewer errors or do usability issues, cognitive
overload, or lack of integration undermine its potential?
Figure 2.3: The funnel outlines the main research question and its three sub­questions.
Together, these sub­questions look at different angles of the main research question, mak­
ing it possible to compare how employees see the benefits and drawbacks of the platform.
I aim to show how the platform influences everyday work, understand how people and
technology work together, and provide guidance for developing an AI platform that fit with
employees’ experiences and skills at The Company.
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Methodology
In this chapter, I describe the choices and steps that shaped the research process. The
aim is to give readers a clear understanding of how the study was carried out, making it
possible to follow the reasoning behind the findings and replicate the approach. [9].
The chapter begins with the foundations of the study, including the epistemological and
paradigmatic assumptions that frame the research. It then, outlines the logic of inquiry
and the overall research strategy. Following this, the design and sampling approach are
explained, describing how participants were selected and how data was collected. Finally,
the chapter introduces the qualitative and quantitative methods used, which are later dis­
cussed in detail alongside the results to help connect methods with findings. To ensure
clarity, this division, qualitative and quantitative data, is consistently applied in both the
methodology, section 3, and the presentation of findings, section 4.
3.1
Epistemology
In this thesis, I adopted a constructivist epistemological perspective, meaning that I ap­
proached the research with the understanding that knowledge about sentiment towards
the AI platform is not simply discovered but actively constructed by individuals based on
their personal experiences, context, and interactions [6].
While effectiveness, defined as the degree to which intended goals are met, can in prin­
ciple be measured objectively, in this study it was explored through the subjective lens
of participants’ experiences. Similarly, efficiency, defined as how quickly and with how
few resources tasks are completed, and satisfaction were understood not through quanti­
tative performance metrics, but through employees’ perceptions and accounts. Different
employees perceived and interacted with the technology differently depending on their
roles, prior experience, and personal expectations. Recognizing this subjectivity allowed
me to investigate how individual perceptions, interactions, and experiences shaped the
perceived impact of the AI platform in The Company. Through interviews and surveys,
I engaged participants in a process of co­constructing knowledge, aiming to capture the
diverse perspectives and meanings they attributed to their experiences with the AI plat­
form.
3.2
Research Paradigm
In alignment with constructivist philosophy, this research adopts an interpretivist paradigm
to guide both the methodological choices and the interpretation of findings. As empha­
sized by Crotty [6], interpretivism recognizes that reality is socially constructed through
interactions and shaped by contextual understanding. This perspective allows for a nu­
anced exploration of human experiences and subjective meanings, particularly relevant
in the study of emerging technologies.
Interpretivist research acknowledges the active role of the researcher in the co­construction
of knowledge. Rather than remaining detached observers, I engaged with participants,
interpreting their words through the lens of our own experiences, values, and situated
context [9]. Reflexivity played a key role throughout the process: I consistently reflected
on how my presence, background, and assumptions may have influenced both the data
collection and its interpretation.
12
==PAGE:21==
This approach was particularly fitting given the exploratory nature of my inquiry. I did not
aim to generalize findings universally, but rather to gain rich, in­depth insights into how
employees experience, evaluate, and adapt to the AI platform in The Company.
Ultimately, adopting an interpretivist stance allowed me to immerse myself in the phe­
nomenon under study, prioritizing meaning­making over measurement, and embracing
the complexity of human­AI interaction in a real­world organizational setting.
3.3
Logic of Inquiry
To guide the design, implementation, and interpretation of my study, I adopted an abduc­
tive logic of inquiry, aligned with a constructivist epistemological stance. This approach
enabled me to explore the nuanced, context­dependent experiences of employees using
AI tools within their daily workflows [7].
Unlike deductive reasoning, which tests predefined hypotheses, or inductive reasoning,
which builds theory from raw observations, abductive reasoning allows for a dynamic in­
terplay between theory and data. My process began with an initial interest in AI’s role in
enhancing efficiency, which was shaped and refined as I engaged with interviews, survey
responses, and related literature. This circular approach helped me continuously revisit
and refine my assumptions in light of emerging insights. It was particularly valuable in
capturing the complex and sometimes contradictory experiences of users, ensuring my
findings reflect both the benefits and the challenges of AI adoption in The Company set­
ting.
3.4
Research Strategy
The research strategy in this thesis is based on a mixed­methods case study. This ap­
proach supports my exploratory goals and helps me work abductively, moving between
data and theory. Because the aim is to understand the real­world value and usability of
the AI platform at The Company in domain 10, combining user research with data anal­
ysis, this single case study was the best fit to explore the topic in this specific setting.
As defined by Yin [24], case studies are particularly valuable when studying contempo­
rary events and when the boundaries between the phenomenon and the context are not
clearly evident. In my case, the dynamics between perceived efficiency gains and newly
introduced complexities were highly context­dependent, necessitating a deep and situ­
ated understanding.
Instead of seeking statistical generalizability, this case study aims for analytical general­
ization, offering conceptual insights that may be useful in similar organizational contexts.
Case studies are sometimes seen as limited in scope or lacking rigor, but I addressed this
by following systematic steps in the research design, data collection, and analysis [24].
Given that the AI platform under study was introduced relatively recently at The Company,
September 2023, this research also captures the specific needs of the employees in a
specific snapshot in time. As such, user perceptions may reflect both present utility and
expectations shaped by broader technological trends.
3.5
Research Design
By focusing on a single company I was able to study the phenomenon in depth and
within its natural environment. This decision also enabled me to allocate resources to­
ward achieving data saturation and ensuring analytical depth, rather than distributing effort
across multiple, potentially disconnected, contexts.
13
==PAGE:22==
Although a multiple case study might have offered comparative perspectives across de­
partments or companies, constraints such as access, time, and analytical scope led me to
prioritize rich insight generation within this single case. My focus on triangulating findings
through mixed methods, quantitative surveys and qualitative interviews, ensured a robust
and nuanced analysis.
The research design of this exploratory case study follows the five components proposed
by Yin [24] :
1. Final Problem Statement: The study investigates whether AI improves workplace
efficiency or introduces complexity. This overarching question is unpacked into sub­
questions concerning perceived usefulness, task performance, and user experience
(see Section 2.4).
2. Propositions: Given the limited academic focus on internal enterprise AI tools, my
work takes an exploratory stance. The proposition underlying my research is that
user perceptions and usage patterns can reveal both benefits and frictions of AI
integration in daily tasks.
3. Unit of Analysis: The use of the internal AI assistant by employees in The Company
in their everyday work.
4. Linking Data to Propositions: Through AI assisted thematic analysis, TF­IDF­based
clustering, and structured survey analysis (SUS, NPS and 5­point Likert scales),
I linked user feedback to theoretical dimensions of efficiency, usability, and trust,
enabling a comprehensive view of how AI affects knowledge work (see Section 4.2).
5. Criteria for Interpreting Findings: Analytical generalization is pursued by comparing
and integrating qualitative and quantitative results, evaluating convergence across
data sources, and reflecting critically on internal validity (see Section 3.7.2).
The single case study allowed me to dig deep into one context while keeping the findings
relevant to The Company, which fits with the interpretivist approach of this thesis.
14
==PAGE:23==
3.5.1
Double Diamond
I decided to structure this research following the Double Diamond framework [8]. This
framework is widely adopted in user­centered design, it consists of four key phases: Dis­
cover, Define, Develop, and Deliver. While it is traditionally applied in design projects
where the output is a tangible product or service, in this thesis it is adapted to serve a
broader research purpose. The model remains useful for structuring exploration, problem
definition, and the identification of opportunities, but here the emphasis is on generat­
ing insights and mapping challenges rather than delivering a finished design solution. In
this way, the Double Diamond supports the discovery and definition of user needs, skill
areas, and frictions in human–AI interactions, while the later phases (“Develop” and “De­
liver”) are considered primarily in a conceptual or future research sense rather than as
executed design deliverables. As previously mentioned, this thesis marks an initial step
toward evaluating the business value of AI, ROI. As a starting point I will examine how
employees use the AI platform at The Company and which skills are most engaged, I will
identifies where value is created and where friction remains. Figure 3.1 and Table 3.1
give an overview of the ideal broader research, with each stage of the Double Diamond
briefly explained. The first two phases, Discover and Define, are marked in red to show
that they are the main focus for this thesis. These phases are then explored in more detail
in Figure 3.2 and Table 3.2.
Figure 3.1: The Double Diamond ­ Broader Research Perspective
Phase
Description
Discover
Explore how AI is currently used in the organization; identify
skill areas, touchpoints, and tasks.
Define
Identify gaps, friction points, and inefficiencies in human­AI
interactions.
Develop
Propose methods to compare AI­assisted vs. non­assisted
workflows (time savings, cost reduction, etc.).
Deliver
Build a framework for calculating ROI based on usage data,
performance metrics, and organizational goals.
Table 3.1: Broader Research Perspective
Figure 3.2 and Table 3.2 illustrate the specific research focus of this thesis. In the fig­
ure, each phase of the Double Diamond is accompanied by the corresponding methods
15
==PAGE:24==
applied during that stage. These methods will be explained in further detail in Subsec­
tions 3.7 and 3.8.
Figure 3.2: The Double Diamond ­ Thesis Focus
Phase
Description
Discover
Conduct user interviews, surveys, and usage data analysis
to understand how employees engage with the AI platform.
Define
Analyze patterns of usage and perceived usability; identify
barriers, inefficiencies, or unaddressed user needs.
Develop
Suggest improvements or design recommendations to en­
hance the AI platform’s value.
Deliver
Provide actionable insights for the organization, enabling
better integration and future steps toward ROI analysis.
Table 3.2: Thesis Focus
Finally, I chose the Double Diamond framework because it places users at the centre,
helping me understand employee needs, experiences, and interactions with the AI plat­
form. Its step­by­step, iterative approach also gave me room to adjust the research as
new insights came up. Most importantly, the framework leads to clear and practical rec­
ommendations. The findings from this thesis will be shared with The Company, with the
aim that they can be turned into concrete improvements for the AI platform.
3.6
Sampling Strategy
Given the exploratory nature of this study and its focus on evaluating an AI platform within
a specific industrial context, The Company, I employed a non­probability, purposive sam­
pling strategy [9]. The aim was to gather insights from a variety of employees with different
roles and levels of seniority who had direct experience using the AI platform in their daily
work since September 2023.
This strategy aligns with the goal of analytical, not statistical, generalizability, allowing me
to capture rich, qualitative insights that reflect the diversity of user experiences across
teams and responsibilities. Participants were selected based on the following criteria:
1. they had access to and experience with the internal AI platform since September
2023,
16
==PAGE:25==
2. they were from teams spanning different focus areas within the same domain 10
(Section 2.1),
3. they represented a range of seniority levels, from students and engineers to senior
staff and managers.
In total, I conducted 8 semi­structured interviews. Participants were recruited by reaching
out directly to individuals across teams of the same domain, ensuring that voices from
both technical and strategic roles were included. I complemented this qualitative sample
with a wider internal survey (n=61), distributed to all 103 employees in the domain of
interest.
3.7
Qualitative data
I collected qualitative data through semi­structured user interviews. This approach facil­
itates an in­depth exploration of user experiences and the usability of the AI platform. I
interviewed eight employees who represented various seniority levels (3 students, 2 as­
sociate engineers, 1 engineer and 2 senior engineers), each having regularly used the AI
platform since September 2023. For confidentiality reasons, the full interview transcripts
are not shared, in line with The Company policies.
The interviews were conducted via Microsoft Teams. They were semi­structured to main­
tain flexibility, allowing participants to explore relevant topics deeply. Although a compre­
hensive set of questions was prepared and shared with the interviewed, not all questions
were asked in every interview, prioritizing conversational fluidity and relevance. Find the
whole set of starting questions in the appendix A.2. I chose these interview questions
because they directly relate to what I’m trying to find out: whether the AI platform actually
makes people’s jobs easier or creates new problems. I drafted a first set of questions
and shared it with my manager at The Company, seeking advice, then tried them out
with one of my colleague from the domain 10 to see if the flow of the conversation felt
right. I started with simple opening questions to help people relax and feel comfortable.
Questions about usage and interaction were designed to get concrete examples on how
employees really use the platform day­to­day, helping me understand their actual experi­
ences. The efficiency and productivity questions explored whether employees felt the AI
platform helped them save time, avoid mistakes, or improve their work performance. With
the user experience questions, I wanted to identify any difficulties or frustrations people
might have when interacting with the AI, so I could suggest practical improvements. The
trust questions were included because it could influences how much they rely on it. Lastly,
I asked for final comments, so people could freely share anything else important to them,
ensuring I wouldn’t miss valuable insights.
Moving on into the qualitative data analysis, I followed a thematic and content analytical
approach, encoding the interview transcripts to identify key patterns and recurring themes
[25]. As previously mentioned, adopting an interpretivist and constructivist perspective,
my goal was not merely to summarize or report data, but to interpret it by carefully search­
ing for meaningful patterns, themes, and narratives. [11].
In order to analyse the qualitative data gathered from the interviews, I followed a struc­
tured approach. Initially, I performed open coding, carefully reviewing the transcribed
interviews to highlight important words, phrases, and ideas. This initial phase allowed
emerging themes to be identified directly from the transcripts. Then, I conducted ax­
ial coding, where similar codes were grouped together, and relationships among these
codes were established, providing a clearer understanding of broader patterns. In the
17
==PAGE:26==
final phase, selective coding, I selected core themes most relevant to the research ques­
tions, which then guided the deeper analysis and interpretation of the results. I utilized
Python for assisting in data analysis. Python packages such as Pandas, NLTK, spaCy,
and scikit­learn were employed for tasks including text processing, thematic identification,
and clustering of similar responses, ensuring traceable analytical outcomes.
Package/Library
Purpose
Pandas
Organizing and managing transcript data
NLTK
Text tokenization and basic linguistic analysis
spaCy
Phrase extraction, named entity recognition, semantic analysis
scikit­learn
Clustering responses and identifying similarities (affinity mapping)
Table 3.3: Python packages used for qualitative data analysis
Throughout the research process, I familiarised myself with the data on an ongoing basis,
for example, reading through transcripts and listening to recordings.
3.7.1
AI­Assisted Thematic Analysis
To deepen my understanding of the interview data, I deliberately applied two different ana­
lytical approaches.While the manual coding explained in the previous section 3.7 allowed
me to engage closely with the interview transcripts and identify themes, the AI­supported
analysis offered an alternative perspective by highlighting patterns and connections that
I might have overlooked before. In particular, comparing my coded themes with the AI­
generated ones helped me notice areas of convergence and identify insights that initially
seemed less prominent. Using these two methods in parallel was not intended to validate
one against the other, but rather to expand my analytical lens and ensure a more com­
prehensive interpretation of the interviews. This approach allowed me to both ground my
findings in human­centered analysis and remain open to unexpected patterns emerging
from automated techniques.
Therefore, I have also adopted a thematic analysis approach supported by a structured
protocol for working with generative AI using the AI platform on which this research is
based on, as proposed by Goyanes et al. [10]. This method builds on the classic phases
of thematic analysis by Braun and Clarke [11], adapting them to incorporate the strengths
of Large Language Models (LLMs) while maintaining methodological rigour.
The steps of this AI­assisted thematic analysis were as follows:
1. Data Familiarization: The interview transcripts were manually cleaned and anonymized,
with interviewer utterances, filler expressions, and identifiable information removed.
This ensured a consistent, clean input for AI processing.
2. Preparing the Chatbot: The cleaned transcripts were integrated into a structured
prompt design [10].
3. Defining the Analysis Process: Clear analytical goals were established before in­
teraction with the AI, including identifying recurring patterns, contrasting viewpoints,
and how these relate to the main research question about AI’s impact on efficiency
and usability.
4. Chatbot Interaction: Iterative prompts were used to extract meaningful themes, rep­
resentative quotes, and relevant interpretations.
18
==PAGE:27==
5. Iterative Refinement: The AI’s initial outputs were reviewed, and further refined
through successive rounds of prompting and synthesis, ensuring the themes re­
mained grounded in the data and relevant to the research objectives.
6. Review and Validation: Final themes were manually cross­checked against the raw
transcripts to ensure validity and to mitigate the risk of overgeneralization or hallu­
cination by the AI model.
This mixed approach made it easier to identify themes while still keeping researcher con­
trol. The automated tools helped speed up the coding process and highlight patterns,
which I then reviewed, interpreted, and validated within the context of the study.
19
==PAGE:28==
3.7.2
Quality Criteria
To ensure the trustworthiness and quality of my qualitative analysis, I followed the four key
criteria for evaluating qualitative studies proposed by Guba and Lincoln, as cited by Far­
quhar [26]: credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability. These are partic­
ularly relevant in constructivist research, where knowledge is understood to be shaped by
individual experience and context. Credibility was supported by using a clearly structured
research design, including semi­structured interviews, a transparent coding process, and
triangulation through AI thematic analysis. Transferability was addressed by describing
the context of the digital department, and offering a detailed explanation of the AI as­
sistant. Dependability was ensured through an iterative research process, for example,
refining interview questions and coding themes as new insights emerged. The final qual­
ity checkpoint in this research is the oral defence of the dissertation, which serves as an
audit of the entire process [25].
This framework helped me maintain methodological transparency and rigour throughout
the research process, and made sure that findings could be both understood and evalu­
ated by others.
Criterion
How it was addressed in this research
Credibility
Used semi­structured interviews, transparent coding pro­
cesses, and triangulation with AI thematic analysis to en­
sure accurate representation of user experiences.
Transferability
Provided background on context, allowing others to assess
applicability to similar organizational settings.
Dependability
Followed an iterative process; adapted interview questions
and refined coding themes based on emerging insights
throughout the analysis.
Confirmability
The oral examination serves as an audit to assess the re­
search process’s decisions, elements, and outcomes.
Table 3.4: Quality criteria for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative research
To support the clarity and coherence of my academic writing, I made selective use of
generative AI tools during the research and review process. Aware of both the capabilities
and limitations of these technologies, I limited their use to two specific purposes: (1)
as a discovery tool and (2) as a language assistant. For literature exploration, I relied
primarily on databases such as DTUfindit [27] and Research Gate [28]. Additionally, I
used Grammarly [29] and ChatGPT [13] to support language refinement, focusing on
improving grammar, structure, and readability during the review stages. Given that my
research explores the adoption of human­centered AI, the use of these tools was a natural
extension of the topic itself. Their inclusion helped me improve the overall quality of the
thesis while maintaining academic integrity and ensuring that all original ideas, arguments,
and analyses remained my own.
3.8
Quantitative data
To complement the qualitative insights from interviews, I conducted a survey to measure
user perceptions and experiences using standardized scales. The survey incorporated
the System Usability Scale (SUS) [30], a widely recognized and reliable 10­item question­
naire measuring users’ perceptions of the platform’s ease of use and learnability. Each
20
==PAGE:29==
SUS item was rated on a 5­point scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree, and the
total score was calculated by summing these ratings and multiplying by 2.5, resulting in
scores ranging from 0 to 100. Higher SUS scores indicate greater usability, with scores
above 68 considered above average and those above 80 excellent.
Additionally, the survey included the Net Promoter Score (NPS) [31], a single­item metric
assessing user advocacy through the question, How likely are you to recommend this AI
platform to others? Participants responded on an 11­point scale from 0, not at all likely to
10, extremely likely. Users were categorized based on their scores into detractors (0–6),
passives (7–8), and promoters (9–10). The final NPS was calculated by subtracting the
percentage of detractors from the percentage of promoters, with scores ranging from ­100
to +100. Typically, an NPS above 0 is considered good, above 50 excellent, and above
70 world­class.
Further quantitative measures asked participants to rate their experience with the assis­
tant in terms of time savings, error reduction, trust in the outputs, and overall productivity.
These items were structured on a 5­point Likert scale. To complement this, open­ended
questions invited participants to compare the assistant with other digital tools they use,
describe which tasks they find it most helpful for, and suggest improvements to better
support their daily work.
The survey was created using Microsoft Forms and initially distributed via email. To in­
crease participation, it was later shared directly through Microsoft Teams messages. It
targeted all the employees from the domain of interest, resulting in 61 responses out of a
total of 103 invitees.
21
==PAGE:30==
4
Results
In the following section, I will present the findings from the analysis. It is essential to
recognize that these results are contextual and may vary in different scenarios. This
research was conducted within an industrial company focused on a specific technology
domain and involved participants across various levels of seniority. Therefore, while the
insights gathered are valuable, they should be interpreted with an understanding of the
unique context in which this study was carried out.
The findings are structured according to the phases of the Double Diamond framework
3.2 introduced in Section 3.5.1. Within each phase, the results are presented following the
same division used in the Methodology Section 3: qualitative data, from interviews and
survey, and quantitative data, only from the survey. Methods relevant to each dataset are
briefly restated at the start of each subsection to provide context and ensure the findings
can be read independently.
Table 4.1: Results structure by Double Diamond phase and data type.
Phase
Qualitative Data
Quantitative Data
Discover
Participant recruitment; interview se­
niority distribution; survey responses
to open­ended items
Survey rollout (email/Teams);
Define
Open/axial/selective
coding;
AI­
assisted thematic analysis
SUS, NPS, and custom 5­point Likert
results
Develop
Triangulation of themes with TF­IDF+KMeans clusters; subgroup (seniority)
gap analysis of usability, satisfaction, and perceived value.
Deliver
Actionable recommendations from a feasibility–impact prioritization matrix.
Throughout this section, it is worth noting that participants occasionally referred to the AI
platform as the AI assistant, both terms are used interchangeably and refer to the same
internal tool evaluated in this thesis.
For consistency, the following definitions are applied:
• Efficiency refers to the optimal use of resources (e.g., time, effort) in performing a
task.
• Effectiveness refers to the degree to which intended goals or outcomes are achieved.
• Productivity refers to the overall output generated within a given time­frame, which
can be influenced by both efficiency and effectiveness.
4.1
Discover
This phase outlines the initial research activities undertaken to understand the context of
the AI platform adoption in the workplace. It describes the distribution and structure of
the survey, including how it was designed to capture user sentiment, behaviors, and per­
ceptions. It also details the recruitment and execution of the semi­structured interviews,
including participant selection, interview format, and transcription process. The goal of
22
==PAGE:31==
this phase was to explore the problem space broadly and gather rich, real­world insights
from employees interacting with the AI platform.
4.1.1
Qualitative data
To better understand employees’ perceptions and experiences with the AI platform, I con­
ducted a total of 8 semi­structured interviews. The selection aimed to ensure diverse per­
spectives across the organization: I contacted two individuals of varying seniority levels
from each relevant team, reaching out to a total of 24 employees. The outreach message
was as follows:
Hello, I am conducting interviews to understand the employee experience and satisfaction
using the AI platform. Would you be open to a 30­minute user interview?
If the person agreed, I scheduled a meeting via Microsoft Teams and included the following
message in the invitation:
Thank you for taking the time to participate in this user interview! There’s no need for any
prior preparation, just answer the questions to the best of your knowledge and experience.
For transparency, here’s a list of questions we may cover during our conversation. While
we won’t go through all of them, this will give you a general idea of the topics we’ll discuss:
• Usage and Interaction: How do you typically use the AI platform? Can you describe
a helpful scenario? Are there tasks for which you avoid using it?
• Efficiency and Productivity: Does the AI help you work faster or more accurately?
Any examples?
• User Experience: Have you experienced any recurring frustrations? What would
you improve?
• Trust: Do you trust the AI’s outputs? Do you double­check its answers?
• Impact on Work: Has the AI improved your work­life quality? Any unintended con­
sequences?
• Comparison to Other Tools: How does it compare to tools like ChatGPT or Copilot?
• Future Vision: How should the role of AI evolve in your work? Any final feedback?
Eight employees agreed to participate, and the interviews were conducted throughout
May 2025. The demographic distribution of the interviewees is shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Seniority Level
Each session was recorded via Microsoft Teams. After each session I downloaded the
transcripts and manually reviewed them while re­listening to the recordings to correct
spelling and transcription errors. This familiarization step also provided a valuable sense
of participants’ sentiments toward the AI platform.
23
==PAGE:32==
The full qualitative analysis is presented in the following section 4.2.1.
Furthermore, three open­ended, non­mandatory questions were included at the end of the
survey: (the complete list of open­ended survey responses is provided in Appendix A.5:
How does your use of the AI assistant compare to your usage of other AI tools?
Please specify which other AI tools you use.
52 users out of 61 answered this question. Many users prefer ChatGPT, Claude, or Copi­
lot, noting these tools are faster, more powerful, better integrated (especially in coding
environments), and provide more accurate or better­formatted responses.
I use public ChatGPT, Gemini from Google. They are far better than the AI
assistant and can do many things that the assistant cannot.
Some mentioned they’ve shifted away from using the AI Assistant due to performance
issues like slowness, crashes, and poor formatting.
The AI assistant is super slow, the frontend is bulky, and it crashes a whole
lot.
It doesn’t like attachments at all.
It is not as fast, and there are sometimes bugs. Biggest headache is it not
being very good at remembering previous prompts.
What specific tasks do you find the AI platform most helpful for?
20 users out of 61 answered this question.
It is frequently used to write, improve, and rephrase content, especially for emails, docu­
mentation, and general communication.
Writing text – correct text – make docs look more professional.
Several respondents mentioned using the AI as a ”rubber duck”, a way to talk through
problems, get unstuck when debugging, or as a tutor.
Useful as a rubber duckie, helping to debug, suggesting new approaches.
As a ’tutor’ to explain things.
Do you have suggestions for improving the AI assistant to better support your daily
work?
11 users out of 61 answered this question.
A recurring request was better integration with internal systems and data sources, allow­
ing users to query documentation and platforms like company­specific terminology more
effectively. Several respondents emphasized the need for faster performance, as current
loading times were described as a barrier to regular use.
It would be great if we can integrate with more inner data sources or info
sources, so we can use it for searching docs or answering some questions
regarding our internal resources.
FASTER, FASTER, FASTER... It is incredibly slow for me.
24
==PAGE:33==
4.1.2
Quantitative data
To reach a broader audience, I distributed a survey to explore users’ sentiments toward the
AI platform in a more systematic way. The survey was designed using Microsoft Forms,
structured with the standardized measurement of the System Usability Scale (SUS), Net
Promoter Score (NPS), and 5­point Likert scales.
The survey was initially distributed via email on the second of April, 2025 to all 103 em­
ployee of the domain. To increase response rates, follow­up reminders were sent directly
via Microsoft Teams on the fourteen and fifteen of April, 2025 to individuals who had not
yet responded, reaching a total of 61 answers out of 103 employees. The follow­up mes­
sage was personalized and read as follows:
Hi [Name],
I’d really appreciate your feedback on the AI platform! If you’ve got 5 minutes
to spare, please fill out this short form: [LINK].
Thank you so much for your input!
It began with a short introductory paragraph explaining the purpose of the study:
Evaluating Your Experience with the AI platform
This survey aims to understand your experience and satisfaction using the
AI platform. Your feedback will help evaluate how the platform supports your
daily tasks, and identify strengths and areas for improvement. The survey
covers aspects such as usability, productivity, satisfaction, and trust. The sur­
vey will take approximately 5­7 minutes to complete. Thank you very much for
contributing to this research!
Three demographic questions were placed at the beginning of the form, the graphs shown
the results obtained from each question:
• What is your seniority level?
Figure 4.2: Seniority Level
• How frequently do you use the AI assistant? (Note: If respondents answered
“Never,” the survey was automatically terminated.)
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.3: Usage frequency of the AI assistant
Then, the following ten questions from the System Usability Scale (SUS) were included
in the survey to assess users’ perceptions of the AI assistant’s usability, I have slighted
modify the statements to make it tailored to my study. Participants were asked to rate
their agreement with each statement using a 5­point Likert scale:
1 = Strongly Disagree, 2 = Disagree, 3 = Neutral, 4 = Agree, 5 = Strongly Agree
1. I think that I would like to use the AI assistant frequently.
2. I found the AI assistant unnecessarily complex.
3. I thought the AI assistant was easy to use.
4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use the AI
assistant.
5. I found the various functions in the AI assistant were well integrated.
6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in the AI assistant.
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use the AI assistant very quickly.
8. I found the AI assistant very cumbersome to use.
9. I felt very confident using the AI assistant.
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with the AI assistant.
To measure overall satisfaction and advocacy, I included a single­item Net Promoter Score
(NPS) question: ”How likely are you to recommend the AI assistant to a colleague?”
Participants responded on a scale from 0 (Not at all likely) to 10 (Extremely likely). Based
on standard NPS methodology, respondents were categorized as Promoters, scores of
9–10, Passives, scores of 7–8), or Detractors, scores of (0–6).
To assess users’ perceptions of the AI platform’s practical value in daily work, I included a
series of five statements using a 5­point Likert scale, from Strongly Disagree to Strongly
Agree. These questions aimed to measure perceived efficiency, error reduction, trust,
and productivity, key indicators of the AI platform’s impact on task performance:
• Using the AI assistant saves me time on my tasks.
• The AI assistant reduces errors in my daily tasks.
• I trust the accuracy of the information provided by the AI assistant.
• I frequently double­check the outputs generated by the AI assistant.
• The AI assistant has improved my productivity.
26
==PAGE:35==
4.2
Define
In this phase, the collected data from both the survey, quantitative data, and the semi­
structured interviews, qualitative data, is analyzed and presented.
4.2.1
Qualitative results
Open Coding
The open coding helps identify concepts and ideas directly from the raw data without pre­
conceived categories. In this context, I used computational tools to assist with identifying
high­frequency words, common n­grams, and visual patterns, laying the groundwork for
more focused thematic analysis in the next stages.
To prepare the interview transcripts for analysis, I first loaded a cleaned CSV file containing
the full anonymized transcriptions. I then combined all responses into a single text string
to simplify the processing and ensure a holistic analysis across participants.
Basic preprocessing was applied to remove punctuation and tokenize the text. After to­
kenization, I filtered out standard English stopwords using the NLTK library. To improve
the quality of the analysis, I extended the stopword list with a custom set of filler and con­
versational words commonly found in spoken language (e.g., ”yeah”, ”ok”, ”like”, ”um”),
as well as transcription artifacts and irrelevant words (e.g., ”nan”, ”abhiti”, ”ive”).
This custom filtering aimed to eliminate noise and retain only meaningful terms relevant
to user sentiment and experience with the AI platform. Below is the Python code used for
the pre­processing step.
1
import pandas as pd
2
import string
3
import nltk
4
from nltk.corpus import stopwords
5
6
nltk.download('punkt')
7
nltk.download('wordnet')
8
nltk.download('stopwords')
9
10
# Load and prepare text data
11
stop_words = set(stopwords.words('english'))
12
df = pd.read_csv("02clean_transcripts.csv")
13
text = ' '.join(df['text'].dropna().astype(str))
14
text = text.translate(str.maketrans('', '', string.punctuation))
15
16
# Tokenization and initial filtering
17
tokens = text.split()
18
filtered = [word for word in tokens if word not in stop_words and len(word) >
2]
19
20
# Extend stopwords with conversational fillers and artifacts
21
custom_stopwords = stop_words.union({
22
'yeah', 'ok', 'okay', 'hmm', 'like', 'maybe', 'just', 'know', 'stuff',
23
'yep', 'nope', 'so', 'but', 'um', 'ah', 'uhm', 'nan', 'huh', 'well',
24
'uh', 'it\'s', 'that\'s', 'would', 'could', 'really', 'cli', 'ide',
25
'use', 'using', 'say', 'get', 'thing', 'things', 'think', 'also', '""',
26
'theres', 'see', 'want', 'one', 'make', 'got', 'lot', 'something',
27
'actually', 'abhiti', 'assistant', 'kind', 'bit', 'even', 'going',
28
'said', 'can', 'cant', 'yes', 'no', '100', '155', 'dunno', 'andersen',
29
'ive', 'thats', 'youre', 'your', 'theyre', 'were', 'im', 'dont', 'gonna',
30
'2025', 'transcription', 'bye', 'transcript'
31
})
32
33
# Final filtering with custom stopwords
27
==PAGE:36==
34
filtered = [word for word in tokens if word not in custom_stopwords and len(
word) > 2]
Listing 4.1: Transcript pre­processing and filtering
After cleaning and filtering the transcripts, I performed a frequency analysis to identify the
most common meaningful words used by participants during the interviews. This helped
reveal recurring themes and terminology without manually scanning the entire dataset.
Using NLTK’s FreqDist, I calculated the frequency distribution of the filtered tokens and
converted the top 10 most frequent words into a pandas DataFrame. These were then
visualized using a horizontal bar chart to highlight which words appeared most often,
providing a quick, interpretable snapshot of participant language patterns.
1
import nltk
2
import pandas as pd
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import seaborn as sns
5
6
# Compute word frequency
7
freq_dist = nltk.FreqDist(filtered)
8
freq_df = pd.DataFrame(freq_dist.most_common(10), columns=['Word', 'Frequency'
])
9
10
# Plot the top 10 frequent words
11
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
12
sns.barplot(data=freq_df , x='Frequency', y='Word', palette='magma')
13
plt.title('Top 10 Frequent Words in Interviews')
14
plt.xlabel('Frequency')
15
plt.ylabel('Word')
16
plt.tight_layout()
17
plt.show()
Listing 4.2: Frequency distribution and visualization
Figure 4.4: Top 10 most frequent words
To further support the frequency analysis, I generated a word cloud to provide a visual
representation of the most commonly used terms in the interviews. The WordCloud library
was used to create an image where the size of each word corresponds to its frequency in
the filtered dataset.
1
from wordcloud import WordCloud
2
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
28
==PAGE:37==
3
4
# Generate and display word cloud
5
wordcloud = WordCloud(
6
width=800,
7
height=400,
8
background_color='white'
9
).generate(' '.join(filtered))
10
11
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 5))
12
plt.imshow(wordcloud , interpolation='bilinear')
13
plt.axis('off')
14
plt.title('Interview Word Cloud')
15
plt.show()
Listing 4.3: Word Cloud Visualization
This approach helps to quickly highlight prominent concepts, offering insights into partic­
ipant language that may not be as immediately obvious in tabular or chart form.
Figure 4.5: Word Cloud
As shown in Figure 4.5, the most frequent terms included code, time, assistant, copilot,
and find, indicating a clear association with programming support, time related sentiment,
and information retrieval.
To uncover deeper linguistic patterns in how participants discussed the AI Assistant, I
conducted an n­gram analysis using both bigrams (two­word combinations) and trigrams
(three­word combinations). This allowed me to explore frequently co­occurring terms and
detect common phrases or expressions in the interview data. Sentiments from the Word
Cloud 4.5 are further reinforced by the most common bigrams (e.g., saves time, github
copilot) and trigrams (e.g., general saves time, ability create sections), which highlight
perceived efficiency and support for structured content generation.
I used the CountVectorizer from scikit­learn with ngram_range=(2,2) and (3,3) respec­
tively, applied on the filtered word list. After extracting the n­grams and calculating their
frequency, I visualized the top results using bar plots. This analysis highlighted relevant
recurring sentiments, such as repeated user concerns or positive phrases.
1
from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import CountVectorizer
2
import pandas as pd
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import seaborn as sns
29
==PAGE:38==
5
6
# Bigrams
7
vectorizer2 = CountVectorizer(ngram_range=(2, 2), stop_words='english')
8
X2 = vectorizer2.fit_transform([' '.join(filtered)])
9
bigrams = zip(vectorizer2.get_feature_names_out(), X2.toarray()[0])
10
bigram_freq = sorted(bigrams , key=lambda x: x[1], reverse=True)[:5]
11
bigram_df = pd.DataFrame(bigram_freq , columns=['Bigram', 'Frequency'])
12
13
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
14
sns.barplot(data=bigram_df , x='Frequency', y='Bigram', palette='viridis')
15
plt.title('Top 5 Bigrams')
16
plt.xlabel('Frequency')
17
plt.ylabel('Bigram')
18
plt.tight_layout()
19
plt.show()
20
21
# Trigrams
22
vectorizer3 = CountVectorizer(ngram_range=(3, 3), stop_words='english')
23
X3 = vectorizer3.fit_transform([' '.join(filtered)])
24
trigrams = zip(vectorizer3.get_feature_names_out(), X3.toarray()[0])
25
trigram_freq = sorted(trigrams , key=lambda x: x[1], reverse=True)[:5]
26
trigram_df = pd.DataFrame(trigram_freq , columns=['Trigram', 'Frequency'])
27
28
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
29
sns.barplot(data=trigram_df , x='Frequency', y='Trigram', palette='plasma')
30
plt.title('Top 5 Trigrams')
31
plt.xlabel('Frequency')
32
plt.ylabel('Trigram')
33
plt.tight_layout()
34
plt.show()
Listing 4.4: N­gram Frequency Analysis
Figure 4.6: Bigrams
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.7: Trigrams
Axial Coding
This step aimed to uncover connections and relationships among the words, allowing for
a more structured understanding of the data. By organizing similar words under central
themes, such as trust, perceived usefulness, frustration, or uncertainty, I was able to refine
the analysis and identify key narratives that emerged across participant responses.
I applied topic clustering using TF­IDF and KMeans on the cleaned interview data. The
analysis revealed nine distinct clusters, I tested multiple values and chose the number nine
based on interpretability and distinctness of topics, each grouping commonly co­occurring
terms. Frequent themes included technical usage (e.g., “code,” “assistant,” “generate”),
efficiency and support (e.g., “time,” “saves,” “help”), and user challenges (e.g., “wrong,”
“correct,” “noticed”). Some clusters highlighted interface and workflow concerns (e.g.,
“command,” “terminal,” “context”), while others reflected requests for improvement and
more personalized outputs. The recurrence of terms like “copilot,” “model,” and “platform”
further underscored comparisons between tools and trust in AI­generated responses. To­
gether, these clusters illustrate how employees are using the platform to assist in coding,
writing, and brainstorming, but also reveal unmet expectations around precision, integra­
tion, and contextual understanding.
1
from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import TfidfVectorizer
2
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
3
import spacy
4
5
# Load spaCy model (download if needed)
6
try:
7
nlp = spacy.load("en_core_web_sm")
8
except OSError:
9
from spacy.cli import download
10
download("en_core_web_sm")
11
nlp = spacy.load("en_core_web_sm")
12
13
# Step 1: Simulate documents by chunking tokens
14
chunk_size = 100
15
documents = [' '.join(filtered[i:i + chunk_size]) for i in range(0, len(
filtered), chunk_size)]
16
17
# Step 2: Apply TF-IDF
18
vectorizer = TfidfVectorizer(max_df=0.9, min_df=2)
19
X = vectorizer.fit_transform(documents)
20
31
==PAGE:40==
21
# Step 3: KMeans clustering
22
num_clusters = 9
23
kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=num_clusters , random_state=42)
24
labels = kmeans.fit_predict(X)
25
26
# Step 4: Print top terms per cluster
27
terms = vectorizer.get_feature_names_out()
28
order_centroids = kmeans.cluster_centers_.argsort()[:, ::-1]
29
30
print("\nTop terms per cluster:")
31
for i in range(num_clusters):
32
print(f"\nCluster {i}:")
33
print(", ".join(terms[ind] for ind in order_centroids[i, :10]))
Listing 4.5: TF­IDF Vectorization and KMeans Clustering
Table 4.2: Top Terms per Cluster (TF­IDF + KMeans Output)
Cluster
Top Terms
0
code, assistant, multiple, sensitive, quality, working, used, time,
sometimes, context
1
history, open, terminal, around, kind, command, sometimes, nice,
find, forward
2
specific, information, need, tool, sort, writing, back, assistant,
work, noticed
3
wrong, code, still, correct, happy, often, time, model, write, work
4
time, help, general, saves, work, sometimes, figure, answer, copi­
lot, platform
5
usually, text, super, generate, doesn’t, code, much, used, haven’t,
write
6
try, information, small, sure, work, add, history, images, writing,
kind
7
image, run, find, exactly, command, bunch, different, baseplate,
ask, model
8
code, answer, time, idea, week, wrong, often, saves, figure, feel
Selective Coding
Building on the clusters identified during axial coding, in selective coding I interpreted the
most frequent terms in each cluster and grouping them into core themes relevant to the
research questions. For instance, clusters emphasizing terms like code, assistant, gener­
ate, and wrong were grouped under the theme Functionality and Code Support, which
reflects users’ mixed experiences when using the assistant for programming tasks. Simi­
larly, clusters focused on terms such as command, terminal, and find were interpreted as
describing user interaction with technical environments, resulting in the theme Command
Interaction and Exploration. Other major themes included Information Seeking and
Task Support, Errors and Frustration, and Perceived Usefulness.
32
==PAGE:41==
Table 4.3: Core Themes from clusters
Theme
Description
Functionality and Code
Support
Users’ experiences with the assistant in coding
tasks, including both helpful and incorrect out­
puts.
Command
Interaction
and Exploration
How users navigate the assistant using com­
mands, history, and search functionality.
Information
Seeking
and Task Support
Seeking help with writing, finding specific info,
or performing creative/technical tasks.
Errors and Frustration
Situations where the assistant provided wrong
or unhelpful answers, leading to user dissatis­
faction.
Perceived Usefulness
Cases where users felt the assistant saved time
or enhanced their workflow.
These themes were chosen not just because they appeared often or were relevant to the
research questions, but also based on my own interpretations during and after the inter­
views. I manually reviewed and summarised these clusters to capture context­specific
insights, which may introduce researcher bias and make the process less scalable.
Figure 4.8:
This visualization shows how raw Clusters were grouped into human­
interpreted Cluster Insights. It represents the manual thematic synthesis process, re­
vealing how multiple clusters contributed to broader, unified insights.
AI­Assisted Thematic Analysis
In addition to manual thematic coding, I incorporated an AI­assisted approach to broaden
the analytical lens and identify potential themes that might have been overlooked. This
method was not used to replace my own interpretation but rather to complement it, of­
fering an additional perspective on the interview data. By combining human judgment
33
==PAGE:42==
with automated pattern recognition, I aimed to produce a richer, more comprehensive
understanding of how employees experienced and used the AI platform.
Following the thematic analysis framework proposed by Braun and Clarke [11], I worked
with the AI platform in a structured, step­by­step process to analyse the eight semi­
structured interviews. The cleaned transcripts were uploaded one at a time to ensure
smooth processing and avoid technical issues. The AI was guided through a series of tai­
lored prompts designed to highlight recurring ideas, detect possible connections between
responses, and suggest areas for deeper exploration.
Prompt 1: I am going to offer you a set of interviews. Specifically, 8. So each instruction
will be an interview. Once we’ve uploaded all the interviews, we’ll let you know and start
asking you for specific instructions, okay?
This approach enables the sequential upload of interviews, ensuring that each is pro­
cessed individually and accurately.
This approach allows the model to associate re­
sponses with specific participants (e.g., Interviewee 1, Interviewee 2, etc.), this method
reduces the risk of misattribution or confusion during the processing and interpretation
phases.
Prompt 2: Below I will attach the following interview: interview1, interview2, interview3,
interview4, interview5, interview6, interview7 and interview8. Please do not take any
action, just indicate whether or not you have incorporated the interviews.
After each interview is uploaded, the AI assistant responded with a confirmation message
indicating that the content has been received and incorporated.
I’ve noted that you’ve provided interview1. Just let me know when you’re ready to share
the next interviews or if you need anything else!
When I finished uploading the interview transcripts I asked for confirmation again to be
sure that the context received was clear.
Prompt 11: Please confirm how many interviews we have provided you in this chat.
Once confirmed I started with the first analytical prompt:
Prompt 13: Identify as exhaustively as possible the most recurring themes taking into
account the content of the 8 interviews we have uploaded.
Resulting in nine key thematic axes: Usage Frequency and Preferences, Task Types
and Use Cases, Trust and Accuracy, Time Efficiency and Productivity, User Interface and
Experience, Quality of Output, Integration with Existing Workflows, Feature Requests and
Improvements, and Overall Satisfaction. These initial themes served as a high­level map
of user experiences and perceptions, capturing a broad spectrum of interaction patterns
with the AI tools.
Subsequently, I prompted the model to list key terms and phrases associated with each
theme, which revealed how participants discussed each topic in their own words. For ex­
ample, phrases such as “double­check results” and “low trust in AI” appeared under Trust
and Accuracy, while terms like “saves time,” “immediate answers,” and “workflow improve­
ment” were frequently linked to Time Efficiency and Productivity. This vocabulary­level
breakdown helped refine my understanding of how different participants framed similar
experiences. I then asked the model to provide representative quotes for each theme,
ensuring that the AI’s interpretation was grounded in actual participant language.
34
==PAGE:43==
Prompt 15: Provide the best examples or quotes that illustrate the 9 topics resulted in the
previous prompt and using the 8 interviews.
These quotes added qualitative depth to the themes and validated that the AI was not
only detecting patterns but also capable of surfacing human­centered expressions and
concerns.
To further structure the analysis, I prompted the AI assistant to identify convergences and
divergences within each theme, estimating the percentage of agreement and disagree­
ment across interviews. This revealed that while users overwhelmingly agreed on the
positive impact of AI on productivity and time efficiency (85% convergence), they diverged
significantly on matters such as tool preferences, trust in accuracy, and satisfaction with
output quality. Finally, I instructed the model to carry out a detailed thematic analysis for
each of the nine identified topics, drawing on all previous prompts, quotes, and thematic
structures. The model elaborated on each theme discussing patterns such as varying
engagement levels with AI tools, different expectations around integration and usability,
and the coexistence of appreciation and skepticism in participants’ evaluations.
Through this multi­step interaction, the AI demonstrated the ability to serve as both an
analytical assistant and a reflective interlocutor. It helped surface patterns I had begun
to intuit during the interview process, while also pointing to new connections and contra­
dictions I had not previously considered. Importantly, my role as a researcher remained
central throughout the process: I curated the prompts, interpreted the outputs, and cross­
validated the insights against the original transcripts to ensure alignment with the study’s
goals. This process revealed not only the thematic structure of user experiences with
AI tools but also illustrated the methodological potential of integrating generative AI into
qualitative research workflows, particularly for synthesizing complex data and amplifying
researcher insight.
Through the AI­Assisted Thematic Analysis of the 8 interviews, nine core themes emerged:
usage frequency and preferences, task types and use cases, trust and accuracy, time ef­
ficiency, user experience, quality of output, integration with workflows, desired improve­
ments, and overall satisfaction.
Key findings include:
• Most participants found AI tools helpful in coding and documentation, though trust
in output accuracy varied.
• Copilot was preferred for technical depth, while the AI Assistant was valued for ac­
cessibility.
• Common usability challenges included reload errors and integration issues with in­
ternal resources.
• Participants expressed a desire for better context awareness and internal document
retrieval.
• Overall sentiment was cautiously optimistic: the tools save time and improve work­
flows, but require refinement.
The full conversation with the AI Assistant, including all prompts and responses used
during the thematic analysis, is available in the appendix A.4 .
35
==PAGE:44==
4.2.2
Quantitative Results
The survey was distributed to all 103 employees within the domain, and 61 responses
were collected, resulting in a response rate of approximately 59%. To assess the ade­
quacy of the sample size, I calculated the margin of error (MoE) at a 95% confidence
level, a conventional threshold offering good statistical power without requiring extremely
large samples [32]. The formula used is:
MoE = z ×
√
p(1 −p)
n
×
√
N −n
N −1
where:
• z = 1.96 is the Z­score for a 95% confidence level,
• p = 0.5 assumes maximum variability,
• n = 61 is the sample size,
• N = 103 is the total population size.
Plugging in the values:
MoE = 1.96 ×
√
0.5(1 −0.5)
61
×
√
103 −61
103 −1 ≈6.3%
Given the relatively small and well­defined population, this response rate and margin of
error are considered sufficient for drawing exploratory insights and identifying patterns in
user perceptions and platform usage [32].
System Usability Scale (SUS)
The average SUS score was 68.01, which aligns with the commonly accepted threshold
for ”acceptable” usability [30]. While this indicates that the platform is broadly usable, it
suggests there is room for improvement.
To calculate the System Usability Scale (SUS) score, I, first, mapped qualitative survey
responses (e.g., “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree”) to numerical values from 1 to 5.
Then applied this mapping to the ten SUS­related questions in the dataset. Following the
standard SUS scoring method, I treated odd­numbered questions (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) as posi­
tively worded and subtracted 1 from each corresponding response, while even­numbered
questions (2, 4, 6, 8, 10) were considered negatively worded, so I subtracted each re­
sponse from 5. The SUS score for each participant was computed by summing these
adjusted values and multiplying the total by 2.5. This result was stored in a new column
called SUS_score, and we printed both the mean score and a descriptive summary of the
score distribution across all respondents.
1
response_map = {
2
"Strongly disagree": 1,
3
"Disagree": 2,
4
"Neutral": 3,
5
"Agree": 4,
6
"Strongly agree": 5
7
}
8
9
sus_cols = df.columns[4:14]
# 10 SUS questions
10
11
for col in sus_cols:
12
df[col] = df[col].map(response_map)
36
==PAGE:45==
13
14
# Indices
15
odd_items = [0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
# Q1, Q3, Q5, Q7, Q9
16
even_items = [1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
# Q2, Q4, Q6, Q8, Q10
17
18
def compute_sus(row):
19
odd_sum = sum([(row[i] - 1) for i in odd_items])
20
even_sum = sum([(5 - row[i]) for i in even_items])
21
return (odd_sum + even_sum) * 2.5
22
23
# Apply compute_sus to the SUS columns only
24
df["SUS_score"] = df[sus_cols].apply(compute_sus , axis=1)
25
26
# Output average SUS and distribution
27
print(f"Mean SUS score: {df['SUS_score '].mean():.2f}")
28
print(f"SUS score breakdown:\n{df['SUS_score '].describe()}")
Listing 4.6: SUS
• Count: 54 complete responses (Out of 61 total survey responses, 54 participants
completed all 10 System Usability Scale (SUS) items, and were thus included in the
SUS analysis)
• Mean: This is the average SUS score across all participants. A SUS score ranges
from 0 to 100, and 68 is generally considered the ”okay” threshold, anything below
might indicate usability problems, while higher scores suggest better user experi­
ences. The score of 68.01 means the platform is just barely acceptable in terms of
usability.
• Standard Deviation: This tells us how spread out the scores are from the average.
A high standard deviation (like 10+) means people had very different experiences:
some found it easy to use, others really struggled. The value of 10.53 suggests that
usability isn’t consistent, some users love it, others don’t.
• Minimum: 32.5 some users had very poor experiences. This is the lowest SUS
score anyone gave. Since 32.5 is quite low, it indicates that at least one participant
had a very bad usability experience.
• Median: This is the middle score, half of the people scored below this, and half
above. It’s more robust than the mean when outliers are present. A median of 70
shows that most people had a slightly better than average experience, even if some
scored very low.
• 75th Percentile: This means that 25% of users scored higher than 75, which is a
good usability score. A quarter of your users found the system very usable.
• Maximum: 85 is the highest score someone gave. It shows that at least one user
had a really great experience, seeing the system as highly usable. This suggests
there’s potential, some users are really benefiting, and their experience could be
replicated across the board.
These results indicate that while the platform functions well for most users, there is notice­
able variability in how it is perceived. This variation likely reflects differences in technical
comfort, task complexity, and role­specific needs.
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.9: Distribution of responses to the ten items of the System Usability Scale
The data reveals a generally positive perception of the AI Assistant, with many users
agreeing that the tool is easy to use, makes their work easier, and is suitable for continued
use. Notably, the statement I believe new colleagues can learn to use the AI assistant
quickly received the highest agreement, indicating strong perceived learnability.
However, several items show critical feedback. A significant portion of respondents agreed
with statements like I consistently notice inconsistency in either the interface or the re­
sponses, which suggests that despite its usability, the platform suffers from perceived
complexity, technical dependency, and occasional unreliability.
Overall, the mixed distribution across items reflects the broader finding of a SUS average
score of 68.01 right on the threshold of what is considered acceptable usability [30].
Net Promoter Score (NPS)
I then calculated the Net Promoter Score (NPS) based on responses to the survey ques­
tion that asked how likely respondents were to recommend the AI assistant to their col­
leagues. First, I selected the relevant column and converted the responses to numeric
values, dropping any missing entries. I then categorized the scores into three groups:
detractors (scores 0–6), passives (7–8), and promoters (9–10). I counted how many
responses fell into each group and applied the standard NPS formula subtracting the per­
centage of detractors from the percentage of promoters to compute the final score. Finally,
I printed the resulting NPS value, along with the number and percentage of respondents
in each category.
1
# --- NPS Calculation (Column O, which is index 14) ---
2
nps_col = df.columns[14]
# "How likely are you to recommend the AI assistant
to your colleagues?"
3
4
# Drop NaN and convert to numeric
5
nps_scores = pd.to_numeric(df[nps_col], errors='coerce').dropna()
6
7
# Categorize
8
detractors = nps_scores[nps_scores <= 6]
9
passives = nps_scores[(nps_scores >= 7) & (nps_scores <= 8)]
10
promoters = nps_scores[nps_scores >= 9]
11
12
n_total = len(nps_scores)
13
nps_value = ((len(promoters) - len(detractors)) / n_total) * 100
14
38
==PAGE:47==
15
print(f"NPS: {nps_value:.1f}")
16
print(f"Detractors: {len(detractors)} ({len(detractors)/n_total:.1%})")
17
print(f"Passives: {len(passives)} ({len(passives)/n_total:.1%})")
18
print(f"Promoters: {len(promoters)} ({len(promoters)/n_total:.1%})")
Listing 4.7: NPS Calculation
The results indicate an NPS of 31.5, with 8 detractors (14.8%), 21 passives (38.9%),
and 25 promoters (46.3%). This suggests that nearly half of the respondents had a highly
positive experience with the AI assistant, while a smaller portion expressed dissatisfaction.
Figure 4.10: Net Promoter Score (NPS) for the AI assistant
Figure 4.10 displays the Net Promoter Score (NPS) for the AI platform, calculated based
on user responses to the standard question: How likely are you to recommend the AI
assistant to a colleague? The resulting NPS is +31, a moderately positive score indicating
a generally satisfied user base with a good level of advocacy for the tool.
This NPS score complements the SUS results by suggesting that, while usability may be
average, the platform still provides sufficient value for a significant number of users to rec­
ommend it. However, the presence of 8 Detractors and 21 Passives also indicates areas
where the platform could improve to convert neutral or dissatisfied users into promoters.
5 point Likert­scale
Lastly, for the 5 point Likert­scale analysis, I first defined a mapping to convert qualitative
responses (“Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree”) into numeric values ranging from 1 to
5. This mapping was applied to the relevant columns to facilitate quantitative analysis.
For each question, I calculated the mean, standard deviation, and the number of valid
responses. These metrics provided a concise summary of how participants rated each
item, highlighting central tendencies and variability in their answers.
1
# --- Likert Scale Analysis (Columns P to T, which are indices 15 to 19) ---
2
likert_cols = df.columns[15:20]
3
likert_map = {
4
"Strongly disagree": 1,
5
"Disagree": 2,
6
"Neutral": 3,
7
"Agree": 4,
8
"Strongly agree": 5
9
}
10
11
# Map Likert responses to numbers
12
likert_numeric = df[likert_cols].replace(likert_map)
13
14
# Calculate mean and distribution for each Likert question
15
print("\nLikert Scale Results:")
16
for col in likert_cols:
17
col_numeric = pd.to_numeric(likert_numeric[col], errors='coerce')
18
print(f"{col}: Mean={col_numeric.mean():.2f}, Std={col_numeric.std():.2f},
Count={col_numeric.count()}")
39
==PAGE:48==
Listing 4.8: 5 point Likert­scale analysis
The results indicate generally positive perceptions of the AI assistant. On average, re­
spondents agreed that the assistant saves them time on tasks (M = 4.17, SD = 0.75, N =
53), and also felt it helped reduce errors in their daily work (M = 3.73, SD = 0.89, N = 52).
Trust in the accuracy of the AI assistant was more moderate (M = 3.21, SD = 0.74, N =
53), while participants often reported double­checking its outputs (M = 3.76, SD = 0.95,
N = 51). Finally, respondents generally agreed that the AI assistant has improved their
productivity (M = 3.73, SD = 0.87, N = 52).
Figure 4.11: User sentiment distribution based on five custom statements rated on a 5­
point Likert scale
Unlike the standardized SUS questions, which are combined into a single usability score,
these items were designed to explore broader perceptions of the AI assistant’s impact on
daily work, particularly in terms of productivity, trust, time­saving, and error reduction. The
data shows strong agreement that the assistant helps users save time and increase pro­
ductivity, indicating a positive impact on efficiency. However, responses to the statement
I trust the accuracy of the information provided by the AI assistant are more mixed, with
a considerable number of users expressing neutrality or disagreement. Furthermore, a
significant portion of users stated that they frequently double­check the outputs, suggest­
ing lingering concerns about reliability. These insights complement the SUS findings by
highlighting where users see value and where skepticism persists. While usability may be
considered acceptable, this results underscores the importance of trust and output quality
in determining the platform’s overall effectiveness.
4.3
Develop
This section builds upon the findings presented in the Discover 4.1 and Define 4.2 phases
by leveraging data triangulation and gap analysis. First, I triangulate qualitative and quan­
titative insights to validate and enrich the understanding of users’ experiences with the AI
platform. This involves comparing patterns identified through AI­assisted thematic analy­
sis 4.2.1 with those derived from topic clustering using TF­IDF and KMeans 4.2.
Second, I perform a gap analysis by examining divergences across user subgroups, in
this case, different levels of seniority, to uncover disparities in usability, satisfaction, and
perceived value. Segmenting results by role allows me to identify areas where the AI
platform meets expectations and where it may fall short for specific groups. The insights
generated from both methods provide the foundation for the final phase of this research:
actionable recommendations and integration improvements (Deliver phase).
40
==PAGE:49==
To triangulate findings and increase analytical robustness, I compared the nine thematic
topics identified through AI­assisted thematic analysis (AI Themes) with the clusters de­
rived from topic modeling using TF­IDF and KMeans (Cluster insights). This comparative
exercise aimed to validate the consistency of user concerns, expectations, and percep­
tions across different analytical lenses.
Figure 4.12: This diagram shows how initial Clusters were synthesized into human­
interpreted Cluster Insights and then compared to AI­derived Themes. Despite differ­
ent methods, overlapping themes emerged across both approaches, revealing a shared
structure and grouped understanding of user needs.
Despite the methodological differences, I observed a strong alignment, for example, clus­
ters featuring terms such as ”code,” ”use,” ”assistant,” ”time,” ”saves” closely mirrored
themes like Task Types and Use Cases, Usage Frequency, and Time Efficiency and Pro­
ductivity. Similarly, clusters emphasizing ”wrong,” ”correct,” ”quality” directly reflected
concerns raised in the Trust and Accuracy and Quality of Output themes.
The visualization shows how initial clusters were synthesized into higher­level Cluster In­
sights and then linked to broader AI Themes. The width of each flow indicates the volume
of feedback associated with each insight, helping highlight areas where users expressed
the greatest needs or frustrations. For example, Information seeking and Task Support
and Functionality and Code Support emerge as the most pressing areas for improve­
ment. This layered mapping offers a clear overview of where enhancements would have
the highest impact on user experience. The full side­by­side cluster–theme mapping is
presented in Appendix A.3, offering a detailed breakdown of the relationships and over­
laps across both approaches.
To explore differences further, results from SUS and NPS were segmented by user senior­
ity. Students reported a mean SUS score of 68.21, on par with the overall average, but
a Net Promoter Score (NPS) of 0, indicating a mix of satisfaction and criticism. Students
may be less familiar with company tools or processes, they may not rely on the platform
heavily, so perceived usefulness may be lower and the high variance in experience could
stem from inconsistent onboarding or task relevance. Associates and engineers showed
a slightly lower average SUS score (66.73) but reported the highest NPS (46.2), suggest­
41
==PAGE:50==
ing high perceived value despite minor usability issues. While the platform may not feel
super polished (lower SUS), it gets the job done, especially for engineers solving practi­
cal problems, high promoter percentage suggests strong value despite usability concerns,
this gap between SUS and NPS scores may indicate that users are willing to tolerate a
rougher interface if the tool proves effective and supports their workflow needs. Senior
staff, including leads and managers, reported the highest SUS score (70.17) and main­
tained a strong NPS (40.0), implying that they find the platform both useful and reliable
for strategic or communication­heavy tasks.
Table 4.4: SUS and NPS Scores by Seniority Level
Group
SUS Mean
NPS
Key Insight
Students
68.2
0.0
Acceptable usability, but low
enthusiasm and mixed value
perception.
Associates / Engineers
66.7
46.2
Usability issues noted, but clear
perceived value;
productivity
gains likely.
Seniors / Leads / Managers
70.2
40.0
High usability and solid support
for strategic tasks; trusted tool.
Table 4.5: Gap Analysis Across User Segments
Segment
Observed Strengths
Reported Gaps/Needs
Students
Learner­friendly tone, safe
to explore
Limited
perceived
value,
low trust
Associates
High task relevance, strong
NPS
UI clunkiness, lacking inte­
grations
Seniors
Strategic tool, strong us­
ability
Feature expectations un­
met
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.13: Usability (SUS scores) against satisfaction (NPS scores) across different
user roles
The scatter plot maps usability (SUS scores) against satisfaction (NPS scores) across
different user roles, providing a strategic view of how various groups experience the plat­
form. Senior staff fall into the “Useful & Usable” quadrant, suggesting that the platform
meets both their functional and usability expectations. Associates and engineers, on the
other hand, land in the “Useful but Frustrating” zone, indicating that while the platform
delivers value, there are usability issues that may hinder efficiency or satisfaction. Stu­
dents sit in the “Usable but Not Engaging” quadrant, showing average usability but low
overall satisfaction, which may reflect a lack of relevance or inconsistent onboarding. This
distribution helps identify where improvements are most needed, suggesting a focus on
usability enhancements for engineers and deeper engagement strategies for students.
These usability and satisfaction findings align closely with the identified user personas
2.1.1 . Students, who scored average on usability but reported low satisfaction (NPS = 0),
map well to the Explorer persona, users who are still early in their journey and may need
clearer onboarding, structure, and support to fully engage with the platform. Their expe­
rience suggests that without tailored guidance or scaffolding, early users may struggle to
see value despite a relatively usable interface. In contrast, Associates and Engineers,
with lower SUS but high NPS, reflect the Builder persona, confident users who prioritize
functionality and speed over polish. They’re willing to tolerate a rougher experience as
long as it enables creative problem­solving. Finally, Senior Staff, with high scores in both
SUS and NPS, align most closely with the Operator persona. They likely rely on the plat­
form for strategic or scalable use cases, appreciating its reliability and integration into
broader workflows. This suggests the platform is meeting their expectations in both us­
ability and long­term value, which is critical for driving enterprise adoption. However, the
high score may also be influenced by top­down incentives that have always encourage
the use of the AI platform since the launch of September 2023.
Triangulating multiple sources of data and perspectives enabled a comprehensive evalua­
tion of the AI platform’s performance and limitations. Segment­based analysis uncovered
needs that would have remain hidden in aggregate scores, reinforcing the importance of
contextual UX evaluation. These findings lay the groundwork for the Deliver phase, where
targeted recommendations are proposed.
43
==PAGE:52==
4.4
Deliver
This final phase draws on the earlier findings and internal discussions with The Company,
synthesizing them into actionable insights. Using a prioritization matrix, key findings are
evaluated based on impact and feasibility to determine which areas should be addressed
first. This section culminates in a set of final recommendations for improving the AI plat­
form and guiding future design decisions, ensuring that the platform evolves in alignment
with user expectations and practical workplace needs.
To ensure the recommendations are meaningful and actionable within The Company’s
context, I mapped the findings onto the three user personas previously defined by the
organization: Explorers, Builders, and Operators. These personas represent a spectrum
of user maturity, technical confidence, and operational demands in relation to the AI as­
sistant.
Figure 4.14: Actionable insights on prioritization matrix divided by user persona specific
improvements
The matrix is visually divided into four quadrants: Useful & Usable (high priority, high fea­
sibility), Useful but Frustrating (high priority, low feasibility), Unpolished & Low Value (low
priority, low feasibility), and Useful but Not Engaging (low priority, high feasibility). Each
sticky note represents an actionable insight, color­coded by the primary user­persona pre­
viously presented 2.1.1 it serves: blue for Explorers, green for Builders, red for Operators,
and yellow for cross­persona improvements.
In the Useful & Usable quadrant (top­right), high­impact and high­feasibility actionable
insights include:
44
==PAGE:53==
• Add contextual guidance in the UI: Include tips, explanations, or onboarding hints
when users interact with the assistant for the first time, and give them the possibility
to access this tutorial every time they want to.
• Implement a structured onboarding path: when there is a new starter in the company
create a guided setup flow that introduces key features and demonstrates simple
use cases, including first­use walk­throughs and tips.
• Improve error recovery so when AI fails, suggest next steps or recovery prompts,
and if the assistant fails to answer, offer suggestions like rephrasing the query or
trying related prompts.
• Allow easy copying/exporting: Enable one­click copy buttons and markdown export
options for responses, code, or documentation.
• Improved discoverability and organisation of features: Use a command palette or
searchable menu to help users find available tools and features more easily and
highlight the new ones when released.
• Persistent memory: Ensure the assistant remembers past prompts in the same ses­
sion, allowing for follow­ups without repetition.
• Faster performance: Improve loading times and responsiveness by optimizing back­
end calls.
In the Useful but not Engaging quadrant (bottom­right), low­impact and high­feasibility,
actionable insights include:
• Introduce feedback loops: Let users rate and flag responses for quality training,
Include thumbs up/down or comment options to gather feedback on helpfulness.
• Improve response formatting: Improve spacing, use headers, or add collapsible
sections to make long answers more easy to scan at first sight.
• Refine prompt input area: Offer syntax highlighting, autocomplete, or real­time sug­
gestions, make the input box more like an IDE with prompt formatting, especially
useful for writing code.
• Template Library with ready­made prompt for common tasks, provide a set of pre­
made prompts like ’write a release note’ or ’summarize a document’.
In the Unpolished & Low Value (bottom­left), low­impact and low­feasibility, actionable
insights include:
• Enable audit logs and version control for sensitive queries or enterprise use, record
all interactions and allow rollback of outputs for enterprise compliance or reviews.
• Keyboard­centric interaction: Allow full keyboard navigation and shortcuts for faster
interaction without using the mouse.
In the Useful but Frustrating (top­left), high­impact and low­feasibility, actionable insights
include:
• Introduce advanced prompt chaining or memory to support multi­step tasks: allow
users to link multiple prompts or stages to solve complex problems like API design
or code generation.
• Integration with internal developer tools: allow the assistant to fetch info from internal
tools like CI pipelines or log dashboards.
45
==PAGE:54==
• Better integration with internal systems: connect the assistant to platforms like Share­
Point, Confluence, or Jira to answer questions about project data.
• Include model transparency options: let users inspect model reasoning or see why
an answer was generated, useful for auditing.
• Offer custom policies or assistant configurations based on team, role, or risk level:
restrict or adapt assistant behavior for legal, design, or engineering teams based on
their needs.
• Better handling of attachments: support uploading and parsing of PDFs or screen­
shots directly in the chat.
This Deliver phase brings together the most critical findings from the research and analy­
sis, transforming them into actionable, persona­driven improvements. The resulting prior­
itization matrix not only identifies quick wins and long­term investments but also provides
a clear, structured path to grow the AI assistant alongside its users while aligning with
both organizational goals and real­world workflows.
46
==PAGE:55==
5
Discussion
In this section, I use the findings and theoretical framework to discuss the sub­questions
defined in this dissertation. Each sub­question corresponds to layers within the research
showcasing the direct contribution to the research domain 2.3. This will subsequently
lead to answering the main research question:
Does AI actually make work more efficient, or does it introduce new challenges that out­
weigh its benefits?
First, I asked: Why is the AI platform being adopted so rapidly within the Company, and
what underlying assumptions drive expectations about its impact on productivity and the
employee experience?
As outlined in 2.1 , the rollout of the internal AI assistant was largely driven by the or­
ganization’s strategic goal to empower all employees to use it for everyday tasks. The
adoption was rapid, with minimal resistance, in part due to its ease of access and visible
organizational support. However, as the results in show in 4.13, adoption is not always
synonymous with meaningful engagement. Many users were introduced to the tool out of
curiosity or through nudges from leadership, not necessarily because they had identified
a task­specific need.
The assumption underlying this rollout is that access to AI tools will inherently lead to
increased productivity and innovation. However, as discussed in 4.4, this assumption of­
ten overlooks the complexity of user contexts, particularly differences in digital fluency,
role­specific workflows, and trust in AI­generated outputs. This gap between organiza­
tional intent and user reality reflects a broader tension identified in existing literature by
Binns [33], which warns against the dangers of techno­solutionism, the belief that complex
social or organizational problems can be effectively addressed through purely technical
fixes. Binns and colleagues emphasize that such approaches often overlook the nuanced,
situated nature of real­world contexts in which AI systems are deployed. When organiza­
tions introduce AI tools based on abstract ideals of efficiency or innovation, without fully
considering how these systems will be interpreted, adopted, or resisted by actual users,
a disconnect emerges. This misalignment can lead to unintended consequences such
as reduced trust, suboptimal usage, or even active workarounds. Therefore, their work
underscores the importance of contextual alignment, ensuring that AI tools are not only
technically sound but also meaningfully integrated into the workflows, values, and lived
experiences of the people who use them.
In addition to internal strategic goals, the rapid adoption of AI can also be understood as
a response to broader institutional pressures. According to institutional theory explained
by DiMaggio and Powell [34], organizations often adopt emerging technologies to main­
tain legitimacy within their industry, not necessarily because of proven effectiveness. This
process, known as institutional isomorphism, suggests that companies may imitate per­
ceived best practices or follow external trends to appear innovative and competitive. In
this light, the introduction of AI tools may reflect a desire to align with industry norms and
expectations, even when their value and role within the organization are still unclear.
In summary AI tools are being adopted so quickly within The Company due to strong insti­
tutional assumptions that AI inherently leads to greater productivity, enhanced decision­
making, and reduced workload across roles. However, this research highlights that such
47
==PAGE:56==
assumptions oversimplify the real­world experience of employees. While some users in­
deed report efficiency gains, particularly for repetitive or communicative tasks, others face
usability issues, contextual mismatches, or a lack of integration with existing workflows.
The enthusiasm for adoption appears to be based on the belief that AI tools are universally
beneficial and can be deployed without significant onboarding, adaptation, or long­term
support. Yet, my findings suggest that the impact of AI is highly dependent on role, ex­
perience level, and the quality of internal implementation. Ultimately, while AI tools hold
promise, their success depends less on their technical capabilities alone and more on
how well they align with organizational needs, workflows, and employee expectations.
Then also asked: How do employees within the domain of interest interact with the AI
platform, and what are their patterns of use, perceptions of usefulness, and skill­based
challenges?
In 2.1.1 of my thesis I presents three user personas within the company context: Explor­
ers, Builders, and Operators, based on definition given by the company itself. Explorers
are early­stage users who often rely on templates and onboarding guidance. Builders,
more confident and technically fluent, use the assistant for ideation and prototyping. Op­
erators, the most advanced group, focus on strategic oversight and require trust, trace­
ability, and integration into secure systems.
Usage patterns differ significantly across these personas. As described in 4.4, most users
engaged with the assistant intermittently and for narrowly scoped tasks, such as rephras­
ing emails, debugging code, or summarizing documents. However, even among more
active users, low trust in output accuracy remained a consistent theme. Also, even when
the assistant was helpful, it often lacked reliability, memory, or contextual awareness,
leading to workarounds or parallel use of external tools like ChatGPT or Copilot.
These findings echo and reinforce insights from the literature on trust calibration and men­
tal models in human–AI interaction [35]. Effective interaction with AI systems depends not
only on technical performance but also on users’ ability to develop accurate mental mod­
els, internal representations of how the system works, what it can and cannot do, and
how it is likely to behave in different situations. When systems fail to provide consistent
or transparent behavior, especially in the absence of meaningful feedback mechanisms,
users struggle to adjust their trust appropriately, either over­trusting the system and rely­
ing on it too much, or under­trusting it and avoiding its use altogether. In this case, the
assistant’s limited contextual retention, its inability to remember previous queries or user
goals, and lack of responsive feedback loops led to moments of friction and unmet ex­
pectations. This was particularly evident among more advanced users, who anticipated
a higher degree of contextual awareness and adaptive behavior from enterprise­grade
AI tools. As one participant noted, I recommend the company prioritize internal context
solutions over replicating external tools. This statement highlights the practical implica­
tions of broken trust calibration: rather than valuing superficial parity with popular external
assistants, users called for deeper contextual integration, signaling a desire for tools that
align with their specific workflows and organizational knowledge rather than generic AI
features.
In summary, employees within the domain of interest interact with the AI platform in highly
varied ways, reflecting differences in role, seniority, and digital fluency. The data reveals
three dominant user patterns: some rely on the assistant for communication tasks (e.g.,
rewriting, summarizing), others engage with it as a coding partner for debugging or gen­
erating code, while a third group, typically less frequent users, approach it sporadically
for inspiration or clarification. Perceptions of usefulness are similarly diverse: while many
48
==PAGE:57==
users report time­saving benefits and appreciate the AI’s ability to reduce reliance on col­
leagues, others express frustration with inconsistencies in output, slow response times,
and limited integration with internal resources. Skill­based challenges also emerge, par­
ticularly among less experienced users (e.g., students), who may lack the confidence or
contextual understanding to frame effective prompts or evaluate AI­generated outputs.
Conversely, senior users are more likely to adapt the assistant strategically to their work­
flows, using it as a trusted co­pilot. These differences suggest that a one­size­fits­all
deployment does not suffice, tailored support and onboarding are essential to maximize
value across the employee spectrum.
Finally, I considered: What specific benefits or inefficiencies arise from the platform’s use?
Are tasks completed faster, with fewer errors or do usability issues, cognitive overload, or
lack of integration undermine its potential?
The AI assistant does help users complete certain tasks faster, particularly content gener­
ation and debugging, by reducing the time spent searching for information or drafting initial
versions. However, these benefits are unevenly distributed. Many users reported usabil­
ity issues like delay, formatting problems, and poor memory between prompts. These
inefficiencies not only slow down work but also require users to invest cognitive effort in
rephrasing or reconstructing queries. Moreover, the platform’s inability to access inter­
nal documentation or provide consistent context across sessions further limits its utility.
Thus, while there are clear productivity gains for some use cases, they are frequently
undermined by friction in the user experience and system limitations.
As shown in the SUS and NPS analysis 4.2.2, the platform achieved a mean SUS score of
68.01, just above the acceptability threshold, yet user feedback was highly polarized. For
example, students reported a neutral NPS of 0, indicating skepticism or a lack of perceived
value, whereas engineers, despite slightly lower SUS scores, reported the highest NPS,
suggesting they found the assistant effective for their specific workflows.
The section 4.2.1 and the open­ended qualitative responses in A.4 reveal that users ap­
preciated the assistant’s ability to help with writing, debugging, and brainstorming, but
at the same time several inefficiencies were cited. These include slow response times,
unreliable formatting, and poor handling of internal data or attachments. Such usability
issues often interrupted flow states and required users to manually reformat or re­input
context.
Cognitive overload emerged most acutely among Builders and Operators, user groups
who typically interact with complex workflows and rely on quick, seamless access to in­
terconnected information. These users entered the system with high expectations for re­
sponsiveness and integration, anticipating that the assistant would not only retrieve data
but intelligently interface with commonly used platforms. However, the assistant’s siloed
interface, operating in isolation rather than embedded within existing digital ecosystems,
led to fragmentation and increased cognitive burden. Users often had to manually switch
contexts, rephrase queries, or duplicate effort to bridge gaps between tools, diminishing
the assistant’s perceived value.
These findings reflect what Moore [12] describes as the pacing problem in AI adoption, a
structural mismatch where technological innovation advances more rapidly than the de­
velopment of the institutional, infrastructural, or cognitive frameworks needed to support
its effective use. In this case, while the assistant may offer technically advanced fea­
tures, the surrounding ecosystem (e.g., lack of deep integration, limited interoperability,
and insufficient user training or process redesign) has not evolved in parallel. As a re­
49
==PAGE:58==
sult, the assistant’s potential is not fully realized, and instead of reducing complexity, it
inadvertently adds to users’ cognitive load. This dynamic illustrates how failing to pace AI
deployment with corresponding organizational readiness can undermine user experience
and trust.
In summary, the use of the AI platform yields several concrete benefits, particularly in
enhancing speed and reducing effort for repetitive or communication­heavy tasks. Many
users report that drafting emails, refining documentation, and even generating code be­
comes faster and easier with the assistant, allowing them to stay in flow and reduce re­
liance on colleagues. In some cases, the AI serves as a ”rubber duck,” helping users
think through problems and debug code more effectively. However, these gains are of­
ten tempered by inefficiencies stemming from usability issues. Participants frequently
cited frustration with slow response times, lack of memory across prompts, and a clunky
interface that interrupts their workflow. Most critically, the platform’s limited integration
with internal systems, such as documentation hubs or codebases, was repeatedly men­
tioned as a barrier, undermining its potential to deliver real context­aware support. These
issues suggest that while the platform holds strong promise, its full value is contingent
on improving performance, personalization, and seamless integration into daily tools and
environments.
Limitations
While this study provides meaningful insights into the adoption and impact of an internal
AI assistant, several limitations must be acknowledged to contextualize the findings and
guide future research.
Importantly, these findings must be interpreted within the specific context of the research
2.1. This study was conducted in a technology­focused domain, where digital fluency
among employees may be higher than average. The AI platform has been accessible for
over a year, meaning most participants were not encountering it for the first time. How­
ever, results may not generalize to other domains, departments, or less tech­savvy envi­
ronments. Also, this research captures a specific moment in time during the early adoption
phase of the AI assistant. As discussed in section 2.1, the platform is still evolving, with
ongoing updates and feature rollouts. Consequently, user perceptions and interaction
patterns shown in sections 4.1 and 4.2 may shift over time as the technology matures or
as employees gain experience. A longitudinal study could have provided a richer under­
standing of how efficiency, trust, and adoption evolve in response to organizational and
technological changes.
Furthermore, out of 61 survey responses, only 54 were complete enough for SUS anal­
ysis, and qualitative feedback came from a subset of participants who self­selected into
interviews 4.1.1. This may have introduced self­selection bias, with responses skewed
toward individuals more engaged with or opinionated about the tool. Additionally, the sam­
ple was uneven across roles and seniority levels since I received more responses from
junior profiles, which may not fully represent organizational diversity in AI usage patterns.
While interviews offered rich, contextual insights, their limited number restricted the explo­
ration of role­specific needs beyond the three identified personas. As section 4.2.1 notes,
Builders and Operators were particularly under­represented in one­on­one sessions, po­
tentially overlooking distinct friction points relevant to advanced users.
The thematic analysis 4.2.1 employed AI­based support to cluster and synthesize qual­
itative data. While this approach increased efficiency and traceability, it may have con­
strained the depth of interpretation. AI­assisted coding can miss subtle cues, latent emo­
50
==PAGE:59==
tions, or context­specific nuances that a fully manual analysis could capture [10]. This
introduces a potential interpretative bias, especially when mapping user sentiment or com­
plex perceptions of trust.
Another limitation is the lack of objective usage or performance metrics from system logs,
meaning that efficiency and productivity gains are based on self­reported data and may
be influenced by personal bias or recall errors. The combination of surveys and interviews
helped strengthen the reliability of these findings, but it does not fully replace system­level
data. In addition, my dual role as both a researcher and an employee of the organization
may have shaped data collection and interpretation. Reflexivity was therefore an impor­
tant part of the process: I consistently reflected on how my background, assumptions,
and interactions with participants might have influenced the study. While steps such as
anonymity, voluntary participation, and the use of mixed methods helped mitigate these
risks, my perspective inevitably shaped the research. The findings should therefore be
read not as completely neutral, but as co­constructed between participants’ voices and
my own position within the organization
Finally, the choice of methods, introduced a level of complexity that may not have been
strictly necessary for answering the research question. Combining traditional qualitative
coding, quantitative survey analysis, AI­assisted thematic analysis, and clustering tech­
niques provided a multi­angle view of user perceptions, but it also required significant
time for implementation, triangulation, and synthesis. In a more constrained setting, sim­
pler approaches, such as focusing solely on manual thematic analysis paired with survey
statistics, could have yielded quicker, more streamlined results.
That said, the more complex approach adopted here was beneficial in several ways: it
enabled validation of themes across independent methods, increased confidence in the
patterns identified, and revealed points of convergence and divergence between human
and AI analysis.
These limitations highlight that the findings are exploratory rather than statistically gen­
eralizable, providing an analytical rather than universal understanding of AI adoption and
its impact on workplace efficiency.
Future Research Relevance
This work primarily aimed to map current AI use cases, touchpoints, and workflows, and
to identify inefficiencies and skill gaps that hinder optimal AI integration. These insights
provide a foundational understanding of the human­AI interaction landscape at this point
in time and in this specific context.
Referring to the figure 3.1 presented in the Methodology section 3 while this thesis fo­
cused on the Discover and Define stages of the AI adoption journey within this specific
organization at this specific time the next steps would be to propose ROI measurement
methods and Build framework to calculate AI ROI.
This findings lay the groundwork for advancing into the Develop and Deliver stages pre­
sented in the figure 3.1. Future work should focus on operationalizing these insights to
create a tangible framework for evaluating the organizational return on AI investments.
Below are the recommended next steps:
Develop Phase: Designing ROI Measurement Methods
Building on the pain points and opportunities identified, the next phase should involve
developing clear, evidence­based methods to assess AI’s impact across workflows. This
includes:
51
==PAGE:60==
• Defining success criteria: Establish measurable indicators for AI adoption, such
as task completion time reductions, error rate improvements, information retrieval
speed, decision­making confidence, and perceived usefulness among employees.
• Data pipeline design: Develop methods to link system usage data, chat logs, and
workflow outcomes to quantitative metrics (e.g., productivity gain per hour saved,
cost avoidance from reduced rework).
• Qualitative measures: Create structured ways to capture human­centric outcomes,
such as employee trust, mental load reduction, and satisfaction with AI assistance,
through regular surveys or in­tool feedback prompts.
• Pilot experiments: Run controlled studies or A/B testing comparing AI­supported
workflows vs. non­AI workflows, gathering data that can feed into ROI calculations.
• Metric validation: Evaluate which indicators are most reliable, scalable, and mean­
ingful for leadership decision­making on AI adoption.
Deliver Phase: Building an AI ROI Evaluation Framework
Once reliable metrics are identified, the next logical step is to consolidate them into a
reusable, organization­wide framework for ongoing AI evaluation. This could involve:
• Framework blueprint: Designing a step­by­step process for assessing AI tools,
from initial needs assessment to long­term value tracking, tailored to internal work­
flows.
• Dashboard or toolkit creation: Developing a centralized reporting tool that aggre­
gates usage data, performance metrics, and qualitative feedback, allowing leaders
to quickly assess ROI for each AI initiative.
• Scenario modeling: Enabling “what­if” simulations that project potential ROI for
future AI implementations based on current data patterns.
• Governance and iteration: Embedding the framework into existing decision­making
processes, with guidelines for periodic review and recalibration to ensure it evolves
alongside AI capabilities and workforce skills.
• Cross­team validation: Testing the framework with different user groups (e.g.,
Builders, Operators, Strategists) to ensure it captures both technical efficiency and
human experience factors before broad rollout.
Building on the findings of this thesis, future work should focus on operationalizing the
insights from the Discover and Define phases. Specifically, the Develop phase should
establish clear ROI measurement methods by defining success criteria, linking system
usage data to workflow outcomes, and piloting controlled experiments to validate these
metrics. The Deliver phase should then consolidate these results into a reusable frame­
work, supported by dashboards, scenario modeling tools, and governance guidelines, en­
abling decision­makers to continuously assess and optimize the value of AI investments
across the organization.
Existing literature underscores the importance of adopting structured and multidimen­
sional frameworks for evaluating the return on investment (ROI) of enterprise AI initiatives.
Strategic models, such as the multi­phase framework proposed by GetDX, outline four
critical value dimensions that organizations should consider when assessing AI adoption:
architectural impact (the degree to which AI improves system interoperability and scala­
bility), compliance efficiency (how AI supports regulatory alignment and risk mitigation),
52
==PAGE:61==
process enablement (the extent to which AI automates or enhances operational work­
flows), and portfolio­level benefits (the aggregate value AI generates across projects and
departments) [36]. This framework highlights that ROI assessment should not focus solely
on immediate cost savings but also on long­term structural and organizational outcomes.
Meimandi et al. [37] further argue that current industry practices for measuring AI value are
often imbalanced, privileging narrow technical metrics such as accuracy or speed while
neglecting broader dimensions of value creation. They propose a four­axis evaluation
model that incorporates technical performance, human­centered factors (e.g., user satis­
faction, cognitive load reduction), safety and ethical considerations (e.g., risk of harmful
outcomes or bias), and economic productivity gains. Their work emphasizes the need
for multidimensional evaluation approaches that capture both the tangible and intangible
effects of AI adoption on organizations.
Complementary practical guidance is offered by Salesforce Ventures [38], which draws
on lessons from enterprise AI deployments to suggest that ROI measurement should be­
gin with “imperfect but actionable” metrics. According to their analysis, early­stage AI
implementations rarely yield precise ROI figures due to experimental uncertainty, but or­
ganizations benefit from establishing baseline indicators, such as time saved, increased
decision velocity, or enhanced collaboration, and iteratively refining them through com­
bined quantitative data (e.g., usage analytics) and qualitative feedback from end­users.
This pragmatic approach reflects the reality that ROI measurement is an evolving process
rather than a fixed one­time calculation.
Finally, Adler [39] emphasizes the importance of adopting a long­term perspective when
assessing the ROI of AI training and adoption initiatives. His research highlights that
many productivity gains from AI systems only become evident after sustained use, often
over a period of 12 to 24 months, as employees adapt their workflows, develop new
competencies, and organizations adjust supporting processes. This work suggests that
short­term evaluations may systematically underestimate the true value of AI investments,
underscoring the need for longitudinal data collection and evaluation frameworks.
Together, these contributions point toward a growing consensus that measuring AI ROI in
enterprise contexts requires multidimensional, iterative, and time­aware approaches that
go beyond narrow technical metrics. Such frameworks could guide future efforts to oper­
ationalize the findings of this thesis in the Develop and Deliver phases, enabling organi­
zations to translate qualitative user insights into measurable, organization­wide indicators
of value.
53
==PAGE:62==
6
Conclusion
The objective of this dissertation was to investigate and answer the research question:
“Does AI actually make work more efficient, or does it introduce new challenges that out­
weigh its benefits?” To address this question, I examined the use, and perceived impact of
an internal AI platform within a specific domain from The Company. By combining survey
data, interviews, and AI­assisted thematic analysis, this research provided a multi­layered
understanding of how employees interact with the AI platform, the benefits they experi­
ence, and the inefficiencies that may hinder their productivity.
Our findings suggest that while the AI platform hold considerable promise for improving
workplace efficiency, particularly for tasks such as drafting text, debugging code, and
brainstorming ideas, this potential is not fully realized in practice. Adoption of the tool was
rapid, driven largely by organizational enthusiasm and top­down encouragement. How­
ever, assumptions that deployment alone would increase productivity were only partially
supported. Many employees reported inconsistent usability, slow response times, lack
of memory across prompts, and poor integration with internal data sources as shown in
section 4. These friction points often offset the expected efficiency gains and, in some
cases, discouraged frequent use of the platform.
To address my research question, I extend the conclusion by offering an outline of the
answers to the individual sub­questions already addressed in section 5.
In the first sub­question, we asked: Why is the AI platform being adopted so rapidly within
the Company, and what underlying assumptions drive expectations about its impact on
productivity and the employee experience? The findings in Section 4.1 indicate that adop­
tion was primarily driven by top­down initiative and organizational enthusiasm, with AI
positioned as an inherently productivity­enhancing tool. Many users engaged with the
assistant due to leadership encouragement or curiosity rather than a clear, self­identified
need. This demonstrates a misalignment between institutional assumptions of efficiency
gains and employees’ real­world experiences, where limited onboarding, poor contextual
integration, and varying digital fluency prevented uniform benefits. These findings echo
literature on techno­solutionism [33], showing that technological deployment alone rarely
guarantees improved performance if contextual barriers are left unaddressed.
In addressing the second question: How do employees interact with the AI platform, and
what are their patterns of use, perceptions of usefulness, and skill­based challenges?
Section 2.1.1 illustrates that interaction patterns varied significantly across the three iden­
tified personas: Explorers, Builders, and Operators. Explorers needed structured guid­
ance and templates to engage effectively. Builders used the assistant for coding and
ideation but demanded speed and better integration with existing tools. Operators val­
ued reliability, trust, and compliance features, which were only partially delivered. Across
groups, inconsistent accuracy, lack of prompt memory, and poor handling of context led
to frequent double­checking and parallel use of external tools like ChatGPT or Copilot.
These findings align with research on trust calibration in AI, Gunning [35] emphasize that
mental models and confidence strongly affect adoption and value realization.
For the third question: What specific benefits or inefficiencies arise from the platform’s
use? Are tasks completed faster, with fewer errors, or do usability issues, cognitive over­
load, or lack of integration undermine its potential? As shown in Sections 4.2.2 and 4.2.1,
from interviews employee perceive that the assistant offered measurable time savings
54
==PAGE:63==
for some tasks, particularly repetitive communication and debugging. Yet many users
reported friction that negated these benefits, including slow response times, clunky for­
matting, cognitive overload from repetitive rephrasing, and lack of access to internal doc­
umentation. The gap between expected and actual efficiency highlights a pacing problem
[12], where organizational processes, infrastructure, and support mechanisms have not
evolved quickly enough to match the tool’s introduction, leading to frustration and incon­
sistent value across teams.
Ultimately, these three sub­questions answer the main research question: Does AI make
work more efficient, or does it introduce new challenges that outweigh its benefits? The
evidence suggests that AI can enhance efficiency in specific, well­defined use cases, but
this effect is highly dependent on user experience, organizational context, and system
design. Where technical limitations, poor integration, or skill gaps exist, AI introduces
new challenges that undermine its potential gains. Thus, deployment alone is insufficient;
efficiency benefits depend on alignment between tool capabilities, workflows, and human
factors.
Lastly, when thinking about future research in Section 5 relevance and the limitations
of this study in Section 5, this dissertation should be seen as an exploratory step to­
wards understanding workplace AI adoption. The study is bounded by its single orga­
nizational context, self­selected participants, and AI­assisted thematic analysis, which
may have missed subtle nuances. Future research should conduct longitudinal studies
to capture how adoption and efficiency evolve over time, extend analysis to diverse orga­
nizational environments, and develop structured ROI frameworks that combine technical
performance with human­centered outcomes like trust, cognitive load, and employee sat­
isfaction. These next steps are crucial for building a more complete understanding of how
AI tools can truly enhance, rather than complicate, modern work.
From a theoretical perspective, this study contributes to understanding AI adoption in
workplace settings by extending the discussion beyond adoption rates to actual effective­
ness and perceived value. The results challenge techno­solutionist assumptions that AI
inherently drives efficiency and instead suggest that context, usability, and organizational
readiness are critical mediators of value creation. The persona­based framework intro­
duced here provides a novel lens to understand variability in adoption and to guide design
strategies that support different user journeys. This echoes calls from human­centered
AI research to design systems that are understandable, trustworthy, and adaptive to user
needs [40].
Practically, the study highlights that organizations cannot assume that introducing AI tools
will automatically lead to efficiency gains. Effective adoption requires:
1. Robust onboarding and support mechanisms to help new users (Explorers) engage
meaningfully with the tool.
2. Technical improvements in speed, reliability, memory retention, and internal system
integration to support advanced users (Builders and Operators).
3. Transparency and governance features to foster trust and ensure responsible use
at scale.
4. Feedback loops and continuous iteration to improve usability and output quality over
time.
These measures are essential to bridge the gap between AI’s potential and its realized
benefits in everyday work.
55
==PAGE:64==
Ultimately, this dissertation concludes that AI can improve workplace efficiency, but its
benefits are neither guaranteed nor evenly distributed. The internal AI assistant studied
here delivered tangible value in specific use cases but introduced friction, inconsistencies,
and unmet expectations in others. Without improved usability, better integration, and tai­
lored support for diverse users, AI risks becoming a net­neutral or even counterproductive
tool despite its promise. This research contributes to a more nuanced understanding of
AI adoption in organizations, emphasizing that true efficiency gains require not just tech­
nological availability, but thoughtful design, continuous alignment with user needs, and
organizational adaptation to harness AI’s potential effectively.
In the end, AI is not a silver bullet for workplace productivity, it is a mirror reflecting the
strengths and gaps of our existing workflows. For AI to truly make work more efficient,
organizations must invest as much in thoughtful integration and user support as they do
in the technology itself. Only then can the promise of AI move from potential to practice.
56
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Bhaskar. The Coming Wave: Künstliche Intelligenz, Macht und das Grösste
Dilemma des 21. Jahrhunderts. Verlag C.H. Beck oHG, 2024. ISBN: 9783406814129.
[2]
G. Hasselbalch. Data Ethics of Power: A Human Approach in the Big Data and AI
Era. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2021.
[3]
C. O’Neil. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and
Threatens Democracy. New York: Crown Publishers, 2016. ISBN: 0553418815.
[4]
David Collingridge. The Social Control of Technology. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1982, p. 200. ISBN: 0903804727.
[5]
Adam Thierer. The Pacing Problem and the Future of Technology Regulation. Ac­
cessed: 2025­02­13. Mercatus Center ­ Expert Commentary. 2018. URL: https :
//www.mercatus.org/economic-insights/expert-commentary/pacing-problem-and-
future-technology-regulation.
[6]
Michael Crotty. The Foundations of Social Research: Meaning and Perspective in
the Research Process. London: Sage Publications, 1998.
[7]
Norman Blaikie. Approaches to Social Enquiry: Advancing Knowledge. 2nd ed.
Polity, 2007. ISBN: 978­0­745­63449­4.
[8]
Design Council. The Double Diamond. Accessed: 2024­03­09. 2024. URL: https:
//www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-resources/the-double-diamond/.
[9]
Russell K. Schutt. Investigating the Social World: The Process and Practice of Re­
search. 9th. Sage Publications, 2018. ISBN: 9781506361192.
[10]
Manuel Goyanes, Carlos Lopezosa, and Beatriz Jordá. “Thematic Analysis of Inter­
view Data with ChatGPT: Designing and Testing a Reliable Research Protocol for
Qualitative Research”. Preprint, Universitat Pompeu Fabra and Universidad Carlos
III de Madrid. 2024. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/6742522fda322727a87fa1b1.
[11]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Using thematic analysis in psychology”. In:
Qualitative research in psychology (2006).
[12]
Gordon E. Moore. “Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the IEEE 86.1 (1998), pp. 82–85. DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.1998.658762.
[13]
OpenAI. GPT­4, GPT­4 Turbo, and DALL∙E 3 Models. Accessed: 2024­04­10. 2024.
URL: https://openai.com/research.
[14]
Databricks. Databricks Lakehouse Platform. Accessed: 2024­04­10. 2024. URL:
https://www.databricks.com/.
[15]
Microsoft Azure. Azure Cloud Computing Services. Accessed: 2024­04­10. 2024.
URL: https://azure.microsoft.com/.
[16]
Amazon Web Services. Amazon Bedrock: Build and Scale Generative AI Applica­
tions. Accessed: 2024­04­10. 2024. URL: https://aws.amazon.com/bedrock/.
[17]
Microsoft. Azure Cosmos DB. Accessed: 2024­04­10. 2024. URL: https://learn.
microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cosmos-db/.
[18]
Python Software Foundation. Python Programming Language. Accessed: 2024­04­
10. 2024. URL: https://www.python.org/.
[19]
Microsoft. TypeScript Language. Accessed: 2024­04­10. 2024. URL: https://www.
typescriptlang.org/.
[20]
Using AI in the workplace. eng. 2024. DOI: 10.1787/73d417f9-en.
[21]
Anna Milanez. The Impact of AI on the Workplace: Evidence from OECD Case
Studies of AI Implementation. eng. 2023. DOI: 10.1787/2247ce58-en.
57
==PAGE:66==
[22]
Min Qin et al. “Research on the impact of employee AI identity on employee proac­
tive behavior in AI workplace”. eng. In: Industrial Management and Data Systems
125.2 (2025), pp. 738–767. ISSN: 17585783, 02635577. DOI: 10.1108/IMDS-03-
2024-0211.
[23]
Lane Marguerita and Williams Morgan. Defining and classifying AI in the workplace.
eng. 2023. DOI: 10.1787/59e89d7f-en.
[24]
Robert K. Yin. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 4th. Thousand Oaks,
CA: SAGE Publications, 2009. ISBN: 978­1­4129­6099­1.
[25]
Uwe Flick. An Introduction to Qualitative Research. 4th. SAGE Publications Ltd,
2009.
[26]
Jill Farquhar. Case Study Research for Business. London: SAGE Publications Ltd,
2012. ISBN: 9780857027482.
[27]
Technical University of Denmark. DTU Findit. https://findit.dtu.dk. Accessed: 2025­
08­07.
[28]
ResearchGate. Discover scientific knowledge and stay connected. https://www.
researchgate.net. Accessed: 2025­08­07.
[29]
Grammarly Inc. Grammarly. https://www.grammarly.com. Accessed: 2025­08­07.
[30]
John Brooke. “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale”. In: Usability evaluation in
industry 189 (1996), pp. 4–7.
[31]
Frederick F. Reichheld. “The one number you need to grow”. In: Harvard Business
Review 81.12 (2003), pp. 46–54.
[32]
Floyd J Fowler. Survey Research Methods. 5th. SAGE Publications, 2014.
[33]
Reuben Binns et al. “Algorithmic accountability and public reason”. In: Philosophy
& Technology 31.4 (2018), pp. 543–556.
[34]
Paul J DiMaggio and Walter W Powell. “The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomor­
phism and collective rationality in organizational fields”. In: American Sociological
Review 48.2 (1983), pp. 147–160. DOI: 10.2307/2095101.
[35]
David Gunning and David W Aha. “DARPA’s Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)
program”. In: AI Magazine 40.2 (2019), pp. 44–58.
[36]
GetDX. How to measure AI ROI in enterprise software projects. 2025. URL: https:
//getdx.com/blog/ai-roi-enterprise/.
[37]
Kiana Jafari Meimandi et al. “The Measurement Imbalance in Agentic AI Evalua­
tion Undermines Industry Productivity Claims”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02064
(2025).
[38]
Salesforce Ventures. Measuring AI Impact: 5 Lessons For Teams. 2025. URL: https:
//salesforceventures.com/perspectives/measuring-ai-impact-5-lessons-for-teams/.
[39]
Dmitri Adler. Measuring the ROI of AI and Data Training: A Productivity￿First Ap­
proach. 2025. URL: https://datasociety.com/measuring- the- roi- of- ai- and- data-
training-a-productivity-first-approach/.
[40]
Ben Shneiderman. “Human­centered artificial intelligence: Reliable, safe & trustwor­
thy”. In: International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 36.6 (2020), pp. 495–
504. DOI: 10.1080/10447318.2020.1741118.
[41]
Neel Guha et al. “AI Regulation Has Its Own Alignment Problem: The Technical
and Institutional Feasibility of Disclosure, Registration, Licensing, and Auditing”. In:
George Washington Law Review (2023). Forthcoming.
[42]
Richard E. Boyatzis. Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and
Code Development. SAGE Publications, 1998.
[43]
Virginia Eubanks. Automating inequality: How high­tech tools profile, police, and
punish the poor. St. Martin’s Press, 2018.
58
==PAGE:67==
[44]
Gary Marcus and Ernest Davis. “Rebooting AI: Building artificial intelligence we can
trust”. In: AI Society (2022).
[45]
J. Espinoza. “European Companies Sound Alarm Over Draft AI Law”. In: Financial
Times (2023). Accessed: 2023­06­30. URL: https://www.ft.com/content/9b72a5f4-
a6d8-41aa-95b8-c75f0bc92465.
59
==PAGE:68==
A
Appendix
A.1
Domain 10 overview
Figure A.1: Domain 10
A.2
Interview Questions
The following questions guided the interviews conducted during the study:
Opening
• Could you briefly describe your role and responsibilities within the digital depart­
ment?
• How long have you been using the AI platform?
Usage and Interaction
• Can you describe how you typically use the AI platform during your workday?
• Could you share a specific example of a task or situation where the AI platform has
been particularly helpful?
• Are there specific tasks for which you prefer not to use the platform? If so, why?
Efficiency and Productivity
• Do you feel the AI platform makes your job more efficient? Why or why not?
• Has the platform impacted your ability to complete tasks accurately or quickly?
Could you provide an example?
• Has using the AI platform saved you time or reduced errors? Please explain.
60
==PAGE:69==
User Experience
• How easy or difficult do you find interacting with the platform? What specifically
makes it easy or challenging?
• Have you encountered recurring frustrations or challenges while using the AI?
• If you could suggest improvements to the AI platform, what would they be?
Trust
• How reliable do you find the AI’s outputs or recommendations?
• Do you typically double­check the AI’s suggestions? If so, why and how?
• Has your trust in the AI platform changed over the time you’ve used it? If so, how?
Impact on Work
• Overall, does the AI platform improve your quality of work­life? In what ways?
• Have you experienced unintended or negative consequences of using the AI plat­
form, such as increased complexity or workload?
• How does your use of this AI assistant compare to other AI tools you use? Please
specify the other tools.
• What further changes or enhancements would better meet your needs and those of
your colleagues?
• Looking forward, how would you like the role of AI to evolve in your daily tasks?
Final Comments
• Is there anything else about your experience with the AI platform you’d like to men­
tion?
• Do you have any additional suggestions or feedback to help me better understand
your interaction with the platform?
61
==PAGE:70==
A.3
Comparing AI­Assisted Thematic Analysis and TF­IDF
Clusters
• Usage Frequency and Preferences
– Related Clusters:
* Cluster 0: Terms like ”assistant,” ”used,” ”time” reflect how users interact
with AI tools.
* Cluster 4: The emphasis on ”saves,” ”work” indicates preferences for tools
that enhance productivity.
– Analysis: Both sources highlight engagement levels and tool preferences.
• Task Types and Use Cases
– Related Clusters:
* Cluster 2: Terms like ”specific,” ”information,” ”writing” reflect various use
cases.
* Cluster 5: Words such as ”generate,” ”code” point to task types.
– Analysis: Emphasizes AI’s role in coding, writing, and communication tasks.
• Trust and Accuracy
– Related Clusters:
* Cluster 3: Includes ”wrong,” ”correct,” ”happy” indicating output verification
needs.
* Cluster 8: Terms such as ”wrong,” ”saves,” ”answer” reinforce trust con­
cerns.
– Analysis: Consistently highlights user skepticism toward AI output accuracy.
• Time Efficiency and Productivity
– Related Clusters:
* Cluster 4: ”time,” ”saves,” ”help” directly relate to perceived productivity.
* Cluster 8: ”saves,” ”time,” ”feel” reinforces time­saving experiences.
– Analysis: Confirms efficiency as a core perceived benefit.
• User Interface and Experience
– Related Clusters:
* Cluster 1: Words like ”command,” ”terminal” reflect UI elements.
* Cluster 7: Terms such as ”find,” ”ask,” ”model” suggest interaction pat­
terns.
– Analysis: Captures aspects of navigation and interface friction.
• Quality of Output
– Related Clusters:
62
==PAGE:71==
* Cluster 3: Emphasis on ”wrong,” ”correct” highlights concerns over re­
sponse quality.
* Cluster 0: ”quality,” ”context” further reflect concerns about effectiveness.
– Analysis: Underlines mixed perceptions of content quality and consistency.
• Integration with Existing Workflows
– Related Clusters:
* Cluster 2: ”tool,” ”work” suggest integration conversations.
* Cluster 6: ”add,” ”work” reinforce the need for seamless tool adoption.
– Analysis: Strong demand for better integration into daily tools and systems.
• Feature Requests and Improvements
– Related Clusters:
* Cluster 0: Words like ”context,” ”quality” point to user demands.
* Cluster 6: ”try,” ”add” suggest experimentation and desire for new features.
– Analysis: Reinforces user expectations for customization and evolution of fea­
tures.
• Overall Satisfaction
– Related Clusters:
* Cluster 4: Terms like ”saves,” ”work” reflect overall satisfaction.
* Cluster 8: ”feel,” ”idea” convey personal impressions and attitudes.
– Analysis: Indicates a generally positive outlook, despite occasional limitations.
A.4
AI­Assisted Thematic Analysis Dialogue
1
2
3
USER:
4
I am going to offer you a set of interviews. Specifically, 8.
5
So each instruction will be an interview.
6
Once we've uploaded all the interviews, we'll let you know
7
and start asking you for specific instructions, okay?
8
9
AI:
10
That sounds great!
11
I'm ready for the interviews whenever you are.
12
Just let me know when you've uploaded them, and we can dive into
13
the specific instructions you need.
14
Looking forward to it!
15
16
USER:
17
Below I will attach the following interview:
18
interview1, interview2, interview3, interview4, interview5,
19
interview6, interview7 and interview8.
20
Please do not take any action, just indicate whether or not you have
63
==PAGE:72==
21
incorporated the interviews.
22
23
AI:
24
Understood! Just let me know when you've attached the interviews,
25
and I'll indicate whether I've incorporated them.
26
I'm ready when you are!
27
28
USER:
29
Interview1.docx this is interview1
30
31
AI:
32
I've noted that you've provided interview1.
33
Just let me know when you're ready to share
34
the next interviews or if you need anything else!
35
36
USER:
37
Interview2.docx this is interview2
38
39
AI:
40
Got it! I've noted that you've provided interview2 as well.
41
Just let me know when you're ready to share the next ones
42
or if you have any other instructions!
43
44
USER:
45
interview3.docx this is interview3
46
47
...
48
49
USER:
50
Please confirm how many interviews we have provided you in this chat.
51
52
AI:
53
You've provided a total of 8 interviews in this chat:
54
interview1, interview2, interview3, interview4, interview5,
55
interview6, interview7 and interview8.
56
If you have any specific questions or tasks related to them,
57
just let me know!
58
59
USER:
60
Next, I will no longer give you more interviews,
61
but rather I will make requests for the 8 interviews. OK?
62
63
AI:
64
Sounds perfect! I'm ready for your requests regarding the eight
interviews.
65
Just let me know what you need, and I'll be happy to assist!
66
67
USER:
68
Identify as exhaustively as possible the most recurring themes
69
taking into account the content of the 8 interviews we have uploaded.
64
==PAGE:73==
70
71
AI:
72
Based on the content of the eight interviews, here are the most recurring
themes:
73
74
Usage Frequency and Preferences:
75
Interviewees frequently mentioned how often they use the AI platforms,
76
with some using it daily and others less frequently.
77
Preferences for specific tools like GitHub Copilot versus the AI
assistant
78
were also highlighted.
79
80
Task Types and Use Cases:
81
Common tasks included coding, debugging, generating code snippets,
82
and composing emails or communications.
83
The interviews noted that users rely on AI for both technical tasks and
brainstorming.
84
85
Trust and Accuracy:
86
A recurring theme was the level of trust users have in the AI's accuracy.
87
Many expressed skepticism about the reliability of AI-generated content,
88
often double-checking results due to past inaccuracies.
89
90
Time Efficiency and Productivity:
91
Interviewees reported that using AI tools generally saves time
92
and improves productivity by providing immediate answers
93
and reducing dependency on colleagues.
94
95
User Interface and Experience:
96
Several comments were made about the user interface of the AI tools,
97
mentioning issues like the need for model selection and automatic prompt
reloads
98
that caused lost input.
99
Preferences for keyboard shortcuts and CLI integration were also noted.
100
101
Quality of Output:
102
There were mixed feelings about the quality of the output from different
AI tools,
103
with some users noting inconsistencies in responses
104
between platforms like Copilot and AI assistant.
105
106
Integration with Existing Workflows:
107
The need for better integration of AI tools into existing workflows
108
was a common request.
109
Users expressed a desire for AI to access internal documents and
resources more effectively.
110
111
Feature Requests and Improvements:
112
Interviewees shared suggestions for new features,
113
such as improved internal information retrieval,
65
==PAGE:74==
114
better context utilization, and faster performance for file handling.
115
116
Overall Satisfaction:
117
While there were concerns about specific functionalities,
118
most users expressed a positive overall impression of AI tools
119
and their impact on their work.
120
121
These themes reflect a comprehensive understanding of user experiences
122
and expectations regarding the AI platforms discussed in the interviews.
123
If you need further analysis or specific insights, just let me know!
124
125
USER:
126
Search for and list key phrases or terms related to the specific topics
127
listed in the previous prompt.
128
129
AI:
130
Here are key phrases and terms related to the specific topics identified
in the previous prompt:
131
132
Usage Frequency and Preferences:
133
"daily usage"
134
"infrequent use"
135
"preferred AI tool"
136
"GitHub Copilot"
137
"AI assistant"
138
139
Task Types and Use Cases:
140
"coding tasks"
141
"debugging"
142
"code generation"
143
"brainstorming"
144
"email composition"
145
146
Trust and Accuracy:
147
"low trust in AI"
148
"double-check results"
149
"historical inaccuracies"
150
"accuracy varies"
151
"requires verification"
152
153
Time Efficiency and Productivity:
154
"saves time"
155
"improves productivity"
156
"immediate answers"
157
"reducing dependency"
158
"workflow improvement"
159
160
User Interface and Experience:
161
"user-friendly"
162
"automatic prompt reloads"
66
==PAGE:75==
163
"keyboard shortcuts"
164
"CLI integration"
165
"model selection"
166
167
Quality of Output:
168
"inconsistent responses"
169
"quality variance"
170
"satisfactory output"
171
"mechanical tone"
172
"contextual memory"
173
174
Integration with Existing Workflows:
175
"better integration"
176
"internal context solutions"
177
"document access"
178
"seamless tools"
179
"workflow integration"
180
181
Feature Requests and Improvements:
182
"improved discoverability"
183
"fuzzy searching"
184
"faster performance"
185
"context utilization"
186
"new features"
187
188
Overall Satisfaction:
189
"positive user experience"
190
"satisfaction with tools"
191
"eager for improvements"
192
"valuable conversation"
193
"overall impression"
194
195
These phrases and terms encapsulate the key aspects discussed in the
interviews
196
and can help in further analysis or discussions about the AI tools.
197
If you need more details or a different focus, just let me know!
198
199
USER:
200
Provide the best examples or quotes that illustrate the 9 topics
201
resulted in the previous prompt and using the 8 interviews.
202
203
AI:
204
Here are some illustrative quotes and examples from the eight interviews
205
that correspond to the nine identified topics:
206
207
Usage Frequency and Preferences:
208
"I use the AI Assistant infrequently, about 1-2 times a month."
209
"I prefer Copilot for initial research and complex API integrations."
210
211
Task Types and Use Cases:
67
==PAGE:76==
212
"I primarily use it for coding and brainstorming new projects."
213
"My tasks include generating code for APIs and debugging."
214
215
Trust and Accuracy:
216
"I maintain low trust in AI accuracy and double-check results due to
historical inaccuracies."
217
"The accuracy varies; I always have to check correctness, especially in
static languages."
218
219
Time Efficiency and Productivity:
220
"Using AI saves time; it allows immediate answers and improves workflow."
221
"The value in AI assistance outweighs the need for verification."
222
223
User Interface and Experience:
224
"The user interface is generally standard and user-friendly,
225
but I have issues with automatic prompt reloads."
226
"I prefer keyboard use; the reliance on the browser and mouse is
frustrating."
227
228
Quality of Output:
229
"Not all AI platforms give consistent quality; I notice differences in
responses."
230
"I find the AI output satisfactory but not perfect, particularly in image
generation."
231
232
Integration with Existing Workflows:
233
"I wish the AI could integrate better with internal resources like
Confluence and SharePoint."
234
"I recommend The Company to prioritize internal context solutions over
replicating external tools."
235
236
Feature Requests and Improvements:
237
"I would love to see improved internal information retrieval for product
IDs."
238
"It would be great if the AI could have better discoverability and
organization."
239
240
Overall Satisfaction:
241
"Overall, I have a positive user experience and am eager for improvements
."
242
"The company is considered ahead of competitors in terms of AI tools."
243
244
These quotes capture the essence of each topic and provide insights into
user experiences
245
and expectations regarding the AI tools discussed in the interviews.
246
If you need further elaboration or additional examples, just let me know!
247
248
USER:
249
Identify convergences and divergences in each of the 9 topics
68
==PAGE:77==
250
resulted in the previous prompt and taking for this purpose the 8
interviews.
251
Identify the approximate percentage of such convergences and divergences.
252
Start with an intro where you give an overview of this result.
253
254
AI:
255
In analyzing the eight interviews, we can identify both convergences and
divergences
256
across the nine topics related to user experiences with AI tools.
257
Overall, there is a strong consensus among users regarding the benefits
of AI
258
in enhancing productivity and efficiency, yet notable differences emerge
in preferences,
259
trust levels, and specific use cases.
260
Below is a breakdown of convergences and divergences for each topic,
261
along with approximate percentages to illustrate the degree of agreement
or disagreement
262
among the interviewees.
263
264
Overview of Results
265
Convergences: Approximately 70\% of the points discussed across the
interviews reflect a consensus among users
266
regarding the advantages of AI tools, their general usability,
267
and the desire for improved features and integrations.
268
Divergences: Around 30\% of the discussions reveal differing opinions and
experiences,
269
particularly regarding trust in AI accuracy, specific tool preferences,
270
and the effectiveness of various functionalities.
271
272
Topic Breakdown
273
Usage Frequency and Preferences
274
Convergence: Most users have a clear preference for specific tools,
275
with GitHub Copilot being favored for coding tasks.
276
Divergence: Variability in usage frequency was noted,
277
with some using AI tools daily and others infrequently.
278
Approximate Percentages: 80\% convergence, 20\% divergence.
279
280
Task Types and Use Cases
281
Convergence: Coding and debugging are common tasks for most users.
282
Divergence: Differences in the scope of tasks,
283
with some focusing on brainstorming and others on technical tasks.
284
Approximate Percentages: 75\% convergence, 25\% divergence.
285
286
Trust and Accuracy
287
Convergence: Users generally express skepticism about AI accuracy.
288
Divergence: The degree of trust varies, with some relying more heavily on
AI than others.
289
Approximate Percentages: 70\% convergence, 30\% divergence.
290
291
Time Efficiency and Productivity
69
==PAGE:78==
292
Convergence: A strong agreement that AI tools save time and enhance
productivity.
293
Divergence: Some users feel that the time saved is not significant enough
to outweigh the need for verification.
294
Approximate Percentages: 85\% convergence, 15\% divergence.
295
296
User Interface and Experience
297
Convergence: Most users find the interfaces user-friendly but acknowledge
areas for improvement.
298
Divergence: Specific issues vary, such as preferences for keyboard
shortcuts versus mouse usage.
299
Approximate Percentages: 75\% convergence, 25\% divergence.
300
301
Quality of Output
302
Convergence: Users agree on the need for consistent quality in AI outputs
.
303
Divergence: Opinions differ regarding the adequacy of the output,
304
with some finding it satisfactory and others less so.
305
Approximate Percentages: 70\% convergence, 30\% divergence.
306
307
Integration with Existing Workflows
308
Convergence: A common desire for better integration of AI tools into
existing workflows.
309
Divergence: Different users have varying needs and suggestions for
integration.
310
Approximate Percentages: 80\% convergence, 20\% divergence.
311
312
Feature Requests and Improvements
313
Convergence: Users express a desire for additional features and
improvements in functionality.
314
Divergence: Specific requested features vary among users.
315
Approximate Percentages: 75\% convergence, 25\% divergence.
316
317
Overall Satisfaction
318
Convergence: Generally positive impressions of AI tools among users.
319
Divergence: Some users are more critical and have specific concerns about
certain functionalities.
320
Approximate Percentages: 80\% convergence, 20\% divergence.
321
322
Conclusion
323
The analysis reveals that while there is a strong overall consensus on
the benefits and functionality of AI tools,
324
individual experiences and preferences lead to significant divergences in
specific areas.
325
This insight can guide future developments and improvements in AI
platforms
326
to better meet user needs and expectations.
327
If you need further analysis or details on any specific topic, feel free
to ask!
328
70
==PAGE:79==
329
USER:
330
Identify the most important quotes supporting the 9 topics
331
thematic axis resulting from the last prompt.
332
To do this, include the direct quotes associated with each of the
interviewees that are part of this thematic axis.
333
Start with an intro where you give an overview of this result.
334
335
AI:
336
In examining the nine thematic axes identified in the previous analysis,
337
we've gathered key quotes from the interviewees that encapsulate their
perspectives
338
and experiences regarding AI tools.
339
These quotes provide valuable insights into user sentiments, preferences,
340
and concerns, reinforcing the themes of usage frequency, task types,
trust, efficiency,
341
user experience, output quality, integration, feature requests, and
overall satisfaction.
342
Below are the most important quotes supporting each thematic axis,
343
categorized according to the identified topics.
344
345
Overview of Results
346
The quotes illustrate a blend of converging thoughts on the benefits and
usability of AI tools,
347
alongside diverging opinions on trust, specific functionalities, and
preferences.
348
They highlight both the positive experiences users have with AI and the
areas where improvement is needed.
349
350
Thematic Axis Quotes
351
Usage Frequency and Preferences
352
"I use the AI Assistant infrequently, about 1-2 times a month."
353
"I prefer Copilot for initial research and complex API integrations."
354
355
Task Types and Use Cases
356
"I primarily use it for coding and brainstorming new projects."
357
"My tasks include generating code for APIs and debugging."
358
359
Trust and Accuracy
360
"I maintain low trust in AI accuracy and double-check results due to
historical inaccuracies."
361
"The accuracy varies; I always have to check correctness, especially in
static languages."
362
363
Time Efficiency and Productivity
364
"Using AI saves time; it allows immediate answers and improves workflow."
365
"The value in AI assistance outweighs the need for verification."
366
367
User Interface and Experience
368
"The user interface is generally standard and user-friendly,
369
but I have issues with automatic prompt reloads."
71
==PAGE:80==
370
"I prefer keyboard use; the reliance on the browser and mouse is
frustrating."
371
372
Quality of Output
373
"Not all AI platforms give consistent quality; I notice differences in
responses."
374
"I find the AI output satisfactory but not perfect, particularly in image
generation."
375
376
Integration with Existing Workflows
377
"I wish the AI could integrate better with internal resources like
Confluence and SharePoint."
378
"I recommend The Company prioritize internal context solutions over
replicating external tools."
379
380
Feature Requests and Improvements
381
"I would love to see improved internal information retrieval for product
IDs."
382
"It would be great if the AI could have better discoverability and
organization."
383
384
Overall Satisfaction
385
"Overall, I have a positive user experience and am eager for improvements
."
386
"The company is considered ahead of competitors in terms of AI tools."
387
388
Conclusion
389
These quotes effectively capture the essence of user experiences and
perspectives on AI tools,
390
highlighting both the strengths and weaknesses as perceived by the
interviewees.
391
They serve as a foundation for understanding user needs and expectations,
392
which can inform future developments in AI technology.
393
If you need further analysis or additional insights, just let me know!
394
395
USER:
396
Perform a thematic analysis on the 9 topics axis identified
397
in the previous prompt.
398
399
AI:
400
Conducting a thematic analysis on the nine identified topics allows us to
explore
401
the nuances of user experiences with AI tools in greater depth.
402
This analysis will delve into the underlying themes, patterns,
403
and implications associated with each topic, drawing from the insights
gathered in the interviews.
404
405
Thematic Analysis
406
Usage Frequency and Preferences
407
Theme: User Engagement Levels
72
==PAGE:81==
408
Analysis: The interviews reveal a spectrum of engagement with AI tools.
409
Some users, like Alberte and Jeppe, utilize the tools regularly for
coding and brainstorming,
410
while others, like Paul, engage less frequently.
411
This divergence suggests varying levels of comfort and reliance on AI,
412
which may be influenced by individual skill sets and specific job
requirements.
413
Users' preferences for certain tools (e.g., GitHub Copilot over the AI
platform) indicate a desire for more efficient and integrated
solutions.
414
415
Task Types and Use Cases
416
Theme: Diverse Applications of AI
417
Analysis: Users employ AI tools for a range of tasks, primarily focused
on coding, debugging,
418
and communication. This highlights the versatility of AI in supporting
technical and creative processes.
419
However, the specific use cases vary, with some users leaning more
towards technical tasks
420
while others focus on brainstorming and project structuring.
421
This diversity indicates that AI tools can cater to multiple roles within
a workplace,
422
though improvements may be needed to address specific user needs.
423
424
Trust and Accuracy
425
Theme: Skepticism and Verification
426
Analysis: A consistent theme across the interviews is the skepticism
surrounding AI accuracy.
427
Users express concerns about the reliability of AI-generated content,
leading many to double-check results.
428
This skepticism may stem from past experiences with inaccuracies,
highlighting the need for AI tools to improve their precision and
build user trust.
429
The varying levels of trust indicate that while some users are more
reliant on AI,
430
others prefer to use it as a supplementary resource.
431
432
Time Efficiency and Productivity
433
Theme: Enhancing Workflow
434
Analysis: Most users agree that AI tools contribute positively to time
efficiency and productivity.
435
They appreciate the immediate responses and the reduction in time spent
searching for solutions.
436
However, some users question whether the time saved justifies the
occasional inaccuracies,
437
suggesting that while AI can enhance workflow, it is not without its
trade-offs.
438
This theme underscores the importance of balancing efficiency with the
quality of output.
439
73
==PAGE:82==
440
User Interface and Experience
441
Theme: Usability Challenges
442
Analysis: Users generally find the interfaces of AI tools to be user-
friendly,
443
but they also highlight specific usability challenges, such as automatic
prompt reloads
444
and reliance on mouse navigation. These issues can hinder the user
experience
445
and suggest that further refinement of the user interface is necessary.
446
The preference for keyboard shortcuts and CLI integration indicates a
desire for more streamlined interactions with the tools.
447
448
Quality of Output
449
Theme: Consistency and Satisfaction
450
Analysis: The quality of output from AI tools is a significant concern
for users.
451
While some find the outputs satisfactory, others notice inconsistencies
across different platforms.
452
This divergence indicates that while AI can provide valuable assistance,
it must strive for greater consistency and quality to meet user
expectations.
453
Users' varying degrees of satisfaction suggest that improvements in
output quality could enhance overall user experience.
454
455
Integration with Existing Workflows
456
Theme: Need for Seamless Integration
457
Analysis: Users express a strong desire for better integration of AI
tools with existing workflows
458
and internal resources. This need for seamless integration is crucial for
maximizing the utility of AI in professional settings.
459
Users' suggestions for improved access to internal documents and
resources indicate that AI tools should evolve
460
to better support the specific contexts in which they are used.
461
462
Feature Requests and Improvements
463
Theme: User-Centric Development
464
Analysis: Interviewees frequently mention specific feature requests and
improvements,
465
such as better discoverability and enhanced internal information
retrieval.
466
This feedback highlights the importance of user input in the development
of AI tools.
467
By actively listening to users' needs, developers can create more
effective solutions that align with real-world use cases.
468
469
Overall Satisfaction
470
Theme: Positive Outlook with Reservations
471
Analysis: While users generally express a positive overall experience
with AI tools,
74
==PAGE:83==
472
there are reservations about specific functionalities and the need for
continued improvements.
473
This theme suggests that while AI tools are perceived as valuable,
ongoing development and refinement are essential
474
to maintain user satisfaction and address emerging challenges.
475
476
Conclusion
477
The thematic analysis reveals a complex landscape of user experiences
with AI tools,
478
characterized by both appreciation for their capabilities and concerns
about their limitations.
479
Users demonstrate a clear desire for improved accuracy, usability, and
integration,
480
which can inform future developments in AI technology.
481
By addressing these themes, developers can enhance user satisfaction
482
and ensure that AI tools effectively meet the diverse needs of their
users.
483
If you need further insights or specific recommendations based on this
analysis, feel free to ask!
A.5
Open­Ended Survey Responses – AI Assistant
Evaluation
How does your use of the AI assistant compare to your usage of other AI tools?
Please specify which other AI tools you use.
• My experience using the AI Assistant has been almost indistinguishable from sing
other AI tools such as chatGPT.
• I don’t use the AI assistant unless it’s necessary because I’m working with material
that is sensitive to the The Company. I find that the responses are sometimes shorter
than desired and not as formatted as other AI tools. I personally tend to use Claude
or DeepSeek.
• I use GitHub Copilot for coding sometimes, but it often misunderstand my questions
or intentions, so I turned it off at some point. I use the AI Assistant more when it
comes to communcation, such as writing posts or emails when I want to sound more
formal and professional.
• Copilot is more convenient to use since it has the auto edit and comparer function­
ality when coding
• I use public ChatGPT, Gemeni from google. They are far better than the assistant
and can do many things that the assistant cannot. Also they are pretty good at giving
me suggestions about what do to next or whats possible. They also generat graphs,
diagrams etc.
• Copilot on web and vscode is superior CURRENTLY because it uses the latest llms.
Only for huge context windows the AI assistant makes currently sense.
• I don’t use much AI tools so I cannot compare
75
==PAGE:84==
• It compares well for the features available. It however lacks a bit behind when it
comes to the variety of features. Other AI tools I use: MS copilot, mistral le chat and
openai chatgpt is some of them.
• I mainly use Ai for coding tasks, but I try to use the AI while at work to avoid data
leakage, github copilot mainly
• I feel safer using it to input any Company specific data to help me in my work.
• I use daily other AI tools, but I am not using the AI assistant that much. Mainly
because of the lack of new models. When the assistant was launched, I used it
everyday, all the time, because they had the best models in the market. Nowadays,
I can only find the best models outside.
• Using ChatGPT for private purposes
• I am more confident using the internal AI assistant with internal data and codebase.
• Compared to ChatGPT i use it the same way in regards to debugging or other related
code tasks and issues
• I use different tools, like Copilot for my day to day, i think that the AI assistant is
more suited for specific question that are related to The Company or for confidential
information that can’t be shared. so its really usefull
• It is not as fast, and there are sometimes bugs. But overall reliable enough that I
will continue using it. Biggest headache is it not being very good at remembering
brevious prompts in the chat. But I think that is a general problem for AIs
• It’s plenty good enough for what I use it for. I just use it as a digital pair programmer
so I can stay in flow state.
• the AI assistant is great. I use Copilot.
• Copilot integrated with Github PRs / VSCode, mainly use the AI assistant though.
• chat GPT, Co­pilot
• I am using copilot while developing and for the rest of my queries the AI assistant.
• I use it for any company­related information due to restrictions. Otherwise I don’t
get special value from it being a proprietary service
• I only use the AI assistant for work related tasks, I also sometimes uses copilot
in visual studio code when I know that there isn’t any important data in my code.
Outside of work I use chatgpt and also copilot, these are mostly used for uni related
tasks
• None
• It does the job for which it was designed :)
• Commercial AI tools performs 20% better in the same context.
• It is comparable to the use of ChatGPT
• JetBrains single line completion is more relevant, built in to my IDE, less intrusive in
my everyday work and runs offline
• MS copilot, ChatGPT
76
==PAGE:85==
• I use chatGBT not for work but school and it is very helpful for studying, summarise
and quickly create quiz or study card.
• I have chatGPT premium that I use for university, when I do not understand some­
thing it can give me very easy, ”for dummy” response
• Most frequently I use https://consensus.app/search/ and https://www.researchrabbit.ai/
with my studies to do research specifically. The internal AI tool doesn’t offer those
specific actions ­ it’s more of a general tool that I use when I’m refining technical
outputs.
• Copilot is great because it’s in my IDE and it’s much much easier to copy and paste
code, but otherwise I use the AI assistant
• I often use ChatGPT instead as the answers are more precise and comprehensive
• ChatGPT
• Not comparable, as the other tools are integrated elsewhere
• I used the copoilt a lot during the coding and chatgpt for my own learning purpose
after work. And for the general docs and image generation, I used the internal AI
assistant
• I use Claude Sonnet 3.7 in my private life, and I really appreciate how that gives me
sources on what it is telling me if it is pulling information from the Internet.
• I dont use the AI assistant for anything productive. I use GitHub copilot for writing
code
• GitHub Copilot sometimes, but I think the AI assistant is better for code.
• I use Claude, ChatGPT, GitHub Copilot (IDE and web GUI), cursor. I use the AI
assistant only when necessary, it is the rare occasion where have to compare some
lists or excel sheets. I use github copilot for code since it is in my ide and can
do actual code changes and know multiple project files for context without having
me to do anything. I use chatgpt and claude directly , since i find their responses
better than what is delivered from the AI assistant. It almost seems to me that
there is some weird proxy prompt between my prompt in the internal AI and the
one delivered to chatgpt and claude. It is super frustrating. It worsens the result so
much, especially when you dont know as a user what the proxy prompt is. Also the
internal AI assistant is super slow, the frontend is bulky and it crashes a whole lot.
It doesn’t like attachments at all.
• Copilot
• Same as Co­Pilot
• Github Copilot, Chat GPT
• I have started using the normal chatGPT now since I think it gives better responses.
the formatting and content is better. I used to only use the AI assistant, but after
seeing my classmates use chatGPT and how good the results are I have started
using it as well.
• internally i only use copilot and mostly for coding while the assistant more for general
information, grammar checks or branstorming
77
==PAGE:86==
• copilot for code the assistant can lack contest it would be annoying to upload all the
files and to big
• ­
• ­
• I mainly use copilot in VSCode. Although I do use internal AI, for searching up
information.
• i use it only for work
• other ai tools i am not allowed to use at work, only copilot that i use mostly for the
code since it is integrated within vsc
• copilot is much better for my daily work
• ­
What specific tasks do you find the AI platform most helpful for?
• Proof­reading text ­ mostly helping me to phrase things concisely and in a different
tone of voice.
• I find it helpful to look over work I’ve done or to ask clarifying questions.
• Content generation.
• Ideation and coding
• Document summarisation. Sparring about ideas.
• everything AI is superior on.
• Any menial tasks like formatting, finding typo errors, suggestion of ideas
• Common simple tasks, with a big emphasis on common. Some coding in python, sql
commands making simple tests, documenting code. It reduced the repetitiveness
of some work.
• coding tasks
• It helps me to code faster, implement stuff that I would never spend energy on im­
plementing, or something that has a high entry barrier. It also speeds up my proto­
typing.
• Help debugging errors
• Rewriting, Asking not to complex questions
• Work related tasks ­ anything related to internal data or internal specific solutions,
which I cannot use other AIs for. ­ Resolving coding issues, or generating agendas
• Answering quick questions covering small gaps in my understanding so I can stay
in flow state rather than spending a long time googling or researching for answers.
• Coding tasks
• Code or support questions.
• specific code boilerplating and quick review of long code
• I mainly use if for coding related issues or to reformulate emails
78
==PAGE:87==
• Rephrasing, error checking
• Coding and text generating tasks.
• Text analysis and rubber­ducking
• grammar correction, writing text, create a framework to start coding, spot syntax
error in my code
• I use the AI platform to help refine my SQL code. I also used the LLM API for my
thesis embeddings which was very helpful.
• Discussing issues and seeking direction setting to various areas
• Image and non code solutions
• rephrasing, generate docs, images or some conversations, getting some inspiration
for a certain topic
• Automating simple recurring tasks, useful as a rubber duckie, helping to debug,
suggesting new approaches, generating test data, analyzing messy data e.g. ques­
tionnaire results, getting me unstuck
• Ive only used it as a replacement for ChatGPT, for a gimmick or the odd image
generation for announcements
• Error messages
• handling sensitive data
• Chat
• Getting myself a head start to write basic template or function.
• Explaining unkown codes.
• as a ”tutor” to explain things.
• writing and brainstorming
• Searching for information. Explanations for certain topics.
• writing text ­ correct text ­ make docs looks more professional
• make my writing better
Do you have suggestions for improving the AI assistant to better support your daily
work?
• This is strictly UI focused, but it would be nice if I could access my chat history more
easily! I like to return to previous chats somewhat regularly.
• I think if answers were given more in sections that were clearly distinct, and that
went into depth in each individual section.
• Embed COmpany­specific content so people can ask Company­specific questions.
• If we can add more internal context it will be great. At the moment it doesn’t not
much about The Company.
• MCP with internal Data and all internal AMMA APIs would make it productivity boost
• I think it’s great enough right now
79
==PAGE:88==
• Remove the like bottom when there’s no dislike bottom. Keep on improving. Con­
sider adding showcases of good use of the AI assistant ­ I think there’s still use
cases I haven’t discovered potential for yet.
• please allow codefiles in the fileupload, dragging and dropping does at least not
work
• Include newer models, keep up with the industry
• Newer models, better UI/UX, easier plugin integration
• Maybe improving the visual clarity in regards to the outputs which are not just normal
text. When it ouputs code or similar formats it is not as easily readable compared
to other AI tools such as ChatGPT
• The log­in cookie is not saved in the session, thus every time it require for access.
Having gemini ai
• I’m not even sure what other features I’d find useful. When I’ve tried AI tooling
integrated with coding it’s always felt like it’s in the way and adding too many sug­
gestions to discard or undo so I just keep the AI separate from my code changes.
The AI assistant is fine for this kind of use.
• sometimes it just reloads and everything I have just written disappears ­ can be very
annoying
• Not at the moment :)
• If it would be updated more frequently and has more hands­on knowledge, that
would be awesome.
• More integrations into our systems so I can look up more internal specific information
like “what is xxx “ and make its answers less generic. Right now it feels like any other
AI model
• If integrated in vsc (like copilot) for developer would be the to go tool to use
• Get the latest models supported
• FASTER, FASTER , FASTER.... It is incredibly slow for me.
• it would be great if we can integrate with more inner data sources or info sources,
so we can use it for searching docs or answering some questions regarding our
internal resources.
• 1: When I open the AI assistant I can’t choose what model is being used. 2: Please
make it be able to access the Internet 3: Please make it so we can set a new default
model ourselves
• All in all i dont get why we try to do our own frontend, when there is companies doing
that stuff? Why not hone in where we can actually make a difference? Get context
the internal context The Company.
• It would be much more convenient if I could paste images or screenshots directly
into the chat, without having to save and upload them first.
• it would be nice to have it integrated within The Company
80
==PAGE:89==
Table A.1: Overview of Literature Sources and How They Were Identified
Citation Key
How It Was Found
[1]
Read independently in 2023
[2]
Recommended by a peer
[3]
Read independently after partial exposure in 2024
[4]
Introduced in an AI course and later researched indepen­
dently
[5]
Introduced in an AI course and followed up with further read­
ing
[6]
Recommended by a peer
[7]
Recommended by a peer
[8]
Introduced during DTU’s Co­creation and Creativity course
[9]
Recommended by a peer
[10]
DTU
Findit
search:
AI-driven AND thematic AND
analysis
[26]
Recommended by a peer
[41]
Recommended by a peer
[12]
Found while reading about the Pacing Problem
[20]
Same DTU Findit search as above
[21]
DTU Findit search:
Impact AND of AND AI AND on AND
the AND Workplace
[22]
Same DTU Findit search as above
[23]
Same DTU Findit search as above
[24]
Same DTU Findit search as above
[25]
Recommended by a peer
[42]
Recommended by a peer
[11]
Recommended by a peer
[30]
Found via a LinkedIn article; explored on Google Scholar
[31]
Recommended by a peer
[32]
DTU Findit search: Survey AND Research AND Methods
[33]
Research
Gate:
Artificial intellicence AND
trasparency AND decision-making
[34]
Recommended by a peer
[35]
Recommended by a peer
[36]
Recommended by a peer
[37]
Recommended by a peer
[39]
Recommended by a peer
[40]
Recommended by a peer
[43]
Mentioned at work; located using DTU Findit (Automating
AND inequality AND Eubanks)
[44]
Found during Responsible AI course
81
==PAGE:90==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 321 room 132
DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
