==PAGE:1==
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty
Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic
Inflammation
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Source Zhan et al. (2022) Potential of gut-derived short-chain fatty acids to control enteric pathogens.
Front. Microbiol.1
 
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section of Bioinformatics, Department of
Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
Internal Supervisor: Ole Lund
Section for Bioinformatics, Department of Health and Technology, Technical University of Den-
mark, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Internal Supervisor: Parvaneh Ebrahimi
Section for Bioinformatics, Department of Health and Technology, Technical University of Den-
mark, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark
External Supervisor: Morten Arendt Rasmussem
Food Microbiology, Gut Health, and Fermentation, Department of Food Science, University of
Copenhagen, 1958 Frederiksberg C, Denmark
Katrine Meldgård - s204513
Signature
Date
ii
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
Kiri
thi
2025 07 30
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my gratitude to my internal supervisors Parvaneh Ebrahimi, for providing
an initial draft for the project and the data for it, as well as for the initial supervision in the project
start, and Ole Lund for the continuous feedback throughout the process. I would also like to thank
my external supervisor Morten Arendt Rasmussen for taking up the supervision and helping me
find a suitable direction as the project evolved.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Metabolic disorders such as type II diabetes, hypertension, and obesity are some of the most press-
ing health issues in the 21st century, and understanding the factors influencing them is crucial to
design proper intervention and treatment. Increasing evidence shows the microbiome’s and its
metabolites’, particularly short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), role in modulating metabolic and in-
flammatory responses. This thesis investigated the association between faecal SCFAs and plasma
metabolic markers under fasting and postprandial conditions in a cohort of 18 year olds, strati-
fied by sex and by menstrual phase for females. Comparative analysis of the faecal metabolome
showed no significant sex-based differences, suggesting similar dietary habits. Fasting plasma
metabolic markers revealed elevated HDL and several lipid markers in females, whereas males
showed increased levels of specific amino acids. Within female participants, the follicular phase
was characterized by heightened levels of glycerides and fatty acids. Postprandial dynamics re-
vealed distinct metabolic curves and notable variation between sexes. Associations between faecal
SCFAs and metabolic markers were modelled using partial least squares (PLS) and tested for statis-
tical significance using permutation testing. Stratifying females by menstrual phase improved the
predictive accuracy to be equal or surpass male models. In fasting females, stratification improved
detection of significant associations, while a different set of markers emerged postprandially.
A few of the significant plasma metabolic markers related to glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism,
and systemic inflammation were further analysed. SCFAs’ association with glucose metabolism
was only seen in females, showing positive association to fasting glucose and citrate in contrast
to existing literature and a negative association to postprandial lactate. Sex specific SCFA effects
were observed in lipid metabolism, showing as opposing association with total free cholesterol
and a positive association to LDL size in females postprandially. Lastly, the inflammatory marker
GlycA showed different associations to SCFAs in fasting and postprandial states, as seen in the
follicular phase and males respectively, underscoring their complex immunomodulatory abilities.
These findings emphasise SCFAs’ role in conditioning metabolic homeostasis and postprandial
responses, while highlighting how sex hormones and menstrual cycle dynamics may modulate
these effects. Incorporating this into metabolic analyses is therefore crucial for uncovering hidden
biological signals and advancing personalised approaches to diagnostics and treatment.
iv
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Human metabolism and metabolic states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Gut regulating human metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Research objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methods
6
2.1
Sample collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Data analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Results
10
3.1
Faecal metabolome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Fasting metabolome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Postprandial metabolome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
PLS regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Discussion
22
4.1
Faecal metabolome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Plasma metabolome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Association of SCFAs to human metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Glucose metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Lipid metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Systemic inflammation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Conclusion
31
A Figure: Distribution of fasting metabolites
42
B
Table: Variable names and units
44
C Figure: Baseline corrected postprandial curves
48
D PLS loadings for each metabolite
49
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
v
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Metabolic disorders such as type II diabetes (T2D), hypertension, and obesity rank among the most
significant health challenges of the 21st century and serve as key risk factors to cardiovascular dis-
ease (CVD), the world’s leading cause of illness and death. In 2021, 506 million people globally
were affected by T2D resulting in 75 million disability adjusted life years (DALYs) and DALYs for
hypertension and obesity, were 226 million and 129 million respectively, with obesity defined by a
body mass index (BMI) above 30.2 Based on data from 1990 to 2021, the burden of these metabolic
disorders continues to increase, with T2D and obesity increasing at an accelerated rate while the
rate of increase for hypertension is slowing.3 Some of the life style risk factors for these disorders
include diet, physical activity, smoking,4,5 and alcohol consumption,6 while the biological risk fac-
tors include chronic inflammation, insulin resistance, as well as the combination of elevated low
density lipoprotein (LDL) particles levels and lowered high density lipoprotein (HDL) particle lev-
els.7 These years, a great effort is being put into understanding these disorders further and new
biomarkers for early risk assessment and prevention are being discovered. While these disorders
are typically found in adults, the metabolic changes leading up to these occur much earlier. Some
of the biomarkers to look out for include cholesterol and its different subtypes in conjunction with
lipoproteins,8 lipoproteins themselves and their composite elements, as well as systemic inflam-
mation,8,9 which may be evaluated by glycoprotein acetyls (GlycA).9 This biomarker measures
the levels and complexity of the oligosaccharide chain present in N-glycosylated proteins, which
are the result of signalling from pro-inflammatory cytokines.10 A comprehensive understanding
of the biological mechanisms underpinning human metabolism is therefore pivotal, as it provides
critical insights into how systemic metabolic imbalances emerge and contribute to the onset of
these increasingly prevalent disorders.
1.1
Human metabolism and metabolic states
The human metabolism is a tightly regulated system that maintains energy homeostasis in order to
provide a continuous supply of energy to the cells, ensuring that metabolic demands are met under
various physiological conditions. The energy that fuels this system comes from the digestion of
food which is then absorbed as glucose, lipids, or amino acids. In order to sustain normal bodily
function even when no energy enters the system, the body stores excess energy when possible in
order to draw on these reserves when energy levels are insufficient. These states are known as the
fed state (absorptive, excess of energy) and fasting state(postabsorptive, insuffient energy).11
The central metabolite in the circulating energy supply is glucose, which cells oxidise to gain ATP.
In the fed state, excess glucose is converted to glycogen by glycogenesis with some being stored
in the peripheral cells and larger amounts being stored in the liver, thereby serving as an extra
glucose buffer. This process is reversed by glycogenolysis in the fasting state. Once these stores
are depleted, gluconeogenesis is activated which will obtain glucose from other sources like lactate,
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
1
==PAGE:7==
glycerol, and amino acids. Lipids, primarily triglycerides (TG), act as a longer term storage and are
located in adipose tissue. While dietary lipids mostly go directly to these stores, excess of energy
sources like carbohydrates can be converted to fatty acids in the liver through lipogenesis and are
then stored as TG. In the fasting state, lipids can be converted to glycerol and fatty acids through
lipolysis, of which fatty acids can be oxidised to yield acetyl-CoA, which can enter the citric acid
cycle to produce ATP.11
Glucose, being the main source of energy, is the primary indicator for the regulatory system on the
energy status and is involved in regulating the balance between insulin and glucagon, two of the
main hormones driving the metabolic states. Increased glucose levels signal that there is excess
energy to the pancreas, which will then secrete insulin, though amino acids and fatty acids may also
increase insulin secretion. Insulin is taken up by the tissues through binding to the insulin receptors
on the cell surface and promotes an anabolic state where the synthesis of energy stores is increased
and the breakdown of these stores is decreased. The liver assumes a central regulatory role by
capturing nearly 70% of insulin immediately following secretion. Glucagon has the opposite ef-
fect of glucose, and is suppressed under high glucose conditions. Its role is to increase glucose
concentrations, which is primarily done by affecting metabolic pathways in the liver, though the
immediate uptake is less than for insulin. Its effect is mediated through binding to the G-protein
couple receptor (GPCR) the glucagon receptor.11
As eluded to in the above sections, the liver plays a special role in the metabolic system. Besides
acting as a buffer for rapid adaption to changes in glucose levels, the liver also has a role in lipid
synthesis and fatty acid oxidation. The liver does not typically have a large reserve of lipids, so
the lipids generated in the liver are transported to other tissues. To ensure solubility in the blood,
the lipids, of which the majority are triglycerides, are packaged into complexes known as very
low density lipoproteins (VLDL), along with cholesterol and apolipoprotein B. These are secreted
by the liver to the circulation where they are subject to lipolysis by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) in
capillary beds thereby delivering triglycerides to the tissue. Not all triglycerides are released at
one time, and thus the VLDL particle will keep circulating, and the lipid storage at the core of
the particle will be gradually reduced resulting in the particle becoming denser. At some point the
particle becomes eligible for uptake by the liver or other tissues by the LDL-receptor resulting in
delivery of cholesterol to the tissue. If not absorbed, the VLDL particle keeps circulating until
it eventually becomes low density protein (LDL), mainly consisting of a shell of phospholipids
and cholesterol as well as apolipoprotein B. The expression of the LDL-receptor producing genes
are regulated by the SCAP-SREBP-2 system such that the synthesis is suppressed when cellular
cholesterol is high. High density lipoprotein (HDL) removes excess cholesterol in two ways. They
obtain excess cholesterol from cells through interaction with them, and they collect excess surface
material released by lipolysis by LPL. This may be delivered to the liver, where it can leave the
body through the bile either as cholesterol itself or after conversion to bile acid, or by excretion
via the small intestine through the trans-intestinal cholesterol efflux (TICE) pathway, the former
of which seems to be the major pathway.11
2
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:8==
Though the metabolic pathways are the same for both males and females, the regulation of them is
different due to the hormonal differences which includes increased levels of oestrogen and proges-
terone for females and androgens for males. These sex hormones exert distinct modulatory effects
on glucose and lipid metabolism, energy expenditure, and mitochondrial function, contributing to
sex-specific metabolic phenotypes. Females have a higher percentage of body fat, in particular
subcutaneous adipose tissue while males have greater amounts of muscle mass. During exercise,
preferential substrate utilisation for lipids over carbohydrates and lower muscle glycogen depletion
has been attributed to oestrogen in females.12 Complicating these differences further, the oestro-
gen and progesterone levels in females change throughout the menstrual cycle, typically lasting
between 25 to 30 days. The two main phases of the menstrual cycle is the follicular (before ovula-
tion) and luteal phase (after ovulation), and are characterised by increased levels of oestrogen and
progesterone respectively. If the egg matured from ovulation has not been fertilised and implanted
into the uterine lining, the progesterone levels will drop, kickstarting menses and the follicular
phase, by which the cycle repeats itself.13
While these hormonal changes give rise a handful of different physiological and mental symp-
toms,14,15 there are particular changes pertaining to metabolism. One of the physiological symp-
toms observed is the rise in basal body temperature during the luteal, compared to follicular phase,
a symptom that has been studied by Zhang et al.16 They observed that the increased tempera-
ture can be attributed to increased energy expenditure and suppressed heat dissipation, eluding to
changes in metabolic activity across the cycle. This observation is supported by the finding that
several metabolites change over the course of the cycle, as reported by Draper et al.17 208 of 397
metabolites significantly change across the different phases like amino acids, glucose, and lipid
levels being decreased in the luteal phase. In addition to the menstrual phases affecting the blood
metabolites, Julia Debik et al. found that the mere presence of a regular cycle is also attributable
to the metabolic variation found in females.18
1.2
Gut regulating human metabolism
In recent years, it is becoming more apparent that the systemic metabolism is not only regulated
by the host, but also by the gut microbiome. The bidirectional communication between the gut and
brain and its implications for health and disease has been well established, with microbiome dys-
biosis being associated with several diseases including metabolic ones.19 More recently, emerging
research has introduced the liver as an integral component of this communication network, lead-
ing to the conceptualization of the gut–liver–brain axis (GLBA). Given the liver’s pivotal roles in
metabolic regulation and signal transduction, the GLBA offers a framework for understanding the
interplay between the gut microbiota and host metabolism. Central to this axis are microbially de-
rived metabolites, which function as biochemical mediators by transiting from the gut lumen into
systemic circulation. Although the chemical identity and receptor-binding capabilities of several of
these metabolites are increasingly understood, their broader impact on host metabolic homeostasis
remains under active investigation.20
The placement of the gut microbiome in the gastrointestinal tract means that they come into contact
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
3
==PAGE:9==
with the host diet and use these for their own metabolism with corresponding microbial metabolites
being released from these processes. These microbial metabolites form the faecal metabolome,
which besides the diet is largely explained by the microbial composition (∼68%) though it is
also to a lesser extend explained by the host genetics (∼19%).21 Alterations in the microbiome
compositions has been associated with several metabolic diseases, which is likely also because of
the changes in the faecal metabolome. A major component forming the microbial composition and
the faecal metabolome is habitual dietary intake. While short term dietary intervention changes the
gut microbiome already after 24-48 hours, the effect is gone once the intervention stops.22 Inter-
estingly, the faecal metabolome has been shown to be more stable over time than the microbiome.
Over a one-month period the faecal metabolome showed larger between individual variability and
a relatively lower within individual variability.23 This suggests that while the microbial compo-
sition may fluctuate, its core functional output reflected in the faecal metabolome remains stable
over time, and it might therefore be relevant to use these when investigating the microbiomes affect
on diseases.
The metabolites produced by the microbiome can roughly be divided in three categories.
1)
Metabolites produced directly from the host diet like short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), 2) metabo-
lites produced from host secreted products like secondary bile acids, and 3) metabolites produced
de novo. Secondary bile acids are one of the major metabolites of the microbiome. Primary bile
acids are produced in the liver and conjugated to glycine, then secreted to the small intestine. Here,
they are deconjugated by gut bacteria, forming secondary bile acids. The microbiome also plays a
role in the synthesis and degradation of the essential amino acid tryptophan. Tryptophan synthesis
also produces serotonin, while its degradation can lead to a variety of metabolites such as indole
derivatives, some of which have the ability to modulate tumorigenesis and immunity.24
Of the metabolic products, SCFAs especially have garnered attention for having a regulatory role
on the host metabolism. SCFAs have been shown to have multiple effects on host and can act
both as an energy source and as a signalling molecule. For instance, they are able to regulate im-
mune response and metabolism, as well as communicate with the central nervous system and are
highlighted as essential communicators in the gut-brain axis.25 They are the product of microbial
fermentation of dietary fibre in the gut, primarily in the colon, and may also be produced by amino
acid metabolism, with some organisms being able to convert lactate to SCFAs. The main SCFAs
are acetate, propionate, and butyrate containing 2, 3, and 4 carbon respectively and are found in the
molar ratio 60:20:20.24 They are taken up by colonocytes primarily by the H+ dependent monocar-
boxylate transporters (MCTs) or sodium dependent monocarboxylate transporters (SMCTs). Here,
they may be metabolised directly for energy or transported to the portal vein where a large part is
used as substrates for energy metabolism in the liver except for acetate. Therefore, only a small part
of the microbially derived SCFAs reach the systemic circulation and tissues26 and the correlation
between faecal and circulating SCFAs is low.27 Their binding to the G-protein-coupled receptors
GPR43 and GPR41 has been identified as a key mediator in the regulatory effects of SCFAs. These
receptors are expressed in several tissues including adipose tissue, the liver, muscle tissue, and the
4
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:10==
gastrointestinal tract. Activation of these receptors leads to tissue specific effect. In adipocytes
composing the adipose tissue they take part in regulation of adipogenesis and insulin sensitivity, in
hepatocytes of the liver they seem to be involved in lipid metabolism, and in muscle fibres GPR41
are involved in glucose uptake and insulin sensitivity while GPR43 induces intracellular calcium
influx thereby affecting cell proliferation of the muscle tissue. In the gastrointestinal tract these
receptors are expressed on enteroendocrine cells, which produces hormones and peptides for gut
regulation, as well as other cell types like immune, epithelial, and smooth muscle cells, implicating
the integral part SCFAs have in host physiology.28
1.3
Research objective
The objective of this thesis is to study the association between faecal SCFAs and plasma metabolic
markers under fasting and postprandial conditions in a cohort of 18 year olds. For this, blood
samples collected after an overnight fast and during a mixed-macronutrient challenge will be used
to reflect the fasting and postprandial conditions, as well as faecal samples. While the faecal
and blood samples are not paired, the assumption that the faecal metabolome remains stable over
time23 allows for the study of this relationship. The study design will therefore reflect how stable
faecal SCFA levels may condition systemic metabolic homeostasis and regulation, particularly in
response to nutrient intake. When interpreting the results, it is important to keep in mind that the
faecal metabolome represents the non-absorbed metabolites and that they correlate poorly with
circulating levels.27 The direct effect on peripheral tissue is therefore limited such as acting as
energy substrate, though previous conditioning may have affected receptor expression or other
tissue modelling.
The study will employ statistical testing and correlation analyses to describe the different data
types, in order to get an understanding of the data, and will explore what differences there are be-
tween males and females, as well as between the menstrual phases for females. Partial least squares
(PLS) regression will then be used to model the relationship between the faecal metabolome and
each of the plasma metabolites, for the fasting and postprandial state respectively. These models
will be tested for statistical significance using permutation testing. This analysis will be done on
four stratifications: all males, all females, females in the follicular phase, and females in the luteal
phase. An explorative approach will be taken for the postprandial data when choosing the time-
point for analysis, in order to allow different timepoints for the metabolic markers at the different
stratifications. In the following chapters, the sample collection and methodology of the analyses
will be described in further detail. The results will provide an overview of the baseline character-
istics of the cohort in terms of anthropometrics and life style habits, after which the metabolome
datasets will be characterised in terms of metabolite concentrations, sexual differences, menstrual
phase differences, and correlation between the metabolic markers where applicable. Then, an
overview of the regression models will be presented in terms of model performance and signif-
icance of metabolic markers for the different stratifications. Lastly, the regression loadings of a
few metabolic markers will be used to analyse the faecal SCFAs effect on the plasma metabolome
and the findings will be contextualised to existing literature.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
5
==PAGE:11==
2
Methods
2.1
Sample collection
The data originates from the Copenhagen Prospective Study on Asthma in Childhood COP-
SAC2000 cohort, a prospective mother-child cohort of children born to asthmatic mothers. The
cohort consists of 411 individuals, who were recruited during pregnancy and followed regularly
throughout their childhood. As part of the follow-up visit at 18 years of age, the participants had
faecal samples collected, had fasting blood samples drawn, and were asked to participate in a meal
challenge.29
The meal challenge was done after an overnight fasting and consisted of a drink containing 60
g palm olein, 75 g glucose, and 20 g dairy protein in a water based drink of a total of 400 mL,
adjusted for the age, sex and height of the participants. Blood samples were then taken at eight
timepoints (15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 150, and 240 min) after the meal challenge. The blood samples
were kept on ice until separation into plasma within 4 hours, after which they were stored at -
80°C. The blood samples were analysed with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
using the Nightingale Blood Biomarker Analysis.30 This provides a total of 249 biomarkers of
lipoprotein lipids, fatty acids, and small molecules related to health and disease.31 For this thesis,
markers pertaining to relative lipoprotein to lipid concentrations and lipoprotein subclasses are not
included resulting in a total of 80 markers. Additionally, the fasting samples were analysed for
progesterone.29 The faecal samples were collected at home, and sent to the COPSAC research
unit, where they were stored at -80 °C. These were also analysed using NMR providing absolute
quantification.32 The number of participants that both participated in the meal challenged, and
also had faecal samples were 157. 2 of these participants were removed from the study as they had
abnormally high acetate levels at fasting.
2.2
Data analysis
To account for the different water content in the faecal matter, the faecal metabolome was nor-
malised using probabilistic quotient normalisation (PQN),33 using 12 control samples as the ref-
erence spectrum. The samples were first normalised to a total intensity of 1, after which the ratio
(quotient) between the observed value and the reference was calculated between each variable and
the corresponding variable in the reference spectrum. Each sample was then divided by the median
of all quotients for the sample, which is considered the most probable dilution factor.
Females were classified into the follicular or luteal phase of the menstrual cycle using progesterone
concentration. Progesterone levels in the follicular phase are typically below 1 ng/mL and start
rising in the late follicular phase.34 A conservative threshold of 0.7 ng/mL was used to divide the
females, such that progesterone concentrations ≤0.7 ng/mL were categorised as in the follicular
phase and females with progesterone levels > 0.7 were categorised as luteal phase. 5 females did
6
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:12==
not have their progesterone concentration measured and are not included in analyses specific to
the menstrual phase.
To prepare the postprandial data for analysis, all values were baseline corrected by subtracting the
fasting levels from the postprandial levels for each metabolic marker respectively, such that the
postprandial curve for each metabolic markers starts at 0. Each timepoint was then summarised us-
ing incremental area under the curve (iAUC), as illustrated in figure 2.1. Areas above 0 (red) count
positively towards the iAUC, while negative areas (blue) count negatively towards the iAUC. Each
time point was summarised using the AUC from fasting (timepoint 0) to the respective timepoint.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the incremental area under the curve (iAUC). Positive areas,
coloured red, count positively towards the iAUC, while negative areas, coloured blue, count
negatively towards the iAUC. Each timepoint is integrated from the fasting timepoint, i.e.
iAUC 120min is integrated from 0 to 2 hours (dotted line) and iAUC 240min is integrated
from 0 to 4 hours (solid line).
To describe the cohort, summary statistics of a few anthropometric markers, insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR), and two lifestyle factors were made. Numerical variables were summarised using
the median, first quartile, and third quartile while categorical variables were summarised with the
number (n) and percent of participants in the category. Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to test
differences between the sexes. This is a non-parametric test that combines the values of both groups
and ranks the observations based on their value, with the smallest value having the lowest rank (1)
and the highest value having the greatest rank (total number of observations). The sum of rankings
for the group containing the fewest observations is then used to obtain a p-value.35
For the faecal and fasting metabolome respectively, the spearman correlation coefficient between
the metabolites was calculated, to identify the relationship between the metabolites. For illustra-
tion purposes, the correlation coefficients were organised into a matrix, and sorted using hierarcical
clustering with the euclidean distance. The faecal and fasting metabolome were tested for differ-
ences between the sexes using Wilcoxon rank sum test, which was also used to test the difference
between the menstrual phases in the fasting metabolome. P-values below 0.05 were considered
significant. In addition to reporting unadjusted results, false discovery rate (FDR) adjustment was
applied to the fasting metabolome. An FDR rate of 0.05 was used to identify which metabolites
remained significant after multiple testing adjustment. Principal component analysis (PCA) was
used to visualise the fasting dataset, which decomposes the data into a set of latent components
(principal components) chosen iteratively to maximise the variation of the dataset.36
The method used to model the association between the faecal metabolome with the plasma
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
7
==PAGE:13==
metabolome is partial least squared (PLS) regression, in particular PLS1. PLS is a generalisa-
tion of multiple linear regression particularly attractive for its ability to handle highly correlated
and noisy data.37 The model gets its name from the original algorithm, the nonlinear iterative
partial least squares (NIPALS), and works by extracting a set of latent variables or components
that maximises the covariance between the predictor and response variable. When extended to
regression problems, these latent variables are then used as predictors. Considering X (n × N) as
a matrix of predictor variables (i.e. faecal metabolites) and Y (n × M) as a matrix of response
variables (i.e. plasma metabolites), PLS decomposes these matrices as
X = TPT + E
(2.1)
Y = UQT + F
(2.2)
where T and U (n × p) are the score matrices of the p latent variables extracted from X and Y
respectively, P (N × p) and Q (M × p) are the loading matrices explaining how the original
variables relate to the latent components, and E (n × N) and F (n × M) are residual matrices
containing variance in X and Y which is not explained by the latent variables. PLS seeks to find
vectors w and c such that the covariance between the projected score t = Xw and u = Yc is
maximised as illustrated below.38
[cov(t, u)]2 = [cov(Xw, Yc)]2 = max|r|=|s|=1[cov(Xr, Ys)]2
(2.3)
The variation PLS1 only uses one variable as Y instead of the whole dataset, which simplifies the
optimisation to
max|w|=1[cov(Xw, y)]2
(2.4)
In this study, one PLS1 model was made for each of the plasma metabolic markers as outcome
using all the faecal metabolites as explanatory variables. This was done for each timepoint, i.e.
at fasting and for each of the postprandial timepoints. The models were fitted using 10 fold cross
validation to select the optimal number of latent variables with the maximum number of variables
set to 10, using root mean square error (RMSE) as evaluation metric. Lastly the models were tested
for significance using permutation test (n=1000) using the R2 value as test statistic. This tests the
obtained R2 value of the model against the null hypothesis, by first producing a null distribution
of randomly expected R2 values (R2
perm), which is done by randomly sampling a new y variable
from the original y, resulting in a random match of y values to the observations in X. This is
then repeated, in this case 1000 times. The significance (p-value) of the original model is then
calculated as the number of R2
perm greater than R2 divided by the total number of permutations, as
also illustrated below.39
p-value =
! R2
perm > R2
n(R2perm)
(2.5)
Models with a p-value below 0.05 were considered significant, and the PLS loadings were used
to assess SCFAs effect on the plasma metabolites. To only have one model representing the post-
prandial data, in case of more than one significant postprandial model for the same metabolite
8
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:14==
and stratification, the model with the highest R2 value was chosen. When reporting the faecal
metabolome effect, for models with multiple components, the PLS loading was summarised us-
ing the weighted sum of all components using the percent of variation explained by each of the
components as weights.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
9
==PAGE:15==
3
Results
A total number 157 individuals from the 18 year visit delivered faecal samples, had fasting blood
samples drawn, and participated in the meal challenge. Two of these were excluded as they ex-
hibited markedly higher acetate concentrations at fasting than the rest of the participants, resulting
in a total of 155 individuals for further analysis (89 females and 66 males). 57 of the females
were in the follicular phase and 27 were in the luteal phase, with 5 females missing progesterone
measurements. To evaluate the general health state of the participants, baseline characteristics of
a few anthropometrics and lifestyle habits have been summarised and evaluated for sex related
differences.
Characteristic
n
Female
(n = 89)1
Male
(n = 66)1
p-value2
BMI
155
21.8 (19.6, 24.6)
22.8 (20.8, 25.7)
0.048
Fat %
147
28 (24, 31)
17 (14, 23)
<0.001
Waist/Hip
155
0.88 (0.82, 0.95)
0.94 (0.91, 0.96)
<0.001
Waist/Height
155
46 (42, 50)
44 (42, 48)
0.2
HOMAIR
145
2.92 (1.87, 3.81)
2.25 (1.51, 3.29)
0.030
Average cigarettes per week
36
0.2
<10
10 (48%)
12 (80%)
10-34
8 (38%)
3 (20%)
>34
3 (14.3%)
0 (0%)
Alcohol frequency
147
0.9
2-3 per. week
7 (8.6%)
5 (7.6%)
2-4 per. month
44 (54%)
37 (56%)
Max once monthly
30 (37%)
23 (35%)
Never
0 (0%)
1 (1.5%)
Table 3.1: Baseline characteristics of the included participants. 1Median (Q1,Q3); n(%),
2Wilcoxon rank sum test.
The BMI of the majority of the participants is within the 20-25 range and they are therefore not
considered obese by WHOs standards, with males displaying higher BMI than females. More
pronounced sexual differences were observed for some of the other anthropometrics. Females
have a higher fat percentage than males as well as a lower waist to hip ratio, illustrating that the
additional fat is stored in the hip area as opposed to abdominal area. Additionally, the female
participants exhibited higher insulin resistance than males. No differences were observed between
the sexes in terms of smoking and alcohol consumption.
10
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:16==
3.1
Faecal metabolome
The faecal samples were analysed with NMR providing a dataset of 31 metabolites. These include
13 amino acids, 5 SCFAs, 4 organic acids, 2 carbohydrates (glucose and galactose), 1 nucleotide
(uracil) along with the metabolites ethanol, acetone, trimethylamine, methanol, and formate. To
account for differences in water content between the samples, the values were normalised using
PQN normalisation. As part of understanding the relationship between these metabolites, the dis-
tribution of their values are shown in figure 3.1. The most abundant metabolites are the three main
SCFAs acetate, propionate, and butyrate, followed by essential amino acids (isoleucine), the larger
SCFAs valerate and isovalerate, and the branched chain amino acids valine and leucine. Testing
for sexual differences for each of the metabolites revealed that there are no sexual differences.
Figure 3.1: Distribution of the normalised concentrations of the faecal metabolites.
The metabolite concentrations were normalised using probabilistic quotient normalisation
(PQN).
Next, the relationships between the metabolites were investigated by calculating the correlation
coefficients, the result of which can be seen in figure 3.2, where the metabolites have been or-
ganised using hierarchical clustering on the correlation coefficients. There are two major groups
of positive correlation which can be found in the upper left and bottom right corner. The upper
corner consists of SCFAs, especially acetate, propionate, and butyrate, while the bottom corner
mainly consists of amino acids. Particularly the branched chain amino acids show a high positive
correlation to each other. Besides amino acids, lactate also has a positive correlation to this cluster.
These two corners of SCFAs and amino acids have a negative correlation to each other. Many of
the other metabolic relationships have a weaker correlation coefficient.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.2: Correlation matrix of the faecal metabolites. Correlation coefficients were cal-
culated using Spearman correlation. The metabolites are ordered using hierarchical clus-
tering on the correlation coefficients.
3.2
Fasting metabolome
The data from the fasting metabolome contains 80 metabolic markers of both metabolite concen-
trations and metabolic ratios. These consist of 28 markers related to lipids, of which 11 cover
cholesterol and free cholesterol markers, 18 markers relating to fatty acids and fatty acid ratios,
10 lipoprotein and apoliprotein markers, 10 amino acids, 5 glycolysis related metabolites, 4 mark-
ers of ketone bodies, 2 markers for fluid balance, and 1 marker for inflammation, namely GlycA.
These metabolic markers display a high degree of collinearity as can be seen from the correlation
matrix in figure 3.3, which is unsurprising as many of them are slightly different variations of the
same complex (as seen for the lipoproteins) or are involved in the same metabolic pathways. This
correlation matrix has been organised with hierarchical clustering, revealing distinct clusters of
positively correlated metabolites.
Particularly in the bottom right, there are large clusters of metabolic markers, covering about half of
the markers. It particularly concerns VLDL, LDL, and lipid markers, and illustrates that the dataset
is overrepresented by these species over other metabolic categories. While this corner can broadly
be seen as a big cluster of VLDL, LDL, and lipid markers, they also form distinct subclusters.
Additionally, the HDL markers (with the exception of HDL-TG) are positively correlated forming
a distinct cluster, as does BCAA and the top left cluster of PUFA ratio and omega-6 %. Notable
relationships between clusters include the negative relationship between the upper cluster of PUFA
ratios and omega-6 % to the VLDL cluster, as well as between the HDL cluster and MUFA %, the
ratio of triglycerides to phosphoglycerides (TG/PG), and VLDL size.
12
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.3: Correlation matrix of the fasting metabolites. Correlation coefficients were
calculated using Spearman correlation. The metabolites are ordered using hierarchical clus-
tering on the correlation coefficients.
Testing for sexual differences for the fasting metabolic markers show that 43 of the markers ( 50%)
are significantly different between the sexes, and 40 markers are significant even after correcting
for multiple testing. A PCA was made to illustrate the fasting metabolome of which the loadings
and scores on the first two principal components (PCs) can be seen in figure 3.4. The metabolites
have been coloured according the p-value of the Wilcoxon rank sum test for sexual differences and
markers that are significant after multiple testing correction have been marked with an asterisk.
Individual plots of the concentrations for each of the markers can be found in appendix A and a
list of abbreviations of the markers can be found in appendix B.
The metabolites’ placement along the first two PCs show a clear separation between the markers
that are significantly different between males and females. The separation is along the diagonal be-
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
13
==PAGE:19==
tween pyruvate and glucose, such that the group of metabolites in the upper left corner have higher
levels in females, while markers in the bottom right have higher levels in males. The metabolites
with the most significant increase in females (p-value < 0.001) include most of the HDL related
markers as well as lipids, fatty acids, and glycerides, along with pyruvate. For males, the metabo-
lites with the most significant increase are amino acids, particularly branched chain amino acids,
along with albumin and creatinine, VLDL size, and the ratio of triglycerides to phosphoglycerides.
Some of the less significant markers, are the different complexes of TG and lipoproteins, with
females having higher levels of HDL-TG and LDL-TG and males having higher levels of VLDL-
TG. Males also have higher levels of glucose, while females have higher levels of PUFA, total
free cholesterol (total-FC), total lipids in lipoprotein particles (total-L), LDL size and the ratio of
linoleic acid to total fatty acids (LA %).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: PCA (a) loadings and (b) scores of the fasting metabolome. (a) Metabolites are
coloured according to the p-value of a Wilcoxon rank sum test of the difference between
sexes. (b) PCA scores coloured according to sex.
14
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:20==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: PCA (a) loadings and (b) scores of the fasting metabolome. (a) Metabolites are
coloured according to the p-value of a Wilcoxon rank sum test of the difference between
menstrual phases. (b) PCA scores coloured according to menstrual phase.
Differences in the metabolic markers between the menstrual phases were also investigated using the
same methods as used for testing the sexual differences. Here, 18 of the metabolic markers ( 23%)
were significantly different, though only 1 remained significant after multiple testing adjustment.
Figure 3.5 shows the same PCA as figure 3.4, though this one is coloured according to the p-value
of a Wilcoxon rank sum test of the difference between the menstrual phases. Here, a separation
along the first principal component is seen between the markers that are significantly different.
The markers with a positive value along PC1 are higher in the follicular phase, while markers with
a negative value on PC1 are higher in the luteal phase. This distinction can weakly be seen from
the score plot. Most of the significantly different markers are increased in the follicular phase and
cover glycerides and fatty acids, while the luteal phase shows increased levels of acetate, PUFA
%, omega-6 %, glutamine, and tyrosine.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
15
==PAGE:21==
When comparing the observed differences between sexes and those across menstrual phases, both
the number of statistically significant biomarkers and the magnitude of their variation are greater
between sexes. This is clear by lower p-values, which remain significant even after correction for
multiple testing. The PCA plots show that the first PC is able to separate the follicular from the
luteal phase, showing that a large source of variation in the dataset is the menstrual cycle. The
separation between males and females is achieved by the first two PCs, which also shows its great
influence on the variation in the dataset.
3.3
Postprandial metabolome
The blood samples for the postprandial metabolome were collected at 7 timepoints from 15 to
240 minutes after the participants had ingested the meal. For a few select metabolic markers, the
postprandial curves are shown in figure 3.6, all of which are adjusted for the fasting levels. The
curves for the rest of the markers can be found in appendix C.
Figure 3.6: Postprandial curves for a few biomarkers in the dataset, representing patterns
observed in the matebolic markers. All values have been corrected for fasting levels.
These metabolites have been selected to represent common patterns observed across all the
metabolic markers.
The first case of markers are glucose and amino acids, represented by
isoleucine (Ile), that spike quickly in the postprandial period, after which they gradually decrease,
with AA levels dropping to below fasting levels. For many of the VLDL complexes like VLDL
lipids (VLDL-L) and VLDL particles (VLDL-P), they also rise in the beginning and start returning
to fasting after 1-2 hours, which is also seen for HDL-TG. Then there’s the case of ketone bodies
like bOHbutrytate that rapidly drops in the beginning and slowly starts comming back to fasting
levels, roughly at the same time that the glucose levels reach fasting levels. Lastly, a few markers
like HDL-lipids (HDL-L) namely HDL-FC and HDL-PL have a wavy curve that increase towards
the end of the period, though most HDL and LDL markers share the pattern observed for LDL-L.
This is also the case for many of the fatty acids. Besides the fact that the curves have different pro-
files to each other, some of them also have slightly different trajectories between the sexes, as is
clearly seen for VLDL-P and isoleucine, where the postprandial curve is similar in the beginning,
but starts differing more towards the end.
16
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:22==
3.4
PLS regression
To study the association between the faecal metabolome and the plasma metabolome both in the
fasting and fed states, a PLS model was fitted for each of the plasma metabolites at each of the
timepoints with all the faecal metabolites as the explanatory variables. The models were stratified
by sex and additional models were made for females, stratified by menstrual phase (follicular or
luteal) for a total of 4 stratifications: all males (Males), all females (Females), females in the
follicular phase (Follicular), and females in the luteal phase (Luteal).
Figure 3.7 shows how well the models for each of the stratifications describes the response variable
using the R2 value. Looking at each of the stratifications, the performance is generally the same
across the timepoints. Comparing the performance of the Male models with the Female model
shows decreased performance for females across all timepoints. This shifts upon stratification of
females into the follicular and luteal phase, resulting in each phase performing better or on par
with the male models. The Luteal stratification has a particularly high performance, though it may
be a result of the low number of observations (27) to number of variables (32). Nevertheless, this
suggests that the two phases exhibit distinct metabolic profiles, and combining them in a single
analysis obscures the individual signals.
Figure 3.7: Distribution of R2 for fasting and postprandial PLS models. 80 models were
made for each timepoint and stratification corresponding to the number of plasma metabolic
markers analysed.
To identify which of the models had a statistically significant association, a permutation test
(n=1000) was performed for each of them on the R2 value, and only the significant models (p-
value < 0.05) are reported here. For the postprandial metabolome, in case a plasma metabolite had
significant models at several timepoints, the model with the highest R2 value was chosen. The
complete list of significant models can be found in appendix D. An overview of the metabolic
markers that were significantly modelled either in the fasting or postprandial phase for at least one
of the stratifications are shown in figure 3.8a. Each tile represents a model and are labelled with
the R2 value and coloured according to the p-value from the permutation test. Additionally, figure
3.8b shows the timepoint chosen for each of the models, including both fasting and postprandial
models.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
17
==PAGE:23==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: Overview of the significant PLS models (p-value < 0.05) based on the permu-
tation test (n=1000). For the postprandial data, in case of multiple significant models for
the same metabolite and sex, the model with the highest R2 value was chosen. (a) Overview
of significant metabolic markers for each stratification. Each tile represents a model and is
coloured according to the p-value obtained from the permutation test and is filled with the
R2 value of the model. (b) Overview of which timepoint and stratification each model is
based on, with each dot representing one model. TG: triglycerides
First of all, it is clear that there are more significant models for the postprandial metabolome than
for the fasting. Of the models of the fasting metabolome, 10 out of the 80 metabolic markers, had
a significant model across the stratifications, with histidine being the only one with a significant
model for two stratifications, namely Females and the Follicular, and is the only metabolite that is
significant when modelling all the women together. This illustrates the importance of considering
stratifying females with a menstrual cycle into their respective phases when using metabolome
18
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:24==
data. In fact, the follicular stratification is the one with the most significant markers of all the strat-
ifications, with Luteal and Males having only two markers. The stratification of females thereby
increases the number of significant markers from 1 to 8. It is also worth noting that the significant
marker found with all females combined (histidine) is also found for the follicular phase, indicating
that the females in the follicular phase may be the main driver of the effect seen when combining
follicular and luteal phase.
Another interesting point regarding the menstrual phase stratification is that the markers that are
significant in the follicular phase are distinct from the significant markers for the luteal phase. The
markers for the follicular phase are related to glycolysis, systemic inflammation, and monounsat-
urated fatty acids (MUFA), while they for the luteal phase are related to lipids and triglycerides
illustrating the hormonal effect on metabolism throughout the cycle. For males, the significant
markers at fasting are bOHbutyrate and alanine and not any of the lipid markers as seen for the
menstrual phases. However, though it for the fasting metabolome does not provide additional value
to combine the menstrual phases, it might still be relevant in some cases. As can be seen from the
significant models of the postprandial metabolome, in most instances where there is a significant
model with all females, there is not a significant model when separating them. Here it may be
the case that the metabolic activity postprandially for some of the metabolites is the same, and the
increased signal coming from combining the two groups, and thus having more observations, is
what enables the finding.
A summary of the number of significant models for the postprandial metabolome reveals that half
of the included markers, a total of 41 out of 80, are significant. These markers cover a wide range
of the metabolite categories, as can be seen in figure 3.8a, though there is an over-representation
of markers related to the lipid metabolism, reflecting the imbalance of the markers included in
the study. There does not seem to be a metabolic category from the dataset that is not significant
at all, though LDL and HDL cholesterol and variations thereof are somewhat under-represented.
Of the significant markers, 10 of them are significant across multiple stratification. These are
especially concerning cholesterol and fatty acids, particularly polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA)
ratios (PUFA/MUFA, LA %, DHA %). The timepoint for cholesterol markers is 240 for most of the
male models, while some are quite early (15) for the female models, with the exception of total-free
cholesterol (Total-FC). It might be relevant to keep this in mind when interpreting and comparing
the two stratifications, as they might represent different underlying metabolic mechanisms. For
the fatty acids, the timepoints are closer to each other for the different stratifications, though the
timepoint for the female models is earlier than for the male models in most cases.
While the significant markers for females across the three stratifications cover several of the
metabolite categories, they are concentrated on certain categories in males. Particularly cholesterol
is significant postprandially in males, including all three VLDL cholesterol markers in addition to
total remnant cholesterol and total free cholesterol. Amino acids and fatty acid ratios are also some
of the significant groups in males, while the faecal metabolome does not display any significant
association to glycolysis related or ketone metabolites.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
19
==PAGE:25==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9: Overview of the loadings for a few significant PLS models (p-value < 0.05)
based on a permutation test (n=1000) representing the faecal metabolome’s effect on a)
glucose metabolism and inflammation and b) lipid metabolism. For models with multiple
components, the PLS loading corresponds to the weighted sum of all components, using the
variance explained by each component as weights. AA: amino acids, CH: carbohydrates,
NA: nucleic acids, OA: Organic Acids, SCFA: short chain fatty acids.
As observed, the faecal metabolites have a significant association to plasma metabolic markers
mainly related to lipid metabolism, though also for glucose metabolism for females, and systemic
inflammation for both sexes. In the following, a few markers have been chosen to represent these
aspects to investigate the role of the specific faecal metabolites. As the number of significant
markers related to glucose metabolism is only three, all of them have been included in the analysis.
Total free cholesterol (total-FC) and LDL size have been chosen for the lipid metabolism. Lastly,
20
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:26==
GlycA is used for systemic inflammation. The PLS loadings of the faecal metabolites for these
markers are shown in figure 3.9, and the rest of the PLS loadings can be found in appendix D.
Models with multiple components have been summarised into a combined effect using a weighted
sum based on the variation explained by each of the components. The markers chosen for analysis
all have 1 component except for total-FC for the follicular stratification which has 2 components.
Regarding glucose metabolism, SCFAs have a positive association to glucose and citrate, both in
fasting and postprandial states. They are both for the follicular stratification, and reach maximum
loading size above 0.25, most of which are positive. The exception is isovalerate, different from the
others in that it is branched, which shows only a small association to fasting glucose and a negative
association to fasting citrate. Citrate in the postprandial state is for the luteal phase at 60 min.,
and shows positive associations with SCFAs, including isovalerate, though the maximum loading
sizes are below 0.25. Lastly, lactate in the postprandial state is for the stratification containing
all females at 90 min., and have strong associations with SCFAs, with acetate, propionate, and
butyrate having a negative association while isovalerate has a positive association, seemingly the
opposite as observed for the fasting citrate.
The chosen markers for lipid metabolism are all in the postprandial metabolism. Total-FC is sig-
nificant for the Follicular and Male stratifications, both at timepoint 120 min., though SCFAs’
association to them seem opposite. The size of the coefficients generally lie around 0.25, not
showing any strong associations. In females, negative loadings are seen for acetate, propionate,
and isovalerate, while valerate and butyrate are close to neutral. Positive loadings are seen for
all the metabolites for males. Also noteworthy for males is that several cholesterol markers are
significant postprandially. These markers are highly correlated and the loadings for SCFAs is in
fact positive for all the markers, except for butyrate which is slightly negative for VLDL-C and
remnant-C, though with a maximum coefficient size of 0.1.
LDL size is significant for Females at 90 min. and most SCFAs show a strong positive association
to this marker, particularly acetate and butyrate. GlycA is significantly modelled for the follicular
phase at fasting and for males postprandially at 150 min. SCFAs association to GlycA in the
follicular phase is modest for acetate, propionate, and butyrate in a positive direction, but clearly
stronger for valerate and isovalerate in a negative direction. The association to males postprandially
is positive for all SCFAs, particularly acetate and propionate.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
21
==PAGE:27==
4
Discussion
Given the increasing recognition of the gut microbiome’s role in modulating host metabolism, this
study aimed to explore the connections between faecal and plasma metabolic markers, both in
fasting and fed states. No sexual differences in the composition of the faecal metabolome were
found, however several of the plasma metabolic markers at fasting showed significant differences
between the sexes as well as between the menstrual phases for females. The sexual differences
were also reflected when studying the association between the faecal metabolome and the plasma
metabolome, as the metabolic markers showed sexual and menstrual phase specific association
to the faecal metabolome. The majority of the markers that had a significant association to the
faecal metabolome were for the postprandial state and are involved in glucose metabolism, lipid
metabolism, and systemic inflammation. The following sections will interpret these findings in
detail and contextualize them within the existing literature.
4.1
Faecal metabolome
From the characterisation of the faecal metabolome, no significant difference was found between
the sexes for any of the metabolites. Given that the faecal metabolome reflects the combined
interaction of the gut microbiome, the diet, and to some degree the host genetics, this provides
evidence that males and females generally adhere to similar dietary patterns. The most abundant
faecal metabolites were the three main SCFA, namely acetate, propionate, and butyrate, followed
by several essential amino acids. These findings are similar to what has been found in an older
cohort of 83 males and 80 females ages 65-75.40 SCFAs are primarily generated through micro-
bial fermentation in the colon, a region where their potential for absorption is relatively limited
compared to other metabolites due to the shorter transit time compared to upstream sections of
the gastrointestinal tract. Similarly, although dietary amino acids are mainly absorbed in the small
intestine,41 amino acids can also be produced or altered in the colon via fermentation processes.42
These physiological and microbial dynamics likely contribute to the elevated concentrations of
SCFAs and amino acids observed in the faecal samples.
The correlation between the faecal metabolite concentrations revealed a positive correlation within
SCFAs and AA respectively, as well as a negative correlation between SCFAs and several of the
amino acids. This inverse relationship may be attributable to the microbial conversion of amino
acids into SCFAs in the colon, as certain bacteria are capable of synthesizing SCFAs from amino
acid substrates.43 This metabolic pathway may also explain the relatively higher concentrations
of SCFAs compared to AA. A similar inverse association is noted between SCFAs and lactate,
potentially reflecting the role of lactate as a precursor in propionate synthesis.44
22
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:28==
4.2
Plasma metabolome
Regarding the fasting metabolome, several of the metabolic markers had significantly different
levels between the sexes as well as between the menstrual phases. For the sexual differences, the
greatest differences observed are increased levels of HDL, lipids, fatty acids, and glycerides for
females, while males have higher levels of amino acids. These sexual differences are an effect
of the sexual maturation as reported by Keeffe et al.45 They found that while most HDL particle
concentrations are lower for females at age 7, this changes from 7 to 25 years old. Large HDL par-
ticle concentrations increased in females while decreasing in males, while medium and small HDL
particle concentrations increases in both sexes, though to a greater extend for females, resulting
in females having a higher concentration of all HDL particle concentrations at age 25, a pattern
also observed for different lipid contents in HDL particles. For amino acids, they found similar
concentrations for males and females at 7 years, which had shifted at 25 years to males having
higher concentrations for all amino acids.45 These findings thus suggest that the sexual maturation
during late childhood and adolescence play a central role in the metabolic differences observed
between males and females. Given that the participants in this study are 18 years old, they are at a
developmental stage where these metabolic differences become more pronounced, though it may
still be ongoing. In fact, metabolic regulation and refinement may continue up to approximately
age 20, at which point metabolic function typically enters a period of relative stability that persists
until around age 60.46
In terms of the differences observed between the menstrual phases, the follicular phase had higher
levels of several lipid types like glycerides and fatty acids. Additionally, of the significantly dif-
ferent markers, most of them were increased in the follicular phase. This supports the evidence
of Draper et al.17 that several metabolites decreases in the luteal phase, including lipids as seen
in this cohort. They also found decreased amino acid concentrations in the luteal phase, which is
not observable in the participants in this study. As a possible explanation, Draper et al. proposed
increased anabolic activity during the luteal phase, whereby cellular energy storage is promoted.
This interpretation corresponds with the physiological orientation of the luteal phase, during which
the body prepares for potential pregnancy following ovulation. In fact, progesterone, the primary
hormone in the luteal phase, promotes fat deposition in adipose and breast tissue as well as divert-
ing glucose utilisation away from muscle and fat and inducing increased glycogen storage in the
liver, an effect that is exaggerated upon onset of pregnancy, in which progesterone levels increase
additionally.47 However, the metabolic changes during the luteal phases are complex, and there
is also an increase in basal body temperature and energy expenditure,16 which supports increased
catabolic activity which has also been attributed to progesterone.48 Increased appetite has been re-
ported in the luteal phase, which provides the foundation for both of these mechanisms to co-exist
through increased energy intake overall, though evidence is still lacking on the exact mechanistic
understandings.49
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
23
==PAGE:29==
4.3
Association of SCFAs to human metabolism
From the PLS models of the association between the faecal and the plasma metabolome over half
of the metabolic markers were found to be statistically significant for at least one stratification
either at fasting or postprandial timepoints. The number of significant markers was greater for
the postprandial data, highlighting the role of the faecal metabolome in the conditioning of the
human metabolome. The significant markers are primarily related to three metabolic areas: glucose
metabolism, lipid metabolism, and systemic inflammation. The following sections provide an
interpretation of faecal SCFAs effect, examining how they relate to the metabolic and inflammatory
pathways.
Glucose metabolism
Of the 5 metabolic markers related to glucose metabolism, three were significantly associated to
the faecal metabolome for females both in the fasting and postprandial state and not seen for males
at any point. At fasting, the association is seen for citrate and glucose for females in the follicular
phase, and postprandially the metabolites are citrate for females in the luteal phase and glucose for
all females combined. While glucose is a major energy source transported in the circulation, citrate
and lactate also play distinct roles in glucose metabolism. Citrate is an intermediate in the tricar-
boxylic acid (TCA) cycle and may also act as a link between glucose and fatty acid metabolism,50
while lactate is one of the biproducts of glycolysis, though it also has distinct roles in metabolic
health.51
The association of the faecal metabolome on fasting glucose metabolism is only seen for females
in the follicular phase. This phase has been reported to have increased insulin sensitivity,52 which
may be attributed to the rise in oestrogen.53 Oestrogen has also been reported to regulate energy
metabolism through suppression of gluconeogenesis.54 Both of these aspects suggest lower glu-
cose concentrations in the follicular phase, though this is in contrast to other findings showing
increased glucose concentrations in this phase.17 Notably, there were no observed differences in
glucose levels between the follicular and luteal phase in this cohort. Nonetheless, the follicular
phase is characterised by comparatively lower energy expenditure, which may necessitate more
precise glucose regulation to accommodate reduced metabolic demands. This could account for
the heightened insulin sensitivity. Importantly, increased insulin sensitivity may render the system
more reactive to glucose related metabolic signals, potentially explaining why effects of SCFA
on fasting glucose metabolism are only detectable during the follicular phase if such effects are
modest.
The SCFA loadings of the PLS model generally show a positive effect on fasting glucose and cit-
rate, particularly acetate, propionate, and butyrate. This contradicts many studies pointing to a pos-
itive effect on glucose metabolism. A meta-analysis 23 studies on SCFA intervention in humans
showed that intervention resulted in lowered fasting insulin concentration and had a beneficial
effect on insulin resistance, while there was no significant difference in fasting glucose concentra-
tion,55 though some also report SCFAs being able to lower fasting glucose levels.56 However, other
studies find a positive association between SCFA and obesity, a condition in part characterised by
24
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:30==
increased fasting glucose concentrations.57 A study by Schwierts et al. found that obese people
had increased total levels of faecal SCFA.58 As SCFA can be act both as signalling molecules and
as substrates for energy metabolism, perhaps this discrepancy eludes to a third aspect pertaining
to the balance between SCFA being signalling molecules and substrates. The positive association
observed here mostly points to SCFA being used as substrates for energy metabolism, an effect
that may be more pronounced due to the increased insulin sensitivity of the follicular phase.
For citrate in the postprandial metabolome, SCFA show the same direction of effect as for fasting,
though the loading sizes are smaller. The loading sizes for lactate, however, are larger in a nega-
tive direction and the following section will focus on this metabolite. The main source of lactate
comes from glycolysis, where lactate is one of the biproducts. But while lactate production has
long been recognised as the product of glucose metabolism under anaerobic conditions, the role
of lactate extends beyond this. In fact, lactate production happens even under aerobic conditions
and acts as a signalling molecule in inflammation and metabolism such as glucose metabolism,
redox homeostasis, and posttranslational modification of proteins51,59 though too high concentra-
tions of serum lactate can be dangerous. Lactate in the cells can be readily converted to and from
pyruvate by lactate dehydrogenase and the irreversible removal of lactate is facilitated by pyru-
vate dehydrogenase (PDH) which converts pyruvate to acetyl-CoA which can then enter the TCA
cycle.51
Specifically under postprandial conditions, lactate shuttling has been recognised as part of the glu-
cose disposal and satiety signalling.60 Lactate shuttling involves conversion of glucose to lactate in
the gut before uptake, whereby lactate is transported directly to the liver to be stored as glycogen,
thereby partially bypassing glucose uptake. This theory is supported by evidence from Leija et al.
who found that lactate levels increased before glucose levels in response to an oral glucose toler-
ance test (OGTT) indicating microbial activity influencing lactate levels.59 Any lactate produced
by the microbiome needs to be transported across the intestinal barrier, a process that is mediated
by the monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT-1) receptor in a proton dependent manner.61
Based on this, the influence of the microbiome on postprandial lactate may be on 1) lactate pro-
duction in the gut thereby influencing the lactate shuttle, 2) lactate absorption from the gut or 3)
regulation of lactate levels in the host. From the PLS loadings, acetate, butyrate and propionate
have a strong negative association to postprandial lactate in females. The first of the proposed
mechanisms pertains to the microbiome’s involvement in lactate synthesis. Several anaerobic bac-
teria produce lactate through fermentation of energy sources, particularly carbohydrates, though
the concentration of lactate in the colon is usually low due to lactate being used as substrate for
SCFA synthesis.44,62 However, these are mainly located in the colon24 and the postprandial time-
point for lactate in females is 90 min. It is therefore unlikely that the meal has reached the colon by
this point, though it cannot be excluded that there is some SCFA production in the small intestine
to explain this mechanism.
Besides factors influencing the lactate availability in the gut, absorption across the intestinal barrier
also affects the postprandial levels. Not only does the MCT-1 receptor transport lactate across
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
25
==PAGE:31==
the intestinal barrier, it also transports SCFAs,63 though this receptor is mainly expressed in the
colon.64 Additionally, it is unlikely that there is SCFA production in the small intestine by this
point, and substrate competition for the receptor does not seem reasonable. Lactate can also be
absorbed through passive diffusion, which is induced under acidic conditions. However, since
SCFAs lower the intestinal pH,65 this does not explain the negative association between plasma
lactate and SCFAs.
Considering both the meal composition and the time range of the meal challenge, production and
absorption of SCFAs for their direct participation in metabolism is unlikely, though modulation
of receptor expression and metabolic homeostasis may carry into the postprandial metabolism.
Though evidence for the direct association of SCFAs and circulating lactate is lacking, SCFAs
have been shown to influence glucose metabolism, in part by regulating insulin sensitivity. The
increased insulin sensitivity both leads to increased glucose uptake by the cells as well as increased
glycogen synthesis by the liver, leaving less glucose available for glycolysis and subsequent lactate
production. Besides regulating the metabolic pathways through insulin sensitivity, SCFAs may
affect the lactate levels through regulation of cellualr receptor expression. Particularly the MCT-1
receptor responsible for transporting lactate across cellular membranes is not only expressed in the
intestines, but is in fact expressed in nearly all tissue.66 SCFAs, particularly butyrate, upregulate
the expression of this receptor,64 which would result in increased cellular uptake of lactate, an
effect potentially sustaining in the brief absence of SCFAs.
Lipid metabolism
It is clear from the overview of the significant models that the faecal metabolome is associated
with the lipid metabolism based on the number of significant markers and that the association is
sexually dependent. For the fasting data, there are no significant markers for males, and the effect
in females is only seen when stratifying by menstrual phase, while the association is seen for both
sexes in the postprandial data. As the majority of the models are significant in the postprandial
state, the association of the faecal metabolites to the lipid metabolism will primarily be focused on
the postprandial state for the markers LDL size and total-FC.
Cholesterol is both absorbed from the intestines and can be synthesised by the liver. Absorp-
tion involves the formation of micelles, together with bile salts, fatty acids, monoacylglyceride,
and phospholipid which can then be taken up by the mucosal cells. Almost all of the cholesterol
absorbed to the mucosal cells are in the ensterified form (free cholesterol), but are secreted to the
intestinal lymph primarily in the esterified form.67 Esterified cholesterol can be hydrolysed to form
free cholesterol, which is the primary form used in cellular membranes and as part of lipoprotein
particles.68 This hydrolysis can occur in the liver or in macrophages as part of reverse cholesterol
transport (RCT),69 which is the process of removing cholesterol from peripheral tissue.
While total-FC was chosen for the lipid metabolism, 5 of the cholesterol markers were significant
in males with SCFAs having an overall positive effect. This may indicate that SCFAs raise the
cholesterol levels in general. In favour of this is SCFAs role in cholesterol availability in the gut,
thus affecting how much is absorbed. The gut microbiome is involved in cholesterol metabolism
26
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:32==
by converting cholesterol to coprostanol which occurs in some individuals. Coprostanol is not
absorbed as readily as cholesterol, and the ability to do this conversion has been reported to have
an inverse relationship with serum cholesterol.70,71 It has been shown that individuals with a
low conversion of cholesterol to coprostanol excrete higher amounts of straight SCFAs (acetate,
propiontate, butyrate) than high converters.72 This conversion is seen in the bacterial species Bi-
fidobacterium, Clostridium, and Lactobacillus in vitro,73 though the mechanisms underlying the
association to faecal SCFAs is still being studied.72
Interestingly, SCFAs’ association to total-FC in females of the follicular phase is negative, the
opposite of what is seen in males. Looking at absorption there is evidence to support a negative
association as well, with propionate and butyrate being shown to downregulate the expression of
the Niemann-Pick C1 like 1 (NPC1L1) receptor responsible for intestinal cholesterol transport.74,75
However, total-FC is the only significant cholesterol marker for this stratification, suggesting that
the underlying mechanism may be different from males, and may be in a more regulatory manner.
SCFAs have been shown to upregulate cholesterol uptake in the liver, thereby inducing RCT.76 This
may have a synergistic effect with the increased oestrogen levels seen in the follicular phase, which
also induces RCT. While the effect of oestrogen on liver RCT is well documented, a consistent
relationship with cholesterol efflux in peripheral tissues remains to be elucidated.77
The contrasting associations of SCFAs with cholesterol markers in males and females suggest dis-
tinct metabolic pathways influenced by sex hormones. In males, higher SCFA levels may reflect
reduced microbial conversion to coprostanol, leading to increased cholesterol absorption. In fe-
males, particularly during the follicular phase, oestrogen may act together with SCFAs to enhance
cholesterol excretion and reduce absorption. This duality underscores the importance of consider-
ing hormonal status and microbial activity when interpreting SCFA cholesterol relationships.
The other marker used to evaluate SCFAs’ effect on lipid metabolism is the LDL size. As men-
tioned in the introduction, most of the lipids absorbed after a meal bypass the liver, entering the
circulation and thereby tissue as part of chylomicron particles. In case of excess energy in the form
of glucose and fatty acids, hepatic lipogenesis will be induced, resulting in the release of VLDL
to the circulation. These particles deliver TG to the tissue through the interaction with lipoprotein
lipase (LPL), eventually becoming LDL particles.11 From the analysis of the fasting metabolome,
females were shown to have greater LDL size compared to males, consistent with findings from
previous research.78,79 A factor influencing the circulating levels of lipids is the signalling protein
angiopoietinlike 4 (ANGPTL4), which is synthesised in most tissues and has an inhibitory effect
on LPL through stimulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ). The con-
sequence of this is that less lipids are disposed in the adipose tissues thus resulting in prolonged
circulation of triglyceride rich lipoproteins (VLDL and to some extend LDL). Notably, ANGPTL4
secretion is induced by SCFAs, in particular butyrate in human colon cell lines. This might ex-
plain the positive relationship between SCFAs and LDL size observed in females. Given that SCFA
through the actions of ANGPTL4 inhibit LPL, the deposition of TG in the tissue is reduced, with
the consequence that the lipoprotein particle does not decrease in size.80
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
27
==PAGE:33==
Systemic inflammation
Systemic inflammation is evaluated using the biomarker GlycA, which measures the level and com-
plexity of glycosylation as a result from the signalling of pro-inflammatory cytokines.10 SCFAs
have been demonstrated to be involved immune regulation through a range of different mecha-
nisms, such as increasing mucin production, increasing expression of tight junctions, and regulat-
ing expression of pro- and anti-inflammatory molecules.81 Their regulatory actions are primarily
through activation of GPR41 and GPR43, which are also expressed on immune cells, resulting in
regulation of gene expression through inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs). On the pro-
inflammatory side, SCFAs have been demonstrated to increase the migration of neutrophils and
thus enhance inflammation by increasing expression of the surface adhesion molecule L-selectin
and the release of the cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant-2αβ (CINC-2αβ). In terms of
anti-inflammatory effect, butyrate in particular has also been shown to decrease pro-inflammatory
mediators like TNF-α, CINC-2αβ and NO in rat neutrophils, indicating that SCFAs’ effect on
inflammation may be context specific.
GlycA shows a significant association to the faecal metabolome for females in the follicular phase
at fasting and for males postprandially. Particular to the females, systemic inflammation has been
reported to vary across the menstrual cycle, and increases as part of follicle maturation82,83 and
well as during menses.84,85,86 For the follicular phase, valerate and isovalerate show the greatest
coefficient sizes in a negative direction. These are the bigger SCFAs containing 4 and 5 carbon
respectively, and are more likely to bind to GPR41 than GPR43, as GPR41 has preferential binding
for C3 and C4 followed by C5, though they are also able to bind to GPR43. While binding to these
receptors has been linked to cellular signalling resulting in reduced inflammation, they can be
activated by all the SCFAs.87 Therefore, if the reduced inflammation was due to the activation of
these receptors, the other SCFA would likely also have a negative coefficient, yet the PLS loadings
are quite specific to valerate and isovalerate. The mechanistic understanding of these metabolites
has not been studied as thoroughly as acetate, propionate, and butyrate at this point in time, and
additional research is required for elucidating their effect on systemic inflammation outside of the
GPR41 and GPR43 receptors
For the postprandial inflammation which is significant in males, SCFA have a positive association.
Inflammation in this state is induced in part by the increase in glucose and TG88 as well as the
increase in apoB, a constituent of both chylomicrons, VLDL, and LDL. This has been linked to
increased neutrophil counts and subsequent production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and oxida-
tive stress as well as leukocyte activation which may take up the chylomicrons.89 With the large
amounts of lipids in the challenge meal, it is likely that this causes some increased inflammation.
As mentioned, it is still largely unknown in what context SCFA enhances or reduces inflammation,
but in this context it would seem that SCFA enhances the neutrophil recruitment already initiated by
the lipid uptake. These opposing findings for the fasting and postprandial inflammation illustrates
the need for a better understanding of SCFAs’ effect on inflammation.
28
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:34==
4.4
Limitations
The human metabolism is an intricate regulatory system controlled by numerous interacting fac-
tors. Investigating the relationship between two individual factors of the system risks oversimpli-
fying a system where variables rarely act independently. This complexity is amplified in a mixed
sex cohort where sex hormones play an additional role in metabolic regulation, particularly post
puberty. In the present study, a PLS1 model was applied to study the association between the fae-
cal metabolome, in particular SCFAs, and the plasma metabolome under fasting and postprandial
conditions. Hormonal stratifications (males, females, follicular phase females, and luteal phase fe-
males) enabled control of sex hormone driven variability, while having participant age at 18 years
for all reduced some of the metabolic variability arising with age. Although these approaches
increased the biological consistency, it may limit the generalisability of the results beyond ado-
lescence. Additionally, only using progesterone to separate females into menstrual phases may
be an insufficient measure, as the several hormones including oestrogen are also distinct between
the phases, and the separation into only two groups may oversimplify the hormonal variation seen
across the cycle and between individuals.
The choice of PLS modelling reduced the investigation to a simple relationship between the faecal
metabolome and a single metabolic marker, thus overlooking the potential metabolic and regulatory
effects between the plasma metabolic markers, potentially leaving some variability unaccounted
for. While permutation testing was used to validate the statistical significance of the PLS models at
fasting and for each of the seven timepoints, the exploratory nature of approach may be susceptible
to multiple testing biases. Some of them may also be challenged on the model stability, particularly
for the smaller stratifications, like the luteal phase only containing 27 observations, also reducing
their generalisability. The approach to the postprandial data to summarise it to iAUC values for
each timepoint simplifies the postprandial responses a simple and straight forward measure of
overall exposure. It neglects potential biological relevance of the postprandial curves themselves,
such as steep increases and decreases versus a consistent concentration over the same time period.
While the plasma metabolic markers provided by 1H NMR metabolomics via the Nightingale
platform provides a dataset of several metabolic risk factors, it does have a bias towards lipoprotein
and lipid markers, leading to incomplete metabolic coverage. The faecal metabolome may be
subject to increased variability due to the sampling procedure handling, and differential freezing
time which may affect metabolite integrity.
4.5
Future perspectives
From an experimental perspective, additional hormonal measurements would allow better mod-
elling of the SCFAs, plasma metabolome, and hormone interactions providing a better foundation
for extracting SCFAs effect. Measuring of oestrogen along with progesterone would enable cate-
gorisation not simply based on menstrual phase, but would allow more precise subgroups of high
versus low oestrogen and progesterone, as that is the true objective of the menstrual phase strat-
ification. It might also be relevant to do repeated measures across the menstrual phase, in order
to reduce the variation contributed by this factor. Coupling the meal challenge with dietary inter-
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
29
==PAGE:35==
vention might also help elucidate faecal SCFAs role on the metabolism. Introducing a diet that
increases the faecal SCFA levels, and doing the meal challenge before and after the intervention,
could provide more compelling evidence of their regulatory effect.
In terms of modelling, future studies might benefit from refining the summary value of the post-
prandial responses, rather than using iAUC. Curve shape descriptors like peak timing and slope
might be better for capturing dynamic features that could carry biological relevance. A different
approach to the model itself, like using multiway modelling techniques, would allow the integration
of the time component in the postprandial data with individuals and metabolic markers, thereby
preserving the inherent structure of the dataset. Finally, integrating hormonal levels directly into
the modelling framework might allow for better isolation of SCFAs impact on metabolic responses.
30
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:36==
5
Conclusion
Metabolic disorders like type II diabetes, hypertension, and obesity are some of the biggest health
issues of the 21st century and understanding their underlying causes is essential to provide the
right care and design intervention strategies. These years, the impact of microbiome and particu-
larly their metabolic products on health and disease is increasingly understood. SCFAs are one of
the microbial metabolic classes, and have been shown to play a role in metabolic and inflammatory
regulation. This thesis aimed to study the association of faecal SCFAs and plasma metabolic mark-
ers at fasting and postprandial states, in a cohort of 18 year olds stratified by sex and menstrual
phase for females.
Looking at the faecal metabolome as a whole, no differences were seen between the sexes, sugges-
tion that they generally adhere to similar dietary habits. For the fasting metabolome, however, half
of the metabolic markers were different between the sexes, with females displaying higher levels
of HDL and lipid markers, while males displayed higher levels of certain amino acids. Differences
between the menstrual phases pertain mostly to increased levels of glycerides and fatty acids in the
follicular phase. Distinct curves were observed postprandially for the different types of metabolic
markers, with some also displaying distinct variation between the sexes.
From the modelling of the faecal metabolome against the metabolic markers, the stratification of
females into the menstrual phases improves the performance of the female models to be on par
or better than then male models for all timepoints, which otherwise performed worse than males
across all timepoints. The importance of stratification is also clear when looking at the overview of
the significant models, with little overlap between all females combined and the menstrual phase
stratifications, and only one significant model for the fasting state when all females are combined
as opposed to 8 when stratifying. The significant models either at fasting or postprandially cover
about half of the markers with the majority of the metabolic classes being represented. To study
SCFAs association to the plasma metabolic markers, markers for glucose and lipid metabolism as
well as systemic inflammation were chosen.
The effect on glucose metabolism is only seen in females, both in the fasting and postprandial
state. SCFAs have a positive association to fasting glucose and citrate in the stratification contain-
ing females in the follicular phase, contrasting most other studies. For postprandial lactate seen
in all females, the association is negative overall with large coefficient sizes, pointing to SCFAs’
ability to condition the metabolic system. For the lipid metabolism, total-FC and LDL size were
studied postprandially. Total-FC had opposite associations with SCFAs between the two stratifi-
cations they were found in, namely males and females in the follicular phase. The significance of
several cholesterol markers for males may suggest an overall increased absorption of cholesterol
from the gut. In females, the negative effect can be explained by increased reverse cholesterol
transport, which may synergise with oestrogens ability to do the same. This suggests that sexual
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
31
==PAGE:37==
differences may influence how SCFAs interact with the metabolic system, potentially modulating
or mediating their downstream effects. Finally, SCFAs’ association to systemic inflammation is
seen at both fasting and postprandially for different stratifications. In the fasting state, valerate
and isovalerate are negatively associated to GlycA in females in the follicular phase, while acetate,
propionate, and butyrate do not have as distinct associations. These metabolites might therefore
be relevant to study further, in order to elucidate their underlying mechanistic abilities. A clear
positive effect is seen for all SCFAs in males postprandially. A complicated relationship between
SCFAs immunomodulatory effect and postprandial inflammation requires additional research in
order to obtain a mechanistic understanding of this.
The findings demonstrate that SCFAs are distinctly associated with both fasting and postpran-
dial metabolic states, as well as systemic inflammation suggesting an ability to influence host
metabolism even in their absence. Furthermore, these associations appear to be shaped not only by
biological sex but also by the hormonal dynamics underlying menstrual physiology. This thesis has
highlighted the importance of considering and including the complexity the menstrual cycle pro-
vides, showing that stratifying by menstrual phase can uncover biological signals otherwise lost in
noise. Acknowledging these nuances may be an important element to understanding the metabolic
system and developing more tailored approaches to diagnostics, intervention, and treatment. Ul-
timately, by looking closer at how microbial signals are involved with the metabolic system, we
move closer to a fuller, more inclusive understanding of human health.
32
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:38==
Bibliography
1 Z. Zhan, H. Tang, Y. Zhang, X. Huang, M. Xu, Potential of gut-derived short-chain fatty acids to
control enteric pathogens, Frontiers in Microbiology 13 (2022). doi:10.3389/fmicb.2022.
976406.
2 WHO,
https://www.who.int/health-topics/obesity#tab=tab_1,
accessed:
2025-07-23
(2025).
3 H. Zhang, X.-D. Zhou, M. D. Shapiro, G. Y. Lip, H. Tilg, L. Valenti, V. K. Somers, C. D. Byrne,
G. Targher, W. Yang, O. Viveiros, C. K. Opio, C. S. Mantzoros, J. D. Ryan, K. Y. Y. Kok,
N. A. Jumaev, N. Perera, A. G. Robertson, A. Abu-Abeid, A. Misra, Y. J. Wong, E. Ruiz-Úcar,
O. Ospanov, M. C. Kızılkaya, F. Luo, N. Méndez-Sánchez, M. Zuluaga, A. Lonardo, H. Al
Momani, C. J. Toro-Huamanchumo, L. Adams, S. A. Al-Busafi, A. I. Sharara, W.-K. Chan, S. I.
Abbas, S. Sookoian, S. Treeprasertsuk, P. Ocama, K. Alswat, A. P.-S. Kong, K. Ataya, M. C.
Lim-Loo, R. J. Oviedo, O. Szepietowski, Y. Fouad, H. Zhang, T. N. Abdelbaki, C. S. Katsouras,
A. Prasad, O. Thaher, A. Ali, G. A. Molina, K.-C. Sung, Q.-F. Chen, C. R. A. Lesmana, M.-
H. Zheng, Global burden of metabolic diseases, 1990–2021, Metabolism 160 (2024) 155999.
doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2024.155999.
4 R. H. Al-Qawasmeh, R. F. Tayyem, Dietary and lifestyle risk factors and metabolic syndrome:
Literature review, Current Research in Nutrition and Food Science 6 (2018). doi:10.12944/
CRNFSJ.6.3.03.
5 S. Castro-Barquero, A. M. Ruiz-León, M. Sierra-Pérez, R. Estruch, R. Casas, Dietary strate-
gies for metabolic syndrome: A comprehensive review, Nutrients 12 (2020). doi:10.3390/
nu12102983.
6 M. Rus, S. Crisan, F. L. Andronie-Cioara, M. Indries, P. Marian, O. L. Pobirci, A. I. Arde-
lean, Prevalence and risk factors of metabolic syndrome: A prospective study on cardiovascular
health, Medicina 59 (2023). doi:10.3390/medicina59101711.
7 M. S. Islam, P. Wei, M. Suzauddula, I. Nime, F. Feroz, M. Acharjee, F. Pan, The interplay of
factors in metabolic syndrome: understanding its roots and complexity, Molecular Medicine 30
(2024). doi:10.1186/s10020-024-01019-y.
8 U. A. Tahir, R. E. Gerszten, Molecular biomarkers for cardiometabolic disease: Risk assessment
in young individuals, Circulation Research 132 (12) (2023). doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.123.
322000.
9 X. Ojanen, R. Cheng, T. Törmäkangas, N. Rappaport, T. Wilmanski, N. Wu, E. F. abd
Rozenn Nedelec, S. Sebert, D. Vlachopoulos, W. Yan, N. D. Price, S. Cheng, P. Wiklund, To-
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
33
==PAGE:39==
wards early risk biomarkers: serum metabolic signature in childhood predicts cardio-metabolic
risk in adulthood, eBioMedicine 72 (2021). doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103611.
10 R. A. Ballout, A. T. Remaley, Glyca: a new biomarker for systemic inflammation and cardio-
vascular disease (cvd) risk assessment, Journal of Laboratory and Precision Medicine 5 (2020).
doi:10.21037/jlpm.2020.03.03.
11 K. Frayn, R. Evans, Human Metabolism a Regulatory Perspective, Wiley-Blackwell, 2019.
12 O. Varlamov, C. L. Bethea, C. T. Roberts, Sex-specific differences in lipid and glucose
metabolism, Frontiers in Endocrinology Volume 5 - 2014 (2015). doi:10.3389/fendo.2014.
00241.
13 F. KR, A. SF, A. B. et al., The normal menstrual cycle and the control of ovulation, in: Endotext,
MDText.com, Inc., South Dartmouth (MA), 2018.
14 A. H. Clayton, Symptoms related to the menstrual cycle: Diagnosis, prevalence, and treatment,
Journal of Psychiatric Practice 14 (2008) 13–21. doi:10.1097/01.pra.0000308491.54885.
f8.
15 M. T. Bernstein, L. A. Graff, L. Avery, C. Palatnick, K. Parnerowski, L. E. Targownik, Gas-
trointestinal symptoms before and during menses in healthy women, BMC Women’s Health 14
(2014). doi:10.1186/1472-6874-14-14.
16 S. Zhang, H. Osumi, A. Uchizawa, H. Hamada, Y. S. Insung Park, Y. Tanaka, A. Ishi-
hara, K. Yajima, J. Seol, M. S. nad Naomi Omi, K. Tokuyama, Changes in sleeping en-
ergy metabolism and thermoregulation during menstrual cycle, Physiological Reports 8 (2020).
doi:10.14814/phy2.14353.
17 C. F. Draper, K. Duisters, B. Weger, A. Chakrabarti, A. C. Harms, L. Brennan, T. Hankemeier,
T. K. L. Goulet1, F. P. Martin, S. M. . . J. van der Greef, Menstrual cycle rhythmicity: metabolic
patterns in healthy women, Scientific Reports 8 (2018). doi:10.1038/s41598-018-32647-0.
18 J. Debik, K. Mrowiec, A. Kurczyk, P. Widłak, K. Jelonek, T. F. B. . G. F. Giskeødegård, Sources
of variation in the serum metabolome of female participants of the hunt2 study, Communications
biology 7 (2024). doi:10.1038/s42003-024-07137-x.
19 K. Hou, Z.-X. Wu, X.-Y. Chen, J.-Q. Wang, D. Zhang, C. Xiao, D. Zhu, J. B. Koya, L. Wei,
J. Li, Z.-S. Chen, Microbiota in health and diseases, Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
7 (2022). doi:10.1038/s41392-022-00974-4.
20 X. Sun, M. Shukla, W. Wang, S. Li, Unlocking gut-liver-brain axis communication metabolites:
energy metabolism, immunity and barriers, npj Biofilms and Microbiomes 10 (2024). doi:
10.1038/s41522-024-00610-9.
21 J. Zierer, M. A. Jackson, G. Kastenmüller, M. Mangino, T. Long, A. Telenti, R. P. Mohney, K. S.
Small, J. T. Bell, C. J. Steves, A. M. Valdes, T. D. Spector, C. Menni, The fecal metabolome as a
34
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:40==
functional readout of the gut microbiome, Nature Genetics 50 (2018). doi:10.1038/s41588-
018-0135-7.
22 L. A. David, C. F. Maurice, R. N. Carmody, D. B. Gootenberg, J. E. Button, B. E. Wolfe, A. V.
Ling, A. S. Devlin, Y. Varma, M. A. Fischbach, S. B. Biddinger, R. J. Dutton, P. J. Turnbaugh,
Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome, Nature 505 (2014) 559–563.
doi:10.1038/nature12820.
23 M. Sangermani, I. Desiati, S. M. Jørgensen, J. V. Li, T. Andreassen, T. F. Bathen, G. F.
Giskeødegård, Stability in fecal metabolites amid a diverse gut microbiome composition: a
one-month longitudinal study of variability in healthy individuals, Gut Microbes 16 (1) (2024)
2427878. doi:10.1080/19490976.2024.2427878.
24 H. Gou, R. Zeng, H. C. H. Lau, J. Yu, Gut microbial metabolites: Shaping future diagnosis
and treatment against gastrointestinal cancer, Pharmacological Research 208 (2024) 107373.
doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107373.
25 V. Mansuy-Aubert, Y. Ravussin, Short chain fatty acids: the messengers from down below,
Frontiers in Neuroscience 17 (2023). doi:10.3389/fnins.2023.1197759.
26 Y. P. Silva, A. Bernardi, R. L. Frozza, The role of short-chain fatty acids from gut microbiota in
gut-brain communication, Frontiers in Endocrinology 11 (2020). doi:10.3389/fendo.2020.
00025.
27 A. Nogal, F. Asnicar, A. Vijay, A. Kouraki, A. Visconti, P. Louca, K. Wong, A.-F. Baleanu,
F. Giordano, J. Wolf, G. Hadjigeorgiou, R. Davies, G. A. Michelotti, P. W. Franks, S. E. Berry,
M. Falchi, A. Ikram, B. J. Ollivere, A. Zheng, J. Nightingale, M. Mangino, N. Segata, W. J.
Bulsiewicz, T. D. Spector, A. M. Valdes, C. Menni, Genetic and gut microbiome determinants
of scfa circulating and fecal levels, postprandial responses and links to chronic and acute inflam-
mation, Gut Microbes 15 (2023). doi:10.1080/19490976.2023.2240050.
28 D.-H. Lee, M.-T. Kim, J.-H. Han, Gpr41 and gpr43: From development to metabolic regula-
tion, Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy 175 (2024) 116735. doi:10.1016/j.biopha.2024.
116735.
29 T. Mølbæk-Engbjerg, N. Vahman, M. Mikkelsen, N. R. Fink, E. D. Christensen, N. Brustad,
L. Sass, H. Løvenhøj, K. Strandberg-Larsen, J. Groot, A.-M. N. Andersen, R. Vinding, A.-
M. M. Schoos, J. Stokholm, K. Bønnelykke, B. Chawes, Design of the 18-year follow-up of
the Danish COPSAC2000 birth cohort, BMJ Pediatrics Open 8 (2024). doi:10.1136/bmjpo-
2024-002634.
30 S. Yan, L. Li, D. Horner, P. Ebrahimi, B. Chawes, L. O. Dragsted, M. A. Rasmussen, A. K.
Smilde, E. Acar, Characterizing human postprandial metabolic response using multiway data
analysis, Metabolomics 20 (2024). doi:10.1007/s11306-024-02109-y.
31 H. Julkunen, A. Cichońska, M. Tiainen, H. Koskela, K. Nybo, V. Mäkelä, J. Nokso-Koivisto,
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
35
==PAGE:41==
K. Kristiansson, M. Perola, V. Salomaa, P. Jousilahti, A. Lundqvist, A. J. Kangas, P. Soininen,
J. C. Barrett, P. Würtz, Atlas of plasma nmr biomarkers for health and disease in 118,461 indi-
viduals from the uk biobank, Nature communications 14 (2023). doi:10.1038/s41467-023-
36231-7.
32 M. Cui, A. Trimigno, V. Aru, M. A. R. Rasmussen, B. Khakimov, S. B. Engelsen, Influence of
age, sex, and diet on the human fecal metabolome investigated by 1h nmr spectroscopy, Jour-
nal of Proteome Research 20 (7) (2021) 3642–3653, pMID: 34048241. doi:10.1021/acs.
jproteome.1c00220.
33 F. Dieterle, A. Ross, G. Schlotterbeck, H. Senn, Probabilistic quotient normalization as robust
method to account for dilution of complex biological mixtures. application in 1h nmr metabo-
nomics, Analytical Chemistry 78 (13) (2006) 4281–4290. doi:10.1021/ac051632c.
34 N. R. Kalakota, L. C. George, S. S. Morelli, N. C. Douglas, A. V. Babwah, Towards an improved
understanding of the effects of elevated progesterone levels on human endometrial receptivity
and oocyte/embryo quality during assisted reproductive technologies, Cells 11 (2022). doi:
10.3390/cells11091405.
35 W. Haynes, Wilcoxon rank sum test, in: W. Dubitzky, O. Wolkenhauer, K.-H. Cho, H. Yokota
(Eds.), Encyclopedia of Systems Biology, Springer New York, New York, NY, 2013, pp. 2354–
2355. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-9863-7_1185.
36 I. T. Jolliffe, J. Cadima, Principal component analysis: a review and recent developments, Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 374 (2016). doi:10.1098/rsta.2015.0202.
37 S. Wold, M. Sjöström, L. Eriksson, Pls-regression: a basic tool of chemometrics, Chemomet-
rics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 58 (2) (2001) 109–130, pLS Methods. doi:10.1016/
S0169-7439(01)00155-1.
38 R. Rosipal, N. Krämer, Overview and recent advances in partial least squares, in: C. Saunders,
M. Grobelnik, S. Gunn, J. Shawe-Taylor (Eds.), Subspace, Latent Structure and Feature Selec-
tion, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 34–51.
39 M. J. Anderson, Permutation tests for univariate or multivariate analysis of variance and re-
gression, Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 58 (3) (2001) 626–639. doi:
10.1139/f01-004.
40 C. M, T. A, C.-M. JL, R. S, B. J, B. RL, N. DS, H. L, E. SB, K. B, Human fecal metabolome
reflects differences in body mass index, physical fitness, and blood lipoproteins in healthy older
adults, Metabolites 11 (2021). doi:10.3390/metabo11110717.
41 J. Trommelena, D. Toméb, L. J. van Loon, Gut amino acid absorption in humans: Concepts
and relevance for postprandial metabolism, Clinical Nutrition Open Science 36 (2021) 43–55.
doi:10.1016/j.nutos.2020.12.006.
36
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:42==
42 E. P. J. G. Neis, C. H. C. Dejong, S. S. Rensen, The role of microbial amino acid metabolism in
host metabolism, Nutrients 7 (2015). doi:10.3390/nu7042930.
43 Y. Song, K. Chen, L. Lv, Y. Xiang, X. Du, X. Zhang, G. Zhao, Y. Xiao, Uncovering the biogeog-
raphy of the microbial commmunity and its association with nutrient metabolism in the intestinal
tract using a pig model, Frontiers in nutrition 9 (2022). doi:10.3389/fnut.2022.1003763.
44 G. den Besten, K. van Eunen, A. K. Groen, K. Venema, D.-J. Reijngoud, B. M. Bakker, The
role of short-chain fatty acids in the interplay between diet, gut microbiota, and host energy
metabolism, Journal of lipid research 54 (2013). doi:10.1194/jlr.R036012.
45 L. M. Keeffe, K. Tilling, J. A. Bell, P. T. Walsh, M. A. Lee, D. A. Lawlor, G. Davey Smith, P. M.
Kearney, Sex-specific trajectories of molecular cardiometabolic traits from childhood to young
adulthood, Heart 109 (9) (2023) 674–685. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2022-321347.
46 H. Pontzer, Y. Yamada, H. Sagayama, P. N. Ainslie, L. F. Andersen, L. J. Anderson, L. Arab,
I. Baddou, K. Bedu-Addo, E. E. Blaak, S. Blanc, A. G. Bonomi, C. V. C. Bouten, P. Bovet, M. S.
Buchowski, N. F. Butte, S. G. Camps, G. L. Close, J. A. Cooper, R. Cooper, S. K. Das, L. R.
Dugas, U. Ekelund, S. Entringer, T. Forrester, B. W. Fudge, A. H. Goris, M. Gurven, C. Hambly,
A. E. Hamdouchi, M. B. Hoos, S. Hu, N. Joonas, A. M. Joosen, P. Katzmarzyk, K. P. Kempen,
M. Kimura, W. E. Kraus, R. F. Kushner, E. V. Lambert, W. R. Leonard, N. Lessan, C. Mar-
tin, A. C. Medin, E. P. Meijer, J. C. Morehen, J. P. Morton, M. L. Neuhouser, T. A. Nicklas,
R. M. Ojiambo, K. H. Pietiläinen, Y. P. Pitsiladis, J. Plange-Rhule, G. Plasqui, R. L. Prentice,
R. A. Rabinovich, S. B. Racette, D. A. Raichlen, E. Ravussin, R. M. Reynolds, S. B. Roberts,
A. J. Schuit, A. M. Sjödin, E. Stice, S. S. Urlacher, G. Valenti, L. M. V. Etten, E. A. V. Mil,
J. C. K. Wells, G. Wilson, B. M. Wood, J. Yanovski, T. Yoshida, X. Zhang, A. J. Murphy-Alford,
C. Loechl, A. H. Luke, J. Rood, D. A. Schoeller, K. R. Westerterp, W. W. Wong, J. R. Speak-
man, I. D. D. Consortium§, Daily energy expenditure through the human life course, Science
373 (6556) (2021) 808–812. doi:10.1126/science.abe5017.
47 R. K. Kalkhoff, Metabolic effects of progesterone, American Journal of Obstetrics and Gyne-
cology 142 (1982) 735–738. doi:10.1016/s0002-9378(16)32480-2.
48 F. C. Baker, F. Siboza, A. Fuller, Temperature regulation in women: Effects of the menstrual
cycle, Temperature 7 (3) (2020) 226–262. doi:10.1080/23328940.2020.1735927.
49 M. M. Rogan, K. E. Black, Dietary energy intake across the menstrual cycle: a narrative review,
Nutrition Reviews 81 (7) (2022) 869–886. doi:10.1093/nutrit/nuac094.
50 N. C. Williams, L. A. J. O’Neill, A role for the krebs cycle intermediate citrate in metabolic
reprogramming in innate immunity and inflammation, Frontiers in Immunology 9 (2018). doi:
10.3389/fimmu.2018.00141.
51 X. Li, Y. Yang, B. Zhang, X. Lin, X. Fu, Y. An, Y. Zou, J.-X. Wang, Z. Wang, T. Yu, Lactate
metabolism in human health and disease, Sig Transduct Target Ther 7 (2022). doi:10.1038/
s41392-022-01151-3.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
37
==PAGE:43==
52 J. M. E. Pulido, M. A. Salazar, Changes in insulin sensitivity, secretion and glucose effectiveness
during menstrual cycle, Archives of Medical Research 30 (1) (1999) 19–22. doi:10.1016/
S0188-0128(98)00008-6.
53 M. De Paoli, A. Zakharia, G. H. Werstuck, The role of estrogen in insulin resistance: A review
of clinical and preclinical data, The American Journal of Pathology 191 (9) (2021) 1490–1498.
doi:10.1016/j.ajpath.2021.05.011.
54 H. Yan, W. Yang, F. Zhou, X. Li, Q. Pan, Z. Shen, G. Han, A. Newell-Fugate, Y. Tian, R. Majeti,
W. Liu, Y. Xu, C. Wu, K. Allred, C. Allred, Y. Sun, S. Guo, Estrogen improves insulin sensitivity
and suppresses gluconeogenesis via the transcription factor foxo1, Diabetes 68 (2018) 291–304.
doi:10.2337/db18-0638.
55 N. H. T. Pham, M. V. Joglekar, W. K. M. Wong, N. T. Nassif, A. M. Simpson, A. A. Hardikar,
Short-chain fatty acids and insulin sensitivity: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Journal
of lipid research 82 (2023). doi:10.1093/nutrit/nuad042.
56 J. Zheng, Y. An, Y. Du, Y. Song, Q. Zhao, Y. Lu, Effects of short-chain fatty acids on blood
glucose and lipid levels in mouse models of diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and network
meta-analysis, Pharmacological Research 199 (2024) 107041. doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2023.
107041.
57 J. A. J. Martyn, M. Kaneki, S. Yasuhara, Obesity-induced insulin resistance and hyperglycemia
etiologic factors and molecular mechanisms, Anesthesiology 109 (2008) 137–48.
doi:10.
1097/ALN.0b013e3181799d45.
58 A. Schwiertz, D. Taras, K. Schäfer, S. Beijer, N. A. Bos, C. Donus, P. D. Hardt, Microbiota and
scfa in lean and overweight healthy subjects, Obesity 18 (2009) 190–195. doi:10.3389/fnut.
2022.1003763.
59 R. G. Leija, C. C. Curl, J. A. Arevalo, A. D. Osmond, J. J. Duong, M. J. Huie, U. Masharani,
G. A. Brooks, Enteric and systemic postprandial lactate shuttle phases and dietary carbohydrate
carbon flow in humans, Nature metabolism 6 (2024). doi:10.1038/s42255-024-00993-1.
60 G. A. Brooks, J. A. Arevalo, A. Osmond, R. Leija, C. C. Curl, A. P. Tovar, Lactate in con-
temporary biology: a phoenix risen, The journal of physiology 600 (2022) 1229–1251. doi:
10.1113/JP280955.
61 M. Kobayashi, K. Narumi, A. Furugen, K. Iseki, Transport function, regulation, and biologu of
human monocarboxylated transporter 1 (hmct1) and 4 (hmct4), Pharmacology & Therapeutics
226 (2021) 107862. doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107862.
62 P. Louis, S. H. Duncan, P. O. Sheridan, A. W. Walker, H. J. Flint, Microbial lactate utilisation and
the stability of the gut microbiome, Gut Microbiome 3 (2022). doi:10.1017/gmb.2022.3.
63 S. Sivaprakasam, Y. D. Bhutia, S. Yang, V. Ganapathy, Short-chain fatty acid transporters: Role
38
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:44==
in colonic homeostasis, Comprehensive Physiology 8 (2018) 299–314. doi:10.1002/j.2040-
4603.2018.tb00009.x.
64 A. Borthakur, S. Saksena, R. K. Gill, W. A. Alrefai, K. Ramaswamy, P. K. Dudeja, Regulation of
monocarboxylate transporter 1 (mct1) promoter by butyrate in human intestinal epithelial cells:
Involvement of nf-κb pathway, Journal of Cellular Chemistry 103 (2008). doi:10.1002/jcb.
21532.
65 K. Sepponen, M. Ruusunen, J. Pakkanen, A. Pösö, Expression of cd147 and monocarboxylate
transporters mct1, mct2 and mct4 in porcine small intestine and colon, The Veterinary Journal
174 (1) (2007) 122–128. doi:10.1016/j.tvjl.2006.05.015.
66 S. J. Park, C. P. Smith, R. R. Wilbur, C. P. Cain, S. R. Kallu, S. Valasapalli, A. Sahoo, M. R. Guda,
A. J. Tsung, K. K. Velpula, An overview of mct1 and mct4 in gbm: small molecule transporters
with large implications, American Journal of Cancer Research 8 (2018).
67 D. Q. Wang, New concepts of mechanisms of intestinal cholesterol absorption, Annals of Hep-
atology 2 (2003) 113–121.
68 K. Paukner, I. K. Lesná, R. Poledne, Cholesterol in the cell membrane—an emerging player
in atherogenesis, International Journal of Molecular Sciences 23 (2022).
doi:10.3390/
ijms23010533.
69 M. Ouimet, T. J. Barrett, E. A. Fisher, Hdl and reverse cholesterol transport, Circulation Research
124 (10) (2019) 1505–1518. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.119.312617.
70 H. SEKIMOTO, O. SHIMADA, M. MAKANISHI, T. NAKANO, O. KATAYAMA, Interrela-
tionship between serum and fecal sterols, Japanese Journal of Medicine 22 (1) (1983) 14–20.
doi:10.2169/internalmedicine1962.22.14.
71 L. Li, K. Buhman, P. Hartman, D. Beitz, Hypocholesterolemic effect of eubacterium co-
prostanoligenes atcc 51222 in rabbits, Letters in Applied Microbiology 20 (3) (1995) 137–140.
doi:10.1111/j.1472-765X.1995.tb00410.x.
72 F. C. Baker, F. Siboza, A. Fuller, Short-chain fatty acids and bile acids in human faeces are
associated with the intestinal cholesterol conversion status, British Pharmacological Society 178
(2021) 3342–3353. doi:10.1111/bph.15440.
73 A. Kriaa, M. Bourgin, H. Mkaouar, A. Jablaoui, N. Akermi, S. Soussou, E. Maguin, M. Rhimi,
Microbial reduction of cholesterol to coprostanol: An old concept and new insights, Catalysts 9
(2019). doi:10.3390/catal9020167.
74 A. Haghikia, F. Zimmermann, P. Schumann, A. Jasina, J. Roessler, D. Schmidt, P. Heinze,
J. Kaisler, V. Nageswaran, A. Aigner, U. Ceglarek, R. Cineus, A. N. Hegazy, E. P. C. van der
Vorst, Y. Döring, C. M. Strauch, I. Nemet, V. Tremaroli, C. Dwibedi, N. Kränkel, D. M. Leist-
ner, M. M. Heimesaat, S. Bereswill, G. Rauch, U. Seeland, O. Soehnlein, D. N. Müller, R. Gold,
F. Bäckhed, S. L. Hazen, A. Haghikia, U. Landmesser, Propionate attenuates atherosclerosis
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
39
==PAGE:45==
by immune-dependent regulation of intestinal cholesterol metabolism, European Heart Journal
43 (6) (2021) 518–533. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab644.
75 Y. Chen, C. Xu, R. Huang, J. Song, D. Li, M. Xia, Butyrate from pectin fermentation inhibits in-
testinal cholesterol absorption and attenuates atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein e-deficient mice,
The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry 56 (2018) 175–182.
doi:10.1016/j.jnutbio.
2018.02.011.
76 Y. Feng, D. Xu, Short-chain fatty acids are potential goalkeepers of atherosclerosis, Frontiers in
Pharmacology 14 (2023). doi:10.3389/fphar.2023.1271001.
77 B. T. Palmisano, L. Zhu, R. H. Eckel, J. M. Stafford, Sex differences in lipid and lipoprotein
metabolism, Molecular Metabolism 15 (2018) 45–55, sex and Gender Differences in Metabolism
(2018). doi:10.1016/j.molmet.2018.05.008.
78 D. S. Freedman, J. D. Otvos, E. J. Jeyarajah, I. Shalaurova, L. A. Cupples, H. Parise, R. B.
D’Agostino, P. W. F. Wilson, E. J. Schaefer, Sex and age differences in lipoprotein subclasses
measured by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy: The framingham study, Clinical Chem-
istry 50 (7) (2004) 1189–1200. doi:10.1373/clinchem.2004.032763.
79 V. Bittner, Lipoprotein abnormalities related to women’s health, The American Journal of Car-
diology 90 (2002) 77–84. doi:10.1016/S0002-9149(02)02637-1.
80 E. Birkeland, S. Gharagozlian, J. Valeur, A.-M. Aas, Short-chain fatty acids as a link between
diet and cardiometabolic risk: a narrative review, Lipids in Health and Disease 22 (2023). doi:
10.1186/s12944-023-01803-5.
81 Y. Shin, S. Han, J. Kwon, S. Ju, T. G. Choi, I. Kang, S. S. Kim, Roles of short-chain fatty
acids in inflammatory bowel disease, Journal of Laboratory and Precision Medicine 15 (2023).
doi:10.3390/nu15204466.
82 K. B. H. Clancy, A. R. Baerwald, R. A. Pierson, Systemic inflammation is associated with
ovarian follicular dynamics during the human menstrual cycle, PLOS ONE 8 (5) (2013) 1–8.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0064807.
83 B. S. Harris, A. Z. Steiner, K. R. Faurot, A. Long, A. M. Jukic, Systemic inflammation and men-
strual cycle length in a prospective cohort study, American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology
228 (2023). doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2022.10.008.
84 A. Alvergne, V. H. Tabor, Is female health cyclical? evolutionary perspectives on menstruation,
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 33 (2018). doi:10.1016/j.tree.2018.03.006.
85 H. O. D. Critchley, R. W. Kelly, R. M. Brenner, D. T. Baird, The endocrinology of menstruation
– a role for the immune system, Clinical Endocrinology 55 (2001). doi:10.1046/j.1365-
2265.2001.01432.x.
40
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:46==
86 J. Evans, L. A. Salamonsen, Inflammation, leukocytes and menstruation, Reviews in Endocrine
and Metabolic Disorders 13 (2012). doi:10.1007/s11154-012-9223-7.
87 Y. Du, C. He, Y. An, Y. Huang, H. Zhang, W. Fu, M. Wang, Z. Shan, J. Xie, Y. Yang, B. Zhao,
The role of short chain fatty acids in inflammation and body health, International Journal of
Molecular Sciences 25 (2024). doi:10.3390/ijms25137379.
88 M. Mazidi, A. M. Valdes, J. M. Ordovas, W. L. Hall, J. C. Pujol, J. Wolf, G. Hadjigeorgiou,
N. Segata, N. Sattar, R. Koivula, T. D. Spector, P. W. Franks, S. E. Berry, Meal-induced in-
flammation: postprandial insights from the personalised responses to dietary composition trial
(predict) study in 1000 participants, The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 114 (3) (2021)
1028–1038. doi:10.1093/ajcn/nqab132.
89 B. Klop, S. D. Proctor, J. C. Mamo, K. M. Botham, M. C. Cabezas, Understanding postprandial
inflammation and its relationship to lifestyle behaviour and metabolic diseases, International
Journal of Vascular Medicine 2012 (2011). doi:10.1155/2012/947417.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
41
==PAGE:47==
A
Figure: Distribution of fasting
metabolites
Figure A.1: Distribution of the fasting metabolites for males and females. Metabolites
with a p-value below 0.05 for a Wilcoxon rank sum test are marked with an asterisk. The
units can be found in appendix B.
42
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.2: Distribution of the fasting metabolites for females stratified by the menstrual
phase. Metabolites with a p-value below 0.05 for a Wilcoxon rank sum test are marked
with an asterisk. The units can be found in appendix B.
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
43
==PAGE:49==
B
Table: Variable names and units
Abbreviated name
Description
Unit
Group
1
Acetate
Acetate
mmol/l
Ketone bodies
2
Acetoacetate
Acetoacetate
mmol/l
Ketone bodies
3
Acetone
Acetone
mmol/l
Ketone bodies
4
Ala
Alanine
mmol/l
Amino acids
5
Albumin
Albumin
g/l
Fluid balance
6
ApoA1
Apolipoprotein A1
g/l
Apolipoproteins
7
ApoB
Apolipoprotein B
g/l
Apolipoproteins
8
ApoB/ApoA1
Ratio of apolipoprotein B to apolipopro-
tein A1
ratio
Apolipoproteins
9
Cholines
Total cholines
mmol/l
Other lipids
10
Citrate
Citrate
mmol/l
Glycolysis
related metabo-
lites
11
Clinical LDL-C
Clinical LDL cholesterol
mmol/l
Cholesterol
12
Creatinine
Creatinine
μmol/l
Fluid balance
13
DHA
Docosahexaenoic acid
mmol/l
Fatty acids
14
DHA %
Ratio of docosahexaenoic acid to total
fatty acids
%
Fatty acids
15
Gln
Glutamine
mmol/l
Amino acids
16
Glucose
Glucose
mmol/l
Glycolysis
related metabo-
lites
17
Gly
Glycine
mmol/l
Amino acids
18
GlycA
Glycoprotein acetyls
mmol/l
Inflammation
19
HDL size
Average diameter for HDL particles
nm
Lipoprotein par-
ticle sizes
20
HDL-C
HDL cholesterol
mmol/l
Cholesterol
21
HDL-CE
Cholesteryl esters in HDL
mmol/l
Cholesteryl
esters
22
HDL-FC
Free cholesterol in HDL
mmol/l
Free cholesterol
23
HDL-L
Total lipids in HDL
mmol/l
Total lipids
24
HDL-P
Concentration of HDL particles
mmol/l
Lipoprotein par-
ticle concentra-
tions
25
HDL-PL
Phospholipids in HDL
mmol/l
Phospholipids
44
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:50==
26
HDL-TG
Triglycerides in HDL
mmol/l
Triglycerides
27
His
Histidine
mmol/l
Amino acids
28
Ile
Isoleucine
mmol/l
Amino acids
29
LA
Linoleic acid
mmol/l
Fatty acids
30
LA %
Ratio of linoleic acid to total fatty acids
%
Fatty acids
31
LDL size
Average diameter for LDL particles
nm
Lipoprotein par-
ticle sizes
32
LDL-C
LDL cholesterol
mmol/l
Cholesterol
33
LDL-CE
Cholesteryl esters in LDL
mmol/l
Cholesteryl
esters
34
LDL-FC
Free cholesterol in LDL
mmol/l
Free cholesterol
35
LDL-L
Total lipids in LDL
mmol/l
Total lipids
36
LDL-P
Concentration of LDL particles
mmol/l
Lipoprotein par-
ticle concentra-
tions
37
LDL-PL
Phospholipids in LDL
mmol/l
Phospholipids
38
LDL-TG
Triglycerides in LDL
mmol/l
Triglycerides
39
Lactate
Lactate
mmol/l
Glycolysis
related metabo-
lites
40
Leu
Leucine
mmol/l
Amino acids
41
MUFA
Monounsaturated fatty acids
mmol/l
Fatty acids
42
MUFA %
Ratio of monounsaturated fatty acids to
total fatty acids
%
Fatty acids
43
Omega-3
Omega-3 fatty acids
mmol/l
Fatty acids
44
Omega-3 %
Ratio of omega-3 fatty acids to total fatty
acids
%
Fatty acids
45
Omega-6
Omega-6 fatty acids
mmol/l
Fatty acids
46
Omega-6 %
Ratio of omega-6 fatty acids to total fatty
acids
%
Fatty acids
47
Omega-6/Omega-3
Ratio of omega-6 fatty acids to omega-3
fatty acids
ratio
Fatty acids
48
PUFA
Polyunsaturated fatty acids
mmol/l
Fatty acids
49
PUFA %
Ratio of polyunsaturated fatty acids to to-
tal fatty acids
%
Fatty acids
50
PUFA/MUFA
Ratio of polyunsaturated fatty acids to
monounsaturated fatty acids
ratio
Fatty acids
51
Phosphatidylcholines
Phosphatidylcholines
mmol/l
Other lipids
52
Phosphoglycerides
Phosphoglycerides
mmol/l
Other lipids
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
45
==PAGE:51==
53
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
mmol/l
Glycolysis
related metabo-
lites
54
Remnant-C
Remnant cholesterol (non-HDL, non-
LDL -cholesterol)
mmol/l
Cholesterol
55
SFA
Saturated fatty acids
mmol/l
Fatty acids
56
SFA %
Ratio of saturated fatty acids to total fatty
acids
%
Fatty acids
57
Sphingomyelins
Sphingomyelins
mmol/l
Other lipids
58
TG/PG
Ratio of triglycerides to phosphoglyc-
erides
ratio
Other lipids
59
Total BCAA
Total concentration of branched-chain
amino acids (leucine + isoleucine + va-
line)
mmol/l
Amino acids
60
Total-C
Total cholesterol
mmol/l
Cholesterol
61
Total-CE
Total esterified cholesterol
mmol/l
Cholesteryl
esters
62
Total-FA
Total fatty acids
mmol/l
Fatty acids
63
Total-FC
Total free cholesterol
mmol/l
Free cholesterol
64
Total-L
Total lipids in lipoprotein particles
mmol/l
Total lipids
65
Total-P
Total concentration of lipoprotein parti-
cles
mmol/l
Lipoprotein par-
ticle concentra-
tions
66
Total-PL
Total phospholipids in lipoprotein parti-
cles
mmol/l
Phospholipids
67
Total-TG
Total triglycerides
mmol/l
Triglycerides
68
Tyr
Tyrosine
mmol/l
Amino acids
69
Unsaturation
Degree of unsaturation
degree
Fatty acids
70
VLDL size
Average diameter for VLDL particles
nm
Lipoprotein par-
ticle sizes
71
VLDL-C
VLDL cholesterol
mmol/l
Cholesterol
72
VLDL-CE
Cholesteryl esters in VLDL
mmol/l
Cholesteryl
esters
73
VLDL-FC
Free cholesterol in VLDL
mmol/l
Free cholesterol
74
VLDL-L
Total lipids in VLDL
mmol/l
Total lipids
75
VLDL-P
Concentration of VLDL particles
mmol/l
Lipoprotein par-
ticle concentra-
tions
76
VLDL-PL
Phospholipids in VLDL
mmol/l
Phospholipids
77
VLDL-TG
Triglycerides in VLDL
mmol/l
Triglycerides
46
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:52==
78
Val
Valine
mmol/l
Amino acids
79
bOHbutyrate
3-Hydroxybutyrate
mmol/l
Ketone bodies
80
non-HDL-C
Total cholesterol minus HDL-C
mmol/l
Cholesterol
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
47
==PAGE:53==
C
Figure: Baseline corrected
postprandial curves
Figure C.1: Baseline corrected postprandial curves of the plasma metabolic markers
48
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
==PAGE:54==
D
PLS loadings for each metabolite
Seperate excel file. For models with multiple components, the PLS loading corresponds to the
weighted sum of all components using the percent of variation explained by each of the components
Associations Between Faecal Short-Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), Human Metabolism, and Systemic Inflammation
49
