==PAGE:1==
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment
from building to materials - the RockHouse case
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Quantitative Sustainability
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials
- the RockHouse case
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By
Tommaso Fattori
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Quantitative Sustainability, Bygningstorvet, Build-
ing 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over ten months at the Section for Quantitative Sustainabil-
ity Assessment, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulﬁlment for the degree Master of Science in In-
dustrial Engineering and Management, MSc Eng.
Tommaso Fattori - s222632
Signature
Date
ii
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis examines the urgent need to revise prevailing standards of resource consump-
tion in the built environment, with a particular focus on residential buildings. It argues
that eﬃciency improvements alone are insuﬃcient to achieve absolute sustainability tar-
gets, and that reducing the scale of consumptionthrough smaller living spaces, extended
building lifespans, and material eﬃciencyis essential.
Building on planetary boundary
frameworks and Life Cycle Assessment, the study proposes and tests new sharing princi-
ples for allocating a Share of the Safe Operating Space (SoSOS) from the building level to
components and, subsequently, to construction materials. These principles are applied to
a recently built single-family house that incorporates a substantial amount of Rockwool
insulation and related solutions, enabling an in-depth case study of both structural and
material-level performance. The analysis quantiﬁes the inﬂuence of diﬀerent allocation
approaches, highlights the role of embodied emissions in key materials such as steel and
concrete, and evaluates alternative design strategies to lower carbon footprints. The ﬁnd-
ings demonstrate that aligning housing provision with planetary limits requires systemic
demand-side measures, including policy incentives, ethical allocation of resources, and de-
sign innovations that enable comfortable, equitable living within reduced material and
energy budgets.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
AP
Ability to Pay
AESA
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment
AESR
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Reference
BR
Building Regulation
CF
Characterization Factors
EoL
End-of-life
EPC
Equal Per Capita
FCE
Final Consumption Expenditures
FHn
Fulﬁlment of Human Needs
FU
Functional Unit
GF
Grand Fathering
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GTP
Global Temperature Potential
GWP
Global Warming Potential
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCI
Life Cycle Inventory
LCIA
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PB
Planetary Boundary
PB-LCIA
Planetary boundary-based LCIA
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SOS
Safe Operating Space
SoSOS
Share of the Safe Operating Space
SP
Sharing Principle
SQ
Status Quo
SSP
Shared Socioeconomic Pathway
TS
Time Spent
iv
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Purpose of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Industry-related literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Academic literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Reading guide
8
4
Comparative Analysis - Reduction Roadmap and Heide
9
4.1
Methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Assigning a SoSOS to the building - RockHouse
19
5.1
Methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
v
==PAGE:8==
6
Assigning a SoSOS to the building components
27
6.1
Methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
Assigning a SoSOS to the building materials
37
7.1
Methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Limitations of the study and conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
A
55
vi
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
It is widely known that the lifestyle of the most developed countries in the world is not
sustainable for our planet. If we do not manage to reduce our environmental footprint,
primarily our CO2 emissions, we increase the risk of reversing the trend of environmental
and meteorological stability that characterizes the era in which we live, called the Holocene
(Steﬀen et al. 2015). For this reason, the Paris agreement (2015) set the goal of keeping the
increase in global average temperature well below 2°C above preindustrial levels (UNFCCC
2015).
Denmark, as a country, has a very high carbon footprint per capita and is committed
to reducing it in the coming years. The Danish climate act set a legally binding goal to
reduce the country’s greenhouse gas emissions by at least 70% by 2030 and to become a
carbon-neutral nation by 2050.
The construction sector is responsible for around 37% of the world’s carbon emissions and
more than one third of Denmark’s (CONCITO 2023). Therefore, it is of great importance
to ﬁnd and apply strategies to reduce the environmental impact of buildings, especially
with respect to CO2 emissions. The Danish government has made it a legal requirement for
companies to reduce their environmental impact by establishing maximum CO2 emission
limits for new construction. These have recently been revised, incorporating updated and
diﬀerentiated LCA-based values tailored to various construction typologies, going from a
general limit of 12 kgCO2-eq/m2/yr to diﬀerent standards based on the building type.
1.2
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment
1.2.1
Theoretical background
The AESA is the process used to determine whether a product, system, or entity can be
considered sustainable from an absolute perspective. Performing an AESA implies having
a complete Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) study on hand, as it consists of comparing the
results of the Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) stage with an assigned value of impact,
namely the share of Safe Operating Space (SoSOS) that is assigned to the object of the
study (Bjørn et al. 2019). The comparison is carried out by calculating the Sustainability
Ratio, obtained by dividing the estimated environmental impact by the SoSOS for each
of the selected impact categories. While various approaches exist for deﬁning a full SOS
(Vea et al. 2020), this study will only introduce a part of them.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
1
==PAGE:10==
The process of deﬁning a SoSOS consists in downscaling the Full Safe Operating Space for
a Planetary Boundary (PB) to the level of the product or system studied (Heide, M. Z.
Hauschild, et al. 2023). "The Planetary Boundaries are the safe limits for human pressure
on the nine critical processes which together maintain a stable and resilient Earth", as
deﬁned by the Stockholm Resilience Center (Center 2012).
The full (or global) SOS
is determined by the diﬀerence between the planetary boundary level and the natural
background level, i.e. the share of planetary boundary that is occupied by the earth’s
system without human intervention (Strømgen&Kristensen 2022).
In order to assign a SoSOS, diﬀerent Sharing Principles (SPs) can be used. These are
for a vast majority based on one or more distributive justice theories, which goal is to
deﬁne the "ideal just distribution of beneﬁts and burdens" among people (Ryberg, M. M.
Andersen, et al. 2020). Ryberg provides a list of distributive justice theories and their
connection to the choice of SPs in several studies. A very commonly applied SP is the
Equal Per Capita (EPC), based on the egalitarian theory. This is frequently applied for
geographical downscaling, while it is often combined with utilitarian-based SPs (e.g., Final
Consumption Expenditure or FCE) when the object of a study is an industry, sector of the
economy, company or even a single product or system. Finally, another very common SP
is based on acquired rights and it is called Grandfathering (GF). This principle considers
the impact trend in a speciﬁc period of time e.g., its past carbon emissions. An overview
of the most common SPs used in AESAs of buildings was developed as part of Strømgen
& Kristensen Master’s Thesis in 2022, and it is hereby reported in Table 1.1
Further insights into the SPs used in this study are provided later in the document (maybe
link to speciﬁc chapter). The process to obtain a SoSOS for an entity is summarized in
equation 1.1, where O is the object of the study, CC refers to Climate Change, NBL is the
Natural Background Level, and S is the share of of impact assigned to the object based
on a speciﬁc Sharing Principle.
Principle
Sharing
Rule
Description
Applicability
Egalitarian
Equal Per
Capita (EPC)
The share is assigned equally between all
individuals
To country,
region, or
individual level
Prioritarian
Ability to Pay
(AP)
The assigned share is negatively correlated with
a region’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per
capita. Hence, an economically wealthy region
gets a relatively small SoSOS and vice versa.
To country,
region, or
individual level
Acquired
Rights
Grandfathering
(GF)
The assigned share is proportional to the speciﬁc
environmental impact trend in a selected
reference year
To country,
region, or
individual level
Status Quo
(SQ)
The assigned share is proportional to current
environmental impact trends
Utilitarian
Final
Consumption
Expenditure
(FCE)
The assigned share is proportional to the ﬁnal
consumption expenditure. Hence, the focus is on
economical parameters instead of individuals and
impact trends
To country,
region, or
individual level
Time Spent
(TS)
The assigned share is proportional to the time
spent on a given activity
Table 1.1: Overview of common Sharing Principles used in construction
2
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:11==
SoSOSO,CC
=
( PBCC
−
NBLCC )
∗
P
∏
p=1
SO,p =
SOSFull
∗
P
∏
p=1
SO,p
(1.1)
As mentioned by Ryberg, the choice of Sharing Principles can greatly inﬂuence the results
of an AESA, with the diﬀerence increasing proportionally with the number of steps applied
in deﬁning the SoSOS(Ryberg et al. 2018). Therefore, it is important to be transparent
about the choice of the selected SPs and justify it, and it is suggested to apply diﬀerent
SPs and compare the results obtained to make up for the uncertainty (C. E. Andersen
et al. 2020). The last step of an AESA consists in comparing the impact potential of the
entity studied with the respective allocated SoSOS. A ratio lower or equal to 1 indicates
the activity is within its absolute sustainability limits, while a ratio higher than 1 means
it exceeds them.
SR = Climate Change Impact
SoSOSO,CC
(1.2)
1.3
Purpose of the study
The main topics that this thesis aims to cover are the following:
• Current carbon limits for buildings disregard their function as housing providers,
focusing solely on emissions per square meter without considering the number of
residents accommodated. This approach allows buildings with larger areas to have
proportionally higher emissions, irrespective of their housing capacity.
• In order to identify the most environmentally critical elements in a building and
understand if current eﬀorts can meet sustainability goals, it can be helpful to per-
form AESA studies on building components and/or materials. By doing that, it will
be easier to deﬁne responsibilities among the actors in the construction industry to
meet these goals.
This thesis aims to investigate the implications of adopting function-based carbon limits
in residential construction in Denmark. Furthermore, it aims to downscale the SoSOS
assigned to buildings as a whole to reach component and material level, to attempt to
provide insights into the absolute environmental performance of those elements. Therefore,
only the impact category of Climate Change will be considered in this study.
This is done by the following steps:
• Compare two existing methods for deﬁning a SoSOS to buildings in the Climate
Change PB: an eﬃciency-based method and a function-based method
• Propose new methods for downscaling the process to component level and subse-
quently to material (or product) level
• Suggesting additional steps to consider when assessing the environmental perfor-
mance of a building in the long term and their relative importance in the construction
sector
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1
Industry-related literature
2.1.1
BR18
In the last years, there has been a lot of work going on to set new CO2 limits for buildings
in Denmark. As mentioned above, the Danish government has recently updated the previ-
ous limit of 12 kgCO2-eq/m2/yr to new values for diﬀerent typologies of buildings (BR18
2018). The maximum values decrease on a 2-year basis until 2029, as shown in table 2.1
These are eﬃciency-based standards, meaning they pose a limit to the carbon footprint
a building can have per unit of area, but there are no actual restrictions to the absolute
amount of CO2-eq emissions associated with the building. In practice, a big villa that
can host one family will be complying with the regulation even if its greenhouse gas emis-
sions are much higher than a small ﬂat that hosts the same number of people, as long as
the ratio of emissions-to-area is the same. These are determined both using a scientiﬁc
approach by downscaling the PB for climate change to the national level and through ne-
gotiation with a broad political majority and actors in the construction sector. As for the
speciﬁc calculations that resulted in the new limits, the steps are not fully explained, but
we can suppose that the EPC and FCE principles were used to downscale the global SOS,
respectively, to national and sector level. Thus, while the Building Regulation is a useful
tool to sure drive more sustainable practices in the construction sector, the process of
estimating the maximum limit values could be improved in order to ensure a fairer distri-
bution of burdens among the Danish population. Setting absolute standards based on the
number of individuals living in the dwelling would ensure that wealthy people invest more
in sustainable alternatives, in the case they decide to allow themselves more space comfort.
4
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:13==
Climate requirements for buildings
2025
2027
2029
Holiday home under 150 sqm.
4.0
3.6
3.2
Single family houses, townhouses, tiny
houses and holiday homes over 150sqm.
6.7
6.0
5.4
Apartment buildings
7.5
6.8
6.1
Oﬃce buildings
7.5
6.8
6.1
Institutions
8.0
7.2
6.4
Other new construction, such as shops,
warehouses and parking garages
8.0
7.2
6.4
Table 2.1: New carbon limits for construction in Denmark
2.1.2
The Reduction Roadmap Denmark
Important work was also carried out by the non-proﬁt organization called the Reduction
Roadmap Denmark, which operates in a cross-sectoral partnership with advisors, research
institutes, architects, and NGOs within the construction industry with the aim of reducing
carbon emissions from the building sector in Denmark. They identiﬁed the SoSOS for new
construction in Denmark starting from the global SOS deﬁned by Petersen (Petersen et al.
2022), which uses data from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC AR6
Synthesis Report-Climate Change 2023). The value amounts to 2.51 billion tons CO2-eq/yr
emission target and assumes global emissions must drop from 47 billion tons CO2-eq/yr
to the target value. The global SOS is downscaled to country-level following the EPC
principle.
To reach sector-level (construction) and sub-sector-level (new construction),
the principle of Grandfathering is applied.
Thus, it is assumed that the construction
sector will keep the same share of the whole country’s GHG emissions and the amount
of m2 of new construction per year will stay the same. Finally, assuming a lifespan of 50
years for all construction, the limit is converted into kg CO2-eq/m2/yr.
2.2
Academic literature
2.2.1
The research at the Technical University of Denmark
The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) is one of the pioneers in the topic of absolute
sustainability of buildings. The study by Andersen (C. E. Andersen et al. 2020) evaluates
the absolute environmental sustainability of six single-family stand-alone dwellings in Den-
mark. Each dwelling was characterized by a unique design focus, such as the use of recycled
materials (Upcycle House), maintenance-free materials with extended service life (Tradi-
tional and Innovative Maintenance-free Houses), adaptability for expansion (Adaptable
House), and smart technologies to inﬂuence resident behavior (Quota House). To assess
environmental performance, life cycle assessments (LCAs) were coupled with two absolute
environmental sustainability assessment (AESA) methods: carrying capacity-based nor-
malization factors and the Planetary Boundaries (PB) framework. In this study, the global
SOS for climate change is in accordance with the Planetary Boundaries (PB) Framework.
The starting point is the PB deﬁned by Rockström (Rockström et al. 2009), to which is
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
5
==PAGE:14==
subtracted the natural background level (Steﬀen et al. 2015) to obtain the full SOS (Ry-
berg et al. 2018). The work of Bjørn (Bjørn et al. 2015) and Sala (Sala et al. 2016) allowed
converting the value of the full SOS from the unit of ppm CO2 to Gt CO2-eq. The authors
applied diﬀerent sharing principles and combined them to allocate environmental impacts
among the residents, including EPC, FCE of households, GF of CO2 emissions and energy
consumption, and time spent at home. The results demonstrated a strong dependency of
the assessment on the chosen sharing principles. While the use of recycled materials and
reduced energy consumption showed signiﬁcant potential for achieving sustainability, all
buildings exceeded their allocated share of the SoSOS in at least three out of four impact
categories. This emphasizes that absolute sustainability is not yet achievable with current
practices. The study highlights energy consumption during operation and material choice
as the most critical aspects of the Danish building sector, necessitating a transition to a
cleaner energy mix and changes in living behaviors. The authors advocate for systemic
changes involving policy interventions, improved building designs, and consumer behavior
adjustments to align the sector with sustainability goals.
The study by Heide (Heide and Micheal Hauschild 2023b) builds on the concept of absolute
environmental sustainability assessments (AESAs) to propose diﬀerentiated CO2 limits for
buildings. They emphasize the need to account for the building’s function, moving beyond
the conventional practice of setting uniform limits based on area (kg CO2-eq/m2/year).
The Fulﬁllment of Human Needs (FHN) framework was developed and applied, prioritiz-
ing suﬃcientarian ethics to ensure that emissions are allocated according to the societal
importance of the services provided by diﬀerent building typologies. Suﬃcientarianism is
a principle of distributive justice which evaluates social allocations based on how many
individuals reach a deﬁned threshold of well-being or consumption. Instead of aiming for
equality or maximizing total welfare, suﬃcientarianism emphasizes that as many people
as possible should have "enough" that is, a suﬃcient level of resources or welfare to live
a decent life (Chamber et al. 2024). Case studies included residential buildings, hospitals,
kindergartens, and university facilities, demonstrating the dependency of sustainability
results on the choice of sharing principles. The ﬁndings underline, in the same way as
the study by Andersen, that energy consumption during operation remains a critical issue
across all typologies. To improve sustainability in the Danish building sector, the authors
call for systemic changes, including function-speciﬁc CO2 limits and a cleaner energy mix.
They further highlight that the current building regulations in Denmark, which apply the
same CO2 limit within a building typology, risk incentivizing larger buildings rather than
promoting resource eﬃciency.
In contrast with the traditional methods for assigning SoSOS to products or sectors, the
FHN framework applies the concept of sustainable consumption while accounting for the
social function of the building itself, which in the case of residential dwellings is to provide
housing to a certain number of people. This study refers to the IPCC SSP1-1.9 (1 2023)
to deﬁne a global SOS for climate change. This is a dynamic approach that assumes a
rapid switch to more sustainable practices and assigns a decreasing yearly SOS for each
decade until 2050. For 2020, it amounts to 52.1 billion tons CO2-eq/yr.
Work from both Andersen and Heide support assigning a SoSOS to residential building
with a strong focus on accounting for the number of people that can live in a building
to account for the main function that residential dwellings provides to society, which is
in fact to provide housing to individuals. In general, researchers at DTU advocate the
need for more standardized AESA methods and vocabulary, especially in non-academic
work.
This would result in a lower chance of confusion and misunderstanding, which
6
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:15==
are currently not uncommon, and make AESA a more ﬁtting tool for decision-making
support (Bjørn et al. 2020). Andersen also mentions the ineﬀectiveness of current rules
and limits in the built environment, which do not give enough importance to operational
energy use still being one of the top contributors in the overall emissions of buildings.
In addition, he criticises the current approach to the problem as non suﬃciently strict:
"...current national legislative initiatives focus on merely reducing the GHGs emissions
from new buildings, ignoring the fact that such policies still increase the total emissions
from the built environment to the atmosphere; only a requirement for CO2 neutrality
or lower will lead to a net decrease of the environmental impacts from new structures."
(C. M. E. Andersen et al. 2020).
2.2.2
From 4 to 1 planet
The "From 4 to 1 Planet" initiative, spearheaded by Realdania and the VILLUM Foun-
dation, seeks to align housing construction with the ecological boundaries of the planet
by targeting a 75% reduction in carbon emissions. This ambitious goal is derived from
the recognition that if everyone consumed resources at the current average Danish rate,
humanity would require four planets to sustain itself. By recalibrating resource consump-
tion to ﬁt within the capacity of one planet, the initiative establishes a framework for
sustainable housing that considers lifecycle assessments, innovative materials, and energy-
eﬃcient designs. The 75% reduction target was calculated based on Denmarks current
emissions in the construction sector, adjusted to reﬂect global equity in resource use and
Denmark’s commitment to the Paris Agreement. The initiative showcases the feasibility of
this reduction through demonstration projects and collaboration with stakeholders across
the construction value chain, aiming to inspire systemic change within the industry. This
aligns with broader eﬀorts to incorporate planetary boundaries into urban planning and
building practices (Boligbyggeri fra 4 til 1 planet n.d.).
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
7
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Reading guide
The sections in this report are structured as follows:
• A comparative analysis of the FHN framework and the method used by the Re-
duction Roadmap Denmark to assign a SoSOS to residential buildings. The results
of the two diﬀerent methodologies are then compared by testing the FHN on the
10-building collection.
• an AESA of the case house provided by ROCKWOOL, divided into 3 main parts:
A. a SoSOS is assigned to the building, and a Sustainability Ratio (SR) is calcu-
lated to assess if the building can be considered sustainable from an absolute
perspective.
B. a SoSOS is assigned to the single components of the building using 3 diﬀerent
Sharing Principles, of which 2 proposed by the author. The SR will then be
calculated for each component for each method.
C. a SoSOS will be calculated for the construction materials of a selected range of
the building using a combination of 2 Sharing Principles. This part of the study
will be carried out by grouping the construction materials by their primary
function as part of the component, and a SR will be calculated for each group.
Furthermore, the comparative analysis and the steps A, B, and C will have 4 sec-
tions each: A Methodologies section introducing the theories and methods applied, a
Data section presenting the relevant information used in the step, a Results section
presenting the conducted work and the results thereof, and a Discussion section
reﬂecting on the work conducted in that section.
• Closing chapters including Uncertainty Analysis, limitations and conclusion.
8
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 4
Comparative Analysis - Reduction
Roadmap and Heide
4.1
Methodologies
The purpose of this chapter is to analyse two diﬀerent methodologies for assigning a SoSOS
to buildings: namely the method used by the Reduction Roadmap Denmark initiative and
the method applied by Heide, where the newly formulated Fulﬁllment of Human Needs
SP is used. In this chapter, these two methods will be referred to respectively as the
RR method and the FHN framework. The analysis will be performed by ﬁrst presenting
each step of the allocation of a SoSOS and, secondly, by applying those to a sample of 10
buildings to identify the diﬀerences in results of applying the two methods.
The reason behind the choice of the two objects of comparison are the following:
• The RR method is strongly considered in the construction industry, coming from a
collaboration among several actors and known experts in the sector. Furthermore,
the allocation steps are public and explained with a good level of detail(RR 2023).
• The FHN framework is considered by the author of this thesis to be an innovative
approach to assign a just SoSOS to a product or system, by merging the theories
of egalitarianism and suﬃcientarianism to drive equity in the allocation of resources
among the population.
4.1.1
The Reduction Roadmap method
The global SOS
In order to formulate a carbon limit for new construction expressed in kgCO2/m2/yr, the
founders of the RR initiative start from the global SOS identiﬁed by Petersen (Petersen et
al. 2022) according to the IPCC AR6 report (IPCC AR6 Synthesis Report-Climate Change
2023), which can be broadly deﬁned as the comprehensive synthesis of the latest scientiﬁc
knowledge on climate change. The value for a full climate change SOS is relative to the
95% likelihood scenario of staying within the 1.5°C temperature increase and amounts to
2.51 Gt CO2-eq/yr.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
9
==PAGE:18==
Allocation steps
1. The SoSOS for country-level was obtained in accordance with the Paris Agreement,
allocating 0.075% of the global carbon budget to Denmark which is equal to 1.9
million tons CO2/yr.
This result is based on the EPC principle, which depends
solely on the population of the country in 2015.
2. To downscale the previous value to sector level, the GF principle was used, meaning
that it is estimated that in the future, new construction will contribute to the coun-
try’s emissions in the same way it does in the reference year. The share amounts to
3.3% as of 2022. The value obtained is 62.123 tons CO2/yr.
3. By dividing for the yearly average area of new construction in Denmark, which
amounts to around 3 million m2/yr, the obtained value is 20 kgCO2-eq/m2.
4. Based on a 50-year reference period, the limit amounts to 0.4 kgCO2-eq/m2/yr.
5. The ﬁnal emission target is intended to be reached progressively by decreasing the
emissions of the construction sector yearly. Under the 67% likelihood scenario to
stay within the 1.5°C temperature increase (the most commonly referred to), it is
expected to reach the target value by 2032. This results in a limit of greenhouse gas
emissions of 5.8 kg CO2-eq/m2/yr for new construction in Denmark in 2025 (RR
2023).
It is relevant to note that the RR method also considers the likelihood scenarios of 83%
and 50% of staying within the temperature increase target; the former reducing the period
allowed to reach the target until 2029 and the latter extending it to 2036. The calculation
steps are to obtain a SoSOS for new construction under the RR method is presented in
equation 4.1
SoSOSConstr,RR =
SOSworld,AR6
Popworld(t) PopDk(t)
∗
CO2Housing,Dk(t)
CO2Tot,Dk(t)
∗
1
m2/yrNew,Dk(t)
∗
1
50
=
5.8kgCO2/m2/yr
(4.1)
4.1.2
The Fulﬁllment of Human Needs Framework
The Full SOS
The developers of the FHN framework, namely Heide and Hauschild, take as a starting
point for their SoSOS allocation the global SOS deﬁned by the IPCC SSP1-1.9 scenario,
which falls within the IPCC AR6 but allows humanity to cause higher emissions in the
early years of the sustainable transition and then progressively reach lower targets of GHG
emissions. The SSP1-1.9 is a sustainability-focused pathway that aims to maintain the
level of radiating forces around 1.9 W/m2 (1 2023) by 2100, which is consistent with lim-
iting the increase in temperature below 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. This scenario
sets ambitious goals for decarbonization and relies on a sustainability-oriented world with
reduced inequality, slower population growth, and high international cooperation. It as-
sumes the use of technologies like Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) and a strong shift
to highly renewable-based energy production. The yearly GHG emissions targets are set
10
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:19==
for each decade, starting from 52.1 Gt CO2-eq/yr in 2020, reaching 30.88 Gt CO2-eq/yr
in 2030, net-zero emissions (8.33 CO2-eq/yr) by 2050, and net negative emissions by 2075.
The SoSOS is obtained by the sum over 50 years of the Full SOS multiplied by Denmark’s
share of global population, both relative to each year, as shown in equation 4.2
From country to sector-level allocation - The FHN Sharing Principle
In the same way as the RR initiative, the country-level SoSOS is assigned following the
EPC principle. The sector and sub-sector-level allocation is divided in 2 steps applying
the FCE principle.
In order to deﬁne a target-share of emissions for the construction
sector in Denmark, the FHN framework takes as a reference the average share of FCE for
housing in 11 countries identiﬁed as the closest to be absolutely sustainable. This step
applies the concept of sustainable consumption, which can be explained by the following
sentence: "If absolute sustainable countries exist, their consumption pattern could be a
key to understanding the importance of diﬀerent needs fulﬁllment for a population to
live within the biophysical limits of our planet" (Heide and Michael Hauschild 2023a).
The potential candidate countries were identiﬁed based on three most commonly applied
indicators for assessing environmental and social sustainability at the national level. These
are the Human Development Index (HDI), which on a scale between 0 and 1 had to be
above 0.8, the ecological footprint, which had to be below 1.6 global ha/capita/year, and
the consumption-based GHG emissions, which had to be below 985 CO2-eq/capita/year
(Bjørn et al. 2015). Since no country in the world meets all requirements, those were
relaxed to new values presented in the study. 19 countries were selected as meeting these
new requirements, but, among these, for only 11 it was possible to retrieve data regarding
speciﬁc FCE for economic sectors. The ﬁnal selected countries were: Albania, Algeria,
Armenia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Jordan, Philippines, Samoa, Sri Lanka,
Tunisia. The average share of FCE related to housing in these countries amounted to 8.8%
Final allocation steps
As mentioned above, also the subsector-level allocation is performed applying the FCE
principle. In this step, the share of emissions assigned to the dwelling refers to the share
of FCE of the consumption categories directly connected to the dwelling on the totality
of FCE on housing in Denmark in 2022. The diﬀerence between the two is the category
named "Water supply and miscellaneous services relating to the dwelling" ((COICOP)).
The last step applies again the EPC principle to include the typical function that a resi-
dential building provides to a society, which is to host a certain number of people. This
step is carried out by dividing the number of residents in the building by the total popula-
tion of the country, assigning a carbon limit to a building based on the carbon budget per
capita. This leads to a total amount of kgCO2-eq, which is then divided by the reference
area of the dwelling and by the expected lifetime of the dwelling to get to the unit of
kgCO2-eq/m2/yr and make the SoSOS comparable to the most commonly used carbon
limits, e.g. the RR or the BR18. By doing this, Heide allows a carbon budget that fol-
lows the egalitarian theory and so depends solely on the amount of people residing in the
dwelling that is object of study.
SoSOSConstr,FHN =
2074
∑
t=2024
(SOSworld,SSP 1−1.9(t)
Popworld(t)
∗PopDk(t)
)
∗SCHousing
∗FCEdwelling
FCEHousing
∗
Popdwelling
PopDk(t)
∗
1
m2
dwelling ∗50
=
kgCO2/m2/yr
(4.2)
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
11
==PAGE:20==
4.1.3
Key diﬀerences
• Progressivity of impact reduction: While the RR method starts from a single
value, which is the yearly amount of global GHG emissions deemed acceptable to
reach the temperature increase reduction target of 1.5 °C, the FHN framework con-
siders a very speciﬁc path of emission reduction based on an optimistic scenario of
global dynamics that goes from the starting year of the study until the year 2100.
It then calculates an average value for the period of the study (typically 50 years for
residential buildings). To incorporate the aspect of progressivity in impact reduc-
tion, the RR method considers instead diﬀerent scenarios based on the likelihood of
meeting the sustainability target. The FHN framework does not consider this aspect,
as the IPCC SSP1-1.9 is considered to be the scenario that meets the impact reduc-
tion targets "for sure". This aspect makes the FHN framework stricter, advocating
the need of starting to change our consumption patterns from day 1. Although the
IPCC SSP1-1.9 initially allows humanity to keep relatively high emissions in the
ﬁrst years, the decreasing curve is very steep and sets very ambitious targets for the
short term.
• Inverting consumption trends: Although the authors of the RR method strongly
advocate the need to change our consumption patterns in order to reach sustain-
ability goals - Eﬃciency without Suﬃciency is waste - , this aspect is not directly
included in the calculation of the carbon limit for new construction. By allocating a
SoSOS based on the current or recent past share of emissions from the construction
sector and total amount of new construction, the limit expresses how much the dan-
ish construction sector should reduce its impact per unit in order to maintain the
same productivity levels. On the other hand, the FHN SP draws on the principle
of sustainable consumption by taking example from the best performing countries
in the world (according to some speciﬁc indexes) and emulate their consumption
patterns, in this case expressed in form of household expenditure in the construction
sector.
• Case diﬀerentiation: Both methods presented in this study do not allow for dif-
ferentiation in regard to the typology of building considered; the RR method assigns
to all new construction the same carbon eﬃciency standard and the FHN framework
presented in this study only applies to residential buildings. The latter, though, as
its peculiar characteristic, assigns a SoSOS to a building based on the number of peo-
ple that live inside it. By combining this feature with accounting for the area of the
building, it assigns a carbon budget that is very likely to change for every building
studied. This aspect is particularly relevant for the method, as it ensures an equal
distribution of burdens among the population. Every single person is assigned the
same amount of emission allowance, and it is the individual’s responsibility to adapt
the carbon eﬃciency of their house based on its area. We can say that this step
indirectly incorporates the distributive theory of prioritarianism, by setting higher
eﬃciency standards to the wealthier classes of society (assuming that such classes
are the ones allowing themselves more space comfort for residential dwellings).
• Compatibility with industry dynamics: While the FHN based SoSOSs may
sound fairer from a social point of view, they do not account for the feasibility in
complying with those in today’s society. As expressed by Chambers, most main-
stream economic frameworks prioritize aggregate gains over ensuring suﬃciency for
all (Chamber et al. 2024), which makes suﬃcentarianism very far from reality. On
the other hand, the RR sets targets that are both ambitious and take into account
12
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:21==
current productivity trends, making it easier for the actors in the industry to agree
with such.
4.2
Data
In this section, the FHN framework will be tested on 10 buildings to analyze the diﬀer-
ences that such method brings if used to assess the environmental performance of the
construction sector. The 10 cases have been extracted from a study conducted by mem-
bers of the Aalborg University (Garnow et al. 2024), which groups and analyzes the 24
best-practice cases in housing construction. Among these, the 10 with the lowest values
of kgCO2-eq/m2/yr were selected. The choice of the size of the sample comes both from
the fact that almost the totality of the buildings comply with the RR standards (8 out
of 10), and to ensure to have a relevant amount of cases for the analysis. For simplicity,
when referred to as a group, the name 10Best will be used.
The 10 building cases are of diﬀerent natures. Speciﬁcations about these are provided in
Table 4.1). Pixie is a term used in the study to refer to a non-completed house. The data
on emissions are therefore based on the design plan of the building.
Building
Typology
Area (m2)
Residents
kgCO2-
eq/m2/yr
m2/person
kgCO2-
eq/person/yr
R01
pixie
1029
28
2.89
36.8
107
ENF01
single-family
147
4
3.85
36.8
143.62
ENF03
single-family
86
4
4.17
21.5
90.78
R04
terraced
8368
207
4.6
40.4
189.19
R05
terraced
4788
216
4.62
22.2
103.22
E02
multi-storey
2853
189
5.09
15.1
76.04
R06
terraced
5 071
222
5.25
22.8
122.49
ENF05
single-family
195
4
5.47
48.8
270.9
R02
terraced
4148
148
5.91
28
165.2
E05
multi-storey
17530
520
6.02
33.7
202.49
Table 4.1: 10 best-performing cases from Garnow et al.
4.3
Results
In Fig.4.1, which shows the impact of 10Best buildings compared to the BR18 carbon
limits, the color code for the building names matches the speciﬁc BR18 limit assigned to
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
13
==PAGE:22==
the type of house. For the sake of space in the chart, the BR18 carbon limit for apartment
dwellings is referred to as BR18 limit A and the one assigned to single-family houses,
terraced houses etc. is referred to as BR18 limit B. All the buildings comply with the
relative limits, and only two of them exceed the RR limit of 5.8 kgCO2/m2/yr. Figure
4.2, instead, shows the results of the application of Heide’s method for the allocation
of a SoSOS to the buildings. It can be seen how the results regarding the environmental
performance of the buildings change when considering the residents in the speciﬁc dwelling.
The buildings ENF01 and R04, among the best performing when considering the carbon
impact per square meter, exceed the assigned SoSOS, together with ENF05, R02 and E05.
By changing the perspective of the assessment, now only 50% of the cases are considered
to be sustainable. The buildings with a higher area per person are more keen to exceed
the assigned limits, due to the higher material intensity that an increased living space
implies.
Figure 4.1: 10Best compared with Reduction Roadmap and BR18 carbon limits
14
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.2: 10Best impact potential and the respective limits set using Heide, IPCC SSP
1-1.9
Figure 4.3: Percentage reduction in impact per quare meter needed to reach absolute
sustainability according to Heide, IPCC SSP1-1.9
It is interesting to see how much each building would have to improve its climate change im-
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
15
==PAGE:24==
pact per unit of area to stay within the newly assigned carbon limits, as shown in ﬁgure 4.3.
The value to consider is not anymore expressed in kgCO2/m2/yr, but in kgCO2/person/yr,
assigning the same SoSOS to each individual. Building ENF05, with a residential area of
195 m2 to only 4 people, should reduce its impact to below 3 kgCO2/m2/yr, which results
in reducing to half the actual value. Figures 4.4 and 4.5 show the diﬀerence between actual
impact per area, number of residents and living space per resident compared to the value
that, considering the other parameters as constant, should be modiﬁed to reach absolute
sustainability for each building according to the FHN method. The buildings that can be
considered as the most sustainable are ENF03 and E02, which are also the buildings pro-
viding the lowest amount of square meters per person; respectively 21.5 and 15.1. It can
be seen, in fact, that both of these, together with R01 and R05, could hypothetically oﬀer
more space to each resident and still stay within a sustainable space for climate change.
E02 could reach a value around 26 m2 per person, getting much closer to the average of
the sample, which is around 30.
Figure 4.4: Minimum requirements for number of residents to reach absolute sustainability
according to Heide, IPCC SSP1-1.9 for each building (assuming same carbon eﬃciency)
16
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.5: Maximum requirements for are per resident to reach absolute sustainability
according to Heide, IPCC SSP1-1.9 for each building (assuming same carbon eﬃciency)
4.3.1
Discussion
Although the living space per person does not directly inﬂuence a building’s performance,
larger buildings require more materials and energy consumption, generally resulting in
higher overall impacts. In fact, 4 out of the 5 buildings that stay within the assigned
SoSOS are also the last 4 in living space per person. Although, it can be seen in ﬁgure
4.5 that buildings ENF03, R05, and E02 could increase their living space per person
respectively to around 26 m2 and 28 m2 (for the two latter), which can be considered
more than enough space comfort, especially if compared with the average of 30 m2 of the
sample. It is also interesting to notice that ENF05, R02, and E05 not only exceed their
assigned share due to the space comfort that is allowed to the residents, but because of
a combination of this and the carbon eﬃciency. In fact, these buildings lay in the higher
half in relation to kgCO2/m2/yr. This means that, by combining small improvements
into both aspects, we can substantially reduce the overall share of the SoSOS that the
construction sector occupies. By focusing on both eﬃciency and consumption standards,
the adjustments needed would be much lower than by only one of the two aspects. As
advocated by Nesterova, several solutions can be applied to contain resource consumption
and limit new construction, while being able to provide a healthy and comfortable lifestyle
to an increasing number of people (“(PDF) Degrowth Perspective for Sustainability in
Built Environments” 2025). The solutions proposed by the author are the following:
1. Right-Sizing Living Spaces.
Design and inhabit only as much space as gen-
uinely needed, optimizing for functionality and eﬃciency rather than size to reduce
embodied and operational resource consumption while maintaining livability.
2. Adaptive Reuse and Retroﬁtting. Prioritize updating and repurposing existing
buildings instead of demolition and new construction to conserve materials and en-
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
17
==PAGE:26==
ergy and expand housing capacity via conversions. This is considered one of the best
solutions for the short term also in the construction industry, as it ﬁnds a compro-
mise to limit short term impact (from building from scratch) and ensure constant
gains over time (by installation of more energy eﬃcient components) (CONCITO
2023)
3. Sharing and Common Spaces. Incorporate shared amenities (kitchens, lounges,
gardens) in co-housing or multi-unit buildings so more functions are available per
square metre without each household owning them individually.
4. Eﬃcient Multi-Functional Design. Use ﬂexible architecture (movable partitions,
transformable furniture) so single areas serve multiple purposes, lowering space needs
while supporting varied lifestyles.
5. Regulations and Incentives Favoring Low-Consumption Housing. Imple-
ment zoning, ﬂoor-area caps, tax beneﬁts, or embodied-carbon pricing to disincen-
tivize oversized developments and encourage leaner housing.
6. Community-Based Planning & Social Equity. Involve residents in design de-
cisions and prioritize aﬀordable, compact housing that meets diverse needs to ensure
space reductions improve resource justice and well-being rather than causing depri-
vation.
R01 represents a peculiar case, since although the living space per person is on the high
side in the case collection, its emission per square meter are so low that the building’s
overall impact is well below its SoSOS. An important outcome of this analysis is that,
based on the current impact eﬃciency of the analyzed collection, the allowed living space
per person spans from a minimum of 21.7 m2 to a maximum of 29.4 m2, excluding the
exceptionally well-performing building E01. In 2025, the average living space in Denmark
for a person residing in capital municipalities is 44.8 m2, growing to 53.7 if considering the
whole country (Denmark 2025). Furthermore Considering that the mentioned values are
assigned to buildings that perform well above average in the impact category of climate
change in Denmark, there is an urgent need for future construction with fewer and more
eﬃciently utilized private square meters (CONCITO 2023). According to the data from
RR, the median footprint of Danish housing amounts to 9.6 kgCO2-eq/m2/yr. There-
fore, the yearly impact per person amounts to 430 kgCO2-eq, meaning that to reach the
target value, the living space should amount to 14 m2/person. While there is space for
improvement in building practices to reach a better resource eﬃciency, without revising
our consumption standards we risk to keep increasing our overall resource consumption
and therefore increase the degradation of our planet. Incorporating principles like suf-
ﬁcientarianism and sustainable consumption, we can make bigger step towards a more
sustainable future in construction and reduce inequalities among the population.
18
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 5
Assigning a SoSOS to the building
- RockHouse
5.1
Methodologies
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt diﬀerent allocation methods to perform a AESA
on a residential building. The object of the study is a single-family house built in 2023 in
Hvidovre, Denmark. The choice of the building was made because of the following reasons:
• The owner of the house commissioned an LCA study for the building and allowed the
author to use all the information available. The collaboration between the author
and ROCKWOOL consists mainly in the provision of the data regarding the building.
• The carbon footprint of the building is 5.82 kg CO2-eq/m2/yr, which makes it in-
teresting to investigate being in a position considered sustainable by the building
regulation and very close to being considered as such by the Reduction Roadmap
initiative as well.
• Finally, the work carried out in this thesis allows ROCKWOOL to have some insights
into the possibility of building a sustainable dwelling using a their products for
insulation purposes mainly.
For simplicity, the building will be called RockHouse.
The deﬁnition of a SoSOS for RockHouse is carried out applying ﬁve diﬀerent Sharing
Principles. Four of these are taken from the study by Andersen (C. E. Andersen et al.
2020). In addition to these, the FHN SP developed by Heide (Heide and Micheal Hauschild
2023b). Two of the selected methods from Andersen apply the EPC principle and therefore
account for the number of people living in the house, while two disregard the use of an
allocation of an equal SoSOS for each individual, taking average values for dwellings in
Denmark. The SPs and the relative steps for each of them are presented in table 5.1,
except for the FHN method which was presented in Chapter The steps of the allocation
are brieﬂy recapped in Table 5.2 The speciﬁc values used to calculate the allocation shares
can be found in Appendix xxx, together with the detailed description of the calculation
in Appendix A.1.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
19
==PAGE:28==
From world to person
From person to household
From household to dwelling
Sharing Principle 1
(egalitarian
+
utilitar-
ian)
Equal Per Capita
Final Consumption Expenditure
Final Consumption Expenditure
1
Popworld
FCEHH
FCEperson
FCEdwelling
FCEHH
× N
Sharing Principle 2
(egalitarian + acquired
rights)
Equal Per Capita
Energy Consumption
Energy Consumption
1
Popworld
ECHH
ECperson
ECdwelling
ECHH
× N
From world to household
From household to dwelling
Sharing Principle 3
(acquired rights + utili-
tarian)
CO2 Emissions
Energy Consumption
CO2HH
CO2world
ECdwelling
ECHH
From world to household
Sharing Principle 4
(utilitarian)
Final Consumption Expenditure
FCEdwelling
FCEworld
=
FCEHH
FCEworld × FCEdwelling
FCEHH
Table 5.1: Sharing Principles applied to perform the AESA of RockHouse
The results are calculated starting from two diﬀerent values of the Full Safe Operating
Space (SOS). One is derived from the Planetary Boundaries (PB) framework as quantiﬁed
by Ryberg et al., who deﬁne the SOS as the diﬀerence between the PB value (in this
case Climate Change) and the respective natural background levels prior to signiﬁcant
anthropogenic inﬂuence. One relies on the IPCC SSP1-1.9 scenario, which complies with
the maximum increase in temperature of 1.5 ° over time, as presented in Chapter xxx. In
practice, Heide considers the evolution of global CO2 emissions over the reference period
of the study to set a full SOS, while the other SPs consider a single value, that is assessed
to be the level of GHG emissions allowed to humanity. In addition, Heide adds the step
of allocation from global to country level, by referring to the evolution of the share of
Denmark’s population to the global population over the reference period of the study.
This allows to adjust the SoSOS per capita based on demographic patterns, as shown in
chapter 4.
From world to
country
From country to
housing
From housing to
dwelling
Fulﬁlment of Human Needs
(egalitarian +
suﬃcientarian + utilitarian)
Equal Per Capita
Final Consumption
Expenditure
(Sustainable
Consumption)
Final Consumption
Expenditure
Table 5.2: Allocation steps and principles of FHN framework
20
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:29==
5.2
Data
In this section the data relative to RockHouse are presented 5.3, together with the values
used for the allocation of a SoSOS to RockHouse.
As the house has the capacity to
welcome a maximum of eight residents in the house are very likely to change over time,
the diﬀerent possible family setups are considered.
1. three people live in the house, namely two parents and one child
2. The number of people increases to six, accounting 1 more child and 2 grandparents
3. The last scenario involves a total amount of eight people residing in the house, with
two additional grandparents.
Impact/m2/year
5.83 kgCO2/m2/year
Reference area
242 (m2)
Reference period
50 years
Table 5.3: RockHouse Data
Figure 5.1: Picture of RockHouse from the outside
The calculation of the environmental impact potential of RockHouse considers the life
cycle stages illustrated in Figure 7.4 from ISO 15978, deﬁning ﬁve stages corresponding
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
21
==PAGE:30==
to the ﬁve main modules. The stages that were not considered in the study are in grey in
the ﬁgure.
Figure 5.2: Life cycle stages for Carbon Footprint Assessment of RockHouse
22
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:31==
5.3
Results
In this section, the diﬀerent SPs are applied on RockHouse, and the Sustainability Ratio
is calculated to assess whether the building is absolutely sustainable. Table 5.4 shows
the shares of the full SOS resulting from the application of the diﬀerent combinations of
Sharing Principles.
FCE
EC
CO2
Sharing Step
Share
Source
Share
Source
Share
Source
FHN
World →Housing
8.80E-02
Heide
and
Micheal
Hauschild
2023b
–
–
–
–
Housing →Dwelling
9.18E-01
Heide
and
Micheal
Hauschild
2023b
–
–
–
–
SP1−4
Person →Household
5.64E-01
World
Devel-
opment
Indi-
cators | Data-
Bank 2025
1.52E-01
C. E. Ander-
sen et al. 2020
–
–
Household →Dwell.
1.97E-01
Brejnrod
et
al. 2017
4.68E-01
C. E. Ander-
sen et al. 2020
–
–
World →Household
5.46E-10
World
De-
velopment
Indicators
|
DataBank
2025;
Statis-
tik 2025
–
–
2.42E-10
World
Devel-
opment
Indi-
cators | Data-
Bank 2025
Table 5.4: Allocation shares and sources across Final Consumption Expenditure, Energy
Consumption, and CO2 Emissions for FHN and SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4 approaches
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.3: SOS for RockHouse for diﬀerent family setups using the SS model
Figure 5.4: SOS for RockHouse for diﬀerent family setups using the IPCC SSP1-1.9 model
The number of residents in the building impacts the SoSOS calculation, and therefore
the outcome of the AESA. In ﬁgure 5.4, it can be seen how the SoSOS for RockHouse
evolves following the increase of residents in the dwelling. The values from SP1, SP2,
and FHN increase together with the amount of residents, while they never overtake the
values derived from SP3 and SP4. SP3 gives the higher SoSOS in all family setups, while
24
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:33==
SP2 is the principle that results in the lower SoSOS overall. Figure 5.5 shows the range
of Sustainability Ratios relative to RockHouse for each combination Sharing Principle -
Number of residents - Full SOS. In the table, the values are in red when exceeding the value
of 1.5, in green when they are below 1 and in yellow when the SR is between 1 and 1.5.
Values in red are considered substantially exceeding their assigned carbon limits, while
the ones in yellow are considered to have the potential to reach absolute sustainability if
improvements are made.
Steady State
IPCC1−1.9
3 ppl
6 ppl
8 ppl
3 ppl
6 ppl
8 ppl
SP1
5.03E+00
2.52E+00
1.89E+00
2.61E+00
1.30E+00
9.77E-01
SP2
7.86E+00
3.93E+00
2.95E+00
4.07E+00
2.04E+00
1.53E+00
SP3
1.82E+00
1.82E+00
1.82E+00
8.63E-01
8.63E-01
8.63E-01
SP4
1.92E+00
1.92E+00
1.92E+00
9.10E-01
9.10E-01
9.10E-01
FHN
6.93E+00
3.46E+00
2.60E+00
3.59E+00
1.79E+00
1.35E+00
Table 5.5: Sustainabiliy Ratios for RockHouse
In total, RockHouse exceeds the limit 100% of the cases when using the steady state model,
whereas using the IPCC model it reaches a percentage of 46.6% of cases when it can be
considered absolutely sustainable. In the case of full capacity, when a total of 8 people
live in the house, the building can be almost considered as environmentally sustainable
from an absolute perspective following the IPCC SSP1-1.9 model. This situation would
still allow a living space of more than 30m2/person. In order to reach the same level of
performance with the current building design, this would drop to less than 23m2/person.
5.3.1
Scenario Analysis
The organization commissioned to perform the LCA of the building estimated a reduction
potential of around 1.3kgCO2-eq/m2/yr, that would bring the overall carbon footprint of
RockHouse to 4.5kgCO2-eq/m2/yr. It is important to specify that the reduced carbon
footprint would have been possible in the case of diﬀerent choices in the design phase of
the building. Thus, they don’t refer to a possible future renovation of the building.
This impact reduction is associated with the following modiﬁcations:
• Installation of 19 m2 solar panel (model FirstSolar, series 6)
• Traditional foundation and ground deck replaced with screw foundations and lightweight
ground deck
• Choice of windows from manufacturer with EPD (Environmental Product Declara-
tion), e.g. Rationel. The current impact of windows is estimated using standard
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
25
==PAGE:34==
industry data in LCAByg database ÖKOBAUDAT.
• More environmentally friendly exterior surfaces, such as recycled steel or slate
Sustainability Ratios
Steady State
SR_IPCC 1-1.9
3 ppl
6 ppl
8 ppl
3 ppl
6 ppl
8 ppl
3.91E+00
1.95E+00
1.46E+00
2.02E+00
1.01E+00
7.58E-01
6.10E+00
3.05E+00
2.29E+00
3.16E+00
1.58E+00
1.18E+00
1.42E+00
1.42E+00
1.42E+00
6.70E-01
6.70E-01
6.70E-01
1.49E+00
1.49E+00
1.49E+00
7.06E-01
7.06E-01
7.06E-01
5.38E+00
2.69E+00
2.02E+00
2.78E+00
1.39E+00
1.04E+00
5.4
Discussion
The applied sharing principles have a great inﬂuence on whether RockHouse can be as-
sessed as being environmentally sustainable or not, in accordance with previous studies
mentioned in chapter 2. Therefore, it is important to be critical of the dynamics of the
SPs and be aware of what drives the shares. It was seen that the SoSOS of RockHouse
gets impacted quite a lot by the application of the EPC principle, as demonstrated by the
fact that SP3 and SP4, which do not involve this step, lead to a share that is substantially
higher than the others. For SP1 and SP2, it is easy to determine the most inﬂuential
factors that leads them to diﬀer, as they apply twice the same allocation method twice.
We can therefore aﬃrm that the factor tha leads to have a higher allocated share for SP1
is the ﬁnal Consumption Expenditure in households. This can be explained by the fact
that Denmark is one of the countries in the top 10 for highest GDP in the world (lower
only than Qatar, Ireland, Singapore and Luxembourg). As for CO2 emissions per capita,
Denmark position is below the global average by 0.2% (4.5% against 4.7% in 2023). It is
arguable that allocating a SoSOS based on current expenditure trends is not the fairest
of the options. However, this is the premise of the status quo principle, and it can be
seen as an approach for deﬁning a more realistic and pragmatic target for countries with,
in this case, a high FCE for households. This comes from the fact that normally more
consumption equals to more resource use and therefore more emissions. As for the dif-
ference between SP3 and SP4, the crucial step is the last one of SP4. The value taken
from Brejnrod et al. estimates a total of FCE for household related to the dwelling as
equal to 19.7%, whereas the energy consumption related of a household related to the
dwelling reaches almost 50% (ﬁnal step of SP3). This gap compensates for the high FCE
of danish households, and leads SP4 to generate a slighlty lower SoSOS. Finally, it can be
aﬃrmed with certainty that the steps that leads the FHN SP developed by Heide to have
the second lowest score is the application of the Sustainable consumption concept, result-
ing in only 8.8% of the countries impact as assigned to construction. This is though the
only SP that accounts for the need to revise the current consumption trends in developed
countries, advocating that only if an increase in resource eﬃciency is paired to a reduction
of resource consumption, we can reach absolute sustainability targets. This approach is
also easier to apply, as resource eﬃciency improvements often require constant research
and investments, whereas a switch in consumption habits only requires will of adaptation
and can lead to consistent ﬁnancial savings.
26
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 6
Assigning a SoSOS to the building
components
6.1
Methodologies
The purpose of this chapter is to propose two diﬀerent methods for downscaling the SoSOS
of RockHouse to the component level. The results generated by these methods are then
compared to the carbon footprint of RockHouse components performing an AESA through
the calculation of a Sustainability Ratio, representing to what measure the impact poten-
tial of each component exceeds its assigned SoSOS or it is lower than such. The ﬁrst
method is named CBR or Current Best Practice, as it assigned to each component a
share that is equal to the share of the same component in the best practice cases available
in the literature. The second method is named ESH or Energy Savings for Heating and
bases the calculation of a share on the energy savings of each component on the total
energy savings of the dwelling. The two methods are illustrated in detail in the following
subsections.
6.1.1
CBP
This methods takes inspiration from the FHN SP presented in the previous chapters, by
adopting as an allocating share the percentage that such category or element represents
on the totality in a range of selected cases.
These cases are chosen as they are the
best performing in a speciﬁc aspect, in this case in carbon eﬃciency per unit of area
(kgCO2/m2/yr). We can aﬃrm that, like the FHN, the CBP SP is based on the sustainable
consumption principle. In this method, the carbon contribution of each component is
calculated for each one of the buildings in 10Best. The average contribution across all the
10 buildings is then computed and multiplied by the building’s SoSOS to assign a new value
to the component. The steps are shown in equation 6.1, where Ci refers to a component
i, and Bt are the buildings part of 10Best. In this case, T is equal to 10. The speciﬁc
share of impact potential for each component of the building of 10Best are presented in
appendix A.2. In some cases, when there are components with null contribution, the value
is not included in the calculation of the average.
SoSOSCBP,Ci
=
SoSOSdwelling
∗
T
∑
t=1
(kgCO2 10Best,Ci
kgCO2 10Best,Bt
)
∗
1
T
(6.1)
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
27
==PAGE:36==
6.1.2
ESH
As for the previous one, also this method was inspired by the message that researchers
at the Technical University of Denmark are perpetuating, which is that the function of a
building (and of an object as a general deﬁnition) should be incorporated in the calculation
of a SoSOS assigned to such. Speciﬁcally, the Energy Savings for Heating method accounts
for the share of total energy savings of a building compared to an baseline that is associated
to the component studied, when considering space heating in the dwelling. As it can be
imagined, this method has a logic sense when applied to components that bring substantial
energy savings to the building, since when applied to the others it would lead to a null
share. In the same way, the dwelling studied needs to be considered as a The method is
therefore tested on the following components: Roofs, External Walls, Ground Floor Slabs,
Foundations. In addition to being components that play an important role in providing
thermal energy savings, which consists in reducing heat loss, they are the only components
for which speciﬁc thermal conductivity values were provided by Rockwool. In fact, the
thermal insulation solutions that are installed in each of these components is a product
manufactured by ROCKWOOL GROUP. The calculation steps are shown in equation
6.1.2, where HL refers to the heat loss relative to a speciﬁc component and a baseline
value, ECH refers to the energy consumption in heating of the dwelling a baseline value.
SoSOSESH,component
=
ESHcomponent
ESHdwelling
=
HLbaseline −HLcomponent
ECHbaseline −ECHdwelling
(6.2)
Equation 6.1.2 shows the formula for calculating the heat loss relative to a component
(h2xengineering.com n.d.), where U is the thermal conductivity coeﬃcient (or U-value),
A is the area in square meters, ∆T is the diﬀerence of temperature, and Q is the instan-
taneous heat loss. It is important to note that this refers to the heat loss by transmission,
and therefore does not account for the ventilation losses and thermal bridging.
HL
=
Q
×
t
=
U
×
A
×
∆T
=
kWh/yr
(6.3)
It is important to note that, in the same way as for the single components, the calculation
is applicable for buildings that have a thermal eﬃciency above average or, at least, above
the baseline case.
6.2
Data
In this section are presented the data related to RockHouse used in the assessment and the
values used for the calculation of a SoSOS relative to the ESH principle. Values associated
with 10Best are presented in Appendix xxx.
28
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:37==
Component Name
kgCO2-eq/m2/yr
Windows, doors, glazing systems
9.26E-01
External walls
8.81E-01
Roofs
6.21E-01
Space heating
5.29E-01
Ventilation and cooling
5.95E-02
Ground ﬂoor slabs
4.67E-01
Foundations
4.26E-01
Floor decks
3.57E-01
Drainage
2.74E-01
Internal walls
2.70E-01
Stairs and ramps
2.58E-01
Columns and beams
1.33E-02
Balconies
9.98E-03
Water systems
9.90E-03
External works
5.01E-02
Op. use
6.77E-01
Total
5.83
Table 6.1: Impact potential of RockHouse components
In table 6.2 are presented the component speciﬁc values used in the calculation of the
shares under the ESH SP, both for RockHouse and for the baseline scenario, which is
represented by the minimum requirements for new construction set by BR18 (BR18 n.d.).
The average yearly outdoor temperature is set as 8.9°C and the indoor temperature as
20°C, giving an annual average ∆T of 11.1 °C. The annual hours of use are estimated to be
8736, the same that are used in RockHouse Energigramme to estimate the annual energy
consumption for heating. Such value amounts to 2246 kWh/yr. The baseline scenario
is the annual energy consumption of a household in heating in Denmark in 2023, which
value is calculated by multiplying the average consumption of a household in Denmark
(17600 kWh/yr) by the average share of energy used in households for heating (82.7%).
This gives a value of 14600 kWh/yr. This leads to average savings of 12354 kWh/yr.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
29
==PAGE:38==
RockHouse
BR18
Component
U-value (W/m2 K)
U-value (W/m K)
Area (m2)
Roofs
0.135
0.2
148.8
Ground ﬂoor slabs
0.06
0.2
103.1
External walls
0.1
0.3
204.3
Tab (W/m K)
Tab (W/m K)
Length (m)
Foundations
0.107
0.4
50.3
Table 6.2: Thermal conductivity and size values for RockHouse components used for the
ESH allocation
The components of RockHouse are grouped in a slightly diﬀerent way compared to the
other cases. Therefore, some of the component names in 10Best were changed to match
the ones of RockHouse, and some components are either merged or deleted because their
impact is considered irrelevant. For some case-speciﬁc components, the impact was redis-
tributed among the other components, as they would have compromised the logic behind
the comparison.
In particular, the following modiﬁcations were made:
• RockHouse
– Space heating and Ventilation and cooling are merged into HVAC (Heat-
ing, ventilation and air conditioning)
– The components Other and Electrical installations were not considered as
their contribution is null to RockHouse.
• 10Best
– Most of the components are the same as for RockHouse with a slightly diﬀerent
name. For these, the names were changed to match the ones of RockHouse.
– Electrical and mechanical refers to the materials utilized for the installation
of photovoltaic systems, which are not present in RockHouse (see above). For
this reason, including them in the calculation of the Sustainability Ratio would
result in a value tending to zero. The share of impact originally assigned to
Electrical and mechanical was therefore redistributed equally among the
other components.
– External works are present in RockHouse and consist mainly of gravel and
stone to build a driveway and a walkway but not in any of the buildings part
of 10Best. This component was hypothesized to have the same share of impact
for the latter as for RockHouse (less than 1%) for the sake of simplicity.
For the remaining components, the names were kept as in the LCAByg ﬁle of the Life
Cycle Assessment (LCA) of RockHouse. The modiﬁcations made to ensure comparability
among the two buildings only involve components with very low impact contributions.
Such redistributions have therefore very low relevance on the ﬁnal assigned SoSOS for each
component. Speciﬁcally, the removal of Electrical and mechanical from 10Best resulted in
an increase of maximum 0.4% on the other components. Successively, the introduction of
External works caused a decrease of maximum 0.1%.
30
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:39==
RockHouse
10Best
New
Windows, doors, g.s.
Windows & doors
Windows, doors, g.s.
External walls
Exterior walls
External walls
Roofs
Roofs
Roofs
Space heating
HVAC(S.V.)
HVAC
Ground ﬂoor slabs
Grade decks
Ground ﬂoor slabs
Foundations
Foundations
Foundations
Floor decks
Decks
Floor decks
Drainage
Drains(S.V.)
Drainage
Internal walls
Interior walls
Internal walls
Stairs and ramps
Stairs & ramps
Stairs and ramps
Ventilation and cooling
Columns & joists
Columns and beams
External works
Balconies
Balconies
Columns and beams
Water(S.V.)
Water systems
Balconies
Electrical and mechanical
External works
Water systems
Op. use
Op. use
Other
Electrical installations
Op. use
Table 6.3: Process of adaptation of RockHouse component to 10Best ones and vice versa
6.3
Results
In this section, the two methods are applied and tested on the respective relevant compo-
nents. Here, as well as in the next chapter, the results are calculated only for the dwelling
at its maximum capacity, which amounts to eight people living in the building. The ﬁrst
sharing principle to be tested is the Current Best Practice, which is applicable to all the
components plus Operational Energy. In ﬁgure 6.1, the contributions relative to some com-
ponents have been grouped using the label Other. The reason behind this is that they each
represent a very small contribution to RockHouse’s overall impact on climate change. The
components in question are Balconies, External Works, Water Systems, Stairs & Ramps.
In addition to this, the relevance of Balconies, External Works, and Stairs & Ramps are
very much dependent on the type of the dwellings, with some of them not having a balcony,
or a storey above ground ﬂoor, a basement, or even a substantial external area within the
property, as is shown in appendix A.2. Water systems, on the other side, together with
HVAC and Drainage, present impact potentials that are calculated using standard values
(S.V. in ﬁgure 6.3 in the study from Garnow. For this reason, the mentioned components
are considered less compliant with the rationale behind the CBP principle.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
31
==PAGE:40==
6.3.1
Results from application of Current Best Practice
Sharing Principle
Figure 6.1: Comparison of climate change potential contribution for components in Rock-
House and average from 10Best
It can be seen how the climate change potential results substantially higher in the two most
impacting components of the building, namely Windows, doors, and glazing systems and
External walls. On the other hand, the share is substantially lower for Operational energy
in RockHouse, which results to be the highest impact contributor among the buildings in
10Best. The lower value of the latter
32
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.2: Sustainability Ratios for RockHouse components applying CBP principle &
SS model
Figures 6.2 and 6.3 show respectively the Sustainability Ratios obtained by applying the
Current Best Practice Sharing Principles for each component of RockHouse. The compo-
nents labeled in green are also part of the assessment using the ESH SP. The components
in grey are the ones deriving from standard industry values, therefore the calculation of
their SoSOS does not reﬂect the rationale behind the sharing principle fully. Finally, the
components in purple are the ones that were part of the group called Other in ﬁg 6.1. As
shown in the ﬁgures, both the best and worst performing components are the one that
present the highest data uncertainty. In particular, Balconies and Water Systems are the
only ones touching the area of SOS. Having also a very low impact potential contribution
among the buildings, these results do not provide very valuable insights. The analysis of
results focuses therefore on the components in dark blue and green. Among these, Roofs,
Ground Floor Slabs, Floor Decks, Internal Walls, and Columns and Beams position them-
selves on a similar level, having a value of SR between approximately 1.5 and 2.5 . On
the other hand, Foundations is farther from entering the sustainable space assigned to the
component, and like External Walls and Windows, doors, g.s. only enters the sustainable
space assigned in the case of applicattion of IPCC SSP1-1.9 model for determining a Full
SOS.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.3: Sustainability Ratios for RockHouse components applying CBP principle &
IPCC SSP1-1.9 model
6.3.2
Results from application of Energy Savings in Heating
Sharing Principle
After the application of the ESH SP, the performance of the components assessed changes
quite drastically, except for Ground Floor Slabs, which presents an almost identical level
of performance. The only component that is aﬀected negatively compared to the CBP SP
is Roofs, which goes from one of the best performing components to exiting its sustainable
space totally. For External Walls, the situation is the opposite, as it moves to being the
component with the lowest SR among the "relevant" ones for this part of the study. This
is due to the high energy savings that the component brings to the building in terms of
heating, which will be further analyzed in the next section. As for Foundation, the positive
eﬀect of the ESH is substantial, but more limited.
SoSOS_SS
SoSOS_IPCC
Component
ESH
(kWh/yr)
Dwelling →
component
max
(SP3)
min
(SP2)
max
(SP3)
min
(SP2)
Roofs
9.35E+02
7.6%
2.41E-01
1.49E-01
5.10E-01
2.88E-01
Ground ﬂoor slabs
1.40E+03
11.4%
3.61E-01
2.23E-01
7.63E-01
4.32E-01
External walls
3.96E+03
32.2%
1.02E+00
6.33E-01
2.16E+00
1.22E+00
Foundations
1.43E+03
11.6%
3.70E-01
2.29E-01
7.81E-01
4.41E-01
34
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.4: Sustainability Ratios for RockHouse components applying ESH principle
6.4
Discussion
This chapter proposed two diﬀerent method for allocating a SoSOS of a residential building
to its components and presented the diﬀerences in results that come from the application
of the methods on a selected range of components. It was seen that the energy eﬃciency
provided by thermal insulation properties of the components can , in some cases, greatly
inﬂuence. A very interesting case is represented by External Walls where a relatively high
impact potential compared to the average of 10Best corresponds with an exceptional per-
formance in thermal insulation. This aspects is conﬁrmed if we compare the U-value of the
component in RockHouse (0.1 W/m2K) with the typical U-value requirement for NZEBs
(Nearly Zero Energy Building), which is 0.29 W/m2K for a single-family house (Simson
et al. 2025), making the component extremely well performing. It is interesting to notice
that the BR18 sets a limit of 0.3 W/m2K for thermal conductivity (U-value), making it a
very optimistic requirements for housing if referring to single-family housing. Although,
in the BR18 it is not speciﬁed a limit based on type of dwelling, while in the article from
Simons et al. the value is set at 0.12 for apartments. The same considerations can be
applied for the other components, with Foundations and Ground Floor Slabs performing
well below the maximum standars for thermal conductivity, therefore granting higher en-
ergy savings and leading them to be closer to reaching absolute sustainability. The only
component that presents a U-value that is higher than the standards presented by the ar-
ticle is Roofs (0.135 against 0.09 W/m2K). The component still grants substantial energy
savings to the building, but the assigned SoSOS is lower and therefore makes it the worst
performing among the ones considered for the ESH assessment. Other component that is
worth to investigate more are Windows, doors, Glazing Systems and Heating, Ventilation
and Coolling. As mentioned in the documentation from the LCA of RockHouse, impact
potential assigned to the former does not come from primary data (product speciﬁc EPD
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
35
==PAGE:44==
or PCF), but from generic industry values. This could be the reason behind the poor
performance relative to the comparison with 10Best. A scenario analysis was provided
by the company which permormed the LCIA of RockHouse, estimating an overall impact
reduction of around 1.3 kgCO2/m2/yr through the application of improvements like uti-
lizing windows with speciﬁc carbon impact values, installing solar panels on the roof and
generally considering alternative solutions to high impact materials like steel and concrete.
It could therefore be interesting to investigate the performance of Windows, doors, Glazing
Systems using more reliable data and incorporating the ESH as well for comparison, as
this component can greatly inﬂuence the energy eﬃciency of the building. The situation
regarding Drainage remains quite curious, as the contribution as part of RockHouse is
quite relevant (4.7%), while the average value of 10Best is 1.7%, and therefore leads to
the component being the worst performing among the whole list. It is though crucial to
include the limitations of the methods when interpreting the results. The CBP SP consid-
ers average values among diﬀerent type of building, including also multi-storey dwelling
and terraced houses. In these cases (six out of ten), which provide a very wide number of
residents, the drainage system is very likely to be shared among the single dwelling and
therefore results in much lower impact potential per square meter. The same consider-
ation can be applied for HVAC and External Walls. The latter would realistically have
a better performance also through the application of the CBP principle. This aspect is
considered a limitation of the method, although linked more to data availability rather
than the Sharing Principle itself.
36
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 7
Assigning a SoSOS to the building
materials
7.1
Methodologies
In this section, a method is proposed and tested on a series of selected categories of
materials used in RockHouse to assess whether they can be considered sustainable solutions
from an absolute perspective. The sharing principle formulated is a combination of the
FCE and a physical factor, speciﬁcally the weight of each material. The author applies
the FCE as a way of quantifying the relative value of the function provided by the speciﬁc
category of materials. On the other hand, the weight contribution is used as a way to
account for the intrinsic material intensity that is needed to carry out a speciﬁc function.
In this step, the SoSOS assigned to the building does not include the share occupied by the
component Operational Energy, as this section is dedicated to the materials used in the
building. In order not to penalize the building, the same impact share that such "peculiar
component" has in RockHouse is removed from the total, resulting in the starting SoSOS
being equal to 88.4% of the original.
7.1.1
Selection of component for application of the FCE ×
Weight principle
Before analyzing the choice of such categories and therefore the choice of the sharing
principle, it is necessary to explain the choice of the components that are subject to the
application of this SP. The chosen components were Foundations, Roofs, Ground Floor
Slabs, and External Walls, which were also part of the assessment carried out through the
application of the Energy Savings in Heating SP. The reasons behind the choice of these
speciﬁc components are the following:
• The chosen components all include at least one product manufactured by the provider
of the data for the study, ROCKWOOL Group. By assessing the environmental
performance of these solutions, the author is able to provide insights to the company
and support the decision-making process towards eventual improvements.
• For these components, the author was able to identify 3 main categories of materials
based on the respective functions. These are Thermal Insulation, Moisture prooﬁng,
and Structural. The selection of categories is presented in detail later in this section.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
37
==PAGE:46==
• By using the only components that were subject to application of both ESH and
CBP principles in chapter xxx, it is possible to perform a better comparison of the
ﬁnal results.
7.1.2
Identiﬁcation of material groups based on their function
In order to identify the categories of materials, the ﬁrst step was to understand the role of
each material as part of the respective component. Due to the author not coming from a
background of construction sciences, architecture, civil engineering or similar, this process
has been done with the aid of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, namely ChatGPT. This consisted in
providing the bot with the datasheet of each component as in appendices A.3, ??, A.5, and
A.4 and asking the algorithm to provide information about the functions of each material
and group them based on such function. After the application of minor adjustments by the
author, which consisted of regrouping the materials into macro categories, this resulted
in the descriptions presented in section 7.2.
The choice of the three MAIN functions
depended both on the composition of the components and on the possibility to connect
the functions to the spend categories of COICOP.04 related to the dwelling, presented in
4.1.2 as part of Heide’s FHN framework. The table with the respective values for FCE
in households in 2022 is provided in the supporting info, section xxx. The association of
spend category to material group function is the following:
• THERMAL INSULATION: the FCE category assigned to this function is Electricity,
gas and other fuels (COICOP.04.5) multiplied by the average share of energy in
households on heating, as per The Danish Energy Ministry (Report 2023).
The
share of expenditure on the total assigned to the dwelling amounts to 19.2%.
• MOISTURE PROOFING: the FCE category assigned to this function is composed
of two elements. First, the COICOP category related to Maintenance and repair
of the dwelling.
The share of this seemed relatively low (4%) compared to the
important service that moisture protection measures deliver to the building and to
the contribution that this has in the good performance of the other functions. For
this reason, the author assigned also the remaining part of the value of COICOP.04.5
to this group of items, resulting in a total share of 8.1%.
• STRUCTURAL: the COICOP categories 04.1 and 04.2 were assigned to this func-
tion, namely Actual rentals for housingand Imputed rentals for housing and amount-
ing to a total of 72.7% of the total FCE related to dwellings. It is necessary to spec-
ify that with Structural, the author identiﬁes all the materials that are used with
the main purpose of providing mechanical resistance to the building, both against
vertical pressures or outer elements like in the case of weight of the dwelling and
precipitations and horizontal, like in the case of wind, seismic movements and more.
In general, this function can be associated to mechanical resistance.
38
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:47==
FCE
Kg
Thermal insulation
FCEenergy · %heating
FCEdwelling
Kgmat
Kgcomponent
Moisture protection
FCEmaintenance + FCEelectricity
FCEdwelling
Kgmat
Kgcomponent
Structural
FCEother
FCEdwelling
Kgmat
Kgcomponent
Table 7.1: Formulas for allocation of FCE and material mass ratios
7.1.3
Choice of the Sharing Principle
The application of the Sharing Principle FCE + Weight, as shown in equations 7.1 and
7.2, consists in two steps.
The ﬁrst one consists in computing the square root of the
multiplication of the share of FCE assigned to each material function by the square root
of the share of weight of such material group on the overall weight of the component.
The second step is the normalization of the obtained shares to ensure a total value of
1. The reason behind combining the two factors is that some function typically require
a much higher amount of materials to reach the desired level of performance, and this
can lead to a very poor performance of load-bearing structures. The structural function
of the foundations, for example, cannot be performed by very lightweight materials, as
the foundations need to carry the weight of the whole building.
On the other hand,
moisture protection measures typically require small amounts of materials placed in very
speciﬁc areas of the dwelling. The same consideration partially apply to thermal insulating
materials, which weight typically is in between the other two cases. At the same time,
having very lightweight group of materials can lead to assign a very small SoSOS, when
the diﬀerence between those and heavier groups is more than one order on magnitude.
In order to account for each group’s weight but also to prevent the chance of this aspect
overruling the FCE element (where all values are of the same order of magnitude), the
square root of the weight is used in the calculation.
SoSOSmat
=
SoSOSCi
×
P norm
mat,Ci
(7.1)
Pj,mat
=
√
FCEmat ×
√
Kgmat,Ci
(7.2)
7.2
Data
7.2.1
Composition of Foundations
The examined foundation component is divided into two main subgroups: strip footings
below the frost line and strip footings above the frost line. The materials and products used
have been categorized according to their primary functional roles within the structure.
• Structural function
The structural integrity is ensured through the use of reinforcement steel wire, ready-
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
39
==PAGE:48==
mixed concrete, lightweight concrete blocks, and tile adhesive. In the below-frost-
line section, reinforcement steel wire accounts for 274 kg, ready-mixed concrete for
15 218 kg, lightweight concrete blocks for 2 298 kg, and tile adhesive for 151 kg.
In the above-frost-line section, reinforcement steel wire weighs 108 kg, ready-mixed
concrete 5 273 kg, lightweight concrete blocks 1 073 kg, and tile adhesive 72 kg. For
external protection, Rockpanel boards (8 mm thick) are incorporated, with a total
weight of 423 kg. This material is engineered to oﬀer weather resistance, durability,
and a stable façade surface capable of withstanding environmental wear.
These
materials collectively provide compressive and tensile strength, dimensional stability,
and reliable bonding between masonry units.
• Thermal insulation & Moisture prooﬁng
Thermal performance is enhanced through the use of Rockwool Terrænbatts (100
mm, class 37), totaling 756 kg. These mineral wool insulation panels provide low
thermal conductivity, moisture resistance, and ﬁre safety, contributing to improved
energy eﬃciency in the foundation wall assembly.
Overall, the combination of these material groups ensures that the foundation system
achieves structural stability, environmental protection, and thermal performance in line
with construction requirements.
7.2.2
Composition of the Roof system
The roof system consists of a light construction main roof section and a roof terrace, to-
taling 7 793 kg of materials. Its composition can be grouped into three primary functional
categories:
• Moisture prooﬁng
Moisture barriers are provided by a polyethylene (PE) damp insulation layer with
a thickness of 0.0002 m, weighing 27 kg, and by bitumen sheets (PYE PV 200 S5
and G 200 S4, both 0.004 m thick) with weights of 83 kg and 80 kg respectively.
These layers form a continuous water- and vapor-resistant membrane, protecting the
underlying structural components from environmental moisture ingress.
• Thermal insulation
Thermal performance is ensured using Rockwool Flexibatts, class 37. In the main roof,
insulation layers weigh 196 kg and 1 064 kg, while in the roof terrace, they weigh
23 kg and 101 kg.
These mineral wool products oﬀer low thermal conductivity,
ﬁre safety, and dimensional stability, thereby reducing heat loss through the roof
structure.
• Structural function
The structural stability and weather resistance are achieved through the use of sawn
and dried construction wood products of pine and spruce, steel sheets (241 kg and
603 kg), Troldtekt 25 mm Natural Grey FUTURECEM panels (1 578 kg in the main
roof, 188 kg + 188 kg in the terrace), timber pine and larch elements, and WISA
spruce plywood (115 kg). These materials provide load-bearing capacity, distribute
40
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:49==
structural loads, resist wind and snow forces, and maintain a durable outer surface
resistant to environmental wear.
The combination of these material groups ensures that the roof assembly delivers structural
integrity, eﬀective thermal insulation, and protection against both moisture and weather-
related degradation.
7.2.3
Composition of Ground Floor Slabs
The ground ﬂoor slab system, with a total material mass of 32 664 kg, consists of several
construction layers serving structural, thermal, and moisture protection functions.
• Thermal insulation & moisture prooﬁng
The moisture barrier system includes a Scan Underlay layer weighing 99 kg, a glass
ﬁbre ﬂeece membrane of 2 kg, silicate plaster weighing 3 kg, and a ﬂexible water-
prooﬁng slurry layer of 20 kg. These layers provide resistance against rising damp,
liquid water penetration, and capillary absorption, ensuring the durability of the
ﬂoor assembly. Thermal eﬃciency is achieved through the application of Rockwool
Terrænbatts (class 37) insulation, with a total weight of 4 983 kg. This mineral wool
insulation oﬀers low thermal conductivity, dimensional stability, ﬁre resistance, and
well as moisture resistance ,reducing energy loss through the ground-contacting slab.
• Structural function
Structural integrity is provided by multiple components: timber oak ﬂooring (1 013
kg), reinforcement steel wire (354 kg), ready-mixed concrete (24 874 kg), sand bedding
(886 kg), stoneware tiles (330 kg), cement mortar (66 kg), and tile adhesive (33 kg).
These materials together provide load-bearing capacity, surface durability, and a
stable substrate for ﬁnish layers, while distributing mechanical loads from interior
use and occupancy.
This combination of materials ensures that the ground ﬂoor assembly meets performance
requirements for strength, insulation, and moisture control in a single integrated construc-
tion system.
7.2.4
Composition of External Walls
The external wall assembly, with a total material mass of 17 001.34 kg, integrates struc-
tural, thermal, and moisture protection functions in a layered composition.
• Moisture prooﬁng
Moisture resistance is provided by multiple layers: silicate plaster (38 kg) and silicate
interior paints (76 kg). These layers limit water ingress, prevent capillary moisture
absorption, and protect structural components from weather exposure.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
41
==PAGE:50==
• Thermal insulation
The Rockzero system, covering 200.64 m2 and weighing 10 678 kg, forms the main
insulating layer. It provides low thermal conductivity while also contributing to the
walls structural stiﬀness and dimensional stability.
• Structural function
Load-bearing properties are ensured in the outer part by Rockzero system and in-
ternally by Fermacell ﬁbregips boards (3 699 kg), while protection from weather and
support is provided by Rockpanel cladding (8 mm, 143 kg), steel sheet cladding (0.3–
30 mm, 869 kg), and timber pine cladding (1 498 kg). These elements enhance the
walls resistance to mechanical loads, improve impact durability, and provide a stable
substrate for external ﬁnishes.
This integrated wall system ensures long-term performance through its balanced combi-
nation of structural stability, insulation eﬃciency, and weather protection.
7.2.5
Considerations about Rockwool products
It is important to specify some considerations that were made about ROCKWOOL prod-
ucts, as they serve a key purpose in the building functioning and are also the items in
which the author and the company itself have the biggest interest in assessing. First, Ter-
rænbatts is considered as a provider of two out of the three functions considered, namely
thermal insulation and moisture prooﬁng (Terrænbatts n.d.). For this reason, the share
assigned to this product is the sum of the ones assigned respectively to these functions
when part of Foundations. In Ground ﬂoor slabs, though, speciﬁc materials for moisture
prooﬁng are present. This would lead to a split in functions with very high uncertainties
and, therefore, the product is considered for its thermal insulation properties. On the
other hand, RockPanel’s main function is of giving structural support and protection
from weather to other insulation materials (RockPanel n.d.), with the secondary function
of providing ﬁre resistance. For this reason, its assigned share of SoSOS is incorporated
into the structural group, and the results relative to this product are therefore less in-
sightful. Flexibatts has the main function of providing thermal insulation to the rooﬁng
structure, and the side function of ﬁre resistance. The latter is therefore disregarded from
the analysis. Finally, Rockzero system provides the dual function of thermal insulation
and structural support. Since it is very hard to estimate how to establish a way to split
these two functions, this was done considering the diﬀerent materials of which Rockzero is
made. As 51% of the weight is composed by ROCKWOOL Stonewool, while the rest con-
sists in steel, wood, screws, and glue, the ﬁnal split is made by considering 51% as having
insulation function and the remaining 49% as structural material. Detailed calculations
are provided in supporting information xxx (Material level).
7.3
Results
In this section, the Sustainability Ratios (SR) are calculated for each material group after
applying the FCE + Weight SP, and for each of the analyzed components and the results
are shown as ranges. In the case where the impact potential exceeds its assigned SoSOS,
the SR results in a value higher than 1, and therefore the material group is considered as
not sustainable and vice versa.
42
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:51==
Structural
Thermal
insulation
Moisture
prooﬁng
Foundations
weight share
9.71E−01
2.95E−02
Pj_norm
7.71E−01
2.29E−01
Roofs
weight share
7.98E−01
1.78E−01
2.44E−02
Pj_norm
6.70E−01
2.37E−01
9.34E−02
External Walls
weight share
6.73E−01
3.20E−01
6.73E−03
Pj_norm
6.52E−01
2.79E−01
6.88E−02
Ground Floor Slabs
weight share
8.44E−01
1.53E−01
3.79E−03
Pj_norm
7.03E−01
2.36E−01
6.07E−02
7.3.1
Foundations
As explained in the previous section, for the building’s foundations the product Rockwool
Terrænbatts covers both the thermal insulation and moisture prooﬁng functions. Based
on the FCE + Weight SP, the assigned share of the component’s SoSOS equals to 23%.
It can be seen in ﬁgure 7.1 that the product stays within its limits for at least one of the
5 SPs used for building level allocation in three out of four cases. As for the structural
materials, this happens in only in 1 case, which is the application of the ESH SP and using
the IPCC SSP1-1.9 model to deﬁne a Full SOS. For this group of materials, the assigned
share to the component was 77%.
Figure 7.1: Sustainability Ratios obtained from applying FCE + Weight SP for Founda-
tions
7.3.2
Roofs
The insulating component used in Roofs is Flexibatts, which was assigned a share of 23.7%
of the impact. This is assessed as sustainable for all used building level SPs in combination
with the CBP at component level. Structural components, on the other hand, only get
close to entering its absolute sustainable space in one case, using the combination IPCC
+ CBP to obtain a component level SoSOS. The assigned share for this material group is
of 67%. Finally, moisture protection materials are assigned a share of 9.3%, and they ﬁnd
themselves closer to their assigned sustainable space. Similarly to structural materials,
only the combination IPCC + CBP leads to entering such space and not for all the building
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
43
==PAGE:52==
level SPs applied.
Figure 7.2: Sustainability Ratios obtained from applying FCE + Weight SP for Roofs
7.3.3
External Walls
As explained in section 7.2, Rockzero system provides a double function to the component,
namely thermal insulation and structural support in the outer shell of the dwelling. While
for the former it is the only material that is part of the group, for the latter it has to share
this function with others (cladding elements and internal structure). Therefore, ﬁgure 7.3
provides speciﬁc insight into the product when showing the range of SR for insulation,
but it is only partially related to it as for the structural part. In relation to an assigned
share of 27% for insulation, Rockzero can be assessed as very close to being absolutely
sustainable when applying the ESH SP. This reﬂects the strong performance in energy
eﬃciency of the component, and the relatively low impact potential per kg of the product.
The results for the structural material group are very similar to the insulation ones, with
Rockzero representing 46% of the total weight and an overall share for the group of 65.2%.
The moisture prooﬁng group is the one with the best performance, being the only one to
enter the sustainable space even with the application of the CBP component level SP.
With an assigned share of 6.9%, this category for External Walls shows a lower impact
potential per unit of weight than the rest of the analyzed components.
44
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:53==
Figure 7.3: Sustainability Ratios obtained from applying FCE + Weight SP for External
Walls
7.3.4
Ground Floor slabs
As expected, the calculations for thermal insulation group result in a penalization for
Terrænbatts, as the only function considered for the product is the insulation property.
Even though its high weight contribution to the total of the component leads to a share of
23.7%, it positions as the worst performing group among Ground Floor Slabs. Structural
and Moisture prooﬁng are assigned a share of respectively 70.3% and 6.1% and present a
similar performance, both abundantly entering their sustainable space when considering
the IPCC-based Full SOS.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 7.4: Sustainability Ratios obtained from applying FCE + Weight SP for Ground
Floor Slabs
7.4
Discussion
In order to better interpret the discussion of the results, it is interesting to visualize the
main contribution that each material has on the total impact of the component (Fig. 7.5)
and to take into account the carbon intensity per kg of each of the materials (7.6). In
Roofs the highest impact is represented by steel sheets, used as external cladding, which
also present a higher impact per kg compared to other structural materials.
In fact,
the structural material group for the component is the one that ﬁnds itself farther from
reaching absolute sustainability. As discussed in the previous sections of the study, this
aspect was already identiﬁed as a potential improvement, as steel production is known to
be one of the main drivers for high carbon emissions in the built environment. According
to Moynihan, over one-quarter of global steel production is used in buildings, and steel
manufacturing is responsible for roughly 9% of global CO emissions (Moynihan et al.
2014). By using recycled steel or composite materials with organic binders, the overall
weight and impacts from production can be decrease signiﬁcantly. The thermal insulation
component, composed of Rockwool Flexibatts, presents a low impact although the share
of weight that it occupies is higher than the steel’s. This leads the product to be very
46
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:55==
close to absolute sustainability using both the ESH and CBP sharing principles.
As
mentioned in the previous chapter, also improvements about thermal insulation in the
rooﬁng system could be a way to increase the overall performance of the component. It
was seen that, as expected, in all the components the material group with the highest
impact and share of weight. This is especially the case for Foundations. Although, it can
be seen that also Rockwool Terranbatts and Rockpanel have a relevant carbon impact
in the component. Terranbatts, being considered as sole provider of thermal insulation
and moisture protection function, can be considered close to being absolutely sustainable.
Although the impacts from production per kg are relatively high for the product, it does
not require the installation of a further solutions and therefore leads to overall savings
in carbon emissions. As for the structural materials, the conclusions are more positive
than the rooﬁng system. This can be explained by the use of concrete with only a small
amount of steel wiring.
It is important to notice how also concrete is often topic of
discussion for possible CO2 reductions in constructions. Screw foundations is a viable
alternative to reduce the amount of material needed in foundations. It can be seen that
the structural group in Ground ﬂoor slabs, composed mainly by ready-mix concrete, is
in this case closer to being absolutely sustainable. In this case we can aﬃrm that the
component-level allocation, especially in the CBP case, plays an important role, as similar
materials lead to a worse performance in the foundations. For External Walls, we can
aﬃrm that the main driver for materials to be within their sustainable space is driven
mainly by the choice of component-level SPs. As a general consideration, it is diﬃcult
to determine the eﬀect of the choice of materials in this ﬁnal step, as no comparison is
provided to the selected SP. Therefore, the insights provided by this ﬁnal step are to be
considered as limited.
Figure 7.5: Chart Impact versus weight ratio for materials
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
47
==PAGE:56==
Roofs
Ground ﬂoor slabs
1
Rockwool ﬂexibatts, 37
11
Timber oak
2
Sawn and dried construction wood products
12
Steel wire
3
Steel sheet (0.3-30mm)
13
Rockwool terrænbatts, 37
4
Troldtekt Natural Grey FUTURECEM
14
Sand 0/2
5
Timber pine
15
Glass ﬁbre ﬂeece
6
Bitumen sheets PYE PV 200 S5
16
Stoneware tiles glazed
7
Bitumen sheets G 200 S4
17
Cement mortar
8
Timber larch
18
Tile adhesive
9
WISA Spruce plywood
19
Flexible waterprooﬁng slurry
10
Damp insulation PE
20
Scan Underlay
21
Ready-mixed concrete
22
Silicate plaster
Table 7.2: Number reference for chart increased readability
Figure 7.6: Carbon intensity of materials used in components
48
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 8
Limitations of the study and
conclusion
8.0.1
Limitations associated to methodologies
Assigning a SoSOS to the building components
The data used for the application of Current Best Practice sharing principle present a
substantial limitation that impacts the results obtained. Diﬀerent typologies of buildings
can have very diﬀerent distributions of resource consumption and therefore environmental
impacts across components. Calculating an average of component impact contribution on
a sample of residential buildings that includes multi-storey, terraced houses, and single-
family houses, leads to allocating shares that do not reﬂect the actual desing of a dwelling
like RockHouse.
Assigning a SoSOS to the building materials
Allocating a share of the Safe Operating Space (SoSOS) to the level of individual prod-
ucts presents substantial methodological challenges. As Ryberg et al. note, such alloca-
tion requires making multiple normative and technical assumptions regarding the choice of
sharing principleswhether based on per-capita rights, economic output, historical responsi-
bility, or other criteriawhich can lead to markedly diﬀerent results. The lack of consensus
on a universally accepted allocation method adds uncertainty to the interpretation of
product-level sustainability assessments (Ryberg, Owsianiak, et al. 2018).
8.0.2
Conclusion
The analysis presented in this thesis underscores that meeting absolute environmental
sustainability targets in the residential building sector demands more than incremental
eﬃciency gainsit requires a fundamental reduction in resource consumption. By applying
planetary boundary-based methodologies to the built environment, the research shows
that the allocation of a Safe Operating Space at the product level is complex and heavily
inﬂuenced by the choice of sharing principles. The RockHouse case study demonstrated
that many of the design and material choicesparticularly in insulation and component
selectionalready positioned the building close to meeting absolute sustainability thresh-
olds under several allocation methods. Moreover, scenario analysis revealed that relatively
small design improvements, such as substituting certain materials and optimizing founda-
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
49
==PAGE:58==
tions and energy systems, could further reduce the buildings carbon footprint and allow it
to get closer to complying with most of the assigned limits. These ﬁndings reinforce that
while function-based limits and material eﬃciency are essential, targeted design optimiza-
tions can deliver substantial progress toward absolute sustainability without compromising
performance or comfort. Achieving these goals will depend on integrated policy frame-
works that address both supply and demand, alongside societal acceptance of new norms
for space, design, and material use. Ultimately, this work calls for a paradigm shift in
building standardsfrom enabling ever-increasing consumption to safeguarding the ecolog-
ical systems upon which human well-being depends.
50
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
Steﬀen, Will, Katherine Richardson, Johan Rockström, Sarah E. Cornell, Ingo Fetzer,
Elena M. Bennett, Reinette Biggs, Stephen R. Carpenter, Wim de Vries, Cynthia A.
de Wit, Carl Folke, Dieter Gerten, Jens Heinke, Georgina M. Mace, Linn M. Pers-
son, Veerabhadran Ramanathan, Belinda Reyers, and Sverker Sörlin (2015). “Planetary
boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet”. In: Science 347.6223.
Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science, p. 1259855. doi:
10.1126/science.1259855. url: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1259855
(visited on 02/09/2025).
UNFCCC (2015). The Paris Agreement | UNFCCC. url: https://unfccc.int/process-and-
meetings/the-paris-agreement.
CONCITO (2023). url: https://concito.dk/en/topic/buildings.
Bjørn, Anders, Katherine Richardson, and Michael Zwicky Hauschild (2019). “A Frame-
work for Development and Communication of Absolute Environmental Sustainability
Assessment Methods”. en. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 23.4. _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com
pp. 838–854. issn: 1530-9290. doi: 10.1111/jiec.12820. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1111/jiec.12820 (visited on 02/09/2025).
Vea, Eldbjørg Blikra, Morten Ryberg, Katherine Richardson, and Michael Z Hauschild
(2020). “Framework to deﬁne environmental sustainability boundaries and a review
of current approaches”. en. In: Environmental Research Letters 15.10. Publisher: IOP
Publishing, p. 103003. issn: 1748-9326. doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/abac77. url: https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abac77 (visited on 07/31/2025).
Heide, Mia, Michael Z. Hauschild, and Morten Ryberg (2023). Reﬂecting the importance of
human needs fulﬁlment in absolute sustainability assessments: Development of a sharing
principle - Heide - 2023 - Journal of Industrial Ecology - Wiley Online Library. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jiec.13405.
Center, Stockholm Resilience (2012). Planetary boundaries. en. text. url: https://www.
stockholmresilience.org/research/planetary-boundaries.html.
Strømgen&Kristensen, Jesper Emil-Christoﬀer Søholm Kristensen (2022). “Development
and testing of method for assessing environmental and social sustainability of building
projects”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Ryberg, Morten W., Martin Marchman Andersen, Mikoaj Owsianiak, and Michael Z.
Hauschild (2020). “Downscaling the planetary boundaries in absolute environmental
sustainability assessments A review”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 276, p. 123287.
issn: 0959-6526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123287. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0959652620333321.
Ryberg, Morten W. et al. (2018). “Development of a life-cycle impact assessment method-
ology linked to the Planetary Boundaries framework”. In: Ecological Indicators 88,
pp. 250–262. issn: 1470-160X. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.065.
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
51
==PAGE:60==
Andersen, Camilla Erns, Pernille Ohms, Freja Nygaard Rasmussen, Harpa Birgisdòttir,
Morten Birkved, Micheal Hauschild, and Morten Ryberg (2020). “Assessment of absolute
environmental sustainability in the built environment”. In: Building and Environment.
issn: 0360-1323. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.106633. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132319308467.
BR18 (2018). Ny aftale stiller ambitiøse klimakrav til nyt byggeri. da. url: https://www.sm.
dk/nyheder/nyhedsarkiv/2024/maj/ny-aftale-stiller-ambitioese-klimakrav-til-nyt-byggeri
(visited on 2018).
Petersen, Steﬀen and Morten Birkved Morten W. Ryberg (2022). (PDF) The safe operating
space for greenhouse gas emissions. en. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2209.00118. url: https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/363209229_ The_ safe_ operating_ space_ for_
greenhouse_gas_emissions.
IPCC AR6 Synthesis Report-Climate Change (2023). Tech. rep. IPCC.
Rockström, Johan and other 28 (2009). “A safe operating space for humanity”. In: url:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/44160502_A_safe_operating_space_for_
humanity.
Bjørn, Anders et al. (2015). “Introducing carrying capacity-based normalisation in LCA:
framework and development of references at midpoint level”. In: doi: 10.1007/s11367-
015-0899-2. url: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/introducing-carrying-capacity-
based-normalisation-in-lca-framewor.
Sala, Serenella et al. (2016). “Global environmental impacts and planetary boundaries
in LCA”. In: doi: 10.2788/64552. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
312385550_Global_environmental_impacts_and_planetary_boundaries_in_LCA.
Heide, Mia and Micheal Hauschild (2023b). “Absolute sustainable CO2-limits for buildings
should reﬂect their function. A case study of four building typologies”. In: Developments
in the Built Environment. issn: 26661659. doi: 10.1016/j.dibe.2023.100175. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2666165923000571.
Chamber, Christopher and Siming Ye (2024). “Haves and have-nots: A theory of economic
suﬃcientarianism”. In: issn: 0022-0531. doi: 10.1016/j.jet.2024.105805. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022053124000115.
1, IPCC SSP1-1.9-Chapter (2023). IPCC SSP1-1.9; Chapter 1: Framing, Context and
Methods | Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Tech. rep. url: https:
//www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/chapter/chapter-1/.
Bjørn, Anders et al. (2020). “(PDF) Review of life-cycle based methods for absolute envi-
ronmental sustainability assessment and their applications”. en. In: ResearchGate. issn:
1748-9326. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340701319_Review_of_life-
cycle_based_methods_for_absolute_environmental_sustainability_assessment_and_
their_applications.
Andersen, Camilla Marlene Ernst, Kai Kanafani, Regitze Kjær Zimmermann, Freja Ny-
gaard Rasmussen, and Harpa Birgisdóttir (2020). “Comparison of GHG emissions from
circular and conventional building components”. In: Buildings and Cities 1.1, pp. 379–
392. issn: 2632-6655. doi: 10.5334/bc.55.
Boligbyggeri fra 4 til 1 planet (n.d.). url: https://www.4til1planet.dk/.
RR (2023). The Reduction Roadmap 2.0. url: https://reductionroadmap.dk/reduction-
roadmap-1.
Heide, Mia and Michael Hauschild (2023a). “Reﬂecting the importance of human needs
fulﬁlment in absolute sustainability assessments: Development of a sharing principle”.
In: doi: 10.1111/jiec.13405. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/371001015_
Reﬂecting_the_importance_of_human_needs_fulﬁlment_in_absolute_sustainability_
assessments_Development_of_a_sharing_principle.
52
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:61==
(COICOP), OECD-Annual household ﬁnal consumption expenditure by purpose (2025).
OECD-Annual household ﬁnal consumption expenditure by purpose (COICOP). url:
https://data-explorer.oecd.org/vis?fs%5B0%5D=Topic%2C1%7CEconomy%23ECO%23%
7CNational%20accounts%23ECO_NAD%23&fs%5B1%5D=Topic%2C2%7CEconomy%
23ECO%23%7CNational%20accounts%23ECO_ NAD%23%7CGDP%20and%20non-
ﬁnancial%20accounts%23ECO_NAD_GNF%23&pg=0&fc=Topic&snb=88&df%5Bds%
5D=dsDisseminateFinalDMZ&df%5Bid%5D=DSD_NAMAIN10%40DF_TABLE5_T501&
df%5Bag%5D=OECD.SDD.NAD&df%5Bvs%5D=1.0&dq=A.DNK.S14.....CP045%
2BCP044%2BCP043%2BCP042%2BCP041%2BCP04.XDC.V..&lom=LASTNPERIODS&
lo=5&to%5BTIME_PERIOD%5D=false&vw=tb (visited on 02/09/2025).
Garnow, Agnes, Buket Tozan, Lea Hasselsteen Nielsen, Liv Kristensen Stranddorf, Kin
Sun Tsang, Camilla Marlene Ernst Andersen, Christian Grau Sørensen, and Harpa Bir-
gisdottir (2024). Housing construction from 4 to 1 planet: 24 best practice cases. Report.
Publication Title: Housing construction from 4 to 1 planet Volume: 1. Department of
the Built Environment, Aalborg University.
“(PDF) Degrowth Perspective for Sustainability in Built Environments” (2025). en. In:
ResearchGate. doi: 10 . 3390 / encyclopedia2010029. url: https : / / www . researchgate .
net / publication / 358469624 _ Degrowth _ Perspective _ for _ Sustainability _ in _ Built _
Environments (visited on 08/11/2025).
Denmark, Statistics (2025). Statistics Denmark - Housing -Denmark. Tech. rep.
World Development Indicators | DataBank (2025). url: https://databank.worldbank.org/
reports.aspx?source=2&series=NE.CON.PRVT.ZS&country= (visited on 04/05/2025).
Brejnrod, Kathrine Nykjær, Pradip Kalbar, Steﬀen Petersen, and Morten Birkved (2017).
“The absolute environmental performance of buildings”. In: Building and Environment
119, pp. 87–98. issn: 0360-1323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.04.003. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132317301543.
Statistik, Danmarks (2025). Household budget survey. en. url: https://www.dst.dk/en/
Statistik/emner/oekonomi/forbrug/forbrugsundersoegelsen (visited on 04/05/2025).
h2xengineering.com (n.d.). url: https://www.h2xengineering.com/blogs/calculating-heat-
loss-simple-understandable-guide/.
BR18 (n.d.). BR18, Energy Consumption - Calculation of heat loss in buildings. url:
https://www.bygningsreglementet.dk/Historisk/BR18_Version5/Tekniske-bestemmelser/
11/Krav?Layout=ShowAll&utm_source=chatgpt.com#.
Simson, Raimo, Kirsten Engelund Thomsen, Kim Bjarne Wittchen, and Jarek Kurnitski
(2025). REHVA Journal NZEB Requirements vs European Benchmarks in Residential
Buildings. en. url: https://www.rehva.eu/rehva-journal/chapter/nzeb-requirements-
vs-european-benchmarks-in-residential-buildings?utm_source=chatgpt.com (visited on
08/12/2025).
Report, The Danish Energy Agency - 2023 (2023).
Terrænbatts (n.d.). url: https://www.rockwool.com/dk/produkter- og- konstruktioner/
produktoversigt/bygningsisolering/terranbatts/.
RockPanel (n.d.). url: https://www.rockpanel.com/en-us/products/rockpanel-stones/.
Moynihan, Muiris C. and Julian M. Allwood (2014). “Utilization of structural steel in
buildings”. In: Proceedings. Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences / The
Royal Society 470.2168, p. 20140170. issn: 1364-5021. doi: 10.1098/rspa.2014.0170.
url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4075790/ (visited on 08/12/2025).
Ryberg, Morten W., Mikoaj Owsianiak, Julie Clavreul, Carina Mueller, Sarah Sim, Henry
King, and Michael Z. Hauschild (2018). “How to bring absolute sustainability into
decision-making: An industry case study using a Planetary Boundary-based method-
ology”. In: Science of The Total Environment 634. issn: 0048-9697. doi: 10 . 1016 /
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
53
==PAGE:62==
j . scitotenv . 2018 . 04 . 075. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0048969718312397 (visited on 08/12/2025).
54
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:63==
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case 55
==PAGE:64==
Appendix A
FHN
Final Consumption Expenditure
Energy Consumption
CO2 Emissions
From World to
Housing
Average share on GDP of FCE of
Housing in 11 selected countries
considered as the most sustainable
worldwide
–
–
From Housing to
Dwelling
Share of COICOP expenditures in
Rentals for housing, Maintenance
& Repair of the dwelling,
Electricity, gas & other fuels
(C.04.1, C.04.2, C.04.3, C.04.5) on
Housing, water, electricity, gas and
other fuels (C.04) in 2022
–
–
SP1–4
From Person to
Household
Share of household expenditure on
total world’s GDP
The share of energy
consumption of a
household in Denmark on
the total energy
consumption according to
Rasmussen et al.
–
From Household to
Dwelling
Share of household expenses
related to dwellings according to
Brejnrod et al.
The share of a household’s
energy consumption
associated with the
dwelling (space heating +
hot water) according to
Rasmussen
–
From World to
Household
Share of total GDP of the average
expenditure of a Danish household
–
The average CO2
emissions (per capita in
Denmark * avg size of a
household in Denmark) on
global emissions
Table A.1: Allocation description across Final Consumption, Energy Consumption, and
CO2 Emissions for FHN and SP1–4 methods
56 Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:65==
kgCO2-eq/m2/year
Component Name
E02
E08
ENF01
ENF03
ENF04
R01
R02
R04
R05
R06
Foundations
4.0E-01
1.7E-01
1.5E-01
3.3E-02
1.6E-01
2.2E-01
7.6E-01
2.7E-01
3.1E-01
3.9E-01
Grade decks
5.0E-01
4.0E-01
2.2E-01
2.7E-01
1.3E+00
2.9E-01
7.6E-01
5.1E-01
6.7E-01
5.7E-01
Exterior walls
3.9E-01
9.4E-01
5.7E-01
2.2E-01
1.2E+00
1.3E-01
4.3E-01
5.5E-01
3.8E-01
4.9E-01
Interior walls
5.5E-01
4.9E-01
1.6E-01
2.9E-01
1.9E-01
1.6E-01
3.6E-01
5.5E-01
3.4E-01
3.5E-01
Decks
2.9E-01
6.0E-01
1.5E-01
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
2.1E-01
2.9E-01
5.4E-01
5.3E-01
7.9E-01
Stairs & ramps
1.4E-01
3.0E-01
1.7E-02
0.0E+00
4.8E-01
1.5E-02
1.6E-02
4.1E-02
2.6E-02
4.9E-02
Columns & joists
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
8.5E-03
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
7.7E-03
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
Balconies
2.2E-02
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
Roofs
9.0E-01
8.0E-01
7.6E-01
7.1E-01
8.7E-01
3.3E-01
6.3E-01
3.9E-01
4.0E-01
4.7E-01
Windows & doors
4.5E-01
1.1E+00
7.0E-01
6.6E-01
7.6E-01
5.4E-01
5.7E-01
4.7E-01
4.0E-01
4.7E-01
El. and mech.
0.0E+00
3.2E-02
2.3E-01
0.0E+00
0.0E+00
2.3E-01
6.3E-02
0.0E+00
1.3E-01
7.9E-02
Drains(S.V.)
1.2E-01
1.2E-01
2.6E-02
2.7E-02
3.5E-02
9.3E-02
9.5E-02
1.0E-01
9.5E-02
9.7E-02
Water(S.V.)
5.5E-02
6.4E-02
6.4E-02
6.5E-02
6.3E-02
4.3E-02
4.7E-02
4.9E-02
4.3E-02
5.8E-02
HVAC(S.V.)
5.1E-01
4.9E-01
6.0E-01
6.1E-01
5.7E-01
5.1E-01
5.2E-01
5.2E-01
5.2E-01
5.2E-01
Op. use
7.2E-01
9.3E-01
2.6E-01
1.3E+00
1.1E+00
1.5E-01
1.4E+00
7.0E-01
8.3E-01
1.0E+00
Total
5.038
6.451
3.908
4.222
6.704
2.919
5.894
4.680
4.656
5.362
Table A.2: Impact potential for components of 10Best
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case 57
==PAGE:66==
Foundations
Weight
Unit
Main function
Impact potential
Unit
Group
2.56E+04
kg
5.16E+03
kgCO2-eq
Subgroup
Strip footings below frost line
1.91E+04
kg
4.17E+03
kgCO2-eq
Element
Randfundament
1.91E+04
kg
4.17E+03
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Randfundament
1.91E+04
kg
4.17E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Reinforcement steel wire
2.74E+02
kg
Structural
1.87E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Ready-mixed
concrete
(exposure
classes
X0,
XC1),
c20/25
SCC
(Foundation)
1.52E+04
kg
Structural
1.56E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Lightweight
concrete
block
2.30E+03
kg
Structural
7.54E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Tile adhesive
1.51E+02
kg
Structural
5.49E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockpanel, 8 mm
4.23E+02
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
7.33E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockwool, Terrænbatts,
100 mm - kl. 37
7.56E+02
kg
Thermal insulation
8.74E+02
kgCO2-eq
Subgroup
Strip footings above frost line
6.53E+03
kg
9.93E+02
kgCO2-eq
Element
Indervægsfundament
6.53E+03
kg
9.93E+02
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Indervægsfundament
6.53E+03
kg
9.93E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Reinforcement steel wire
1.08E+02
kg
Structural
7.38E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Ready-mixed
concrete
(exposure
classes
X0,
XC1),
c20/25
SCC
(Foundation)
5.27E+03
kg
Structural
5.41E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Lightweight
concrete
block
1.07E+03
kg
Structural
3.52E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Tile adhesive
7.15E+01
kg
Structural
2.60E+01
kgCO2-eq
Table A.3: Data relative to component Foundations
58 Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:67==
Roofs
Weight
Unit
Main function
Impact potential
Unit
Group
Roofs
7.79E+03
kg
7.51E+03
kgCO2-eq
Subgroup
Roofs
7.79E+03
kg
7.51E+03
kgCO2-eq
Element
Tage
7.79E+03
kg
7.51E+03
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Tag, let konstruktion
6.56E+03
kg
6.47E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Damp insulation PE (thickness 0.0002 m)
2.68E+01
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
2.56E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockwool ﬂexibatts, 37
1.96E+02
kg
Thermal insulation
7.20E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockwool ﬂexibatts, 37
1.06E+03
kg
Thermal insulation
3.90E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Sawn and dried construction wood products of pine and spruce., Incin-
eration
4.55E-01
kg
Structure
4.79E-02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Sawn and dried construction wood products of pine and spruce., Incin-
eration
1.05E+03
kg
Structure
1.11E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Sawn and dried construction wood products of pine and spruce., Incin-
eration
2.55E+02
kg
Structure
2.68E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Steel sheet (0.3-30mm)
2.41E+02
kg
Structure
1.17E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Steel sheet (0.3-30mm)
6.03E+02
kg
Structure
2.93E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Troldtekt 25mm Natural Grey FUTURECEM - painted, 25.0mm
1.58E+03
kg
Structure
9.48E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Timber pine (12% moisture / 10.7% H2O content)
1.54E+03
kg
Structure
5.68E+02
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Tagterrasse
1.24E+03
kg
1.04E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockwool ﬂexibatts, 37
2.34E+01
kg
Thermal insulation
8.60E+00
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockwool ﬂexibatts, 37
1.01E+02
kg
Thermal insulation
3.71E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Sawn and dried construction wood products of pine and spruce., Incin-
eration
6.67E-02
kg
Structure
7.02E-03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Sawn and dried construction wood products of pine and spruce., Incin-
eration
2.48E+01
kg
Structure
2.61E+00
kgCO2-eq
Products
Sawn and dried construction wood products of pine and spruce., Incin-
eration
1.09E+02
kg
Structure
1.15E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Sawn and dried construction wood products of pine and spruce., Incin-
eration
1.09E+02
kg
Structure
1.15E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Bitumen sheets PYE PV 200 S5 (non-slated) (thickness 0.004 m)
8.34E+01
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
2.77E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Bitumen sheets G 200 S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
8.00E+01
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
1.38E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Troldtekt 25mm Natural Grey FUTURECEM - painted, 25.0mm
1.88E+02
kg
Structure
2.27E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Troldtekt 25mm Natural Grey FUTURECEM - painted, 25.0mm
1.88E+02
kg
Structure
1.13E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Timber larch (12% moisture / 10.7% H2O content)
2.11E+02
kg
Structure
1.79E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
WISA Spruce plywood, uncoated, Incineration
1.15E+02
kg
Structure
3.46E+01
kgCO2-eq
Table A.4: Data relative to component Roofs
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case 59
==PAGE:68==
Ground ﬂoor slabs
Weight
Unit
Main function
Impact potential
Unit
Group
Ground ﬂoor slabs
3.27E+04
kg
5.66E+03
kgCO2-eq
Subgroup
Ground ﬂoor slabs
3.27E+04
kg
5.66E+03
kgCO2-eq
Element
Terrændæk
3.27E+04
kg
5.66E+03
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Flydende trægulv
1.11E+03
kg
6.16E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Scan Underlay
9.90E+01
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
2.98E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Timber oak (12% moisture / 10.7% H2O content)
1.01E+03
kg
Structural
3.18E+02
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Terrændæk
3.11E+04
kg
4.88E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Reinforcement steel wire
3.54E+02
kg
Structural
2.42E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Ready-mixed concrete (exposure classes X0, XC1)
2.49E+04
kg
Structural
2.80E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockwool terrænbatts, 37
4.98E+03
kg
Thermal insulation
1.83E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Sand 0/2
8.86E+02
kg
Structural
8.49E+00
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Vådrumsgulv
4.54E+02
kg
1.58E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Glass ﬁbre ﬂeece
2.06E+00
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
5.07E+00
kgCO2-eq
Products
Silicate plaster
3.14E+00
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
1.87E+00
kgCO2-eq
Products
Stoneware tiles glazed (thickness 0.01 m)
3.30E+02
kg
Structural
1.04E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Cement mortar
6.60E+01
kg
Structural
1.24E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Tile adhesive
3.30E+01
kg
Structural
1.20E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Flexible waterprooﬁng slurry (PCI ő Seccoral 1K)
1.98E+01
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
2.20E+01
kgCO2-eq
Table A.5: Data relative to component Ground Floor Slabs
60 Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case
==PAGE:69==
Weight
Unit
Main function
Impact potential
Unit
Group
External walls
1.07E+04
kgCO2-eq
Subgroup
External walls
1.07E+04
kgCO2-eq
Element
Ydervæg
1.70E+04
kg
1.07E+04
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Indv. ﬁnish
1.45E+04
kg
7.75E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Fermacell ﬁbergips
3.70E+03
kg
Structural
7.97E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Silicate plaster
3.81E+01
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
9.09E+01
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockzero system
1.07E+04
kg
Thermal
insula-
tion, Structural
6.57E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Silicate
interior
paints
7.62E+01
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
2.92E+02
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Rockpanelbeklædning1.43E+02
kg
2.47E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Rockpanel, 8 mm
1.43E+02
kg
Moisture prooﬁng
2.47E+02
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Stålbeklædning
8.69E+02
kg
2.11E+03
kgCO2-eq
Products
Steel
sheet
(0.3-
30mm)
8.69E+02
kg
Structural
2.11E+03
kgCO2-eq
Construction
Træbeklædning
1.50E+03
kg
5.51E+02
kgCO2-eq
Products
Timber pine (12%
moisture
/
10.7%
H2O content)
1.50E+03
kg
Structural
5.51E+02
kgCO2-eq
Table A.6: Data relative to component External Walls
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment from building to materials - the RockHouse case 61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
