==PAGE:1==
Investigating fire spread in large
compartments with exposed wood surfaces
using a scaling-based pyrolysis model by
use of CFD
Final thesis - Master in Fire Safety
Signe Harvig Bjerrum - s141886
June 13, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the applicability of the newly introduced scaling- based pyrolysis model,
Spyro, in Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) for simulating fire propagation in large compartments
with exposed wood surfaces. The study aims to assess whether the Spyro model can serve as a
predictive alternative to the traditional Ignition Temperature Pyrolysis (ITP) model, which
relies on user-defined heat release rate (HRR) inputs and lacks sensitivity to environmental and
thermal feedback.
To evaluate the Spyro model, simulations were performed with the aim for replicating the
full-scale FRIC compartment fire test involving exposed cross-laminated timber (CLT) surfaces.
Cone calorimeter experiments for CLT were conducted using three different heat flux levels of
35, 50 and 70 kW/m2. The cone calorimeter data for CLT and mass timber from literature were
used as input for the Spyro model, and its predictions were benchmarked against those from the
ITP model and the FRIC test. Key parameters including fire growth rate, time to flashover,
and total HRR were compared.
The results show that both the Spyro and ITP model are capable of reproducing key features of
the FRIC test when wind conditions are included. However, the Spyro model demonstrated
an under-prediction of fire growth rate and an over-prediction of peak HRR, attributed to
limitations in its scaling behaviour. The ITP model provided more accurate fire growth rates
but still overestimated total HRR. The study also highlights the importance of sample thickness
in cone calorimeter tests, as Spyro currently does not account for this variable.
Despite current limitations, the Spyro model offers a promising approach for simulating fire spread
based on experimentally derived material data, with comparable computational performance
to the ITP model. With further validation, of the down-scaling abilities and additional cone
calorimeter experiments for lower incident heat flux levels relevant to early fire development, the
Spyro model could possibly serve as a useful tool for performance-based fire safety engineering
in timber buildings.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This report presents the thesis, that constitute the final assignment of my Master’s degree in
Fire Safety Engineering (Master i Brandsikkerhed) at the Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering (DTU Construct), Technical University of Denmark. The project accounts for 15
ECTS points and was carried out during the period from January 14 to June 13, 2025.
I would like to thank my Supervisor Associate professor Bjarne B. P. Husted, for his constructive
feedback, and availability throughout the project. I am grateful for the opportunity to conduct
the cone calorimeter experiments at DBI – Danish Institute of Fire and Security Technology. I
would also like to thank Iben Hansen-Bruhn and Martin Pauner for their assistance during the
experiments and for generously sharing their technical expertise.
Kgs. Lyngby, June 13, 2025
Signe Harvig Bjerrum, s141886
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
2
Background and Literature Review
3
2.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2
The FRIC Fire Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3
Theory
6
3.1
Heat Release Rates in Compartment Fires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.2
Ignition of Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.3
Fire development in compartments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.4
Surface Flame Spread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Methodology
13
4.1
FDS Pyrolysis models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
The FDS Modelling Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Computational Domain and Model Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Fuel Specifications and Material Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
Input for the ITP Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Input for the Spyro Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.7
Mesh Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
iii
==PAGE:5==
4.8
Cone Calorimeter Experiments for CLT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Results and Discussion
33
5.1
FDS Simulation Results Using the ITP Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.2
Validation of the Spyro Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
FDS Simulation Results Using the Spyro Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.4
Results - Cone Calorimeter Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6
Overall Discussion
71
6.1
Comparison of the Spyro Model vs ITP Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6.2
The Spyro Model - Comparison of CLT vs Mass Timber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6.3
Assessment of the FDS Modelling Approach and the Spyro Model . . . . . . . . 75
7
Conclusion
77
8
Future work
79
Bibliography
80
Appendix
83
A
Construction of Wood Crib in FDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
B
Heptane Fuel - Calculation of HRR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
C
ITP - Ceiling Surface Temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
D
SP - Ceiling Surface Temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
E
CLT Cone test - Charring rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
F
CLT Cone test - Heat Release Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
G
FDS Code - Spyro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
==PAGE:6==
1. Introduction
On a global scale, there is a growing demand for the construction industry to reduce its
CO2 emissions and environmental impact. With the construction industry accounting for
approximately 30 % of Denmark’s total CO2 emissions, there is a rising interest in using
timber and other biobased materials as sustainable alternatives to traditional non combustible
construction materials such as steel and concrete, as timber provides a great potential for reducing
the carbon footprint ((Lind and Damsgaard, 2021), CONCITO (2022)). Modern engineered
wood products like cross-laminated timber (CLT) offer structural capabilities comparable to
concrete, while also lowering the carbon footprint (Buchanan and Östman, 2022).
However, the combustibility of timber presents unique fire safety challenges. Exposed wood
surfaces and structural elements in compartments add to the available fuel load, fundamentally
changing the fire dynamics compared to compartments of non-combustible materials (Nandish
et al., 2025). The combustible nature of wood might be the limiting factor for increasing the
amount of wood in new buildings. Most countries have regulatory limitations on the use of CLT
and exposed wood surfaces. Especially in high-rise or complex buildings based in this concern,
despite growing architectural and environmental incentives for its use (Buchanan and Östman,
2022). In Denmark the limit is maximum 20 % exposed untreated wood surfaces on ceilings and
walls in compartments above 150 m2 in most cases. Closing this gap between sustainability goals
and safety requirements demands a profound understanding of fire development in compartments
with combustible linings and structures.
While full-scale fire tests have improved our understanding of fire behaviour in CLT compartments
(e.g. (Brandon et al., 2021), (Bøe et al., 2023b), Kotsovinos et al. (2021)), such experiments
are costly and limited in scope. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) tools like Fire Dynamics
Simulator (FDS) offer a flexible alternative for investigating fire dynamics and fire propagation
under varied conditions for compartments with exposed wood surfaces and CLT. However, the
accuracy of such simulations currently depends on the user-defined input, which has to be
validated by experiments.
A common approach for CFD studies rely on the simple Ignition Temperature Pyrolysis model
(ITP model), which is based on a user defined prescribed surface ignition temperature and a
fixed heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA). Recently, Jiang et al. (2024) investigated
the feasibility of applying FDS to simulate a large-scale CLT compartment fire with overall
good results by recreating the FRIC test conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b) using the ITP model.
The ITP model, however, neglects the dynamic interaction between the local heat flux and
the burning rate. As concluded by Jiang et al. (2024), the ITP model is not suited to predict
1
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
an accurate fire spread rate in an arbitrary CLT compartment as the main limitation of this
method is a constant heat release rate. FDS also offers a complex pyrolysis model besides the
ITP model but this model require detailed knowledge of the actual materials obtained through
experiments.
Recently a scaling-based pyrolysis model, the Spyro model, was introduced in FDS (version
6.9.1), which dynamically scales the heat release rate according to the incident heat flux at the
surface using a reference cone calorimeter heat release curve (Hodges et al., 2023),(McGrattan
et al., 2024b). This model might eliminate some of the limitations inherent in the ITP model.
This thesis therefore investigates how effectively the Spyro model can predict fire spread and
heat release in large compartments with exposed wood surfaces. The work builds on the FRIC
full-scale test by Bøe et al. (2023b), using it as a benchmark for the FDS model.
1.1
Objective
Building on prior research in the fire dynamics and fire spread within CLT compartments,
the overall objective of this study is to explore how the Spyro model can be used to simulate
fire propagation in large compartments with exposed wood surfaces.This is approached by
implementing the Spyro model in a FDS simulation of a large-scale compartment scenario.
Specifically through an attempt to reproduce the FRIC-test using experimentally derived cone
calorimeter HRRPUA data for CLT and cone calorimeter data from literature for mass timber.
Additionally, the Spyro model is benchmarked against established methods by comparing
its predictions with those obtained from the Ignition Temperature Pyrolysis (ITP) model.
Furthermore, the design applicability of the Spyro model is assessed by evaluating whether
its computational cost, data requirements, and prediction accuracy align with the needs in
performance-based fire engineering design for buildings with exposed wood surfaces.
2
==PAGE:8==
2. Background and Literature Review
In the following the back ground for this study is elaborated further together with an overall
literature review which present the an overview of the current state of knowledge. In addition
the FRIC test by Bøe et al. (2023b) is presented in more detail, as this study is based on the
FRIC test and its properties. For a detailed description of the test setup and the results refer
to the articles by Bøe et al. (2023a) and Bøe et al. (2023b).
2.1
Literature Review
The use of CLT and wood in modern buildings is largely driven by its environmental profile
and architectural aesthetics but its use remain limited due to fire safety limitations. Studies
like Östman et al. (2017) highlights how regulations restrict the use of CLT especially in
complex buildings and high-rise buildings due to its combustibility, despite its architectural
and environmental appeal. Current fire tests have contributed to the understanding of the fire
dynamics in combustible compartments including the influence of various parameters such as fuel
load, number of exposed surfaces, char formation, delamination and self-extinction (Buchanan
and Östman, 2022). The literature and basic knowledge is although still limited, especially for
large compartments (Östman et al., 2017).
To date, most tests have been small- and medium-scale tests which have provided insights into the
fire dynamics within compartments with exposed timber linings. According to Liu and Fischer
(2022) most full scale fire tests have been focusing on small compartments which may correspond
to a room in a dwelling or a residential building. In the review by Liu and Fischer (2022) 70 %
of conducted fire tests for full scale CLT compartments were compartments with a floor area of
less than 25 m2. Further the analysis revealed a knowledge gap for compartments above 100 m2.
This demands for further research in the fire dynamics and fire propagation in large combustible
compartments of unprotected CLT. Gorska et al. (2021) observed that the introduction of timber
linings does not necessarily result in higher internal temperatures compared to compartments
with non-combustible linings. Further Gorska et al. (2021) concluded that exposed timber
ceilings can sometimes yield safer conditions than exposed timber walls. The contrary was
observed by Pope et al. (2023) who has performed a series of five large scale CLT compartment
test with a floor area of approx. 10 m2. The tests showed a larger heat flux on the ceiling which
questions the findings by Gorska et al. (2021) applying these results to full scale compartments.
Such contradictions highlights the challenges associated with scaling results from small and
medium scale tests to large scale compartments. Other researchers, like Hadden et al. (2017)
and Hopkin et al. (2024), have conducted fire tests indicating higher total heat release rates
3
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
for compartments with exposed CLT surfaces than predicted by existing methodologies. Both
investigating the influence of different configurations of exposed CLT, despite gas temperatures
align with predictions. These tests, however, were limited to compartments under 12 m2.
More recently, large-scale experiments have attempted filling the knowledge gap for large
compartments.
Brandon et al. (2021) investigated compartment of approximately 50 m2
conducting five tests with different opening factors and different configurations of exposed wood
surfaces. Kotsovinos et al. (2021), and the two studies by Bøe et al. (2023a) and Bøe et al.
(2023b) investigated compartments between 95 m2 and 352 m2 with different configurations of
exposed CLT surfaces. Their findings revealed an accelerated fire spread compared to literature
and non-combustible compartments, most likely due to radiant preheating of the fuel load on
the floor. Furthermore extensive external flaming was observed despite the compartments being
well-ventilated. Besides the previous mentioned studies by Kotsovinos et al. (2021), Bøe et al.
(2023a) and Bøe et al. (2023b) the number of the number of full scale tests and research in
combustible compartments with CLT including large well-ventilated spaces is currently limited.
Due to the cost and complexity of full-scale tests, numerical simulation e.g FDS has become
a key tool for studying fire dynamics.
FDS provides the opportunity for studying many
different fire scenarios varying different parameters, which can supplement the full-scale fire
tests of CLT compartments. This however requires careful attention to the input parameters in
FDS and the pyrolysis models used in the simulation. A common approach is to employ the
Ignition Temperature Pyrolysis model (ITP model), which utilizes a surface ignition temperature
threshold, and a fixed HRR which requires knowledge of the actual HRR for the scenario. Current
studies, like Dai et al. (2023), Nandish et al. (2025) and Janardhan and Hostikka (2019) have
investigated fire spread on wood cribs utilizing the ITP model, but this literature review reveal
that research in numerical modelling of fire development in CLT compartments is limited.
Currently Jiang et al. (2024) applied the ITP model in FDS to recreate the FRIC-02 experiment
conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b) to explore the use of numerical simulation to investigate fire
dynamics and fire spread in compartments with wood surfaces. As concluded by Jiang et al.
(2024) the ITP model is not suited to predict an accurate fire spread rate in an arbitrary CLT
compartment as the main limitation of this method is the absence of the radiative feedback
mechanism in compartments.
Recently, the Spyro model, a scaling-based pyrolysis model was introduced in FDS (version 6.9.1)
(McGrattan et al., 2024b). The Spyro model can predict the HRR of a surface by dynamically
adjust a reference HRRPUA derived from cone calorimeter experiments, based on the local heat
flux onto the surface (Hodges et al., 2023). Early validation shows good agreement, but the
Spyro model’s applicability to different fire scenarios is still a new topic of research (Hodges
et al., 2023).
This thesis builds on the prior research of Jiang et al. (2024) by applying the Spyro model in
4
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
FDS to the full-scale compartment fire test conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b). The aim is to
investigate the application of Spyro model for modelling fire propagation in large compartments
with exposed CLT surfaces using cone calorimeter data for CLT obtained experimentally. In
the following the FRIC test conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b) is presented in more detail.
2.2
The FRIC Fire Test
The FRIC-02 is the second of two tests conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b) investigating the fire
development, heat release rate, charring and temperature distribution inside CLT compartments
with different configurations of exposed CLT surfaces. In the FRIC-02 test (hereafter referred
to as the FRIC test), both the ceiling and back wall were made of exposed CLT.
The compartment in the FRIC test had a floor area of 95 m² (18.8 m x 5.0 m) with a ceiling
height of approximately 2.5 m. The CLT panels used were made of Norwegian Spruce bonded
with polyeruthane adhesive and the panels were 0.14 m thick consisting of five layers, with 40
mm thick outer layers. The material properties used in the FDS model, based on this setup, are
specified in Table 4.3 in section 4.4.2.
The compartment was constructed with four large window openings corresponding to an opening
factor of 0.18 m
1
2. The variable fuel load was represented by two wood cribs made of spruce
sticks (50 mm × 50 mm cross-section), with a total mass of 2075 kg. One of the cribs was placed
on a scale to measure mass loss. Ignition was initiated using 14 heptane trays (0.7 L each) at
one end of the crib. The test was conducted outdoors, with wind conditions reported 2 m/s
(gusting to 5-8 m/s), blowing diagonally from the rear right corner. Thermocouples embedded
in the CLT wall and ceiling were used to estimate char depth and charring rates, assuming
charring onset at 300 ◦C. The HRR of the CLT was derived from the mass loss rate calculated
from these charring rates. Additional data reported include compartment gas temperatures,
facade temperatures, external flame heights, and flame spread rates.
The FRIC test revealed extremely rapid fire development, with ceiling ignition occurring within
120 seconds and flashover was reached at 193 seconds post-ignition. Combustion of the CLT
wall and ceiling self-extinguished approximately 13 minutes after ignition, while the wood crib
continued burning. A second flashover occurred after approximately 76 minutes post-ignition,
due to adhesive failure and delamination of CLT layers, which exposed new fuel to the fire. The
fire exhibited exponential growth, with external flame heights reaching up to 8 meters and a
peak HRR estimated to 73 MW for the total compartment.
These detailed measurements and thorough documentation of the test set up make FRIC a
suitable benchmark case for simulation in FDS assessing the applicability of the Spyro model
for large compartments with exposed wood surfaces.
5
==PAGE:11==
3. Theory
In the following is concepts of heat release rates for for compartment fires are presented along
with the ignition process of wood. Focus will be on flaming ignition and how exposed wood
surfaces and combustible structures can change the classic conceptions of compartment fires
and fire dynamics for non- combustible compartments in terms of the additional fuel load.
3.1
Heat Release Rates in Compartment Fires
Heat is energy transferred due to a temperature difference, through conduction, convection and
radiation. All three are presented during a fire, although one often dominates depending on
the stage or location of the fire. Conduction is important in relation to ignition and spread of
flames over a combustible surface as described in Section 3.4 and 3.2.1. Convection occurs at
all stages in a fire but is especially important in the early stages, when radiation levels are low
and for transferring heat from a flame to a surface (Drysdale, 2005). Radiative heat transfer
often becomes dominant in compartment fires due to high flame temperatures and hot smoke
layers, and radiation determines the growth and spread of fires in compartments (Karlsson and
Quintiere, 2022). Most radiation is emitted by solid soot particles, and as the fire increases in
size increases, radiative feedback becomes more significant. This includes both internal radiation
(feedback from flame to fuel surface) and external radiation (to surroundings), which is discussed
in more detail in Section 3.2. As radiation does not require a medium it can ignite objects at a
distance accelerating fire spread within the compartment (Drysdale, 2005).
The rate of heat release in a compartment controls fire propagation, including plume flow, the
descent of the hot gas layer and the gas temperatures (Karlsson and Quintiere, 2022). After
ignition fire growth can range from slow to fast depending on the fuel characteristics, oxygen
availability and interactions with the compartment. For compartment fires the ventilation
conditions and the hot gas layer are the two main factors influencing the burning rate. The
descending hot gas layer heat the surrounding surfaces, which then radiate energy back to
the fuel, increasing pyrolysis and thus the burning rate. At the same time air supply through
openings governs the oxygen availability (Karlsson and Quintiere, 2022).
In well-ventilated compartments, burning is fuel-controlled and depends on the fuel surface
area. Limited ventilation restricts oxygen, reducing combustion efficiency, heat release rate and
increasing unburnt gases and smoke due to incomplete combustion. This leads to lower gas
temperatures and reduced heat transfer back to the fuel, which continues to release volatiles
at a slower mass loss rate. When the oxygen is limited unburnt gases will collect under the
6
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
ceiling where may ignite at the openings when mixed with incoming oxygen causing visible
flames (Karlsson and Quintiere, 2022).
Compared to free-burning fires, compartment fires show higher burning rates due to heat feedback
from the surrounding surfaces and smoke layer. At the same time, ventilation constraints may
limit available oxygen which reduces the overall HRR (Karlsson and Quintiere, 2022).
The mass loss rate (MLR) describes the rate at which a solid or liquid fuel is vaporized and
burnt. The mass loss rate can be expressed as mass flow per unit time typically in kg/s denoted
˙m or as mass loss rate per unit area (MLRPUA) denoted ˙m
′′ [kg/(s · m2)]. The steady burning
MLRPUA is given by:
˙m
′′ =
˙q
′′
∆Hg
(3.1.1)
Where ˙q
′′ [kW/m2] is the net heat flux from the flame to the fuel used to release the violatiles,
and ∆Hg [kJ/kg] is the heat of gasification which is the amount of heat needed to gasify some
unit of the fuel.
The heat release rate (HRR) ( ˙Q) [KW] or energy release rate, describes the amount of energy
(heat) a burning object releases per unit time, or as heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA)
˙Q
′′ [KW/(m2)]. In the following the term HRR og HRRPUA will be used as it is the term used
in FDS. For most materials the energy release rate changes over time. The heat release rate can
be calculated using the mass loss rate and the effective heat of combustion:
˙Q = ˙m · ∆Heff = ˙m
′′ · Af · ∆Heff
(3.1.2)
Where ∆Heff [kJ/kg] is the effective heat of combustion, describing the energy (heat) released
per unit mass of fuel combusted, and Af [m2] is the horizontal burning area of the fuel. A
distinction is made between the complete heat of combustion ∆Hc and the effective heat of
combustion ∆Heff. The ration between the two is denoted the combustion efficiency χ [−] :
χ = ∆Heff
∆Hc
(3.1.3)
The combustion efficiency of soothing fuels wood is typically in the range of the range of 70-80%.
The heat release rate, HRR [kW] can then be calculated as (Karlsson and Quintiere, 2022):
˙Q = ˙m
′′ · ∆Hc · χ · Af
(3.1.4)
7
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
3.2
Ignition of Wood
When wood is exposed to an external heat flux (radiant heat) it undergoes thermal decomposition
through a complex sequence of chemical reactions, known as pyrolysis. This process breaks down
the solid material into combustible volatile gases and char, as illustrated in Figure 3.1. This
pyrolysis process is described in more detail in Section 3.2.1. The rate at which the combustible
volatiles are released from the surface is called the mass loss rate as mentioned in the previous
section.
Ignition occurs when the volatiles released from the surface mixed with oxygen at a sufficient
concentration are subjected to an ignition source. Ignition can only occur if the fuel–air mixture
falls between the lower and upper flammability limit (Buchanan and Östman, 2022). To sustain
combustion, the flow of volatiles must exceed a critical threshold. For wood, this typically
correspond to a surface temperature of approximately 300 ◦C which is referred to as the ignition
temperature ( Tig [◦C]).
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the ignition process of a solid fuel (Sørensen, 2014)
Once the wood is ignited, the combustion process intensifies as radiant heat from the flame,
hot gases, and compartment surfaces contributes to increased heating. This leads to continued
pyrolysis and fire growth (Buchanan and Östman, 2022). The energy or heat released from the
combustion is expressed as the heat release rate (HRR) discussed in Section 3.1.
As the flame grows, it may no longer entrain enough oxygen, resulting in incomplete combustion.
This produces carbon monoxide and soot, which will increase the pyrolysis process as the
radiative heat transfer back to the surface enhances the pyrolysis process as illustrated in Figure
3.2 (Hurley, 2016). The rate at which wood reaches its ignition temperature due to combined
heating from the flame, soot radiation and hot compartment boundaries determines the flame
spread rate as elaborated in Section 3.4.
8
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Solid wood cannot sustain flaming combustion based on radiation from the flame alone. A
continuous external heat flux, such as from the hot smoke layer or heated walls and ceiling, is
required to maintain combustion (Buchanan and Östman, 2022).
Figure 3.2: Illustration of flaming combustion of wood
3.2.1
Thermal degradation of wood
Wood is porous, inhomogeneous material primarily consisting of cellulose, hemicellulose and
lignin, with the proportions varying by species. Typically, wood consist of 40-44 % cellulose,
20-30 % hemicellulose and 25-30 % lignin (Buchanan and Östman, 2022).
When exposed to heat, wood undergoes thermal degradation. The three main constitiuents
decomposes at different temperature ranges:
• Hemicellulose: 200-260 ◦C
• Cellulose: 240-350 ◦C
• Lignin:2 80-500 ◦C.
At around 450 ◦C, approximately 15-25 % of the wood mass is converted intro char (Drysdale,
2005). During pyrolysis, wood is broken down into combustible volatiles and solid char, which
leads to a reduction in density due to the mass loss (Hurley, 2016).
9
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
Figure 3.3: Illustration of degradation zones through a section of charred CLT from the
conducted cone calorimeter experiment showing the transition from unburnt wood, pyrolysis
zone and char layer
3.2.2
Thermal Properties of Wood
When wood is exposed to a heat flux the temperature distribution varies over time and depth,
with the highest temperatures occurring at the surface. The rate of temperature rise depends
on the material’s thermal conductivity k, [W/(m · K)], specific heat capacity c, [kJ/(kg · K)],
density ρ, [kg/m3] and the absorption coefficient ε, [−]. The thermal conductivity describes
how well a material conducts heat. For wood, it varies with density, moisture content and
temperature, increasing about 2-3% per 10 ◦C temperature rise (Forrest Products Laboratory,
2010). The specific heat capacity indicates the amount of heat needed to raise the temperature
of 1 kg of material by 1 Kelvin. While it also depends on temperature and moisture content, it
is generally independent of wood species and density (Forrest Products Laboratory, 2010).
3.2.3
Charring
A temperature of 300 ◦C within wood is commonly used in engineering assessment to define the
boundary between wood and char where 300 ◦C is the base of the char layer. Under standard
fire exposure, it is generally assumed that wood chars at a constant linear rate (Hurley, 2016).
The charring rate β [mm/s] can be expressed as the char depth divided by burning time:
β = dchar
t
(3.2.1)
Where dchar [mm] is the charring depth and t [s] is the time from ignition (burning time). Glued
wood products such as CLT is however observed to have a non uniform charring rate due to
cross-layering of the lamellae and the adhesive used (Buchanan and Östman, 2022). In the
FRIC test the charring was used to estimate the mass loss rate of CLT:
MLRCLT = β · ACLT · ρCLT
(3.2.2)
Where β [m/s] is the charring rate measured per meter, ACLT [m2] is the exposed surface area,
and ρCLT [kg/m3] is the density of the CLT element (Bøe et al., 2023b).
10
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
3.3
Fire development in compartments
The development of a classic compartment fire is often illustrated by a schematic time–temperature
curve divided into four phases (Figure 3.4).
The first phase occurs prior to flaming combustion, during which the fuel is heated as elaborated
in Section 3.2. This is followed by ignition and a growth phase, which is influenced by the fuel
type, fuel quantity, and interactions with compartment boundaries (Karlsson and Quintiere,
2022). If sufficient oxygen available, the fire is said to be fuel-controlled, and its growth will be
driven by the ignition of unburned fuel (Section 3.2 and 3.4).
Figure 3.4: Graphic representation of a typical time temperature curve for a fire devel-
opment process for a compartment fire in a non-combustible compartment (Buchanan and
Östman, 2022)
The likelihood of flashover depends on the compartment size and ventilation conditions. During
the growth phase hot gases will accumulate under the ceiling forming a hot gas layer which
radiates back to the combustible items in the compartment (Buchanan and Östman, 2022).
Flashover typically occur when gas temperatures exceed 500-600 ◦C, incident heat flux at the
floor reaches 15-20 kW/m2 and flames emerge from the compartment openings. Flashover
represents the rapid ignition of all fuel due to radiation from the hot gas layer (Karlsson and
Quintiere, 2022). Compartments with exposed timber surfaces, such as CLT can lead to faster
fire growth and earlier flashover which was demonstrated by Kotsovinos et al. (2021) where a
significantly faster fire spread in a compartment with an exposed CLT ceiling were reported
compared to non-combustible linings. Similar trends were reported in the FRIC test conducted
by Bøe et al. (2023b) which showed faster fire growth compared to Eurocode estimations.
After flashover, the fire enters the fully developed phase, where the energy release into the
compartment is peaking and the burning rate is usually ventilation-controlled as combustion
depends on oxygen supplied through openings. In such fires, unburnt gases often accumulate
beneath the ceiling and may ignite as they exit the compartment, producing external flames.
Studies have shown that CLT compartments tend to exhibit more intense external flaming than
11
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
non-combustible ones ((Kotsovinos et al., 2021), (Bøe et al., 2023b), Gorska et al. (2021)).
The duration of fully developed stage depends on both the available fuel and oxygen, and
this phase is usually critical to the structural design. At this stage the average compartment
temperatures can reach 700-1200 ◦C. Experiments indicates that CLT compartments produce
higher heat release rates that predicted heat release rates due to the added fuel load from
exposed surfaces ((Hadden et al., 2017),Kotsovinos et al. (2021)). Additionally, the fire duration
is extended, as the exposed CLT continues to burn even after movable fuel load is consumed.
The placement of exposed surfaces, especially corners of ceiling/wall intersections can intensify
local heat fluxes due to radiative feedback (Hadden et al., 2017).
The fourth phase is the decay phase where most fuel is consumed. In this phase the burning
rate and gas temperatures inside the compartment decline eventually leading to extinguishment
(Buchanan and Östman, 2022). However for CLT or other engineered wood products a second
flashover can sometimes sometimes occur due to glueline failure or failure in the protective
claddings, exposing previously protected or un-charred wood and reinitiating combustion.
3.4
Surface Flame Spread
Flame spread over combustible surfaces, and the resulting increase in burning area, strongly
influences flame size and burning rates within a compartment. Flame spread is defined as the
growth of the fire perimeter, governed by how quickly flames can expand the pyrolysis zone by
igniting unburned material ahead of the flame front. This advancing ignition front acts as both
an ignition source and a heat source (Drysdale, 2005).
While solid surfaces can burn in any orientation, flame spread is fastest in the upward direction
on vertical surfaces due to buoyant flow enhancing heat transfer ahead of the flame. In contrast,
horizontal and downward flame spread is slower, as air entrainment leads to counter-current
flow that reduces preheating (Drysdale, 2005). For horizontal ceilings, flame spread is of often
driven by a ceiling jet which create a flow of hot smoke beneath the ceiling. This will result in
preheating unburned material ahead of the burning area.
Even low radiant heat flux can significantly increase flame spread by preheating the fuel. This
is especially relevant in the early stages of a compartment fire, where rising smoke layers and
hot boundaries contribute to surface heating. As the fire intensifies, stronger flames behind the
front provide further heat feedback, accelerating spread.
Air movement (wind) generally enhance flame spread. However, opposing airflow can reduce
the spread rate if velocities are high. At low velocities, it can promote spread by enhancing
oxygen at the pyrolysis front.This airflow corresponds to counter-current spread, common in
horizontal and downward propagation, where the opposing flow both mixes pyrolysis gases and
cools the surface ahead.
12
==PAGE:18==
4. Methodology
The Scaling Pyrolysis Model (Spyro model), may or may not be a useful pyrolysis model
for investigating fire spread on wood surfaces in compartment fire scenarios. To evaluate its
applicability, the FDS model predictions are compared to the FRIC full-scale test conducted
by Bøe et al. (2023b). Aditionally, the Spyro model is benchmarked against the established
Ignition Temperature Pyrolysis Model (ITP model). The overall approach for this analysis is
structured in four steps:
• Step 1: Application of the ITP model in FDS to simulate the FRIC test scenario.
• Step 2: Validation of the Spyro model by comparing its scaling performance against cone
calorimeter data from literature for mass timber and experimentally obtained data for
cross-laminated timber (CLT).
• Step 3: Application of the Spyro model in FDS using cone calorimeter data for mass
timber to simulate the FRIC test.
• Step 4: Performance of the cone calorimeter experiments on CLT and application of the
Spyro model in FDS using using the resulting data.
The FDS modelling methodology is described in Section 4.2, while the experimental setup for
the conducted cone calorimeter tests is described in Section 4.8.
In total, ten FDS simulations were conducted, as outlined in Table 4.1 in Section 4.2. This
includes five simulations using the ITP model and five simulations using the Spyro model. The
variations in model inputs for each set of simulations are provided in Table 4.4 (ITP model)
and Table 4.5 (Spyro model).
The comparison of the Spyro model to the ITP model and the FRIC test focuses on the following
four key performance parameters:
• Visual comparison of fire development (ignition, flame spread, and flashover)
• Heat release rate (HRR) and total energy release
• Surface temperature of CLT elements
• Compartment gas temperatures
13
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
4.1
FDS Pyrolysis models
In this study the fire propagation and fire spread on wood surfaces in a compartment is
investigated, using computer simulations performed in the open source software Fire Dynamic
Simulator (FDS). FDS is a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model of fire-driven fluid
flow (McGrattan et al., 2024b). FDS is developed by The National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), and version 6.9.1 is used for this study. The visualization program,
Smokeview (Version 6.9.1), also developed by NIST, is used to visualise the simulation results.
In FDS, the modelling of the solid-phase reactions is governed by what is generally referred
to as the pyrolysis model, which is embedded in the heat conduction equations (McGrattan
et al., 2024a). This study focuses on two pyrolysis models implemented in FDS: The Ignition
Temperature Pyrolysis (ITP) model also known as the "Specified Heat Release Rate model"
and the Scaling Pyrolysis (Spyro) model. For reference, the Complex Pyrolysis Model is also
briefly introduced, although it is not applied in this study.
Each model is described in practical terms to provide an understanding of their mechanisms,
without going into the underlying mathematical formulations, which are outside the scope of
this thesis.
4.1.0.1
Ignition Temperature Pyrolysis Model (ITP model)
In many FDS simulations, the standard approach involves presribing the heat release rate to
predicting the development of heat and smoke of a given fire. This approach requires prior
knowledge of the actual fire scenario, as the HRR is user-defined and not predicted by the model
itself (McGrattan et al., 2024a).
The ITP is based on this principal which requires adaption/adjustments to fit the HRR of an
experiment together with a specified surface ignition temperature. In this model the heat release
rate from the fire is translated into a mass flux for a solid surface (fuel) denoted ( ˙m
′′
f) using the
following equation:
˙m
′′
f = f(t) · ˙q
′′
user
∆Hc
(4.1.1)
Here, ( ˙m
′′
f) is the mass flux of the solid fuel, ˙q
′′
user is the user defined HRRPUA, f(t) is the
user-defined time ramp and ∆Hc is the gas-phase heat of combustion (McGrattan et al., 2024a).
Optional inputs such as the fuel’s density, specific heat of combustion, and material thickness
can also be included.
This model initiates combustion when the surface temperature exceeds a specified ignition
threshold and then follows the predefined HRR ramp. Consequently, the burning rate is entirely
governed by the user input, rather than by interaction with surrounding fire conditions (Gissi).
14
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
In this study, the ITP model is applied in FDS as outlined in Section 4.5, using a defined surface
ignition temperature for the CLT and prescribed HRR ramps.
4.1.0.2
Scaling Pyrolysis Model, Spyro
Another approach is scaling the burning rate by the heat flux using the Spyro model in FDS,
which is a new model included in FDS version 9.6.1 (McGrattan et al., 2024b). It modifies the
ITP model to utilize data from cone calorimeter tests or similar experiments, in which samples
are exposed to a fixed radiative heat flux while their HRRPUA is measured.
The Spyro model is based on the assumption that the general shape of a material’s HRRPUA
remains constant across different heat flux levels, while the magnitude and duration may change
with the applied heat flux (Hodges et al., 2023).
Thus, the Spyro model scales the reference HRRPUA curve dynamically during the simulation
in response to the local heat flux , allowing it to simulate fire growth based on actual feedback
conditions within the compartment (McGrattan et al., 2024a). The underlying algorithm and
details of the scaling approach can be found in McGrattan et al. (2024a).
In this study, the Spyro model is implemented in FDS as described in Section 4.6, using a surface
ignition temperature and reference HRRPUA curves derived from cone calorimeter experiments
and literature data, as detailed in Section 4.8.
4.1.0.3
Complex Pyrolysis Models
FDS also includes a more advanced pyrolysis modelling option referred to as the Complex
Pyrolysis Model. This approach enables a more detailed representation of thermal degradation
by allowing multiple concurrent and sequential chemical reactions to be defined for a solid
material.
Users can specify thermo-physical properties for each constituent of a fuel, and each constituent
can undergo multiple reactions at different temperature thresholds. The model supports up to
10 reactions per material and up to 20 sequential steps in a reaction chain. Like the Spyro model,
the Complex Pyrolysis Model bases pyrolysis on net heat feedback from the surroundings.
However, due to its complexity, this model requires extensive input data, including the exact
composition of the material, thermal properties, and reaction parameters.These parameters
have to be obtained experimentally.
While the Complex Pyrolysis Model offers detailed modelling capabilities, it is not applied in
this study due to its high data requirements and the focus on evaluating the more practical
Spyro and ITP models.
15
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
4.2
The FDS Modelling Approach
To evaluate the applicability of the Spyro model for simulating fire spread on wood surfaces in
compartment fire scenarios, a computational model of the FRIC full-scThe fire scenario from
the FRIC test is simulated in two stages: first by applying the ITP model, and subsequently by
applying the Spyro model. The model geometry, material properties, and mesh configuration
are identical for both the ITP and Spyro simulations and are described in detail in Section 4.3.2.
As previously mentioned, the overall analysis approach is structured into four sequential steps:
Step 1 is the initial analysis applying the ITP model, where five different simulations are
performed as outlined in Table 4.1. The varied parameters within these simulations are described
in Section 4.5.
Step 2 is the validation of the Spyro model and assessment of its ability to scale the input
HRR curves from mass timber and CLT.
Step 3 is the application of the Spyro model using cone calorimeter data from literature for
mass timber (MT), where three different simulations are performed as outlined in Table 4.1.
The results from Step 1 (the ITP simulations) are used to define the wood crib input for the
Spyro simulations.
Step 4 is the application of the Spyro model using the conducted cone calorimeter data obtained
experimentally for CLT where two different simulations are performed as outlined in Table 4.1.
As in Step 3, the wood crib parameters are based on the results from the initial ITP simulations.
The method used for conducting the cone calorimeter test is described in Section 4.8.
Table 4.1: Overview of performed simulations
Step
Simulation
Ignition Model
Simulation variables
Step 1
ITP-00
ITP
See Table 4.4
ITP-01
ITP
ITP-02
ITP
ITP-02W
ITP
ITP-03
ITP
Step 3
SP-MT-A
Spyro
See Table 4.5
SP-MT-B
Spyro
SP-MT-B-W
Spyro
Step 4
SP-CLT
Spyro
See Table 4.5
SP-CLT-W
Spyro
16
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
The simulation identifiers are structured to distinguish between the pyrolysis models and datasets
used. Simulations applying the ITP model are labeled with the prefix "ITP" followed by a
serial number. Simulations using the Spyro model are labeled with the prefix "SP". Within the
Spyro simulations, "MT-A" and "MT-B" refer to simulations using mass timber datasets A and
B, respectively, while "CLT" indicates simulations based on cross-laminated timber data. The
suffix "W" denotes the inclusion of wind conditions in the simulation setup.
Details regarding the mesh resolution and computational time considerations are discussed in
Section 4.7.
4.2.1
Criteria for Comparison
The results of the FDS simulations using the ITP model and the Spyro model respectively are
compared based on the following criteria:
• Visual comparison of fire development (ignition, flame spread, and flashover)
• Heat release rate (HRR) and total energy release
• Surface temperature of CLT elements
• Compartment gas temperatures temperatures
The visual comparison of the FDS results are performed in Smokeview examining at the surface
temperatures which is measured in FDS by Wall temperature boundary files using a 300 ◦C
threshold for determining ignition of a surface. The total HRR output as a function of time is
measured automatically in FDS. The CLT surface temperatures are measured in FDS using the
wall temperature devices.
4.3
Computational Domain and Model Geometry
The computational domain and model geometry used in the FDS simulations are described in
the following. The setup is identical for simulations using both the ITP model and the Spyro
model. The complete FDS input code for the SP-CLT simulation is included in Appendix G.
4.3.1
Computational domain
The computational domain is extended in the X, Y, and Z directions to ensure free space above
and around the compartment. This includes a vertical extension in the positive Z-direction
(above the compartment), as well as lateral extensions in the X and Y directions to accommodate
external flow development, as illustrated in Figure 4.1.
17
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Based on the actual compartment geometry and the mesh sensitivity analysis discussed in
Section 4.7, a mesh resolution of (δx, δy, δz) = (0.05 m, 0.05 m, 0.05 m) is applied within the
compartment. For the external domain in the negative Y-direction, a coarser mesh resolution
of (0.10 m, 0.10 m, 0.10 m) is used to reduce computational cost. These external meshes are
illustrated by the 12 sub-meshes shown in the negative Y-direction in Figure 4.1.
To further optimize computational performance, the domain is divided into 60 sub-meshes.
Within the compartment, the number of cells per sub-mesh is 58,752. To avoid known simulation
errors related to vertical partitioning, the compartment sub-meshes are not divided along
the Z-axis, in accordance with best practices described by Gissi. For the sub-meshes outside
the compartment, the number of cells ranges from 31,824 to 84,456 due to the coarser mesh
resolution.
In the simulations that include wind, a wind velocity of 2 m/s is specified with an incident angle
of 55◦, representing wind blowing diagonally toward the rear right corner of the compartment in
the −Y direction. Wind is implemented using Method 1 as described in the FDS User Guide
(McGrattan et al., 2024b).
The standard FFT pressure solver in FDS is used, with a maximum of 10 pressure iterations
and a velocity tolerance of 0.5. To improve the accuracy of radiative heat transfer, the number
of radiation angles is increased to 300. Additionally, the angle and time step increments are
both set to 6, balancing accuracy with computational cost as recommended by Husted (2025).
The FDS code is provided in Appendix G.
Figure 4.1:
Illustration of the computational domain, which is extended beyond the
compartment geometry. The white lines indicate the subdivision of the mesh. The left image
shows the domain viewed in the positive Y-direction, while the right image shows the domain
viewed in the positive X-direction.
4.3.2
Compartment geometry
The internal dimensions of the compartment are modelled to match those used in the FRIC
test, with a width of 18.8 m in the X-direction, 5.0 m in the Y-direction, and a height of 2.5 m
18
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
in the Z-direction (Figure 4.2). The compartment height is set to 0.02 m less than in the FRIC
experiment to align with the mesh configuration.
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the internal compartment geometry and wood crib layout in the
X–Y plane. The 14 red squares at the left end of the wood crib represent the heptane trays
used for ignition.
In the FRIC test setup, the back wall and ceiling were constructed from exposed CLT elements,
while the two end walls consisted of CLT covered by two layers of fire-rated gypsum boards.
In the FDS model, the CLT back wall and ceiling are modelled with a geometric thickness of
0.15 m to fit the mesh, whereas the material properties are defined for a thickness of 0.14 m,
consistent with the CLT elements used in the FRIC test. The wall and ceiling geometry are
extended outward to ensure that the inner compartment dimensions remain unaffected by this
discrepancy.
The four windows are each modelled with a width of 4.25 m and a height of 2.2 m, replicating
the FRIC test configuration. Additionally, two vertical façade walls, each 2.45 m high and 5.0
m wide, are placed above windows 2 and 4, as illustrated in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the outer dimensions of the compartment and the wood crib in
the X–Z plane
The total opening area, Ao, of the four windows in the FRIC test is Ao = 9.35 m2 · 4 = 37.4 m2
which corresponds to an opening factor of 0.18 m
1
2.
19
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
4.3.2.1
Geometry of the Wood Crib
Two wood cribs of different sizes were used as fuel in the FRIC test, as illustrated in Figure
4.2. One continuous crib spans 15.5 m in the x-direction, while a smaller crib spans 1.0 m.
Both cribs are 2.8 m wide in the y-direction and 0.2 m high, each consisting of four alternating
layers of wooden sticks. The smaller crib is placed on a scale, elevated 0.2 m above the floor, as
illustrated in Figure 4.3.
In the FDS model, the wood cribs are represented as obstructions with cross-sectional dimensions
of 0.05 m × 0.05 m, corresponding to the mesh resolution. The sticks are arranged with one
empty cell in between each stick. Further construction details are provided in Appendix A.
According to Dai et al. (2023), the mesh size should be at least half the dimension of the wooden
sticks (i.e., 0.025 m) to accurately resolve flow and heat transfer inside the crib. However, due
to computational constraints, a coarser mesh is used in this study, as described in Section 4.7.
The total mass of the two wood cribs is 2179.59 kg, based on an average density of 486 kg/m3 as
reported by Bøe et al. (2023b). This is 104.59 kg more than the total mass reported in the FRIC
test. The discrepancy likely results from unreported stick spacing in the FRIC setup, combined
with a stated material density variation of ± 40 kg/m3 in the FRIC test. The difference in
mass is neglected in this study as an consistent evenly distributed fire load is prioritised.
4.3.2.2
Geometry of Heptane trays
In the FRIC test, the ignition of the long wood crib was initiated using 14 small metal trays
filled with heptane, positioned at the left end of the crib. These trays are illustrated in Figure
4.2 as red squares.
In the FDS model, each tray is represented as an obstruction with dimensions of (x, y, z) =
(0.15 m, 0.22 m, 0.05 m), and they are evenly distributed along the edge of the wood crib,
positioned with a 0.15 m overlap between the wood crib and the trays. The 14 trays are modelled
individually, with a spacing of 0.05 m between each. The total surface area of the trays is 0.04
m2, matching the configuration reported in the FRIC test.
To replicate the experimental setup accurately, the two bottom sticks of the wood crib that
were removed to make space for the trays. The removed sticks were placed on top of the crib,
consistent with the FRIC configuration described by Bøe et al. (2023b).
4.4
Fuel Specifications and Material Properties
This section outlines the fuel specifications and material properties used in the FDS simulations.
Unless otherwise stated, the same parameters are applied for both the ITP and Spyro model
simulations.
20
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
4.4.1
Heptane Fuel Properties
The wood crib is ignited by 14 heptane trays placed beneath its leading edge, as described in
Section 4.3.2. Each tray has a surface area area of 0.033 m2, with a total of 0.7 L of heptane
(C7H6), corresponding to liquid depth of approximately 0.02 m per tray. Using the pool fire
correlation, the burning rate for each tray is estimated to ˙m
′′ = 0.02
kg
m2·s, resulting in a heat
release rate of approximately HRRC7H6 = 27.5 kW ≈30 kW, assuming a combustion efficiency
of 90 %. The total heat release rate from all 14 trays is thus approximately 420 kW. The detailed
calculation is included in Appendix B.
In the FDS model, each heptane tray is specified to produce a HRR of 30 kW by assigning a
HRRPUA of 1000 kW/m2. The heat release is controlled by the specified time ramp in Figure
4.4. The ramp is linearly increasing to 30 kW during the first 60 s, held constant until 170 s,
and then reduced to 0 kW by 172 following the same approach as used by Jiang et al. (2024).
The exact burnout time of the trays was not reported in the FRIC test by Bøe et al. (2023b).
Figure 4.4: Prescribed heat release rate (HRR) [kW] as a function of time [s] for each
individual heptane tray used in the model. The HRR ramp increases linearly to 30 kW over
the first 60 s, remains constant until 170 s, and then decreases to 0 kW at 172 s, following
the approach by Jiang et al. (2024).
Heptane combustion is modelled using the chemical heat of combustion along with CO and soot
yield values, as summarized in Table 4.2. An initial validation confirmed that the FDS setup
reproduces the prescribed HRR behaviour, as shown in Appendix B.
21
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Table 4.2: Physical properties of heptane used in the model
Material
Density♮Heat of comb.∗Chem. heat of comb.∗CO yield∗Soot yield∗
ρ
∆Hc
∆Hch
yCO
ys
[kg/m3]
[MJ/kg]
[MJ/kg]
[g/g]
[g/g]
Heptane
(C7H6)
675
44.6
41.2
0.010
0.037
♮From Table 26.21 in Hurley (2016)
∗From Table A.39 in Hurley (2016)
4.4.2
Material Properties
In the FRIC experiment, both the CLT and the wood sticks used in the wood crib were made
of Norwegian spruce. A minor deviation in average density was recorded between the two, with
the wood crib measured at 486 kg/m3 ± 40 kg/m3, and the CLT elements at 484 kg/m3 (Bøe
et al., 2023b).
In FDS, the CLT elements are modeled as a single homogeneous wood material with a thickness
of 140 mm and the individual wood layers and adhesive layers are not explicitly modelled. Both
the CLT and the wood crib are represented using the same material reaction properties for
Norwegian spruce, as listed in Table 4.3.
The wood fuel is modelled with a chemical composition of CH1.7O0.83,defined for pine wood in
Table 36.11 of Hurley (2016), which is assumed to be comparable to spruce. An average heat
of combustion of ∆Hc = 16.1 MJ/kg is used both in the FDS simulations and the FRIC test.
This value falls within the standard range for wood materials reported in Hurley (2016). A
surface ignition temperature of Tig = 300 ◦C is applied for both the CLT and the wood crib,
consistent with assumptions in the FRIC experiment and common practice in FDS modelling.
The soot yield and CO yield are applied as specified in Table 4.3. Combustion of the wood fuel
is modelled using a two-step reaction mechanism in FDS.
The input parameters for the heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA) of the wood crib and
CLT ceiling are further detailed in:
• Section 4.5 for the ITP model simulations
• Section 4.6 for the Spyro model simulations
22
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Table 4.3: Material properties used in the model
Material
Density
Heat of Comb.
Conductivity
Specific heat
CO yield
Soot yield
ρ
∆Hc
k
c
yCO
ys
[kg/m3]
[MJ/kg]
[W/(m · K)]
[kJ/(kg · K)]
[g/g]
[g/g]
Norwegian
spruce ‡
CH1.7O0.83
484-486∗
16.1 ♮
0.12 (20 ◦C)
1.53 (20 ◦C)
0.005 ⋆
0.015 ⋆
0.15 (200 ◦C)
1.77 (99 ◦C)
0.07 (350 ◦C)
13.5 (120 ◦C)
0.09 (500 ◦C)
2.12 (221 ◦C)
0.35 (800 ◦C)
2.00 (200 ◦C)
1.5 (1200 ◦C)
1.62 (250 ◦C)
0.71 (300 ◦C)
0.85 (350 ◦C)
1.0 (400 ◦C)
1.40 (600 ◦C)
1.65 (800 ◦C)
Gypsum
board †
700
-
0.21
1.0
-
-
Concrete †
2300
-
2.3
1.0
-
-
Mineral
wool ⋄
100
-
0.041
0.8
-
-
∗Average wood crib density of 486 ± 40 kg/m3 and average CLT density of 484 kg/m3 (Bøe et al.,
2023b)
♮Average net heat of combustion for wood crib and CLT (Bøe et al., 2023b).
‡ Conductivity and specific heat for wood from page 2003 in Hurley (2016)
⋆From Table A.39 in Hurley (2016)
† From Table 3 in DS/EN-ISO-10456 (2008) for reinforced concrete with 1% steel
⋄From Table 6.1 in Karlsson and Quintiere (2022)
23
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
4.5
Input for the ITP Model
In total five simulations are performed using the ITP model with variations in HRRPUA and
surface ignition temperature as outlined in Table 4.4. Simulation ITP-02W also include wind
conditions of 2 m/s.
Table 4.4: Overview of the performed FDS simulations using the ITP model and the
varying input parameters. All simulations using the HRRPUA ramp specified in Figure 4.5
for both wood crib and CLT wall and ceiling
Simulation
Wood crib
CLT ceiling
CLT wall
Ignition temp.
HRRPUA
Ignition temp.
HRRPUA
Ignition temp.
HRRPUA
[◦C]
[kW/m2]
[◦C]
[kW/m2]
[◦C]
[kW/m2]
ITP-00
300
265
300
265
300
265
ITP-01
300
260
300
260
300
260
ITP-02
300
240
300
260
300
260
ITP-02W ∗
300
240
300
260
300
260
ITP-03
300
260
310
260
310
260
∗Including wind conditions of 2 m/s.
In the ITP simulations, the maximum HRRPUA is varied, while an identical time ramp is
applied across all five simulations for the wood crib, CLT wall, and ceiling. This approach
ensures consistency and minimizes the number of varying parameters (Figure 4.5).
Each simulation was intended to run for 600 seconds. However, due to computational constraints
(run time limit of 73 hours per simulation), the actual simulated time may differ slightly between
the five cases.
A starting point of 265 kW/m2 was selected for the HRRPUA, corresponding to the maximum
value measured for the CLT ceiling in the FRIC test. The outcomes from these five ITP
simulations are used to inform the definition of wood crib parameters in the Spyro simulations,
as discussed in Section 4.6.
24
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Figure 4.5: Applied HRRPUA ramp [kW/m2] as a function of time [s], following the
approach suggested by Jiang et al. (2024). The ramp reaches its maximum value within 15
seconds, remains constant until 50 seconds, and is then reduced to 85% of the peak value at
60 seconds, maintaining that level for the remainder of the simulation
4.6
Input for the Spyro Model
A total of five simulations were conducted using the Spyro model, each employing different cone
calorimeter datasets as outlined in Table 4.5. The Spyro model dynamically scales the reference
HRRPUA curve based on the energy absorbed at the surface. In this study, cone calorimeter
data for two types of wood are used as input to the Spyro model for the CLT wall and ceiling,
along with a surface ignition temperature of 300 ◦C:
• Mass timber (MT) HRRPUA data from literature provided by RISE Research Institutes
of Sweden
• Cross Laminated Timer (CLT) HRRPUA data obtained experimentally at DBI Dansk
Brand- og sikringsteknisk Institut, specifically for this study Pauner et al. (2025)
The cone calorimeter data used for both mass timber and CLT are described in the following
section. To reduce the number of varying parameters, the HRRPUA of the wood crib is modelled
using the ITP model with a surface ignition temperature of 300 ◦C, and a maximum HRRPUA
of 240 kW/m2 applying the same HRRPUA ramp as the ITP model (Figure 4.5). The value of
240 kW/m2 for the wood crib was selected based on the results of the ITP model simulations.
Each simulation was intended to run for 600 seconds. However, due to computational constraints
(run time limit of 73 hours per simulation), the actual simulated time may differ slightly between
the five cases.
25
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Table 4.5: Overview of the performed FDS simulations using the Spyro model and the
varying input parameters for the CLT ceiling and wall. RISE MT refers to the datasets
provided by RISE. Experiment, CLT, refers to the data obtained experimentally
Simulation
Wood crib
CLT ceiling and wall
Ignition temp.
HRRPUA
Dataset
Ignition temp.
Ref. heat flux
[◦C]
[kW/m2]
[-]
[◦C]
[kW/m2]
SP-MT-A
300
240
RISE,MT
300
40A∗,50
SP-MT-B
300
240
RISE, MT
300
40B♮,50
SP-MT-BW †
300
240
RISE, MT
300
40B♮,50
SP-CLT
300
240
Experiment, CLT
300
35,50,70
SP-CLT-W†
300
240
Experiment, CLT
300
35,50,70
† Including wind conditions of 2 m/s
∗Dataset A for reference heat flux 40 kW/m2 (RISE Research Institutes of Sweden)
♮Dataset B for reference heat flux 40 kW/m2 (RISE Research Institutes of Sweden)
4.6.1
Cone Calorimeter Datasets
Three HRRPUA datasets, MT50 (Import ID 250), MT40A (import ID 242), and MT40B
(import ID 247) for mass timber are applied in the FDS simulations using the Spyro model
in this study. The datasets originate from the RISE Research Institutes of Sweden database
and were obtained via cone calorimeter tests according to ISO 5660. The mass timber samples
consist of unvarnished spruce with a thickness of 10 mm and a density of 450 kg/m3. Two
datasets correspond to an incident heat flux of 40 kW/m2 (MT40A and MT40B), and one to 50
kW/m2 (MT50). he three HRRPUA curves are plotted in Figure 4.6 as a function of time over
600 seconds, reflecting the simulation time used for all three corresponding FDS simulations.
Both MT40A and MT40B are included to investigate the influence of differences in input data
trends. MT40B features a higher first peak and a slightly faster ignition time compared to
MT40A, but a lower second peak (Figure 4.6).
As outlined in Table 4.5, three FDS simulations are conducted using mass timber data. Simulation
SP-MT-A uses datasets MT50 and MT40A, while SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW use datasets MT50
and MT40B, with and without wind conditions, respectively.
26
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Figure 4.6: Applied HRRPUA curves as a function of time for 600 s for dataset MT50
(incident heat flux 50 kW/m2), and dataset MT40A and MT40B (incident heat flux 40
kW/m2)
For cross-laminated timber (CLT), three average HRRPUA datasets, CLT35-Avg, CLT50-Avg,
and CLT70-Avg are used in the Spyro model simulations (Figure 4.7). These datasets are
derived from experimental tests described in Section 4.8 and correspond to CLT samples with
a thickness of 40 mm and an average density of 393 kg/m2. The three average datasets are
obtained as follows from to tests each:
• CLT35-Avg: Average HRRPUA from two tests at 35 kW/m2
• CLT50-Avg: Average HRRPUA from two tests at 50 kW/m2
• CLT70-Avg: Average HRRPUA from two tests at 70 kW/m2
All curves are plotted over a 600-second interval, matching the simulation duration for these
scenarios in Figure 4.7. The full dataset is provided through the link in the reference Pauner
et al. (2025).
27
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Figure 4.7: Applied HRRPUA curves as a function of time for 600 s for CLT for dataset
CLT35-Avg (incident heat flux of 35 kW/m2), CLT50-Avg (incident heat flux of 50 kW/m2)
and CLT70-Avg (incident heat flux of 70 kW/m2)
As shown in Table 4.5, two FDS simulations are carried out using the CLT data. Simulation
SP-CLT uses the three datasets without wind conditions, while SP-CLT-W uses the same
datasets but includes wind.
A comparison of the HRRPUA curves for mass timber and CLT reveals significant differences in
burning behaviour. These differences, as well as the implications of including the second HRR
peak, which emerges late in the burning process, are discussed in Chapter 5.
4.7
Mesh Sensitivity
The computational time of FDS simulations is highly dependent on mesh resolution. A finer
mesh, with smaller cell dimensions, will improve the resolution of the calculation compared to a
coarser mesh will but increase computational cost. Therefore, it is important to determine a
mesh size that balances accuracy and efficiency.
A suitable mesh size can be determined by the relationship between the characteristic fire
diameter D∗and the mesh size δx (McGrattan et al., 2024b):
D∗=
 
Q
ρ∞· cp · T∞· √g
! 2
5
, 4 ≤D∗
δx ≤16
(4.7.1)
Where Q [kW] is the heat release rate of the fire in the domain, ρ∞[kg/m3] is the ambient
air density, c [kJ/kg · K is the specific heat of the ambient air, T∞[K] is the ambient air
temperature in kelvin and g [m/s2] is the gravitational constant.
28
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Based on a total heat release rate of approximately 73 MW measured i the FRIC test and
ambient temperatures of 288.5 K (15 ◦C), the value of D∗becomes D∗= 5.4. This means that
the mesh size should be in the range of 0.3 m ≤δx ≤1.3 m. Using the heat release rate of 88
MW the value of D∗becomes D∗= 5.8 as estimated in the FDS simulations in the following
(Chapter 5) suggest a mesh size in the range of 0.4 m ≤δx ≤1.4 m.
In this study, a mesh size of (δx, δy, δx)=(0.05 m, 0.05 m, 0.05 m) is selected for the compartment.
This resolution is dictated by the compartment geometry and the dimensions of the wood crib.
A coarser mesh of (0.10 m, 0.10 m, 0.10 m) is used for the region outside the compartment
to reduce computational time. Both mesh sizes fall within the acceptable range based on the
characteristic fire diameter, D∗.
The wood crib is composed of sticks with a cross-section of 0.05 m × 0.05 m. Using a mesh size
larger than 0.05 m would result in a coarser representation of the crib geometry, potentially
preventing ignition in the model. With the chosen mesh size of 0.05 m, each wood stick
corresponds to a single cell width, separated by one empty cell. According to Dai et al. (2023),
the mesh size should ideally be at least half the dimension of the wood sticks (i.e., 0.025 m) to
accurately resolve the flow and heat transfer within the crib.
However, adopting a 0.025 m mesh would lead to a substantial increase in computational time,
making it impractical for this study. Consequently, a mesh size of 0.05 m is adopted for the
compartment domain, despite the potential for some inaccuracies in modelling fire spread on
the wood crib.
4.8
Cone Calorimeter Experiments for CLT
The cone calorimeter experiments conducted in this study follow the principles outlined in the
ISO 5660-1 standard, though the procedure was adapted, as the goal was to obtain HRRPUA
data for use in the Spyro model rather than for classification purposes (DS/ISO-5660-1, 2015).
A total of six tests were conducted at three incident heat flux levels: 35, 50 and 70 kW/m2 (two
tests at each level).
The cone calorimeter tests are performed at DBI - Dansk Brand- og sikringsteknisk Institut in
Hvidovre on May 16th (Pauner et al., 2025).
The cone calorimeter test is based on the principle that most fuels release approximately
13.1 · 103 kJ of heat per kilogram of oxygen consumed. During testing, combustion gases are
collected through a hood above the burning sample. The mass flow of combustion gas and
the oxygen mass fraction are measured in the exhaust duct. Given that ambient air typically
contains 23 %, oxygen by mass, the heat release rate, ˙Q [kW] can then be calculated as:
˙Q = 13100 · (0.23 −mO2) · ˙mgas
(4.8.1)
29
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Where mO2 [−] is the oxygen mass fraction in the combustion gas and ˙mgas [kg/s] is the mass
flow of combustion gases (Karlsson and Quintiere, 2022), (DS/ISO-5660-1, 2015).
The following sections describe the specimen preparation, testing procedure, and post-test
analysis.
4.8.1
Selection of Test Specimens
The CLT samples used were made from three-layer CLT panels, cut into smaller blocks of
approximately 100 × 100 × 80 mm. All samples were conditioned to constant mass at 23 ◦C
and 50 % relative humidity. TThe manufacturer, species, and adhesive type were unknown,
though visual inspection suggests a mix of spruce and pine based on wood grain and knots.
On the day of testing each sample was cut in half perpendicular to the glued layers to create two
specimens per sample with a thickness of approximately 40 mm (see Table 4.6). The exposed
surface was polished to remove splinters and ensure smoothness for consistent heat exposure.
Specimens were selected based on visible quality which means samples with uniform grain,
minimal defects, and absence of knots, cracks, or resin were prioritized (Figure 4.8). Testing
was performed parallel to the glue layers, as testing perpendicular would resemble the behavior
of solid timber rather than laminated layers. The properties of the specimens prior to testing
are presented in Table 4.6.
Figure 4.8: Sample CLT50 divided into two duplicate specimens (I and II) with no visible
knots or resin at the upward surface which will face the heater in the cone calorimeter.
Arrows indicate examples of glue lines within the CLT elements.
The average density of the CLT test specimens was 393 kg ± 11.6 kg, which is lower than 484
kg/m3 measured for the CLT elements used in the FRIC test (Bøe et al., 2023b).
30
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Table 4.6: Properties of the conditioned CLT test specimens prior to testing.
Specimen
Weight
Thickness
Approximate Density
[g]
[mm]
[kg/m3]
CLT70-I
160.1
40.0
400
CLT70-II
150.1
40.0
375
CLT50-I
153.8
40.1
384
CLT50-II
164.7
40.0
411
CLT35-I
159.4
40.0
398
CLT35-II
156.3
40.0
390
4.8.2
Cone Calorimeter Test Procedure
Before testing, specimens were wrapped in aluminum foil on the sides and bottom with the
shiny side facing the wood (Figure 4.9). The total mass of the specimen, including foil, was
recorded prior to testing.
Figure 4.9: Specimen CLT50-I wrapped in aluminium foil on bottom and sides with the
shiny side towards the specimen
Each specimen was placed in a sample holder with insulating material at the bottom and a steel
retainer frame on top (Figure 4.10). Two complete sample holders were prepared to allow one
to cool while the other was in use, ensuring thermal consistency between tests.
The cone heater was calibrated to the desired heat flux before each pair of tests. Tests were
performed sequentially: first the two specimens at 70 kW/m2 were conducted first, followed by
the 50 kW/m2 and then 35 kW/m2. The cone was recalibrated between heat flux levels.
31
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Figure 4.10:
Left: Insulation material, specimen holder and retainer frame.
Right:
Specimen placed in the specimen holder with retainer frame on top
Before each test, ambient oxygen concentration, temperature, humidity, specimen weight, and
surface area were recorded. A 60-second baseline measurement was taken before placing the
specimen on the scale in the test chamber (Figure 4.11). Once in position, the protective screen
was removed and the spark igniter was activated. The time to sustained flaming ignition was
recorded manually.
Each test ran for 1500 seconds, except for one (CLT70-I), which was extended to 2500 seconds
to observe potential secondary burning behaviour. After testing, specimens were allowed to cool.
HRR and mass loss rate (MLR) data were recorded and exported, and specimens were visually
examined for char depth and structural changes.
Figure 4.11: Cone calorimeter setup
32
==PAGE:38==
5. Results and Discussion
The FDS simulations and the cone calorimeter experiments were carried out as described in the
methodology (Chapter 4). This chapter presents the results and initial interpretation from the
FDS simulations using both the ITP and Spyro models, along with findings from the conducted
cone calorimeter experiments. An overview of the simulations and associated model variables
can be found in Section 4.5 and 4.6.
The results of the analysis of the Spyro model’s applicability for modelling fire spread on wood
surfaces is structured as follows:
• Section 5.1: Initial assessment of the ITP model in FDS to simulate the FRIC test
scenario with and without wind. Results from this step also inform the wood crib input
used in the Spyro model simulations.
• Section 5.2: Validation of the Spyro model’s scaling ability, based on its reproduction of
HRRPUA curves using input from mass timber and CLT cone calorimeter data.
• Section 5.3.1: Simulation results of the FRIC test scenario using the Spyro model with
cone calorimeter data for mass timber (MT), with and without wind.
• Section 5.3.2: Simulation results of the FRIC test scenario using the Spyro model with
cone calorimeter data experimentally obtained for CLT, with and without wind
• Section 5.4: Results from the conducted calorimeter experiments for CLT, with focus on
ignition times, charring depths, heat release rates, and mass loss rates.
The discussion of the results are provided in Chapter 6.
The analysis of the results from the FDS simulations (ITP and Spyro model) are focusing the
following four parameters:
• Visual comparison of fire development (ignition, flame spread, and flashover)
• Heat release rate (HRR) and total energy release
• Surface temperature of CLT elements
• Compartment gas temperatures
33
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.1
FDS Simulation Results Using the ITP Model
Five FDS simulations were conducted using the ITP model, varying the heat release rate (HRR)
and ignition temperature of CLT as outlined in Table 4.4.
This section presents the results from Step 1 of the analysis, where the ITP model is applied
to simulate the FRIC test. The simulation results are benchmarked against the FRIC test
conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b), with a focus on evaluating the impact of wind conditions.
Further comparison between the ITP and Spyro models is presented in Chapter 6. Additionally,
the ITP simulation results are used to define the wood crib input in the Spyro model, as
described in Section 4.6.
5.1.1
Visual Observations
The ignition times of the CLT ceiling and wall, as well as the time to flashover, were evaluated by
visually inspecting the FDS simulation outputs using Smokeview and wall temperature boundary
files. A temperature threshold of 300 ◦C was used to determine ignition, while flashover was
defined as the point when the entire wood crib was fully involved in flames, consistent with the
FRIC test procedure by Bøe et al. (2023b).
Overall, the ITP simulations produced slightly faster times to flashover, than the FRIC test
(Table 5.1). Notably, ITP-03, which used a higher surface ignition temperature of 310 ◦C for
CLT, showed a flashover time nearly identical to the FRIC test. This suggests that increasing the
ignition temperature slightly on the CLT surfaces slows down fire spread in the compartment.
The fire spread on the wood crib (in meters) is plotted over time in Figure 5.1, where all five
ITP simulations demonstrate faster spread rates than observed in the FRIC test. For instance,
at t = 102 seconds, only 0.15 m of the crib had ignited in the FRIC test, while substantially
more was burning in all simulations. Fire spread rates were fairly consistent across all five ITP
simulations. The simulation that included wind showed an even faster fire spread, though this
simulations was unfortunately terminated earlier.
In all simulations, the fire on the wood crib had grown larger by the time the ceiling ignited,
compared to the FRIC test (Figure 5.1). This likely explains the earlier ceiling ignition, as a
larger burning area increases the heating on the ceiling, accelerating ignition. This tendency
was also observed by Jiang et al. (2024).
34
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.1: Fire spread on the wood crib [m] as a function of time [s] for the five ITP
simulations, compared to measurements from the FRIC test. Visual observations are based
on Smokeview outputs.
Varying the HRRPUA for the CLT surfaces and wood crib had little impact on ceiling and
wall ignition times, which occurred between 79–87 seconds for the ceiling and 87–102 seconds
for the back wall (Table 5.1). These are slightly faster than the FRIC test’s ignition times of
102 seconds (ceiling) and 120 seconds (back wall). Similar ignition times were also observed by
Jiang et al. (2024), who modelled the FRIC test using the ITP model with wind, reporting a
ceiling ignition at 80 seconds.
Using a higher ignition temperature of 310 ◦C for the CLT surfaces (in ITP-03) did not
significantly affect ignition times compared to the other simulations using 300 ◦C.
35
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 5.1: Observed ignition times for the CLT ceiling and back wall, and time to flashover
in the five ITP simulations. Ignition is defined as the time when the surface temperature
reaches 300 ◦C, and flashover is defined as the point at which the entire wood crib is fully
involved in flames
Simulation
Ceiling ignition
Wall ignition
Time to flashover†
tig,ceiling
tig,wall
tflashover
[s]
[s]
[s]
ITP-00
81.0
100.0
180.0
ITP-01
82.0
102.0
183.0
ITP-02
79.0
96.0
184.0
ITP-02W∗
87.0
87.0
-
ITP-03
84
100
192
FRIC
102
120
193
† Including wind conditions of 2 m/s.
Interestingly, the simulation with wind (ITP-02W) showed a slightly delayed ceiling ignition,
resulting in ignition times more closely aligned with the FRIC test (Table 5.1). This may be due
to wind deflecting the flames, delaying their contact with the ceiling. However, in ITP-02W, the
wind redirected flames toward the back wall, potentially explaining the simultaneous ignition of
both wall and ceiling.
5.1.2
Total Heat Release and Energy Release
The total heat release rate (HRR) of the compartment and the corresponding energy release
were investigated by analysing the HRR output from FDS. Energy release was calculated by
integrating the HRR curve over time.
Figure 5.2 shows the HRR as a function of time for the five ITP simulations, compared to the
FRIC test data by Bøe et al. (2023b) and the simulation results by Jiang et al. (2024). All five
ITP simulations exhibit a very similar initial fire growth rate compared to the FRIC test and
Jiang et al. (2024), particularly during the pre-flashover phase.
However, in contrast to the FRIC test, which shows a distinct peak followed by a decay phase,
the HRR in all ITP simulations continues to rise and stabilise around t = 400 seconds, due to
the prescribed HRRPUA ramp. The FRIC test HRR begins to decline shortly after its peak, a
behaviour not captured in the ITP simulations unless the HRR ramp is manually calibrated to
model the decay phase.
36
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.2: Heat release rate (HHR) [kW] as a function of time [s] for the five ITP
simulations. HRR is plotted as a 10 second average. Results are compared to the FRIC test
HRR using combustion efficiency factors of χ = 0.8 and χ = 1.0 (Bøe et al., 2023b)
Among the four simulations without wind, the HRR development is almost identical, especially
during the early fire growth phase. This is consistent with the similar ignition times reported
for the CLT ceiling and wall in Table 5.1. The most noticeable deviation is observed in ITP-02,
where the HRRPUA of the wood crib is set to 240 kW/m2, resulting in a lower overall HRR.
This highlights that the ITP model is more sensitive to variations in the wood crib HRRPUA
than to changes in ignition temperature, as the contribution from the wood crib is larger than
that from the CLT surfaces.
The simulation with wind (ITP-02W) shows a faster initial fire growth rate, suggesting that
wind enhances the early burning rate. However, the simulation was only run for 145 seconds
due to computational constraints, and therefore the full fire development was not captured.
As shown in Table 5.2, the estimated amount of burned wood is over-predicted in all ITP
simulations relative to the FRIC test. This can be attributed to the HRRPUA ramp, which does
not account for the decay phase. Furthermore, the combustion efficiency used in the FRIC test
is unknown. Given the very high compartment gas temperatures above 1000 ◦C, it is possible
that combustion efficiency was higher than assumed, perhaps closer to 1.0.
37
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 5.2: Peak heat release rate (pHRR), time to peak (TTP), estimated total energy
release, and the corresponding theoretical amount of burned wood for the ITP simulations.
Results are shown for a time interval of t=549.
Test
Time interval
pHRR
TTP
Total energy
Wood burnt∗
t
˙Q
t
Q
m
[s]
[MW]
[s]
[MJ]
[kg]
ITP-00
0-549
96.3
495
32500
2020
ITP-01
0-549
95.0
540
32020
1990
ITP-02
0-549
91.0
537
30580
1900
ITP-02W
-
-
-
-
-
ITP-03
0-549
95.5
424
31920
1980
FRIC-0.8 ⋄
0-549
73.0
185
23740
1470
FRIC-1.0 †
0-549
91.3
185
29670
1840
∗Using a value of 16.1 MJ/kg for heat of combustion of wood
⋄Using a combustion efficiency factor of χ = 0.8
† Using a combustion efficiency factor of χ = 1.0
In summary, the ITP model successfully reproduces the initial fire growth rate, closely matching
both the FRIC test and the simulation by Jiang et al. (2024). However, it tends to overestimate
HRR and total energy release, due to the simplified HRR ramp. Accurate replication of the
FRIC test results would require manual calibration of the HRRPUA ramp which might be the
biggest limitation in this model using it for predictive simulations of fire spread in compartments.
The results also suggest that ITP-02 provides the closest overall match to the FRIC test in
terms of total HRR and energy release. Finally, the findings reinforce the importance of a more
detailed evaluation of the combustion efficiency assumptions used in the FRIC test, as potential
inaccuracies may influence the reported HRR.
5.1.3
Surface temperature of CLT elements
Surface temperatures on the ceiling were recorded at positions x = 3.0 m, x = 7.0 m, and x =
16.6 m, both at the centre of the compartment (y = 2.5 m) and closer to the openings (y = 1.0
m). For all ITP simulations, maximum ceiling surface temperatures exceeded 1000 ◦C (Table
5.3).
The highest temperatures were consistently observed in the centre of the compartment (y = 2.5
m) compared to near the openings (y = 1.0 m), likely due to the cooling effect of incoming air
through the openings.
38
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Additionally, maximum temperatures tended to occur at x = 16.6 m, near the end wall, rather
than at x = 3.0 m or 7.0 m. This is in line with the FRIC test, which showed the lowest
temperatures in the compartment centre and the highest at both end walls (x = 0 m and x =
18.8 m).
Table 5.3: Peak surface temperature of the CLT ceiling for the five ITP simulations
Test
Max surface temperature
TX=3.0,Y =1.0
TX=7.0,Y =1.0
TX=16.6,Y =1.0
TX=3.0,Y =2.5
TX=7.0,Y =2.5
TX=16.6,Y =2.5
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
ITP-00
1100
1100
1120
1130
1130
1160
ITP-01
1100
1110
1130
1140
1130
1180
ITP-02
1100
1110
1120
1120
1140
1180
ITP-02W∗
750
710
240
800
660
120
ITP-03
1110
1100
1130
1130
1120
1180
∗Including wind of 2 m/s, simulation time t=145 s
The surface temperatures for simulation ITP-02W (with wind) cannot be directly compared
to the other ITP simulations due to its shorter simulation time of 146 seconds, which did not
capture the fully developed fire. However, the initial temperature development followed a similar
trend to ITP-02 without wind. At y = 2.5 m, a slightly slower temperature rise was observed at
x = 16.6 m in ITP-02W (Figure 5.3), while a slightly faster rise was observed at x = 7.0 m, y
= 1.0 m (Appendix C). Overall, these findings suggest that wind does not significantly affect
ceiling surface temperatures during the fire growth phase when using the ITP model.
39
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.3: Ceiling surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a function
of time [s] for simulation ITP-02 and ITP-02W measured at Y=2.5
Surface temperatures on the back wall were recorded at x = 3.0 m, 7.0 m, and 16.6 m, at
z = 1.1 m (mid-height) and z = 2.4 m (just below the ceiling). All five ITP simulations
yielded maximum wall surface temperatures above 1000 ◦C. The lowest wall temperatures were
consistently observed at x = 7.0 m, z = 1.1 m, which aligns well with the FRIC test observations
(Table 5.4).
Table 5.4: Peak surface temperature of the CLT back wall for the five ITP simulations
Test
Peak surface temperature
TX=3.0,Z=1.1
TX=7.0,Z=1.1
TX=16.6,Z=1.1
TX=3.0,Z=2.4
TX=7.0,Z=2.4
TX=16.6,Z=2.4
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
ITP-00
1170
1030
1130
1130
1060
1120
ITP-01
1170
1040
1150
1120
1060
1120
ITP-02
1190
1070
1170
1140
1082
1140
ITP-02W∗
860
330
50
930
820
50
ITP-03
1160
1050
1150
1120
1070
1130
∗Including wind of 2 m/s, simulation time t=145 s
As with the ceiling, ITP-02W shows similar initial wall temperature development to ITP-02
(Figures 5.4 and 5.5). A faster initial temperature rise was noted at x = 3.0 m, z = 1.1 m, close
to the ignition source. This is likely due to wind forcing the flames up against the back wall,
contributing to the faster ignition observed for this wall (see Section 5.1.1). Despite this early
40
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
increase, the temperature development suggests the effect of wind on long-term wall heating is
limited when using the ITP model.
In the FRIC test, all ceiling and wall surface temperatures reached between 700-1000 ◦C after
240 s, with peak temperatures of 1010-1172 ◦C recorded at around t = 420 seconds. A similar
trend was observed across the ITP simulations, as exemplified by ITP-02 and ITP-02W in
Figure 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5.
Figure 5.4: Back wall surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a function
of time [s] for simulation ITP-02 and ITP-02W measured at Z=1.1
Figure 5.5: Back wall temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a function of
time [s] for simulation ITP-02 and ITP-02W measured at Z=2.4
41
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.1.4
Compartment Gas Temperatures and Incident Heat Flux
For all ITP simulations, the highest gas temperatures were consistently observed under the
ceiling and just above the wood crib, corresponding to the formation of a hot smoke layer beneath
the ceiling. Conversely, the lowest temperatures occurred in the middle of the compartment.
This temperature distribution pattern is consistent with observations from the FRIC test. Figure
5.6 below show the temperature development of the ITP-02 simulation at t=79 s (Ignition of
ceiling) and t=537 (peak HRR measured). The compartment gas temperature distribution is
consistent with the CLT surface temperatures reported in Section 5.1.3.
Figure 5.6: Compartment temperature development [◦C] for simulation ITP-02 measured
at Y=2.5 at t=79 s (ignition of ceiling) and t=537 (pHHR
The incident heat flux is unfortunately not measured for the ITP simulations.
5.2
Validation of the Spyro Model
Before applying the Spyro model in full-scale compartment simulations its ability to scale heat
release rate data is evaluated using cone calorimeter datasets for mass timber and CLT. This
Step 2 of the analysis evaluates the model’s ability to reproduce characteristic burning trends
and response to varying incident heat flux levels.
5.2.1
The Spyro Scaling Ability (MT)
Before applying the Spyro model in full-scale compartment simulations, its ability to scale heat
release rate data is evaluated using cone calorimeter datasets for mass timber.
The Spyro model successfully reproduces the HHRPUA curves for dataset MT50 (incident
heat flux 50 kW/m2) and MT40-B (incident heat flux 40 kW/m2) for mass timber with good
approximation, as illustrated in Figure 5.7.
42
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.7: Heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time for datasets
MT40-B and MT50, corresponding to incident heat fluxes of 40 kW/m2 and 50 kW/m2,
respectively. The reference data are compared to the HRRPUA curves reproduced using the
Spyro model in FDS, plotted over a duration of 600 seconds.
In general the Spyro model captures the overall trend seen in the original datasets (Figure 5.8).
Scaling the HRRPUA from dataset MT40-B to obtain a HRRPUA curve for a incident heat
flux of 50 kW/m2 (Spyro-40 to 50) results in a higher first and second peak, as well as an earlier
time to peak, compared to the reference MT50 curve. Conversely, scaling the HRRPUA from
MT50 down to obtain a HRRPUA curve for an incident heat flux of 40 kW/m2 (Spyro-50 to
40) produces a lower first and second peak and a delayed time to peak compared to MT40-B.
This suggests a general trend in the Spyro model. The Spyro model tends to under-predict
the HRRPUA when scaling down and over-predict it when scaling up. These observations are
consistent with the findings reported by Hodges et al. (2023).
Figure 5.8: Heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time for datasets
MT40-B and MT50, corresponding to incident heat fluxes of 40 kW/m2 and 50 kW/m2,
respectively. The reference data are compared to the scaled HRRPUA curves using the Spyro
model in FDS, plotted over a duration of 600 seconds.
43
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Further scaling the HRRPUA for dataset MT50 and MT40-B dataset to obtain a HRRPUA
curve for an incident heat flux of 70 kW/m2 (Spyro-40,50 to 70) results in a reduced time to
ignition, an increased peak HRRPUA, and a shorter burning duration. When scaling up to
even higher incident heat flux levels to obtain a HRRPUA curve for an incident heat flux of 100
kW/m2 (Spyro-40,50 to 100) and 300 kW/m2 (Spyro-40,50 to 300) the same trend continues
with shorter ignition times, higher peaks in heat release rate, and significantly shorter total
burning durations (Figure 5.9).
These high heat flux scaling predictions, however, cannot be directly validated against cone
calorimeter data, as most cone calorimeters are limited to a maximum incident heat flux of
70-75 kW/m2 is maximum for most cone calorimeters which make them a subject to additional
uncertainty.
Figure 5.9: Heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time for datasets
MT40-B and MT50, corresponding to incident heat fluxes of 40 kW/m2 and 50 kW/m2,
respectively. The reference data are compared to the scaled HRRPUA curves using the Spyro
model in FDS, plotted over a duration of 600 seconds.
5.2.2
The Spyro Scaling Ability (CLT)
Before applying the Spyro model in full-scale compartment simulations, its ability to scale heat
release rate data is evaluated using cone calorimeter datasets for mass timber.
The Spyro model successfully reproduces the HRRPUA curves for dataset for dataset CLT70-Avg
(incident heat flux 70 kW/m2), and CLT50-Avg (incident heat flux 50 kW/m2) and CLT35-Avg
(incident heat flux 35 kW/m2) CLT with good approximation, as illustrated in Figure 5.10.
44
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.10:
Heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time for
datasets CLT70-Avg, CLT50-Avg and CLT35-Avg, corresponding to incident heat fluxes of
70 kW/m2, 50 kW/m2 and 35 kW/m2, respectively. The experimental data are compared
to the HRRPUA curves reproduced using the Spyro model in FDS, plotted over a duration
of 300 seconds.
In general the Spyro model captures the overall trend seen in the original datasets (Figure
5.11). Scaling the HRRPUA from dataset CLT50-Avg to obtain a HRRPUA curve for an
incident heat flux of 70 kW/m2 (Spyro-50 to 70) results in a very similar peak compared to the
reference CLT70-Avg curve. Conversely, scaling the HRRPUA from CLT50-avg down to obtain
a HRRPUA curve for an incident heat flux of 40 kW/m2 (Spyro-50 to 40) produces a lower first
and second peak and a delayed time to peak compared to CLT35-Avg. This suggests a general
trend in the Spyro model. The Spyro model tends to under-predict the HRRPUA when scaling
down and over-predict it when scaling up. These observations are consistent with the findings
reported by Hodges et al. (2023) and by the validation using data for mass timber.
The scaling of two dataset CLT35-Avg and CLT70-Avg to generate a HRRPUA curve for an
incident heat flux of 50 kW/m2 (Spyro-35,70 to 50), results in a higher peak and a delayed
time to peak compared to the experimental HRRPUA curve for CLT50-Avg. This suggests that
the Spyro model over-predicts the HRRPUA when scaling down to a heat flux level that lies
between two input reference curves, but under-predicts the time to ignition.
45
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.11: Heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time for datasets
CLT70-Avg, CLT50-Avg and CLT35-Avg, corresponding to incident heat fluxes of 70 kW/m2,
50 kW/m2 and 35 kW/m2, respectively. The experimental data are compared to the scaled
HRRPUA curves using the Spyro model in FDS, plotted over a duration of 300 seconds.
Scaling the HRRPUA curves for the three CLT datasets (CLT70-Avg, CLT50-Avg, and CLT35-
Avg) to obtain a HRRPUA curve for an incident heat flux of 100 kW/m2 (Spyro-35,50,70 to
100) results in a reduced time to ignition and an increased peak heat release rate, as shown in
Figure 5.12. Further scaling to an incident heat flux of 300 kW/m2 (Spyro-35,50,70 to 100)
Scaling the HRRPUA for the three dataset (CLT70-Avg, CLT50-Avg and CLT35-Avg) to obtain
a HRRPUA curve for an incident heat flux of 300 kW/m2 (Spyro-35,50,70 to 300) lleads to an
additional reduction in ignition time and higher peak HRR, but does not show a significantly
shorter burning duration, as was observed for mass timber and reported by Hodges et al. (2023).
These results cannot be directly validated against experimental data, as most cone calorimeters
have an upper limit of 70–75 kW/m2 for incident heat flux.
Figure 5.12: Heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time for datasets
CLT70-Avg, CLT50-Avg and CLT35-Avg, corresponding to incident heat fluxes of 70 kW/m2,
50 kW/m2 and 35 kW/m2, respectively. The experimental data are compared to the scaled
HRRPUA curves using the Spyro model in FDS, plotted over a duration of 300 seconds.
46
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.3
FDS Simulation Results Using the Spyro Model
Five FDS simulations were conducted using the Spyro model as outlined in Table 4.5. Three
simulations are conducted using data for mass timber as input and two simulations using data
for CLT as input.
This section presents the results from Step 3 and 4 of the analysis, where the Spyro model is
applied to simulate the FRIC test using cone calorimeter data from literature for mass timber
(Section 5.3.1) and cone calorimeter data for cross laminated timber (CLT) (Section 5.3.2).
The simulation results are benchmarked against the FRIC test conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b),
with a focus on evaluating the impact of wind conditions.
Further comparison between the ITP and Spyro models is presented in Chapter 6.
5.3.1
The Spyro Model - Mass Timber (MT) as Input
In the following the results of the analysis in Step 3 is presented where the Spyro model is applied
using cone calorimeter data from literature for mass timber (MT). Three FDS simulations
are performed using mass timber as described in Section 4.6 and the simulation results are
benchmarked against the results in the FRIC test conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b), and the
influence of wind is assessed.
5.3.1.1
Visual Observations (MT)
The ignition times of the CLT ceiling and wall, as well as the time to flashover, were evaluated by
visually inspecting the FDS simulation outputs using Smokeview and wall temperature boundary
files. A temperature threshold of 300 ◦C was used to determine ignition, while flashover was
defined as the point when the entire wood crib is fully involved in flames, consistent with the
FRIC test procedure by Bøe et al. (2023b).
Wind conditions clearly influenced the ignition dynamics. In SP-MT-BW, both the wall and
ceiling ignited almost simultaneously, suggesting that wind accelerated the initial flame spread
by forcing flames toward the back wall and increasing the heated surface area. This wind-aided
spread aligns with the behavior described in Section 3.4.
The ignition times for the CLT ceiling ranged from 82 to 93 seconds across all three simulations
using HRRPUA curves derived from mass timber (Table 5.5). These values are slightly faster
than the ignition time of 102 seconds reported in the FRIC test. The fastest ceiling ignition
occurred in SP-MT-BW, which included wind conditions.
In contrast, the ignition times for the CLT wall showed a greater variation, with a 16-second
difference between the simulations SP-MT-A and SP-MT-B. SP-MT-A was 10 seconds slower
than the FRIC test, while SP-MT-B was 6 seconds faster, though both remained within a
comparable range. The slower ignition observed in SP-MT-A is attributed to the use of Dataset
47
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A (reference heat flux: 40 kW/m2) from the cone calorimeter, which exhibited a slower ignition
profile than Dataset B, used in SP-MT-B (see Chapter 6).
Initial fire spread along the wood crib was faster in all three Spyro simulations compared
to the FRIC test, where only 0.15 meters of the crib was burning at t = 102 seconds, the
moment of ceiling ignition (Bøe et al., 2023b) (Figure 5.13). However, considering the overall
fire propagation and time to flashover, both simulations SP-MT-A and SP-MT-B (without wind)
showed significantly slower development, while SP-MT-BW showed a trend more closely aligned
with the FRIC test.
Figure 5.13: Fire spread on the wood crib [m] as a function of time [s] for the three Spyro
simulations using cone calorimeter data for mass timber, compared to measurements from
the FRIC test. Visual observations are based on Smokeview outputs.
The time to flashover was slower in all three Spyro simulations compared to the FRIC test
(Table 5.5). While SP-MT-BW showed faster ceiling ignition, it reached flashover at 226 seconds,
which is 33 seconds later than in the FRIC test, but still within a reasonable deviation.
48
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 5.5: Observed ignition times for the CLT ceiling and back wall, and time to flashover
in the three Spyro simulations using cone calorimeter data for mass timber. Ignition is
defined as the time when the surface temperature reaches 300 ◦C, and flashover is defined
as the point at which the entire wood crib is fully involved in flames.
Test
Ceiling ignition
Wall ignition
Time to flashover
tig,ceiling
tig,wall
tflashover
[s]
[s]
[s]
SP-MT-A
93
130
283
SP-MT-B
86
114
258
SP-MT-BW∗
82
84
226
FRIC
102
120
193
∗Including wind conditions of 2 m/s
These observations suggest that wind conditions played a substantial role in the fire development
reported by Bøe et al. (2023b). Wind appears to promote flame spread across both the wood
crib and CLT surfaces, which is attributed the wind-aided propagation mechanisms discussed in
Section 3.4. The influence of wind is also evident in the external flaming behavior. SP-MT-BW
displayed asymmetrical flaming, with the largest flames emerging from window 4 (right side)
(Figure 5.14). In contrast, SP-MT-B (without wind) showed symmetrical external flaming across
all windows. The asymmetrical pattern observed in SP-MT-BW aligns well with the FRIC test,
which also showed the largest flames emerging from the same window.
Figure 5.14: Visual observations from Smoke View of outside flaming of the SP-MT-B
simulation without wind and simulation with wind SP-MT-BW with wind at t=408 s. A
more symmetrical outside flaming is observed for SP-MT-B where SP-MT-BW show a more
asymmetrical outside flaming with largest flames to the right.
49
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.3.1.2
Total Heat Release and Energy Release (MT)
The total heat release rate (HRR) of the compartment and corresponding energy release were
investigated by analysing the HRR output FDS. Energy release was calculated by integrating
the HRR curve over time.
Figure 5.15 shows the total HRR as a function of time for the three Spyro simulations using
with cone calorimeter data for mass timber, compared to the total HRR from the FRIC test.
Overall, the FDS simulations produce a similar general shape of the HRR curve, indicating
reasonable alignment with the experimental fire dynamics.
However, the initial fire growth rate and time to peak are noticeably slower in the simulations
compared to the FRIC test. All three Spyro simulations also show higher peak HRRs than
the FRIC test when using a combustion efficiency factor of 0.8. A closer match in peak HRR
is achieved when a combustion efficiency factor of 1.0 is applied (Figure 5.15). Since the
combustion efficiency factor was not measured in the FRIC test, some uncertainty remains, and
this discrepancy may be due to either an overestimation of HRR in FDS or an underestimated
combustion efficiency in the FRIC test.
The initial growth phase, up to ceiling ignition at approximately 80–90 seconds, is very similar
across all three simulations (Figure 5.15). The simulation with wind conditions (SP-MT-BW)
exhibits a faster fire growth and a higher, earlier peak HRR compared to simulation SP-MT-B,
both using the same datasets. Key HRR characteristics, including peak HRR and time to peak,
are summarized in Table 5.6.
50
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.15: Heat release rate (HHR) [kW] as a function of time [s] for the three Spyro
simulations using cone calorimeter data for mass timber. HRR is plotted as a 10 second
average. Results are compared to the FRIC test HRR using combustion efficiency factors of
χ = 0.8 and χ = 1.0 (Bøe et al., 2023b)
When comparing SP-MT-A and SP-MT-B, SP-MT-A shows a slower fire growth rate but a
higher peak HRR. This mirrors the behaviour observed in the raw cone calorimeter data, where
the MT40-A dataset shows a higher peak but longer time to peak than MT40-B. This reflects
the Spyro model’s sensitivity to cone calorimeter input, as also discussed in Section 6.2.1.
The decay phase is captured in the simulations but appears much slower than in the FRIC test.
This difference may be due to the use of HRR data from 10 mm thick mass timber samples,
which include a second peak that occurs around 300 seconds. In contrast, the FRIC test exhibits
a faster decay. Omitting the second peak in the input cone calorimeter data could result in a
decay phase that better matches experimental observations, point discussed further in Chapter
6.
In terms of burned mass, SP-MT-BW closely matches the FRIC test when assuming a combustion
efficiency of 0.8 over the interval t = 0–394 s (Table 5.6). During this interval, SP-MT-A and
SP-MT-B under-predict the burned mass due to their slower initial fire growth. However, for a
longer interval (t = 0–549 s), SP-MT-B achieves a closer match, as the higher peak HRR and
slower decay compensate for the delayed start. SP-MT-A continues to under-predict burned
mass across both intervals.
51
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 5.6: Peak heat release rate (pHRR), time to peak (TTP), estimated total energy
release, and the corresponding theoretical amount of burned wood for the Spyro simulations
using cone calorimeter data for mass timber. Results are shown for two different time
intervals of t=394 and t=549.
Simulation
Time interval
pHRR
TTP
Total energy
Wood burnt∗
t
˙Q
t
Q
m
[s]
[MW]
[s]
[MJ]
[kg]
SP-MT-A
0-394
88.0
366
10590
660
SP-MT-B
0-394
88.4
351
12280
760
SP-MT-BW
0-394
99.5
289
16750
1040
FRIC-0.8 ⋄
0-394
73.0
185
17060
1060
FRIC-1.0 †
0-394
91.3
185
21320
1320
SP-MT-A
0-549
88.0
366
21370
1330
SP-MT-B
0-549
88.4
351
22900
1420
FRIC-0.8 ⋄
0-549
73.0
185
23740
1470
FRIC-1.0 †
0-549
91.3
185
29670
1840
∗Using a value of 16.1 MJ/kg for heat of combustion of wood as done in the Bøe
et al. (2023b)
⋄Using a combustion efficiency factor of χ = 0.8
† Using a combustion efficiency factor of χ = 1.0
5.3.1.3
Surface temperature of CLT elements (MT)
Surface temperatures on the ceiling were measured at x = 3.0 m, x = 7.0 m, and x = 16.6 m,
both at the center of the compartment (y = 2.5 m) and closer to the openings (y = 1.0 m).
Across all three Spyro simulations using mass timber cone calorimeter data, maximum ceiling
surface temperatures exceeded 1000 ◦C, consistent with the FRIC test results (Table 5.7).
For the two simulations without wind (SP-MT-A and SP-MT-B), higher ceiling temperatures
were observed in the middle of the compartment (y = 2.5 m) than near the openings (y = 1.0
m), likely due to the cooling effect of incoming air. In both y = 2.5 and y = 1.0 planes, surface
temperatures were generally highest at x = 16.6 m compared to x = 3.0 m. In SP-MT-BW
(with wind), x = 16.6 m consistently showed the highest ceiling temperatures.
This temperature distribution aligns well with the FRIC test, which also recorded lower
temperatures in the compartment center and higher values near the end walls (x = 0 and x =
18.8).
52
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 5.7: Peak surface temperature of the CLT ceiling for the three Spyro simulations
using cone calorimeter data for mass timber
Test
Max surface temperature
TX=3.0,Y =1.0
TX=7.0,Y =1.0
TX=16.6,Y =1.0
TX=3.0,Y =2.5
TX=7.0,Y =2.5
TX=16.6,Y =2.5
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
SP-MT-A
1070
1080
1110
1100
1120
1150
SP-MT-B
1080
1090
1100
1100
1110
1150
SP-MT-BW†
1170
1230
1230
1240
1230
1250
† Including wind of 2 m/s
Figure 5.16 illustrate the ceiling temperature development over time for simulations SP-MT-B
and SP-MT-BW at y = 2.5 m. Wind is observed to cause faster and higher temperature
development in the ceiling (SP-MT-BW). The temperature development measured at y = 1.0 m
is provided in Appendix D.
Figure 5.16: Ceiling surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a function
of time [s] for simulation SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW measured at Y=2.5
Surface temperatures on the back wall were measured at x = 3.0 m, x = 7.0 m, and x = 16.6
m, at z = 1.1 m (mid-height) and z = 2.4 m (just below the ceiling). Across all three Spyro
simulations using mass timber data, maximum back wall temperatures were above 1000 ◦C. The
lowest wall temperatures were observed at x = 7.0 m, z = 1.1 m, which is in good agreement
with the FRIC test (Table 5.8). In general, higher surface temperatures on the back wall were
seen in the simulation including wind (SP-MT-BW) compared to SP-MT-A and SP-MT-B.
53
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 5.8: Peak surface temperature of the CLT back wall for the three Spyro simulations
using cone calorimeter data for mass timber
Test
Max surface temperature
TX=3.0,Z=1.1
TX=7.0,Z=1.1
TX=16.6,Z=1.1
TX=3.0,Z=2.4
TX=7.0,Z=2.4
TX=16.6,Z=2.4
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
SP-MT-A
1180
1090
1160
1140
1080
1130
SP-MT-B
1170
1050
1150
1130
1060
1110
SP-MT-BW†
1220
1150
1150
1260
1200
1170
† Including wind of 2 m/s
Figures 5.17 and 5.18 show the temperature development over time for SP-MT-B and SP-
MT-BW at the two vertical positions. The effect of wind is most pronounced at z = 2.4 m,
where SP-MT-BW shows significantly higher surface temperatures than SP-MT-B. At z = 1.1
m, the two simulations show comparable temperatures, suggesting that wind effects are more
significant near the ceiling. This indicates that wind has a notable impact on back wall surface
temperatures when using the Spyro model.
Figure 5.17: Back wall surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a
function of time [s] for simulation SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW measured at Z=1.1
54
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.18: Back wall surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a
function of time [s] for simulation SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW measured at Z=2.4
In the FRIC test, all surface temperature measurements on the wall and ceiling reached
700–1000◦C within 240 seconds. Peak temperatures between 1010–1172 ◦C were recorded
around t = 420 seconds. A similar trend was observed across all three Spyro simulations using
mass timber data.
5.3.1.4
Compartment Gas Temperatures and Incident Heat Flux (MT)
For all ITP simulations, the highest gas temperatures were consistently observed under the
ceiling and just above the wood crib, corresponding to the formation of a hot smoke layer beneath
the ceiling. Conversely, the lowest temperatures occurred in the middle of the compartment
as illustrated in Figure 5.19 for simulation SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW. This temperature
distribution pattern is consistent with observations from the FRIC test. A more stratified
temperature distribution is observed for SP-MT-B compared to SP-MT-BW most likely due to
more turbulent wind conditions mixing the hot gases within the compartment. The compartment
gas temperature distribution is consistent with the CLT surface temperatures reported in Section
5.3.1.3.
55
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.19: Compartment temperatures [◦C] for simulation SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW
measured at Y=2.5 at t=394
In figure 5.20 the incident heat flux wall boundary files are showed for SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW
at t=394 s. The highest heat flux levels were observed at the corners of the compartment and
where the wall and ceiling is connected which is attributed the thermal feedback mechanism
between surfaces. Higher heat flux levels are seen on the the simulation without wind.
Figure 5.20: Compartment heatflux distribution [kW/m2] for simulation SP-MT-B and
SP-MT-BW measured at t=394
5.3.2
The Spyro Model - Cross Laminated Timber (CLT) as Input
In the following the results of the analysis in step 4 is presented where the Spyro model is
applied using cone calorimeter data obtained experimentally for cross laminated timber (CLT).
Two FDS simulations are performed using CLT as described in Section 4.6 and the simulation
56
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
results are benchmarked against the results in the FRIC test conducted by Bøe et al. (2023b),
and the influence of wind is assessed.
5.3.2.1
Visual Observations (CLT)
The ignition times of the CLT ceiling and wall, as well as the time to flashover, were evaluated by
visually inspecting the FDS simulation outputs using Smokeview and wall temperature boundary
files. A temperature threshold of 300 ◦C was used to determine ignition, while flashover was
defined as the point when the entire wood crib is fully involved in flames, consistent with the
FRIC test procedure by Bøe et al. (2023b).
Wind conditions clearly influenced the ignition dynamics. In simulation SP-CLT-W (with wind),
both the wall and ceiling ignited nearly simultaneously, suggesting that wind accelerated the
initial flame spread by forcing flames toward the back wall and increasing the exposed surface
area. This wind-aided behaviour is consistent with the mechanisms described in Section 3.4.
he ignition times for the CLT ceiling were very similar in both simulations, ranging from 86 to
87 seconds (Table 5.9). These are slightly faster than the ignition time of 102 seconds reported
in the FRIC test. No notable difference in ceiling ignition time was observed between the
simulations with and without wind.
In contrast, the wall ignition times showed greater variation, with a 33 second difference between
SP-CLT and SP-CLT-W. SP-CLT-W ignited the wall 30 seconds faster than the FRIC test,
while SP-CLT was only 3 seconds slower than the FRIC test. Despite this variation, both results
remain within a comparable range to the experiment (Table 5.9).
Initial fire spread along the wood crib was faster in both simulations compared to the FRIC
test, in which only 0.15 meters of the crib was observed burning at t = 102 seconds (time of
ceiling ignition) (Bøe et al., 2023b) (Figure 5.21). However, in terms of overall fire propagation
and time to flashover, SP-CLT (without wind) exhibited a somewhat slower development, while
SP-CLT-W (with wind) showed a progression more comparable to the FRIC test.
57
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.21: Fire spread on the wood crib [m] as a function of time [s] for the two Spyro
simulations using cone calorimeter data for CLT, compared to measurements from the FRIC
test. Visual observations are based on Smokeview outputs.
The time to flashover was slower in both simulations compared to the FRIC test (Table 5.9).
SP-CLT-W reached flashover at 233 seconds, which is 40 seconds later than in the FRIC test.
Nonetheless, this difference remains within a reasonable margin given the complexity of the
scenario.
These observations further suggest that wind conditions played a substantial role in the fire
development observed by Bøe et al. (2023b). Wind appears to enhance flame spread across
both the wood crib and the CLT surfaces, Which is attributed the wind-driven fire propagation
described in Section 3.4.
Table 5.9: Observed ignition times for the CLT ceiling and back wall, and time to flashover
in the two Spyro simulations using cone calorimeter data for CLT. Ignition is defined as
the time when the surface temperature reaches 300 ◦C, and flashover is defined as the point
at which the entire wood crib is fully involved in flames.
Test
Ceiling ignition
Wall ignition
Time to flashover
tig,ceiling
tig,wall
tflashover
[s]
[s]
[s]
SP-CLT
87
123
291
SP-CLT-W∗
86
90
233
FRIC
102
120
193
∗Including wind conditions of 2 m/s
58
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The influence of wind was also reflected in the external flaming behaviour. SP-CLT-W exhibited
asymmetrical flames, with the largest flames appearing from window 4 (right side) (Figure
5.22). In contrast, SP-CLT (without wind) showed a more symmetrical flame distribution across
the four windows. The asymmetry in SP-CLT-W is consistent with the FRIC test, which also
recorded the largest external flames from window 4.
Figure 5.22: Visual observations from Smoke View of outside flaming of the SP-CLT
simulation without wind and simulation with wind SP-CLT-W with wind at t=394 s. A
more symmetrical outside flaming is observed for SP-CLT where SP-CLT-W show a more
asymmetrical outside flaming with largest flames to the right.
5.3.2.2
Total Heat Release and Energy Release (CLT)
The total heat release rate (HRR) of the compartment and the corresponding energy release
were investigated by analysing the HRR output from FDS. Energy release was calculated by
integrating the HRR curve over time.
Figure 5.23 presents the HRR as a function of time for the two Spyro simulations using cone
calorimeter data for CLT, compared to the total HRR from the FRIC test. Both SP-CLT and
SP-CLT-W (with wind) show a good match with the FRIC test during the initial fire growth
phase, up until the ignition of the CLT elements around t=100 s (as discussed in Section ??).
After CLT ignition, however, both simulations exhibit a slower fire growth rate compared to the
FRIC test.
The simulation including wind (SP-CLT-W) shows a closer match to the FRIC test in terms
of growth rate, peak HRR, and time to peak, indicating the model’s sensitivity to external
airflow conditions. Both simulations show higher peak HRRs than the FRIC test when using a
combustion efficiency factor of 0.8. As the combustion efficiency was not measured in the FRIC
59
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
experiment, this introduces uncertainty. The results suggest either an over-prediction of HRR
by FDS or that the combustion efficiency used in interpreting the FRIC data was too low.
The initial growth phase, up to ceiling ignition at approximately 86–87 seconds, is nearly
identical for both simulations with and without wind. SP-CLT-W shows a faster growth rate
and slightly higher, earlier peak HRR than SP-CLT. Key HRR characteristics, including peak
values and time to peak, are summarized in Table 5.10.
Figure 5.23: Heat release rate (HHR) [kW] as a function of time [s] for the two Spyro
simulations using cone calorimeter data for CLT obtained experimentally. HRR is plotted
as a 10 second average. Results are compared to the FRIC test HRR using combustion
efficiency factors of χ = 0.8 and χ = 1.0 (Bøe et al., 2023b)
The decay phase observed in the FRIC test is not captured in the Spyro simulations. This
discrepancy is likely due to the input cone calorimeter data for CLT, which did not reach full
burnout within the 600-second simulation window. As discussed in Section 5.4, this affects the
shape of the HRR curve and is further addressed in Chapter 6.
In terms of burned mass, both SP-CLT and SP-CLT-W under-predict the total amount of
burned wood over the interval t = 0–394 s compared to the FRIC test (Table 5.6). However,
the difference is smaller for SP-CLT-W, likely due to the influence of wind enhancing the fire
growth. When extending the comparison to t = 0–549 s, the simulation SP-CLT shows a closer
match, as the higher HRR during the steady phase compensates for the slower early growth and
the absence of a decay phase.
60
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
These results reinforce the importance of capturing realistic decay behaviour in CLT fire scenarios
and highlight the sensitivity of the Spyro model to both input data and environmental conditions.
Table 5.10: Peak heat release rate (pHRR), time to peak (TTP), estimated total energy
release, and the corresponding theoretical amount of burned wood for the Spyro simulations
using cone calorimeter data for CLT. Results are shown for two different time intervals of
t=394 and t=549.
Simulation
Time interval
pHRR
TTP
Total energy
Wood burnt∗
t
˙Q
t
Q
m
[s]
[MW]
[s]
[MJ]
[kg]
SP-CLT
0-394
81.2
381
9270
580
SP-CLT-W
0-394
88.9
346
15740
980
FRIC-0.8 ⋄
0-394
73.0
185
17060
1060
FRIC-1.0 †
0-394
91.3
185
21320
1320
SP-CLT
0-549
85.9
582
21160
1310
FRIC-0.8 ⋄
0-549
73.0
185
23740
1470
FRIC-1.0 †
0-549
91.3
185
29670
1840
∗Using a value of 16.1 MJ/kg for heat of combustion of wood as done in the Bøe
et al. (2023b)
⋄Using a combustion efficiency factor of χ = 0.8
† Using a combustion efficiency factor of χ = 1.0
5.3.2.3
Surface temperature of CLT elements
Surface temperatures on the ceiling were measured at x = 3.0 m, x = 7.0 m, and x = 16.6 m,
both at the center of the compartment (y = 2.5 m) and near the openings (y = 1.0 m). In both
FDS simulations using the Spyro model with cone calorimeter data for CLT, maximum ceiling
surface temperatures exceeded 1000 ◦C consistent with the FRIC test results (Table 5.11).
In the simulation without wind (SP-CLT), higher ceiling temperatures were observed in the
middle of the compartment (y = 2.5 m) than near the openings (y = 1.0 m), likely due to
the cooling effect of incoming air. In contrast, SP-CLT-W (with wind) showed only marginal
differences between y = 1.0 and y = 2.5, suggesting that wind promotes uniform flame spread,
evening out temperature gradients across the ceiling. The lowest ceiling temperature in SP-
CLT-W occurred at x = 3.0 m, y = 1.0 m, likely due to fresh air entering through window
1.
The overall temperature distribution seen in the FRIC test, with lower ceiling temperatures
in the centre and higher temperatures at the end walls (x = 0 and x = 18.8), was reflected in
SP-CLT, but not clearly observed in SP-CLT-W most likely due to wind effects.
61
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The overall tendency observed in the FRIC test, where the lowest temperatures were observed
in the middle of the compartment and and the highest temperatures were observed at the two
end walls (X=0 and X=18.8) is reflected in simulation SP-CLT, but there is no clear tendency
showing for SP-CLT-W including wind.
Table 5.11: Peak surface temperature of the CLT ceiling for the two Spyro simulations
using cone calorimeter data for CLT
Test
Max surface temperature
TX=3.0,Y =1.0
TX=7.0,Y =1.0
TX=16.6,Y =1.0
TX=3.0,Y =2.5
TX=7.0,Y =2.5
TX=16.6,Y =2.5
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
SP-CLT
1090
1090
1100
1140
1120
1160
SP-CLT-W∗
1180
1230
1230
1230
1230
1220
∗Including wind of 2 m/s
In Figure 5.24 the temperature development on the ceiling for simulation SP-CLT and SP-CLT-
W is shown for Y=2.5. Wind is observed to cause faster and higher surface temperatures for
the ceiling compared to simulation SP-CLT without wind.
Figure 5.24 show the ceiling temperature development at y = 2.5 for both simulations. The
inclusion of wind led to faster and higher ceiling temperatures, confirming wind’s impact on
flame spread and heating intensity. The temperature development at y = 1.0 is provided in
appendix D.
Figure 5.24: Ceiling surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a function
of time [s] for simulation SP-CLT and SP-CLT-W measured at Y=2.5
62
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Surface temperatures on the back wall were measured at x = 3.0 m, x = 7.0 m, and x = 16.6
m, at two heights: z = 1.1 m (mid-wall) and z = 2.4 m (just below the ceiling). Both Spyro
simulations using CLT data produced peak back wall temperatures above 1000 ◦C. In general
the lowest wall temperatures were recorded at x = 7.0 m, z = 1.1 m, which agrees well with the
FRIC test findings (Table 5.12).
Table 5.12: Peak surface temperature of the CLT back wall for the two Spyro simulations
using cone calorimeter data for CLT
Test
Max surface temperature
TX=3.0,Z=1.1
TX=7.0,Z=1.1
TX=16.6,Z=1.1
TX=3.0,Z=2.4
TX=7.0,Z=2.4
TX=16.6,Z=2.4
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[◦C]
SP-CLT
1200
1060
1160
1160
1070
1120
SP-CLT-W∗
1240
1150
1100
1240
1200
1130
∗Including wind of 2 m/s
There were no significant differences in temperatures at z = 1.1 m between SP-CLT-W (with
wind) and SP-CLT (Figure 5.25). However, at z = 2.4 m SP-CLT-W (with wind) showed higher
surface temperatures on the back wall compared to SP-CLT (without wind) (Figure 5.26).
Figures 5.25 and 5.26 show the back wall temperature development at both heights. Wind
clearly causes faster heating of the wall, particularly near the ceiling, indicating that the Spyro
model is sensitive to wind effects on surface heating.
Figure 5.25: Back wall surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a
function of time [s] for simulation SP-CLT and SP-CLT measured at Z=1.1
63
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.26: Back wall surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a
function of time [s] for simulation SP-CLT and SP-CLT measured at Z=2.4
In the FRIC test, all surface temperature measurements on the wall and ceiling reached
700–1000◦C within 240 seconds. Peak temperatures between 1010–1172 ◦C were recorded
around t = 420 seconds. A similar trend was observed for the two Spyro simulations using CLT
data.
5.3.2.4
Compartment Gas Temperatures and Incident Heat Flux (CLT)
In general the hottest temperatures for the two Spyro simulations using CLT. The lowest
temperatures are measured in the middle of the compartment, as illustrated in Figure 5.27 for
simulation SP-CLT and SP-CLT-B. A similar tendency was observed in the FRIC test. A more
stratified temperature distribution is observed for SP-CLT compared to SP-CLT-W most likely
due to more turbulent wind conditions mixing the hot gases within the compartment. The
compartment gas temperature distribution is consistent with the CLT surface temperatures
reported in Section 5.3.2.3.
64
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.27: Compartment temperatures [◦C] for simulation SP-CLT and SP-CLT-W
measured at Y=2.5 at t=394
In figure 5.28 the incident heat flux wall boundary files are showed for SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW
at t=394 s. The highest heat flux levels were observed at the corners of the compartment and
where the wall and ceiling is connected which is attributed the thermal feedback mechanism
between surfaces. Higher heat flux levels are seen on the the simulation without wind.
Figure 5.28: Compartment heatflux distribution [kW/m2] for simulation SP-CLT and
SP-CLT-W measured at t=394
5.4
Results - Cone Calorimeter Experiments
This section presents the results from six cone calorimeter tests conducted on CLT specimens
at three heat flux levels: 70 kW/m2, 50 kW/m2 and 35 kW/m2. wo tests were performed at
each heat flux level, and all were run for 1500 s except for one extended test (CLT70-I) which
was run for 2500 s. The full datasets of the six conducted cone calorimeter tests are provided
65
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
through the link in the reference Pauner et al. (2025).
5.4.1
Ignition Time and Charring Depth
Ignition times were observed visually during testing, while charring depths were measured
post-test by examining the charred layers of the specimens.
The most intense flames were observed for the specimens exposed to the highest heat flux of
70 kW/m2 (CLT70-I and CLT70-II), as expected due to the accelerated pyrolysis process and
increased release of combustible volatiles (mass loss rate) at higher temperatures (see Section
3.2.1). These specimens also exhibited the highest peak heat release rates, as discussed in
Section 5.4.2.
The shortest ignition times occurred in CLT70-I and CLT70-II, which ignited after 11 s and 12
s respectively (Table 5.13). At 50 kW/m2, specimens CLT50-I and CLT50-II ignited after 19 s
and 18 s, while the slowest ignition was observed for CLT35-I and CLT35-II at 44 s and 39 s
respectively. Overall, ignition times were highly consistent between duplicate specimens at each
heat flux level (Table 5.13).
Table 5.13: Measured ignition times and charring depths for the six specimens tested in
the cone calorimeter at three different heat flux levels (35, 50 and 70 kW/m2) for 1500 s
except specimen CLT70-I which was tested for 2500 s.
Sample
Heat flux
Test duration
Ignition time
Charring depth
[kW/m2]
[s]
[s]
[mm]
CLT70-I
70
2500
11
40
CLT70-II
70
1500
12
25-30
CLT50-I
50
1500
19
20
CLT50-II
50
1500
18
20
CLT35-I
35
1500
44
15
CLT35-II
35
1500
39
15
Distinct surface colours were observed were observed post-test, correlated with the applied
heat flux (Figure 5.29). Specimens tested at 70 kW/m2 (CLT70-I and CLT70-II) developed a
predominant black charred surface, those tested at 50 kW/m2 (CLT50-I and CLT50-II) showed a
more brown coloured surface, and those tested at 35 kW/m2 (CLT35-I and CLT35-II) exhibited
a lighter grey appearance (Figure 5.29). The colour variation can attributed the temperature
dependent decomposition of the three main constituents of wood (cellulose, hemicellulose and
lignin) as described in Section 3.2.1. The average measured temperatures within the cone
calorimeter were 833 ◦C, 757 ◦C and 630 ◦C for the 70, 50 and 35 kW/m2 heat flux levels
66
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
respectively.
Despite the varying heat flux levels, all specimens burned with similar visual characteristics.
Each exhibited two clear fissures perpendicular to the grain in the middle layer, caused by
internal gas pressure exceeding the strength of the wood, forcing it to split (Figure 5.29) .
Figure 5.29: Visual observations of colour variation and fissures of the six CLT specimens
tested in the cone calorimeter at three heat flux levels (35, 50 and 70 kW/m2) for 1500 s
except specimen CLT70-I which was tested for 2500 s. The orange arrows show fissures
perpendicular to the veins
Charring depth increased with both heat flux and burning time(Table 5.13. Specimen CLT70-I
(70 kW/m2) was fully charred after 2500 seconds, while CLT70-II showed a charring depth of
25–30 mm after 1500 seconds corresponding to a charring rate of 1-1.2 mm/min. CLT50-I and
CLT50-II showed charring depths of approximately 20 mm (0.8 mm/min), and CLT35-I and
67
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
CLT35-II around 15 mm (0.6 mm/min). These results are summarized in Table 5.13, and visual
comparisons of the charring are included in Appendix E.
5.4.2
Heat Release Rate and Mass Loss Rate
Figure 5.30 presents the average heat release rate per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time
for the three heat flux levels tested (70, 50, and 35 kW/m2), over a period of approximately
1500 seconds. All curves exhibit a sharp initial peak shortly after ignition.
As expected, the highest heat flux level of 70 kW/m2 produced the most intense peak HRRPUA,
occurring slightly earlier than those observed for 50 kW/m2 and 35 kW/m2. The lowest peak
HRRPUA was observed for the 35 kW/m2 tests. Peak HRRPUA values and time to peak (TTP)
are summarized in Table 5.14.
The greatest mass loss occurred in specimens CLT70-I and CLT70-II, which were exposed to the
highest heat flux. In contrast, lower mass loss was observed for specimens tested at 35 kW/m2.
Across all heat flux levels, minimal variation was found between duplicate specimens, indicating
a highly consistent burning behaviour for the CLT samples.
Figure 5.30: Average heat release rates per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time for
the tested CLT samples subjected to a heat flux of 70 kW/m2, 50 kW/m2 and 35 kW/m2.
Following the initial HRRPUA peak, a rapid decline was observed stabilizing at roughly 20–30
% of the peak value. This behaviour corresponds with the formation of a surface char layer,
which acts as a thermal barrier that slows pyrolysis and restricts the transport of heat and
volatile gases through the material (see Section 3.2.1). Later in the tests, all three HRRPUA
curves began to rise slightly toward the end of the test period (Figure 5.30).
This secondary increase developed into a distinct second peak of approximately 100 kW/m2
after 1880 seconds in the extended test CLT70-I, which ran for 2500 seconds (Figure 5.31). A
68
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
similar second peak is expected for the other specimens, though the tests were only conducted
for 1500 seconds and did not capture the full progression.
Figure 5.31: Comparison of the measured heat release rate per unit area for CLT subjected
to a heat flux of 70 kW/m2 as a function of time and the datasets from rise for mass timber
subjected to a heat flux of 50 kW/m2 and 40 kW/m2.
Comparable burning behavior is seen in the three mass timber datasets from the RISE database,
also plotted in Figure 5.31. These specimens displayed a similar two-peak profile, but with a
considerably shorter overall burning duration. The second peak developed more rapidly in the
mass timber samples than in CLT70-I.
While CLT70-I showed a higher initial peak, due to the higher applied heat flux of 70 kW/m2
compared to 40–50 kW/m2 for the mass timber tests, it exhibited a lower second peak. This
difference is likely attributable to the thickness of the specimens. The CLT samples were 40
mm thick, while the mass timber samples were only 10 mm thick. The influence of this second
peak and sample thickness is discussed further in Section 6.2.1.
69
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 5.14: Measured peak heat release rate per unit area (pHHRPUA), time to peak
(TTP) and mass loss (ML) for for the six specimens tested in the cone at three different
heat flux levels (35, 50 and 70 kW/m2) for 1500 s except specimen CLT70-I.
Sample
Heat flux
pHRRPUA
TTP
ML
MRLPUA (Avg)
[kW/m2]
[kW/m2]
[s]
[g]
[kg/s · m2]
CLT70-I∗
70
231.7
25
128
6.13 · 10−3
CLT70-II
70
224.4
26
81
5.84 · 10−3
CLT50-I
50
171.1
35
70.5
5.18 · 10−3
CLT50-II
50
165.3
36
70.7
5.22 · 10−3
CLT35-I
35
135.9
64
57.5
4.34 · 10−3
CLT35-II
35
135.8
63
57.1
4.34 · 10−3
∗Test duration of approximately 2500 seconds
70
==PAGE:76==
6. Overall Discussion
An overall discussion of the results is presented in the following. The discussion is structured by
first a comparison between the simulation results of the Spyro and ITP models in relation to
the FRIC test. Secondly a more in-depth discussion of the Spyro model and the input cone
calorimeter reference curves for CLT and mass timber, and finally an assessment of the general
applicability of the Spyro model for performance based design in fire safety engineering.
6.1
Comparison of the Spyro Model vs ITP Model
Both the ITP and Spyro FDS models can simulate fire propagation in large compartments with
exposed wood surfaces, but notable differences exist between their outputs.
The key differences in this study are observed in the fire growth rate looking at the total HRR
results, and the influence of wind on the CLT surface temperatures. The ITP model, with or
without wind, predicts an overall similar fire growth rates but slightly faster times to flashover
than the FRIC test. In contrast, the Spyro model, with or without wind, predicts slower fire
growth rates and delayed flashover. The imitation of the ITP model lies in its fixed, user-defined
heat release rate, which does not account for radiation feedback, making it difficult to apply for
predictive purposes without benchmark data from fire tests.
Surface temperature predictions are comparable between both models and the FRIC test.
However, only the Spyro model showed significant sensitivity to wind, suggesting it may better
capture dynamic environmental effects by its ability to scale the heat release rate.
6.2
The Spyro Model - Comparison of CLT vs Mass Timber
In the following, the results applying the Spyro model in FDS are discussed by first, a comparison
of cone calorimeter HRRPUA reference curves for mass timber and CLT, followed by a discussion
of the scaling abilities for the Spyro model and lastly, a comparison of the Spyro results using
CLT and mass timber.
6.2.1
Comparison of Cone Calorimeter HRRPUA Reference Curves
HRRPUA reference curves from cone calorimeter tests show shorter burning durations for mass
timber than CLT (Figure 5.31). Both materials exhibit a second HRRPUA peak, but it occurs
sooner and with higher magnitude for mass timber. This sooner second peak for mass timber
occurs even though the incident heat flux from the cone calorimeter is higher for CLT (70
71
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6. OVERALL DISCUSSION
kW/m2) compared to 40-50 kW/m2 for mass timber. This is likely due to a sample thickness of
10 mm for mass timber compared to a thickness of 40 mm for CLT.
In the FDS simulations, the full HRRPUA cone calorimeter reference curve (including second
peak, or emerging second peak) was used for both materials. However, as noted by Sanned
et al. (2013), the second peak observed in cone calorimeter data is a result of the char-through
of the sample. The char provides insulation against heat loss through the back of the sample,
which result in an increased pyrolysis rate contributing to increase in HRR. This phenomenon
is delayed for thicker samples and because of the longer burning duration for thick samples,
most fuel is burned inside the sample reaching the burn out phase corresponding to a lower
second peak reaching char-through as seen in CLT compared to mass timber (Figure 5.31)
(Sanned et al., 2013). This may partially explain why the FDS simulations applying the Spyro
model over-predicts peak HRR where full burnout of the wood does not occur within 600
as in the FRIC test. This suggest that the burning behaviour and overall trend of the cone
calorimeter HRRPUA reference curves must be evaluated and considered carefully, as using
complete burnout HRRPUA reference curve from a thin sample might not be accurate for
modelling a thick CLT construction.
6.2.2
Validation of the Spyro Scaling Ability
The FDS Spyro model reproduces HRRPUA curves well for both CLT and mass timber when
heat flux levels match the reference heat flux from the cone calorimeter test. When scaling the
HRRPUA up or down within cone calorimeter limits (typically up to 70-75 kW/m2) the overall
trends are preserved for both CLT and mass timber.
Slight over-predictions in peak HRRPUA and time to peak were observed when scaling up the
HRRPUA for mass timber, while scaling down led to under-prediction. For CLT, scaled curves
closely matched the reference cone calorimeter HRRPUA curve for 70 kW/m2, while scaling
down also lead to under-prediction using a single curve as input. An over-prediction in peak
HRRPUA was found when scaling down to a HRRPUA within the interval of two reference
curves but times to peak was under-predicted. Similar results are observed by Hodges et al.
(2023).
Scaling up the HRRPUA curves for for mass timber (reference heat flux of 40 and 50 kW/m2) to
meet an incident heat flux of 70 kW/m2 closely match the cone calorimeter reference HRRPUA
for CLT (70 kW/m2) in terms of peak HRRPUA and time peak for the first 50 seconds (Figure
6.1). Thus the overall burning behaviour and trend of the curve is not comparable due to
different sample thickness as discussed in Section 6.2.1. This however suggests that the thickness
of the sample might be more important than the type of wood used to obtain the HRRPUA in
the cone calorimeter test.
72
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 6. OVERALL DISCUSSION
Figure 6.1: Comparison of scaled HRRPUA curves for using the cone calorimeter data
for mass timber and CLT.
Predictions become uncertain applying the Spyro model to scale HRRPUA curves corresponding
to incident heat flux levels beyond the scope of the cone calorimeter as validation of the Spyro
results become difficult. The upper limit for most cone calorimeters are incident heat flux
levels of 70-75 kW/m2. In the FRIC test heat flux levels reaching 175 kW/m2 were measured
outside the compartment and heat flux levels of 150-200 kW/m2 with even higher peaks of 300
kW/m2 were seen within the compartment in the FDS simulations. The Spyro models show
almost identical peak HRRPUA and time to peak for mass timber and CLT testing the scaling
ability for incident heat flux levels of 100 and 300 kW/m2 (Figure 6.1). If the previous tendency
apply when scaling up, the peaks of approximately 300 kW/m2 and 700 kW/m2 are most likely
over-predicted. This though will require further validation.
Further it is recommend to conduct future cone calorimeter tests at lower incident heat flux
levels (≈25kW/m2) to improve predictions of the initial fire growth on the surface where heat
flux levels are low at the early stages of the fire. In the Spyro simulations heat flux levels
of approximately 20-25 kW/m2 were measured on the ceiling by the time of ignition for the
simulations.
6.2.3
FDS Spyro Simulations: CLT vs Mass timber
Simulations using both mass timber and CLT produced ignition times and times to flashover
comparable with the FRIC test, though slightly faster ignition times were observed for the FDS
simulations. Wind accelerated ignition in all cases.
Fire spread on the wood crib occurred faster in simulations than in the FRIC test, potentially
explaining earlier ceiling ignition. Faster fire spread on the wood crib in the beginning results
in a larger fire by the time the ceiling ignites, which could explain the faster ceiling ignition
compared to the FRIC test. Similar fire spread on the wood crib is observed for both simulations
with and without wind, suggesting that the overall slower fire growth rate seen in the HRR
73
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6. OVERALL DISCUSSION
output from the FDS simulations must be attributed to the CLT surfaces in the model.
Overall, fire growth was slower in the Spyro simulations for mass timber and CLT, compared
to the FRIC test, particularly after ceiling ignition. This is likely due to Spyro’s tendency to
under-predict the HRRPUA when scaling it down corresponding to low incident heat flux levels
in the early stages of the fire.
The over-predicted total peak HRR observed in simulations for both mass timber and CLT, can
at the same time be explained by the Spyro model’s tendency to over-predict the HRR when
scaling up the reference HRRPUA curves corresponding to higher incident heat flux levels and
the inclusion of the second peak in the reference HRRPUA. Besides the scaling ability of the
Spyro model, this slower fire growth rate could also be a result of the material input parameters,
or the FDS model setup. It is recommended to conduct a sensitivity study of these parameters
in the future. As wind seemingly have a great influence of the results, it is suggested to apply a
more detailed wind model that includes the gust velocities.
An emerging decay phase is seen for the total HRR from the Spyro simulations using mass timber,
which is not captured by the simulations using CLT. A simulation (SP-CLT-W2) excluding the
second peak in the HRRPUA reference curves for CLT showed a better match to the FRIC test
decay phase, but fire growth remained too slow (Figure 6.2 and 6.3).
Figure 6.2: Modified cone calorimeter HRRPUA curves for CLT as a function of time for
an reference incident heat flux of 70, 50 and 35 kW/m2 used for input in the additional
FDS simulation applying the Spyro model in Figure 6.3
74
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 6. OVERALL DISCUSSION
Figure 6.3: The total heat release rate [kW] as a function of time [s] for the alternative
FDS simulation applying the Spyro model using the modified cone calorimeter data for CLT
(SP-CLTW2) in Figure 6.2 including wind.
6.3
Assessment of the FDS Modelling Approach and the Spyro Model
Based on the investigations in this study the FDS Spyro model shows promising results as a
predictive tool for fire safety engineering and modelling of fire spread on wood surfaces. Unlike
the ITP model, which requires user-defined HRR values, Spyro enables dynamic prediction of fire
spread based on input from cone calorimeter tests. Importantly, it offers similar computational
performance to simulations using the ITP.
However, several limitations were identified using the Spyro model. The thickness of the test
samples has a strong influence on the overall trend of the HRRPUA curves, obtained from
the cone calorimeter data. Currently the Spyro model is not able to scale the thickness of the
tested materials. In addition, assessment of whether to use both the first and second peak of
the HRRPUA curve is needed. Further the number of input reference HRRPUA curves and
their distribution across heat flux levels seem to affect accuracy of the Spyro model. At least
three reference HRRPUA obtained from a range of incident heat flux levels (low, medium and
high) are recommended to better cover early fire growth conditions, with the lower being just
above the critical incident heat flux of the material.
Spyro tends to under-predict early fire growth, which is critical for assessing egress times
and personal safety. This underlines the importance of validation before applying Spyro in
performance-based fire safety design as predictions might be non-conservative. Nevertheless, its
tendency to over-predict the total peak HRR may be conservative in design contexts. Finally,
the model’s sensitivity to wind conditions suggests that wind must be accurately represented
75
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6. OVERALL DISCUSSION
in simulations. Further research is needed to validate the Spyro model for high heat flux
conditions and to explore how it scales to realistic construction geometries. In summary, with
refinement and additional data, Spyro has strong potential as a practical and predictive tool in
performance-based fire safety design for timber structures.
76
==PAGE:82==
7. Conclusion
This study investigates the use of the Spyro model in FDS for simulating fire propagation
in large compartments with exposed timber surfaces, using the FRIC test as a benchmark.
The Spyro model was evaluated against the ITP model and assessed for its potential role in
performance-based fire safety design.
The literature review confirmed the value of CFD tools like FDS as a supplement to full-scale
fire testing, which is often costly and limited in scope. However, many existing FDS simulations
for timber compartments have primarily relied on the ITP model, which is constrained by its
dependence on user-specified HRR input, limiting its predictive capability.
The simulation results show that both the Spyro and ITP models can reproduce key characteris-
tics of the FRIC test, particularly when wind conditions are included. The Spyro model tended
to over-predict peak HRR while under-predicting fire growth rate, for the CLT surfaces. The
ITP model produced more accurate fire growth compared to the FRIC test, but the ITP model
also showed an overestimation of the total HRR. Because the Spyro simulations captured the
observed fire spread on the wood crib well, it is concluded that the slower fire growth rate is
tied specifically to the applied Spyro pyrolysis model for the CLT elements.
Validation studies suggest that the under-prediction of the fire growth rate using the Spyro
model is related to the model’s tendency to under-predict the HRRPUA when scaling the
reference HRRPUA curves down corresponding to lower incident heat flux levels.This has
critical implications for fire safety assessments, particularly in early fire stages, as it may lead to
non-conservative predictions of available egress time.
The findings also indicate that while the type of timber used in cone calorimeter tests may not
significantly influence Spyro’s output, the thickness of the test samples does. Since Spyro does
not currently account for sample thickness, careful consideration is needed when selecting input
data, especially regarding whether to include the second peak in the reference HRRPUA curve
in simulations.
Overall, the Spyro model demonstrate promising capabilities for simulating fire prorogation
in large compartments with exposed timber surfaces. Its scaling-based approach offers a new
addition to FDS and potentially a useful supplement to the well-established ITP model, using
standard cone calorimeter data to estimate HRR and flame spread. Although its current tendency
to under-predict fire growth needs further investigation, Spyro’s computational performance is
comparable to ITP, making it a feasible tool for engineering applications.
With continued development and validation, particularly for early fire behaviour and extreme
77
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
heat flux conditions, the Spyro model could play a significant role in advancing performance-based
fire safety design for buildings with exposed wood surfaces in the future.
78
==PAGE:84==
8. Future work
As discussed in the previous chapters, the Spyro model demonstrates promising capabilities for
simulating fire spread on wood surfaces and predicting heat release rates (HRR) in compartment
fire scenarios. However, to enhance confidence in its predictions and expand its applicability,
further research is needed to deepen the understanding of the model behaviour and its sensitivity
to input parameters. The following areas are suggested for future investigation:
• Sensitivity analysis of input parameters: It is suggested to conduct a sensitivity
study to evaluate the influence of material properties and FDS model parameters on the
HRR and fire growth predicted by the Spyro model. This would help identify the most
critical parameters and improve the accuracy and reliability of the model.
• Enhanced wind modelling: Since wind conditions were found to significantly impact
fire dynamics in the simulations, the application of a more detailed wind model, including
the incorporation of gust velocities, should be explored in more detail.
• Expanded cone calorimeter testing at low heat flux levels: It is suggested to
perform additional cone calorimeter experiments at lower incident heat flux levels e.g., 25
kW/m2 or below, to improve the input data available for the Spyro model. These data
points might be important for the improvement of the model’s prediction of fire growth.
79
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
D. Brandon, J. Sjöström, A. Temple, E. Hallberg, and F. Kahl. Fire safe implementation of
visible mass timber in tall buildings – compartment fire testing. Technical report, RISE
Research Institutes of Sweden AB, 2021.
A. Buchanan and B. Östman. Fire Safe Use of Wood in Buildings - Global Design Guide. CRC
Press, Taylor Francis Group, 1. edition, 2022.
A. S. Bøe, K. L. Friquin, D. Brandon, A. Steen-Hansen, and I. S. Ertesvåg. Fire spread in a
large compartment with exposed cross-laminated timber and open ventilation conditions:
fric-02 - exposed wall and ceiling. Fire Safety Journal, 141, 2023a.
A. S. Bøe, K. L. Friquin, D. Brandon, A. Steen-Hansen, and I. S. Ertesvåg. Fire spread in a
large compartment with exposed cross-laminated timber and open ventilation conditions:
fric-01 – exposed ceiling. Fire Safety Journal, 140, 2023b.
CONCITO. Nye co2-krav kan påvirke flere facetter af byggeriet. Online, 0 2022. URL
https://concito.dk/nyheder/nye-co2-krav-kan-paavirke-flere-facetter-byggeriet.
Last visited on 2024-03-01.
X. Dai, A. Gamba, C. Liu, J. Anderson, M. Charlier, D. Rush, and S. Welch. An engineering
cfd model for fire spread on wood cribs for travelling fires. Advances in Engineering Software,
173, 2023.
D. Drysdale. An Introduction to Fire Dynamics. Wiley, 2. edition, 2005.
DS/EN-ISO-10456. Builing materials and products - Hygrothermal properties - Tabulated design
values and procedures for determining declared and design thermal values. Dansk Standard, 2.
edition, 2008.
DS/ISO-5660-1. Reaction to fire tests - Heat release, smoke production and mass loss rate -
Part 1: Heat release rate (Cone Calorimeter method) and smoke production rate (dynamic
measurement). Dansk Standard, 2. edition, 2015.
80
==PAGE:86==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Forrest Products Laboratory. Wood Handbook - Wood as an Engineering material. Forrest
Products Laboratory, Unitet States Department of Agriculture Forrest Service, centennial
edition edition, 2010.
E. Gissi. An introduction to Fire Simulation with FDS and Smokeview (Updated to FDS 5.4.1).
C. Gorska, J. P. Hidalgo, and J. L. Torero. Fire dynamics in mass timber compartments. Fire
Safety Journal, 2021.
R. M. Hadden, A. I. Bartlett, J. P. Hidalgo, S. Santamaria, F. Weisner, L. A. Bisby, S. Deeny,
and B. Lane. Effects of exposed cross laminated timber on compartment fire dynamics. Fire
Safety Journal, 2017.
J. L. Hodges, B. Y. Lattimer, A.Kapahi, and J. E. Floyd. An engineering model for the
pyrolysis of materials. Fire Safety Journal, 141, 2023.
D. Hopkin, W. Węgrzyński, C. Gorska, M. Spearpoint, J. Bielawski, H. Krenn, T. Sleik,
R. Blondeau, and G. Stapf. Full-scale fire experiments on cross- laminated timber residential
enclosures featuring different lining protection configurations. Fire Technology, 2024.
M. J. Hurley. SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering. Springer, 5. edition, 2016.
B. P. Husted. FDS User Manual (Draft) A practical manual on how to use FDS. DTU,
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering„ 2025.
R. K. Janardhan and S. Hostikka. Predictive computational fluid dynamics simulation of fire
spread on wood cribs. Fire Technologry, 2019.
L. Jiang, A. S. Bøe, and T. Li. Numerical simulation of fire spread in a large-scale open clt
compartment. Fire Safety Journal, 2024.
B. Karlsson and J. G. Quintiere. Enclousure Fire Dynamics. CRC Press, Taylor Francis
Group, 2. edition, 2022.
P. Kotsovinos, E. Rackauskaite, E. Christensena, A. Glew, E. O’Loughlin, H. Mitchell, R. Amin,
F. Robert, M. Heidari, D. Barber, G. Rein, and J. Schulz. Fire dynamics inside a large
open-plan compartment with exposed timber ceiling anf columns: Codered 01. Fire and
Materials, 2021.
A. Lind and I. Damsgaard. Performanceindikator for trÆets andel i byggeriet , analyserapport.
Technical report, Rambøll Management Consulting for Foreningen Træ i Byggeriet, Dansk
Træforening og Træ- og Møbelindustrien, 2021.
J. Liu and E. Fischer. Review of large-scale clt compartment fire tests. Construction and
Building Materials, 2022.
81
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
K. McGrattan, S. Hosrikka, J. Floyd, R. McDermott, M. Vanella, and E. Mueller. Fire
Dynamics Simulator Technical Reference Guide Volume 1: Mathematical Model. NIST,
National Institute of Standards and Technology U.S. Depertment of Commerce, 6. edition,
2024a.
K. McGrattan, S. Hosrikka, J. Floyd, R. McDermott, M. Vanella, and E. Mueller. Fire
Dynamics Simulator User’s Guide. NIST, National Institute of Standards and Technology
U.S. Depertment of Commerce, 6. edition, 2024b.
R. Nandish, C. Knaust, and J. Zehfuss. Numerical investigations of a large fire exposure crib
test—presenting different pyrolysis modelling methodologies and numerical results. Fire and
Materials, 2025.
M. Pauner, S. Bjerrum, I. Hansen-Bruhn, and B. P. Husted. Cone calorimeter tests of cross
laminated timber (clt) [data set]. Online, 0 2025. URL .
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15630293. Last visited on 2025-06-13.
I. Pope, V. Gupta, H. Xu, F. Wiesner, D. Lange, J. L. Torero, and J. P. Hidalgo.
Fully-developed compartment fire dynamics in large-scale mass timber compartments. Fire
Safety Journal, 141, 2023.
E. Sanned, R. A. Mensah, M. Försth, and O. Das. The curious case of the second/end peak in
the heat release rate of wood: A cone calorimeter investigation. Fire Science Reviews, a
Springer Opden Journal, 2013.
L. S. Sørensen. Fire-Saftety Engineering and Performance-Based Codes. Polyteknisk Forlag, 1
edition, 2014.
B. Östman, D. Brandon, and H. Frantzich. Fire safety engineering in timber buildings. Fire
Safety Journal, 91:11–20, 2017.
82
==PAGE:88==
Appendix
83
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
A
Construction of Wood Crib in FDS
The structure of the wood cribs are provided in Table ?? below.
Table .1: Wood crib structure, where layer 1 refers to the wood stick layer placed on the
floor
Wood crib
Layer
Number
Volume
Mass
[m3]
[kg]
Wood
crib A
(15.5 m x
2.8 m x
0.2 m)
1
152
1.06
517.10
2
26
1.01
489.65
3
154
1.08
523.91
4
27
1.05
508.48
5
2
0.01
6.80
Wood
crib B
(1.0 m x
2.8 m x
0.2 m)
1
10
0.07
34.02
2
27
0.07
32.81
3
10
0.07
34.02
4
27
0.07
32.81
In total
435
4.48
2179.59
84
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
B
Heptane Fuel - Calculation of HRR
The wood crib is ignited by the 14 heptane fuel trays placed under the edge of the wood crib as
described in Section 4.3.2.
The burning rate of heptane (liquid fuel) ˙m
′′ [kg/(m2 · s)] can be found using the pool fire
correlation from Karlsson and Quintiere (2022):
˙m
′′ = ˙m
′′
∞· (1 −e−k·β·D)
(B.1)
Where ˙m
′′
∞[kg/(m2 ·s)] is the asymptotic diameter mass loss rate per unit, which is ˙m
′′
∞= 0.101
[kg/(m2 ·s)] for heptane according to table 26.21 in ?. k ·β [m−1] are empirical constants related
to the fuel type, where k is the extinction absorption coefficient, and the empirical constant β
is the mean beam length which is k · β = 1.1 [m−1] for heptane according to Table 26.21 in ?.
D [m] is the diameter of the pool. The heptane trays are rectangular with an surface area of
A=0.0330 m2 and the diameter of a circle with equivalent area become:
D = 0.2 m
(B.2)
This gives the following burning rate of heptane:
˙m
′′ = ˙m
′′
∞· (1 −e−k·β·D) = 0.101 · (1 −e−1.1·0.2 = 0.02
(B.3)
The heat release rate, HRR [kW] can then be calculated using equation the HRR equation
where ∆Hc = 44.6 assuming a combustion efficiency factor χ = 0.9:
HHR = ˙m
′′ · A · χ · ∆Hc = 0.02 · 0.033 · 0.9 · 44.6 · 103 = 27.48 ≈30 kW
(B.4)
Initially the HRR curve from the 14 heptane trays modelled without the contribution of fire load
from the wood crib, CLT wall and ceiling. FDS reproduce the assumed total HRR curve for
the 14 heptane as expected as illustrated in figure B.1 below. The HRR is growing linearly to
approximately 420 kW over 60 s, where it is kept constant until 171 seconds where it is reduced
to 0 kW at 171 s. As described in Section4.4 420 kW corresponds to a single tray of heptane
produces approximately 30 kW.
The total energy contribution from the heptane trays is calculated as Q=59 MJ by integrating
the HRR curve.
85
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
Figure B.1: Output from the FDS simulations of the total HRR [kW] from the 14 heptane
trays as a function of time [s]
86
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
C
ITP - Ceiling Surface Temperatures
Figure C.2: Ceiling surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a function
of time [s] for simulation ITP-02 and ITP-02W measured at Y=1.1
87
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
D
SP - Ceiling Surface Temperatures
Figure D.3: Ceiling surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a function
of time [s] for simulation SP-MT-B and SP-MT-BW measured at Y=1.0
Figure D.4: Ceiling surface temperature development [◦C] (10 sec. average) as a function
of time [s] for simulation SP-CLT and SP-CLT-W measured at Y=1.0
88
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
E
CLT Cone test - Charring rates
Figure E.5: Measured charring depths for the 6 cone calorimeter experiments applying a
heat flux of 70 kW/m2, 50 kW/m2 and 35 kW/m2.
89
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
F
CLT Cone test - Heat Release Rates
The full dataset for the six cone calorimeter tests can be found using the provided link in the
reference (Pauner et al., 2025).
Figure F.6: Measured heat release rates per unit area (HHRPUA) as a function of time
for the CLT samples subjected to a heat flux of 70kW/m2. The orange graph is sample I
and the green graph is sample II.
Figure F.7: Measured heat release rates per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time
for the CLT samples subjected to a heat flux of 50kW/m2. The orange graph is sample I
and the green graph is sample II.
90
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
Figure F.8: Measured heat release rates per unit area (HRRPUA) as a function of time
for the CLT samples subjected to a heat flux of 35kW/m2. The orange graph is sample I
and the green graph is sample II.
91
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
G
FDS Code - Spyro
92
==PAGE:98==
1   MiB Projekt Student: Signe Harvig Bjerrum, s141886
2   ******************************************************************
3   
4   
5   
6   ************************* GENERALITIES ***************************
7   
8   &HEAD CHID='SP_CLT',TITLE='SP_CLT'/ Maj 2025
9   
10   ************************ PROBLEM DOMAIN **************************
11   
12   ----Time----------------------------------------------------------
13   
14   Duration (XB) XB=0 --> Set-up only
15   Time step (DT) 600 for nemmere at kunne sammenligne
16   
17   &TIME T_END=600/
18   
19   
20   &DUMP DT_SL3D=30.0, NFRAMES=400, DT_DEVC=1.0, DT_RESTART=60.0/
21   &MISC RESTART =.FALSE., TMPA=15.0 /
22   
23   &PRES SOLVER='FFT',
24   
MAX_PRESSURE_ITERATIONS=10,
25   
VELOCITY_TOLERANCE=0.5/
26   
27   
28   &RADI NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES=300,
29   ANGLE_INCREMENT = 6,
30   TIME_STEP_INCREMENT = 6 /
31   
32   
33   
34   ----Mesh----------------------------------------------------------
35   
36   
37   &MESH ID='MESH-01', IJK=34,32,72, XB=-0.6,1.1,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
38   &MESH ID='MESH-02', IJK=34,32,72, XB=1.1,2.8,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
39   &MESH ID='MESH-03', IJK=34,32,72, XB=2.8,4.5,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
40   &MESH ID='MESH-04', IJK=34,32,72, XB=4.5,6.2,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
41   &MESH ID='MESH-05', IJK=34,32,72, XB=6.2,7.9,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
42   &MESH ID='MESH-06', IJK=34,32,72, XB=7.9,9.6,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
43   &MESH ID='MESH-07', IJK=34,32,72, XB=9.6,11.3,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
44   &MESH ID='MESH-08', IJK=34,32,72, XB=11.3,13.0,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
45   &MESH ID='MESH-09', IJK=34,32,72, XB=13.0,14.7,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
46   &MESH ID='MESH-10', IJK=34,32,72, XB=14.7,16.4,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
47   &MESH ID='MESH-11', IJK=34,32,72, XB=16.4,18.1,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
48   &MESH ID='MESH-12', IJK=34,32,72, XB=18.1,19.8,-1.2,0.4,0.0,3.6/
49   
50   &MESH ID='MESH-13', IJK=34,32,54, XB=-0.6,1.1,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
51   &MESH ID='MESH-14', IJK=34,32,54, XB=1.1,2.8,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
52   &MESH ID='MESH-15', IJK=34,32,54, XB=2.8,4.5,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
53   &MESH ID='MESH-16', IJK=34,32,54, XB=4.5,6.2,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
54   &MESH ID='MESH-17', IJK=34,32,54, XB=6.2,7.9,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
55   &MESH ID='MESH-18', IJK=34,32,54, XB=7.9,9.6,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
56   &MESH ID='MESH-19', IJK=34,32,54, XB=9.6,11.3,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
57   &MESH ID='MESH-20', IJK=34,32,54, XB=11.3,13.0,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
58   &MESH ID='MESH-21', IJK=34,32,54, XB=13.0,14.7,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
59   &MESH ID='MESH-22', IJK=34,32,54, XB=14.7,16.4,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
60   &MESH ID='MESH-23', IJK=34,32,54, XB=16.4,18.1,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
61   &MESH ID='MESH-24', IJK=34,32,54, XB=18.1,19.8,0.4,2.0,0.0,2.7/
62   
63   &MESH ID='MESH-25', IJK=34,32,54, XB=-0.6,1.1,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
64   &MESH ID='MESH-26', IJK=34,32,54, XB=1.1,2.8,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
65   &MESH ID='MESH-27', IJK=34,32,54, XB=2.8,4.5,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
66   &MESH ID='MESH-28', IJK=34,32,54, XB=4.5,6.2,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
67   &MESH ID='MESH-29', IJK=34,32,54, XB=6.2,7.9,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
68   &MESH ID='MESH-30', IJK=34,32,54, XB=7.9,9.6,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
69   &MESH ID='MESH-31', IJK=34,32,54, XB=9.6,11.3,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
70   &MESH ID='MESH-32', IJK=34,32,54, XB=11.3,13.0,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
71   &MESH ID='MESH-33', IJK=34,32,54, XB=13.0,14.7,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
72   &MESH ID='MESH-34', IJK=34,32,54, XB=14.7,16.4,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
73   &MESH ID='MESH-35', IJK=34,32,54, XB=16.4,18.1,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
93
==PAGE:99==
74   &MESH ID='MESH-36', IJK=34,32,54, XB=18.1,19.8,2.0,3.6,0.0,2.7/
75   
76   &MESH ID='MESH-37', IJK=34,52,54, XB=-0.6,1.1,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
77   &MESH ID='MESH-38', IJK=34,52,54, XB=1.1,2.8,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
78   &MESH ID='MESH-39', IJK=34,52,54, XB=2.8,4.5,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
79   &MESH ID='MESH-40', IJK=34,52,54, XB=4.5,6.2,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
80   &MESH ID='MESH-41', IJK=34,52,54, XB=6.2,7.9,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
81   &MESH ID='MESH-42', IJK=34,52,54, XB=7.9,9.6,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
82   &MESH ID='MESH-43', IJK=34,52,54, XB=9.6,11.3,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
83   &MESH ID='MESH-44', IJK=34,52,54, XB=11.3,13.0,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
84   &MESH ID='MESH-45', IJK=34,52,54, XB=13.0,14.7,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
85   &MESH ID='MESH-46', IJK=34,52,54, XB=14.7,16.4,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
86   &MESH ID='MESH-47', IJK=34,52,54, XB=16.4,18.1,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
87   &MESH ID='MESH-48', IJK=34,52,54, XB=18.1,19.8,3.6,6.2,0.0,2.7/
88   
89   
90   &MESH ID='MESH-49', IJK=34,46,54, XB=-0.6,2.8,-3.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
91   &MESH ID='MESH-50', IJK=34,46,54, XB=2.8,6.2,-3.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
92   &MESH ID='MESH-51', IJK=34,46,54, XB=6.2,9.6,-3.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
93   &MESH ID='MESH-52', IJK=34,46,54, XB=9.6,13.0,-3.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
94   &MESH ID='MESH-53', IJK=34,46,54, XB=13.0,16.4,-3.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
95   &MESH ID='MESH-54', IJK=34,46,54, XB=16.4,19.8,-3.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
96   
97   
98   &MESH ID='MESH-55', IJK=34,26,36, XB=-0.6,2.8,-3.8,-1.2,0.0,3.6/
99   &MESH ID='MESH-56', IJK=34,26,36, XB=2.8,6.2,-3.8,-1.2,0.0,3.6/
100   &MESH ID='MESH-57', IJK=34,26,36, XB=6.2,9.6,-3.8,-1.2,0.0,3.6/
101   &MESH ID='MESH-58', IJK=34,26,36, XB=9.6,13.0,-3.8,-1.2,0.0,3.6/
102   &MESH ID='MESH-59', IJK=34,26,36, XB=13.0,16.4,-3.8,-1.2,0.0,3.6/
103   &MESH ID='MESH-60', IJK=34,26,36, XB=16.4,19.8,-3.8,-1.2,0.0,3.6/
104   
105   
106   &VENT ID='Vent_Front', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,19.8,-3.8,-3.8,0.0,9.0/
107   &VENT ID='Vent_-X', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,-0.6,0.4,6.2,0.0,2.7/
108   &VENT ID='Vent_-X1', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,-0.6,-3.8,0.4,0.0,3.6/
109   &VENT ID='Vent_-X3', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,-0.6,-3.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
110   
111   &VENT ID='Vent_Top', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,19.8,0.4,6.2,2.7,2.7/
112   &VENT ID='Vent_Top1', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,19.8,-3.8,0.8,9.0,9.0/
113   
114   &VENT ID='Vent_Back', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,19.8,6.2,6.2,0.0,2.7/
115   &VENT ID='Vent_Back1', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,19.8,0.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
116   
117   &VENT ID='Vent_+X', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=19.8,19.8,0.4,6.2,0.0,2.7/
118   &VENT ID='Vent_+X1', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=19.8,19.8,-3.8,0.4,0.0,3.6/
119   &VENT ID='Vent_+X3', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=19.8,19.8,-3.8,0.8,3.6,9.0/
120   
121   &VENT ID='Vent', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,19.8,0.4,0.4,2.7,3.6/
122   &VENT ID='Vent01', SURF_ID='OPEN', XB=-0.6,19.8,0.4,0.8,3.6,3.6/
123   
124   
125   
126   
127   ------Initial Heptane Fire
------------------------------------------------------------------
128   
129   
130   &REAC ID='N-Heptane_FUEL',
131   FYI='SFPE tab 39A',
132   
FUEL='N-HEPTANE',
133   
C=7
134   
H=16
135   
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION=41200,
136   
SOOT_YIELD= 0.037,
137   
CO_YIELD=0.01/
138   
139   
140   &SURF
141   ID
='Burner_Heptane',
142   COLOR
='RED',
143   SPEC_ID
='N-HEPTANE',
144   HRRPUA
= 1000,
145   RAMP_Q
='fireramp',
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
94
==PAGE:100==
146   THICKNESS
=0.02/
147   
148   &RAMP ID='fireramp', T=0.0,
F=0.0 /
149   &RAMP ID='fireramp', T=30.0, F=0.5 /
150   &RAMP ID='fireramp', T=60.0, F=1 /
151   &RAMP ID='fireramp', T=170.0,F=1 /
152   &RAMP ID='fireramp', T=171, F=0.0 /
153   
154   
155   
156   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,1.10,1.25,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT',ID=
'Tray1'/
157   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,1.30,1.45,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT',ID=
'Tray2'/
158   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,1.50,1.65,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray3'/
159   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,1.70,1.85,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray4'/
160   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,1.90,2.05,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray5'/
161   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,2.10,2.25,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray6'/
162   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,2.30,2.45,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray7'/
163   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,2.50,2.65,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray8'/
164   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,2.70,2.85,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray9'/
165   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,2.90,3.05,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray10'/
166   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,3.10,3.25,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray11'/
167   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,3.30,3.45,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray12'/
168   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,3.50,3.65,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray13'/
169   &OBST XB=1.05,1.25,3.70,3.85,0.0,0.0, SURF_IDS='Burner_Heptane', 'INERT', 'INERT'ID=
'Tray14'/
170   
171   
172   ----MATERIALS-----------------------------------------------------------------
173   
174   ----Timber------
175   
176   &REAC
177   
FYI='SFPE Handbook, 5th Ed see table A39 and 36.11',
178   
FUEL='Timber_Fuel',
179   
N_SIMPLE_CHEMISTRY_REACTIONS=2,
180   
FUEL_C_TO_CO_FRACTION=0.6667
181   
C=1.0,
182   
H=1.7,
183   
O=0.83,
184   
CO_YIELD=5.0E-3,
185   
SOOT_YIELD=0.015,
186   
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION=16100/
187   
188   &MATL ID='SpruceCrib',
189   
FYI='Material parameters as defined in L. Jiang et al',
190   
SPEC_ID= 'Timber_Fuel',
191   
SPECIFIC_HEAT_RAMP='c_spruceCrib',
192   
CONDUCTIVITY_RAMP='k_spruceCrib',
193   
DENSITY=484/
194   
195   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=20.0,
F=1.53 /
196   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=99.0,
F=1.77 /
197   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=120.0,
F=13.5 /
198   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=121.0,
F=2.12 /
199   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=200.0,
F=2.00 /
200   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=250.0,
F=1.62 /
201   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=300.0,
F=0.71 /
202   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=350.0,
F=0.85 /
203   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=400.0, F=1.0 /
204   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=600.0, F=1.40 /
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
95
==PAGE:101==
205   &RAMP ID='c_spruceCrib', T=800.0, F=1.65 /
206   
207   &RAMP ID='k_spruceCrib', T=20.0,
F=0.12 /
208   &RAMP ID='k_spruceCrib', T=200.0,
F=0.15 /
209   &RAMP ID='k_spruceCrib', T=350.0,
F=0.07 /
210   &RAMP ID='k_spruceCrib', T=500.0,
F=0.09 /
211   &RAMP ID='k_spruceCrib', T=800.0,
F=0.35 /
212   &RAMP ID='k_spruceCrib', T=1200.0, F=1.5 /
213   
214   &MATL ID='SpruceW',
215   
FYI='Material parameters as defined in L. Jiang et al',
216   
SPEC_ID= 'Timber_Fuel',
217   
SPECIFIC_HEAT_RAMP='c_spruceW',
218   
CONDUCTIVITY_RAMP='k_spruceW',
219   
DENSITY=484/
220   
221   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=20.0,
F=1.53 /
222   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=99.0,
F=1.77 /
223   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=120.0,
F=13.5 /
224   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=121.0,
F=2.12 /
225   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=200.0,
F=2.00 /
226   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=250.0,
F=1.62 /
227   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=300.0,
F=0.71 /
228   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=350.0,
F=0.85 /
229   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=400.0, F=1.0 /
230   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=600.0, F=1.40 /
231   &RAMP ID='c_spruceW', T=800.0, F=1.65 /
232   
233   &RAMP ID='k_spruceW', T=20.0,
F=0.12 /
234   &RAMP ID='k_spruceW', T=200.0,
F=0.15 /
235   &RAMP ID='k_spruceW', T=350.0,
F=0.07 /
236   &RAMP ID='k_spruceW', T=500.0,
F=0.09 /
237   &RAMP ID='k_spruceW', T=800.0,
F=0.35 /
238   &RAMP ID='k_spruceW', T=1200.0, F=1.5 /
239   
240   &MATL ID='SpruceC',
241   
FYI='Material parameters as defined in L. Jiang et al',
242   
SPEC_ID= 'Timber_Fuel',
243   
SPECIFIC_HEAT_RAMP='c_spruceC',
244   
CONDUCTIVITY_RAMP='k_spruceC',
245   
DENSITY=484/
246   
247   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=20.0,
F=1.53 /
248   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=99.0,
F=1.77 /
249   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=120.0,
F=13.5 /
250   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=121.0,
F=2.12 /
251   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=200.0,
F=2.00 /
252   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=250.0,
F=1.62 /
253   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=300.0,
F=0.71 /
254   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=350.0,
F=0.85 /
255   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=400.0, F=1.0 /
256   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=600.0, F=1.40 /
257   &RAMP ID='c_spruceC', T=800.0, F=1.65 /
258   
259   &RAMP ID='k_spruceC', T=20.0,
F=0.12 /
260   &RAMP ID='k_spruceC', T=200.0,
F=0.15 /
261   &RAMP ID='k_spruceC', T=350.0,
F=0.07 /
262   &RAMP ID='k_spruceC', T=500.0,
F=0.09 /
263   &RAMP ID='k_spruceC', T=800.0,
F=0.35 /
264   &RAMP ID='k_spruceC', T=1200.0, F=1.5 /
265   
266   
267   &SURF ID = 'Woodcrib_Burner',
268   FYI='Fra Artiklel',
269   COLOR = 'YELLOW',
270   MATL_ID = 'SpruceCrib',
271   HRRPUA = 260.0,
272   IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 300.0,
273   RAMP_Q = 'woodcrib_ramp',
274   THICKNESS = 0.05 /
275   
276   &RAMP ID='woodcrib_ramp', T= 0.0, F=0.0 /
277   &RAMP ID='woodcrib_ramp', T= 15.0, F=1 /
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
96
==PAGE:102==
278   &RAMP ID='woodcrib_ramp', T=50, F=1 /
279   &RAMP ID='woodcrib_ramp', T=60, F=0.85 /
280   
281   
282   
283   &SURF ID='CLT_Wall',
284   COLOR='MELON',
285   IGNITION_TEMPERATURE=300,
286   EXTERNAL_FLUX=0,
287   CONVECTION_LENGTH_SCALE=2.5,
288   HRRPUA=1,
289   RAMP_Q='CONE 35','CONE 50','CONE 70',
290   REFERENCE_HEAT_FLUX=35,50,70,
291   MATL_ID='SpruceW',
292   THICKNESS=0.140/
293   
294   &SURF ID='CLT_Ceiling',
295   COLOR='MELON',
296   IGNITION_TEMPERATURE=300,
297   EXTERNAL_FLUX=0,
298   CONVECTION_LENGTH_SCALE=2.5,
299   HRRPUA=1,
300   RAMP_Q='CONE 35','CONE 50','CONE 70',
301   REFERENCE_HEAT_FLUX=35,50,70,
302   MATL_ID='SpruceC',
303   THICKNESS=0.140/
304   
305   
306   
307   --------CONE RAMP-------------------------------
308   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
0.0 ,
F=
2.36
/
309   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
1.0 ,
F=
2.43
/
310   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
2.0 ,
F=
2.33
/
311   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
3.0 ,
F=
2.15
/
312   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
4.0 ,
F=
1.78
/
313   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
5.0 ,
F=
1.65
/
314   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
6.0 ,
F=
1.56
/
315   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
7.0 ,
F=
1.37
/
316   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
8.0 ,
F=
1.33
/
317   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
9.0 ,
F=
1.05
/
318   &RAMP ID='CONE 35', T=
10.0
,
F=
0.80
/
319   
320   Only the first 10 lines are showed in this Appendix
321   
322   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
0.0 ,
F=
2.04
/
323   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
1.0 ,
F=
1.86
/
324   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
2.0 ,
F=
1.69
/
325   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
3.0 ,
F=
1.63
/
326   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
4.0 ,
F=
1.78
/
327   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
5.0 ,
F=
1.71
/
328   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
6.0 ,
F=
1.63
/
329   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
7.0 ,
F=
1.49
/
330   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
8.0 ,
F=
1.38
/
331   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
9.0 ,
F=
1.21
/
332   &RAMP ID='CONE 50', T=
10.0
,
F=
1.04
/
333   
334   Only the first 10 lines are showed in this Appendix
335   
336   
337   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
0.0 ,
F=
2.83
/
338   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
1.0 ,
F=
2.90
/
339   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
2.0 ,
F=
2.90
/
340   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
3.0 ,
F=
2.68
/
341   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
4.0 ,
F=
2.20
/
342   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
5.0 ,
F=
1.69
/
343   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
6.0 ,
F=
1.37
/
344   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
7.0 ,
F=
1.00
/
345   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
8.0 ,
F=
0.72
/
346   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
9.0 ,
F=
0.43
/
347   &RAMP ID='CONE 70', T=
10.0
,
F=
0.00
/
348   
349   Only the first 10 lines are showed in this Appendix
350   
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
97
==PAGE:103==
351   
352   
353   --------Concrete----------------------------
354   
355   &MATL ID='Concrete',
356   
FYI='DS/EN-ISO 10456',
357   
SPECIFIC_HEAT=1.0,
358   
CONDUCTIVITY=2.3,
359   
DENSITY=2300/
360   
361   
362   &SURF ID ='Concrete_column',
363   FYI='Fra artikle',
364   COLOR = 'SILVER',
365   MATL_ID = 'Concrete',
366   THICKNESS = 0.4 /
367   
368   &SURF ID = 'Concrete_floor',
369   FYI='Fra Artikle',
370   COLOR = 'SILVER',
371   MATL_ID(1:2,1)= 'Insulation', 'Concrete',
372   THICKNESS(1:2) = 0.03, 0.1 /
373   
374   &SURF ID ='Concrete_Scale',
375   FYI='Fra Artikle',
376   COLOR = 'SILVER',
377   MATL_ID = 'Concrete',
378   THICKNESS = 0.2 /
379   
380   --------Gipsum walls-----------------------------------
381   
382   &MATL ID='Gipsum',
383   
FYI='DS/EN-ISO 10456',
384   
SPECIFIC_HEAT=1.0,
385   
CONDUCTIVITY=0.21,
386   
DENSITY=700/
387   
388   
389   &SURF ID = 'Gipsum_wall',
390   FYI='Fra Artikle',
391   COLOR = 'SILVER',
392   MATL_ID(1:2,1)= 'Gipsum', 'SpruceW',
393   THICKNESS(1:2) = 0.03, 0.8 /
394   
395   
396   --------Insulation--------------------------------------
397   
398   &MATL ID='Insulation',
399   
FYI='DS/EN-ISO 10456',
400   
SPECIFIC_HEAT=0.8,
401   
CONDUCTIVITY=0.041,
402   
DENSITY=100/
403   
404   
405   
406   ----Geometry----------------------------------------------------------
407   
408   &OBST ID='Ceiling', XB=-0.10,18.9,0.0,5.15,2.5,2.65, SURF_ID='CLT_Ceiling',
BULK_DENSITY=484 /
409   &OBST ID='Beam', XB=0.0,18.8,0.0,0.25,2.2,2.5, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID='INERT'/
410   &OBST ID='Column', XB=4.25,4.85,0.0,0.4,0.0,2.2, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID=
'Concrete_column'/
411   &OBST ID='Column', XB=9.1,9.7,0.0,0.4,0.0,2.2, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID=
'Concrete_column'/
412   &OBST ID='Column', XB=13.95,14.55,0.0,0.4,0.0,2.2, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID=
'Concrete_column'/
413   
414   
415   
416   &OBST ID='Scale', XB=17.0,18.0,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.2, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID=
'Concrete_Scale'/
417   
418   &OBST ID='Exterior_Facade', XB=4.5,9.5,0.0,0.2,2.65,5.15, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID=
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
98
==PAGE:104==
'INERT'/
419   &OBST ID='Exterior_Facade', XB=13.9,18.9,0.0,0.2,2.65,5.15, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID=
'INERT'/
420   &OBST ID='End_Wall', XB=-0.10,0.0,0.0,5.15,0.0,2.5, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID=
'Gipsum_wall'/
421   &OBST ID='Back_Wall', XB=0.0,18.8,5.0,5.15,0.0,2.5, SURF_ID='CLT_Wall', BULK_DENSITY=
484 /
422   &OBST ID='End_Wall', XB=18.8,18.9,0.0,5.15,0.0,2.5, COLOR='GRAY 80', SURF_ID=
'Gipsum_wall'/
423   
424   
425   
426   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=1.3,1.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
427   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=1.4,1.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
428   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=1.5,1.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
429   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=1.6,1.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
430   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=1.7,1.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
431   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=1.8,1.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
432   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=1.9,1.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
433   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.0,2.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
434   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.1,2.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
435   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.2,2.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
436   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.3,2.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
437   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.4,2.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
438   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.5,2.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
439   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.6,2.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
440   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.7,2.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
441   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.8,2.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
442   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=2.9,2.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
443   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.0,3.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
444   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.1,3.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
445   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.2,3.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
446   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.3,3.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
447   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.4,3.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
448   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.5,3.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
449   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.6,3.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
450   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.7,3.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
451   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.8,3.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
452   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=3.9,3.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
453   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.0,4.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
454   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.1,4.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
455   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.2,4.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
456   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.3,4.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
99
==PAGE:105==
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
457   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.4,4.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
458   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.5,4.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
459   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.6,4.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
460   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.7,4.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
461   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.8,4.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
462   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=4.9,4.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
463   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.0,5.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
464   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.1,5.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
465   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.2,5.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
466   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.3,5.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
467   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.4,5.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
468   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.5,5.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
469   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.6,5.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
470   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.7,5.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
471   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.8,5.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
472   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=5.9,5.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
473   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.0,6.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
474   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.1,6.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
475   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.2,6.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
476   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.3,6.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
477   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.4,6.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
478   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.5,6.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
479   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.6,6.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
480   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.7,6.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
481   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.8,6.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
482   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=6.9,6.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
483   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.0,7.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
484   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.1,7.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
485   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.2,7.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
486   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.3,7.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
487   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.4,7.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
488   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.5,7.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
489   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.6,7.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
490   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.7,7.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
491   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.8,7.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
492   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=7.9,7.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
100
==PAGE:106==
493   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.0,8.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
494   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.1,8.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
495   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.2,8.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
496   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.3,8.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
497   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.4,8.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
498   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.5,8.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
499   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.6,8.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
500   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.7,8.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
501   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.8,8.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
502   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=8.9,8.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
503   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.0,9.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
504   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.1,9.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
505   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.2,9.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
506   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.3,9.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
507   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.4,9.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
508   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.5,9.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
509   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.6,9.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
510   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.7,9.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
511   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.8,9.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
512   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=9.9,9.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
513   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.0,10.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
514   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.1,10.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
515   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.2,10.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
516   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.3,10.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
517   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.4,10.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
518   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.5,10.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
519   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.6,10.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
520   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.7,10.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
521   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.8,10.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
522   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=10.9,10.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
523   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.0,11.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
524   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.1,11.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
525   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.2,11.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
526   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.3,11.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
527   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.4,11.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
528   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.5,11.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
529   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.6,11.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
101
==PAGE:107==
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
530   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.7,11.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
531   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.8,11.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
532   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=11.9,11.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
533   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.0,12.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
534   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.1,12.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
535   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.2,12.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
536   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.3,12.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
537   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.4,12.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
538   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.5,12.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
539   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.6,12.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
540   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.7,12.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
541   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.8,12.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
542   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=12.9,12.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
543   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.0,13.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
544   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.1,13.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
545   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.2,13.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
546   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.3,13.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
547   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.4,13.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
548   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.5,13.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
549   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.6,13.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
550   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.7,13.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
551   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.8,13.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
552   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=13.9,13.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
553   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.0,14.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
554   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.1,14.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
555   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.2,14.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
556   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.3,14.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
557   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.4,14.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
558   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.5,14.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
559   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.6,14.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
560   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.7,14.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
561   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.8,14.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
562   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=14.9,14.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
563   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.0,15.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
564   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.1,15.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
565   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.2,15.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
102
==PAGE:108==
566   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.3,15.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
567   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.4,15.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
568   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=16.2,16.25,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
569   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.5,15.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
570   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.6,15.65,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
571   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.7,15.75,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
572   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.8,15.85,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
573   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=15.9,15.95,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
574   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=16.0,16.05,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
575   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=16.1,16.15,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
576   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=16.5,16.55,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
577   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=16.4,16.45,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
578   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.0', XB=16.3,16.35,1.1,3.9,0.0,0.05, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
579   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.15,1.2,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
580   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.25,1.3,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
581   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.45,1.5,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
582   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.35,1.4,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
583   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.55,1.6,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
584   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.65,1.7,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
585   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.75,1.8,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
586   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.85,1.9,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
587   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,1.95,2.0,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
588   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.05,2.1,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
589   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.25,2.3,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
590   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.15,2.2,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
591   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.35,2.4,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
592   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.45,2.5,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
593   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.55,2.6,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
594   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.65,2.7,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
595   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.75,2.8,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
596   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.85,2.9,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
597   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.05,3.1,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
598   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,2.95,3.0,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
599   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.15,3.2,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
600   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.25,3.3,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
601   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.35,3.4,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
602   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.45,3.5,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
103
==PAGE:109==
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
603   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.75,3.8,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
604   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.65,3.7,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
605   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.55,3.6,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
606   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.05', XB=1.1,16.6,3.85,3.9,0.05,0.1, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
607   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.15,1.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
608   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.25,1.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
609   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.35,1.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
610   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.45,1.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
611   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.55,1.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
612   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.65,1.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
613   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.75,1.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
614   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.85,1.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
615   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=1.95,2.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
616   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.05,2.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
617   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.15,2.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
618   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.25,2.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
619   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.35,2.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
620   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.45,2.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
621   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.55,2.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
622   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.65,2.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
623   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.75,2.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
624   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.85,2.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
625   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=2.95,3.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
626   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.05,3.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
627   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.15,3.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
628   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.25,3.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
629   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.35,3.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
630   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.45,3.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
631   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.55,3.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
632   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.65,3.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
633   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.75,3.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
634   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.85,3.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
635   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=3.95,4.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
636   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.05,4.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
637   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.15,4.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
638   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.25,4.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
104
==PAGE:110==
639   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.85,6.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
640   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.75,6.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
641   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.65,6.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
642   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.55,6.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
643   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.45,6.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
644   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.35,6.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
645   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.25,6.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
646   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.15,6.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
647   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.05,6.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
648   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.95,6.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
649   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.85,5.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
650   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.75,5.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
651   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.65,5.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
652   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.55,5.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
653   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.45,5.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
654   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.35,5.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
655   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.25,5.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
656   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.15,5.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
657   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=5.05,5.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
658   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.95,5.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
659   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.85,4.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
660   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.75,4.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
661   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.65,4.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
662   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.55,4.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
663   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.45,4.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
664   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=4.35,4.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
665   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.05,7.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
666   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.15,7.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
667   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.25,7.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
668   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.35,7.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
669   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.45,7.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
670   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.55,7.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
671   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.65,7.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
672   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.75,7.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
673   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.85,7.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
674   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=7.95,8.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
675   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.05,8.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
105
==PAGE:111==
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
676   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.15,8.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
677   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.25,8.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
678   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.35,8.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
679   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.45,8.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
680   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.55,8.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
681   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.65,8.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
682   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.75,8.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
683   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.85,8.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
684   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=8.95,9.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
685   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.05,9.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
686   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.15,9.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
687   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.25,9.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
688   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.35,9.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
689   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.45,9.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
690   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.55,9.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
691   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=6.95,7.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
692   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.75,9.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
693   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.85,9.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
694   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.95,10.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
695   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.05,10.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
696   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.15,10.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
697   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.25,10.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
698   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.35,10.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
699   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.45,10.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
700   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.55,10.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
701   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.65,10.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
702   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.75,10.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
703   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.85,10.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
704   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=10.95,11.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
705   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.05,11.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
706   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.15,11.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
707   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.25,11.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
708   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.35,11.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
709   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.45,11.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
710   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.55,11.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
711   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.65,11.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
106
==PAGE:112==
712   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.75,11.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
713   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.85,11.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
714   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=11.95,12.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
715   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.05,12.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
716   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.15,12.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
717   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.25,12.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
718   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=9.65,9.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
719   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.45,12.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
720   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.55,12.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
721   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.65,12.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
722   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.75,12.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
723   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.85,12.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
724   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.95,13.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
725   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.05,13.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
726   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.15,13.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
727   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.25,13.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
728   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.35,13.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
729   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.45,13.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
730   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.55,13.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
731   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.65,13.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
732   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.75,13.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
733   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.85,13.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
734   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=13.95,14.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
735   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.05,14.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
736   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.15,14.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
737   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.25,14.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
738   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.35,14.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
739   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.45,14.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
740   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.55,14.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
741   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.65,14.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
742   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.75,14.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
743   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.85,14.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
744   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=14.95,15.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
745   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=12.35,12.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
746   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.05,15.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
747   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.15,15.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
748   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.25,15.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
107
==PAGE:113==
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
749   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.35,15.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
750   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.45,15.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
751   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.55,15.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
752   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.65,15.7,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
753   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.75,15.8,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
754   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.85,15.9,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
755   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=16.35,16.4,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
756   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=16.25,16.3,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
757   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=16.15,16.2,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
758   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=16.05,16.1,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
759   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=15.95,16.0,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
760   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=16.55,16.6,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
761   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.1', XB=16.45,16.5,1.1,3.9,0.1,0.15, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
762   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.15,1.2,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
763   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.25,1.3,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
764   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.35,1.4,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
765   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.45,1.5,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
766   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.55,1.6,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
767   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.65,1.7,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
768   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.75,1.8,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
769   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.85,1.9,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
770   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,1.95,2.0,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
771   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.05,2.1,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
772   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.15,2.2,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
773   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.25,2.3,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
774   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.35,2.4,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
775   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.45,2.5,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
776   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.55,2.6,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
777   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.65,2.7,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
778   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.75,2.8,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
779   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.85,2.9,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
780   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,2.95,3.0,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
781   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.05,3.1,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
782   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.15,3.2,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
783   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.25,3.3,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
784   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.35,3.4,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
108
==PAGE:114==
785   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.45,3.5,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
786   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.55,3.6,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
787   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.65,3.7,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
788   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.75,3.8,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
789   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.15', XB=1.1,16.6,3.85,3.9,0.15,0.2, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
790   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=1.1,1.15,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
791   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=1.2,1.25,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID=
'Woodcrib_Burner'/
792   
793   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.0,17.05,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
794   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.1,17.15,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
795   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.2,17.25,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
796   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.3,17.35,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
797   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.4,17.45,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
798   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.5,17.55,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
799   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.6,17.65,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
800   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.7,17.75,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
801   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.8,17.85,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
802   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.2', XB=17.9,17.95,1.1,3.9,0.2,0.25, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
803   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.15,1.2,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
804   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.25,1.3,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
805   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.35,1.4,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
806   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.45,1.5,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
807   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.55,1.6,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
808   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.65,1.7,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
809   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.75,1.8,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
810   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.85,1.9,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
811   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,1.95,2.0,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
812   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.05,2.1,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
813   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.15,2.2,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
814   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.25,2.3,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
815   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.35,2.4,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
816   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.45,2.5,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
817   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.55,2.6,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
818   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.65,2.7,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
819   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.75,2.8,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
820   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.85,2.9,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
821   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,2.95,3.0,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
109
==PAGE:115==
822   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.05,3.1,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
823   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.15,3.2,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
824   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.25,3.3,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
825   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.35,3.4,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
826   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.45,3.5,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
827   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.55,3.6,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
828   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.65,3.7,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
829   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.75,3.8,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
830   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.25', XB=17.0,18.0,3.85,3.9,0.25,0.3, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
831   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.95,18.0,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
832   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.85,17.9,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
833   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.75,17.8,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
834   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.65,17.7,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
835   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.55,17.6,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
836   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.45,17.5,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
837   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.35,17.4,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
838   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.25,17.3,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
839   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.15,17.2,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
840   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.3', XB=17.05,17.1,1.1,3.9,0.3,0.35, BULK_DENSITY=486.0, SURF_ID
='Woodcrib_Burner'/
841   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.85,3.9,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
842   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.15,1.2,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
843   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.25,1.3,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
844   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.35,1.4,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
845   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.45,1.5,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
846   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.55,1.6,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
847   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.65,1.7,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
848   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.75,1.8,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
849   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.85,1.9,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
850   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,1.95,2.0,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
851   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.05,2.1,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
852   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.15,2.2,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
853   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.25,2.3,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
854   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.35,2.4,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
855   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.45,2.5,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
856   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.55,2.6,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
857   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.65,2.7,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
858   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.75,2.8,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
110
==PAGE:116==
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
859   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.85,2.9,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
860   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,2.95,3.0,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
861   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.05,3.1,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
862   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.15,3.2,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
863   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.25,3.3,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
864   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.35,3.4,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
865   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.45,3.5,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
866   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.55,3.6,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
867   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.65,3.7,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
868   &OBST ID='Wood_crib_z0.35', XB=17.0,18.0,3.75,3.8,0.35,0.4, BULK_DENSITY=486.0,
SURF_ID='Woodcrib_Burner'/
869   
870   
871   
872   
873   ----Output-------------------------------------------------------------
874   
875   
876   
877   &DEVC
XYZ =
1.0,
2.5, 0.35, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_1.0 2.5 0.35'/
878   &DEVC
XYZ =
1.0,
2.5, 1.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_1.0 2.5 1.1'/
879   &DEVC
XYZ =
1.0,
2.5, 2.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_1.0 2.5 2.1'/
880   &DEVC
XYZ =
1.0,
2.5, 2.40, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_1.0 2.5 2.4'/
881   
882   
883   
884   &DEVC
XYZ =
3.0,
2.5, 0.35, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_3.0 2.5 0.35'/
885   &DEVC
XYZ =
3.0,
2.5, 1.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_3.0 2.5 1.1'/
886   &DEVC
XYZ =
3.0,
2.5, 2.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_3.0 2.5 2.1'/
887   &DEVC
XYZ =
3.0,
2.5, 2.40, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_3.0 2.5 2.4'/
888   
889   
890   
891   &DEVC
XYZ =
5.0,
2.5, 0.35, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_5.0 2.5 0.35'/
892   &DEVC
XYZ =
5.0,
2.5, 1.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_5.0 2.5 1.1'/
893   &DEVC
XYZ =
5.0,
2.5, 2.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_5.0 2.5 2.1'/
894   &DEVC
XYZ =
5.0,
2.5, 2.40, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_5.0 2.5 2.4'/
895   
896   
897   &DEVC
XYZ =
7.0,
2.5, 0.35, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_7.0 2.5 0.35'/
898   &DEVC
XYZ =
7.0,
2.5, 1.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_7.0 2.5 1.1'/
899   &DEVC
XYZ =
7.0,
2.5, 2.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_7.0 2.5 2.1'/
900   &DEVC
XYZ =
7.0,
2.5, 2.40, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_7.0 2.5 2.4'/
901   
902   
903   &DEVC
XYZ =
9.0,
2.5, 0.35, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_9.0 2.5 0.35'/
904   &DEVC
XYZ =
9.0,
2.5, 1.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_9.0 2.5 1.1'/
905   &DEVC
XYZ =
9.0,
2.5, 2.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_9.0 2.5 2.1'/
906   &DEVC
XYZ =
9.0,
2.5, 2.40, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_9.0 2.5 2.4'/
907   
908   
909   &DEVC
XYZ =
11.5,
2.5, 0.35, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_11.5 2.5 0.35'/
910   &DEVC
XYZ =
11.5,
2.5, 1.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_11.5 2.5 1.1'/
911   &DEVC
XYZ =
11.5,
2.5, 2.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_11.5 2.5 2.1'/
912   &DEVC
XYZ =
11.5,
2.5, 2.40, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_11.5 2.5 2.4'/
913   
914   
915   &DEVC
XYZ =
14.0,
2.5, 0.35, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_14.0 2.5 0.35'/
916   &DEVC
XYZ =
14.0,
2.5, 1.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_14.0 2.5 1.1'/
917   &DEVC
XYZ =
14.0,
2.5, 2.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_14.0 2.5 2.1'/
918   &DEVC
XYZ =
14.0,
2.5, 2.40, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_14.0 2.5 2.4'/
919   
920   
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
111
==PAGE:117==
921   &DEVC
XYZ =
16.6,
2.5, 0.35, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_16.6.0 2.5 0.35'/
922   &DEVC
XYZ =
16.6,
2.5, 1.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_16.6 2.5 1.1'/
923   &DEVC
XYZ =
16.6,
2.5, 2.10, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_16.6 2.5 2.1'/
924   &DEVC
XYZ =
16.6,
2.5, 2.40, QUANTITY ='TEMPERATURE', ID='T_16.6 2.5 2.4'/
925   
926   &DEVC
XYZ =
3.0,
5.0, 1.10, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-2, ID='T_BW 
X3.0_Z1.10'/
927   &DEVC
XYZ =
3.0,
5.0, 2.40, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-2, ID='T_BW 
X3.0_Z2.40'/
928   &DEVC
XYZ =
7.0,
5.0, 1.10, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-2, ID='T_BW 
X7.0_Z1.10'/
929   &DEVC
XYZ =
7.0,
5.0, 2.40, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-2, ID='T_BW 
X7.0_Z2.40'/
930   &DEVC
XYZ =
16.6, 5.0, 1.10, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-2, ID='T_BW 
X16.6_Z1.10'/
931   &DEVC
XYZ =
16.6, 5.0, 2.40, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-2, ID='T_BW 
X16.6_Z2.40'/
932   
933   &DEVC
XYZ =
3.0,
1.0, 2.5, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-3, ID='T_C 
X3.0_Y1.0'/
934   &DEVC
XYZ =
7.0,
1.0, 2.5, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-3, ID='T_C 
X7.0_Y1.0'/
935   &DEVC
XYZ =
16.6, 1.0, 2.5, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-3, ID='T_C 
X16.6_Y1.0'/
936   
937   &DEVC
XYZ =
3.0,
2.5, 2.5, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-3, ID='T_C 
X3.0_Y2.5'/
938   &DEVC
XYZ =
7.0,
2.5, 2.5, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-3, ID='T_C 
X7.0_Y2.5'/
939   &DEVC
XYZ =
16.6,
2.5, 2.5, QUANTITY ='WALL TEMPERATURE', IOR=-3, ID='T_C 
X16.6_Y2.5'/
940   
941   
942   &DEVC
XYZ=7.0, 0.0, 0.3, QUANTITY ='VELOCITY', ID='VEL 7.0, 0.0, 0.3'/
943   &DEVC
XYZ=7.0, 0.0, 2.1, QUANTITY ='VELOCITY', ID='VEL 7.0, 0.0, 2.1'/
944   
945   &DEVC
XYZ=16.6, 0.0, 0.3, QUANTITY ='VELOCITY', ID='VEL 16.6, 0.0, 0.3'/
946   &DEVC
XYZ=16.6, 0.0, 2.1, QUANTITY ='VELOCITY', ID='VEL 16.6, 0.0, 2.1'/
947   
948   
949   
950   &SLCF PBY= 2.5, QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE'/
951   &SLCF PBX= 7.0, QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE'/
952   &SLCF PBX= 16.6, QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE'/
953   
954   &SLCF PBX= 7.0, QUANTITY='VELOCITY'/
955   &SLCF PBX= 16.6, QUANTITY='VELOCITY'/
956   &SLCF PBY= 2.5, QUANTITY='VELOCITY'/
957   
958   
959   
960   &DEVC XYZ=
3.0,
5.0,
1.1,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
3.0 5.0 1.1'/
961   &DEVC XYZ=
3.0,
5.0,
2.4,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
3.0 5.0 2.4'/
962   &DEVC XYZ=
7.0,
5.0,
1.1,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
7.0 5.0 1.1'/
963   &DEVC XYZ=
7.0,
5.0,
2.4,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
7.0 5.0 2.4'/
964   &DEVC XYZ=
16.5,
5.0,
1.1,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
16.5 5.0 1.1'/
965   &DEVC XYZ=
16.5,
5.0,
2.4,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
16.5 5.0 2.4'/
966   
967   &DEVC XYZ=
7.0,
0.0,
3.0,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
7.0 0.0 3.0'/
968   &DEVC XYZ=
7.0,
0.0,
4.0,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
7.0 0.0 4.0'/
969   &DEVC XYZ=
7.0,
0.0,
5.0,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
7.0 0.0 5.0'/
970   
971   &DEVC XYZ=
16.5,
0.0,
3.0,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
16.5 0.0 3.0'/
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
112
==PAGE:118==
972   &DEVC XYZ=
16.5,
0.0,
4.0,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
16.5 0.0 4.0'/
973   &DEVC XYZ=
16.5,
0.0,
5.0,
QUANTITY='INCIDENT HEAT FLUX',
IOR=-2, ID='INC
16.5 0.0 5.0'/
974   
975   
976   
977   &BNDF QUANTITY = 'WALL TEMPERATURE'/
978   &BNDF QUANTITY = 'HEAT TRANSFER COEFFICIENT'/
979   &BNDF QUANTITY = 'INCIDENT HEAT FLUX'/
980   
981   &SLCF PBZ=1.1,QUANTITY='VELOCITY',VECTOR=.TRUE./
982   &SLCF PBZ=2.4,QUANTITY='VELOCITY',VECTOR=.TRUE./
983   
984   
985   
986   
987   
988   
989   
990   &TAIL / end of file
991   
APPENDIX . APPENDIX
113
