==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department DTU Compute
Master’s Degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
MASTER’S THESIS
Adaptive Document Extraction: A Mixture
of Experts Approach for Visma’s Smartscan
Universit`a Degli Studi di Padova
Department of Information Engineering
Master’s Degree in ICT for Internet and Multimedia
Supervisors:
Prof. Jes Frellsen
Prof. Pietro Zanuttigh
Claus Dahl
Graduate student:
Luca D’Este
s233231
2082123
Academic Year 2024/2025
Graduation Date 13/08/2025
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The extraction of structured data from unstructured documents, such as invoices and receipts,
represents a significant challenge in the automation of financial processes. Visma’s Smartscan
engine employs machine learning to deliver high-accuracy results, yet it encounters perfor-
mance bottlenecks when addressing domain-specific variations across diverse customer datasets.
This thesis investigates the potential of Mixture of Experts (MoE) models to enhance Smartscan’s
accuracy and efficiency by specializing sub-models for distinct document facets, including type,
layout, and language; as well as trying to predict multiple fields from a single model. Two ap-
proaches have been taken. In the first, the data is clustered into coherent subsets based on doc-
ument characteristics, and dedicated expert subnetworks are trained on each cluster. The MoE
architecture employs a dynamic routing mechanism that directs inference tasks to the most suit-
able expert(s), thereby facilitating the tailored handling of diverse input distributions. In the
second technique, a single model has been trained with MoE to explore how features of the
documents can be shared to predict multiple fields simultaneously. By tackling domain-specific
biases, improving scalability, and enabling dynamic adaptation to diverse input distributions,
the proposed MoE approach aspires to demonstrate the viability of machine learning for opti-
mizing document extraction workflows in production environments.
iii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Sommario
L’estrazione di dati strutturati da documenti non strutturati, come fatture e ricevute, rappresenta
una sfida significativa nell’automazione dei processi finanziari. Smartscan, di Visma, utilizza il
machine learning per fornire risultati altamente accurati, ma presenta differenze di prestazione
quando deve affrontare variazioni specifiche tipiche di un diverso dominio in diversi set di
dati dei clienti. Questa tesi studia il potenziale dei modelli Mixture of Experts (MoE) per
migliorare l’accuratezza e l’efficienza di Smartscan specializzando dei sottomodelli su aspetti
distintivi dei documenti, tra cui tipo, layout e lingua, oltre a cercare di prevedere pi`u campi da
un unico modello. Sono stati adottati due approcci. Nel primo, i dati sono stati raggruppati
in sottoinsiemi coerenti in base alle caratteristiche dei documenti e su ciascun cluster sono
state addestrate delle sottoreti di esperti dedicate. L’architettura MoE utilizza un meccanismo
di routing dinamico che indirizza i compiti agli esperti pi`u adatti, facilitando cos`ı la gestione
personalizzata di diverse distribuzioni di input. Nella seconda tecnica, un singolo modello `e
stato addestrato con MoE per esplorare come le caratteristiche dei documenti possano essere
condivise per prevedere pi`u campi contemporaneamente. Affrontando le specificit`a dei domini,
migliorando la scalabilit`a e consentendo l’adattamento dinamico a diverse distribuzioni di input,
l’approccio MoE proposto aspira a dimostrare la fattibilit`a dell’apprendimento automatico per
ottimizzare i flussi di lavoro di estrazione dei documenti in ambienti di produzione.
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments - Ringraziamenti
I would like to first thank the Visma Machine Learning Assets team that allowed me to do
my thesis with them and provided the necessary support and resources. Special thanks to the
manager of the team Claus Dahl that organized the whole thing, Benjamin, Esben, Kenneth and
Lasse for their help and supervision, and Patrik, Michal and Jon for their support.
I would also like to thank my supervisor at DTU, Prof. Jes Frellsen, for choosing to follow
the project and his guidance. Thanks to my UNIPD supervisor, Prof. Pietro Zanuttigh, for his
help with the organization of this thesis, too.
A special thanks to my friends in Denmark e in Italia, for your support throughout this
journey, in particolare a Andrea che si `e preso l’impegno di leggere e correggere questa tesi.
Very special thanks also to my flatmates, Riccardo, Davide & Lucas! Un grassie speciale ai
compagni di uni Aurora, Federica, Alvise, Davide, Leo, Sara... Thanks to friends supporting in
CPH Jan, Z, David, Sofia, Carla, Patrick, Christian... E agli italiani in Danimarca per sentirsi
pi`u a casa Luca, Matteo, Nicola... E GRAZIE a Max
Ultimi ma assolutamente non per importanza, ai miei genitori e a mia sorella Federica, per
il supporto lungo tutto il percorso ben pi`u lungo di questa tesi.
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Document Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Mixture of Experts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
Dense and Sparse Mixture of Experts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Experts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Training Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
LayoutLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.1
Adapters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.2
Low-Rank Adaptation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.3
Mixture of Parameter-Efficient Experts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods
17
3.1
Methodology of Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Evaluation Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Initial Experiments
21
4.1
Dense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Sparse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Domain Experts MoE
27
5.1
MoE on the output
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.1
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.2
Document Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.3
Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
MoE per layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
MoE on Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
MoE on Entire Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Multi-Field MoE
37
6.1
Multi-Field with Entire Layer as Expert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Multi-Field with MoE inside the layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Conclusion
41
7.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
References
43
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
CONTENTS
A Code snippets
49
B
Extra Results
53
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis work focuses on the implementation of the Mixture of Experts (MoE) technique in
the domain of Document Extraction for Smartscan from Visma Machine Learning Assets [1],
[2] .
Smartscan is a tool to scan and extract information from unstructured invoices and receipts.
It leverages optical character recognition (OCR) and passes that info through a fine-tuned model
based on LayoutLM, augmented with Adapter modules. Smartscan processes more than 4 mil-
lion documents per month [3].
Despite the fact that Smartscan has been shown to achieve high levels of accuracy in the ex-
traction process for the majority of documents, variability in terms of accuracy and efficiency is
still exhibited for some domain-specific layouts and languages across diverse customer datasets.
These challenges are addressed in this thesis particularly with the evaluation of the Mixture
of Experts framework to assess its potential to extend adaptability. The emphasis is placed on
performances as opposed to the achievement of speed gains. Rather than relying on a single
model, here the problem space is split into specialized Experts that can focus on a particular
document type or regional format. This is implemented using a lightweight routing mecha-
nisms that dynamically selects the most relevant experts for each document, keeping the com-
putational cost comparable to the original model, while tailoring the extraction process to the
unique characteristics of each document.
To build this system in the best possible way in Chapter 2 a complete study of the related
work is presented. It starts with an analysis of the market motivation to this kind of product
in Section 2.1. It proceeds to a full investigation on the Mixture of Experts framework, in
Section 2.2, focusing on all the research that has already been done, and identifying which
solutions have the most potential to adapt to this setting. In Section 2.3 the current base model
named LayoutLM is studied. Section 2.4 presents a full description of the main Fine-Tuning
techniques as this is the starting point of the experiments. Section 2.5 discusses the topic of
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) which is the actual type of Fine-Tuning utilized for
the experiments. This latest section also explores the combination between Mixture of Experts
and Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning.
Chapter 3 presents important information on the setup of the experiments. Section 3.1
briefly explains how the experiments will be done. Section 3.2 explores the characteristics of
the data used in the experiments and adds information to the motivation of specifically these
experiments. Section 3.3 deeply explains the evaluation metrics used across the experiments.
In Chapter 4 the first experiments are introduced. These experiments focus on Mixture of
Experts to extract a single field and are directly built on top of the existing architecture. The
main goal of this chapter is to study the feasibility of the MoE framework in Smartscan. Two
main architectures are studied: Dense Routing in Section 4.1, where all experts are used, and
1
==PAGE:12==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Sparse Routing in Section 4.2 where only some experts are used. The results of this chapter are
very promising, with all results improving on the current architecture.
Chapter 5 explores how Mixture of Experts can specifically be used to improve perfor-
mances on the subdomains of Document Types and Countries. Section 5.1 addresses this prob-
lem starting from experts trained on only their subdomain and including a router on the com-
plete trained models. It also includes the baseline that will be used across this and the following
chapters. Section 5.2 focuses instead of using MoE inside the layers of the aforementioned
subdomain experts, in order to try to solve the same problem from a different perspective. Here
two different architectures have been tested, though at this point no architectural choice has
been able to outperform the baseline.
Chapter 6 investigates a different problem, where it has been tested whether the common
features of different fields can be leveraged by a MoE model to extract multiple fields simulta-
neously. Sections 6.1, and 6.2 explore two different architectures from the previous chapters.
While the models show to be learning simultaneously, the performances on the different fields
are very different from the baseline results. In no instance is the baseline outperformed.
In Chapter 7 the main conclusions are summarized. Directions for future work are outlined
in Section 7.1.
All experiments focus on changes on three levels: problem, starting point of the experts, and
architectures. Fig. 1.1 presents in a visual format all these experiments, where the different
transparency show the different focus and number of experiments in that specific setup. The
blue experiments include the initial experiments from Chapter 4 on a single field problem and
some short verification that the code was working for other setups. The orange experiments
outline the problem of Domain Experts as in Chapter 5, and show the different focus of different
architectures between Document Type Experts and Countries Experts. The green experiments,
instead, focus on the Multi Field problem of Chapter 6.
Figure 1.1: 3D Mapping of the experiments
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Document Extraction
Document extraction, particularly Intelligent Document Processing (IDP), represents a rapidly
growing technology sector that enables organizations to automate the capture, processing, and
analysis of document data. It uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML)
techniques to automatically extract valuable information from documents. In particular, it can
exploit optical character recognition (OCR) and natural language processing (NLP) systems
that can understand document layouts and contextualize information for tasks like scanning,
extraction of text information, understanding and categorization [4].
Fig. 2.1 shows the predicted growth and the main application sectors [5].
Figure 2.1: Market size and application sectors [5]
This growth is happening because of more investments in the digital transformation and a higher
demand for cheap and efficient solutions. For Europe, in particular, the growth is driven by the
banking, financial services, and insurance (BFSI) sector, which also has to adhere to stronger
regulations like the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Therefore more secure and
compliant solution are needed [6].
Moreover, from a technical standpoint, integration of Generative AI (GenAI) with in par-
ticular the use of large language models (LLMs) and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
can further increase the capabilities of these systems making them able to perform even more
difficult tasks with a higher accuracy.
2.2
Mixture of Experts
Mixture of Experts (MoE) is a framework built upon a fundamental yet powerful idea: de-
composing a complex problem into smaller, specialized tasks handled by distinct sub-models,
3
==PAGE:14==
4
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
termed experts. This approach enables efficient computation and improved model scalability
by dynamically allocating different experts to different parts of the input space [7]. The MoE
concept was initially introduced in the seminal work of Jacobs [8] and subsequently expanded
upon by Jordan [9]. Since then, it has undergone significant evolution, particularly within the
domain of deep learning. Recent advancements in this field have employed the MoE approach
to scale models efficiently while maintaining manageable computational costs.
In its most general form, one or more layers in a neural network are substituted with a
series of experts, along with a gating network or router that dynamically assigns inputs to the
most relevant experts [10]. Fig. 2.2 illustrates a basic MoE implementation, where a standard
multilayer perceptron (MLP) layer is substituted with E expert copies, each specializing in
different aspects of the input data. This mechanism enables the model to adapt dynamically,
activating only a subset of experts per input.
Figure 2.2: Example of basic MoE [11]
The MoE architecture provides a highly flexible and scalable solution for large-scale machine
learning applications, particularly in the domain of large language models (LLMs). This has
been instrumental in recent breakthroughs, as demonstrated in models such as Mixtral [12], and
DeepSeekMoE [13]. It is important to note that while MoE models increase the total number
of parameters relative to standard architectures, they maintain a similar computational cost per
input. This results in a model with performance comparable to a significantly larger dense
model but with reduced computational expenses.
However, a key challenge with MoE is the increase in storage requirements and memory
bandwidth, which can become a bottleneck in deployment. Addressing issues of load balancing
is also crucial for the efficient training of MoE models, with the aim of ensuring that all experts
contribute meaningfully to the learning process without overloading specific ones.Strategies to
mitigate these challenges, such as the imposition of limits on expert capacity and the introduc-
tion of balanced routing mechanisms, have been explored in recent literature.
A broader perspective on the evolution and research advancements in Mixture of Experts
is illustrated in Fig.2.3 which presents a taxonomy of MoE-related studies over the years. It
also shows, using the background color, which aspects have been more explored during the
following experiments.
==PAGE:15==
2.2. MIXTURE OF EXPERTS
5
Figure 2.3: Taxonomy on Mixture of Experts from [7]
==PAGE:16==
6
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Formally, a MoE network consists of N Expert Networks f1, ..., fN and a Gating Function
G. The gating function is usually a linear layer followed by a softmax. Each expert fi is
parameterized by Wi, takes the same input x as the other experts, and produces an output
fi(x; Wi). The Gating Function G is parameterized by Θ, and produces an output G(x; Θ). In
order to follow a consistent notation across the description, the notation is based on [7].
2.2.1
Dense and Sparse Mixture of Experts
A significant advancement in MoE models was achieved with the introduction of sparsely-gated
Mixture of Experts (MoE) models [14]. In a standard, or dense, MoE model, all experts are
activated for each input, with the router assigning different weight contributions to each expert.
While this can enhance prediction accuracy, it leads to substantial computational costs, making
it impractical for large-scale implementations.
A dense MoE model can be effective, for example, in a situation like a mixture of Low-Rank
Adaption (LoRA) [15] fine-tuning as the computational cost is relatively low [16].
The output of a dense layer like in Fig. 2.4 (a) is given by:
FMoE
dense(x; Θ; {Wi}N
i=1) =
N
X
i=1
G(x; Θ)i fi(x; Wi)
(2.2.1)
where
G(x; Θ)i = softmax(g(x; Θ))i =
exp(g(x; Θ)i)
PN
j=1 exp(g(x; Θ)j)
(2.2.2)
where g(x; Θ) is the gating value before the softmax operation.
Conversely, sparse MoE models selectively activate only a small subset of experts per input,
thereby significantly reducing computation while maintaining the benefits of specialization.
Typically, the top-k experts are chosen dynamically, with k often set to 1 [17] or 2, depending
on the application.
In sparse MoE, as it can be seen in Fig. 2.4 (b), the gating function changes:
G(x; Θ)i = softmax(TopK(g(x; Θ) + Rnoise, k))i
(2.2.3)
where
TopK(g(x; Θ), k))i =
(
g(x; Θ)i,
if g(x; Θ)i is in the top-k elements of g(x; Θ)
−∞,
otherwise
(2.2.4)
Rnoise is an optional noise that is believed to help in load balancing [14]; however, other studies
suggest it does not help improving performances [17].
Although sparsity has been shown to improve computational efficiency, it has also been demon-
strated to introduce a new challenge in the form of expert imbalance. This occurs when certain
experts are frequently selected whilst others are underutilized, resulting in uneven training and
reduced model robustness. In order to mitigate this challenge, additional loss terms are often
introduced with the aim of encouraging an even token distribution among experts. Further-
more, approaches such as the imposition of limits on the capacity of experts, as demonstrated in
GShard [18], assist in the effective distribution of workloads by capping the number of tokens
that each expert is permitted to process per batch.
==PAGE:17==
2.2. MIXTURE OF EXPERTS
7
Figure 2.4: Dense and Sparse MoE [7]
2.2.2
Experts
The incorporation of MoE into transformer-based architectures has been a conventional ap-
proach, whereby the feed-forward network (FFN) layers are substituted with multiple expert
FFNs. This method, facilitates the seamless integration of MoE into existing deep learning
pipelines. Fig. 2.5 provides an illustration of this substitution in a transformer encoder module.
Figure 2.5: Switch Encoder module with FFN MoE [17]
In the field of research, the exploration of incorporating MoE into other model components,
such as the attention mechanism, has been undertaken beyond FFNs. A promising direction is
the Mixture of Attention Heads [19], where different experts specialize in different attention
patterns. This approach enhances the model’s ability to capture diverse dependencies in data.
An illustration of this technique is presented in Fig. 2.6.
==PAGE:18==
8
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.6: Mixture of Attention Heads [19]
In the process of designing an MoE system, there are several crucial architectural choices to
be made, including the number and size of experts, the activation function, and the number of
expert layers. These decisions are highly task-dependent, and ongoing research continues to
refine best practices for different applications.
One innovative approach introduced by DeepSeekMoE [13] enhances expert specialization
while maintaining computational efficiency. This method finely segments the total number of
experts, N, into smaller sets of experts, mN, where each set has a size of N/m. The activation
of experts is selective, with only mK of them being activated for each input. Additionally,
a subset of experts, Ks, is designated as shared, ensuring that common knowledge is always
accessible. This strategy enhances performance while preserving efficiency. The architecture
of DeepSeekMoE is visualized in Fig. 2.7.
2.2.3
Training Strategies
While a MoE model could be trained end-to-end, a lot of effort is being put in its training and
inference strategy to maximize the efficiency of this technique while making sure to get the best
results. The new baseline, as shown before in Fig. 2.2, is to re-use the trained dense block by
duplicating the expert and adding the router [11]. This is part of the Dense-to-Sparse training
strategy, where indeed the starting point is a dense model that is later turned into a sparse version
to exploit their advantages. Another example is the DS-MoE, where the training is dense but
the inference is sparse, activating only the top-K [20].
An different notable approach is the Sparse-to-Dense, as Switch Transformers where start-
ing from a large spare model a smaller dense one is created to achieve parameter efficiency
[17]. A further interesting example is OneS, which replicating how a student learns from multi-
ple teachers (i.e. experts), is able to gather knowledge from pre-trained MoE and then fine-tune
the dense model (student) [21].
Ongoing research is exploring dynamic adaptation techniques such as adding or pruning
experts during training, merging underutilized experts and using novel routing loss functions.
These techniques are designed to enhance training stability and final performance further [7].
==PAGE:19==
2.3. LAYOUTLM
9
Figure 2.7: DeepSeekMoE architecture [13]
These innovations continue to push the boundaries of what MoE architectures can achieve in
large-scale, real-world deployments.
2.3
LayoutLM
In document understanding, useful information is not only the text of the documents but also
layout information and potentially the image itself. To achieve this, LayoutLM has been intro-
duced [22].
Its architecture is displayed in Fig. 2.8. This architecture integrates 2−D layout and image
embeddings in the original BERT architecture [23]. Indeed, as explained in the paper, docu-
ments often feature “Document Layout Information” where the relative positions of words are
important for the semantic representation, like in a key-value pair, the value is more likely to
be to the right or below the key; and “Visual Information” where visual elements like bold,
underline and italic are important hints for the tasks.
The 2−D position embeddings are related to the relative position in the document and they
are originated from the bounding boxes coordinates. Image embeddings, instead, split the image
into several pieces based on bounding boxes.
==PAGE:20==
10
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.8: LayoutLM architecture [22]
Following the great importance of this model, LayoutLMv2 has been introduced [24]. It outper-
forms LayoutLM by including two new pretraining tasks: text-image alignment and text-image
matching, that are added to the existing masked visual-language modeling task. It also includes
a spatial-aware self-attention mechanism within the Transformer architecture that can help in
completely understanding how different text blocks behave with reference to relative positional
relationships.
2.4
Fine-Tuning
Fine-tuning is a standard Transfer Learning strategy in modern Machine Learning, especially
in Natural Language Processing (NLP). Transfer Learning is the broader approach of sharing
knowledge of a model trained on one task, and adapted to solve a different but related task [25].
Fine-tuning is a specific method within transfer learning where a pre-trained model is further
trained on a new dataset to adapt it to a new task. It is, therefore, an essential technique to tailor
a pretrained model to a specific downstream task. The main advantage is that it does not require
a specific architecture design for the new task, it can just re-train the model’s parameters on the
new dataset [26].
In the traditional (full) fine-tuning, all model parameters are updated, which can be very
computationally expensive. It also requires to store and compute a new copy of the model
for each task, as it does not allow for weight sharing. Full fine-tuning has also been the first
implementation of this approach on Transformer-based models, which have been introduced
in [27]. In the full fine-tuning all model parameters are initialized as the pre-trained model
weights, and they are re-trained on the new dataset. This approach, although quite unfeasible,
when used usually gave good results [28].
An alternative approach, called Feature Extraction, part of the Transfer Learning approach,
exploits the frozen pre-trained model. It takes its output as features an trains a new classifier to
the new task. While this approach is cheaper it also usually gets less good results [29].
Another solution, which obtains very similar results to full fine-tuning with far less resources
is Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT), which will be talked more in details in Section 2.5.
==PAGE:21==
2.5. PARAMETER-EFFICIENT FINE-TUNING
11
2.5
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) are techniques to fine-tune large models by only hav-
ing to train a small percentage of the parameters. The goal is to adapt large trained models to
other similar tasks in an efficient and cheap way.
PEFT methods have achieved great results in fine-tuning of big models, however they may
struggle in generalizing to multiple tasks due to the limited amount of trainable parameters and
the risk of catastrophic forgetting. This relates to forgetting what was learned after new data is
added. To adapt PEFT methods to these new lines of models, the use of them in a mixture of
experts approach has emerged, called Mixture of Parameter-Efficient Experts (MoPE).
2.5.1
Adapters
One of the ways of achieving this is through adapters, small layers that include a down-projection
to a smaller dimension, a non-linear operation, and an up-projection back to the original di-
mension [29]. The layer is shown in Fig. 2.9. These adapters are currently used in Visma’s
Smartscan. During training, or fine-tuning, the model’s parameters are frozen and only these
adapters are trained.
Figure 2.9: Adapter Layer architecture [29]
2.5.2
Low-Rank Adaptation
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) is another PEFT technique which introduces two low-rank ma-
trices to receive incremental updates associated with the task-specific fine-tuning. These matri-
ces are the only updated parts during the fine-tuning thus achieving good results with a small
==PAGE:22==
12
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
computational cost. This approach is said to improve on the Adapters technique for having no
additional inference latency [15]. Indeed, even if the Adapter layer has very few parameters it
creates a bottleneck as it needs to be processed sequentially, and this does not allow to exploit
all benefits of parallelization. Instead, with LoRA the learned weights can be merged to the
model weights, thus not introducing any latency.
For a pre-trained weight matrix W0 ∈Rd×k (which can be Wq, Wk, Wv in the Attention
module) its updates are represented with a low rank decomposition:
W0 + ∆W = W0 + BA
(2.5.1)
Where B ∈Rd×r and A ∈Rr×k, and the rank r << min(d, k). During training W0 is frozen
while A and B contain the parameters that are trainable. For a forward pass h = W0x the
decomposition yields:
h = W0x + ∆Wx = W0x + BAx
(2.5.2)
In this implementation A is initialized with a random Gaussian while B is zero, so that at the
start ∆W = BA is zero.
When applied to Transformer models only attention weights have been adapted to LoRA for
the adaptation to downstream tasks.
This setup can also be used in MoE approach. While basic solutions just plug-in LoRA
experts, MixLoRA, for example, fuses LoRA experts with the shared Feed-Forward Network
(FFN) layer [30].
The architecture of MixLoRA can be seen in Fig. 2.10.
Figure 2.10: MixLoRA architecture [30]
2.5.3
Mixture of Parameter-Efficient Experts
Mixture of Parameter-Efficient Experts (MoPE) is the line of research of specifically using MoE
framework with experts constructed with PEFT techniques [7]. The goal is to get the best of
both aspects: the flexibility of MoE and the efficiency of PEFT.
This can be implemented in all parts of the network: on the Self-Attention (SA), in the FFN,
on both FFN and Attention but separately, and on every layer treating the entire Transformer
==PAGE:23==
2.5. PARAMETER-EFFICIENT FINE-TUNING
13
block as a single part.
When implemented in the Self-Attention mechanism, it can be applied to the Query, Key, Value,
and Output projection modules, individually or in various combinations. Only the used param-
eters are updated while the rest is frozen in the fine-tuning phase.
Following the example in Fig. 2.11 (a) where it is applied to Key and Value, the mathemat-
ical formalization is as follows. In order to write it some definitions are needed: N number of
experts; dhead the dimensions in the Multi-Head Attention mechanism (where the input is split
and processed independently); Q, K, V represent the Query, Key, Value modules.
SAMoE(x) = softmax
 
Q · (KT + PN
i=1 x ∆Wk
i · Gk(x)i)
√dhead
!
·
 
V +
N
X
i=1
x ∆Wv
i · Gv(x)i
!
(2.5.3)
Where Wk and Gk represent the parameter efficient expert and its gating function for the Key
module, similarly for Value Wv and Gv. This obviously follows regular attention principles,
where Attention scores are computed by the dot product of Query and Key, they are then com-
puted into weights by the softmax, which are used to get the output by doing the product with
the Value [27].
Relevant frameworks that adopt this strategy are MoELoRA which treats LoRA adapters
as experts and leverages contrastive learning to make them learn distinct features [31], Mod-
uleFormer which uses a load-balancing (maximizing the Mutual Information between tokens
and modules) during pre-training and a concentration loss during fine-tuning to remove unused
experts [32], SiRA which uses a sparse approach with dropout [33].
It can also be applied to the Feed-Forward Network part of the Transformer block. Following
the example in Fig. 2.11 (b) it can expressed as:
FFNMoE(x′) = FFN(x′) +
N
X
i=1
x′ ∆Wffn
i
· Gffn(x′)i
(2.5.4)
where
x′ = LayerNorm(SA(x) + x)
(2.5.5)
Similarly as before, Wffn and Gffn are the parameter efficient expert and the gating function
of the FFN layer. LayerNorm is Layer Normalization, introduced by [34].
Relevant studies that adopt this strategy are LoRAMoE which categorizes experts into
groups for global knowledge and for the tasks to avoid world-knowledge forgetting [35], AdaMix
which achieves great results using MoE and only 0.1-0.2% of the pre-trained model’s parame-
ters and in inference weights are merged to reduce storage cost [36].
Another approach, as depicted in Fig. 2.11 (c), involves using two separate sets of experts in
each Transformer block, one for the Attention mechanism and one for the FFN (or output) part.
Formally, it can be expressed as:
y = LayerNorm(x′ + FFNMoE(x′))
(2.5.6)
x′ = LayerNorm(SAMoE(x) + x)
(2.5.7)
where y is the final output.
A relevant study of this technique introduces two frameworks, which use a combination of
==PAGE:24==
14
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
LoRA and (IA)3 vectors at both locations with a dense and Top-K router, respectively called
MoLORA and MoV [37]. (IA)3 vectors are another PEFT method which introduces three new
learned vectors lk ∈Rdk, lv ∈Rdv, lff ∈Rdff which rescale keys and values in the Attention
part and in the position-wise feed-forward networks in the FFN part [38]. At the Attention part
it can be written as:
SA(IA)3 = softmax
Q (lk ⊙KT)
√dk

(lv ⊙V)
(2.5.8)
where ⊙represents element-wise multiplication. In the FFN part it can be expressed as:
FFN(IA)3 = (lff ⊙γ (W1x))W2
(2.5.9)
where γ is the feed-forward network nonlinearity and W1, W2 are the frozen weights of the
feed-forward layers in the pretrained model.
The last way as MoPE can be applied is considering the Transformer Layer as a single element,
capturing the complete dynamics of the system. It is presented in Fig. 2.11 (d) and can be
formalized as:
y = LayerNorm(x′ + FFN(x′)) +
N
X
i=1
x∆Wlayer
i
· Glayer(x)i
(2.5.10)
where
x′ = LayerNorm(SA(x) + x)
(2.5.11)
Here ∆Wlayer and Glayer are the parameter-efficient expert and gating function. A relevant
example of this is MoLE which treats each layer of trained LoRAs as an independent expert
and only trains the gating to determine the optimal combination of weights [16].
==PAGE:25==
2.5. PARAMETER-EFFICIENT FINE-TUNING
15
Figure 2.11: Implementations of MoPE [7]
==PAGE:26==
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Methods
3.1
Methodology of Experiments
The current implementation of Visma’s Smartscan uses a fine-tuned version of LayoutLM with
a series of Adapter Layers. Different models are fine-tuned for each individual field to extract
and then they are combined into a single model for actual use.
The experiments build on top of the implementation and new fine-tune runs are performed,
on a single field as starting point.
All fine-tuning experiments are done with a GPU A-100 80 GB on a virtual machine.
3.2
Data
The data used for the experiments includes the Optical Character Recognition (OCR) and the
manual annotated labels for all fields. The OCR data is the extracted text of an image/pdf
potentially, like here, with information of where in the document that text was found as this is
particularly useful to the LayoutLM model.
The data is already separated in Train, Validation and Test datasets. It includes 4191 doc-
uments for training, 1407 documents for validation, and 2126 documents in test. The training
and validation datasets are processed before each run to only keep the entirety of the documents
with an actual value for the interested field, Positive Examples and up to 15% of those docu-
ments without that field present, Negative Examples. This is a particularly useful technique for
fields that only appear in a small number of documents. The model is induced to answer for all
fields in this way, otherwise it is very likely that the model will never predict a field that is not
frequent.
The data is believed to be very different in layout. An example is shown in Fig. 3.1 which
illustrates the possibility of a receipt and an invoice appearing in different forms. This difference
particularly motivates the experiments in Chapter 5 where having specific experts for these
differences may avoid having to consider them in the creation of datasets. In Chapter 5 the data
has been divided according to Table 3.1, showing training data, where it can be noted how the
two divisions are quite different, for example some groups of countries have more Invoices than
Receipts while for others is the opposite, supporting how the two divisions are both relevant to
investigate.
17
==PAGE:28==
18
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
Benelux
Nordics
German
East Europe
South Europe
Rest of the World
Total
Invoice
535
441
73
410
195
229
1883
Receipt
283
378
202
312
340
326
1841
Credit Note
125
57
28
18
21
11
260
Debit Note
176
12
8
5
0
6
207
Total
1119
888
311
745
556
572
4191
Table 3.1: Train Data Distribution
Figure 3.1: Receipt and Invoice
3.3
Evaluation Metrics
The evaluation is one of the most important parts of the thesis. It is necessary to understand
how different models perform and to analyze the results.
The metrics are based on these common confusion matrix variables.
• TPc : True Positives (Correct) - the field exists in the document and the model predicted
it correctly
• TPi : True Positives (Incorrect) - the field exists in the document but the model predicted
the wrong value
• FP : False Positives - the model predicted a field that it does not exist in the document
• FN : False Negatives - the field exists in the document but the model made no prediction
==PAGE:29==
3.3. EVALUATION METRICS
19
• TN : True Negatives - the field does not exist in the document and the model made no
prediction
As illustrated in Fig. 3.2, the above values are employed in the confusion matrices. These
matrices are used to present the results of the experiments in the following chapters. The green
section counts the True Positive (Correct) documents, and the blue section the True Negative
indicate when the model is correct. Instead, the red section counts the False Negatives which
are regarded as being of a lesser severity in comparison to the orange section counting the True
Positive (Incorrect) and the purple one counting the False Positives.
Figure 3.2: Example result for metrics
The metrics are the following five. While the first four are quite common, the last one has been
designed to better evaluate this task.
• Precision measures how accurate the model’s predictions are, meaning evaluating how
often a prediction is correct when the model makes a prediction.
Precision =
TPc
TPc + TPi + FP
(3.3.1)
• Recall measures how often the prediction is correct when there is a field that can be
predicted.
Recall =
TPc
TPc + TPi + FN
(3.3.2)
• Support measures the actual number of times in which the true label is known
Support = TPc + TPi + FN
(3.3.3)
• Suggestion Rate measures the percentage of when the model makes a prediction, inde-
pendently if correct or incorrect.
Suggestion Rate =
TPc + TPi + FP
TPc + TPi + FP + FN + TN
(3.3.4)
• Work Done measures the efficiency gain of using the model, meaning how much human
work is saved or created by using the model’s predictions.
Work Done =
TPc −TPi −FP
TPc + TPi + FN + FP
(3.3.5)
==PAGE:30==
20
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
The Work Done metric is particularly useful as it:
• Rewards correct predictions (+1)
• Penalizes incorrect predictions (-1)
• Penalizes unnecessary predictions (-1)
• Is neutral on missing predictions (0)
• Ranges from -1 (creating more work) to 1 (saving maximum work)
This balanced approach helps evaluate the real-world utility of the model.
The Work Done is the main metric of interest, and it is the monitored metric during the
validation phase.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Initial Experiments
In this first series of experiments, multiple setups of Mixture of Experts are applied for the ex-
traction of a single field. The main goal is to prove if and how beneficial this approach can be
on the specific task. Multiple routers and different sets of parameters have been tried to have a
direct comparison among them and against the model trained without MoE on the same data.
In these experiments two adapters per layer are substituted by MoE, both at the attention part
and at the output part. And the same architecture is repeated in both locations. Therefore, each
adapter is substituted by a router and multiple copies of the original adapters that are combined
differently in every experiment. Little changes also include the use of the LayerNorm. Keeping
it as similar to the original architectures without super diverse setups have the goal of giving
hints on the usefulness of MoE in this task, without aiming necessarily for the best results that
could be obtained through a complete analysis.
4.1
Dense
The first experiments included a dense MoE layer consisting of four equal adapters with a router
whose weights were trained during fine-tuning alongside the adapters. This router works by as-
signing different weight contributions to each expert adapter. This strategy, while also resulting
in a simple baseline, is also based on mixture of Low-Rank Adaption (LoRA) [15], where a
dense MoE model can be effective.
Early experiments have been done on 2 fields from Visma’s Smartscan ”total incl vat” and ”to-
tal excl vat”. The results presented will be for ”total excl vat” as more tests have been done
for this field, so they can be more complete. The first one is one of those that already provides
very good results while the latter is one of those that is not always perfect. The experiments
show the models fine-tuned on these 2 fields with and without the MoE modifications to serve
as first tests and baseline.
For completeness, and as this is the first experiment, the entire code of the Router, MoE setup,
and individual Adapter are reported in the Appendix A.
Here the Adapters are copied and duplicated four times, each keeping its own LayerNorm;
then their output is combined through a weighted sum. Then, a single common LayerNorm is
introduced instead of the adapters’.
The initial results are very similar to the original non-MoE setup and this is probably caused by
21
==PAGE:32==
22
CHAPTER 4. INITIAL EXPERIMENTS
the Expert collapse phenomenon, where an expert is given more and more importance (weight in
dense, selected in sparse). Here, as a single expert for each layer takes very close to 1 weight, as
shown in validation for an example layer in Fig. 4.2, the behavior is very similar to non-MoE.
The resulting plots can be seen in Fig. 4.1, which compares the confusion matrices of these
experiments as introduced in Section 3.3. In this figure, the original non-MoE architecture is
compared to two MoE setups, one with each adapter keeping its own LayerNorm and the other
where only a single common LayerNorm is included after the weighted sum of the outputs of
the experts and the routing weights. As the single LayerNorm option performs slightly better,
this choice will be used throughout the next experiments. Numerically, Table 4.1 shows the
information, in particular reporting the Work Done values on the test set.
Figure 4.1: Non-MoE and Dense-Router MoE Comparison
Router
LayerNorm
Number of Experts
Test Work Done
Non-MoE
-
-
0.760
Dense Router
Expert Level
4
0.778
Dense Router
MoE Level
4
0.780
Table 4.1: Non-MoE and Dense-Router MoE Comparison
This choice of the model to basically give weight equal to 1 to always the same expert may
be justified by the fact that the task is not complex enough to need multiple experts, or it may
be that the model is always giving more importance to the same expert as it is slightly better
than the others making it even more better than the others but losing the principles of MoE.
Figure 4.2: Validation Routing Weights
==PAGE:33==
4.1. DENSE
23
To address this potential issue and reduce expert collapse a balancing loss is introduced.
This loss uses the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to measure how far the actual expert
allocation distribution is from an uniform distribution, as suggested in [39].
Lbalance = DKL(p||q) =
N
X
i=1
p(i) log p(i)
q(i)
(4.1.1)
Where:
• p(i) is the mean probability of using expert i across the batch,
• q(i) = 1
N is the uniform distribution (our ideal target),
• N is the number of experts
Since qi = 1
N for all i (uniform distribution), we can simplify:
DKL(p||q) =
N
X
i=1
pi log
pi
1
N

(4.1.2)
DKL(p||q) =
N
X
i=1
pi log (pi · N)
(4.1.3)
Using logarithm properties:
DKL(p||q) =
N
X
i=1
pi log(pi) +
N
X
i=1
pi log(N)
(4.1.4)
Since PN
i=1 pi = 1 (probability distribution property):
DKL(p||q) =
N
X
i=1
pi log(pi) + log(N)
(4.1.5)
Therefore, minimizing DKL(p||q) is equivalent to minimizing PN
i=1 pi log(pi), which is the
negative entropy of distribution p.
The final loss combines the main task loss with the balance loss from all adapter layers, α
is the hyperparameter representing the weight of this loss on the total loss calculation:
Ltotal = Ltask + α
X
l
L(l)
balance
(4.1.6)
The goal is to minimize the divergence which directs towards the uniform distribution, which
has an higher entropy. This is a common choice in the MoE research, as used, in slightly
different ways in [40], [41], [42]. This solution may also have its drawbacks as by constraining
all experts to very similar weights, it does not allow experts to specialize a lot.
The experiments with this balance loss included, show very different results on the routing
weights, with them being very close to 0.25, as seen in Fig. 4.4 for validation data, but the over-
all predictions are numerically quite similar to the previous tests but different in type. Results
are shown in Fig. 4.3 and Table 4.2, where the first thing that is noticed is that the True negative
are more but the True Positive Correct are less.
==PAGE:34==
24
CHAPTER 4. INITIAL EXPERIMENTS
Figure 4.3: Non-MoE and Dense-Router with Balance Loss MoE Comparison
Router
LayerNorm
Number of Experts
α
Test Work Done
Non-MoE
-
-
-
0.760
Dense Router
MoE Level
4
0.01
0.783
Dense Router
MoE Level
4
0.001
0.772
Table 4.2: Non-MoE and Dense-Router with Balance Loss MoE Comparison
Figure 4.4: Validation Routing Weights example with Balance loss
Despite the numerical results slightly improve on the previous ones, these forced weights may
prevent specialization. Therefore, to address this potential finding, a new loss function called
Expert Diversity Loss has been implemented. It focuses on encouraging experts to specialize
more.
It uses cosine similarity to measure how similar the parameters between experts are [43].
First, for each expert i, we extract its parameters wi, in particular the up-projection weights,which
are most responsible for the expert’s specialization, are used. Then Cosine Similarity is com-
puted: each parameter vector is normalized
ˆwi =
wi
||wi||2
(4.1.7)
Then, pairwise similarity is computed:
Si,j = ˆwi · ˆwj
(4.1.8)
This gives a similarity matrix S ∈RN×N, where N is the number of experts. Next, masking of
==PAGE:35==
4.2. SPARSE
25
the self-similarity is applied through masking the diagonal to ignore it:
˜Si,j = Si,j · (1 −δi,j)
(4.1.9)
Where δi,j is the Kronecker Delta which equals 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise. Then mean similarity
can be computed. The diversity loss is the mean of all pairwise similarities:
Ldiversity =
1
N(N −1)
N
X
i=1
N
X
j=1,j̸=i
˜Si,j
(4.1.10)
Finally, the final loss combines the KL-divergence for balance and this parameter similarity
for diversity loss. It uses a weight β for this last loss, while now the α parameter weights the
entirety of these auxiliary losses:
Ltotal = Ltask + α · (Lbalance + β · Ldiversity)
(4.1.11)
This approach encourages experts to learn parameters that point in different directions in the
parameter space, even when routing weights are forced to be uniform.
The results of this last Dense experiment are presented in Fig. 4.5 and Table 4.3. Again,
they are very similar with a behavior a bit in the middle of the previous two groups. In this
setup this extra loss does not seem to be very beneficial, and this is probably due to the very
little weight considering the small values of α and β.
Figure 4.5: Non-MoE and Dense-Router with Balance and Diversity Losses MoE Comparison
Router
LayerNorm
Number of Experts
α
β
Test Work Done
Non-MoE
-
-
-
-
0.760
Dense Router
MoE Level
4
0.001
0.001
0.772
Table 4.3: Non-MoE and Dense-Router with Balance and Diversity Losses MoE Comparison
4.2
Sparse
To further try to specialize experts a sparse approach has been taken. This has been done
building on top of the previous losses as the Expert collapse issue can have a larger impact in a
Sparse MoE.
==PAGE:36==
26
CHAPTER 4. INITIAL EXPERIMENTS
In the this small set of experiments, first a Sparse approach has been tried where only one
expert is selected at every decision and it is given full weight. This approach allows, especially
in inference, to have almost original speed results.
After this, the approach by DeepSeekMoE [13], where an expert is shared and always used
in combination with the highest remaining expert, has been tried. In this case the combina-
tion is inspired by DeepSeek-V3 [44] where they are done sequentially and combined with the
Sigmoid.
Fig. 4.6 and Table 4.4 compare the results of using 5 total experts, 1 shared and 4 that use
a Sparse router with Top-K = 1 . This experiments, which yields results similar to the previous
outcomes, has the main advantage that is faster in inference than the previous Dense MoE, as
only 2 experts are active every time. However, it comes at the cost of higher memory required
by the whole model.
Figure 4.6: Non-MoE and Shared MoE Comparison
Router
LayerNorm
Number of Experts
α
β
Test Work Done
Non-MoE
-
-
-
-
0.760
Shared Router
MoE Level
1 + 4 (K=1)
0.001
0.001
0.778
Table 4.4: Non-MoE and Shared MoE Comparison
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Domain Experts MoE
After seeing the results of the previous section, suggesting that Mixture of Experts has the
potential to improve on the current setup, the interest has shifted into solving an actual problem.
Indeed, for different document types like receipts and invoices, and for different countries the
results are different. Therefore, it is valuable to analyze whether domain experts can share
knowledge to improve answers in all domains. For example, Fig. 5.1 shows how different the
predictions can be on different document types because of their different characteristics. This
example shows the different results on the field Receiver Address for Invoices and Receipts, as
in receipts this field is missing more frequently.
Figure 5.1: Baseline Comparison on Invoices and Receipts
This would also assist the Visma Machine Learning Assets team in reducing the need to
carefully balance data across various categories. By starting from a number of trained, more
specialized experts, the team would be able to optimize this aspect.
For example, while all invoices look similar, some receipts are actually pretty close to in-
voices, hence an invoice expert may help these particular receipts.
To clearly state the problem and the goal the following research question has been proposed:
Research Question
Can Mixture of Experts be used to improve the results in cases where they are different
for categories of documents?
The goal here is to create domain experts and to later train a router on top of them to share this
domain knowledge.
27
==PAGE:38==
28
CHAPTER 5. DOMAIN EXPERTS MOE
5.1
MoE on the output
In this first phase, as mentioned above, the router is added on the experts final outputs. This
way the trained models are frozen, and the MoE is only done on their complete output.
5.1.1
Baseline
The first step, which is later shared, is to fine-tune a baseline. It is also necessary to have a
specific baseline for this project to have coherence with the data used. To do so, a subset of
5 fields has been chosen. These are some fields where the difference in performance across
categories is relevant, and it is hypothesized this setup may improve them. The 5 fields are:
• Supplier Address
• Receiver Address
• IBAN
• Total VAT
• Payment Method
It is worth noting that Payment Method is a categorical field, while the others require an extrac-
tion task.
With the current architecture the model is fine-tuned, individually, on the 5 fields. This
represents the baseline for the project.
5.1.2
Document Type
As second step a document type expert/baseline is created. To do this the training and validation
data have been split according to document types. There are 4 document types in the sets:
• Invoice
• Receipt
• Credit Note
• Debit Note
For each subset a new fine-tuning is done on each of the 5 fields, this is done keeping the same
code but hyperparameters, like early stopping patience and batch size, can be adapted based on
previous experience on the fields and amount of documents for each category.
After the training, the comparison is done looking at the document type results of the doc-
ument type expert and the baseline. For example, Fig. 5.2 compares the results on predicting
IBAN on invoice test data between the baseline model (Subsection 5.1.1) and the model trained
on invoice data.
==PAGE:39==
5.1. MOE ON THE OUTPUT
29
Figure 5.2: Document Type Model vs Baseline Comparison
However, being the baseline better than the specialized model, it suggests this solution may not
be the best solution. This is indeed the first hint that the model may prefer more general and in
larger amount data rather than less, more specialized data.
Nevertheless, a router has been trained on these complete models that are kept frozen. This
has been done taking the 4 models, one for document type, fine-tuned on the same field, and
adding a router trained using the entire dataset. Despite multiple versions of the router, fol-
lowing the ideas from Chapter 4, none of them achieves better results than the baseline from
Subsection 5.1.1. These results can be seen in Fig. 5.3 and Table 5.1. In this figure the baseline
is compared to a Dense Router model without baseline as expert, to a Dense Router model with
baseline as expert, and a Shared Router model with the baseline as the Shared expert. Unsur-
prisingly, the models which include the baseline achieve better results than the one without. No
model outperforms the baseline, probably because no expert alone outperforms it on its domain.
It is worth noting that, as expected given the above comparison, when the baseline is an expert,
it is the one with the highest weights. In the first dense MoE experiment, in which the baseline
is not included, the Invoice and Receipt experts are given the highest weights. These routing
behaviors are shown in Fig. 5.4.
Figure 5.3: Baseline and MoE on complete experts Comparison
==PAGE:40==
30
CHAPTER 5. DOMAIN EXPERTS MOE
Router
Baseline as Expert
Test Work Done
Baseline
-
0.844
Dense Router
No
0.795
Shared Router
Yes
0.833
Dense Router
Yes
0.841
Table 5.1: Baseline and MoE on complete experts Comparison
Figure 5.4: Comparison of Routing Weights for document type with and without the baseline
as expert
5.1.3
Countries
Similarly to Subsection 5.1.2, a new split has been created. This hopes to find a different
subdivision of the dataset that can potentially better specialize on differences in the data, to
serve as better experts for the Mixture of Experts approach. The same five fields are analyzed
in order to keep the same baseline and have more comparable results. The data have been
manually divided in groups of countries with considerations of: number of total groups to be
created, number of data entries for each country, number of data entries for each potential group,
language/culture similarities, geographical position. Although, of course, this is not guaranteed
to be the best choice, the following division has been introduced:
• Benelux
• Nordics
• German speaking countries
• East Europe
• South Europe
• Rest of the world
==PAGE:41==
5.1. MOE ON THE OUTPUT
31
The comparison against the baseline has been carried out as before and the baseline is consis-
tently better than the countries models. Fig. 5.5 shows an example where the Benelux model
and the baseline model are compared when predicting IBAN on Benelux test data.
Figure 5.5: Countries Model vs Baseline Comparison
To have a complete discussion and comparison, also here a router has been trained on the
complete, fine-tuned, frozen models per group of countries. The results presented here do not
use the baseline as expert as they are already more and it is more relevant to analyze how the
model treats them. In Fig. 5.6 and Table 5.2 a Dense Router model is compared to the baseline.
This time the True Positive (Correct) are slightly improved but at the cost of a larger increase in
False Positives. Here the German speaking countries and the South Europe experts are almost
not used with a routing weight below 0.05 in validation as shown in Fig. 5.7.
Figure 5.6: Baseline and MoE on complete experts per countries Comparison
Router
Baseline as Expert
Test Work Done
Baseline
-
0.828
Dense Router
No
0.760
Table 5.2: Baseline and MoE on complete experts per countries Comparison
Figure 5.7: Validation routing weights
==PAGE:42==
32
CHAPTER 5. DOMAIN EXPERTS MOE
5.2
MoE per layer
This new technique uses the same principles and reasoning as before, but puts the MoE router
on every layer, rather than on the output of the complete model. These experiments are based
on Subsection 2.5.3, not in the positioning of the elements but when the adapters are used as
experts. This approach is intended to utilize the specialized models as experts in a more realistic
MoE framework. The key difference is that these models are not trained from scratch; rather,
they are already experts in specific subdomains. This is more in line with the team’s hopes for
this group of experiments.
5.2.1
MoE on Output
This series of experiments are still compared to the baseline of Subsection 5.1.1 and are mainly
based on the countries experts. In this phase multiple approaches have been tested and the re-
sults of each test may have had an influence on subsequent tests, in order to try to maximize the
efficiency of tests.
For consistency with the baseline the hyper-parameters of early stopping and learning rate have
not been changed. Batch size has only been reduced when using the layer as expert because of
memory issues.
For example, the first two experiments have been done with dense routers, where in one the
MoE was put twice per layer, at the Attention level and at the Output level, like in Chapter 4,
while in the second the MoE was only put at the Output level, like important works like Mixtral
[12] and Deepseek-MoE [13]. As the experiment with a single router per layer performed best,
this approach has been kept for the following experiments. While this solution may not be the
best for all routing strategies, it reduces the number of experiments.
Also it is been quickly noticed that keeping the Adapters frozen and only training the routers,
when positioning them at the Output level, does not get to any meaningful results, with the work
done metric at below zero values. Therefore, all experiments presented below are done with
Adapters unfrozen, when this is the positioning of the MoE.
The following routing approaches have been tested:
• Dense Router: this has been tried in two different versions, named Dense and Simple in
the result plots. The Simple version is a normal linear layer with softmax as it is normal
practice in the literature [16]. The Dense version replaces it with a two-layer network
with GELU activation function in between [45], [46].
• Sparse Top-K Router: in this architecture only a subsection of the experts are used at each
stage. This works by just taking the K routers with highest routing weights and rescale
them with a softmax [17], [14]. It has been used with K=1 and K=2.
• Shared Router: this architecture is similar to the Sparse but one or more experts are always
chosen; while for the others a sparse approach is used. Here used weights are rescaled
with a softmax [13]. This is used with the shared expert to be the Baseline.
• Dynamic Router: this router uses Tsallis entropy on the normal router outputs to select
how many experts are activated each time [47], [48]. It uses a threshold to decide whether
to use a dense or sparse approach.
==PAGE:43==
5.2. MOE PER LAYER
33
• Hierarchical Router: this approach uses two routers where the first classifies the input in
abstract learned categories, and the second uses these categories for the real routing [49].
• Gating Router: this router substitutes the standard linear layer of the router with a set of
learnable parameters one per expert. This learns a static representation, without analyzing
the inputs.
To encourage the model to use country experts more differently, a new loss function has been
introduced. It uses entropy to penalize uneven expert usage. This is, of course, a secondary loss
and does not prevent actual learning.
Let K be the number of country experts (excluding the baseline expert in the shared setup),
and let ci be the total routing weight assigned to expert i over the batch. The usage fraction for
each expert is:
pi =
ci
PK
j=1 cj
(5.2.1)
The entropy of the expert usage distribution is:
H = −
K
X
i=1
pi log(pi + ϵ)
(5.2.2)
where ϵis a small constant to avoid log(0).
The maximum possible entropy (for a uniform distribution) is:
Hmax = log K
(5.2.3)
The normalized entropy is:
ˆH =
H
Hmax
(5.2.4)
The diversity loss is then defined as:
Ldiversity = λ

1 −ˆH

(5.2.5)
where λ is a small weight (e.g., self.diversity weight).
This loss is small when the expert usage is diverse (high entropy). It is large when the
routing is concentrated on a few experts (low entropy). This encourages the router to use all
experts more evenly, thereby promoting diversity in expert selection.
The main results of this set of experiments using MoE at the Output part of each layer are
presented in Fig. 5.8 and Table 5.3. The complete results of the finished tests are included in
the Appendix B in Fig. B.1 and Table B.1. The results presented here include the baseline, two
models with Simple router, one with the baseline as expert one without, a Sparse router model
with K=1 and a Shared router model using the baseline as shared expert and K=2. None of
the models outperforms the baseline, with the ones using the baseline showing better results. It
must be noted that using also the results in Appendix B, a short study on more complex routers,
like the Dense and the Hierarchical, and easier like Simple and Gating has been done, but this
does not seem to be relevant to achieve better results.
==PAGE:44==
34
CHAPTER 5. DOMAIN EXPERTS MOE
Figure 5.8: Baseline and MoE in adapters per countries Comparison
Router
Baseline as Expert
Diversity Loss used
Test Work Done
Baseline
-
-
0.828
Simple
No
No
0.690
Simple
Yes
No
0.713
Sparse k-1
No
No
0.665
Shared k-2
Yes
Yes
0.753
Table 5.3: Baseline and MoE in adapters per countries Comparison
5.2.2
MoE on Entire Layer
After the latest experiments gave not ideal results, a new approach has been tried. This is based
on Subsection 2.5.3 where the entire layer is treated as expert.
For these experiments that batch had to be reduced to 64, as with the architecture the entire
model has to be loaded in memory. The routers remain the same.
The results are presented in Fig. 5.9 and Table 5.4. They include the baseline, two models
with Simple router, one with the baseline as expert one without, a Dense router model with the
baseline as expert and a Shared router model using the baseline as shared expert and K=2. None
of the models outperforms the baseline, with the ones using the Simple router showing better
results. Notably here all models improve in the True Positive (Correct) but at the cost of higher
False Positives.
==PAGE:45==
5.2. MOE PER LAYER
35
Figure 5.9: Baseline and MoE on full layers per countries Comparison
Router
Baseline as Expert
Test Work Done
Baseline
-
0.828
Dense
Yes
0.745
Simple
No
0.805
Simple
Yes
0.818
Shared k-2
Yes
0.773
Table 5.4: Baseline and MoE on full layers per countries Comparison
This set of experiments involved a more thorough analysis of routing weights, particularly
during inference. In particular here the weights for the two Simple routing experiments, with
and without the Baseline as expert, are presented.
Fig. 5.10 shows the routing weights at the first and last layer of the Simple architecture
without the baseline as experts. The weights are the average weight of each expert for each
layer when the prediction belongs to that cluster. Fig. B.2 show the weights for all layers.
Fig. 5.11 illustrates the routing weights at the first and last layer when the baseline is one of
the experts. Fig. B.3 show the weights for all layers.
It can be noted that the model tends to use, as expected, the baseline if it is present. It is
also interested that when the baseline is present, the second most used expert is the Rest of the
world, suggesting that the model may prefer general inputs. When the baseline is not present,
the model still struggles to recognize the same cluster expert as the country of input.
The primary conclusion of these experiments is that the model essentially ignores the origin of
the document and processes them all in the same way. This finding suggests that the model
does not consider these documents to be as different as humans do, thereby suggesting that this
approach started from the wrong hypothesis.
==PAGE:46==
36
CHAPTER 5. DOMAIN EXPERTS MOE
Figure 5.10: Test routing weights analysis of the Simple architecture
Figure 5.11: Test routing weights analysis of the Simple with Baseline architecture
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Multi-Field MoE
In this set of experiments, a new route has been taken. A new approach to incorporate Mixture
of Experts has been tried with the goal of exploring other capabilities of this framework. In
particular, it has been considered of interest to understand how different experts can learn how
to extract multiple fields at the same time, leveraging common aspects of the samples and the
fields.
For this task the 4 Extractive fields have been used. This is done to keep the same baseline
and therefore the results comparable, while excluding the Categorical field Payment method to
have a single task. This selection of fields Total Vat, IBAN, Supplier Address, Receiver Address
may not be the best for the task at hand. This is due to the fact that modifying the number of ex-
perts with only four fields can exert a more substantial influence on the outcomes. Furthermore,
the use of more similar fields could facilitate the exchange of more information among them.
The goal for this chapter can be formalized through the following research question:
Research Question
Can Mixture of Experts be used to learn how to extract multiple fields simultaneously?
To setup this, the data here has been duplicated once per field, where only a specific label is
kept each time, corresponding to the specific field. This however, also leads to an unbalanced
distribution of the datasets when the negative fraction for each field is used.
6.1
Multi-Field with Entire Layer as Expert
The starting point here has been the Entire Layer as Expert that gave the best results in the
previous chapter. All experiments in this section use the Simple router of before. Field embed-
dings have been included as well, and are concatenated to the input to the router; these are also
learnable.
The first major test here has been an ablation study on the number of experts to use, which
focused on determining the optimal number of experts to utilize, as it was hypothesized that this
would significantly impact the outcomes. Tests with 3, 4 and 5 experts have been done, plus
one with 4 experts where the data in training and validation has been balanced so that each field
had the same number of positive examples. This has been achieved by reducing the number of
examples to the lowest possible level.
An example confusion matrix is presented here in Fig. 6.1, while the others have been
included in Appendix B, in particular in Fig. B.4, B.5, B.6. The table 6.1 includes the test Work
37
==PAGE:48==
38
CHAPTER 6. MULTI-FIELD MOE
Done results for all fields for all models.
These results suggest that the model is not able to learn effectively, and in particular, it
learns differently for different fields. The reasons for the observed differences remain unclear;
however, the consistency of these variations across experiments indicates that they are not de-
pendent on the number of experts involved. The model incorporating 4 experts demonstrates
the most efficacy across all domains, thereby confirming that the model is learning all domains
concurrently. It is noteworthy that the 3 experts model consistently yields superior outcomes in
comparison to the 5 experts model. This phenomenon may be attributed to the potential ambi-
guity in the 5 experts model. It is also interesting to evaluate the results of the 4 experts model
with balanced data perform consistently worse than the standard 4 experts model. This hints
again that the models were indeed learning all fields simultaneously.
Figure 6.1: Multi Field models Total Vat comparison
Model
Total Vat
IBAN
Supplier Address
Receiver Address
Baseline
0.828
0.868
0.655
0.571
3 Experts
0.447
0.805
0.403
0.406
4 Experts
0.501
0.833
0.459
0.441
5 Experts
0.370
0.795
0.202
0.323
4 Experts Balance
0.426
0.809
0.390
0.393
Table 6.1: Baseline and MoE on full layers Multi Field Work Done Comparison
Also the routing weights have been examined and for the 4 experts model it is presented
here in Fig. 6.2, while for the others they can be found in Appendix B in Fig. B.7, B.8, and
B.9. It can be seen how the different fields are routed differently but how the model is not
collapsing to a single expert that is just using the field embeddings to make the decisions. This
suggest there are some similarities in the features but also some differences. To illustrate this
point, it is notable that, subsequent to the initial layers, the weights assigned to the supplier and
==PAGE:49==
6.2. MULTI-FIELD WITH MOE INSIDE THE LAYERS
39
receiver addresses exhibit a greater degree of similarity than those allocated to the remaining
fields. It is unclear at this point if that is just not enough specialization and if these weights
can provide information on the different performances of the different fields with respect to the
baseline. However, this could be addressed by conducting experiments with a different set of
fields, experimenting with fields that are hypothesized to be more similar among each other,
and with fields that are believed to be more different between each other.
Figure 6.2: Test routing weights in 4 Experts model
6.2
Multi-Field with MoE inside the layers
In the final series of experiments, an attempt was made to incorporate the MoE framework into
the layers at both the Attention and Output levels, as outlined in Chapter 4. This architecture
proved to be powerful when learning from scratch and therefore it has been adapted to a multi
field approach. The router has been kept consistent with the above experiments in Section 6.1,
and the batch size has been increased to 100. This is due to the fact that this architecture presents
less memory requirements.
Only one experiment was conducted with 4 experts. The test metrics are presented in Table
6.2 where it is evident how the model is not learning well any of the fields. While, as it can be
seen in Fig. 6.3, the average validation cosine similarity between pairs of field embeddings is
below 0.05 suggesting that they are quite different; the routing weights in test at both locations
are almost identical between fields as shown in Fig. 6.4. These plots hint that while field
embeddings are different this model is not able to use the information to learn how to handle
different fields. Extra losses to induce routing weights to be more different among fields for
each layer could help in this setup but have not been tested yet.
Model
Total Vat
IBAN
Supplier Address
Receiver Address
Baseline
0.828
0.868
0.655
0.571
4 Experts
-0.378
0.002
-1.000
-0.998
Table 6.2: Baseline and MoE inside layers Multi Field Work Done Comparison
==PAGE:50==
40
CHAPTER 6. MULTI-FIELD MOE
Figure 6.3: Validation Field Embedding Average Similarity
Figure 6.4: Comparison of Routing Weights
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis the Mixture of Expert framework has been studied in the specific contest of
Visma’s Smartscan, developed by the Visma Machine Learning Assets team. It was explored
how it can impact the performances in multiple scenarios.
The experiments started by adapting the existing architecture to include MoE systems instead
of single adapters. The findings, in Chapter 4, showed that all results yielded modest gains over
the baseline in a single field extraction task. Different routing choices lead to different behav-
iors mainly improving the results by removing the False Positives.
Building on this promise, the problem of different results for different subdomains has been
investigated, in Chapter 5. Specialized models have been trained on separate Document Types
and clusters of Countries and a router has been introduced to use them in the best dynamical
way. Surprisingly, however, these Subdomain Experts did not outperform the Baseline, sug-
gesting that the existing model of Smartscan already internalizes much of the variation across
the document subdomains. It can thus be concluded that the process of data partitioning may in
fact result in a restriction of the capabilities of each individual model. The findings of this study,
when considered in conjunction with the analysis of the routing weights, which are largely inde-
pendent of the subdomain, appear to indicate that the model does not interpret these documents
so differently as humans do, therefore these findings suggest that the initial hypothesis may be
incorrect. This is considered to be the primary reason why the MoE model does not demonstrate
superior performance in this particular scenario in comparison to the baseline.
Finally, the more ambitious scenario of correctly extracting multiple fields simultaneously was
tested. Despite the careful ablation on the number of experts and router placement these ex-
periments also failed to match the performances of the baseline. While it is unclear whether
different selected fields would have produced better results, the routing weights per field and
the different results of each field compared to the baseline suggest that this is worth examining.
Taking all these findings into account, it can be concluded that MoE methods can easily improve
the results of narrowly scoped, single-field tasks in this production setting. However, they fail to
outperform the original model in other areas, which suggests that Smartscan is already capable
of capturing much of the domain variation. This indicates that more sophisticated MoE designs
may be required to achieve further improvements.
41
==PAGE:52==
42
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
7.1
Future Work
To build on top of this thesis the following steps are proposed. First, the good improvements
from Chapter 4 should be tested for all fields and new test data. This would confirm that the
improvements are reliable and rubust and can really be used in production settings.
Secondly, building on the issue of subdomains, it would probably be interesting to try in-
ducing different routing weights for each subdivision. While it is uncertain whether this will
improve the results, given that the subdomain experts are not outperforming the baseline, it is
believed that this could be the best first step in the right direction.
Lastly, for the multi field problem, the first route to take is a better choice of fields to inves-
tigate on. Keeping multiple similar fields may help the model learn based on the similarities of
these fields. Another interesting approach is to use categorical fields, which may be easier to
handle due to their limited output options.
It is also worth considering that multiple inspiring papers, cited in this thesis, were published
in 2024 and 2025. This indicates that research in this field is still very active, and that new
breakthroughs may be published soon.
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1] “Smartscan - Extract data from your documents.” [Online]. Available:
https:
//vml.visma.ai/smartscan
[2] “Visma ML Assets.” [Online]. Available: https://docs.vml.visma.ai/
[3] “Visma’s Machine Learning Assets Team make innovation in NLP | Article | Visma.”
[Online]. Available: https://www.visma.com/resources/content/innovation-in-nlp
[4] S. Patil, “Intelligent Document Processing:
The AI Revolution in Enterprise Data
Extraction| Sagar Patil,” Mar. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://sagarpatil2000.medium.
com/intelligent-document-processing-the-ai-revolution-in-enterprise-data-extraction-sag
ar-patil-6736f3c44731
[5] “Intelligent Document Processing Market Size | Trends 2032,” Apr. 2025. [Online].
Available: https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/intelligent-document-processing-m
arket-108590
[6] “Intelligent Document Processing Market Size Report, 2030.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/intelligent-document-processin
g-market-report
[7] W.
Cai,
J.
Jiang,
F.
Wang,
J.
Tang,
S.
Kim,
and
J.
Huang,
“A
Survey
on Mixture of Experts,” Aug. 2024, arXiv:2407.06204 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.06204
[8] R. A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, and G. E. Hinton, “Adaptive Mixtures of Local
Experts,” Neural Computation, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 79–87, Feb. 1991. [Online]. Available:
https://direct.mit.edu/neco/article/3/1/79-87/5560
[9] M. Jordan and R. Jacobs, “Hierarchical mixtures of experts and the EM algorithm,”
in Proceedings of 1993 International Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN-93-
Nagoya,
Japan),
vol. 2,
Oct. 1993,
pp. 1339–1344 vol.2. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/716791
[10] “Mixture of Experts Explained,” Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/b
log/moe
[11] A. Komatsuzaki, J. Puigcerver, J. Lee-Thorp, C. R. Ruiz, B. Mustafa, J. Ainslie,
Y. Tay, M. Dehghani, and N. Houlsby, “Sparse Upcycling: Training Mixture-of-Experts
from Dense Checkpoints,” Feb. 2023, arXiv:2212.05055 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.05055
[12] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Roux, A. Mensch, B. Savary, C. Bamford, D. S. Chaplot,
D. d. l. Casas, E. B. Hanna, F. Bressand, G. Lengyel, G. Bour, G. Lample, L. R. Lavaud,
43
==PAGE:54==
44
BIBLIOGRAPHY
L. Saulnier, M.-A. Lachaux, P. Stock, S. Subramanian, S. Yang, S. Antoniak, T. L. Scao,
T. Gervet, T. Lavril, T. Wang, T. Lacroix, and W. E. Sayed, “Mixtral of Experts,” Jan.
2024, arXiv:2401.04088 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04088
[13] D. Dai, C. Deng, C. Zhao, R. X. Xu, H. Gao, D. Chen, J. Li, W. Zeng, X. Yu, Y. Wu,
Z. Xie, Y. K. Li, P. Huang, F. Luo, C. Ruan, Z. Sui, and W. Liang, “DeepSeekMoE:
Towards Ultimate Expert Specialization in Mixture-of-Experts Language Models,” Jan.
2024, arXiv:2401.06066 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06066
[14] N. Shazeer, A. Mirhoseini, K. Maziarz, A. Davis, Q. Le, G. Hinton, and J. Dean,
“Outrageously Large Neural Networks: The Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer,”
Jan. 2017, arXiv:1701.06538 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.06538
[15] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, and W. Chen, “LoRA:
Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models,” Oct. 2021, arXiv:2106.09685 [cs].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685
[16] X. Wu, S. Huang, and F. Wei, “Mixture of LoRA Experts,” Apr. 2024, arXiv:2404.13628
[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13628
[17] W. Fedus, B. Zoph, and N. Shazeer, “Switch Transformers: Scaling to Trillion Parameter
Models with Simple and Efficient Sparsity,” Jun. 2022, arXiv:2101.03961 [cs]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.03961
[18] D. Lepikhin, H. Lee, Y. Xu, D. Chen, O. Firat, Y. Huang, M. Krikun, N. Shazeer,
and Z. Chen,
“GShard:
Scaling Giant Models with Conditional Computation
and Automatic Sharding,” Jun. 2020, arXiv:2006.16668 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.16668
[19] X. Zhang, Y. Shen, Z. Huang, J. Zhou, W. Rong, and Z. Xiong, “Mixture of Attention
Heads:
Selecting Attention Heads Per Token,” Oct. 2022, arXiv:2210.05144 [cs].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05144
[20] B. Pan,
Y. Shen,
H. Liu,
M. Mishra,
G. Zhang,
A. Oliva,
C. Raffel,
and
R. Panda, “Dense Training, Sparse Inference:
Rethinking Training of Mixture-of-
Experts Language Models,” Apr. 2024, arXiv:2404.05567 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05567
[21] F. Xue, X. He, X. Ren, Y. Lou, and Y. You, “One Student Knows All Experts
Know: From Sparse to Dense,” Oct. 2022, arXiv:2201.10890 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.10890
[22] Y. Xu, M. Li, L. Cui, S. Huang, F. Wei, and M. Zhou, “LayoutLM: Pre-training of Text and
Layout for Document Image Understanding,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp.
1192–1200, arXiv:1912.13318 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.13318
[23] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of Deep
Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding,” May 2019, arXiv:1810.04805
[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805
[24] Y. Xu, Y. Xu, T. Lv, L. Cui, F. Wei, G. Wang, Y. Lu, D. Florencio, C. Zhang, W. Che,
M. Zhang, and L. Zhou, “LayoutLMv2: Multi-modal Pre-training for Visually-Rich
Document Understanding,” Jan. 2022, arXiv:2012.14740 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.14740
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
45
[25] F. Zhuang, Z. Qi, K. Duan, D. Xi, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, H. Xiong, and Q. He,
“A Comprehensive Survey on Transfer Learning,” Jun. 2020, arXiv:1911.02685 [cs].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.02685
[26] J. Dodge, G. Ilharco, R. Schwartz, A. Farhadi, H. Hajishirzi, and N. Smith, “Fine-Tuning
Pretrained Language Models: Weight Initializations, Data Orders, and Early Stopping,”
Feb. 2020, arXiv:2002.06305 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06305
[27] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, u. Kaiser, and
I. Polosukhin, “Attention is All you Need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 30.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. [Online]. Available: https://proceeding
s.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html
[28] S. Pratap, A. R. Aranha, D. Kumar, G. Malhotra, A. P. N. Iyer, and S. S.s., “The
fine art of fine-tuning: A structured review of advanced LLM fine-tuning techniques,”
Natural Language Processing Journal, vol. 11, p. 100144, Jun. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2949719125000202
[29] N. Houlsby, A. Giurgiu, S. Jastrzebski, B. Morrone, Q. d. Laroussilhe, A. Gesmundo,
M. Attariyan, and S. Gelly, “Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning for NLP,” Jun. 2019,
arXiv:1902.00751 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.00751
[30] D. Li, Y. Ma, N. Wang, Z. Ye, Z. Cheng, Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, L. Duan, J. Zuo,
C. Yang, and M. Tang, “MixLoRA: Enhancing Large Language Models Fine-Tuning with
LoRA-based Mixture of Experts,” Jul. 2024, arXiv:2404.15159 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.15159
[31] T. Luo,
J. Lei,
F. Lei,
W. Liu,
S. He,
J. Zhao,
and K. Liu,
“MoELoRA:
Contrastive Learning Guided Mixture of Experts on Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
for Large Language Models,” Feb. 2024, arXiv:2402.12851 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12851
[32] Y. Shen, Z. Zhang, T. Cao, S. Tan, Z. Chen, and C. Gan, “ModuleFormer:
Modularity Emerges from Mixture-of-Experts,” Sep. 2023, arXiv:2306.04640 [cs].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04640
[33] Y. Zhu, N. Wichers, C.-C. Lin, X. Wang, T. Chen, L. Shu, H. Lu, C. Liu, L. Luo,
J. Chen, and L. Meng, “SiRA: Sparse Mixture of Low Rank Adaptation,” Nov. 2023,
arXiv:2311.09179 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.09179
[34] J. L. Ba,
J. R. Kiros,
and G. E. Hinton,
“Layer Normalization,”
Jul. 2016,
arXiv:1607.06450 [stat]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450
[35] S. Dou, E. Zhou, Y. Liu, S. Gao, J. Zhao, W. Shen, Y. Zhou, Z. Xi, X. Wang, X. Fan,
S. Pu, J. Zhu, R. Zheng, T. Gui, Q. Zhang, and X. Huang, “LoRAMoE: Alleviate World
Knowledge Forgetting in Large Language Models via MoE-Style Plugin,” Mar. 2024,
arXiv:2312.09979 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.09979
[36] Y. Wang, S. Agarwal, S. Mukherjee, X. Liu, J. Gao, A. H. Awadallah, and J. Gao,
“AdaMix: Mixture-of-Adaptations for Parameter-efficient Model Tuning,” Nov. 2022,
arXiv:2205.12410 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12410
==PAGE:56==
46
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[37] T. Zadouri, A.
¨Ust¨un, A. Ahmadian, B. Ermis¸, A. Locatelli, and S. Hooker,
“Pushing Mixture of Experts to the Limit:
Extremely Parameter Efficient MoE
for Instruction Tuning,”
Sep. 2023,
arXiv:2309.05444 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05444
[38] H. Liu, D. Tam, M. Muqeeth, J. Mohta, T. Huang, M. Bansal, and C. Raffel, “Few-Shot
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning is Better and Cheaper than In-Context Learning,” Aug.
2022, arXiv:2205.05638 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.05638
[39] F. Gamal, T. Afifa, and F. Gamal, “MoE at Scale:
From Modular Design to
Deployment in Large-Scale Machine Learning Systems,” Apr. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/202504.1313/v1
[40] B. Peralta, A. Saavedra, L. Caro, and A. Soto, “Mixture of Experts with Entropic
Regularization for Data Classification,” Entropy, vol. 21, no. 2, p. 190, Feb. 2019,
number: 2 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/21/2/190
[41] X. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Chen, S. Yu, and Q. Xuan, “Mixture of Decoupled Message
Passing Experts with Entropy Constraint for General Node Classification,” Feb. 2025,
arXiv:2502.08083 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.08083
[42] B. Mustafa, C. Riquelme, J. Puigcerver, R. Jenatton, and N. Houlsby, “Multimodal
Contrastive Learning with LIMoE: the Language-Image Mixture of Experts,” Jun. 2022,
arXiv:2206.02770 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.02770
[43] N. Omi,
S. Sen,
and A. Farhadi,
“Load Balancing Mixture of Experts with
Similarity Preserving Routers,” Jun. 2025, arXiv:2506.14038 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2506.14038
[44] DeepSeek-AI, A. Liu, B. Feng, B. Xue, B. Wang, B. Wu, C. Lu, C. Zhao, C. Deng,
C. Zhang, C. Ruan, D. Dai, D. Guo, D. Yang, D. Chen, D. Ji, E. Li, F. Lin, F. Dai,
F. Luo, G. Hao, G. Chen, G. Li, H. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Xu, H. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Ding,
H. Xin, H. Gao, H. Li, H. Qu, J. L. Cai, J. Liang, J. Guo, J. Ni, J. Li, J. Wang, J. Chen,
J. Chen, J. Yuan, J. Qiu, J. Li, J. Song, K. Dong, K. Hu, K. Gao, K. Guan, K. Huang,
K. Yu, L. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Xu, L. Xia, L. Zhao, L. Wang, L. Zhang, M. Li, M. Wang,
M. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Tang, M. Li, N. Tian, P. Huang, P. Wang, P. Zhang, Q. Wang,
Q. Zhu, Q. Chen, Q. Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, R. Ge, R. Zhang, R. Pan, R. Wang,
R. Xu, R. Zhang, R. Chen, S. S. Li, S. Lu, S. Zhou, S. Chen, S. Wu, S. Ye, S. Ye, S. Ma,
S. Wang, S. Zhou, S. Yu, S. Zhou, S. Pan, T. Wang, T. Yun, T. Pei, T. Sun, W. L. Xiao,
W. Zeng, W. Zhao, W. An, W. Liu, W. Liang, W. Gao, W. Yu, W. Zhang, X. Q. Li, X. Jin,
X. Wang, X. Bi, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Shen, X. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Nie, X. Sun,
X. Wang, X. Cheng, X. Liu, X. Xie, X. Liu, X. Yu, X. Song, X. Shan, X. Zhou, X. Yang,
X. Li, X. Su, X. Lin, Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei, Y. X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Xu,
Y. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Sun, Y. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Zheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Shi,
Y. Xiong, Y. He, Y. Tang, Y. Piao, Y. Wang, Y. Tan, Y. Ma, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Wu,
Y. Ou, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, Y. Gong, Y. Zou, Y. He, Y. Zha, Y. Xiong, Y. Ma, Y. Yan,
Y. Luo, Y. You, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Z. Ren, Z. Sha, Z. Fu, Z. Xu,
Z. Huang, Z. Zhang, Z. Xie, Z. Zhang, Z. Hao, Z. Gou, Z. Ma, Z. Yan, Z. Shao, Z. Xu,
Z. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, Z. Gu, Z. Zhu, Z. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Xie, Z. Song, Z. Gao, and
Z. Pan, “DeepSeek-V3 Technical Report,” Feb. 2025, arXiv:2412.19437 [cs]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437
==PAGE:57==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
47
[45] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “Gaussian Error Linear Units (GELUs),” Jun. 2023,
arXiv:1606.08415 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.08415
[46] Z. Qiu, Z. Huang, S. Cheng, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, I. Titov, and J. Fu, “Layerwise Recurrent
Router for Mixture-of-Experts,” Mar. 2025, arXiv:2408.06793 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06793
[47] C. Tsallis,
“Possible generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistics,”
Journal of
Statistical Physics, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 479–487, Jul. 1988. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01016429
[48] D. Li, N. Wang, Z. Zhang, H. Yin, L. Duan, M. Xiao, and M. Tang, “DynMoLE: Boosting
Mixture of LoRA Experts Fine-Tuning with a Hybrid Routing Mechanism,” Apr. 2025,
arXiv:2504.00661 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.00661
[49] W. Zhao, Y. Gao, S. A. Memon, B. Raj, and R. Singh, “Hierarchical Routing
Mixture of Experts,” Mar. 2019, arXiv:1903.07756 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1903.07756
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A
Code snippets
Here below is reported the full code of the first experiment from section 4.1
1 class SimpleRouter(torch.nn.Module):
2
"""Simple router for Mixture of Experts."""
3
4
def __init__(self, hidden_size, num_experts):
5
super().__init__()
6
self.router = torch.nn.Linear(hidden_size, num_experts)
7
8
def forward(self, hidden_states):
9
# Average over sequence length for stable routing
10
sequence_repr = hidden_states.mean(dim=0)
# [batch_size,
hidden_size]
11
# Shape: [batch_size, num_experts]
12
routing_weights = torch.softmax(self.router(sequence_repr), dim=-1)
13
return routing_weights
14
15
def init_weights(self):
16
torch.nn.init.normal_(self.router.weight, std=0.01)
17
torch.nn.init.zeros_(self.router.bias)
18
19
20 class AdapterMoE(torch.nn.Module):
21
def __init__(self, config):
22
super().__init__()
23
self.config = config
24
self.num_experts = config.num_experts
25
26
# Use the existing Adapter class as experts
27
self.experts = torch.nn.ModuleList([Adapter(config) for _ in range(
self.num_experts)])
28
29
# Router for expert selection
30
self.router = SimpleRouter(config.hidden_size, self.num_experts)
31
49
==PAGE:60==
50
APPENDIX A. CODE SNIPPETS
32
self.LayerNorm = torch.nn.LayerNorm(config.hidden_size, eps=config.
layer_norm_eps)
33
34
def forward(self, hidden_states, input_tensor):
35
# Handle both Flash Attention and standard format
36
is_flash_attn = hidden_states.dim() == 2
# Flash Attention has 2D
tensors [flattened_seq, hidden]
37
38
# Get routing weights - handle shape differences
39
routing_weights = self.router(hidden_states)
# [num_experts] or [
batch_size, num_experts]
40
41
# Process input through each expert
42
expert_outputs = []
43
for expert in self.experts:
44
output = expert(hidden_states, input_tensor)
45
expert_outputs.append(output)
46
47
# Stack outputs along the last dimension
48
stacked_outputs = torch.stack(expert_outputs, dim=-1)
49
50
# For multiple experts with Flash Attention format:
51
if is_flash_attn:
52
# For Flash Attention: [flattened_seq, hidden_dim, num_experts]
53
# Routing weights from router: [num_experts]
54
expanded_weights = routing_weights.view(1, 1, -1)
# [1, 1,
num_experts]
55
combined_output = (stacked_outputs * expanded_weights).sum(dim
=-1)
56
else:
57
# For standard attention: [seq_len, batch_size, hidden_dim,
num_experts]
58
# Routing weights from router: [batch_size, num_experts]
59
expanded_weights = routing_weights.unsqueeze(0).unsqueeze(2)
#
[1, batch_size, 1, num_experts]
60
combined_output = (stacked_outputs * expanded_weights).sum(dim
=-1)
61
62
return combined_output
63
64
def init_weights(self):
65
# Initialize experts
66
for expert in self.experts:
67
expert.init_weights()
68
69
# Initialize router
70
self.router.init_weights()
==PAGE:61==
51
1 class Adapter(torch.nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, config: LayoutLMAdapterConfig):
3
super().__init__()
4
self.config = config
5
self.down_projection = torch.nn.Linear(config.hidden_size, config.
adapter_hidden_size)
6
self.up_projection = torch.nn.Linear(config.adapter_hidden_size,
config.hidden_size)
7
self.LayerNorm = torch.nn.LayerNorm(config.hidden_size, eps=config.
layer_norm_eps)
8
9
if isinstance(config.hidden_act, str):
10
self.activation = ACT2FN[config.hidden_act]
11
else:
12
self.activation = config.hidden_act
13
14
def forward(self, hidden_states: torch.Tensor, input_tensor: torch.
Tensor):
15
adapter_states = self.down_projection(hidden_states)
16
adapter_states = self.activation(adapter_states)
17
adapter_states = self.up_projection(adapter_states)
18
adapter_outputs = adapter_states + hidden_states
19
hidden_states = self.LayerNorm(adapter_outputs + input_tensor)
20
return hidden_states
21
22
def init_weights(self):
23
self.down_projection.weight.data.normal_(mean=0.0, std=self.config.
adapter_init_scale)
24
self.down_projection.bias.data.zero_()
25
self.up_projection.weight.data.normal_(mean=0.0, std=self.config.
adapter_init_scale)
26
self.up_projection.bias.data.zero_()
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
53
==PAGE:64==
54
APPENDIX B. EXTRA RESULTS
Appendix B
Extra Results
Figure B.1: Full Baseline and MoE in adapters per countries Comparison
==PAGE:65==
55
Fig. B.1 and Table B.1 show the full results of Subsection 5.2.1. In the main text only the main
results, giving the better results were included.
Router
Baseline as Expert
Diversity Loss used
Test Work Done
Baseline
-
-
0.828
Dense
No
No
0.619
Dense
Yes
No
0.626
Simple
No
No
0.690
Simple
Yes
No
0.713
Dynamic
No
No
0.601
Gating
Yes
No
0.699
Hierarchical
Yes
No
0.656
Sparse k-1
No
No
0.665
Sparse k-2
No
No
0.689
Sparse k-1
Yes
No
0.653
Shared k-2
Yes
Yes
0.753
Shared k-2
Yes
No
0.739
Shared k-1
Yes
No
0.694
Table B.1: Full Baseline and MoE in adapters per countries Comparison
Fig. B.2 and B.3 show the routing weights for all layers in the two models with Simple
Router, with and without baseline, presented in Subsection 5.2.2
==PAGE:66==
56
APPENDIX B. EXTRA RESULTS
Figure B.2: Complete test routing weights analysis of the Simple architecture
==PAGE:67==
57
Figure B.3: Complete test routing weights analysis of the Simple with Baseline architecture
==PAGE:68==
58
APPENDIX B. EXTRA RESULTS
Fig. B.4, B.5, B.6 complete the analysis of the multi field results from Section 6.1
Figure B.4: Multi Field models Iban comparison
Figure B.5: Multi Field models Supplier Address comparison
==PAGE:69==
59
Figure B.6: Multi Field models Receiver Address comparison
Fig. B.7, B.8, B.9 complete the analysis of the routing weights multi field results from
Section 6.1
Figure B.7: Routing weights for 3 Expert multi field model
Figure B.8: Routing weights for 5 Expert multi field model
==PAGE:70==
60
APPENDIX B. EXTRA RESULTS
Figure B.9: Routing weights for 4 Expert multi field model with balanced data
