==PAGE:1==
INTEGRATING MOLECULAR DYNAMICS
SIMULATIONS AND NMR TO ANALYZE
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN
THE N-TERMINAL 47 RESIDUES
AND THE CATALYTIC DOMAIN
OF TRYPTOPHAN HYDROXYLASE 2
Authors
Astrid Aabo Olsen - s194227
July 18, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master’s thesis is submitted to the Technical University of Denmark in partial fulﬁll-
ment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering. The project
was conducted under the supervision of Professor Günther H. J. Peters. Nuclear mag-
netic resonance spectroscopy experiments were performed at the Department of Biology,
University of Copenhagen, in the research group of Professor Birthe B. Kragelund.
Astrid Aabo Olsen
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Professor Günther H. J. Petersen for his guidance, support, and
valuable sparring throughout this project. I am grateful to Postdoc Signe Simonsen for
her supervision and assistance in the laboratory, and to Julie Franck Høvring for her
guidance with the MD simulations.
I also thank Professor Birthe Kragelund for her
insightful sparring, as well as Laboratory Technician David F. Nielsen for his help and
valuble advise.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (TPH2) is the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of
serotonin in the central nervous system. While the catalytic domain of TPH2 is well
characterized, the structure and function of its intrinsically disordered N-terminal region
remain poorly understood. This region is believed to play an important role in enzyme
regulation. Irregular serotonin production has been implicated in various neuropsychi-
atric disorders, emphasizing the importance of understanding the regulatory mechanisms
controlling TPH2 activity. In this thesis, the structure of the ﬁrst 47 residues of the
N-terminal tail of human TPH2 (hTPH2(1-47)) was investigated using a combination
of circular dichroism spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations, while functional
role of the N-terminal tail was investigated with nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
and molecular dynamics simulations. Three hTPH2(1-47) variants were investigated. A
unmodiﬁed variant, a Ser19 phosphorylated variant, and an methionine oxidized variant.
NMR spectroscopy revealed that the hTPH2(1-47) variants interact with the catalytic
domain of hTPH2, supporting the hypothesis that the N-terminal tail functions as a
regulatory segment.
MD simulations were performed on the hTPH2(1-23) fragment,
which includes highly conserved residues identiﬁed through ortholog sequence alignment.
The N-terminal tail adopted a partially disordered conformation with a stable α-helix
from Ser10 to Arg16, independent of phosphorylation or oxidation. The simulations also
showed that N-terminal residues lie within 3.5 Å of Ile412, a residue known to bind
the natural substrate, suggesting that the tail may compete for the binding site.
In
oxidized variants, NMR and MD results indicated weakened interactions with the cat-
alytic domain, attributed to Fe3+ and methionine oxidation. These ﬁndings support a
redox-sensitive regulatory mechanism in which both iron oxidation state and methionine
oxidation modulate N-terminal tail binding to the catalytic domain.
==PAGE:5==
Dansk resumé
Tryptofan hydroxylase 2 (TPH2) er det hastighedsbegrænsende enzym i biosyntesen
af serotonin i det centrale nervesystem. Selvom den katalytiske domæne af TPH2 er
velkarakteriseret, er struktur og funktion af enzymets N-terminale region endnu ikke
fuldt belyst.
Det formodes, at denne region har en væsentlig funktion i regulerin-
gen af enzymet.
I dette projekt blev strukturen af de første 47 aminosyrer i den N-
terminale hale af humant TPH2 (hTPH2(1-47)) undersøgt ved hjælp af cirkulær dikro-
isme spektroskopi og molekylære dynamik simuleringer, mens den funktionelle rolle af den
N-terminale hale blev undersøgt med kernemagnetisk resonans (NMR) og molekylære
dynamik-simuleringer. Tre varianter af hTPH2(1-47) blev undersøgt: en umodiﬁceret
variant, en Ser19 fosforyleret variant, samt en methioninoxideret variant.
NMR-spektroskopi viste, at hTPH2(1-47)-varianterne interagerer med den katalytiske
domæne af hTPH2, hvilket understøtter hypotesen om, at den N-terminale hale fungerer
som et regulatorisk segment. MD-simuleringer blev udført på hTPH2(1-23)-fragmentet,
da de første 23 aminosyrer blev identiﬁceret som højt konserverede via en ortolog sekvenssam-
menligning. Den N-terminale hale antog en delvist uordnet konformation med en stabil
α-helix fra Ser10 til Arg16, uafhængigt af fosforylering og oxidation.
Simuleringerne
viste også, at N-terminale rester er placeret inden for 3,5 Å af Ile412, en aminosyre
kendt for at binde det naturlige substrat, hvilket antyder, at halen kan konkurrere om
bindingssitet. I for oxiderede variant viste NMR- og MD-resultaterne svækkede interak-
tioner med den katalytiske domæne, hvilket skyldes konformationsændringer induceret
af Fe3+ og oxiderede methioniner. Disse resultater understøtter en redox-følsom reguler-
ingsmekanisme, hvor både jernets oxidationstilstand og methioninoxidation påvirker den
N-terminales hales evne til at binde til den katalytiske domæne.
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
3CP
Human Rhinovirus 3C Protease
5-HTP
5-Hydroxy-L-tryptophan
AAAH
Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylase
AADC
Aromatic Amino Acid Decarboxylase
AC
Aﬃnity Chromatography
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
BBB
Blood-Brain Barrier
BH4
Tetrahydrobiopterin (cofactor)
CD
Circular Dichroism
cpHMD
Constant pH Molecular Dynamics
DSS
2,2-dimethyl-2-silapentane-5-sulfonate
DTT
Dithiothreitol
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
HEPES
4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (buﬀer)
HSQC
Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence
IMAC
Immobilized Metal Aﬃnity Chromatography
IPTG
Isopropyl -D-1-thiogalactopyranoside
LacI
Lac repressor protein
LB
Lysogeny Broth (growth media)
MBP
Maltose-Binding Protein
NMR
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
PAH
Phenylalanine Hydroxylase
SAXS
Small-Angle X-ray Scattering
SEC
Size Exclusion Chromatography
TPH2
Tryptophan Hydroxylase Isoform 2
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Human tryptophan hydroxylase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Intrinsically disordered proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
8
2.1
Peptide expression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Gel Electrophoresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Tag removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Circular dichroism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Small-Angle X-ray Scattering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.8
Molecular Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Expression of hTPH2(1-47)
33
4
Protein puriﬁcation
35
4.1
Puriﬁcation of hTPH2(1-47) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Puriﬁcation of chTPH2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Modiﬁcation of hTPH2(1-47)
43
5.1
Phosphorylation of hTPH2(1-47)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Oxidation of hTPH2(1-47) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
CD of hTPH2(1-47) variations
47
7
SAXS of hTPH2 variations
53
==PAGE:8==
8
MD simulations of hTPH(1-47) variants
57
9
NMR of chTPH2 and 15N-labeled hTPH2(1-47) variants
65
9.1
15N-labeled hTPH2(1-47) and chTPH2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9.2
15N-labeled phosphorylatedhTPH2(1-47) and chTPH2 . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9.3
Oxidized 15N-labeled hTPH2(1-47) and chTPH2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
10 MD simulations of chTPH
81
11 MD simulations of hTPH2(1-23) variants in complex with chTPH2
85
12 Conclusion
98
13 Future perspectives
100
A Sequences
102
A.1 AAAH sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
A.2 Protein sequences puriﬁed in this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
A.3 Alignments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
A.4 SDS-PAGES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
A.5 NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
A.6 MD structure preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
A.7 MD system setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
A.8 MD analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
Bibliography
166
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Human tryptophan hydroxylase
Serotonin is an important neurotransmitter and hormone. It plays a central role in a wide
range of physiological and behavioral processes [1]. The serotonergic system is divided
into a central and a peripheral compartment, each responsible for diﬀerent physiological
outcomes [1, 2].
In the central nervous system (CNS), serotonin is synthesized through a pathway in
which tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (TPH2) catalyzes the rate-limiting step [2]. Irregular
TPH2 function has been implicated in numerous neurological disorders, including depres-
sion, and bipolar disorder [1, 3, 4]. In contrast, the peripheral serotonin system, which
depends on tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (TPH1), plays a role in regulating liver function
[5], gastrointestinal motility [6], vasoconstriction, and hemostasis [7, 1]. Dysregulation of
peripheral serotonin has been associated with disorders such as ulcerative colitis, irritable
bowel syndrome, and carcinoid syndrome [8, 9].
The division of serotonin synthesis into central and peripheral systems makes selective
drug targeting possible but challenging. For example, selective serotonin reuptake in-
hibitors (SSRIs), which increase serotonin levels, are widely used as antidepressants, but
are also associated with various peripheral side eﬀects, including cardiovascular compli-
cations, weight gain, and gastrointestinal distress [10]. A promising strategy to achieve
selective modulation of serotonin involves isoform-speciﬁc targeting of TPH1 and TPH2.
Although the TPH1 inhibitor telotristat ethyl has received FDA approval for the treat-
ment of carcinoid syndrome, it is not isoform speciﬁc. Its therapeutic selectivity is due to
its inability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB), restricting its eﬀects to the peripheral
system [11].
1
==PAGE:10==
In contrast, targeting TPH2 remains signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult due to two main factors:
(i) any drug aimed at TPH2 must cross the BBB, and (ii) in the central nervous sys-
tem, the therapeutic goal is often to increase rather than decrease serotonin levels. This
implies that future therapeutic eﬀorts should focus on the development of TPH2-speciﬁc
activators [12]. However, this goal is currently hindered by a limited understanding of
TPH2’s structural and regulatory mechanisms. Therefore, advancing the knowledge of
the structure-function relationship of both TPH isoforms is critical to enable the rational
design of isoform-speciﬁc therapeutics [13, 14].
TPH is a member of the aromatic amino acid hydrozylase (AAAH) enzyme family.
This family also includes phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) and tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH). AAAHs catalyze the hydroxylation of their respective substrates using a non-heme
Fe(II) ion as a cofactor and molecular oxygen (O2) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) as
co-substrates [15]. Speciﬁcally, TPH catalyzes the hydroxylation of L-tryptophan to L-5-
hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), which is subsequently decarboxylated by aromatic amino
acid decarboxylase (AADC) to form serotonin [14].
The reaction mechanism for the
formation of serotonin from L-tryptophan can be seen in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Serotonin is synthesized in two enzymatic steps. In the ﬁrst step, L-tryptophan is
hydroxylated to L-5-hydroxytryptophan by TPH. Fe(II) is required as a cofactor and O2 and
tetrahydrobiopterin (BH−
4 ) as co-substrates. The second step involves the decarboxylation of
L-5-hydroxytryptophan by aromatic amino acid decarboxylase, resulting in the production of
serotonin [16]. Illustration made with ChemDraw 23.1.1 [17].
AAAH enzymes are structurally homologous and share a common domain architecture
with an N-terminal regulatory domain, a catalytic domain, and a C-terminal tetramer-
ization domain [18, 19, 20]. Among these, the catalytic domains are the most conserved
in terms of sequence and structure. A visualization of the aligned catalytic domains of
AAAHs can be seen in Figure 1.2, and the identity percentages from multiple sequence
alignment made with Clustal Omega [21] can be seen in Table 1.1
2
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Structural alignment of the cat-
alytic domains of human PAH (orange, PDB
ID: 6HPO), human TH (cyan, PDB ID: 2XSN),
human TPH1 (blue, PDB ID: 1MLW), and hu-
man TPH2 (green, PDB ID: 4V06). The align-
ment was generated using PyMOL.
Table 1.1:
Pairwise sequence identity (%)
between
the
catalytic
domains
of
human
TPH2 (chTPH2), human TPH1 (chTPH1),
human PAH (chPAH), and human TH (chTH).
Sequence alignments were performed using
Clustal Omega [21].
TPH2
TPH1
PAH
TH
TPH2
100
80.89
64.97
63.55
TPH1
100
64.65
60.97
PAH
100
63.87
TH
100
The active site of TPH is located approximately 13 Å from the protein surface [18] and
is divided into two binding pockets: one for BH−
4 and one for L-tryptophan [22]. This is
visualized in Figure 1.3
Figure 1.3: Surface representation of the catalytic domain of TPH2 (grey), L-tryptophan (blue)
and the BH−
4 analogue BH2 (magenta) are shown in stick representation, while the coordinated
iron ion (orange) is shown as a sphere. A zoom-in on the binding pocket is shown on the right
using a transparent surface overlay. L-tryptophan was superimposed from the chicken TPH1
structure (PDB ID: 3E2T[23]), and BH2 from the human TPH1 structure (PDB ID: 1MLW[24]).
3
==PAGE:12==
The iron ion is coordinated in a canonical facial triad of 2-histidine-1-carboxylate with
His318, His323, and Glu363 (residue numbering according to TPH2)[16].
Figure 1.4
shows a visualization of the iron ion and its coordinating residues within the active site
of TPH2. Structural studies of hTPH1 bound to the BH−
4 analogue BH2 have identiﬁed
key interactions that stabilize BH2 binding, such as π-stacking with Tyr235 and Phe241
[24]. These residues are conserved in TPH2 (Tyr281 and Phe 287), suggesting a similar
binding mechanism. A visualization of the interacting residues for BH2 in TPH2 can be
seen in Figure 1.5.
Figure 1.4: Illustration of residues interacting
directly with Fe(II) in the catalytic site of hu-
man TPH2 (PDB ID: 4V06) shown as sticks.
Fe(II) shown as orange sphere. Visualization
created with PyMOL.
Figure 1.5: Illustration of residues inter-
acting directly with BH2 (magenta) in the
catalytic site of human TPH2.
BH2 was
superimposed from the TPH1 crystal struc-
ture (PDB ID: 1MLW). Visualization cre-
ated with PyMOL.
The L-Trp binding site has been characterized in the structure of chicken TPH1, which
shares 91% sequence identity with human TPH1. The sequence identities between ccTPH1,
chTPH1, and chTPH2 are listed in Table 1.2. In ccTPH1, the predicted binding pocket
for L-Trp includes the directly interacting residues: Arg257, Thr265, His272, Ser336, and
Ile366 [23]. These residues are fully conserved in both chTPH1 and chTPH2, support-
ing the notion of a preserved substrate binding mode between isoforms and species. A
structural model of L-Trp bound to the catalytic domain of TPH2 is shown in Figure 1.6.
4
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.6: Illustration of residues interacting
directly with L-tryptophan (blue) in the cat-
alytic site of human TPH2. L-tryptophan was
superimposed from the chicken TPH1 crystal
structure (PDB ID: 3E2T). Visualization cre-
ated with PyMOL.
Table 1.2:
Pairwise sequence identity (%)
between chTPH2,
chTPH1,
and ccTPH1.
Sequence alignments were performed using
Clustal Omega [21].
chTPH2
chTPH1
ccTPH1
chTPH2
100
79.87
81.79
chTPH1
100
91.40
ccTPH1
100
The N-terminal regions of AAAHs, including those of PAH and TPH2, are less struc-
turally characterized than their catalytic domains but are known to play important regu-
latory roles [25]. In PAH, the regulatory domain acts as an auto-inhibitory segment. The
removal of the ﬁrst 26-31 residues in PAH leads to a signiﬁcantly increased enzymatic
activity, suggesting that the N-terminus actively represses the catalytic function in the
resting state. Moreover, phosphorylation of Ser16 within this region modulates this inhi-
bition, linking regulatory control to external signaling pathways and cellular conditions
[26]. A similar mechanism is believed to exist in TPH2, where studies found that removal
of the ﬁrst 44 N-terminal residues increased the catalytic activity signiﬁcantly [27].
In addition to this N-terminal regulation, PAH is further modulated by its co-substrate
BH−
4 , which not only participates in catalysis but also stabilizes the inactive conformation
of the enzyme, acting as a negative regulator[28]. This dual functional role of BH−
4 may
extend to TPH2, although it has yet to be experimentally conﬁrmed.
Although the precise structural conﬁguration of the N-terminal tail of TPH2 remains un-
resolved, it is predicted to contribute to isoform-speciﬁc regulation within the CNS. This
region includes Ser19, a phosphorylation site targeted by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase II (CaMKII), which has been suggested to be essential for enzymatic ac-
tivation of hTPH2 without altering catalytic function[25, 29].
Despite these functional insights, high-resolution structural data for the full-length N-
terminal domains of TPH isoforms remain sparse. Interestingly, the N-terminal tail of
TPH2 is highly conserved between species, suggesting an important and potentially con-
served regulatory function. Figure 1.7 shows a multiple sequence alignment of the ﬁrst
5
==PAGE:14==
47 residues for 300 ortholog TPH2 sequences, visualized as consensus and conservation
plots.
Figure 1.7: Multiple sequence alignment of 300 TPH2 sequences highlighting conserved regions
within the N-terminal domain. Residue conservation is represented by numerical scores, where
lower values correspond to higher evolutionary conservation. Large letters in the consensus
sequence represent residues with high consensus across species, reﬂecting strong evolutionary
conservation. The red box highlights residues Met1 to Ala23. Alignment was performed using
COBALT [30] and visualized with JalView [31].
The alignment shown in Figure 1.7 reveals a highly conserved stretch within the ﬁrst
23 amino acids, as indicated by both the consensus sequence and conservation scores.
The consensus reﬂects the most frequent residue at each position, whereas the conserva-
tion score captures the similarity of residues based on their biochemical properties. This
pattern suggests a functionally important region that is preserved across species. In con-
trast, the remaining portion of the N-terminal domain displays low overall conservation,
consistent with structural disorder. Additional details for the alignments can be found
in Appendix A.3.
The general lack of structural information about the 47-residue-long N-terminal tail lim-
its a complete understanding of its potentially regulatory role and impedes the rational
design of isoform-speciﬁc therapeutics.
Further investigation of this ﬂexible region is
essential to elucidate how the N-terminal domain potentially governs the activity and
regulation of the hTPH2 [16, 29].
1.2
Intrinsically disordered proteins
The N-terminal tail of hTPH2 is classiﬁed as an intrinsically disordered region (IDR)
or intrinsically disordered protein (IDP). Unlike classical globular proteins that adopt
a well-deﬁned and stable three-dimensional structure, intrinsically disordered IDPs lack
a ﬁxed tertiary structure under physiological conditions [32]. This structural ambiguity
arises from the amino acid composition, which is typically enriched in polar and charged
6
==PAGE:15==
residues and depleted in hydrophobic residues that usually drive folding. As a result,
IDPs exist as dynamic ensembles of conformations rather than as a single static struc-
ture [33].
Because of their lack of a rigid fold, IDPs exhibit high conformational ﬂexibility. This
allows them to adapt their shape when interacting with various binding partners. This
structural plasticity is a fundamental trait that underlines their broad functional versatil-
ity [32]. IDPs are frequently involved in crucial cellular processes such as signal transduc-
tion, transcriptional regulation, and cell cycle control [34, 35]. Their disordered nature
allows for transient, multivalent, and often low-aﬃnity interactions, making them ideal for
roles that require rapid binding and release [32, 34]. Furthermore, IDPs frequently par-
ticipate centrally in protein-protein interaction networks, functioning as ﬂexible scaﬀolds
capable of engaging multiple partners, sometimes concurrently [36]. Post-translational
modiﬁcations (PTMs) such as phosphorylation, acetylation, and oxidation are also preva-
lent in IDPs, dynamically tuning their binding aﬃnities and functional outcomes [32].
For hTPH2, the intrinsically disordered N-terminal tail is proposed to contribute to reg-
ulation, potentially through transient interactions or conformational changes inﬂuenced
by PTMs. Phosphorylation, in particular, has been shown to enhance hTPH2 activity
[37]. Importantly, phosphorylation alone does not activate the enzyme; activation occurs
only upon binding of phosphorylated hTPH2 to the regulatory protein 14-3-3. This in-
teraction is believed to induce structural changes that improve catalytic eﬃciency [37].
In addition to phosphorylation, oxidative stress could play a signiﬁcant role in the regu-
lation of hTPH2 activity. Methionine residues in hTPH2 can be oxidized to methionine
sulfoxide under oxidative conditions, which may lead to conformational changes. This
reversible modiﬁcation can be regulated by the methionine sulfoxide reductase system,
which helps to maintain enzyme function during oxidative stress [38].
Dysfunctional
regulation of hTPH2 through oxidative modiﬁcations has been associated with neuropsy-
chiatric and neurodegenerative disorders, where impaired serotonin synthesis contributes
to the pathology of the disease [39, 40].
To shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying this dysregulation, this project
aims to provide structural and dynamic insights into the conformational behavior and
regulatory functions of the intrinsically disordered N-terminal tail of hTPH2. Speciﬁ-
cally, the project focuses on two key aspects: (1) the structural characterization of the
isolated N-terminal region hTPH2(1-47), and (2) its interaction with the catalytic do-
main of TPH2. To achieve this, a combination of circular dichroism, small-angle X-ray
scattering, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and molecular dynamics simulations
is employed.
7
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Peptide expression
Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a widely used host organism for the production of recombi-
nant protein, due to its rapid growth rate, simple genetics, and high yieldability. This
process involves introducing a synthetic or natural gene that encodes the peptide of in-
terest into E. coli, which initiates the cellular machinery for the synthesis of the target
protein [41].
In this project, a His-SUMO tag was added to facilitate downstream puriﬁcation using
immobilized metal aﬃnity chromatography. The SUMO tag enhances protein solubility
and stability, while the polyhistidine tag (His-tag) allows eﬃcient puriﬁcation.
hTPH2(1-47) was expressed in NiCo21 (DE3) competent E. coli cells. This strain is
speciﬁcally engineered to minimize contamination from E. coli proteins. NiCo21 cells
were chosen because the target peptide is puriﬁed using immobilized metal aﬃnity chro-
matography, a method that is often prone to contamination by metal-binding proteins
from E. coli. By choosing this strain, contamination is signiﬁcantly reduced [42].
To express hTPH(1-47) in E. coli, the gene encoding the peptide must be inserted into a
plasmid expression vector. Plasmids are small circular pieces of extrachromosomal DNA
that serve as vectors for the production of recombinant proteins [43]. In this project, a
pET-24a(+) vector was used. The transformation process introduces the recombinant
plasmid into cells, enabling the expression of the target peptide. Cells that have success-
fully taken up the plasmid are selected using antibiotic-containing media to ensure that
only transformed cells survive [43].
8
==PAGE:17==
To achieve controlled protein production, cells carrying the recombinant plasmid are cul-
tured under optimal conditions, and expression is induced by adding an inducer molecule
[43]. The promoter system commonly used in E. coli is called the T7 promoter sys-
tem, which is controlled by the lac operon. When isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) is added, it binds to LacI, which allows T7 RNA polymerase to transcribe the tar-
get gene. When the peptide is successfully expressed, the target peptide can be extracted
and puriﬁed.
2.2
Chromatography
Chromatography is a widely used technique for the separation, identiﬁcation, and puriﬁ-
cation of proteins based on their diﬀerent physical or chemical properties. In this project,
immobilized metal ion aﬃnity chromatography (IMAC), reverse phase chromatography
(RPC), aﬃnity chromatography (AC), and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) were
used for the puriﬁcation of hTPH(1-47) and chTPH2.
Immobilized Metal Ion Aﬃnity Chromatography
IMAC exploits the ability of certain amino acid residues, such as histidine, cysteine, and
tryptophan, to coordinate with transition metal ions. In this project, hTPH2(1-47) was
tagged with a His-tag, which binds strongly to divalent metal ions [44].
IMAC operates by immobilizing metal ions onto a solid-phase matrix that is functional-
ized with a chelating ligand capable of coordinating metal ions. In this project, nitrilo-
triacetic acid (NTA) was used as the chelating ligand, and nickel (Ni2+) was selected for
its strong aﬃnity for His-tagged peptides. As the sample passes through the column,
peptides or proteins with exposed histidine or other coordinating residues bind to the
immobilized metal ions, while unbound proteins are washed away [44].
Imidazole is structurally similar to the histidine side chain and can coordinate with the
metal ions used in IMAC. This property allows it to modulate the interaction between
His-tagged proteins and the metal-charged resin. At low concentrations, imidazole is used
in washing steps to displace weakly or non-speciﬁcally bound proteins without aﬀecting
the tightly bound target.
Subsequently, a high concentration of imidazole is used to
out-compete the His-tag, saturating the metal coordination sites and enabling selective
elution of the target protein [44].
9
==PAGE:18==
Reverse Phase Chromatography
RPC is a method that separates proteins based on their hydrophobicity. The puriﬁcation
method relies on a non-polar stationary phase and a polar mobile phase consisting of a
water-organic solvent mixture [45].
In RPC, hydrophobic interactions govern the retention. This means that less hydropho-
bic compounds will elute ﬁrst, while more hydrophobic molecules are retained longer
because of their interaction with the column material. The elution is controlled by in-
creasing the concentration of an organic solvent, such as acetonitrile or methanol, which
weakens hydrophobic interactions and facilitates the release of adsorbed compounds from
the stationary phase. Gradient elution is commonly used, where the organic solvent per-
centage is gradually increased, leading to better resolution of complex mixtures as the
compounds will be released gradually based on the strength of their interaction with the
column material [45].
Aﬃnity chromatography
Aﬃnity chromatography is a technique used for the selective puriﬁcation and analysis of
biomolecules based on speciﬁc interactions between a target molecule and an immobilized
ligand. This method relies on highly selective and reversible binding between a ligand
and its target analyte, making it particularly eﬀective for purifying recombinant proteins
with aﬃnity tags [46].
The high speciﬁcity of aﬃnity chromatography enables eﬃcient isolation of the target
protein from complex mixtures. The process involves immobilizing a ligand with strong
speciﬁcity for the tagged protein onto a solid-phase matrix, such as agarose or Sepharose
beads. The sample is applied under conditions that promote binding between the ligand
and the target protein, while non-speciﬁc proteins are removed through washing. Finally,
the target protein is eluted by introducing a competitive molecule [46]. In this project,
Maltose-Binding Protein (MBP) was used as the aﬃnity tag to purify the catalytic do-
main of hTPH.
Size exclusion chromatography
Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC), also known as gel ﬁltration chromatography, is
a technique used to separate molecules based on their size rather than their chemical
properties [44].
10
==PAGE:19==
SEC relies on a porous stationary phase that allows molecules to separate according to
their size. The column is packed with porous beads. When a sample is applied, molecules
diﬀuse into the pores based on their size. Larger molecules cannot enter the pores and
elute ﬁrst, while smaller molecules diﬀuse into the pores and elute later due to increased
retention time [44].
Unlike other chromatographic methods, SEC does not involve interactions between the
analyte and the stationary phase, making it a non-adsorptive and mild separation method
that preserves protein activity [44].
2.3
Gel Electrophoresis
Electrophoresis separates molecules in an electric ﬁeld based on their molecular weight,
structure, or charge-state modiﬁcations [47]. In this project, the technique was employed
to assess sample purity
The application of an electric ﬁeld forces the molecules to move through the pores in the
gel. This leads to separation based on the molecular weight and charge of the compound.
Larger molecules move more slowly, while smaller molecules migrate faster.
Sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) is a method commonly
used for protein separation. The sample is loaded onto the gel together with the anionic
detergent SDS [47]. SDS denatures proteins and provides them with a uniform negative
charge. As a result, proteins migrate through the gel according to size when subjected to
an electric ﬁeld [48].
Tricine-SDS-PAGE is a variation of SDS-PAGE designed to improve the resolution of
separation of small proteins and peptides (<30 kDa) [49]. In standard SDS-PAGE, a
Tris-Glycine running buﬀer is used, where glycine acts as the trailing ion.
However,
glycine has a relatively high molecular weight and migrates slowly, resulting in poor sep-
aration of low-molecular-weight proteins. Tricine-SDS-PAGE replaces glycine with tricine
(N-tris[hydroxymethyl]methylglycine), a smaller molecule with higher electrophoretic mo-
bility. This allows for sharper resolution of separation of small proteins by creating a more
deﬁned separation [49]. Tricine-SDS-PAGE was used to validate the purity and presence
of hTPH(1-47) in this project due to the low molecular weight of this compound.
After electrophoresis, proteins can be visualized using various staining techniques such
as Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250, silver staining, or ﬂuorescence-based methods [48]. In
this project, Coomassie Brilliant Blue was used as a stain. It is an anionic dye that binds
to proteins through electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions, making them visible after
11
==PAGE:20==
electrophoretic separation. The dye binds primarily to basic (arginine, lysine, and histi-
dine) and hydrophobic amino acid residues in proteins. After electrophoresis, the gel is
incubated in a Coomassie solution, where proteins absorb the dye. To enhance contrast,
the excess of unbound dye is removed by destaining with a solvent mixture, typically
methanol and acetic acid in water [50].
2.4
Tag removal
Two diﬀerent tags are used for this project. A His-SUMO tag as well as a MBP tag.
These tags were added to aid the puriﬁcation process. However, the tags need to be
removed before analysis. This was done by protease cleavage using Ubiquitin-Like-Speciﬁc
Protease 1 (UPL1) and Human Rhinovirus 3C Protease (3CP).
ULP1
ULP1 is a Small Ubiquitin-like Modiﬁer (SUMO) protease responsible for cleaving SUMO
from target proteins. This enzyme is widely used in molecular biology and protein re-
search for the precise removal of SUMO tags, facilitating the production of native recom-
binant proteins. ULP1 protease speciﬁcally recognizes the tertiary structure of SUMO
rather than an amino acid sequence, making it highly speciﬁc [51].
3CP
3C protease (3CP) is a recombinant enzyme derived from human Rhinovirus type 14,
commonly expressed in E. coli. It is widely used in recombinant protein puriﬁcation
due to its high speciﬁcity for cleaving fusion tags. The enzyme recognizes and cleaves
the sequence Leu-Glu-Val-Leu-Phe-Gln ↓Gly-Pro, allowing removal of puriﬁcation tags
without leaving extra residues on the target protein [52]. This property makes 3CP a
valuable tool for obtaining native protein sequences after tag removal.
12
==PAGE:21==
2.5
Circular dichroism
Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is a technique used to study structural properties
of chiral molecules [53]. Plane polarized light can be considered as a combination of two
circularly polarized light components of equal intensity. One is rotating counter-clockwise
(left-handed) and the other clockwise (right-handed) [54]. CD describes the diﬀerential
absorption (∆A) of left- and right-handed circularly polarized light by an optically active
chiral molecule[54].
When both left- and right-circularly polarized components are either unabsorbed or ab-
sorbed equally whe they pass through a sample, the emerging light remains linearly
polarized in the same plane as the original beam. However, if the absorption diﬀers be-
tween the two components, the recombined light exhibits elliptical polarization, reﬂecting
the unequal attenuation of the circular components. This is visualized in Figure 2.1
(a) A linearly polarized light beam can be rep-
resented as a sum of left- and right-circularly
polarized components (EL and ER) of equal
magnitude and phase. The electric ﬁeld vector
E (EL + ER) will then oscillate along a ﬁxed
direction [55].
(b) When polarized light passes through a chi-
ral medium, the two circular components (EL
and ER) can be absorbed to diﬀerent extents.
This diﬀerential absorption (EL ̸= ER) results
in elliptically polarized light [55].
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of how circular dichroism arises from interactions with
polarized light. Inspired by [55].
13
==PAGE:22==
Elliptical polarization occurs when the electric ﬁeld vector of light traces an ellipse rather
than a straight line. In CD spectroscopy, this eﬀect arises because a chiral sample absorbs
left- and right-circularly polarized light unevenly.[54]. The CD spectropolarimeter does
not recombine the two components but detects them separately. It displays the dichroism
at a given wavelength as the diﬀerence in absorbance of the two components, as shown
in Equation 2.1 [56]:
∆A = Al + Ar
(2.1)
Where ∆A is the absorbance, and Al and Ar are the left and right components, respec-
tively. Absorbance is often reported in terms of ellipticity (θ) [57] as shown in Equation
2.2.
θ = tan−1(b
a)
(2.2)
Where a and b are the major and minor axes of the resulting ellipse. The relationship
between ellipticity and the diﬀerence in absorbance can be seen in Equation 2.3.
θ = 32.98 · ∆A
(2.3)
Here, the constant 32.98 is derived from conversion factors relating diﬀerence in absorp-
tion and ellipticity, as seen in equation 2.4
32.98 = 180 × 103
π × ln(10)
(2.4)
This factor converts from the natural logarithm to the common logarithm, and from radi-
ans to millidegrees. To eliminate the eﬀects of path length and concentration, ellipticity
can be given as the molar ellipticity [θ]. Molar ellipticity is deﬁned in Equation 2.5 [58].
[θ] = 100 · θ
l · c
(2.5)
Where molar ellipticity are measured in degrees · cm2 · dmol−1. c is the concentration in
mol/L and l is the path length in cm. This allows for comparison of CD signals between
samples of diﬀerent concentration[59].
The CD spectrum is recorded by measuring the dichroism of a sample across diﬀer-
ent wavelengths [57]. CD signals only arise when the sample absorbs radiation, enabling
distinct structural features to be correlated with speciﬁc spectral bands. However, be-
cause CD spectra reﬂect an average over the entire protein, the technique cannot provide
detailed structural information. While it can distinguish general secondary structures, it
cannot localize them within the protein or detect subtle diﬀerences between similar mo-
14
==PAGE:23==
tifs. Consequently, CD is best used as a complementary method alongside high-resolution
techniques such as nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy or X-ray crystallography.
The chromophore is the part of a molecule responsible for absorbing light in the UV-
visible range, typically due to conjugated double bonds or lone electron pairs that can
be excited at speciﬁc wavelengths. In proteins, the chromophores of interest include the
peptide bond, which absorbs below 240 nm, the side chains of aromatic amino acids,
which absorb in the range of 260 to 320 nm, and the disulﬁde bonds, which have weak
broad absorption bands centered around 260 nm [60].
Absorption by the amide group of the peptide bond can provide insight into the pro-
tein backbone and thereby its secondary structure. The main transitions that cause the
absorption are n →π∗at 220 nm and π →π∗at 190 nm. The lone pair on the nitrogen
adjacent to the π bond is rehybridized from sp3 to sp2, allowing conjugation of the π
electrons and lowering their energy. The Hückel diagram for the peptide bond can be
seen in Figure 2.2 [60].
(a)
Ground
state
electronic
conﬁguration
of
the
peptide
bond.
(b) Excited state corresponding
to the n →π∗transition at 220
nm.
(c) Excited state corresponding
to a π →π∗transition at 190
nm.
Figure 2.2: Hückel diagram of the peptide bond showing the ground state (a) and two common
electronic excitations relevant for circular dichroism: (b) n →π∗and (c) π →π∗.
These
transitions contribute to the CD signal in the far-UV region and provide information about the
secondary structure of proteins [61].
Regular secondary structures found in proteins, such as α-helices and β-sheets, give rise
to very characteristic CD spectra in the far UV region. These characteristic spectra are
visualized in Figure 2.3.
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.3: Representative CD spectra of proteins with distinct secondary structure elements in
far-UV region (190-250 nm): α-helix (yellow), β-sheet (blue), and random coil (red). Adapted
from [62].
These characteristic CD spectra arise from exciton coupling, a phenomenon that oc-
curs between neighboring peptide chromophores, when they are spatially arranged in
an ordered manner, such as in α-helices or β-sheets. In these secondary structures, the
transition dipole moments of the chromophores interact because of their ﬁxed relative
orientation. This interaction causes a splitting of the electronic transition energies, re-
sulting in the appearance of characteristic spectral features. The speciﬁc pattern of these
features is sensitive to the geometry of the chromophore arrangement and can provide
information about the secondary structure of the protein [63].
For instance, α-helices exhibit two negative bands at 222 nm and 208 nm and a strong
positive band near 193 nm. β-sheets show a negative band at around 218 nm and a
positive band at 195, while disordered or random coil structures generally show a weak
negative band near 195 nm and a low signal above 210 nm. Spectral shapes allow for
rapid qualitative and quantitative estimation of the relative composition of the secondary
structure [64].
Multiple algorithms exist that can extrapolate the data from far UV CD spectra and
provide an estimation of the secondary structure composition of the proteins. In this
project, BeStSel [65] and CDPro are used to analyze the obtained CD spectra.
Although CD does not resolve atomic-level structures like NMR or X-ray crystallog-
raphy, it is an excellent tool for rapid evaluation of protein folding, thermal stability, and
mutation eﬀects. Importantly, measurements can be performed in aqueous buﬀers under
near physiological conditions, requiring only small amounts of protein [66].
16
==PAGE:25==
2.6
Small-Angle X-ray Scattering
Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) is a technique for investigating the structure of
biomolecules in solution at low resolution [67]. In contrast to X-ray crystallography or
cryo-electron microscopy, SAXS does not require crystallization or freezing, which makes
it particularly suitable for studying ﬂexible, disordered, or dynamic systems, such as in-
trinsically disordered proteins[68, 69].
SAXS relies on the diﬀerence in electron density between the molecule and the solvent.
This diﬀerence is typically small, requiring careful subtraction of the solvent scattering
to isolate the particle’s contribution [69]:
∆ρ(r) = ρ(r) −ρs
(2.6)
Where ∆ρ(r) is the excess average scattering length density, ρ(r) is the measured scat-
tering length density and ρs is the measured scattering length density of the solvent.
When an incident X-ray beam interacts with electrons in a molecule, the electrons are
accelerated by the electromagnetic ﬁeld and re-emit radiation of the same frequency, a
process known as elastic scattering. The intensity of X-rays scattered by a single electron
is described by the Thomson formula [70]:
Ie(θ) = I0 · r2
0 ·
!
1 + cos2(2θ)
"
(2.7)
Where Ie(θ) is the intensity of the scattered X-ray at the scattering angle, θ, by a single
electron. I0 is the intensity of the incident X-ray beam, and r0 = 2.8210−13 cm is the
classical electron radius. Note that θ represents half of the total scattering angle.
The scattering vector q is deﬁned as [70]:
q = k1 −k0,
q = |q| = 4π sin(θ)
λ
(2.8)
Where λ is the wavelength of the X-rays and k0 and k1 are the incident and scattered
wave vectors, respectively. The magnitude q is referred to as the scattering magnitude.
Under the assumption of a monodispersed ideal solution, the scattering amplitude, A(q),
can be written as the Fourier transform of the contrast in electron density, ∆ρ(r), between
the particle and the solvent [70]:
A(q) =
#
V
∆ρ(r) · eiq·r, dr
(2.9)
17
==PAGE:26==
The observed scattering intensity can then be described as:
I(q) = |A(q)|2 = A(q) · A∗(q)
(2.10)
Due to this correlation between intensity and amplitude, the following equation can be
written [71]:
I(q) = 1
V |
#
V
∆ρ(r) · ei·q·rdr|2
(2.11)
For chaotically tumbling systems of identical molecules, the intensity will only depend on
the magnitude of q, which means that equation 2.11 can be written as [71]:
I(q) = n∆ρ2V 2P(q)S(q)
(2.12)
Where n is the number density of particles, V is the volume of a single particle, P(q) is
the form factor, and S(q) is the structure factor.
The form factor P(q) accounts for the intraparticle interference and depends on the shape,
size, and internal electron density distribution of individual particles. The structure fac-
tor S(q) describes the interparticle correlations and becomes important in concentrated
systems or in the presence of interactions between particles such as electrostatic repulsion
or attraction. In dilute solutions where such interactions are negligible, S(s) ≈1, and
the scattering intensity is dominated by the form factor [71]. Having a monodisperse so-
lution is therefore crucial for obtaining valid structural information about the compound
in question.
To investigate the quality of the sample, a log-log plot of the scattering intensity, I(q)
versus the momentum transfer (q) can be used. In this representation, an upward curva-
ture or deviation from the expected linear trend at low q-values typically indicates sample
aggregation, whereas a downward curvature indicates repulsion. Both eﬀects can com-
promise the accurate interpretation of structural parameters [72]. Therefore, inspecting
the log-log plot is an essential quality control step in SAXS data analysis.
Another important tool for assessing sample quality and extracting structural parameters
is the Guinier plot. This plot involves plotting the natural logarithm of the scattering
intensity, ln I(q) against q2. In the low-q region, a monodisperse, aggregation-free sample
produces a linear relationship in the plot, as described by the Guinier approximation in
Equation 2.13.
I(q) = I(0) · exp
$
−q2R2
g
3
%
(2.13)
18
==PAGE:27==
The Guinier plot allows determination of the radius of gyration (RG) from the slope, and
the forward scattering intensity, I0, from the intercept. Deviations from linearity, such as
upward or downward curvature, indicate aggregation or repulsion, respectively [73]. An
example Guinier plot illustrating these features is shown in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Overview of Guinier plots showing the linear behavior of ln I(q) versus q2 in the
low-q region for high-quality data (A), and deviations from linearity indicating interparticle
repulsion (B) or aggregation (C). Adapted from [74].
From the Guinier plot, the radius of gyration is obtained from the slope, as shown in
Equation 2.14:
slope = −R2
g
3
(2.14)
The value of I0 is computed as the y-intercept of the linear ﬁt in the Guinier region. Using
this extrapolated value, the molecular weight of the sample can be estimated through the
relation shown in equation 2.15 [70].
I0 = c · M · V
Na
· [vpartial · (ρ −ρs)2]
(2.15)
where c is the concentration, M, is the molecular mass, V is volume, vpartial is the partial
speciﬁc volume, ρ is the electron density of the sample, and ρs is the electron density of
the solvent. For proteins, vpartial can be estimated computationally based on amino acid
composition[75], while the electron density of proteins is generally around 1.37 g/cm3
[76], while that of pure water (solvent) is approximately 1.00 g/cm3. These values can
likewise be reﬁned computationally.
To gain more detailed information about the internal structure of the particle, the pair-
distance distribution function P(r) can be calculated using an indirect Fourier transform.
This can be seen in Equation 2.16. The pair-distribution function describes the distribu-
tion of distances between pairs of atoms in the molecule [68].
P(r) = r2
2π2
# ∞
0
q2I(q) · sin(qr)
qr
dq
(2.16)
19
==PAGE:28==
Where I(q) is the intensity of the scattering, q is the scattering vector, and r is the
distance in real space. The function P(r) represents a histogram of all intramolecular
distances. It peaks at the most probable distance and drops to zero at the maximum
particle dimension Dmax[77]. The value of Dmax represents the largest intramolecular dis-
tance within the particle, eﬀectively deﬁning its maximum size. It is determined during
the analysis to ensure that P(r) approaches zero smoothly [77].
The shape of the plotted P(r) curve provides insight into the overall geometry of the
molecule. A bell-shaped symmetric curve suggests a globular shape, while an asymmet-
ric or skewed curve indicates elongation or ﬂexibility [68]. An illustration of the diﬀerent
P(r) curves and the correlating shape of the molecule can be seen in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Examples of pair-distance distribution functions P(r) for various particle shapes.
Adapted from [74]
A Kratky plot, which plots q2 · I(q) against q, is used to assess the folding state of the
protein. A pronounced peak indicates a compact and folded structure, while a plateau or
rising curve suggests an unfolded or ﬂexible conformation [68]. An illustration of diﬀerent
Kratky plots and their corresponding folded states can be seen in Figure 2.6.
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.6: Examples of Kratky plots illustrating compact, partially folded, and unfolded protein
conformations. Borrowed from [78]
SAXS data can be used to reconstruct a low-resolution three-dimensional envelope that
represents the overall shape and size of the particle in solution. This is achieved through
ab initio modeling programs such as DAMMIN or GASBOR[79], which generate models
by ﬁtting the experimental scattering data without relying on prior structural informa-
tion. These methods typically represent the particle as an assembly of dummy atoms
or beads and optimize their arrangement to best match the measured scattering proﬁle.
The resulting 3D envelope provides valuable insights into the particles shape and can be
used to complement high-resolution structural techniques [79].
In this project, SAXS was particularly relevant due to its ability to capture the over-
all shape and conformational ﬂexibility of compounds in solution.
21
==PAGE:30==
2.7
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a technique used in many diﬀer-
ent disciplines, and particularly in structural biology [80]. It enables the investigation
of molecular structure, dynamics, and interactions at atomic resolution under near-
physiological conditions [81]. A major strength of NMR lies in its ability to investigate
ﬂexible systems like IDPs, whose dynamic nature is often inaccessible to techniques such
as X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy [80].
The theoretical foundation of NMR spectroscopy lies in the magnetic properties of atomic
nuclei. Certain atomic nuclei possess a property known as spin, behaving as if they were
physically spinning. Any nucleus with an odd mass number, an odd atomic number, or
both, possesses a nonzero nuclear spin and an associated magnetic moment [82].
The spin angular momentum is characterized by the nuclear spin quantum number, I.
Only nuclei with I ̸= 0 are NMR active. Nuclei with even mass and atomic numbers
(I = 0) are NMR inactive. For a given nucleus with spin I, the number of allowed spin
states is 2I + 1, corresponding to the following quantized values [82]:
+I, (I −1), . . . , (−I + 1), −I
(2.17)
In the absence of an applied magnetic ﬁeld, all spin states are energetically degenerate,
meaning they have the same energy and are equally populated. Upon applying a magnetic
ﬁeld (B0), this degeneracy is lifted. The interaction between the nuclear magnetic mo-
ment and the external magnetic ﬁeld leads to energy splitting between the spin states [82].
The nucleus, being a charged particle, generates a magnetic moment, µ, through its
charge and spin. In an applied magnetic ﬁeld, the magnetic moments align either with
(low energy) or against (high energy) the ﬁeld. The energy gap between these orienta-
tions gives rise to the NMR signal[82].
The quantized absorption of electromagnetic radiation occurs when nuclei transition be-
tween spin states. The energy absorbed, Eabsorbed, corresponds to the energy diﬀerence
∆E between spin states [82]:
Eabsorbed = E−1
2 −E+ 1
2 = hv
(2.18)
Where h is Planck’s constant and v is the frequency of the absorbed radiation.
The magnitude of the energy separation depends on both the strength of the applied
22
==PAGE:31==
ﬁeld and the properties of the nucleus [82]. Speciﬁcally:
∆E ∝B0
(2.19)
More precisely [82]:
∆E = γℏB0
(2.20)
Where γ is the magnetogyric ratio, a nucleus-speciﬁc constant, and ℏis the reduced
Planck constant (ℏ=
h
2π). Thus:
∆E = γ
$ h
2π
%
B0 = hv
(2.21)
Solving for the frequency yields:
v =
& γ
2π
'
B0
(2.22)
This is known as the Larmor frequency, which describes the rate at which the magnetic
moment of a nucleus precesses around the direction of the applied magnetic ﬁeld. The
Larmor frequency increases linearly with the applied magnetic ﬁeld strength, as described
by Equation 2.22. This frequency corresponds to the precession of the nuclear magnetic
moment around the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld. In angular frequency terms, this is
often written as:
ω0 = γB0
(2.23)
Here ω0 = 2πv is the angular Larmor frequency, representing the rate at which nuclear
spins precess around the magnetic ﬁeld. This precession is fundamental to NMR, as nu-
clei absorb energy most eﬃciently when the radio frequency matches this frequency [82].
The precessing magnetic moment induces an oscillating electric ﬁeld. When radio fre-
quency (RF) waves are applied precisely at the Larmor frequency, the nucleus absorbs
energy, resulting in a transition between spin states. This phenomenon is known as reso-
nance [82]. The resonance condition is crucial because it allows the nuclei to be selectively
excited by the RF pulse, by temporarily disturbing their alignment with the external
magnetic ﬁeld. After excitation, the nuclei gradually return to their original alignment,
releasing energy in the process. This relaxation generates a measurable time-dependent
signal called free induction decay (FID), which forms the basis of NMR detection [83].
The FID signal is produced by the spinning nuclei as their magnetic moments grad-
ually return to their original alignment. This oscillating signal is picked up by radio
23
==PAGE:32==
frequency coils positioned perpendicular to the main magnetic ﬁeld, and the resulting
FID is a complex time-domain signal that contains information about the resonance fre-
quencies of the nuclei in the sample [83].
A Fourier Transform converts the FID into a frequency-domain spectrum, revealing chem-
ical shifts, coupling constants, and other structural information [83]. An illustration of
this process can be seen in Figure 2.7
Figure 2.7: Free Induction Decay (FID) signal and its transformation into a frequency-domain
NMR spectrum via Fourier Transform. Inspired by [84].
Chemical Shifts and Shielding
Although nuclei of the same type have identical intrinsic properties, their chemical envi-
ronments alter their resonance frequencies. Surrounding electrons create local magnetic
ﬁelds that shield the nucleus from B0, a phenomenon known as diamagnetic shielding [83].
As a result, the eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld Beﬀexperienced by a nucleus is slightly reduced:
Beﬀ= B0(1 −σ)
(2.24)
Here σ is the shielding constant, which varies depending on the electronic environment.
Consequently, each nucleus absorbs at a slightly diﬀerent frequency. These diﬀerences
are small but measurable as chemical shifts [83].
To eliminate the dependency on ﬁeld strength, the chemical shift δ is deﬁned relative
to a standard reference compound, usually tetramethylsilane (TMS) or 4-dimethyl-4-
silapentane-1-sulfonic acid (DSS) [82], according to:
δ =
shift in Hz
spectrometer frequency in MHz
(2.25)
24
==PAGE:33==
This gives a dimensionless number expressed in parts per million (ppm) [82].
2D and 3D NMR Spectroscopy
NMR extends beyond 1D spectra through multidimensional techniques like 2D and 3D
NMR, which are essential for studying large and/or complex biomolecules, including IDPs
[85]. 2D NMR techniques, such as Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence (HSQC),
allow for the detection of correlations between nuclear spins that are close in space or
coupled through bonding interactions. This enables mapping of molecular connectivity
and structure [83].
HSQC is a two-dimensional NMR technique commonly used to study interactions between
hydrogen nuclei (1H) and heteronuclei such as carbon-13 (13C) or nitrogen-15 (15N). It is
especially valuable in structural studies of biomolecules like proteins [83, 86]. The exper-
iment detects correlations between directly bonded 1H and hetero-nuclei. In an HSQC
experiment, the x-axis typically displays the proton (1H) chemical shifts, while the y-axis
displays the chemical shifts of the heteronucleus. Each cross-peak in the 2D spectrum
corresponds to a directly bonded proton-heteronucleus pair. This makes HSQC particu-
larly useful for assigning backbone amide signals in proteins labeled with 15N, where each
peak represents an individual residue [83].
Three-dimensional NMR expands on two-dimensional methods by adding a third fre-
quency dimension, often tracking interactions among (1H), (13C), and (15N) nuclei. This
additional dimension enhances spectral resolution, allowing overlapping peaks to be sep-
arated.
This makes resonance assignments more precise and unambiguous, which is
critical for detailed structural characterization of biomolecules. Speciﬁcally, 3D NMR
experiments facilitate both backbone and side-chain assignments by correlating chemical
shifts of atoms along the polypeptide chain, thus enabling comprehensive mapping of
protein structure [83].
Through multidimensional NMR, it is possible to obtain both structural and dynamic
information about IDPs in solution, oﬀering insights into their molecular motions and
interactions with other molecules [83]. By monitoring changes in chemical shifts or relax-
ation rates upon the addition of binding partners, interaction sites can be mapped and
complex formation kinetics studied.
25
==PAGE:34==
2.8
Molecular Dynamics
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are a computational technique used to study the
motion and interactions of atoms and molecules over time. MD simulations can pro-
vide insights at the atomic level into structural stability, conformational dynamics, and
thermodynamic properties [87]. One of the key advantages of MD is its ability to com-
plement experimental techniques such as X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, and
cryo-electron microscopy, oﬀering a detailed perspective on molecular motion that is often
inaccessible through traditional laboratory methods[88]. In this project, MD simulations
will serve as a complementary approach to NMR spectroscopy, oﬀering atomic-level in-
sight to help interpret the experimental results.
Classical Mechanics and Equations of Motion
In classical MD, atoms are modeled as simple particles with mass, and electrons are not
explicitly considered. As a result, the atomic motion can be described using Newtonian
mechanics [89]. The fundamental principle governing atomic motion is Newtons second
law, shown in Equation 2.26:
Fi = miai = mi
d2ri
dt2
(2.26)
Here, Fi is the net force acting on atom i, mi is its mass, ri is its position vector, t is
time, and ai is the acceleration of atom i. The force is derived from the potential energy
function of the system, U, through the negative gradient as shown in Equation 2.27 [90].
Fi = −∇iU(r1, r2, ..., rN)
(2.27)
Molecular dynamics simulations break down time into small steps and calculate how
atoms move at each step using numerical methods. This can be done by using the Verlet
algorithm. The basic Verlet integration formula updates the position of atom i at time
t + ∆t based on its positions at times t and t −∆t as shown in equation 2.28 [91]:
ri(t + ∆t) = 2ri(t) −ri(t −∆t) + ∆t2
mi
Fi(t)
(2.28)
where ri(t) is the position of atom i at time t, ∆t is the time step, mi is the atomic mass,
and Fi(t) is the force acting on the atom at time t.
While the basic Verlet algorithm is simple and numerically stable, it does not explic-
itly calculate velocities, which can be important for computing kinetic properties or for
coupling to thermostats. The velocity Verlet algorithm addresses this by updating both
positions and velocities in a time-symmetric manner, allowing direct velocity access. The
26
==PAGE:35==
position and velocity updates are given by [91]:
ri(t + ∆t) = ri(t) + vi(t)∆t + ∆t2
2mi
Fi(t)
(2.29)
vi(t + ∆t) = vi(t) + ∆t
2mi
[Fi(t) + Fi(t + ∆t)]
(2.30)
where vi(t) is the velocity of atom i at time t, and Fi(t + ∆t) is the force at the updated
position. By explicitly incorporating velocities, the velocity Verlet algorithm is widely
used in molecular dynamics programs, including AMBER, due to its balance of accuracy
and computational eﬃciency.
Force Fields
To compute the forces acting on atoms, MD simulations rely on empirical potential energy
functions known as force ﬁelds. These force ﬁelds deﬁne how atoms interact and include
both bonded terms, such as bond stretching, angle bending, and torsions, and non-bonded
terms, such as van der Waals and electrostatic interactions [92]:
U(r) =
(
stretch
1
2 · ki(li −li0)2 +
(
angle
1
2 · ki(θi −θi0)2 +
(
torsion
1
2 · Vn (1 + cos(nω −γ))
+
N−1
(
i=1
N
(
j=i+1
)
4ϵij
*$σij
rij
%12
−
$σij
rij
%6+
+
qiqj
4πϵ0rij
,
(2.31)
where U(r) is the potential energy, r is the Cartesian coordinates, N is the number of
atoms.
The equation can be divided into four summations. The ﬁrst summation, stretch, repre-
sents the bonded interactions that involve bond stretching, where each bond is modeled
as a harmonic spring with force constant ki, and the energy depends on the deviation of
the bond length li from its equilibrium length li0.
The second summation, angle, accounts for bonded interactions related to bending of
the bond angle. This is also treated harmonically, where ki is the angle force constant
and θi and θi0 are the bond angle and equilibrium bond angle, respectively.
The third summation covers torsion, or dihedral angle rotations. These rotations are
described using a periodic cosine function, where Vn represents the energy barrier of ro-
tation, n is the number of energy minima in a full 360◦rotation, and γ is the phase shift
27
==PAGE:36==
that determines the angle at which the torsional potential energy minimum occurs. ω.
Finally, the double summation over i and j includes non-bonded interactions, combining
van der Waals forces modeled by the Lennard-Jones potential with the depth parameter
ϵij, which determines the strength of attraction between a speciﬁc pair of atoms, and the
distance parameter σij deﬁnes the separation at which this attraction is strongest. The
electrostatic interactions are based on the atomic charges qi and qj and their separation
distance rij. Here, ϵ0 is the vacuum permittivity, which sets the scale for the strength of
electrostatic interactions in a vacuum.
MD simulations typically employ periodic boundary conditions (PBC) to mimic an inﬁ-
nite bulk environment and minimize artifacts from the ﬁnite size of the simulation box
[91]. Under PBC, the simulation box is replicated inﬁnitely in all spatial directions, so
each particle interacts not only with particles inside the primary box but also with pe-
riodic images of particles in neighboring boxes [91]. While PBC help to approximate
bulk properties more realistically, they introduce signiﬁcant computational challenges for
calculating long-range electrostatic interactions, since one must account for the inﬁnite
lattice of periodic images [91].
Consequently, directly computing electrostatic interactions using Coulombs law becomes
both ineﬃcient and inaccurate due to the slow convergence of long-range forces in pe-
riodic systems [92].
To overcome this limitation, most MD simulations utilize Ewald
summation techniques or more eﬃcient variants like the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME)
algorithm. These methods allow for accurate and computationally eﬃcient calculation of
electrostatic interactions by dividing the potential into short-range and long-range com-
ponents[92]. The Ewald summation method divides the total electrostatic energy into
three components, as outlined in Equation 2.32.
Ucoul =
1
4πε0
(U1 + U2 −U3)
(2.32)
where U1 accounts for the direct interactions between charged particles and their nearby
periodic images in real space. U2 represents the long-range contributions, evaluated in
reciprocal space, while U3 corrects for the self-interaction of each charge to avoid over
counting. The reciprocal space term U2 is derived from a Fourier transform of the Poisson
equation, which relates the electrostatic potential φ(r) to the charge distribution ρ(r),
which is shown in Equation 2.33 [91]:
−∇2φ(r) = ρ(r)
εrε0
(2.33)
Here, ∇2 is an operator, εr is the relative permittivity of the medium, and ε0 is the vac-
28
==PAGE:37==
uum permittivity. Applying a Fourier transform converts the Poisson equation, allowing
the computation of long-range interactions in reciprocal space. This transformation ef-
fectively replaces slowly decaying real-space interactions with rapidly converging Fourier
coeﬃcients, making the evaluation of U2 computationally feasible.
However, the computational cost of the Ewald method scales approximately as O(N 3/2),
which becomes ineﬃcient for very large systems. In this project, electrostatic interactions
were calculated using the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method [91], as implemented in
Amber19 [93]. PME eﬃciently computes long-range electrostatics by mapping atomic
charges onto a three-dimensional grid and applying a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to
solve Poisson’s equation in reciprocal space.
This reduces the computational cost to
O(N log N), making it signiﬁcantly faster than traditional Ewald summation methods.
Although the potential is initially computed on grid points, it is interpolated back to the
atomic positions, enabling accurate calculation of electrostatic forces in periodic systems.
Thermostats and Langevin Dynamics
To maintain a constant temperature during molecular dynamics simulations, thermostats
are employed to regulate the kinetic energy of the system. One widely used thermostat is
based on Langevin dynamics, which introduces a frictional (damping) term and a random
force to the equations of motion. This mimics the interaction between solute particles
and an implicit solvent, enabling eﬃcient temperature control [94].
Langevin dynamics are based on Brownian motion [95], which is the random movement
of small particles suspended in a ﬂuid, caused by constant collisions with rapidly mov-
ing solvent molecules [95]. This stochastic behavior introduces ﬂuctuations in velocity
that reﬂect thermal energy, making it an ideal framework for simulating temperature-
controlled environments.
In molecular dynamics, the dynamics of a single molecule can be modeled by including
the average interactions from surrounding molecules as two additional forces: a friction
term proportional to the atomic velocity, with friction coeﬃcient ζ, and a random force
Frandom with zero mean [96]. These are added to the usual intramolecular forces Fintra.
The friction term removes energy while the random force injects energy consistent with
the system temperature. The equation of motion is shown in Equation 2.34 [96].
md2r
dt2 = −ζ dr
dt + Fintra + Frandom
(2.34)
This Langevin equation of motion describes stochastic or Brownian dynamics. The fric-
tion coeﬃcient ζ controls the relative importance of the intramolecular forces compared
29
==PAGE:38==
to friction, with large ζ values leading toward the Brownian dynamics limit. The random
force is typically assumed to have a Gaussian distribution with zero mean, balancing the
damping to maintain the system at a target temperature [96].
Pressure Control via Monte Carlo Barostat
In this project, constant pressure conditions were maintained using a Monte Carlo (MC)
barostat. This method enables periodic volume adjustments by proposing random changes
to the simulation box size and evaluating whether these changes should be accepted based
on thermodynamic criteria [97].
A new trial volume, V ′, is generated by applying a random perturbation to the current
volume, V as shown in Equation 2.35 [97].
V ′ = V + R · S(∆V )
(2.35)
Here, R is a uniformly distributed random number in the interval [−0.5, 0.5], S is a scaling
factor, and ∆V deﬁnes the maximum allowed change in volume. In AMBER, the scaling
factor S is chosen automatically to maintain a reasonable acceptance rate for volume
changes. If the volume is modiﬁed, atomic positions are rescaled accordingly as shown in
Equation 2.36 [97].
r′(t + ∆t) = r(t + ∆t) ·
$V ′
V
%1/3
(2.36)
The acceptance of the new volume is determined by evaluating the free energy diﬀerence,
∆W, associated with the move shown in Equation 2.37 [97].
∆W = ∆E + P0(V ′ −V ) −NkBT0 ln
$V ′
V
%
(2.37)
Here, ∆E is the change in potential energy resulting from the volume change, including
the rescaling of atomic coordinates to the new volume. P0 is the target pressure, T0
the system temperature, N the number of atoms, and kB the Boltzmann constant. If
∆W ≤0, the move is accepted. If ∆W > 0, the move is accepted with probability
exp(−∆W/kBT0) [97].
Solvation
In molecular dynamics simulations, including an explicit solvent environment is therefore
necessary to mimic physiological conditions accurately. Several water models are avail-
able for this purpose, including TIP3P, which was used in this project. TIP3P is a rigid,
three-point model where the molecular geometry of water is ﬁxed to reﬂect gas-phase
30
==PAGE:39==
values, with a bond angle of 104.5◦, point charges on each atom, and a Lennard-Jones
potential centered on the oxygen atom [98]. This rigid structure reduces the degrees of
freedom, thereby lowering computational cost.
Although TIP3P is widely used due to its eﬃciency and ease of implementation, it has
known limitations. For instance, it does not perfectly reproduce liquid water properties
such as hydrogen-bonding networks and dielectric behavior. These limitations can inﬂu-
ence the accuracy of water-protein interactions. However, TIP3P remains a practical and
widely accepted choice for biomolecular simulations, including those involving proteins,
due to its compatibility with major force ﬁelds such as AMBER [98].
Trajectory Analysis
To investigate the structural and dynamic behavior of the simulated protein, several tra-
jectory analyses were performed using cpptraj [99]. These included root mean square
deviation (RMSD), root mean square ﬂuctuation (RMSF), radius of gyration (RoG),
solvent accessible surface area (SASA), secondary structure assignment, and k-means
clustering.
RMSD quantiﬁes the average displacement of atomic positions relative to a reference
structure [100]. It is used to assess structural stability. The equation for RMSD calcula-
tions is given in Equation 2.38 [100]:
RMSD =
-
.
.
/ 1
N
N
(
i=1
|ri −rref|2
(2.38)
where N is the number of atoms, ri is the coordinates of atom i and rref is the reference
coordinates.
RMSF measures the average positional ﬂuctuation of each atom or residue over time.
This can be used to indicate regions of ﬂexibility or rigidity. It is calculated as shown in
Equation 2.39 [101].
RMSFi =
01
(ri −⟨ri⟩)22
(2.39)
Where ri initial position i and ⟨ri⟩is the average atomic position.
The radius of gyration RG describes the compactness of the protein structure by quanti-
fying the distribution of atoms around the center of mass. Lower values indicate a more
compact/folded structure, whereas higher values indicate more disordered or ﬂexible re-
31
==PAGE:40==
gions [100]. The equation for RG calculations can be seen in Equation 2.40 [100].
Rg =
-
.
.
/ 1
N
N
(
i=1
|ri −rcenter|2
(2.40)
Where N is the number of atoms, ri is the coordinates of the atom i and rcenter is the
coordinates for the center of mass. To contextualize the calculated RG values, theoretical
estimates for intrinsically disordered and globular proteins can be used as benchmarks.
The equation for the theoretical value of RG can be seen in Equation 2.41 [102]:
RG = R0 · N v
(2.41)
Where N is the number of residues, R0 is a prefactor, and v is the scaling exponent. For
IDPs in a good solvent, the values R0 = 1.92 Å and v = 0.588 are typically used [102]. A
"good solvent” refers to conditions where the polymer favors interactions with the solvent
over self-association, leading to an expanded conformation. In contrast, globular proteins
the values R0 = 2.2 Å and v = 1
3[102].
SASA is the surface area of the protein that is accessible to solvent molecules. It was
calculated using the Lee and Richards algorithm, which rolls a probe sphere (typically
1.4 Å in radius) over the van der Waals surface of the molecule [103].
The evolution of secondary structure elements during the simulation was assessed us-
ing the DSSP algorithm [104]. DSSP classiﬁes residues into secondary structure types
such as α-helices, β-sheets, turns, and coils based on hydrogen bonding patterns and
backbone geometries. By monitoring how the secondary structure elements change over
time, local folding or unfolding events and the overall stability of the secondary structure
[104].
Conformational clustering was performed using the k-means algorithm, which partitions
trajectory frames into k distinct clusters based on their pairwise root-mean-square de-
viation (RMSD). This approach iteratively assigns structures to the cluster with the
nearest centroid, where similarity is quantiﬁed by the RMSD between selected atomic
positions, typically backbone atoms. By grouping similar conformations, the method
enables identiﬁcation of representative structures and dominant conformational states
sampled throughout the simulations [105].
32
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
Expression of hTPH2(1-47)
As previously mentioned the peptide was expressed in NiCo21 E. coli cells. 100 µl of the
NiCo21 cells were thawed on ice. When the cells were completely thawed, 1 µl of the
plasmid was added to the cells. The mixture was incubated for approximately 30 minutes
on ice.
The mixture was then incubated at 42 ◦C for 90 seconds and put back on ice after-
ward to heat shock the cells. Upon rapid increase in temperature, pores are created in
the plasma membrane of bacteria. This allows plasmid DNA to enter the cell. After
heating, the mixture was put back on ice.
500 µl lysogeny broth media was added to the mixture and the sample was incubated at
37 ◦C for 45 minutes. 100 µl of the transformed cell mixture was plated on two LB Agar
plates with Kanamycin (Kan) and left to incubate overnight. Due to previous problems
with cell growth in the lab, an additional two plates were also prepared using a glycerol
stock stored from a previous expression of HIS-SUMO-hTPH2(1-47).
The next day, a single cell colony from each plate was collected and added to a mix-
ture of 10 mL LB and 10 µl 50 mg/mL Kanamycin stock. The cell mixture was left to
incubate overnight at 37 ◦C at 180 rpm.
The next day, 10 mL of each of the overnight cultures was mixed in 5L ﬂasks with 1
L M9 media. Two diﬀerent media were used. One unlabeled and one 15N labeled. Their
content can be seen in Table 3.1.
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 3.1: Content of the labelled and the unlabelled M9 media.
Material
Unlabelled M9 media
15N labelled M9 media
KH2PO4
3 g
3 g
Na2HPO4
7.5 g
7.5g
NaCl
1 g
1 g
Glucose
8 g
8 g
NH4Cl
1 g
-
15N-labelled NH4Cl
-
1 g
M2 Trace element solution
1 mL
1 mL
1 M MgSO4
1 mL
1 mL
Kan
1000 µL
1000 µL
Four diﬀerent samples were made. One unlabeled with the cells from the transformation
(T), one 15N-labeled with cells from the transformation, one unlabeled with the cells
from the glycerol stock (G), one 15N-labeled with cells from the glycerol stock. The cells
were incubated until the optical density (OD) reached approximately 1.2, which took
around 7.5 hours. At this point, 500 µL of 1 M IPTG was added to each culture, and the
samples were incubated overnight at 37◦C. OD was monitored multiple times during the
incubation period to assess cell concentration [106]. The OD was also measured the fol-
lowing day to conﬁrm suﬃcient cell growth for induction, with a value above 2.5 required.
The cells were harvested by ﬁrst spinning them down in a centrifuge at 5000g at 4 ◦C for
15 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the cells were scooped up and frozen. To
see if His-SUMO-TPH2(1-47) had been expressed correctly, an SDS-PAGE with samples
from before induction and after the ﬁnal incubation was run. The SDS-PAGE can be
seen in Appendix A.4.
34
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Protein puriﬁcation
4.1
Puriﬁcation of hTPH2(1-47)
For the puriﬁcation of hTPH(1-47), the following buﬀers were used
Buﬀer A: 20 mM sodium phosphate, 1M NaCl, 40 mM imidazole, pH 7.4
Buﬀer B: 20 mM sodium phosphate, 1M NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, pH 7.4
Tris buﬀer: 50 mM Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5
RPC Buﬀer A: MiliQ water + 0.1% TFA
RPC Buﬀer B: 70% Acetonitrile + 0.1% TFA
IMAC
The harvested cells were thawed on ice and resuspended in approximately 30 mL buﬀer
A. Each sample was lysed using a French press to release the target peptide from the
cells. This was done 2 times at 20 kpsi. The samples were then centrifuged for 30 minutes
at 20.000g and the supernatant was collected. Each sample mixtures were loaded onto a
5 mL Ni-NTA gravity ﬂow column. The columns were prepared by ﬁrst washing with 10
mL MilliQ water (MQ) followed by 10 mL Buﬀer A. Each sample was then loaded onto
a column, and the columns were washed with 50 mL Buﬀer A. The target protein was
eluted using 10 mL Buﬀer B. To regenerate the columns, the columns were washed with
10 mL MQ and stored in 20% ethanol.
Buﬀer exchange and ULPC1 cleavage
Each sample was loaded onto an 8.3 mL PD-10 desalting column, which was prepared by
washing with approximately 16 mL MQ and equilibrated with approximately 16 mL Tris
buﬀer. Each sample was loaded onto a column in fractions of 2.5 mL and eluted with 3.5
mL Tris buﬀer and collected. The columns was subsequently washed with approximately
35
==PAGE:44==
12mL of Tris buﬀer, a process that was repeated four times to ensure complete buﬀer
exchange of the sample. After use, the column was washed with 16 mL of MQ water and
stored in 20% ethanol. 100 µL of 1 mg/mL ULP1 was added to each sample and left to
cleave the peptide overnight at 4 ◦C.
RPC
0.5% v/v of 99.99% TFA was added to each sample before loading one sample at a time
onto a Zorbax C18 column. The column was equilibrated with RPC buﬀer A. The process
was performed at a ﬂow rate of 4 mL/min, using 100% Buﬀer A for the ﬁrst 3 minutes.
From 3 minutes onward, a linear gradient from 100% Buﬀer A to 100% RPC Buﬀer B
was applied. The chromatograms for the 15N-labeled, and the unlabeled hTPH2 can be
seen in Figure 4.1 and 4.2, respectively.
Figure 4.1: RPC chromatogram from puriﬁcation of 15N-labeled hTPH2.
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.2: RPC chromatogram from puriﬁcation of unlabeled hTPH2.
Figures 4.1 and 4.2 show chromatograms that are nearly identical, which is expected
since both samples contain the same peptide. The peak corresponding to the peptide
itself is well-deﬁned and consistent between runs. However, the retention times of subse-
quent peaks, such as those from the His-Sumo construct, show slight variations between
the two chromatograms. However, this was a known issue with the speciﬁc column in
this laboratory, particularly when working with His-SUMO-tagged proteins, and was
therefore not considered problematic. Elution occurred between 31-34 minutes for both
samples. After the main peak eluted, 100% RPC Buﬀer B was maintained to ﬂush the
column. Peak purity was assessed using Tricine-SDS-PAGE (Appendix A.4). Fractions
corresponding to the pure target protein were pooled, ﬂash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and
freeze-dried overnight. The resulting powder was re-dissolved in MQ water, aliquoted
into 0.5 mL portions in Eppendorf tubes, freeze-dried again, and stored at -20 ◦C.
37
==PAGE:46==
4.2
Puriﬁcation of chTPH2
Puriﬁcation of MBP-3CP
Before puriﬁcation of chTPH2, the protease MBP-3CP needed to be puriﬁed. This was
done by AC. A dextrin sepharose HP 16/14 column was used with a ﬂow rate of 5
mL/min. The following buﬀers were used:
Binding buﬀer: 20 mM Tris/H2SO4, 70 mM (NH4)2SO4, pH 8.0.
Elution buﬀer: 20 mM Tris/H2SO4, 70 mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.1mM maltose, pH 8.0.
Storage buﬀer: 50 mM Tris/H2SO4, 50 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1mM DTT, 10 mM EDTA, 20
v/v% glycerol, pH 8.0
Cells were resuspended in approximately 30 ml of binding buﬀer and lysed 3x30 sec
on ice using a Satorius Labsonic P sonicator [107]. The lysed cells were then centrifuged
in high-speed centrifuge tubes at 12.000 rpm and 4 ◦C for 2x20 min. The supernatant
was collected each time and ﬁltered through a 0.45 µm ﬁlter.
The AC column was equilibrated with ﬁve CV of binding buﬀer. The protein sample
was loaded onto the column and subsequently eluted using elution buﬀer. The process
was continuously monitored at 280 nm. The chromatogram for the AC of MBP-3CP can
be seen in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: AC chromatogram from puriﬁcation of MBP-3CP.
38
==PAGE:47==
To prevent protein degradation, a buﬀer exchange was carried out using an Amicon cell
[108] equipped with a PLGC NMWL 10 kDa membrane. The elution buﬀer in the protein
solution was replaced with storage buﬀer by diluting the sample to 30 mL with storage
buﬀer, followed by ultraﬁltration to concentrate it back to approximately 5 mL. This step
was repeated three times to ensure complete buﬀer exchange.
The protein concentration was determined using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer [109],
after which the samples were aliquoted into seven 1.5 mL tubes, each containing roughly
1 mL 60 nmol 3MBP-3CP. The aliquots were frozen with liquid nitrogen and then stored
at -20 ◦C for future use. Approximately 26.5 mg of protein was collected.
Puriﬁcation of chTPH2
Binding and gel ﬁltration buﬀer: 3000 ml 20mM Hepes/NH4OH, 300mM (NH4)2SO4,
3 mM L-Phe, pH 7.0.
Elution buﬀer: 250 ml 20 mM Hepes/ NH4OH, 300mM (NH4)2SO4, 3 mM L-Phe, 1
mM maltose, pH 7.0
NMR buﬀer: 500 ml 10 mM Hepes/NaOH, 10 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0
E.Coli cells were thawed on ice, resuspended in approximately 30 ml of Binding buﬀer,
and lysed 3x30 seconds on ice with 30-second breaks in between using a Satorius Lab-
sonic P sonicator. The lysed cells were then centrifuged in high-speed centrifuge tubes at
12000 rpm and 4 ◦C for 2x20 min. The supernatant was collected each time and ﬁltered
through a 0.45 µm ﬁlter.
The ﬁltered sample was loaded onto a Dextrin Sepharose HP 16/14 column, which had
been equilibrated with 5 CV Binding buﬀer. After sample loading, the column was washed
with 5 CV Binding buﬀer to ensure that unbound compounds were eluted. After wash-
ing, the protease, MBP-3CP, was loaded on the column at a volume of approximately 22
mL and a concentration of 2.2 µL. The system was then paused for an hour to give the
protease suﬃcient time to cleave chTPH2 from the MBP-tag. The cleaved chTPH2 was
eluted using a 5 CV elution buﬀer. The resulting chromatogram can be seen in Figure
4.4.
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.4: AC chromatogram from puriﬁcation of chTPH2.
The collected fractions were pooled and the volume was reduced to approximately 5 ml
using an Amicon cell[110] equipped with a 10 kDa PLGC NMWL membrane.
The sample was loaded onto a Superdex 75 SEC column to isolate the target protein.
The resulting chromatogram can be seen in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: SEC chromatogram from puriﬁcation of chTPH2.
40
==PAGE:49==
To know which fractions should be collected, an SDS-PAGE of the collected fractions
was performed. The resulting SDS-PAGE can be seen in Appendix A.4. The concentra-
tion was determined using the Nanodrop [109], and approximately 7.3 mg protein was
acquired.
Unfortunately, during initial NMR sample preparation, most of the puriﬁed chTPH2
was lost. Therefore, another puriﬁcation of chTPH2 was performed. The puriﬁcation
protocol was followed as mentioned above.
In an attempt to increase the yield, the
protease was left to cleave for 4 hours instead of 1 hour. The resulting AC and SEC
chromatograms can be seen in Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.6: AC chromatogram from the second puriﬁcation of chTPH2.
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.7: SEC chromatogram from the second puriﬁcation of chTPH2.
To know which fractions should be collected, an SDS-PAGE of the collected fractions was
performed. The resulting SDS-PAGE can be seen in Appendix A.4. Protein concentration
was measured using Nanodrop [109], yielding approximately 10.3 mg of protein. The
increased yield suggests that allowing the protease to cleave for longer than one hour
may be beneﬁcial in future puriﬁcations.
42
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Modiﬁcation of hTPH2(1-47)
5.1
Phosphorylation of hTPH2(1-47)
Approximately half of each of the original puriﬁed 15N-labeled and unlabeled hTPH2
samples were diluted with 1.89 mL 10 mM Hepes/NaOH 10 mM MgCl2 pH 7.0 buﬀer,
10 µL of 1 M DTT, and 100 µL 0.1 M ATP, resulting in ﬁnal concentrations of 5 mM for
both ATP and DTT in a total volume of 2 mL. Phosphorylation was initiated by adding
1 µg of PKA to each sample, followed by overnight incubation at room temperature.
To remove the kinase and ATP from the samples, 0.5% v/v 99.99% TFA was added
to each sample before loading one sample at a time onto a Zorbac C18 column. The
column was prepared by equilibrating the column with RPC Buﬀer A. The process was
performed at a ﬂow rate of 4 mL/min, using 100% Buﬀer A for the ﬁrst 3 minutes. From
3 minutes onward, a linear gradient from 100% Buﬀer A to 100% RPC Buﬀer B was
applied. The chromatogram for both the unlabeled and the 15 N-labeled hTPH2(1-47)
can be seen in Figure 5.1 and 5.2.
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.1: RPC chromatogram from puriﬁcation of 15N-labeled phosphorylated hTPH2(1-47).
Figure 5.2: RPC chromatogram for unlabeled phosphorylated hTPH2(1-47).
As shown in Figure 5.1 and 5.2, the peptide did not elute as a single symmetrical peak.
Therefore, multiple fractions were collected across the peak, freeze-dried, and re-dissolved
in 250µL MQ water.
Furthermore, SDS-PAGE was performed on these fractions to
assess their purity, with the results presented in Appendix A.4. Concentrations were
determined using a Nanodrop [109], and NMR samples were prepared from each fraction.
Phosphorylation was assessed by analyzing the 1D 1H NMR spectrum from the individual
fractions (Appendix A.5). The pure fractions were subsequently pooled, freeze-dried, and
stored at -20◦C.
44
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Oxidation of hTPH2(1-47)
One aliquot of freeze dried 15N-labeled hTPH(1-47) was dissolved in 517 µL 10 mM Hep-
es/NaOH, 10 mM MgCl2, pH 7, 27.50 µL 1 M D2O with DSS, and 5 µL 1 M DTT.
To follow the oxidation process, a 1D 1H and an 1H–15N HSQC were measured. Af-
ter this, approximately 19 µL 3% H2O2 was added to obtain a 0.1% concentration. The
oxidation process was followed continuously at 10◦C for 24 hours. The H2O2 was removed
by buﬀer exchange on an Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter[110] with a 3 kDa molecular
weight cutoﬀ(MWCO).
Analysis of the resulting 1H–15N HSQC spectra revealed the absence of several peaks cor-
responding to Met1, Gln2, Pro3, Pro25, and Pro39. The missing signals was attributed
to two main factors: (1) Proline residues lack a backbone amide proton and are therefore
inherently invisible in HSQC experiments [111]; and (2) residues in the N-terminal region
often undergo conformational exchange on the intermediate NMR timescale, leading to
line broadening and subsequent signal loss [112].
Since no assignment of the oxidized variant of hTPH(1-47) is available, the 1H–15N
HSQC spectra recorded throughout the oxidation process were used to track potential
peak shifts. Shifts were observed for residues Ala4 to Ser10. The residues Met5, Met6,
and Met7 were assumed to undergo oxidation, while Ala4, Phe8, Ser9, and Ser10 were
assumed to change due to local changes in their chemical environments. Met1 is also
likely oxidized under these conditions, although its peak is not observed in the spectrum
and cannot be conﬁrmed from this data alone. However, given the clear oxidation of
Met5 to Met7, it is highly probable that Met1 is also oxidized. The movement of the
oxidized residues is shown in Figure 5.3
Figure 5.3:
1H–15N HSQC spectrum showing movement of peak placement at the beginning
(black) and the end (green) of the oxidation process of Met5, Met6, and Met7.
Movement of peak placement was, as mentioned, also observed for residue Ala4, Phe8,
Ser9, and Ser10. Their movement is shown in Figure 5.4
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.4:
1H–15N HSQC spectrum showing movement of peak placement at the beginning
(black) and at the end (green) of the oxidation process for residues aﬀected by oxidation that
do not get oxidized themselves.
Based on these observations, a preliminary assignment of oxidized hTPH2(1-47) was ob-
tained. The full 1H–15N HSQC spectrum of the oxidation of hTPH2 can be found in
Appendix A.5.
Oxidation of the unlabeled hTPH2 was carried out by dissolving one aliquot in 550
µL of 10mM Hepes, 10mM MgCl2, pH7 buﬀer, followed by the addition of approximately
19µL of 3% H2O2 to achieve a ﬁnal concentration of 0.1% H2O2 in the sample. Although
the reaction could not be directly monitored by NMR because the sample was unlabeled,
successful oxidation of the 15N-labeled hTPH2 under identical conditions supports the
assumption that the unlabeled variant underwent similar oxidation.
46
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 6
CD of hTPH2(1-47) variations
Sample preparation
CD spectroscopy was performed on three diﬀerent variants of hTPH2(1-47). An unmodi-
ﬁed variant ( hTPH2orig(1-47)), a phosphorylated variant (hTPH2phos(1-47)), and an ox-
idized variant (hTPH2ox(1-47)). Each variant was dissolved in 10 mM Hepes/NaOH, 10
mM MgCl2, pH 7 buﬀer. A freeze-dried aliquot of hTPH2orig(1-47) was dissolved in 1300
µL buﬀer, obtaining a concentration of 56.89 µM. A freeze-dried aliquot of hTPH2phos(1-
47) was dissolved in 570 µL buﬀer obtaining a concentration of 54.32 µM, and an aliquot
of hTPH2ox(1-47) was diluted with 1400 µL buﬀer obtaining a concentration of 57.13
µM. All three samples were pH adjusted to pH 7 with NaOH.
CD spectroscopy was performed on a J-1500 Circular Dichroism Spectrophotometer [113]
using an Xe lamp as a light source. Spectra were recorded at 25 ◦C in the far-UV region
from 260 to 190 nm using a scanning speed of 50 nm/min. Measurements were performed
in continuous scanning mode, starting immediately upon measurement initiation. The
wavelength interval (data pitch) was set to 0.1 nm, and the digital integration time (DIT)
was set to 2 seconds. All spectra were recorded using a quartz cuvette with a path length
of 1 mm. Each sample was recorded 15 times to improve the signal-to-noise ratio.
47
==PAGE:56==
Data processing and analysis
The raw CD spectra were baseline-corrected by subtracting the buﬀer spectrum. They
were then converted from millidegrees to mean residue ellipticity (MRE) using Equation
6.1:
[θ]MRE = θobs · 100 · MRW
c · l
(6.1)
where θobs is the observed ellipticity in millidegrees, MRW is the mean residue weight,
c is the peptide concentration in mg/mL, and l is the path length in cm. The resulting
spectra can be seen in Figure 6.1
Figure 6.1: CD spectra for hTPH2(1-47) variants.
As can be seen from Figure 6.1, the spectra for the three hTPH2(1-47) variants are quite
similar. To gain insights into the secondary structure of each variant, the CD spectra were
analyzed using BeSTSel. The secondary structure content prediction for hTPH2(1-47)
can be seen in Figure 6.2.
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.2: Secondary structure prediction based on CD spectra for hTPH2(1-47) variants.
Made with BeSTSel[65].
As seen from Figure 6.2, the three hTPH2(1-47) variants are predicted to have mainly the
same secondary structure content. The general structures are predicted to be mainly dis-
ordered (>44.3%) with hTPH2orig(1-47) displaying the highest predicted disorder(46.3%).
All three variants shows similar turn content (∼15.5 %) while their α-helix and β-sheet
content varies a bit more. hTPH2orig(1-47) shows the highest combined amount of β-
sheet (antiparallel and parallel) with 34.5% β-sheet content. Upon phosphorylation and
oxidation, the α-helix content does seem to increase slightly while the β-sheet content
decreases.
Importantly, antiparallel β-sheet is the most prominent structured element across all
three variants, decreasing slightly from 28.5% in hTPH2orig(1-47) to 25.9% and 26.7%
in hTPH2phos(1-47) and hTPH2ox(1-47), respectively. These modest reductions may re-
ﬂect minor destabilization of β-sheet interactions upon post-translational modiﬁcation.
However, the relatively high β-sheet content is somewhat surprising, considering that
hTPH2(1-47) is expected to be intrinsically disordered based on its amino acid composi-
tion and sequence properties.
One possible explanation for the elevated antiparallel β-sheet content is the formation
of aggregates during sample preparation or measurement [114]. Disordered peptides are
often prone to self-association [115]. Such aggregation can lead to the formation of in-
termolecular β-sheet structures, which predominantly adopt an antiparallel orientation
[114]. These structures contribute signiﬁcantly to CD spectra and can artiﬁcially inﬂate
49
==PAGE:58==
predicted β-sheet content [65]. Although aggregation was not visually observed, it cannot
be ruled out without complementary methods.
Another important consideration is the nature of the BeSTSel algorithm itself [65]. BeST-
Sel is a specialized software tool designed to improve the accuracy of secondary structure
prediction from CD spectra, particularly for β-sheet-rich proteins. It uses an expanded
reference set and deconvolution models that emphasize distinguishing between parallel
and antiparallel β-sheets. While this makes BeSTSel especially powerful for structured
proteins with signiﬁcant β-content, it can introduce a bias when applied to IDPs, which
typically lack stable secondary structure elements [116]. This bias may result in an over-
estimation of β-sheet content in disordered peptides like hTPH2(1-47).
To validate and improve the interpretation of the secondary structure content, comple-
mentary analyses were performed using the CDPro software package, which incorporates
the three algorithms: CDSSTR, CONTINLL, and SELCON3 [117]. The secondary struc-
ture predictions generated by CDSSTR, CONTINLL, and SELCON3 are shown in Figure
6.3, 6.4, and 6.5, respectively.
Figure 6.3: Secondary structure prediction of hTPH2(1-47) variants calculated with CDSSTR.
50
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.4: Secondary structure prediction of hTPH2(1-47) variants calculated with CON-
TINLL.
Figure 6.5: Secondary structure prediction of hTPH2(1-47) variants calculated with SELCON.
The secondary structure estimates from the three CDPro algorithms vary considerably
in values but reveal consistent trends across the three samples.
51
==PAGE:60==
All three algorithms predict substantially higher α-helix content compared to BeSTSel.
Both CDSSTR and CONTINLL estimate a baseline α-helical content of approximately
65-80%, while SELCON3 predicts a lower value of around 35%. The elevated estimates
from CDSSTR and CONTINLL are somewhat unexpected given the expected intrinsi-
cally disordered nature of hTPH2(1-47), and likely reﬂect diﬀerences in the algorithms
and their reference datasets, which were originally designed and validated for more struc-
tured proteins.
The SELCON3 data show that phosphorylation and oxidation increase the overall α-
helical content of hTPH2(1-47) from 33.8% to 39.3% and 40.9%, respectively. In con-
trast, β-strand content slightly decreases, while the proportion of unordered regions drops
from 32.0% to around 27%. These changes suggest that post-translational modiﬁcations
may stabilize helical elements and reduce conformational disorder. Similar trends were
observed with BeSTSel. Notably, the β-sheet content predicted by CDPro algorithms is
considerably lower than that predicted by BeSTSel, supporting the notion that BeSTSel
tends to overestimate β-sheet content in disordered proteins.
The variation in secondary prediction across the diﬀerent algorithms makes it diﬃcult to
say anything speciﬁc about the secondary structure content in the hTPH2(1-47) variants.
However, the results do indicate that all three hTPH2(1-47) variants exhibit highly similar
secondary structure distributions, supporting the conclusion that neither phosphorylation
nor oxidation induces major conformational changes. These ﬁndings also underscore the
importance of understanding the speciﬁc algorithms and reference datasets used in CD
analysis, as they can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the interpretation of secondary structure con-
tent, particularly for intrinsically disordered proteins. Careful selection and comparison
of methods are therefore essential for reliable conclusions.
52
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
SAXS of hTPH2 variations
Sample preparation
For SAXS measurements, the following buﬀer was used:
SAXS buﬀer: 10 mM Hepes/NaOH, 10 mM MgCl, pH 7.0.
Prior to SAXS measurements, all samples were dialyzed.
An aliquot of freeze dried
hTPH2orig(1-47) and hTPH2phos(1-47) was diluted in 1000 µL SAXS buﬀer buﬀer. An
aliquot 100 µL hTPH2ox(1-47) was diluted in 900 µL of SAXS buﬀer.
Each sample was loaded into a dialysis cassette (Thermo Scientiﬁc Slide-A-Lyzer MINI
Dialysis Devices, 3.5K MWCO [118]). Dialysis was performed against 44.5 mL of SAXS
buﬀer for two hours on an orbital shaker at room temperature. The buﬀer was then re-
placed with a fresh 44.5mL portion and dialysis continued overnight at room temperature.
Following dialysis, the samples were concentrated to ∼4 mg/mL using spin ﬁlters and
frozen in liquid nitrogen.
An initial plan to prepare samples at 6, 4, and 2 mg/ml
for a series of concentrations was abandoned due to precipitation above ∼4.3 mg/mL.
Furthermore, limited availability of puriﬁed protein restricted sample preparation: two
concentrations ( ∼2 mg/mL and ∼4 mg/mL) were prepared for hTPH2orig(1-47) and
hTPH2ox(1-47), while only one sample (∼4 mg/mL) was obtained for hTPH2phos(1-47)
as it precipitated signiﬁcantly more than the other variants.
53
==PAGE:62==
Measurements, in batch mode, were performed at the German Electron Synchrotron
DESY at the EMBL BioSAXS beamline in Hamburg. It was transported on dry ice and
stored in a freezer overnight. Before measurement, samples were thawed on ice, cen-
trifuged to remove precipitated protein, and their concentrations were veriﬁed using a
NanoDrop [109]. The measured concentrations were as follows:
hTPH2orig(1-47): 4.25 mg/mL & 1.89 mg/mL
hTPH2ox(1-47): 4.12 mg/mL & 1.88 mg/mL
hTPH2phos(1-47): 3.95 mg/mL
For SAXS measurements, 40µL of each sample was loaded onto the instrument and
measured at 20◦C
Results
The SAXS data were analyzed using PRIMUS [119]. The ﬁrst 20 signals were omitted
due to beam noise. For each SAXS experiment, 30 frames were collected throughout the
exposure. However, not all frames were included in the ﬁnal data analysis. A subset of
frames exhibiting consistent scattering proﬁles and no evidence of radiation damage was
selected for averaging and further analysis. For hTPH2orig(1-47) with concentration 4.25
mg/mL and 1.89 mg/mL, 15 and 3 frames were used, respectively. For hTPH2ox(1-47)
with concentrations 4.12 mg/mL and 1.88 mg/mL, 16 and 21 frames were used, respec-
tively. For the hTPH2phos(1-47) 14 frames were used. Based on the low number of usable
frames for hTPH2(1-47) at 1.89 mg/mL, the dataset should be regarded as unreliable
and interpreted with caution.
The ﬁrst step in analyzing the SAXS data was to inspect the log-log plot of scatter-
ing intensity (I) versus momentum transfer (q).
This allows a general assessment of
sample quality and overall particle shape in solution. Figure 7.1,7.2 and 7.3 shows the
scattering curves for hTPH2orig(1-47), hTPH2ox(1-47), and hTPH2phos(1-47).
54
==PAGE:63==
Figure 7.1: Double logarithmic plot of the scattering curves of hTPH2orig(1-47) at 4.25 mg/mL
(red) and 1.89 mg/mL (pink). Plot generated with PRIMUS [119].
Figure 7.2:
Double logarithmic plot of the scattering curves of hTPH2ox(1-47) at 4.12
mg/mL(green) and 1.88 mg/mL (yellow). Plot generated with PRIMUS [119].
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 7.3:
Double logarithmic plot of the scattering curve of hTPH2phos(1-47) at 3.95
mg/mL.Plot generated with PRIMUS [119].
As shown in all three double logarithmic plots (7.1, 7.2, 7.3), all samples exhibit strong
aggregation with hTPH2(1-47), as evidenced by the upward-turning curve in the low-q
region. Although the oxidized variant appears slightly less aggregated, the extent remains
too great to extract meaningful structural information. Consequently, no further analysis
was performed.
56
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 8
MD simulations of hTPH(1-47)
variants
Structure preparation
MD simulations were conducted on the ﬁrst 47 residues of the N-terminal tail of hTPH2.
The initial structure of hTPH2 was obtained from the AlphaFold model, AF-Q8IWU9-F1
[120], as no experimental structure is available for the N-terminal tail of hTPH2. Three
structural variants were studied: The unmodiﬁed variant (hTPH2orig(1-47)), a Ser19
phosphorylated variant (hTPH2phos(1-47)), and a Met1, Met5, Met6, and Met7 oxidized
variant (hTPH2ox(1-47)).
Structure preparation was carried out using LEaP. The systems were solvated with TIP3P
water model, with box dimensions chosen to maintain 15 Å between the solute and the
box edges. Sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) ions were added to neutralize the overall
charge and to achieve a ﬁnal salt concentration of 150 mM. Equation 8.1 was used to
calculate the number of ions needed to obtain the desired concentration.
Number of ions = Mwater
ρwater
· C · number of water molecules
(8.1)
Where Mwater is the molecular weight of water, ρwater is the density of water and C is the
wanted concentration. The number of water molecules is estimated by tleap during sol-
vation by ﬁlling the simulation box with pre-equilibrated water molecules, while ensuring
that each molecule ﬁts within the deﬁned octahedral box and does not overlap with the
solute. The ﬁnal number of water molecules is therefore determined by the volume of the
solvent box and the space occupied by the protein.
Simulations were performed in AMBER 19 [93], using multiple force ﬁelds depending
on the structure. The speciﬁc force ﬁelds used in this project can be found in Appendix
57
==PAGE:66==
A.6. Energy minimization was performed in two stages using steepest descent followed
by conjugate gradient. ncyc was varied (1000, 1250, 1500, 1750, and 2000) while keeping
the total number of minimization steps (maxcyc) ﬁxed at 5000. A nonbonded cut-oﬀof
12 Å was applied during minimization. Restraints with a force constant of 10.0 kcal/mol
· Å2 were applied to the backbone atoms during minimization. Following minimization,
each system was gradually heated from 10 K to 300 K over 150,000 steps, correspond-
ing to 300 ps, using a Langevin thermostat with a collision frequency of 5.0 ps−1. The
integration time step was 2 fs, and SHAKE was enabled to constrain bonds involving
hydrogen atoms. During heating, periodic boundary conditions in the NVT ensemble.
After heating, the systems were equilibrated in the NPT ensemble, and the temperature
was maintained at 300 K. The time step remained at 2 fs. Subsequently, production sim-
ulations were run for 100 ns with constant pH molecular dynamics (cpHMD) at a target
pH of 7.0. The simulations used a 2 fs integration time step with SHAKE constraints
applied to bonds involving hydrogen atoms. Temperature was regulated using a Langevin
thermostat with a collision frequency of 1.0 ps−1, while pressure was maintained at 1 atm
using the Monte Carlo barostat under periodic boundary conditions. A nonbonded cutoﬀ
of 12 Å was applied. A detailed description of the system preparation and the input ﬁles
used can be found in Appendix A.7.
Results
MD simulations were performed to assess the structural stability and dynamics of hTPH2orig(1-
47) as well as the eﬀects of phosphorylation and oxidation on its structure. The analysis
included backbone RMSD to evaluate overall stability and RMSF to examine residue-
level ﬂexibility. Additional metrics such as RG and SASA were also calculated to provide
insights into the compactness and behavior of the protein. Lastly, secondary structure
analysis was carried out to monitor structural elements.
The RMSD values for the simulations for each of the three variants hTPH2orig(1-47),
hTPH2phos(1-47), and hTPH2ox(1-47) can be seen in Figure 8.1a,8.1b, and 8.1c, respec-
tively.
58
==PAGE:67==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.1:
The RMSD values of the backbone heavy atoms for hTPH2orig(1-47) (a),
hTPH2phos(1-47) (b), and hTPH2ox(1-47) (c) with respect to their equilibrated structure over
time.
All simulations showed a rapid increase in RMSD values within 10 ns and stabilized
around 30 ns, suggesting equilibration to an ensemble of conformations.
The RMSD
values for the three hTPH2(1-47) variants are not considered statistically signiﬁcant and
likely reﬂect natural ﬂuctuations within the conformational ensemble.
To investigate
the structural changes associated with the increase in RMSD observed around 47 ns
for hTPH2phos(1-47) in the simulation with 1500 minimization steps, the trajectory was
visually inspected using VMD. Speciﬁcally, frames at 47 ns (just before the increase in
RMSD values), and 60 ns (after stabilization) were compared. The structural diﬀerences
between these two frames are illustrated in Figure 8.2.
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 8.2: Comparison of the 47 ns (red) and 60 ns (blue) structures from the simulation with
1500 minimization steps of hTPH2phos(1-47). The two frames were superimposed in PyMOL
by aligning the backbone atoms of residues Arg16 to Ser19 from the 47 ns structure onto the
corresponding residues of the 60 ns structure.
As shown in Figure 8.2, a relatively substantial conformational rearrangement occurs be-
tween 47 ns and 60 ns. The structure transitions from a more extended conformation to
a more compact conformation in this time frame. This is likely the cause of the observed
increase in RMSD. Similar conformational changes were observed in the hTPH2ox(1-47)
simulations with 1000, 1250, and 1500 minimization steps. Based on the stabilization of
the RMSD around 30 ns, only frames from this time point onward were included in the
subsequent analyses.
To further investigate the ﬂexibility at the residue level of the three hTPH2orig(1-47)
variants, average RMSF values were calculated per residue. These values are compared
in Figure 8.3.
Figure 8.3: Average RMSF values calculated for the hTPH2(1-47) variants. Error bars represent
the standard deviation across simulations.
As seen in Figure 8.3, all three hTPH2(1-47) variants exhibit a high degree of ﬂexibility
60
==PAGE:69==
across the entire sequence. Moreover, the RMSF proﬁles are very similar among the vari-
ants, indicating that phosphorylation or oxidation does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the overall
residue-level ﬂexibility.
To complement this residue-level analysis and gain further insight into the global confor-
mational properties for the hTPH2(1-47) variants, average RG and SASA were calculated.
The results are summarized in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1: Average RG and SASA values for each hTPH2(1-47) variant calculated over the time
interval 30–100 ns.
Structure
Average RG [Å]
Average SASA [Å2]
hTPH2orig(1-47)
11.7 ± 0.4
(38.8 ± 0.8) ·102
hTPH2phos(1-47)
12.3 ± 0.4
(40.1 ± 0.7) ·102
hTPH2ox(1-47)
12.8 ± 0.5
(40 ± 1) ·102
As seen from Table 8.1, the hTPH2(1-47) variants show no statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ference in RG and SASA values. This indicates that no substantial diﬀerences in global
compactness or solvent exposure can be concluded based on these results alone. This
suggests that phosphorylation or oxidation does not markedly alter the overall structural
dimensions of hTPH2(1-47) under the simulated conditions.
Theoretical RG values for a 47-residue peptide were calculated using Equation 2.41, yield-
ing 18.5 Å for a disordered conformation and 7.9 Å for a globular protein. The experimen-
tally observed average RG values for all three hTPH2(1-47) variants fall between these
two values, suggesting that the protein is neither fully disordered nor entirely globular.
To investigate the presence of secondary structure and assess the impact of phosphoryla-
tion and oxidation, secondary structure analysis was performed. The results are summa-
rized in the form of time-dependent "heat maps" that shows secondary structure evolution
over time. Among the resulting heat maps, the one representing the best overall average
behavior for each variant was selected for comparison. The remaining heat maps can be
found in Appendix A.8. The selected heat maps for hTPH2orig(1-47), hTPH2phos(1-47),
and hTPH2ox(1-47) are shown in Figures 8.4a, 8.4b, and 8.4c, respectively.
61
==PAGE:70==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.4: Secondary structure heat maps of hTPH2orig(1-47) from simulations with diﬀerent
minimization steps: (a) 2000 steps for hTPH2orig(1-47), (b) 1000 steps for the hTPH2phos(1-
47), and (c) 1750 steps for the hTPH2ox(1-47).
62
==PAGE:71==
As seen from Figure 8.4, the secondary structure across all variants is predominantly
disordered. This is observed for all simulations (see Appendix A.8). In hTPH2orig(1-47),
two stable α-helical regions are observed. One spanning from Ser10 to Arg16 and one
spanning from Glu26 to Ser33. Upon phosphorylation, the helix spanning from Glu26 to
Ser33 is almost completely destabilized, with only transient helical content. The Ser10
to Arg16 helix remains relatively stable. In contrast, hTPH2ox(1-47) shows less overall
disruption compared to the phosphorylated variant. The Ser10 to Arg16 α-helix remains
stable, while the Glu26 to Ser33 α-helix is only slightly destabilized and truncated to
span from Glu26 to Leu31 for the phosphorylated variant. These results suggest that
phosphorylation signiﬁcantly disrupts local secondary structure, particularly the Glu26
to Ser33 α-helix, whereas oxidation does not alter the stable secondary structure to the
same degree. The structure for hTPH2orig(1-47), hTPH2phos(1-47) and hTPH2ox(1-47)
with stable secondary structure highlighted, can be seen in Figure 8.5a, 8.5b, and 8.5c
respectively.
(a) hTPH2orig(1-47) (red)
from the simulation with
2000 minimization steps
extracted at 100 ns, show-
ing two stable α-helical
regions
(blue)
spanning
from Ser10 to Arg16 and
Glu26 to Ser33.
(b) hTPH2ox(1-47) (yellow)
from
the
simulation
with
1000 minimization steps ex-
tracted at 100 ns, showing
two stable α-helical regions
(blue) spanning from Ser10
to Arg16 and Glu26 to Leu31.
(c) hTPH2phos(1-47) (orange) from
the simulation with 1750 minimiza-
tion steps extracted at 100 ns, show-
ing one stable α-helical region (blue)
spanning from Ser10 to Arg16.
Figure 8.5: Representative structures for each hTPH2(1-47) variant highlighting stable α-helical
regions identiﬁed from secondary structure analysis.
Overall, the molecular dynamics simulations indicate that all hTPH2(1-47) variants re-
main largely disordered throughout the simulations, with stable secondary structure ele-
ments present regardless of phosphorylation or oxidation. These ﬁndings are supported
by the results from the CD analysis, which revealed highly similar secondary structure
proﬁles across the three variants. Consistently, the experimentally measured RG and
SASA values are very similar between variants and fall between the theoretical RG values
expected for a fully disordered protein and a compact globular structure. This suggests
that hTPH2(1-47) adopts a conformation that is neither fully extended nor fully folded.
63
==PAGE:72==
Taken together, these results indicate that neither phosphorylation nor oxidation induces
major conformational rearrangements, although subtle changes in secondary structure
may occur. Notably, the consistent presence of the α-helix spanning from Ser10 to Arg16
suggests it may play a functional role, although this remains to be conﬁrmed through
further investigation.
64
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 9
NMR of chTPH2 and 15N-labeled
hTPH2(1-47) variants
To investigate interactions between the catalytic domain and the hTPH2(1-47) variants,
NMR spectroscopy was performed at 10 ◦C using 800 MHz and 600 MHz spectrometers.
hTPH2orig(1-47) and hTPH2phos(1-47) were analyzed on the 800 MHz instrument, while
hTPH2ox(1-47) was measured on the 600 MHz instrument. Peak assignment was carried
out by Dr. Signe Simonsen, postdoctoral researcher at DTU.
It is assumed that iron is present in the catalytic domain, as iron was available dur-
ing protein expression.
Although DTT was added prior to the NMR experiments to
maintain a reducing environment, it is likely that the iron exists in its oxidized Fe3+
instead of Fe2+ during measurement. This assumption is based on the fact that DTT
loses its reducing eﬀect after a few hours, while the NMR experiments were conducted
over a period exceeding 24 hours.
9.1
15N-labeled hTPH2(1-47) and chTPH2
Approximately 0.5 mg 15N-labeled hTPH2orig(1-47) was dissolved in 200 µL 10 mM Hep-
es/NaOH 10 mM MgCl2 pH 7.0 buﬀer. The pH was adjusted to pH 7.0 using 1 M NaOH,
and the concentration was measured using a Nanodrop [109].
Two 325 µL samples were prepared using 10 mM HEPES/NaOH and 10 mM MgCl2
buﬀer (pH 7) with 5 µM dithiothreitol (DTT). D2O containing 2 mM 2,2-dimethyl-2-
silapentane-5-sulfonate (DSS) was then added to each sample to reach a ﬁnal concentra-
tion of 5% (v/v) D2O. Both samples contained 40 µM hTPH2orig(1–47). One contained
only hTPH2orig(1–47), while the other also included 80 µM chTPH2, resulting in a 1:2
ratio of hTPH2orig(1–47) to chTPH2.
65
==PAGE:74==
Both a 1D 1H and an 1H–15N HSQC spectrum were measured. However, only the 1H–15N
HSQC’s were used for analysis. An overlay of the resulting 1H–15N HSQCs is shown in
Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1: Alignment of 1H–15N HSQC spectra from sample without chTPH2 (black) and sam-
ple with both chTPH2 and hTPH2orig(1-47) (red). The spectrum was analyzed with CcpNmr
Analysis [121] and illustrated with InkScape [122].
As can be seen from Figure 9.1, several residue peaks are missing when chTPH2 is present.
This indicates that these residues interact with the catalytic domain. To quantify the
binding, the normalized intensity values were plotted as a function of the residue number.
This is visualized in Figure 9.2.
66
==PAGE:75==
Figure 9.2: Intensity plot for hTPH2orig(1-47):chTPH2 at molar ratio 1:2.
From Figure 9.2, it can be seen that residues Ala4 to Gly17 almost completely disappear,
and the intensities of the following residues slowly increase. This indicates that residues
Ala4 to Gly17 have a strong interaction with the catalytic domain, while the following
residues interact decreasingly with the catalytic domain. Residues Ser33 to Lys47 seem to
have only a slight decrease in intensity, indicating that these residues are more dynamic,
possibly due to limited interactions with chTPH2. Some residue values were discarded
due to overlapping peaks giving an incorrect intensity; these were Glu26 and Glu27, Met6
and Gln29, Met7 and Lys43.
To investigate the concentration-dependent behavior of the interaction between hTPHorig(1-
47) and the catalytic domain, a series of NMR measurements was performed at varying
concentrations. This was done by adding the sample containing both hTPH2orig(1-47)
and chTPH2 to the sample containing only hTPH2orig(1-47) to obtain a ratio of 1:0.25,
1:0.5, and 1:1 of hTPH(1-47) and the catalytic domain, respectively. The normalized
intensity values plotted as a function of residue number can be seen in Figure 9.3.
Figure 9.3: Normalized intensities for hTPH2orig(1-47):chTPH2 at diﬀerent molar ratios.
67
==PAGE:76==
As can be seen from Figure 9.3, the intensity of the binding residues (residue Ala4
to Leu31) decreases as the concentration of chTPH2 increases.
This indicates that
hTPH2orig(1-47) engages in a concentration-dependent interaction with the catalytic do-
main.
The degree of binding strength per residue is illustrated on the structure from the
hTPH2orig(1-47) simulation with 1500 minimization steps extracted at 100 ns in Fig-
ure 9.4.
Figure 9.4: Structure of hTPH2orig(1-47) from simulation with 1500 minimization steps. Blue
colored regions correspond to regions where the intensity completely disappears. Green colored
regions indicate where intensity increases gradually. Red colored regions indicate where inten-
sities hardly change. Visualized with PyMol [123].
To further investigate the structural properties of the hTPH2orig(1-47) region, secondary
chemical shifts (SCS) of Cα, Cβ, and backbone carbonyl carbon were analyzed. The
data originate from assignments of hTPH2(1-47), kindly shared by Signe Simonsen, post-
doctoral researcher at DTU. SCS provides insight into the local secondary structure, as
deviations from random coil values correlate with the formation of α-helices or β-sheets
[124]. The random coil chemical shifts used to calculate the SCS were generated using
Potenci [125], which estimates random coil values based on protein sequence, pH, ionic
strength, and temperature. The reference SCS was calculated at pH 6.85, ionic strength
= 0.01 M, and temp =10 ◦C to match the parameters of the assignment experiment. The
resulting The SCS plots for Cα, Cβ, and backbone carbonyls can be seen in Figure 9.5a,
9.5b, 9.5c respectively.
68
==PAGE:77==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9.5: Secondary chemical shifts (∆δ) for Cα (a), Cβ (b), and backbone carbonyls (c) of
hTPH2(1-47).
Positive SCS values for Cα and backbone carbonyls, together with negative SCS values for
Cβ in the Ser10 to Arg16 region, indicate the presence of an α-helix. This corresponds
nicely with the stable α-helix found in the same region in the MD simulations of the
hTPH2(1-47) variants. The agreement between experimental and computational data
strengthens the evidence for this structural feature.
69
==PAGE:78==
To investigate the binding properties further, the experiment was repeated - this time
with a higher concentration of both hTPH2orig(1-47) and chTPH2 in a molar ratio of 1:4.
Two 325 µL samples were prepared using 10 mM HEPES/NaOH and 10 mM MgCl2
buﬀer (pH 7) with 5 µM DTT. D2O containing 2 mM DSS was then added to each
sample to reach a ﬁnal concentration of 5% (v/v) D2O. Both samples contained 50 µM
hTPH2orig(1–47). One contained only hTPH2orig(1–47), while the other also contained
200 µM chTPH2, resulting in a 1:4 ratio of hTPH2orig(1–47) to chTPH2.
Results
An overlay of the resulting 1H–15N HSQCs is shown in Figure 9.6.
Figure 9.6: Alignment of 1H–15N HSQC specta from sample without chTPH2 (black) and sam-
ple with both chTPH2 and hTPH2orig(1-47) (red). The spectrum was analyzed with CcpNmr
Analysis [121] and illustrated with InkScape [122].
70
==PAGE:79==
As expected, several peaks disappear from Figure 9.6 when chTPH2 is present. The nor-
malized intensity values were plotted as a function of residue number. This is visualized
in Figure 9.11.
Figure 9.7: Normalized intensities for hTPH2orig(1-47):chTPH2 at molar ratio 1:4.
As expected, the intensity plot closely resembles that of the lower concentration sample
(Figure 9.2). However, in this experiment, several residues (Gln29 to Ser34) exhibit slight
chemical shift changes that was not observed at lower concentrations. For these residues,
the signal strength was measured at ﬁxed positions in both spectra. However, because
the signals shifted slightly between the two measurements, these ﬁxed positions no longer
captured the strongest part of the signal. This means that the measured intensities are
lower than the true values. This leads to an underestimation of their intensities, which
should be kept in mind. The observed chemical shift perturbations may indicate subtle
structural rearrangements or transient interactions in this region. One possibility is that
hTPH2orig(1-47) undergoes self-association when bound to the catalytic domain, which
could lead to the local environment changes observed for residues Gln29 to Ser34.
To examine the concentration-dependent behavior of hTPH2orig(1-47) at elevated con-
centrations, NMR experiments were conducted across a series of varying molar ratios
between hTPH2orig(1-47) and chTPH2: 1:0.25, 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:2. The corresponding
normalized intensity values plotted as a function of residue number can be seen in Figure
9.8.
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 9.8: Normalized intensities for hTPH2orig(1-47):chTPH2 at diﬀerent molar ratios.
Consistent with observations at lower hTPH2(1-47) concentrations, the intensities of
the binding residues decrease as the concentration of the catalytic domain increases,
indicating an interaction between the catalytic domain and hTPH2orig(1-47). However,
these results alone are insuﬃcient to identify the binding site on the catalytic domain,
so it remains uncertain whether hTPH2orig(1-47) binds to the active site of chTPH2.
Nonetheless, some form of binding occurs between hTPH2orig(1-47) and chTPH2. To
pinpoint the exact binding site, the experiment could be reversed by performing it with
15N-labeled chTPH2, thereby elucidating which residues in chTPH2 that are involved in
binding of hTPH2.
72
==PAGE:81==
9.2
15N-labeled phosphorylatedhTPH2(1-47) and chTPH2
Two 325 µL samples were prepared using 10 mM HEPES/NaOH and 10 mM MgCl2
buﬀer (pH 7) with 5 µM DTT. D2O containing 2 mM DSS was then added to each
sample to reach a ﬁnal concentration of 5% (v/v) D2O. Both samples contained 50 µM
hTPH2phos(1–47).
One sample contained only hTPH2phos(1–47), while the other also
included 200 µM chTPH2, resulting in a 1:4 ratio of hTPH2phos(1–47) to chTPH2. pH
was adjusted with 1 M NaOH to pH 7.
Results
The two 1H–15N HSQC spectra were aligned This is shown in Figure 9.9.
Figure 9.9: Alignment of 1H–15N HSQC spectra from sample without chTPH2 (black) and
sample with both chTPH2 and hTPH2phos(1-47) (orange). The spectrum was analyzed with
CcpNmr Analysis [121] and illustrated with InkScape [122].
Similarly to hTPH2orig(1-47), several residue peaks are missing upon addition of the
catalytic domain. This indicates that the catalytic domain and hTPH2phos(1-47) still
73
==PAGE:82==
interact. The normalized intensity values were plotted as a function of residue number.
This is visualized in Figure 9.10.
Figure 9.10: Intensity plot for hTPH2phos(1-47):chTPH2 at molar ratio 1:4.
As seen in Figure 9.10 several intensities nearly disappear. For the ﬁrst Met1 to Gly17,
the intensity is almost completely lost, after which it gradually increases. This indicates
a gradual decrease in binding aﬃnity. Some binding interactions appear to occur around
Ser33 to Asn40, similarly to what is observed for hTPH2orig(1-47). This suggests a simi-
lar binding mechanism between hTPH2orig(1-47) and hTPH2phos(1-47). The intensities of
Met7, Lys11, Glu26, Glu27, Asp45, and Asp46 were excluded due to peak overlap. To see
if the concentration-dependent behavior of hTPH2(1-23) was changed upon phosphory-
lation, a series of NMR measurements was performed at varying concentrations between
hTPH2phos(1-47) and chTPH2 at molar ratios: 1:0.25, 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:2. The resulting
normalized intensity values plotted as a function of residue number can be seen in Figure
9.11
Figure 9.11: Normalized intensities for diﬀerent hTPH2phos(1-47):chTPH2 ratios.
As shown in Figure 9.11, the intensities of binding residues decrease as the concentration
74
==PAGE:83==
of the catalytic domain increases, similar to what is seen for hTPH2orig(1-47). To directly
compare the two variants, the intensity plots at the 1:4 ratio for hTPH2orig(1-47) and
hTPH2phos(1-47) were combined. This can be seen in Figure 9.12
Figure 9.12: Comparison of intensity plot for hTPH2phos(1-47):chTPH2 and hTPH2orig(1-
47):chTPH2 at a 1:4 molar ratio.
As shown in Figure 9.12, the binding behavior of the two variants is largely similar, sug-
gesting a shared binding mechanism. However, hTPH2orig(1-47) exhibits reduced peak
intensity in the region spanning residues Phe18 to Leu31 compared to hTPH2phos(1-47),
potentially indicating slightly stronger binding in this region for hTPH2orig(1-47). Con-
versely, residues Gly32 to Lys47 show lower intensity in hTPH2phos(1-47, which may
suggest enhanced binding in this region upon phosphorylation.
To complement the intensity data and further understand the eﬀect of Ser19 phospho-
rylation on the local structure, SCS of Cα, Cβ, and backbone carbonyl carbons were
analyzed for hTPH2phos(1-47). The data originate from assignments of phosphorylated
hTPH2phos(1-47), kindly shared by Signe Simonsen, postdoctoral researcher at DTU. The
results can be seen in Figure 9.13a, 9.13b, and 9.13c, respectively.
75
==PAGE:84==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9.13: Secondary chemical shifts (∆δ) for Cα (a), Cβ (b), and backbone carbonyls (c) of
hTPH2phos(1-47).
Based on the SCS results, phosphorylation of Ser19 in hTPH2(1-47) seems to destabilize
the α-helix motif between residue Ser10 to Arg16. In general, the secondary structure
seems less deﬁned for hTPH2phos(1-47), this aligns with the observed secondary structure
tendencies for MD simulations of hTPH2phos(1-47), which also showed a small destabi-
lization of the α-helix between residue Ser10 and Arg16 upon phosphorylation.
These ﬁndings suggest that phosphorylation at Ser19 does not abolish interaction with
the catalytic domain but may slightly modulate the binding interactions, possibly by
destabilization of the α-helix between residues Ser10 to Arg16.
76
==PAGE:85==
9.3
Oxidized 15N-labeled hTPH2(1-47) and chTPH2
Sample preparation
Two 325 µL samples were prepared using 10 mM HEPES/NaOH and 10 mM MgCl2
buﬀer (pH 7) with 5 µM DTT. D2O containing 2 mM DSS was added to each sample to
reach a ﬁnal concentration of 5% (v/v) D2O. Both samples contained 50 µM hTPH2ox(1-
47). One sample contained only hTPH2ox(1-47), while the other also included 200 µM
chTPH2, resulting in a 1:4 ratio of hTPH2ox(1-47) to chTPH2.
Results
The two resulting spectra were aligned. This is shown in Figure 9.14.
Figure 9.14: Alignment of 1H–15N HSQC specta from sample without chTPH2 (black) and
sample with both chTPH2 and hTPH2orig(1-47) (green).
As can be seen in Figure 9.14, no peaks seem to disappear in the presence of chTPH2 for
77
==PAGE:86==
hTPH2ox(1-47), which indicates that the binding is signiﬁcantly weakened upon oxidation
of hTPH2(1-47). The normalized intensity values were plotted as a function of residue
number. This is visualized in Figure 9.15.
Figure 9.15: Intensity plot for hTPH2ox(1-47):chTPH2 in ratio 1:4. Glu36 and Glu27 were
excluded due to overlapping peaks.
In contrast to hTPH2orig(1-47), hTPH2ox(1-47) does not show a marked decrease in in-
tensity upon addition of the catalytic domain. This indicates a signiﬁcant decrease in
binding aﬃnity towards the catalytic domain. The slight decrease in intensity observed
at residues Phe8 to Ser9, and Lys11 to Leu20 may suggest some interaction with the
catalytic domain, though to a much lesser extent than observed with hTPH2orig(1-47).
Interestingly, this region is the same region in which the stable α-helix is observed based
on SCS values for hTPH2orig(1-47) and hTPH2phos(1-47) as well as in the secondary
structure analysis of the MD simulations of the hTPH2(1-47) variants. This supports the
notion that the α-helix is an important motif for binding hTPH2(1-47) and chTH2.
To investigate the eﬀect of the concentration-dependent behavior of hTPH2ox(1-47) upon
oxidation, a series of NMR measurements was performed at varying concentrations be-
tween hTPH2ox(1-47) and chTPH2 at molar ratios 1:0.25, 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:2. The nor-
malized intensity plot can be seen in Figure 9.16
78
==PAGE:87==
Figure 9.16: Normalized intensities for diﬀerent hTPH2ox(1-47):chTPH2 ratios.
No real changes occur in the intensities upon increase in the concentration of the cat-
alytic domain except for the decrease around residues Ser10 to Leu20. To enable direct
comparison with hTPH2orig(1-47). The 1:4 ratio intensity plots for hTPH2ox(1-47) and
hTPH2orig(1-47) were combined. This can be seen in Figure 9.17
Figure 9.17:
Comparison of intensity plot for hTPH2ox(1-47):chTPH2 and hTPH2orig(1-
47):chTPH2 at a 1:4 molar ratio.
As shown in Figure 9.17, clear diﬀerences in binding aﬃnity are observed between hTPH2orig(1-
47) and hTPH2ox(1-47) toward the catalytic domain. These ﬁndings suggest that methio-
nine oxidation in hTPH2orig(1-47) could potentially play an important role in modulating
the interaction between the catalytic domain and the N-terminal tail.
Oxidation of methionine as a regulatory mechanism is mechanistically plausible consider-
ing the reactivity of the hTPH2 active site. The catalytic mechanism of hTPH2 involves
the formation of a high-valent Fe(IV)=O intermediate through reaction of Fe(II), BH−
4 ,
79
==PAGE:88==
and molecular oxygen. This highly reactive oxoferryl species hydroxylates the aromatic
ring of tryptophan, and given the high susceptibility of methionine to oxidation, it is likely
that the same species can oxidize methionine [126]. Furthermore, oxidized methionines
can be converted back to methionine by enzymes called methionine sulfoxide reductases
[127], making the mechanism reversible. Therefore, the observed changes in interaction
between hTPH2ox(1-47) and chTPH2 upon oxidation of hTPH2(1-47) could suggest a
regulatory mechanism involving methionine oxidation by the same catalytic machinery
responsible for tryptophan hydroxylation. A possible reaction scheme for the oxidation
of methionine via the active site of hTPH2 can be seen in Figure 9.18
Figure 9.18: Possible reaction mechanism for oxidation of methionine by the active site of
hTPH2 using Fe(II), BH−
4 , and O2 and its reduction back to methionine by methionine sulfoxide
reductase. Inspired by [128] and [129]. Made in ChemDraw [17]
80
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 10
MD simulations of chTPH
Structure preparation
Before running MD simulations on the complex between the N-terminal tail and the cat-
alytic domain, the stability and ﬂexibility of chTPH2 alone were assessed through MD
simulations. Although a crystal structure of this domain is available (PDB ID: 4V06),
it contains signiﬁcant structural gaps, including approximately 100 missing side-chains,
which limits its reliability for simulations.
As part of the course 27325 Advanced Protein Structure Engineering and Analysis, the
4V06 structure was reﬁned using the program Coot [130] to improve structural complete-
ness and quality. Missing residues were modeled into the electron density, and iterative
rounds of reﬁnement were performed. Table 10.1 summarizes the progression of the model
across three key reﬁnement stages.
Table 10.1: Comparison of model quality at diﬀerent reﬁnement stages. 4V06 is the original
structure, with residues is the structure after adding the missing residues. Optimized is the
ﬁnal optimized structure.
4V06
With residues
Optimized
Ramachandran outliers: 0.15%
Rotamer outliers: 3.12%
Clashscore 8.01
Ramachandran favored: 96.79%
R-work: 0.2124
R-free: 0.2561
Overall score: 2.01
Ramachandran outliers: 0.44%
Rotamer outliers: 5.56%
Clashscore 12.0
Ramachandran favored: 95.04%
R-work: 0.2053
R-free: 0.2538
Overall score: 2.50
Ramachandran outliers: 0.14%
Rotamer outliers: 2.58%
Clashscore 10.03
Ramachandran favored: 97.84%
R-work: 0.1884
R-free: 0.2336
Overall score: 1.87
The Ramachandran outliers indicate how many backbone φ/ψ angles fall outside favored
regions, where fewer outliers suggest a more physically plausible structure.
Rotamer
outliers reﬂect unusual side-chain conformations. The clashscore measures steric clashes
between atoms, which ideally should be minimized. Ramachandran favored values shows
the percentage of residues in energetically preferred backbone conformations.
81
==PAGE:90==
The R-work and R-free values assess how well the model ﬁts the experimental X-ray
data, where lower values indicate a better ﬁt. R-work is calculated from the data used
during reﬁnement, while R-free is based on a subset withheld for validation.
As shown in Table 10.1, the initial 4V06 structure already has relatively good geome-
try. However, after modeling the missing residues, the structural quality initially worsens
slightly, as seen from the increase in clash score and outlier percentages in column 2 in
Table 10.1. Following further reﬁnement, the ﬁnal model shows clear improvements across
all metrics, including reduced R-factors and higher Ramachandran-favored percentage.
Overall, the optimized model provides a more complete and reliable starting point for
molecular dynamics simulations.
The structure was simpliﬁed to a monomeric catalytic domain, retaining only the protein,
and prepared using the same protocol as for hTPH2(1-47) (see Appendix A.6 and A.7).
Results
Molecular dynamics simulations were carried out to investigate the stability and confor-
mational dynamics of the optimized structure. Analysis included backbone RMSD values
to evaluate global stability and RMSF to assess residue-level ﬂexibility.
The RMSD values for the simulations of chTPH2 can be seen in Figure 10.1
Figure 10.1: RMSD values for chTPH2 as a function of time.
82
==PAGE:91==
As can be seen from Figure 10.1, the RMSD value remained mostly constant during the
simulations, indicating that major conformational changes occuring during the simula-
tions.
However, an ∼2.5 Å increase in RMSD is observed at ∼65 ns for simulations
with 1750 and 2000 minimization steps. This increase was investigated further by visu-
alizing the structure in VMD. The discrepancies were found to be an α-helix spanning
from residue Leu142 to Asp150, losing interactions with the beta sheet (residue Ile454 to
Lys458) and regaining them. This is visualized in Figure 10.2.
(a)
Structure
from
60
ns
(green) aligned with structure
from 65 ns (red). Distance be-
tween Cα in Leu142 in both
structures. Measurements and
visualization made with PyMol
[123].
(b)
Structure
from
60
ns
(green) aligned with structure
from 70 ns (yellow). Distance
between Cα in Leu142 in both
structures. Measurements and
visualization made with PyMol
[123].
(c) Structure from 60 ns (green)
aligned with structure from 100
ns (blue).
Distance between
Cα in Leu142 in both struc-
tures.
Measurements and vi-
sualization made with PyMol
[123].
Figure 10.2: Movement of α-helix (residue 1-4) causing spike in RMSD values for simulation
2000.
As can be seen from Figure 10.2, the α-carbon of the ﬁrst residue moves 16.2 Å away
from its initial position. At 70 ns, the ﬁrst residue is only 4 Å away from the original
position. At 100 ns, the residue is almost back at the initial position with only a 2 Å
diﬀerence. This movement could explain the discrepancy in RMSD. A similar movement
was observed for the simulation with 1750 minimization steps.
To investigate the ﬂuctuation of each residue, the RMSF values were calculated. These
are summarized in Figure 10.3.
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure 10.3: RMSF values for 10-100 ns simulations of chTPH2.
As can be seen from Figure 10.3, there is very little ﬂuctuation for the structure in gen-
eral. A little more mobility is observed in the N-terminal.
In summary, the optimized chTPH2 catalytic domain structure demonstrated good over-
all stability throughout the simulations, as evidenced by relatively stable RMSD values
and low RMSF ﬂuctuations across most residues. The transient increase in RMSD ob-
served around 65 ns in some simulations is attributable to reversible rearrangements
involving the N-terminal α-helix, highlighting a local ﬂexibility rather than global un-
folding.
84
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 11
MD simulations of hTPH2(1-23)
variants in complex with chTPH2
Structure preparation
MD simulations were performed on the N-terminal tail and the catalytic domain of hTPH2
to gain a deeper understanding of their binding interactions. The structure was prepared
in LEaP by combining the catalytic domain with the ﬁrst 23 residues of the N-terminal
tail. These residues were chosen based on both the NMR results and the conservation
and consensus plots (Figure 1.7). The C-terminal of all three hTPH2(1-23) variants were
capped with N-methylamide to avoid a C-terminal charge that could potentially distort
the results.
Results
The global stability of the complex was evaluated based on the time evolution of RMSD.
The results can be seen in Figure 11.1.
Figure 11.1: RMSD values for hTPH2orig(1-23)-chTPH2 complex as a function of time.
85
==PAGE:94==
As seen in Figure 11.1, most trajectories exhibited stable RMSD proﬁles, ﬂuctuating
between 2.0 and 3.0 Å throughout the 600 ns simulations. This indicate that the overall
structural integrity of the complex was maintained. However, for the simulation with
1750 minimization steps, a noticeable increase in RMSD values was observed. To further
investigate this deviation, RMSD calculations were performed on the catalytic domain
and hTPH2orig(1-23) individually. The results can be seen in Figure 11.2a and 11.2b,
respectively
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.2: RMSD values of chTPH2 (a) and hTPH2(1- 23) (b) in complex as a function of
time
As shown in Figure 11.2a, the RMSD values for chTPH2 show little ﬂuctuation as ex-
pected. The trajectories for the simulations with 1000 and 1750 minimization steps was
investigated in VMD due to their increase in RMSD values.
A movement of the N-
terminal of chTPH2 was observed, similar to the observation made in the simulations
of the catalytic domain alone (Figure 10.2). As seen in Figure 11.2b hTPH2orig(1-23)
exhibits signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations throughout the simulations, indicating considerable con-
formational ﬂexibility.
The ﬂexibility was investigated at the residue level of the complex. The average RMSF
values for each residue were calculated.
The RMSF values for the catalytic domain
showed a very low degree of ﬂexibility and showed little to no diﬀerence from the one
calculated for the MD simulations of chTPH2 alone (see Figure 10.3). Therefore, these
results are not shown but can be found in Appendix A.8. The average RMSF values for
hTPH2orig(1-23) in complex with chTPH2 can be found in Figure 11.3.
86
==PAGE:95==
Figure 11.3: Average RMSF values for 600 ns simulations of hTPH2orig(1-23) in complex with
chTPH2. Error bars represent the standard deviation across simulations.
As shown in Figure 11.3, hTPH2orig(1-23) exhibits low ﬂexibility in the N-terminal region
and signiﬁcantly higher ﬂexibility toward the C-terminal. This suggests that the mobility
of the N-terminus is limited by interactions with chTPH2, whereas the C-terminal region
interacts less strongly with the catalytic domain, which allows for greater mobility of this
region.
To complement the residue-level analysis and provide a broader view of the global con-
formational behavior of hTPH2orig(1-23) in complex with chTPH2, the average RG and
SASA were calculated for hTPH2orig(1-23). The results are summarized in Table 11.1.
Table 11.1: Average RG and SASA values for hTPH2orig(1-23) in complex with chTPH2 from
30-100 ns.
Structure
Average 1000
Average 1250
Average 1500
Average 1750
Average 2000
Average
RG [Å]
9.3 ± 0.4
9.2 ± 0.2
10.2 ± 0.4
10.1 ± 0.4
10.9 ± 0.6
9.9 ± 0.3
SASA [Å2]
(13 ± 1)·102
(15 ± 1)·102
(14 ± 1)·102
(15 ± 1) ·102
(15 ± 1) ·102
(14 ± 1)·102
Using Equation 2.41, the theoretical RG values were calculated for both a 23-residue
intrinsically disordered protein and a globular protein. These were calculated to 12.1 Å
and 6.3 Å, respectively. The calculated RG average for hTPHorig(1-47) indicates that the
structure of hTPH2orig(1-23) is somewhere in between fully disordered and fully globular.
To evaluate the potential impact of complex formation on secondary structure, a sec-
ondary structure analysis was performed for each trajectory.
From the resulting sets
87
==PAGE:96==
of secondary structure heat maps, the one that best represented the average structural
behavior was selected.
The full set of heat maps is available in Appendix A.8.
The
representative heat map for hTPH2orig(1-23) is shown in Figures 11.4.
Figure 11.4: Secondary structure heat map of hTPH2orig(1-23) in complex with chTPH2 from
simulation with 1250 minimization steps showing secondary structure as a function of time.
All simulations showed varying degrees of secondary structure throughout the simula-
tions.
However, the α-helix spanning from Ser10 to Arg16 was the only consistently
secondary structure element across all hTPH2orig(1-23) simulations. The presence of the
stable α-helix upon complexation further supports that this region may be important in
hTPH2.
To investigate the interactions between hTPH2orig(1-23) and chTPH2, a clustering anal-
ysis was performed on each trajectory. K-means clustering (k = 20) was applied to the
backbone RMSD. The resulting clusters showed minimal variation, suggesting that the
simulations for each variant explored similar conformational states. In hindsight, the
chosen value of k may have been too high, as many of the clusters were highly similar.
This also explains the relatively low population of the most dominant cluster (18.4%).
Due to the high degree of similarity between clusters, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences could be
distinguished among them. When considering the combined presence of the four most
dominant clusters (18.4%, 18.3%, 13.7%, and 12.1%), they represent a substantial por-
tion of the total conformational ensemble. The remaining clusters each account for less
than 5% but still display high structural similarity. The four most present clusters can
be seen in Figure ??
88
==PAGE:97==
Figure 11.5: The four most populated clusters from the k-means clustering of the hTPH2orig(1-
23)-chTPH2 complex trajectories, representing 18.4% (blue), 18.3% (red), 13.7% (green), and
12.1% (orange) of the total conformational ensemble. Despite the low individual percentages,
these clusters collectively account for a substantial portion of the sampled conformations. All
four clusters exhibit high structural similarity. Made in PyMol [123].
A summary of the clustering analysis is provided in Appendix A.8, and the most repre-
sentative cluster for hTPH2orig(1-23) is shown in Figure 11.6
Figure 11.6: Most prevalent cluster across simulations for hTPH2orig(1-23). hTPH2orig(1-23) is
colored red (18.4%) and chTPH2 is shown in grey. Ser10 to Arg16 colored blue. The percentage
indicates the proportion of simulation time the cluster was observed. Made in PyMol [123]
As seen in Figure 11.6, the N-terminal tail is buried within the catalytic domain, suggest-
ing a stable interaction between hTPH2orig(1-23) and the catalytic domain. To explore
these interactions in more detail, the binding motifs of each cluster were examined in Py-
Mom [123] by identifying residues in chTPH2 that were within 3.5 Å of hTPH2orig(1-23).
Interestingly, the N-terminal residues of hTPH2orig(1-23) comes within 3.5 Å of Ile412, a
residue which binds the natural substrate, L-Trp, in the catalytic domain. This proximity
89
==PAGE:98==
suggests that the N-terminal tail of hTPH2 may bind the catalytic domain in a way that
mimics substrate binding, potentially acting as a competitor at the active site of chTPH2
or could possibly contribute to substrate coordination. However, given that deletion of
the ﬁrst 44 N-terminal residues increases enzymatic activity, a competitive role appears
more plausible.
Peptide modiﬁcations
To investigate the impact of phosphorylation and oxidation on complex formation be-
tween hTPH2(1-23) and chTPH2, MD simulations were run on these complexes as well.
Both phosphorylation and oxidation exhibited similar RMSD, RMSF, RG, and SASA
values compared to hTPH2orig(1-23), indicating that the post-translational modiﬁcations
do not signiﬁcantly alter the overall structure of hTPH2(1-23). Average RG and SASA
values for the modiﬁed variants are provided in Appendix A.8. However, both modiﬁca-
tions appear to slightly destabilize the α-helix spanning Ser10 to Arg16, as indicated by
a transient loss of helical structure, particularly at the N- and C-terminal ends, where
the structure shifts from helix structure to turns or bends. This observation supports
the observed SCS results, which also showed minor destabilization of the α-helix upon
phosphorylation. Together, these ﬁndings suggest that phosphorylation and oxidation
may locally alter the secondary structure of hTPH2(1-23).
A clustering analysis was also performed on the modiﬁed hTPH2(1-23) variants. Both
hTPH2phos(1-23) and hTPH2ox(1-23) had their N-terminal residues anchored in the cat-
alytic domain with a more ﬂexible C-terminal, consistent with the behavior observed for
hTPH2orig(1-23) (Figure 11.6). This indicates that the binding of hTPH2orig(1-23) to
chTPH2 is not signiﬁcantly altered upon phosphorylation or oxidation.
Together, these results indicate that neither phosphorylation nor oxidation of hTPH2(1-
23) leads to major structural changes or alters the interaction interface with chTPH2
signiﬁcantly. However, both PTMs appeared to subtly destabilize the secondary struc-
ture of the N-terminal tail, which could aﬀect binding aﬃnity to the catalytic domain.
This could have been investigated by estimating the binding free energy for the diﬀerent
variants. However, due to time constraints, this analysis was not performed.
The binding behavior of the phosphorylated variant is consistent with the observed NMR
results, which showed that hTPH2phos(1-23) interacts with the catalytic domain. In con-
trast, the N-terminal residues of hTPH2ox(1-23) remained anchored in the active site
of chTPH2 in the MD simulations, which does not reﬂect the NMR ﬁndings.
These
90
==PAGE:99==
suggested a signiﬁcant reduction in binding, particularly in the N-terminal region if
hTPH2ox(1-47).
This discrepancy suggests that additional factors may inﬂuence the
binding behavior of the oxidized variant. Another possible explanation is the diﬀerence
in construct length. The MD simulations only included the ﬁrst 23 residues, whereas
the NMR experiments used a 47-residue segment. This highlights a limitation of the
simulation setup, as it may not fully capture the dynamics observed in the experimental
data.
Simulation with Iron
To investigate whether or not the presence of iron (Fe) in the active site aﬀects binding
of the hTPH2(1-23) variants to the catalytic domain, MD simulations with Fe present
in the active site were performed. Since the crystal structure already includes Fe, it was
simply kept in the structure during structure preparation. A description of the structure
preparation can be found in Appendix A.3.
The parameters for Fe were assigned, using the nonbonded Li and Merz 12-6-4 ion model
[131]. This model is compatible with the TIP3P water model and provides Lennard-Jones
parameters for monovalent and polyvalent ions.
Fe was chosen to be in oxidation state 3+ (Fe3+).
This is consistent with the enzy-
matic mechanism of the catalytic domain of hTPH2, where Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+ upon
binding of the cofactor BH−
4 . The ferrous form is catalytically active and participates in
forming a reactive oxygen species for substrate hydroxylation. In the absence of BH−
4 , the
iron remains in the ferric (Fe3+) state, rendering the enzyme inactive [132]. The reaction
mechanism for this reaction can be seen in Figure 11.7 [133].
91
==PAGE:100==
Figure 11.7: Reaction mechanism for the formation of L-5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) from L-
Trp: The chTPH2·Fe(II)·BH−
4 complex binds L-Trp and O2, catalyzing the conversion of L-Trp
to 5-HTP and BH−
4 to BH3OH. BH3OH is then further processed by pterin-4a-carbinolamine
dehydratase (PCD) into BH2, which is subsequently regenerated to BH−
4 by dihydropteridine
reductase (DHPR) using NADH as a cofactor. Additionally, molecular oxygen can oxidize the
TPH2·Fe(II) complex to TPH2·Fe(III), which is reactivated back to the Fe(II) state through
reduction by BH−
4 . Made in ChemDraw [17]
The presence of Fe3+ did not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the RMSD, RMSF, RG, and SASA val-
ues for the hTPH2(1-23) variants. This indicates that the presence of Fe3+ in the active
site does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the overall structure of the hTPH2(1-23) variants when
in complex with chTPH2. Average RG, and SASA values and additional analyses are
provided in Appendix A.8
The secondary structure of the hTPH2(1-23) variants appears to be inﬂuenced by the
presence of Fe3+. The α-helix spanning from Ser10 to Arg16 is maintained across all
simulations, it is generally destabilized to a similar extent in all variants. This suggests
that while the presence of Fe3+ may inﬂuence the secondary structure, it does not aﬀect
the variants diﬀerently. It also implies that in the inactive Fe3+ state, the N-terminal
tail becomes more conformationally ﬂexible regardless of the speciﬁc modiﬁcation, which
may alter its interaction with the catalytic domain.
Clustering analysis was also performed on the modiﬁed variants. The most prevalent
cluster of hTPH2orig(1-23) and hTPH2phos(1-23) were very similar to those observed in
the absence of Fe3+. In contrast, hTPH2ox(1-23) showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences. The N-
terminal of hTPH2ox(1-23) left the binding pocket of chTPH2 in the presence of Fe3+.
The decrease in binding aﬃnity of the N-terminal residues of hTPH2ox(1-23) aligns well
with the observed NMR data, which also showed an increase in intensities for the N-
terminal residues of the oxidized variant. This suggests that the N-terminal is released
from the catalytic domain upon oxidation. Importantly, hTPH2ox(1-23) does not fully
dissociate from chTPH2 during the simulations and remains bound, consistent with ob-
servations from the NMR experiments.
92
==PAGE:101==
To further investigate this interaction, PyMOL [123] was used to identify residues in
hTPH2ox(1-23) located within 3.5 Å of the catalytic domain. This analysis revealed that
residues from the N-terminal tail, speciﬁcally Gln2, Pro3, Phe8, Ser10, Ala14, Arg16,
and Gly17, in hTPH2ox(1-23) maintain contacts with the catalytic domain. These in-
teractions are particularly noteworthy, as they overlap with regions that also indicated
interactions between hTHP2(1-47) and chTPH2 in the NMR experiments. This is true
for all residues except Gln2-Pro3. However, these two residues exhibit higher average
RMSF values, suggesting greater ﬂexibility, which may result in a more transient or less
stable interactions with the catalytic domain. Averaged RMSF values can be found in
Appendix A.8. Moreover, residues Ser10 to Arg16 correspond to the stable α-helix ob-
served in the other analyses, further supporting the hypothesis that this helix plays an
important role in mediating interactions between the N-terminal tail and the catalytic
domain of hTPH2. It could possibly act as an anchoring element that stabilizes the tails
association with the catalytic domain. However, further investigation is needed to be
certain. The most present cluster for hTPH2ox(1-23) in complex with chTPH2 and Fe3+
can be seen in Figure 11.8.
Figure 11.8:
Most prevalent cluster from hTPH2ox(1-23)-chTPH2 complex.
Residues in
hTPH2ox(1-23) within 3.5 Å of chTPH2 is colored blue. hTPH2ox(1-23) is colored green while
chTPH2 is colored grey. Fe3+ is shown as an orange sphere. Made in PyMol [123].
The binding motifs of the most prevalent cluster from hTPH2orig(1-23) and hTPH2phos(1-
23) in complex with chTPH2 and Fe3+ were further investigated in PyMol [123] by
identifying interacting residues between these and the catalytic domain. This showed
that both hTPH2orig(1-23) and hTPH2phos(1-23) come within 3.5 Å of Ile412, indicating
that the presence of Fe3+ does not signiﬁcantly alter this interaction. Furthermore, the
sulfur atom in Met7 in hTPH2 comes within 4.8 Å of Fe3+, supporting the possibility
that Fe can oxidize methionine in the complex as a regulatory mechanism (See Figure
9.18). Figures 11.9a and 11.9b illustrate the interaction of hTPH2orig(1-23) with Ile412,
93
==PAGE:102==
and the interaction of Met7 from hTPH2 with Fe3+, respectively
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.9: Important interactions observed in the most prevalent cluster of hTPH2orig(1-23)-
chTPH2 complex. (a) shows interaction between Met5 in hTPH2orig(1-23) (red stick) and Ile412
in chTPH2 (blue stick). (b) illustrates the possible interaction between Met7 in hTPH2orig(1-
23) (red stick) and Fe3+ (orange sphere). The catalytic domain is showed as grey cartoon.
Made with PyMol [123].
Combining these results, it suggests that the presence of Fe3+ induces structural changes
in the hTPH2(1-23) variants by destabilization of the α-helix spanning from Ser10 to
Arg16. Furthermore, the presence of Fe3+ also signiﬁcantly altered the binding interface
for hTPH2ox(1-23). The N-terminal tail of hTPH2ox(1-23) is almost fully released from
chTPH2, but remained bound through interaction between the α-helix spanning from
Ser10 to Arg16 and chTPH2. Together with the NMR results, this suggests a possible
regulatory mechanism governed by Fe3+ and oxidation of the N-terminal methionines.
Simulations with Fe2+ and BH−
4
To investigate the potential structural inﬂuence of BH−
4 on the interaction between the
catalytic domain and the N-terminal tail, MD simulations were performed on diﬀerent
structures in complex with BH−
4 and Fe2+. The BH−
4 molecule was modeled in MolView
and positioned by aligning it to the position of BH2 from the chTPH1 crystal structure
(PDB ID: 1MLW), which was then aligned to the structure of chTPH2. Fe2+ was used
instead of Fe3+, as Fe2+ represents the catalytically active state of the enzyme, consistent
with the reaction mechanism illustrated in 11.7. The structures were combined in LEaP.
Details of the preparation of the structure and the system conﬁguration are provided in
Appendix A.6.
94
==PAGE:103==
The presence of Fe2+ and BH−
4 did not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the RMSD, RMSF, RG, or
SASA values for hTPH2(1-23) or its modiﬁed variants compared to the complex with or
without Fe3+. Likewise, secondary structure seemed to be unaﬀected, with the α-helix
between Ser10 and Arg16 present across all three variants in the presence of BH−
4 and
Fe2+.
Clustering analysis of the complexes with BH−
4 and Fe2+ present revealed that the N-
terminal remains anchored in the catalytic domain for all variants. This is particularly
interesting since the oxidized variant was released in the presence of only Fe3+. This
suggests that when chTPH2 is in the active conformation, the oxidized variant exhibits
a binding pattern highly similar to both the unmodiﬁed and phosphorylated variants,
while being released in the inactive conformation of the enzyme. This suggests that it
may not be the oxidation alone that causes the N-terminus to dissociate from the cat-
alytic domain, but likely structural changes associated with the oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+,
that contribute to destabilization of the interaction between chTPH2 and hTPH2ox(1-23).
Analysis in PyMol [123] revealed that all three hTPH2(1-23) variants come within 3.5
Å of Ile412 in a similar manner as illustrated in Figure 11.9a. This suggests that the
N-terminal tail still binds near the L-Trp binding pocket when Fe2+ and BH−
4 is present,
underlining the N-terminal tails potential role as a competitor for the binding site of L-
Trp. However, further investigation is needed to conﬁrm this hypothesis and determine
the functional relevance of these interactions.
In conclusion, the MD simulations of hTPH2(1-23) variants in complex with chTPH2
revealed a mixture of disordered and ordered structural features, including a consistently
formed α-helix between Ser10 and Arg16. These characteristics remain largely stable
upon phosphorylation and oxidation of hTPH2(1-23), with no major changes observed in
overall conformation or ﬂexibility as shown by similar RG, SASA values, and secondary
structure analysis.
The lack of detectable changes in binding for the phosphorylated variant is surprising,
considering that phosphorylation is known to enhance TPH2’s catalytic function. One
possible explanation is the absence of the 14-3-3 protein, which plays a critical role in
enabling phosphorylation-dependent activation. Furthermore, as this study examined a
truncated form of the N-terminal tail, it is possible that key interactions required for
activation occur only in the context of the full-length regulatory domain of hTPH2.
While the presence of Fe3+ did not signiﬁcantly alter the global structure of hTPH2orig(1-
23) or its variants, as evidenced by consistent RMSD, RMSF, RG, and SASA values. It
95
==PAGE:104==
caused the N-terminal region of hTPH2ox(1−23) to disengage from the catalytic domain
but remained bound through interactions between the stable α-helix between Ser10 to
Arg16 and the catalytic domain. These results suggests that the disruption of the interac-
tions between hTPH2ox(1-23) and chTPH2 is dependent on both oxidation of N-terminal
methionines and Fe3+, likely due to associated structural changes rather than oxidation
alone.
Conversely, the combined presence of Fe2+ and BH−
4 did not induce signiﬁcant structural
diﬀerences between the variants, and the α-helix between residue Ser10 to Arg16 remained
stable. Importantly, under these conditions, the N-terminal region of hTPH2ox(1-23) re-
mains anchored to the catalytic domain, in contrast to the complex with Fe3+. This
suggests that dissociation of the N-terminus is speciﬁc to the when Fe3+ is present.
Notably, it seems that when the enzyme is in its inactive state (Fe3+), the N-terminal
residues of hTPH2ox(1–23) dissociate from the catalytic domain, whereas they remain
bound in the active conformation (Fe2++BH−
4 ).
This possible redox- and oxidation-
dependent dissociation of the N-terminal residues suggests a potential regulatory mech-
anism for the enzymatic activity of hTPH2.
A possible reaction mechanism could be proposed as follows: the N-terminal tail binds to
the catalytic domain in the presence of BH−
4 and Fe2+. The methionine residues within
the tail are oxidized by the same catalytic mechanism that converts L-Trp to 5-HTP.
Concurrently, molecular oxygen in the binding site oxidizes Fe2+ to Fe3+. This oxidation
triggers the release of the oxidized N-terminal tail from the complex, while the formed
BH3OH diﬀuses out of the binding pocket and is subsequently converted back into BH−
4
by PDC and DPHR/NADH (See Figure 11.7). As the oxidized tail is released, L-Trp and
BH−
4 can enter the active site, allowing L-Trp to be converted to 5-hydroxytryptophan
(5-HTP). Both BH3OH and 5-HTP can then exit the active site. Meanwhile, methionine
sulfoxide reductase (Msr) reduces the oxidized methionine residues back to their native
state, enabling the tail to rebind to the catalytic domain and inhibit enzymatic activity
once more. An illustration of this proposed catalytic mechanism is shown in Figure 11.10.
96
==PAGE:105==
Figure 11.10: Illustration of the proposed regulatory mechanism involving the N-terminal tail of
hTPH2. The N-terminal tail is bound in the active site of chTPH2 in the presence of Fe2+ and
BH−
4 . (1) Methionine residues in the N-terminal tail become oxidized via a mechanism similar to
the conversion of L-Trp to 5-HTP using BH−
4 and O2 (See Figure 11.7). (2) Upon oxidation of the
N-terminal methionines, BH4 is converted into BH3OH and released from the active site, where
it can be converted back into BH−
4 by PDC and DPHR/NADPH. Molecular oxygen present in
the active site oxidizes Fe2+ to Fe3+, promoting the release of the oxidized N-terminal tail. (3)
L-Trp and BH−
4 enter the active site. (4) L-Trp is converted to 5-HTP, and BH−
4 is oxidized
to BH3OH. (5) BH3OH and 5-HTP leave the catalytic domain. (6) The oxidized methionine
residues in the N-terminal tail are reduced back to methionine by methionine sulfoxide reductase
(Msr). Upon BH−
4 binding, the N-terminal tail can rebind to the catalytic domain, potentially
regulating enzyme activity.
While this model is compelling, the precise molecular mechanisms driving these confor-
mational changes and their regulatory roles remain to be fully elucidated. Therefore, the
proposed regulatory mechanism should be viewed as a starting point for further experi-
mental and computational studies, rather than a deﬁnitive conclusion.
97
==PAGE:106==
Chapter 12
Conclusion
In this project, CD spectroscopy, NMR spectroscopy, and MD simulations were used to
investigate the structure of hTPH2(1-47). Additionally, their interactions with the cat-
alytic domain of hTPH2 were examined. Three diﬀerent variants of hTPH21-47) were
investigated. The unmodiﬁed variant, a Ser19 phosphorylated variant, and a Met1, Met5,
Met6, and Met7 oxidized variant.
CD spectroscopy revealed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in secondary structure content among
the hTPH2(1-47) variants. Due to the inherent biases of secondary structure prediction
algorithms, it was not possible to draw deﬁnitive conclusions about the overall distribu-
tion of structural elements. MD simulations showed that all hTPH2(1-47) variants adopt
a predominantly disordered conformation, while maintaining a stable α-helix spanning
from residues Ser10 to Arg16. This structural feature is consistent with average RG values
calculated from the simulations, which suggest that the protein adopts a conformation
that is neither fully folded nor fully unfolded. The presence of the α-helix was further-
more supported by the secondary chemical shift (SCS) analysis for both hTPH2orig(1-47)
and hTPH2phos(1-47).
NMR spectroscopy of the three hTPH2(1-47) variants demonstrated that the N-terminal
tail interacts with the catalytic domain, although this interaction was signiﬁcantly weak-
ened upon oxidation. Notably, binding of the oxidized variant was maintained within the
Ser10 to Arg16 region, which corresponds to an α-helix, as found in the SCS analysis.
MD simulations further supported the NMR results as they also showed that the hTPH2
variants had a predominantly disordered structure with a stable α-helix spanning residues
Ser10 to Arg16.
Simulations of complexes between hTPH2(1–23) variants and chTPH2 showed that the
phosphorylated and unmodiﬁed forms bind similarly to chTPH2 in both its active and
inactive conformations. In contrast, the binding of the oxidized variant was highly in-
98
==PAGE:107==
ﬂuenced by the presence of Fe3+, with hTPH2ox(1-23) remaining bound in the absence
of Fe, as well as in the presence of Fe2+ and BH−
4 , but partially dissociating from the
catalytic domain in the presence of Fe3+.
These results suggest a potential regulatory mechanism in which the N-terminal tail acts
as an inhibitor of the enzyme. This regulation appears to be modulated by methionine
oxidation and the presence of Fe3+. However, several aspects of this mechanism remain
unknown, and the results of this project should be considered as a foundation for further
investigation rather than anything conclusive.
The absence of observable diﬀerences in binding for the phosphorylated variant is un-
expected, since this modiﬁcation is known to enhance the catalytic activity of TPH2.
This discrepancy may result from the absence of the 14-3-3 protein, which has been
found to be essential for activating the enzyme upon phosphorylation.
Additionally,
the project focused on a truncated version of the N-terminal tail, so it is possible that
phosphorylation-dependent activation requires interactions that involve regions outside
the truncated construct and are only present in the full regulatory domain.
In summary, this project provides new insights into the structural and regulatory role of
the N-terminal tail of hTPH2, focusing on the stable α-helix and its modulation by oxi-
dation and metal cofactor. While these ﬁndings advance the understanding of potential
inhibitory mechanisms, further research is needed to fully clarify the complex regulation
of TPH2 activity.
99
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 13
Future perspectives
To deepen the understanding of the regulatory mechanism governing hTPH2 activity,
several complementary experimental and computational approaches can be pursued.
First, reversed NMR experiments using 15N-labeled chTPH2 and the hTPH2(1-47) vari-
ants should be conducted to conﬁrm whether the N-terminal tail indeed binds within
the active site of chTPH2. Additionally, NMR studies in the presence of L-Trp or BH4−
would provide valuable insight into how these ligands inﬂuence the interaction between
the N-terminal tail and the catalytic domain.
Enzyme kinetic experiments could help determine whether the binding of the N-terminal
tail is competitively displaced by L-Trp. These experiments should be performed both on
the catalytic domain in the presence of the hTPH2(147) segment and on the full-length
enzyme to assess potential diﬀerences between the isolated and full-length systems, as
important interactions may be lost when using the truncated proteins alone, potentially
leading to an incomplete or misleading picture of the interaction.
Finally, molecular dynamics simulations of the full-length hTPH2 protein would oﬀer
a more comprehensive view of how the N-terminal tail dynamically interacts with the
catalytic domain, and how post-translational modiﬁcations inﬂuence the enzymes overall
structure and function. It would also be valuable to model a complex between the phos-
phorylated variant and 14-3-3 to explore whether this interaction reveals any additional
insights. Similarly, NMR and enzymatic experiments could be performed in the presence
of 14-3-3 to further broaden the understanding of its role in regulating TPH2 activity.
To complement these approaches, SAXS experiments could be carried out on the full-
length TPH2 protein, both alone and in complex with 14-3-3.
SAXS would provide
low-resolution information about the overall shape, ﬂexibility, and domain organization
in solution, and could help detect conformational changes upon 14-3-3 binding. Further-
100
==PAGE:109==
more, attempts to crystallize the full-length TPH214-3-3 complex could be valuable for
obtaining high-resolution structural details, particularly at the interaction interface.
Together, these studies would provide a more detailed and nuanced understanding of
the structural dynamics and functional regulation of hTPH2.
101
==PAGE:110==
Appendix A
Sequences
A.1
AAAH sequences
hTPH1 - P17752
1 MIEDNKENKD HSLERGRASL IFSLKNEVGG LIKALKIFQE KHVNLLHIES
51 RKSKRRNSEF EIFVDCDINR EQLNDIFHLL KSHTNVLSVN LPDNFTLKED
101 GMETVPWFPK KISDLDHCAN RVLMYGSELD ADHPGFKDNV YRKRRKYFAD
151 LAMNYKHGDP IPKVEFTEEE IKTWGTVFQE LNKLYPTHAC REYLKNLPLL
201 SKYCGYREDN IPQLEDVSNF LKERTGFSIR PVAGYLSPRD FLSGLAFRVF
251 HCTQYVRHSS DPFYTPEPDT CHELLGHVPL LAEPSFAQFS QEIGLASLGA
301 SEEAVQKLAT CYFFTVEFGL CKQDGQLRVF GAGLLSSISE LKHALSGHAK
351 VKPFDPKITC KQECLITTFQ DVYFVSESFE DAKEKMREFT KTIKRPFGVK
401 YNPYTRSIQI LKDTKSITSA MNELQHDLDV VSDALAKVSR KPSI
cTPH1 - P70080
1 MIEDNKENKD HAPERGRTAI IFSLKNEVGG LVKALKLFQE KHVNLVHIES
51 RKSKRRNSEF EIFVDCDSNR EQLNEIFQLL KSHVSIVSMN PTEHFNVQED
101 GDMENIPWYP KKISDLDKCA NRVLMYGSDL DADHPGFKDN VYRKRRKYFA
151 DLAMNYKHGD PIPEIEFTEE EIKTWGTVYR ELNKLYPTHA CREYLKNLPL
201 LTKYCGYRED NIPQLEDVSR FLKERTGFTI RPVAGYLSPR DFLAGLAFRV
251 FHCTQYVRHS SDPLYTPEPD TCHELLGHVP LLAEPSFAQF SQEIGLASLG
301 ASDEAVQKLA TCYFFTVEFG LCKQEGQLRV YGAGLLSSIS ELKHSLSGSA
351 KVKPFDPKVT CKQECLITTF QEVYFVSESF EEAKEKMREF AKTIKRPFGV
401 KYNPYTQSVQ ILKDTKSIAS VVNELRHELD IVSDALSKMG KQLEV
102
==PAGE:111==
hTPH2 - Q8IWU9
1 MQPAMMMFSS KYWARRGFSL DSAVPEEHQL LGSSTLNKPN SGKNDDKGNK
51 GSSKREAATE SGKTAVVFSL KNEVGGLVKA LRLFQEKRVN MVHIESRKSR
101 RRSSEVEIFV DCECGKTEFN ELIQLLKFQT TIVTLNPPEN IWTEEEELED
151 VPWFPRKISE LDKCSHRVLM YGSELDADHP GFKDNVYRQR RKYFVDVAMG
201 YKYGQPIPRV EYTEEETKTW GVVFRELSKL YPTHACREYL KNFPLLTKYC
251 GYREDNVPQL EDVSMFLKER SGFTVRPVAG YLSPRDFLAG LAYRVFHCTQ
301 YIRHGSDPLY TPEPDTCHEL LGHVPLLADP KFAQFSQEIG LASLGASDED
351 VQKLATCYFF TIEFGLCKQE GQLRAYGAGL LSSIGELKHA LSDKACVKAF
401 DPKTTCLQEC LITTFQEAYF VSESFEEAKE KMRDFAKSIT RPFSVYFNPY
451 TQSIEILKDT RSIENVVQDL RSDLNTVCDA LNKMNQYLGI
hPAH - P00439
1 MSTAVLENPG LGRKLSDFGQ ETSYIEDNCN QNGAISLIFS LKEEVGALAK
51 VLRLFEENDV NLTHIESRPS RLKKDEYEFF THLDKRSLPA LTNIIKILRH
101 DIGATVHELS RDKKKDTVPW FPRTIQELDR FANQILSYGA ELDADHPGFK
151 DPVYRARRKQ FADIAYNYRH GQPIPRVEYM EEEKKTWGTV FKTLKSLYKT
201 HACYEYNHIF PLLEKYCGFH EDNIPQLEDV SQFLQTCTGF RLRPVAGLLS
251 SRDFLGGLAF RVFHCTQYIR HGSKPMYTPE PDICHELLGH VPLFSDRSFA
301 QFSQEIGLAS LGAPDEYIEK LATIYWFTVE FGLCKQGDSI KAYGAGLLSS
351 FGELQYCLSE KPKLLPLELE KTAIQNYTVT EFQPLYYVAE SFNDAKEKVR
401 NFAATIPRPF SVRYDPYTQR IEVLDNTQQL KILADSINSE IGILCSALQK
451 IK
hTH - P07101
1 MPTPDATTPQ AKGFRRAVSE LDAKQAEAIM VRGQGAPGPS LTGSPWPGTA
51 APAASYTPTP RSPRFIGRRQ SLIEDARKER EAAVAAAAAA VPSEPGDPLE
101 AVAFEEKEGK AVLNLLFSPR ATKPSALSRA VKVFETFEAK IHHLETRPAQ
151 RPRAGGPHLE YFVRLEVRRG DLAALLSGVR QVSEDVRSPA GPKVPWFPRK
201 VSELDKCHHL VTKFDPDLDL DHPGFSDQVY RQRRKLIAEI AFQYRHGDPI
251 PRVEYTAEEI ATWKEVYTTL KGLYATHACG EHLEAFALLE RFSGYREDNI
301 PQLEDVSRFL KERTGFQLRP VAGLLSARDF LASLAFRVFQ CTQYIRHASS
351 PMHSPEPDCC HELLGHVPML ADRTFAQFSQ DIGLASLGAS DEEIEKLSTL
401 YWFTVEFGLC KQNGEVKAYG AGLLSSYGEL LHCLSEEPEI RAFDPEAAAV
451 QPYQDQTYQS VYFVSESFSD AKDKLRSYAS RIQRPFSVKF DPYTLAIDVL
501 DSPQAVRRSL EGVQDELDTL AHALSAIG
103
==PAGE:112==
A.2
Protein sequences puriﬁed in this project
His-SUMO-hTPH2(1-47)
1 MGHHHHHHGS DSEVNQEAKP EVKPEVKPET HINLKVSDGS SEIFFKIKKT
51 TPLRRLMEAF AKRQGKEMDS LRFLYDGIRI QADQTPEDLD MEDNDIIEAH
101 REQIGGMQPA MMMFSSKYWA RRGFSLDSAV PEEHQLLGSS TLNKPNSGKN
151 DDK
hTPH2(1-47)
1 MQPAMMMFSS KYWARRGFSL DSAVPEEHQL LGSSTLNKPN SGKNDDK
MBP-chTPH2
1 MKIEEGKLVI WINGDKGYNG LAEVGKKFEK DTGIKVTVEH PDKLEEKFPQ
51 VAATGDGPDI IFWAHDRFGG YAQSGLLAEI TPDKAFQDKL YPFTWDAVRY
101 NGKLIAYPIA VEALSLIYNK DLLPNPPKTW EEIPALDKEL KAKGKSALMF
151 NLQEPYFTWP LIAADGGYAF KYENGKYDIK DVGVDNAGAK AGLTFLVDLI
201 KNKHMNADTD YSIAEAAFNK GETAMTINGP WAWSNIDTSK VNYGVTVLPT
251 FKGQPSKPFV GVLSAGINAA SPNKELAKEF LENYLLTDEG LEAVNKDKPL
301 GAVALKSYEE ELAKDPRIAA TMENAQKGEI MPNIPQMSAF WYAVRTAVIN
351 AASGRQTVDE ALKDAQTNSS SNNNNNNNNN NLGLEVLFQG PEELEDVPWF
401 PRKISELDKC SHRVLMYGSE LDADHPGFKD NVYRQRRKYF VDVAMGYKYG
451 QPIPRVEYTT EEETKTWGVV FRELSKLYPT HACREYLKNF PLLTKYCGYR
501 EDNVPQLEDV SMFLKERSGF TVRPVAGYLS PRDFLAGLAY RVFHCTQYIR
551 HGSDPLYTPE PDTCHELLGH VPLLADPKFA QFSQEIGLAS LGASDEDVQK
601 LATCYFFTIE FGLCKQEGQL RAYGAGLLSS IGELKHALSD KACVKAFDPK
651 TTCLQECLIT TFQEAYFVSE SFEEAKEKMR DFAKSITRPF SVYFNPYTQS
701 IEILKD
chTPH2
1 GPEELEDVPW FPRKISELDK CSHRVLMYGS ELDADHPGFK DNVYRQRRKY
51 FVDVAMGYKY GQPIPRVEY TEEETKTWGV VFRELSKLYP THACREYLKN
101 FPLLTKYCGY REDNVPQLED VSMFLKERSG FTVRPVAGYL SPRDFLAGLA
151 YRVFHCTQYI RHGSDPLYTP EPDTCHELLG HVPLLADPKF AQFSQEIGLA
201 SLGASDEDVQ KLATCYFFTI EFGLCKQEGQ LRAYGAGLLS SIGELKHALS
251 DKACVKAFDP KTTCLQECLI TTFQEAYFVS ESFEEAKEKM RDFAKSITRP
301 FSVYFNPYTQ SIEILKDTRS IENVVQDLRS DLNTVCDALN KMNQYLGI
104
==PAGE:113==
MBP-3CP
1 MKIEEGKLVI WINGDKGYNG LAEVGKKFEK DTGIKVTVEH PDKLEEKFPQ
51 VAATGDGPDI IFWAHDRFGG YAQSGLLAEI TPDKAFQDKL YPFTWDAVRY
101 NGKLIAYPIA VEALSLIYNK DLLPNPPKTW EEIPALDKEL KAKGKSALMF
151 NLQEPYFTWP LIAADGGYAF KYENGKYDIK DVGVDNAGAK AGLTFLVDLI
201 KNKHMNADTD YSIAEAAFNK GETAMTINGP WAWSNIDTSK VNYGTVTLPT
251 FKGQPSKPFV GVLSAGINAA SPNKELAKEF LENYLLTDEG LEAVNKDKPL
301 GAVALKSYEE ELAKDPRIAA TMENAQKGEI MPNIPQMSAF WYAVRTAVIN
351 AASGRQTVDE ALKDAQTNSS SNNNNNNNNN NLGGIPGPEH EFLNALIRRN
401 CHIITTDKGE FNLLGIYSNC AVVPTHAEPG DVVDIDGRLV RVLKQQVLTD
451 MNDVDTEVTV LWLDQNEKFR DIRRFIPEHQ QDWHNIHLAT NVTKFPMLNV
501 EVGHTVPYGE INLSGNATCR LYKYDYPTQP GQCGAVLANT GNIIGIHVGG
551 NGRVGYAAAL LRKYFAEEQ
A.3
Alignments
Alignment of AAAHs domains
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
MPTPDATTPQAKGFRRAVSELDAKQAEAIM..........
30
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
MPTPDATTPQAKGFRRAVSELDAKQAEAIMVRGQ......
34
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
MPTPDATTPQAKGFRRAVSELDAKQAEAIM....GAPGPS
36
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
MPTPDATTPQAKGFRRAVSELDAKQAEAIMVRGQGAPGPS
40
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
........................................
0
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
........................................
0
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
.......................MQPAMM..........M
7
consensus
******************************
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
.....................SPRFIGRRQSLIEDARKER
49
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
.....................SPRFIGRRQSLIEDARKER
53
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
LTGSPWPGTAAPAASYTPTPRSPRFIGRRQSLIEDARKER
76
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
LTGSPWPGTAAPAASYTPTPRSPRFIGRRQSLIEDARKER
80
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
........................................
0
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
........................................
0
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
FSSKYWA....................RRGFSLDSAVPEE
27
consensus
*
*******************
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
EAAVAAAAAAVPSEPGDP..LEAVAF......EEKEGKAV
81
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
EAAVAAAAAAVPSEPGDP..LEAVAF......EEKEGKAV
85
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
EAAVAAAAAAVPSEPGDP..LEAVAF......EEKEGKAV
108
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
EAAVAAAAAAVPSEPGDP..LEAVAF......EEKEGKAV
112
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
...MST...AVLENPGLGRKLSDFGQETSYIEDNCNQNGA
34
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
.......................MIEDNKENKDHSLERGR
17
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
HQLLGS...STLNKPNSGK.NDDKGNKGSSKREAATESGK
63
consensus
******************
******
********
105
==PAGE:114==
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
LNLLFSPRATKPSALSRAVKVFETFEAKIHHLETRPAQRP
121
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
LNLLFSPRATKPSALSRAVKVFETFEAKIHHLETRPAQRP
125
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
LNLLFSPRATKPSALSRAVKVFETFEAKIHHLETRPAQRP
148
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
LNLLFSPRATKPSALSRAVKVFETFEAKIHHLETRPAQRP
152
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
ISLIFSLK.EEVGALAKVLRLFEENDVNLTHIESRPSRLK
73
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
ASLIFSLK.NEVGGLIKALKIFQEKHVNLLHIESRKSKRR
56
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
TAVVFSLK.NEVGGLVKALRLFQEKRVNMVHIESRKSRRR
102
consensus
****!!********!******!********!*!*!*****
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
RAGGPHLEYFVRLEVRRG.DLAALLSGV..........RQ
150
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
RAGGPHLEYFVRLEVRRG.DLAALLSGV..........RQ
154
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
RAGGPHLEYFVRLEVRRG.DLAALLSGV..........RQ
177
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
RAGGPHLEYFVRLEVRRG.DLAALLSGV..........RQ
181
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
...KDEYEFFTHLDKRSLPALTNIIKILRHDIG.....AT
105
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
...NSEFEIFVDCDINRE.QLNDIFHLLKSHTNVLSVNLP
92
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
...SSEVEIFVDCECGKT.EFNELIQLLKFQTTIVTLNPP
138
consensus
*******!*!******** *********
**
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
VSEDVRSPAGPKVPWFPRKVSELDKCHHLVTKFDPDLDLD
190
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
VSEDVRSPAGPKVPWFPRKVSELDKCHHLVTKFDPDLDLD
194
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
VSEDVRSPAGPKVPWFPRKVSELDKCHHLVTKFDPDLDLD
217
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
VSEDVRSPAGPKVPWFPRKVSELDKCHHLVTKFDPDLDLD
221
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
VHELSRDKKKDTVPWFPRTIQELDRFANQILSYGAELDAD
145
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
DNFTLKEDGMETVPWFPKKISDLDHCANRVLMYGSELDAD
132
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
ENIWTEEEELEDVPWFPRKISELDKCSHRVLMYGSELDAD
178
consensus
************!!!!!*****!!************!!*!
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
HPGFSDQVYRQRRKLIAEIAFQYRHGDPIPRVEYTAEEIA
230
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
HPGFSDQVYRQRRKLIAEIAFQYRHGDPIPRVEYTAEEIA
234
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
HPGFSDQVYRQRRKLIAEIAFQYRHGDPIPRVEYTAEEIA
257
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
HPGFSDQVYRQRRKLIAEIAFQYRHGDPIPRVEYTAEEIA
261
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
HPGFKDPVYRARRKQFADIAYNYRHGQPIPRVEYMEEEKK
185
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
HPGFKDNVYRKRRKYFADLAMNYKHGDPIPKVEFTEEEIK
172
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
HPGFKDNVYRQRRKYFVDVAMGYKYGQPIPRVEYTEEETK
218
consensus
!!!!*!*!!!*!!!*****!**!**!*!!!*!!***!!**
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
TWKEVYTTLKGLYATHACGEHLEAFALLERFSGYREDNIP
270
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
TWKEVYTTLKGLYATHACGEHLEAFALLERFSGYREDNIP
274
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
TWKEVYTTLKGLYATHACGEHLEAFALLERFSGYREDNIP
297
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
TWKEVYTTLKGLYATHACGEHLEAFALLERFSGYREDNIP
301
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
TWGTVFKTLKSLYKTHACYEYNHIFPLLEKYCGFHEDNIP
225
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
TWGTVFQELNKLYPTHACREYLKNLPLLSKYCGYREDNIP
212
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
TWGVVFRELSKLYPTHACREYLKNFPLLTKYCGYREDNVP
258
consensus
!!**!***!**!!*!!!!*!******!!****!**!!!*!
106
==PAGE:115==
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
QLEDVSRFLKERTGFQLRPVAGLLSARDFLASLAFRVFQC
310
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
QLEDVSRFLKERTGFQLRPVAGLLSARDFLASLAFRVFQC
314
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
QLEDVSRFLKERTGFQLRPVAGLLSARDFLASLAFRVFQC
337
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
QLEDVSRFLKERTGFQLRPVAGLLSARDFLASLAFRVFQC
341
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
QLEDVSQFLQTCTGFRLRPVAGLLSSRDFLGGLAFRVFHC
265
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
QLEDVSNFLKERTGFSIRPVAGYLSPRDFLSGLAFRVFHC
252
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
QLEDVSMFLKERSGFTVRPVAGYLSPRDFLAGLAYRVFHC
298
consensus
!!!!!!*!!****!!**!!!!!*!!*!!!!**!!*!!!*!
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
TQYIRHASSPMHSPEPDCCHELLGHVPMLADRTFAQFSQD
350
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
TQYIRHASSPMHSPEPDCCHELLGHVPMLADRTFAQFSQD
354
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
TQYIRHASSPMHSPEPDCCHELLGHVPMLADRTFAQFSQD
377
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
TQYIRHASSPMHSPEPDCCHELLGHVPMLADRTFAQFSQD
381
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
TQYIRHGSKPMYTPEPDICHELLGHVPLFSDRSFAQFSQE
305
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
TQYVRHSSDPFYTPEPDTCHELLGHVPLLAEPSFAQFSQE
292
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
TQYIRHGSDPLYTPEPDTCHELLGHVPLLADPKFAQFSQE
338
consensus
!!!*!!*!*!***!!!!*!!!!!!!!!******!!!!!!*
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
IGLASLGASDEEIEKLSTLYWFTVEFGLCKQNGEVKAYGA
390
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
IGLASLGASDEEIEKLSTLYWFTVEFGLCKQNGEVKAYGA
394
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
IGLASLGASDEEIEKLSTLYWFTVEFGLCKQNGEVKAYGA
417
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
IGLASLGASDEEIEKLSTLYWFTVEFGLCKQNGEVKAYGA
421
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
IGLASLGAPDEYIEKLATIYWFTVEFGLCKQGDSIKAYGA
345
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
IGLASLGASEEAVQKLATCYFFTVEFGLCKQDGQLRVFGA
332
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
IGLASLGASDEDVQKLATCYFFTIEFGLCKQEGQLRAYGA
378
consensus
!!!!!!!!**!***!!*!*!*!!*!!!!!!!*******!!
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
GLLSSYGELLHCLSEEPEIRAFDPEAAAVQPYQDQTYQSV
430
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
GLLSSYGELLHCLSEEPEIRAFDPEAAAVQPYQDQTYQSV
434
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
GLLSSYGELLHCLSEEPEIRAFDPEAAAVQPYQDQTYQSV
457
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
GLLSSYGELLHCLSEEPEIRAFDPEAAAVQPYQDQTYQSV
461
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
GLLSSFGELQYCLSEKPKLLPLELEKTAIQNYTVTEFQPL
385
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
GLLSSISELKHALSGHAKVKPFDPKITCKQECLITTFQDV
372
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
GLLSSIGELKHALSDKACVKAFDPKTTCLQECLITTFQEA
418
consensus
!!!!!**!!***!!***************!*******!**
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
YFVSESFSDAKDKLRSYASRIQRPFSVKFDPYTLAIDVLD
470
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
YFVSESFSDAKDKLRSYASRIQRPFSVKFDPYTLAIDVLD
474
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
YFVSESFSDAKDKLRSYASRIQRPFSVKFDPYTLAIDVLD
497
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
YFVSESFSDAKDKLRSYASRIQRPFSVKFDPYTLAIDVLD
501
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
YYVAESFNDAKEKVRNFAATIPRPFSVRYDPYTQRIEVLD
425
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
YFVSESFEDAKEKMREFTKTIKRPFGVKYNPYTRSIQILK
412
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
YFVSESFEEAKEKMRDFAKSITRPFSVYFNPYTQSIEILK
458
consensus
!*!*!!!**!!*!*!*****!*!!!*!***!!!**!**!*
107
==PAGE:116==
sp|P07101-3|TY3H_HUMAN
SPQAVRRSLEGVQDELDTLA
490
sp|P07101-4|TY3H_HUMAN
SPQAVRRSLEGVQDELDTLA
494
sp|P07101-2|TY3H_HUMAN
SPQAVRRSLEGVQDELDTLA
517
sp|P07101|TY3H_HUMAN
SPQAVRRSLEGVQDELDTLA
521
sp|P00439|PH4H_HUMAN
NTQQLKILADSINSEIGILC
445
sp|P17752|TPH1_HUMAN
DTKSITSAMNELQHDLDVVS
432
sp|Q8IWU9|TPH2_HUMAN
DTRSIENVVQDLRSDLNTVC
478
consensus
********************
Alignment of catalytic domains
human_TPH2
EELEDVPWFPRKISELDKCSHRVLMYGSELDADHPGFKDNVYRQRRKYFV
50
human_TPH1
DGMETVPWFPKKISDLDHCANRVLMYGSELDADHPGFKDNVYRKRRKYFA
50
chicken_TPH1
GDMENIPWYPKKISDLDKCANRVLMYGSDLDADHPGFKDNVYRKRRKYFA
51
consensus
*! *!!*!*!!!*!!*!**!!!!!!!*!!!!!!!!!!!!!!*!!!!!*
human_TPH2
DVAMGYKYGQPIPRVEYTEEETKTWGVVFRELSKLYPTHACREYLKNFPL
100
human_TPH1
DLAMNYKHGDPIPKVEFTEEEIKTWGTVFQELNKLYPTHACREYLKNLPL
100
chicken_TPH1
DLAMNYKHGDPIPEIEFTEEEIKTWGTVYRELNKLYPTHACREYLKNLPL
101
consensus
!*!!*!!*!*!!! *!*!!!!*!!!!*!**!!*!!!!!!!!!!!!!!*!!
human_TPH2
LTKYCGYREDNVPQLEDVSMFLKERSGFTVRPVAGYLSPRDFLAGLAYRV
150
human_TPH1
LSKYCGYREDNIPQLEDVSNFLKERTGFSIRPVAGYLSPRDFLSGLAFRV
150
chicken_TPH1
LTKYCGYREDNIPQLEDVSRFLKERTGFTIRPVAGYLSPRDFLAGLAFRV
151
consensus
!*!!!!!!!!!*!!!!!!! !!!!!*!!**!!!!!!!!!!!!!*!!!*!!
human_TPH2
FHCTQYIRHGSDPLYTPEPDTCHELLGHVPLLADPKFAQFSQEIGLASLG
200
human_TPH1
FHCTQYVRHSSDPFYTPEPDTCHELLGHVPLLAEPSFAQFSQEIGLASLG
200
chicken_TPH1
FHCTQYVRHSSDPLYTPEPDTCHELLGHVPLLAEPSFAQFSQEIGLASLG
201
consensus
!!!!!!*!!*!!!*!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!*!*!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
human_TPH2
ASDEDVQKLATCYFFTIEFGLCKQEGQLRAYGAGLLSSIGELKHALSDKA
250
human_TPH1
ASEEAVQKLATCYFFTVEFGLCKQDGQLRVFGAGLLSSISELKHALSGHA
250
chicken_TPH1
ASDEAVQKLATCYFFTVEFGLCKQEGQLRVYGAGLLSSISELKHSLSGSA
251
consensus
!!*!*!!!!!!!!!!!*!!!!!!!*!!!!**!!!!!!!!*!!!!*!!* !
human_TPH2
CVKAFDPKTTCLQECLITTFQEAYFVSESFEEAKEKMRDFAKSITRPFSV
300
human_TPH1
KVKPFDPKITCKQECLITTFQDVYFVSESFEDAKEKMREFTKTIKRPFGV
300
chicken_TPH1
KVKPFDPKVTCKQECLITTFQEVYFVSESFEEAKEKMREFAKTIKRPFGV
301
consensus
*!!*!!!! !!*!!!!!!!!!**!!!!!!!!*!!!!!!*!*!*!*!!!*!
human_TPH2
YFNPYTQSIELKD
313
human_TPH1
KYNPYTRSIQILK
313
chicken_TPH1
KYNPYTQSVQILK
314
consensus
**!!!!*!*****
108
==PAGE:117==
Alignment of 300 TPH2 sequences
A multiple sequence alignment of 300 orthologous TPH2 protein sequences was generated
using the COBALT tool [30]. The sequences were retrieved from the NCBI Gene database
[134], and the alignment was used to visualize conservation and generate a consensus
sequence.
A.4
SDS-PAGES
Puriﬁcation of hTPH2(1-23)
Figure A.1: SDS-Page from expression of His-SUMO-hTPH2(1-47)
A band at approximately 21 kD is present. This is the His-SUMO-TPH2(1-47) band.
Although the target peptide has a molecular weight of 17.47 kD, the band is expected to
be seen at a higher molecular weight on the gel due to the properties of SUMO proteins,
which aﬀect their electrophoretic mobility. This causes them to migrate more slowly
through the gel matrix[135].
109
==PAGE:118==
Figure A.2: SDS-Page from RPC of 15N-labeled and unlabeled -hTPH2(1-47)
(a)
(b)
Figure A.3:
SDS-PAGEs from RPC of 15N-labeled (a) and unlabeled (b) phosphorylated
hTPH2(1-47)
110
==PAGE:119==
Puriﬁcation of hTPH2(1-23)
(a) SDS-PAGE of SEC fractions from the ﬁrst puriﬁcation
of chTPH2.
(b) SDS-PAGE of pooled fractions from the
second puriﬁcation of chTPH2.
Figure A.4: SDS-PAGEs from the ﬁrst (a) and second (b) puriﬁcation of chTPH2.
A.5
NMR
Phosphorylation
Figure A.5: 1D 1H spectrum for fractions collected from RPC of phosphorylad hTPH2(1-47).
Loss of peak in the area marked with a red box indicates phosphorylation.
111
==PAGE:120==
Oxidation
Figure A.6: Overlay of 1H-15N HSQC spectra illustrating spectral changes during the course of
methionine oxidation.
112
==PAGE:121==
A.6
MD structure preparation
Force Fields
Several force ﬁelds are loaded into tLEaP. leaprc.constph loads the parameters re-
quired to perform constant pH molecular dynamics (CpHMD) simulations in AMBER.
This setup enables the dynamic modeling of changes in protonation state in response to
the pH of the chosen system. By incorporating this ﬁle, the system becomes compatible
with CpHMD protocols, where residue pKa values and their local environment are con-
tinuously evaluated throughout the simulation [98].
leaprc.protein.ff19SB loads the ﬀ19SB force ﬁeld, part of the AMBER family of
biomolecular force ﬁelds. Released in 2019, ﬀ19SB is an improved version of earlier force
ﬁelds such as ﬀ14SB. It was developed using quantum mechanical torsion scans of back-
bone dipeptides and includes enhanced side-chain rotamer distributions and backbone
φ/ψ energetics. These reﬁnements lead to better agreement with NMR observables and
improved prediction of secondary structure stability [98].
leaprc.gaff2 loads the General AMBER Force Field 2 (GAFF2), which is used to model
organic molecules and non-standard residues, such as small-molecule ligands or post-
translational modiﬁcations. GAFF2 oﬀers improved torsional parameters and broader
chemical coverage compared to its predecessor, making it suitable for simulations that
include molecules beyond the standard amino acids [98] .
leaprc.water.tip3p loads parameters for the TIP3P (Three-Point Transferable Inter-
molecular Potential) water model. In this model, water is represented in a rigid geometry
by three interaction sites. Two hydrogens and one oxygen. TIP3P is commonly used
due to its compatibility with AMBER force ﬁelds and its balance between computational
eﬃciency and realistic representation of solvent behavior, hydrogen bonding, and ion
solvation [98].
Structure preparation: hTPH2(1-47)
The peptide was deprotonated using pdb4amber, which is part of AmberTools [136]. The
following command was used:
pdb4amber -i hTPH2_47.pdb -o hTPH2_47_deprot.pdb -y
The software H++ [137] was used to protonate the peptide. The following settings were
applied:
113
==PAGE:122==
Salinity: 0.15 M
Internal dielectrics: 10
External dielectrics: 80
pH: 7.0
Correct orientation: Thicked on
Prepare explicit solvent box: Octahedral
Water model: TIP3P
Box edge distance: 10 Å
Add counter ions: Neutralise using CL-/Na+
Topology and coordinate ﬁles for implicit water were saved and used to generate a PDB
ﬁle using ambpdb:
ambpdb -p hTPH2_47.top -c hTPH2_47.crd > hTPH2_47_H+.pdb
Histidines (HIS), glutamic acids (GLU) and aspartic acids (ASP) were renamed to HIP,
GL4, and AS4 in the PDB ﬁle to make them titratable by tleap . The peptide was then
solvated using tLEaP. The input ﬁle can be seen in Table A.9 below:
Table A.1: Input commands for tLEaP for hTPH2(1-47).
tLEaP.in hTPH2_47
# Load Force fields and parameters:
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
# Load molecule:
mol = loadpdb hTPH2_47_H+.pdb
# Solvate system:
solvateoct mol TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15:
addions mol Cl- 0
addions mol Cl- 41
addions mol Na+ 0
# Save files:
savepdb mol
hTPH2_47_solv.pdb
saveamberparm mol hTPH2_47_solv.parm7 hTPH2_47_solv.rst7
quit
tLEaP was run using:
tleap -f tleap.in
The number of Cl−1 ions needed to reach a concentration of 0.15 M was calculated based
on Equation 8.1
Number of ions = Mwater
ρwater
· C · number of water molecules
(A.1)
114
==PAGE:123==
Phosporylated hTPH2(1-47)
Because H++ is unable to process non-standard residues, the coordinate ﬁle, topology,
and PDB ﬁle from the unmodiﬁed hTPH2(1-47) system were used as a starting point
for the phosphorylated hTPH2(1-47). As a result, hydrogen atoms had already been
added to the structure before phosphorylation. Phosphorylation was performed on Ser19
by renaming the residue from SER to SEP in the PDB ﬁle, and running the following
tleap.in script:
Table A.2: Input commands for tLEaP for phosphorylated hTPH2(1-47).
tLEaP_1.in phosphorylated hTPH2_47
# Load Force fields and parameters:
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
# Load phosphorylation parameters
source leaprc.phosaa10
# Load molecule
mol = loadpdb phos_hTPH2_47_H+.pdb
# Save files:
savepdb mol
phos_hTPH2_47_REMOVE.pdb
quit
leaprc.phosaa10 loads parameters speciﬁcally developed for phosphorylated amino acids
in AMBER. This includes parameterizations for phosphorylated serine (SEP), threonine
(TPO), and tyrosine (PTR), which are common sites of post-translational modiﬁcation
in proteins [98].
These parameters are compatible with the AMBER ﬀ10 family of force ﬁelds and ensure
accurate representation of electrostatics, bonded interactions, and protonation states for
phosphorylated residues in molecular dynamics simulations. Although originally designed
for use with ﬀ10, they are also compatible with more recent AMBER force ﬁelds such as
ﬀ14SB and ﬀ19SB, making them suitable for protein simulations involving phosphoryla-
tion [98].
Upon phosphorylation, a hydrogen atom from the original structure remains on Ser19,
although it is no longer chemically correct in the phosphorylated state, and the following
message is given in tLEaP:
115
==PAGE:124==
Created a new atom named: HG within residue: .R<SEP 19>
The hydrogen atom should be removed from the PDB ﬁle before solvation. Figure A.7
illustrates the position of HG in the structure before and after removal A.7.
Figure A.7: Illustration of placement of HG upon phosphorylation of Ser19 using the phosaa10
force ﬁeld to the left. Illustration of phosphorylated Ser19 after removal of HG to the right.
After removing HG from the PDB ﬁle for the phosphorylated hTPH2(1-47), the system
can be solvated. This was done using the following tleap.in script:
Table A.3: Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of phosphorylated hTPH2(1-47).
tLEaP_2.in phosphorylated hTPH2_47
# Load Force fields and parameters:
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
# Load phosphorylation parameters
source leaprc.phosaa10
# Load molecule
mol = loadpdb phos_hTPH2_47_REMOVE.pdb
# Solvate system
solvateoct mol TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions mol Cl- 0
addions mol Cl- 41
addions mol Na+ 0
savepdb mol
phos_hTPH2_47_solv.pdb
saveamberparm mol phos_hTPH2_47_solv.parm7 phos_hTPH2_47_solv.rst7
quit
116
==PAGE:125==
Oxidized hTPH2(1-47)
Oxidized residues are non-standard, which means that tools such as H++ cannot process
them directly. Therefore, the previously generated coordinate ﬁle, topology, and PDB
ﬁle for unmodiﬁed hTPH2(147) were used as a starting point for modeling the oxidized
variant. Oxidation was performed using PyTMs, a PyMOL plugin that allows the intro-
duction of common post-translational modiﬁcations (PTMs) into protein structures.
hTPH2(147) contains four methionine residues, Met1, Met5, Met6, and Met7, which were
oxidized using the command oxidize_met in PyMOL. Upon oxidation, these residues
are renamed from MET to SME in the resulting PDB ﬁle. Illustrations of the modiﬁed
residues are shown in Figures A.8 and A.9.
Figure A.8: Illustration of ox-
idation of Met1 to Sme1 using
PyTMs. Made with PyMol.
Figure A.9: Illustration of oxidation of Met5, Met6, and Met7
to Sme5, Sme6, Sme7 using PyTMs. Made with PyMoL.
Oxidized methionine is not a standard residue in Amber, and no parameters are avail-
able by default.
Therefore, custom parameters were generated using Antechamber.
Antechamber is a program included in the AmberTools suite designed to assist in the
preparation of input ﬁles for molecular dynamics simulations involving non-standard
residues, small molecules, or drug-like compounds. It generates force ﬁeld parameters
and assigns atom types and partial charges [138].
Because there are two types of oxidized residues in hTPH2(1-47) - one with an exposed
N-terminus and one incorporated into the backbone - two diﬀerent parameter sets were
needed. Two separate structures were built using MolView. One with an NME-capped C-
terminus, and one with both an ACE-capped N-terminus and NME-capped C-terminus,
to simulate backbone binding. MolView is a free, browser-based molecular editor and
visualization tool that allows users to draw chemical structures and visualize them. It
can generate molecular geometries and export ﬁles in various formats, making it a conve-
nient platform for quickly creating simpliﬁed molecular structures [139]. These structures
are shown in Figures A.10 and A.11. To distinguish the oxidized N-terminal methionine
from those in the backbone, the residue name in the PDB ﬁle was changed from SME1
117
==PAGE:126==
to SEM1.
Figure A.10: Illustration of
oxidized NME-capped me-
thionine structure.
Made
with MolView.
Figure A.11: Illustration of
oxidized NME- and ACE-
capped
methionine
struc-
ture. Made with MolView.
The .mol ﬁles were downloaded from MolView, and converted to .mol2 format using
Chimera. To get the correct Amber-compatible terminology, the .mol2 ﬁles were further
processed with Antechamber:
antechamber -i structure.mol2 -fi mol2 -o structure_converted.mol2
-fo mol2 -c bcc -s 2 -nc X
Where -c speciﬁes the charge calculation method. A common option is bcc, which uses
the AM1-BCC method to quickly generate partial atomic charges.
This is useful for
preparing ligands for use with the GAFF force ﬁeld. -s controls the verbosity of status
messages printed during execution. -nc deﬁnes the net charge of the molecule. This is
critical for accurate charge assignment.
Upon conversion, the atom names were not correctly assigned in the .mol2 ﬁle. The
oxidized methionine atoms were manually renamed based on PyTMs naming conventions.
These changes are summarized in Table A.4. Only the atom names for oxidized methio-
nine was corrected. The atom names for the ACE and NME caps were kept unchanged.
Table A.4: Atom numbers and names from the .mol2 ﬁle. Only corrected atoms are included.
Atom #
Name
Name corrected
3
OS
OS1
7
CB
CA
8
CG
CB
9
CE
CG
10
CA
C
15
H1
HA
20
H6
H
118
==PAGE:127==
The .ac ﬁles were then generated using:
antechamber -i structure_converted.mol2 -fi mol2 -o structure.ac
-fo ac -c bcc -j 4 -at amber
-j speciﬁes the job type, determining which steps Antechamber should perform. The
most common value is 4, which tells Antechamber to run all relevant steps, including
geometry checks, atom typing, and charge calculation. This is the recommended setting
when preparing a new molecule from scratch. -at amber sets the atom type scheme to
use AMBER atom types instead of the default GAFF types. This option is useful when
the molecule is part of a standard AMBER protein or nucleic acid system.
Because Antechamber does not recognize oxidized methionine, it cannot assign the cor-
rect Amber type to the sulfur atom. This was manually corrected in the .ac ﬁle, as shown
in Table A.5:
Table A.5: ATOM entry for corrected .ac ﬁle.
Label
Atom Name
Residue
ResID
x (Å)
y (Å)
z (Å)
Charge
AMBER Type
Original
ATOM
SD
SME
2
3.608
-0.776
-0.160
0.269600
DU
Corrected
ATOM
SD
SME
2
3.608
-0.776
-0.160
0.269600
S
The .frcmod ﬁles containing the needed force ﬁeld parameters for oxidized methionine
were generated using parmchk2 with the following command:
parmchk2 -i structure.ac -f ac -o structure.frcmod -a Y
-a Y stands for "add all atoms", meaning that hydrogens will be added automatically if
they are not included in the input ﬁle. This ensures a complete set of parameters. To let
Amber know which atoms are part of the main chain, a .mc ﬁle was created, as shown in
Table A.6:
119
==PAGE:128==
Table A.6: .mc ﬁle used for parametrization of oxidized methionine.
.mc ﬁle for NME- and ACE-capped oxidized methionine
HEAD_NAME N
#Head atom at the start of the chain.
TAIL_NAME C
#Tail atom at the end of the chain.
MAIN_CHAIN CA
#Main chain atom used to represent the backbone
OMIT_NAME C5
OMIT_NAME C8
OMIT_NAME O3
#Omit ACE cap
OMIT_NAME H14
OMIT_NAME H15
OMIT_NAME H16
OMIT_NAME N2
OMIT_NAME H7
OMIT_NAME C7
#Omit NME cap
OMIT_NAME H11
OMIT_NAME H12
OMIT_NAME H13
PRE_HEAD_TYPE C
#Defines atom type before the head atom.
POST_TAIL_TYPE N
#Defines atom type after the tail atom.
CHARGE 0.0
#Sets the net charge of the molecule
The prepin ﬁles, which contains topology and charge information of a molecule, were then
generated using:
prepgen -i Met1_capped.ac -o prepin.Met1_capped -m Met1_capped.mc
-rn SXX
Where -rn is used to specify the residue name of interest (SME/SEM). The required
.prepin and .frcmod ﬁles were then ready, and the structure could be solvated using
tLEaP. The input ﬁle used is shown in Table A.9:
120
==PAGE:129==
Table A.7: Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of oxidized hTPH2(1-47).
tLEaP.in oxidized hTPH_47
# Load Force fields and parameters:
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
# Load new parameters for oxidized methionine:
loadamberprep prepin.Met_backbone
loadamberprep prepin.Met1
loadamberparams Met_backbone.frcmod
loadamberparams Met1.frcmod
Load molecule:
mol = loadpdb ox_hTPH2_47.pdb
# Solvate system
solvateoct mol TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions mol Cl- 0
addions mol Cl- 41
addions mol Na+ 0
savepdb mol
ox_hTPH2_47_solv.pdb
saveamberparm mol ox_hTPH2_47_solv.parm7 ox_hTPH2_47_solv.rst7
quit
121
==PAGE:130==
Input ﬁles for complexes
Complex
Table A.8: Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of hTPH2(1-23) and chTPH2 complex.
tLEaP.in hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
# Load molecule
Peptide = loadpdb hTPH2_23.pdb
Protein = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
# Combine the two structures in one system
complex = combine { Peptide Protein }
# Solvate system
solvateoct complex TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions complex Cl- 0
addions complex Cl- 54
addions complex Na+ 0
savepdb complex complex_solv.pdb
saveamberparm complex complex_solv.parm7 complex_solv.rst7
quit
122
==PAGE:131==
Phosphorylated Complex
Table A.9:
Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of phosphorylated hTPH2(1-23) and
chTPH2 complex.
tLEaP.in hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
source leaprc.phosaa10
# Load molecule
Peptide = loadpdb phos_hTPH2_23.pdb
Protein = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
# Combine the two structures in one system
complex = combine { Peptide Protein }
# Solvate system
solvateoct complex TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions complex Cl- 0
addions complex Cl- 54
addions complex Na+ 0
savepdb complex phos_complex_solv.pdb
saveamberparm complex phos_complex_solv.parm7 phos_complex_solv.rst7
quit
123
==PAGE:132==
Oxidized Complex
Table A.10: Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of oxidized hTPH2(1-23) and chTPH2
complex.
tLEaP.in oxidized hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff
source leaprc.water.tip3p
# Load new parameters for oxidized methionine
loadamberprep prepin.molview
loadamberprep prepin.Met1_capped
loadamberparams molview.frcmod
loadamberparams Met1_capped.frcmod
# Load molecule
Pep = loadpdb ox_hTPH2_23.pdb
Pro = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
complex = combine { Pep Pro }
# Solvate system
solvateoct complex TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions complex Cl- 0
addions complex Cl- 54
addions complex Na+ 0
savepdb complex ox_complex_solv.pdb
saveamberparm complex ox_complex_solv.parm7 ox_complex_solv.rst7
124
==PAGE:133==
Complex + Fe3+
Table A.11:
Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2, and
Fe3+complex.
tLEaP.in oxidized hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
loadamberparams frcmod.ions234lm_1264_tip3p
#Load molecule
Pro = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
Pep = loadpdb hTPH2_23.pdb
Fe = loadpdb Fe.pdb
#combine
Complex
= combine {Pro Pep Fe}
# Solvate system
solvateoct complex TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions complex Cl- 0
addions complex Cl- 54
addions complex Na+ 0
savepdb complex complex_iron_solv.pdb
saveamberparm complex complex_iron_solv.parm7
complex_iron_solv.rst7
125
==PAGE:134==
Phosphorylated Complex + Fe3+
Table A.12: Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of phosphorylated hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2,
and Fe3+complex.
tLEaP.in oxidized hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
source leaprc.phosaa10
loadamberparams frcmod.ions234lm_1264_tip3p
#Load molecule
Pro = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
Pep = loadpdb phos_hTPH2_23.pdb
Fe = loadpdb Fe.pdb
#combine
Complex
= combine {Pro Pep Fe}
# Solvate system
solvateoct complex TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions complex Cl- 0
addions complex Cl- 54
addions complex Na+ 0
savepdb complex phos_complex_iron_solv.pdb
saveamberparm complex phos_complex_iron_solv.parm7
phos_complex_iron_solv.rst7
126
==PAGE:135==
Oxidized Complex + Fe3+
Table A.13:
Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2, and
Fe3+complex.
tLEaP.in oxidized hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
loadamberparams frcmod.ions234lm_1264_tip3p
#Load molecule
Pro = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
Pep = loadpdb hTPH2_23.pdb
Fe = loadpdb Fe.pdb
#combine
Complex
= combine {Pro Pep Fe}
# Solvate system
solvateoct complex TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions complex Cl- 0
addions complex Cl- 54
addions complex Na+ 0
savepdb complex complex_iron_solv.pdb
saveamberparm complex complex_iron_solv.parm7
complex_iron_solv.rst7
127
==PAGE:136==
Complex + BH4 +Fe2+
Table A.14: Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2, BH4, and Fe2+
complex.
tLEaP.in oxidized hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
# Load new parameters for oxidized methionine:
loadamberprep prepin.Met_backbone
loadamberprep prepin.Met1
loadamberparams Met_backbone.frcmod
loadamberparams Met1.frcmod
loadamberparams frcmod.ions234lm_1264_tip3p
#Load molecule
Pro = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
Pep = loadpdb ox_hTPH2_23.pdb
Fe = loadpdb Fe.pdb
#combine
Complex
= combine {Pro Pep Fe}
# Solvate system
solvateoct complex TIP3PBOX 15
# Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions complex Cl- 0
addions complex Cl- 54
addions complex Na+ 0
savepdb complex complex_iron_solv.pdb
saveamberparm complex complex_iron_solv.parm7
complex_iron_solv.rst7
128
==PAGE:137==
Phosphorylated Complex BH4 +Fe2+
Table A.15: Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of phosphorylated hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2,
BH4, and Fe2+ complex.
tLEaP.in oxidized hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
source leaprc.phosaa10
loadamberparams frcmod.ions234lm_1264_tip3p
# Load extraparameters for the ligand
loadamberparams BH4.frcmod
#Load molecule
Pep = loadpdb phos_hTPH2_47.pdb
Pro = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
Fe = loadpdb Fe.pdb
BH4 = loadmol2 BH4.mol2
Complex = combine{ Pep Pro Fe BH4}
set Complex.342.FE type Fe2+
set Complex.342.FE charge 2.0
#Solvate system
solvateoct Complex TIP3PBOX 15
#Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions Complex Cl- 0
addions Complex Cl- 54
addions Complex Na+ 0
savepdb Complex phos_BH4_complex_iron_solv2.pdb
saveamberparm Complex phos_BH4_complex_iron_solv.parm7 phos_BH4_complex_iron_solv.rst7
quit
129
==PAGE:138==
Oxidized Complex BH4 +Fe2+
Table A.16: Input commands for tLEaP for solvation of oxidized hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2, BH4,
and Fe2+ complex.
tLEaP.in oxidized hTPH2_chTPH2_complex
source leaprc.constph
source leaprc.protein.ff19SB
source leaprc.gaff2
source leaprc.water.tip3p
loadamberprep prepin.molview
loadamberprep prepin.Met1_capped
loadamberparams frcmod.ions234lm_1264_tip3p
loadamberparams BH4.frcmod
loadamberparams molview.frcmod
loadamberparams Met1_capped.frcmod
#Load molecule
Pro = loadpdb chTPH2.pdb
Pep = loadpdb ox_hTPH2_17.pdb
Fe = loadpdb Fe.pdb
BH4 = loadmol2 BH4.mol2
#combine
complex
= combine {Pro Pep Fe BH4}
set complex.342.FE type Fe2+
set complex.342.FE charge 2.0
#Solvate system
solvateoct complex TIP3PBOX 15
#Adding ions to get saltconc = 0.15
addions complex Cl- 0
addions complex Cl- 54
addions complex Na+ 0
savepdb complex ox_BH4_complex_iron_solv.pdb
saveamberparm complex ox_BH4_complex_iron_solv.parm7 ox_BH4_complex_iron_solv.rst7
quit
130
==PAGE:139==
A.7
MD system setup
Table A.17: Input parameters for energy minimization in explicit solvent.
Minimization Parameters - Explicit Solvent
&cntrl
imin=1,
ncyc=1000,
maxcyc=5000,
ntpr=50,
cut=12,
restraintmask=’!:WAT&@CA,C,O,N’
restraint_wt=10.0,
/
Table A.18: MDIN Parameters for Initial Heating with Explicit Solvent.
Explicit Solvent Initial Heating MDIN Parameters
&cntrl
imin=0, irest=0, ntx=1,
ntpr=2500, ntwx=2500, nstlim=500000,
dt=0.002, ntt=3, gamma_ln=5.0, ig=-1,
ntc=2, ntf=2, cut=12, ntb=1,
iwrap=1, ioutfm=1, nmropt=1,
/
&wt
TYPE=’TEMP0’, ISTEP1=0, ISTEP2=150000,
VALUE1=10.0, VALUE2=300.0,
/
&wt TYPE=’END’
This standardized setup was applied to all simulations.
131
==PAGE:140==
Table A.19: MDIN Parameters for Explicit Solvent Molecular Dynamics with Constant Pres-
sure.
Explicit Solvent Molecular Dynamics Constant Pressure
MD Parameters
&cntrl
imin=0, irest=1, ntx=5,
ntpr=5000, ntwx=5000, nstlim=2000000,
ntwr=5000, dt=0.002, ntt=3, tempi=300,
temp0=300, gamma_ln=1.0, ig=-1,
ntp=1, ntc=2, ntf=2, cut=12,
ntb=2, iwrap=1, ioutfm=1, barostat=2
/
Table A.20: MDIN Parameters for Explicit Solvent Molecular Dynamics with Constant Pres-
sure.
Explicit Solvent Molecular Dynamics Constant Pressure
MD Parameters
&cntrl
imin=0, irest=1, ntx=5,ntxo=2
ntpr=5000, ntwx=5000, nstlim=50000000,
dt=0.002, ntt=3, tempi=300,
temp0=300, gamma_ln=1.0, ig=-1,
ntc=2, ntf=2, cut=12, iwrap=1, barostat=2, ntb=2,
ioutfm=1, iconstph=2, ntconstph=500
solvph=7.0, ntrelax=100,
/
132
==PAGE:141==
A.8
MD analysis
RMSD
RMSD for complex of hTPH2(1-23) and chTPH2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.12: RMSD values over time for the complexes of chTPH2 and (a) hTPH2(1-23), (b)
phosphorylated hTPH2(1-23), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(1-23).
133
==PAGE:142==
RMSD for catalytic domain in hTPH2(1-23)-chTPH2 complex.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.13: RMSD values over time for chTPH2 in complex with (a) hTPH2(123), (b) phos-
phorylated hTPH2(123), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(123).
135
==PAGE:143==
RMSD for hTPH2 variants in complex of hTPH2(1-23) and chTPH2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.14: RMSD values over time for the hTPH2(1-23) variant in complex with chTPH2:
(a) hTPH2(1-23), (b) phosphorylated hTPH2(1-23), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(1-23).
136
==PAGE:144==
RMSD for complex of hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2, and Fe3+
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.15: RMSD values over time for the Fe3+ complexes of chTPH2 with (a) hTPH2(123),
(b) phosphorylated hTPH2(123), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(123).
137
==PAGE:145==
RMSD for catalytic domain in hTPH2(1-23)-chTPH2-Fe3+ complex.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.16: RMSD values over time for chTPH2 in complex with Fe3+ and (a) hTPH2(123),
(b) phosphorylated hTPH2(123), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(123).
138
==PAGE:146==
RMSD for N-terminal tail in hTPH2(1-23)-chTPH2-Fe3+ complex.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.17: RMSD values over time for the hTPH2(1-23) variant in complex with chTPH2
and Fe3+: (a) hTPH2(1-23), (b) phosphorylated hTPH2(1-23), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(1-23).
139
==PAGE:147==
RMSD for complex of hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2, Fe2+, and BH4.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.18: RMSD values over time for the Fe2+ complexes of chTPH2, BH4, and with (a)
hTPH2(123), (b) phosphorylated hTPH2(123), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(123).
140
==PAGE:148==
RMSD for catalytic domain in hTPH2(1-23)-chTPH2-Fe2+-BH4 complex.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.19:
RMSD values over time for chTPH2 in complex with Fe2+, BH4, and (a)
hTPH2(123), (b) phosphorylated hTPH2(123), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(123).
141
==PAGE:149==
RMSD for hTPH2 variants of hTPH2(1-23), chTPH2, Fe2+, and BH4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.20: RMSD values over time for chTPH2 in complex with Fe2+, BH4: (a) hTPH2(123),
(b) phosphorylated hTPH2(123), and (c) oxidized hTPH2(123).
142
==PAGE:150==
RMSF
Complex - Catalytic domain
(a)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.21: RMSF values for chTPH2 from complex (a), phosphorylated complex (b) oxidized
complex (c).
143
==PAGE:151==
Complex with Fe3+ - Catalytic domain
(a)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.22: RMSF values for chTPH2 from complex (a), phosphorylated complex (b) oxidized
complex (c) in the presence of Fe3+.
144
==PAGE:152==
Complex with Fe2+ and BH4 - Catalytic domain
(a)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.23: RMSF values for hTPH2(1-23) from complex (a), phosphorylated complex (b),
oxidized complex (c) in the presence of Fe2+ and BH4.
145
==PAGE:153==
RMSF averages of hTPH2 variants in complex
Figure A.24: Average RMSF values for hTPH2(1-23) variants in complex with chTPH2.
Figure A.25: Average RMSF values for hTPH2(1-23) variants in complex with chTPH2 and
Fe3+.
146
==PAGE:154==
Figure A.26: AverageRMSF values for hTPH2(1-23) variants in complex with chTPH2, BH4,
and Fe2+.
Radius of Gyration - Complex averages
time [ns]
Average RG complex
Average RG complex + Fe3+
Average RG complex + Fe2+ + BH4
hTPH2orig(1-23)
100-600
9.9 ± 0.3 Å
9.5 ± 0.3 Å
9.7 ± 0.2 Å
hTPH2phos(1-23)
150-600
9.3 ± 0.3 Å
9.8 ± 0.4 Å
9.5 ± 0.3 Å
hTPH2ox(1-23)
100-600
9.2 ± 0.3 Å
9.8 ± 0.3
9.6 ± 0.3 Å
Table A.21: Average RG values
SASA - Complex averages
time [ns]
Average SASA complex
Average SASA complex + Fe3+
Average SASA complex + Fe2+ + BH4
hTPH2orig(1-23)
100-600
(14 ± 1) ·103 Å2
(14.7 ± 0.5) ·103 Å2
(14.2 ± 0.2)·103 Å2
hTPH2phos(1-23)
150-600
(14.1 ± 0.4) ·103 Å2
(14.6 ± 0.5) ·103 Å2
(14.2 ± 0.5) ·103 Å2
hTPH2ox(1-23)
100-600
(14 ± 1) ·103 Å2
(14.8 ± 0.6) ·103 Å2
(14.2 ± 0.6) ·103 Å2
Table A.22: Average SASA values
147
==PAGE:155==
Secondary structure heat maps
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.27: Secondary structure plots for hTPH2(1–47) from simulations minimized with 1000
(a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
148
==PAGE:156==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.28: Secondary structure plots for phosphorylated hTPH2(1–47) from simulations min-
imized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
149
==PAGE:157==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.29: Secondary structure plots for oxidized hTPH2(1–47) from simulations minimized
with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
150
==PAGE:158==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.30: Secondary structure plots for hTPH2(1–47) and chTPH2 complex from simulations
minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
151
==PAGE:159==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.31: Secondary structure plots for phosphorylated hTPH2(1–47) and chTPH2 complex
from simulations minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
152
==PAGE:160==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.32: Secondary structure plots for oxidized hTPH2(1–47) and chTPH2 complex from
simulations minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
153
==PAGE:161==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.33: Secondary structure plots for hTPH2(1–47), chTPH2, and Fe3+ complex from
simulations minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
154
==PAGE:162==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.34: Secondary structure plots for phosphorylated hTPH2(1–47), chTPH2, and Fe3+
complex from simulations minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e)
steps.
155
==PAGE:163==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.35: Secondary structure plots for oxidized hTPH2(1–47), chTPH2, and Fe3+ complex
from simulations minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
156
==PAGE:164==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.36: Secondary structure plots for hTPH2(1–47), chTPH2, Fe2+, and BH4 complex
from simulations minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e) steps.
157
==PAGE:165==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.37: Secondary structure plots for phosphorylated hTPH2(1–47), chTPH2, Fe2+, and
BH4 complex from simulations minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000
(e) steps.
158
==PAGE:166==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure A.38: Secondary structure plots for oxidized hTPH2(1–47), chTPH2, Fe2+, and BH4
complex from simulations minimized with 1000 (a), 1250 (b), 1500 (c), 1750 (d), and 2000 (e)
steps.
159
==PAGE:167==
Cluster
Table A.23: Clustering input parameters (CPPTRAJ)
c l u s t e r
c1 \
kmeans c l u s t e r s
20 randompoint maxit 500 \
rms :1−341@CA,C,N,O \
sieve 5 random \
out cnumvtime_complex_1000 . dat \
summary summary_complex_1000 . dat \
info
info_complex_1000 . dat \
cpopvtime cpopvtime_complex_1000 . agr normframe \
repout rep_complex_1000 repfmt pdb \
singlerepout
singlerep_complex_1000 . nc singlerepfmt
netcdf \
avgout avg_complex_1000 avgfmt pdb
run
Summary for cluster analysis of structures mentioned
Table A.24: Cluster statistics for hTPH2orig(1-23) in complex with chTPH2.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
9192
0.184
1.160
0.151
35432
1.679
1
9169
0.183
1.196
0.153
14627
1.674
2
6832
0.137
1.169
0.151
5399
1.790
3
6036
0.121
1.202
0.158
21359
1.634
4
2563
0.051
1.218
0.178
49718
1.846
5
2548
0.051
1.262
0.227
40500
1.734
6
2005
0.040
1.240
0.190
25757
2.648
7
1650
0.033
1.322
0.210
43663
1.703
8
1505
0.030
1.213
0.187
27805
2.576
9
1231
0.025
1.257
0.205
45953
1.949
10
1188
0.024
1.203
0.201
42916
1.881
11
1059
0.021
1.386
0.256
496
2.110
12
1000
0.020
1.160
0.220
3099
2.219
13
954
0.019
1.387
0.240
43497
1.762
14
905
0.018
1.320
0.232
29018
2.250
15
826
0.017
1.337
0.272
1658
1.701
16
621
0.012
1.371
0.299
29702
2.029
17
382
0.008
1.139
0.192
47350
1.949
18
266
0.005
1.086
0.190
44602
2.146
19
69
0.001
1.080
0.202
43269
1.918
160
==PAGE:168==
Table A.25: Cluster statistics for hTPH2phos(1-23) in complex with chTPH2.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
16895
0.338
1.169
0.146
13819
2.354
1
9702
0.194
1.215
0.177
39957
2.484
2
6879
0.138
1.237
0.219
45726
2.754
3
6462
0.129
1.097
0.135
25089
2.349
4
2300
0.046
1.178
0.261
31674
2.403
5
1242
0.025
1.242
0.248
2134
3.566
6
1046
0.021
1.047
0.166
30018
2.538
7
949
0.019
1.195
0.221
6277
2.356
8
767
0.015
1.376
0.305
503
2.522
9
554
0.011
1.529
0.326
4699
2.406
10
499
0.010
1.409
0.269
1351
2.759
11
418
0.008
1.575
0.331
1212
2.415
12
414
0.008
1.365
0.263
3157
3.014
13
392
0.008
1.331
0.274
3767
2.766
14
340
0.007
1.437
0.291
4369
2.276
15
320
0.006
1.246
0.258
1120
3.005
16
307
0.006
1.336
0.297
5558
2.819
17
259
0.005
1.393
0.376
4056
2.732
18
187
0.004
1.286
0.267
5051
2.313
19
69
0.001
1.238
0.269
4503
2.472
161
==PAGE:169==
Table A.26: Cluster statistics for hTPH2ox(1-23) in complex with chTPH2.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
12735
0.255
1.071
0.131
49451
1.283
1
5317
0.106
1.201
0.144
17308
1.315
2
4729
0.095
1.206
0.175
24463
1.277
3
4368
0.087
1.254
0.193
6215
1.497
4
4245
0.085
1.216
0.177
19815
1.375
5
3370
0.067
1.026
0.138
1412
1.775
6
2676
0.054
1.226
0.192
9513
1.469
7
2173
0.043
1.287
0.232
39871
1.335
8
2122
0.042
1.171
0.191
33303
1.525
9
1551
0.031
1.196
0.188
16709
1.539
10
1360
0.027
1.240
0.198
29989
1.568
11
1263
0.025
1.242
0.197
28755
1.426
12
938
0.019
1.182
0.188
13648
1.362
13
861
0.017
1.189
0.199
14712
1.598
14
724
0.014
1.144
0.178
28043
1.551
15
601
0.012
1.169
0.199
35074
1.611
16
338
0.007
1.107
0.187
35613
2.173
17
294
0.006
1.089
0.166
21549
1.605
18
191
0.004
1.231
0.257
35934
1.461
19
145
0.003
1.091
0.185
34924
2.068
Table A.27: Cluster statistics for hTPH2orig(1-23) in complex with chTPH2 and Fe3+.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
10862
0.181
1.041
0.117
51732
1.477
1
7431
0.124
1.094
0.130
29709
1.396
2
7137
0.119
1.018
0.153
55393
1.572
3
6048
0.101
1.097
0.125
20708
1.402
4
5602
0.093
1.070
0.145
38026
1.478
5
5590
0.093
1.139
0.128
24006
1.323
6
5286
0.088
1.108
0.144
15752
1.326
7
2153
0.036
1.022
0.137
35047
1.542
8
1866
0.031
1.038
0.138
2249
1.490
9
1663
0.028
1.059
0.140
4868
1.529
10
1172
0.020
1.141
0.149
8030
1.350
11
1100
0.018
1.157
0.173
9447
1.326
12
891
0.015
1.170
0.165
5728
1.532
13
754
0.013
1.054
0.156
7249
1.434
14
726
0.012
1.226
0.234
1629
1.609
15
606
0.010
1.220
0.201
406
1.758
16
465
0.008
1.201
0.178
6769
1.609
17
342
0.006
1.187
0.191
294
2.016
18
189
0.003
1.082
0.165
1144
2.043
19
117
0.002
1.129
0.197
994
2.074
162
==PAGE:170==
Table A.28: Cluster statistics for hTPH2phos(1-23) in complex with chTPH2 and Fe3+.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
7730
0.172
1.223
0.187
15510
2.132
1
5132
0.114
1.002
0.109
6908
2.246
2
4333
0.096
1.132
0.148
26869
2.053
3
3960
0.088
1.078
0.134
12876
2.170
4
3445
0.077
1.115
0.187
43009
2.099
5
3190
0.071
1.118
0.161
34855
1.903
6
2420
0.054
1.162
0.197
32629
2.058
7
1766
0.039
0.996
0.161
39699
2.063
8
1700
0.038
1.192
0.221
25292
2.123
9
1589
0.035
1.173
0.174
37796
1.895
10
1457
0.032
1.029
0.138
648
2.284
11
1385
0.031
0.977
0.124
3297
2.463
12
1314
0.029
1.066
0.131
21991
1.837
13
1128
0.025
1.119
0.244
10734
2.254
14
1104
0.025
1.112
0.195
41018
2.383
15
933
0.021
1.122
0.165
32381
2.147
16
844
0.019
1.175
0.213
23073
1.787
17
799
0.018
1.190
0.226
24063
2.023
18
600
0.013
1.033
0.147
20870
1.885
19
172
0.004
1.072
0.211
37031
2.061
Table A.29: Cluster statistics for hTPH2ox(1-23) in complex with chTPH2 and Fe3+.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
14624
0.244
1.298
0.162
49544
1.735
1
9210
0.153
1.211
0.191
54464
1.845
2
7346
0.122
1.156
0.136
28806
1.778
3
6233
0.104
1.250
0.183
15628
1.833
4
5084
0.085
1.357
0.195
9042
1.681
5
2913
0.049
1.243
0.191
22966
1.753
6
2049
0.034
1.473
0.242
35324
2.059
7
2000
0.033
1.162
0.155
38797
1.977
8
1519
0.025
1.254
0.223
11728
1.792
9
1481
0.025
1.139
0.159
10271
1.907
10
1422
0.024
1.204
0.219
5406
1.930
11
1183
0.020
1.237
0.197
662
2.920
12
1061
0.018
1.306
0.232
59571
2.212
13
955
0.016
1.137
0.163
4709
2.006
14
855
0.014
1.277
0.200
2739
2.262
15
644
0.011
1.343
0.225
3116
2.381
16
556
0.009
1.303
0.262
3763
2.052
17
467
0.008
1.237
0.206
1559
2.143
18
247
0.004
1.125
0.190
133
2.895
19
151
0.003
1.133
0.177
1709
2.273
163
==PAGE:171==
Table A.30: Cluster statistics for hTPH2orig(1-23) in complex with chTPH2, Fe2+, and BH4.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
11089
0.217
1.087
0.141
10841
1.973
1
9570
0.188
1.152
0.178
25974
1.967
2
7631
0.150
1.128
0.157
42326
1.811
3
3905
0.077
1.260
0.185
37811
1.774
4
3136
0.061
1.231
0.211
46126
2.083
5
3032
0.059
1.300
0.302
1605
1.930
6
1758
0.034
1.234
0.189
50806
1.857
7
1640
0.032
1.134
0.188
18561
1.736
8
1540
0.030
1.062
0.160
50364
2.282
9
1113
0.022
1.112
0.159
8082
2.069
10
924
0.018
1.370
0.308
22390
2.213
11
866
0.017
1.302
0.259
15176
1.888
12
864
0.017
1.384
0.278
23064
1.860
13
777
0.015
1.404
0.325
16253
1.960
14
754
0.015
1.180
0.222
21246
1.991
15
700
0.014
1.152
0.222
5326
2.155
16
552
0.011
1.204
0.210
19943
2.347
17
520
0.010
1.225
0.199
20644
2.199
18
461
0.009
1.188
0.234
19477
2.176
19
169
0.003
1.301
0.314
20291
2.509
Table A.31: Cluster statistics for hTPH2phos(1-23) in complex with chTPH2, Fe2+, and BH4.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
14590
0.286
1.124
0.132
20915
1.676
1
6097
0.120
1.166
0.155
13383
1.662
2
4588
0.090
1.157
0.163
48292
1.830
3
4222
0.083
1.128
0.150
43949
1.823
4
3941
0.077
1.110
0.139
9884
1.866
5
3099
0.061
1.041
0.133
3560
2.422
6
2912
0.057
1.038
0.135
40410
1.770
7
2717
0.053
1.104
0.137
35832
1.670
8
1465
0.029
1.170
0.183
6907
1.920
9
1357
0.027
1.089
0.162
1143
2.416
10
1180
0.023
1.105
0.145
18517
2.004
11
1111
0.022
1.245
0.235
22143
2.352
12
825
0.016
1.069
0.154
1765
2.317
13
667
0.013
1.400
0.268
22685
2.011
14
526
0.010
1.176
0.205
19503
1.814
15
511
0.010
1.204
0.199
19877
1.962
16
411
0.008
1.077
0.175
5453
2.240
17
329
0.006
1.076
0.165
5837
2.614
18
258
0.005
1.047
0.156
10819
2.109
19
195
0.004
1.187
0.238
6143
2.318
164
==PAGE:172==
Table A.32: Cluster statistics for hTPH2ox(1-23) in complex with chTPH2, Fe2+, and BH4.
#Cluster
Frames
Frac
AvgDist
Stdev
Centroid
AvgCDist
0
21639
0.386
1.231
0.163
31724
1.803
1
8898
0.159
1.168
0.151
53094
1.883
2
7525
0.134
1.180
0.194
5070
1.883
3
3683
0.066
1.377
0.254
14875
1.886
4
3433
0.061
1.187
0.183
29751
1.827
5
1523
0.027
1.354
0.201
34414
1.943
6
1434
0.026
1.276
0.198
23712
2.468
7
1285
0.023
1.243
0.183
21411
2.684
8
987
0.018
1.211
0.167
18276
2.065
9
899
0.016
1.346
0.251
9516
1.838
10
857
0.015
1.282
0.324
410
2.203
11
716
0.013
1.201
0.182
23216
3.082
12
632
0.011
1.258
0.224
10806
2.108
13
591
0.011
1.391
0.280
20363
2.451
14
513
0.009
1.441
0.313
1333
2.083
15
309
0.006
1.024
0.148
12314
1.849
16
304
0.005
1.315
0.261
10205
2.273
17
297
0.005
1.191
0.211
11374
2.335
18
250
0.004
1.186
0.207
105
2.412
19
226
0.004
1.132
0.188
11234
3.161
165
==PAGE:173==
Bibliography
[1]
Berger Miles, Gray John, and Roth Bryan L. “The expanded biology of serotonin”.
In: Annual Review of Medicine 60.1 (2009), pp. 355–366.
[2]
Michael D. Gershon and Jan Tack. “The serotonin signaling system: from basic un-
derstanding to drug development for functional GI disorders”. In: Gastroenterology
132.1 (2007), pp. 397–414.
[3]
Xiaodong Zhang et al. “Loss-of-function mutation in tryptophan hydroxylase-2
identiﬁed in unipolar major depression”. In: Neuron 45.1 (2005), pp. 11–16.
[4]
Natalia K Popova and Alexander V Kulikov. “Targeting tryptophan hydroxylase
2 in aﬀective disorder”. In: Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets 14.10 (2010),
pp. 1259–1271.
[5]
Carla Santos et al. “The janus face of serotonin: Regenerative promoter and chronic
liver disease aggravator”. In: Heliyon 10.5 (2024), e30703.
[6]
Gary M Mawe and Jennifer M Hoﬀman. “Serotonin signalling in the gutfunc-
tions, dysfunctions and therapeutic targets”. In: Nature Reviews Gastroenterology
Hepatology 10.8 (2013), pp. 473–486.
[7]
Dirk J Walther and Michael Bader. “A unique central tryptophan hydroxylase
isoform”. In: Biochemical Pharmacology 66.9 (2003), pp. 1673–1680.
[8]
Matthew D Coates et al. “Molecular defects in mucosal serotonin content and
decreased serotonin reuptake transporter in ulcerative colitis and irritable bowel
syndrome”. In: Gastroenterology 126.7 (2004), pp. 1657–1664.
[9]
Maria Tsoli and George Kaltsas. “Carcinoid Syndrome”. In: Encyclopedia of En-
docrine Diseases. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 13–20.
[10]
Mayo Clinic Staﬀ. “Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and side ef-
fects”. In: Mayo Clinic (2024).
[11]
Amit Sharma and Chris Chang. “Telotristat ethyl: An inhibitor of tryptophan
hydroxylase type 1”. In: PMC (2019).
[12]
Kongfu Zhu et al. “Cryo-EM Structure and Activator Screening of Human Tryp-
tophan Hydroxylase 2”. In: Frontiers in Pharmacology (2022).
166
==PAGE:174==
[13]
Patricia Gaspar and Christel Lillesaar. “Tryptophan hydroxylase-2: Challenges
and opportunities in brain serotonergic modulation”. In: PMC (2012).
[14]
Michael Bader. “Inhibition of serotonin synthesis: A novel therapeutic paradigm”.
In: Pharmacology and Therapeutics 205 (2020), p. 107423.
[15]
Paul F. Fitzpatrick. “The aromatic amino acid hydroxylases”. In: Advances in
Enzymology and Related Areas of Molecular Biology. Vol. 74. John Wiley and
Sons Inc., 2000, pp. 235–294.
[16]
Ida Marie Vedel. “Mapping L-phenylalanine binding to the regulatory domains of
human tryptophan hydroxylase isoforms”. English. PhD Thesis. Department of
Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark (DTU Chemistry), 2022.
[17]
PerkinElmer Informatics. ChemDraw 23.1.1. Version 23.1.1, PerkinElmer Infor-
matics. 2023. url: https://www.perkinelmer.com/category/chemdraw.
[18]
Neslihan Carkaci-Salli et al. “Functional Domains of Human Tryptophan Hydrox-
ylase 2 (hTPH2)”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 281.39 (2006), pp. 28105–
28112.
[19]
E. C. Arturo et al. “First structure of full-length mammalian phenylalanine hy-
droxylase reveals the architecture of an autoinhibited tetramer”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 113.9 (2016), pp. 2394–2399.
[20]
S. C. Daubner, T. Le, and S. Wang. “Tyrosine hydroxylase and regulation of
dopamine synthesis”. In: Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 508.1 (2011),
pp. 1–12.
[21]
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI). Clustal Omega Multiple Sequence Align-
ment Service. https://www.ebi.ac.uk/jdispatcher/msa/clustalo. Online;
accessed 23 May 2025.
[22]
Giovanni Cianchetta et al. “Mechanism of Inhibition of Novel Tryptophan Hy-
droxylase Inhibitors Revealed by Co-crystal Structures and Kinetic Analysis”. In:
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry (2010).
[23]
Michael S. Windahl et al. “Crystal Structure of Tryptophan Hydroxylase with
Bound Amino Acid Substrate”. In: Biochemistry 47.46 (2008), pp. 12087–12094.
[24]
L Wang et al. Crystal structure of human tryptophan hydroxylase with bound 7,8-
dihydro-L-biopterin cofactor and Fe(III). 2002.
[25]
Donald M Kuhn et al. “Phosphorylation and activation of tryptophan hydrox-
ylase 2: Identiﬁcation of serine-19 as the substrate site for calcium, calmodulin-
dependent protein kinase II”. In: Journal of Neurochemistry 103.4 (2007), pp. 1567–
1573.
167
==PAGE:175==
[26]
B. Kobe, I.G. Jennings, and R.G.H. Cotton. “Structural basis of autoregulation of
phenylalanine hydroxylase”. In: Nature Structural Biology 6.5 (1999), pp. 442–448.
[27]
Kerstin Tenner, Daniel Walther, and Michael Bader. “Inﬂuence of human trypto-
phan hydroxylase 2 N- and C-terminus on enzymatic activity and oligomerization”.
In: Journal of Neurochemistry 102.6 (2007), pp. 1887–1894.
[28]
Marte Innselset Flydal et al. “Structure of full-length human phenylalanine hy-
droxylase in complex with tetrahydrobiopterin”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 116.23 (2019), pp. 11229–11234.
[29]
S. Montanez et al. “Cryo-EM Structure and Activator Screening of Human Tryp-
tophan Hydroxylase 2”. In: Frontiers in Pharmacology 13 (2022), p. 907437.
[30]
John S. Papadopoulos and Richa Agarwala. “COBALT: constraint-based align-
ment tool for multiple protein sequences”. In: Bioinformatics 23.9 (2007), pp. 1073–
1079.
[31]
Andrew M. Waterhouse et al. “Jalview Version 2a multiple sequence alignment
editor and analysis workbench”. In: Bioinformatics 25.9 (2009), pp. 1189–1191.
[32]
Alex S. Holehouse and Birthe B. Kragelund. “The molecular basis for cellular
function of intrinsically disordered protein regions”. In: Nature Reviews Molecular
Cell Biology 25.3 (2024), pp. 187–211.
[33]
Peter E. Wright and H. Jane Dyson. “Intrinsically disordered proteins in cellular
signalling and regulation”. In: Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 16.1 (2015),
pp. 18–29.
[34]
Lilia M. Iakoucheva et al. “Intrinsic disorder in cell-signaling and cancer-associated
proteins”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 323.3 (2002), pp. 573–584.
[35]
Ho Yee Joyce Fung, Melissa Birol, and Elizabeth Rhoades. “IDPs in macromolec-
ular complexes: the roles of multivalent interactions in diverse assemblies”. In:
Current Opinion in Structural Biology (2018).
[36]
A. Keith Dunker et al. “Flexible nets. The roles of intrinsic disorder in protein
interaction networks”. In: FEBS Journal 272.20 (2005), pp. 5129–5148.
[37]
Donald M. Kuhn and Hiroyuki Hasegawa. “Tryptophan hydroxylase and serotonin
synthesis regulation”. In: Oxidative Stress. Ed. by Helmut Sies. Elsevier, 2020.
Chap. 12, pp. 203–217.
[38]
H. Weissbach, L. Resnick, and N. Brot. “Peptide Methionine Sulfoxide Reduc-
tase: Structure, Mechanism of Action, and Biological Function”. In: Archives of
Biochemistry and Biophysics 397.2 (2002), pp. 172–178.
168
==PAGE:176==
[39]
Donald M. Kuhn et al. “Tryptophan hydroxylase 2 aggregates through disulﬁde
cross-linking upon oxidation: Possible link to serotonin deﬁcits and non-motor
symptoms in Parkinson’s disease”. In: Journal of Neurochemistry 116.3 (2011),
pp. 426–437.
[40]
Qi Ding et al. “Oxidative Damage of Tryptophan Hydroxylase2 Mediated by Per-
oxisomal Superoxide Anion Radical in Brains of Mouse with Depression”. In: Jour-
nal of the American Chemical Society 142.49 (2020), pp. 20735–20743.
[41]
G. L. Rosano and E. A. Ceccarelli. “Recombinant protein expression in Escherichia
coli: advances and challenges”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 5 (2014), p. 172.
[42]
New England Biolabs. NiCo21 (DE3) Competent E. coli. Accessed: 2025-01-28.
2025. url: https://www.neb.com/en/products/c2529-nico21de3-competent-
e-coli.
[43]
Kakoli Bose. Textbook on cloning, expression and puriﬁcation of recombinant pro-
teins. Springer, 2022.
[44]
Lennart Kågedal. “Immobilized Metal Ion Aﬃnity Chromatography”. In: Protein
Puriﬁcation: Principles, High Resolution Methods, and Applications. Wiley Black-
well, 2011, pp. 183–201.
[45]
Kjell O Eriksson. “Reversed phase chromatography”. In: Biopharmaceutical Pro-
cessing. Elsevier, 2018, pp. 433–439.
[46]
Ashley G Woolfork and David S Hage. “Aﬃnity chromatography”. In: Particle
Separation Techniques. Elsevier, 2022, pp. 297–338.
[47]
A. Drabik, A. Bodzo-Kuakowska, and J. Silberring. “Gel Electrophoresis”. In:
Proteomic Proﬁling and Analytical Chemistry: The Crossroads. Second Edition.
Elsevier Inc., 2016, pp. 115–143.
[48]
MBL International Corporation. SDS-PAGE (Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate Polyacry-
lamide Gel Electrophoresis). Accessed: 2025-02-10. 2025. url: https://ruo.mbl.
co.jp/bio/e/support/method/sds-page.html.
[49]
Hermann Schägger. “Tricine-SDS-PAGE”. In: Nature Protocols (2006), pp. 16–22.
[50]
Christos D. Georgiou et al. “Mechanism of Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 bind-
ing to proteins: A hydrophobic assay for nanogram quantities of proteins”. In:
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry (2008).
[51]
Leadgene Biomedical. SUMO Protease ULP1 (Active) - LDG0014RG. Accessed:
2025-02-10. 2025. url: https://www.leadgenebio.com/sumo-protease-ulp1-
active-ldg0014rg.html.
169
==PAGE:177==
[52]
Takara Bio. HRV 3C Protease. Accessed: 2025-02-10. 2025. url: https://www.
takarabio.com/products/protein-research/accessory-enzymes/hrv-3c-
protease.
[53]
Bhaswati Banerjee, Gauri Misra, and Mohd Tashfeen Ashraf. “Circular Dichro-
ism”. In: Data Processing Handbook for Complex Biological Data Sources. Elsevier,
2019, pp. 21–30.
[54]
Henderson James Cleaves. “Circular Dichroism”. In: Encyclopedia of Astrobiology.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2023, pp. 580–581.
[55]
B. Rupp. Circular Dichroism. https://hackert.cm.utexas.edu/courses/
ch370/old2008/CD/CD_Rupp.htm. Accessed: 2025-06-29. 2008.
[56]
Chuan He, H. Zhang, P. Davies, et al. “Circular Dichroism”. In: Encyclopedia of
Analytical Chemistry. Wiley, 2009, pp. 1–25.
[57]
C. Kalidas and M. V. Sangaranarayanan. “Circular Dichroism as a Tool for the
Analysis of Biochemical Reactions”. In: Biophysical Chemistry: Techniques and
Applications. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, pp. 361–373.
[58]
Applied Photophysics. CD Units FAQs. Accessed: 29. june 2025. 2025. url: https:
//www.photophysics.com/faqs/methods-techniques/cd-units-faqs/.
[59]
Gerald D. Fasman, ed. Circular Dichroism and the Conformational Analysis of
Biomolecules. Plenum Press, 1996.
[60]
Dr. J. Reyna. Analysis of Protein Secondary Structure. Accessed: 2025-04-19. 2023.
url: https://bio.libretexts.org/Courses/Ouachita_Baptist_University/
Reyna_Cell_Biology/02%3A_2-(T2-first_lecture)_Protein_Structure/2.
02%3A_Composition_Sequence_and_Conformational_Analysis_of_Proteins/
2.2.04%3A_B4._Analysis_of_Protein_Secondary_Structure.
[61]
Henry Jakubowski. Analysis of Protein Secondary Structure. Accessed: 2025-06-
29. 2021. url: https://employees.csbsju.edu/hjakubowski/classes/ch331/
protstructure/PS_2B4_Analy_Secondary.html.
[62]
Veronica Dodero, Zulma Quirolo, and Alejandra Sequeira. “Biomolecular studies
by circular dichroism”. In: Frontiers in bioscience : a journal and virtual library
16 (Jan. 2011), pp. 61–73.
[63]
R. W. Woody. “The Exciton Model and the Circular Dichroism of Polypeptides”.
In: Methods in Enzymology (1995), pp. 34–71.
[64]
Norma J. Greenﬁeld. “Using circular dichroism spectra to estimate protein sec-
ondary structure”. In: Nature Protocols (2006), pp. 2876–2890.
170
==PAGE:178==
[65]
Micsonai, Attila and Kardos, Julianna. BeStSel Web Server: Accurate Protein
Secondary Structure Prediction from CD Spectra. https://bestsel.elte.hu/
index.php. Accessed: 2025-06-06. 2025.
[66]
Sharon M. Kelly, Thomas J. Jess, and Nicholas C. Price. “How to study proteins
by circular dichroism”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Proteins and
Proteomics (2005).
[67]
Leandro Ramos Souza Barbosa et al. “Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering Applied to
Proteins in Solution”. English. In: Proteins in Solution and at Interfaces: Meth-
ods and Applications in Biotechnology and Materials Science. Ed. by Catherine
Le Bon and Stephen E. Harding. John Wiley and Sons, 2013, pp. 49–72. isbn:
9780470952511. doi: 10.1002/9781118523063.ch3.
[68]
Christopher D. Putnam et al. “X-ray solution scattering (SAXS) combined with
crystallography and computation: Deﬁning accurate macromolecular structures,
conformations and assemblies in solution”. In: Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics
40.3 (2007), pp. 191–285.
[69]
Dmitri I. Svergun and Michel H. J. Koch. “Small-angle scattering studies of biolog-
ical macromolecules in solution”. In: Reports on Progress in Physics 66.10 (2003),
pp. 1735–1782.
[70]
Thomas M. Weiss. Introduction to Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS). Stanford
Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL). 2017. url: https://www-ssrl.slac.
stanford.edu/~saxs/download/weiss_intro.pdf.
[71]
Christopher M. Jeﬀries, Dmitri I. Svergun, and et al. “Small-angle X-ray and
neutron scattering”. In: Nature Reviews Methods Primers 1.1 (2021), p. 69.
[72]
David A. Jacques and Jill Trewhella. “Small-angle scattering for structural biol-
ogyExpanding the frontier while avoiding the pitfalls”. In: Protein Science 19.4
(2010), pp. 642–657.
[73]
Oleg Gang. Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) from Bulks and Surfaces. Ac-
cessed: 2025-04-24. 2021. url: https : / / www . bnl . gov / nsls2 / userguide /
lectures/lecture-7-gang.pdf.
[74]
BioXTAS RAW Documentation. SAXS Guinier Analysis. https://bioxtas-
raw.readthedocs.io/en/latest/saxs/saxs_guinier.html. Accessed: 2025-06-
29. 2024.
[75]
Ron Milo and Rob Phillips. Partial speciﬁc volume of proteins. https://bionumbers.
hms.harvard.edu/bionumber.aspx?id=104272. Accessed: 2025-07-09. 2009.
[76]
V. Piiad et al. “SAXSMoW 2.0: Online calculator for protein molecular weight
from solution SAXS data”. In: Protein Science 31.2 (2022), pp. 447–454.
171
==PAGE:179==
[77]
Tomá Klumpler. “Biological small-angle X-Ray scattering (SAXS)”. In: Plant
Structural Biology: Hormonal Regulations. Ed. by Jan Hejátko and Toshio Hakoshima.
Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 277–293.
[78]
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. Assessment of SAXS Data Quality. Ac-
cessed: 2025-06-29. 2021. url: https://www-ssrl.slac.stanford.edu/~saxs/
analysis/assessment.htm.
[79]
Jesse B. Hopkins, Richard E. Gillilan, and Soren Skou. “A practical guide to small
angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) of ﬂexible and intrinsically disordered proteins”.
In: (2015).
[80]
A. Bax. “NMR spectroscopy in structural biology: challenges and perspectives”.
In: Nature 10.9 (2017), pp. 302–308.
[81]
D. F. et al Gauto. “Integrated NMR and cryo-EM atomic-resolution structure
determination of a half-megadalton enzyme complex”. In: Nature Communications
10 (2019), p. 2697.
[82]
Donald L. Pavia et al. Introduction to Spectroscopy. 5th. Cengage Learning, 2015.
[83]
Thibault Orand. “Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy for the study
of proteins and protein interactions”. In: Chapter 5 in Advances in Structural
Biology. Grenoble, France: Institut de Biologie Structurale, 2023.
[84]
Department of Chemistry University of Wyoming. Introduction to NMR Spec-
troscopy. https://www.uwyo.edu/chemistry/instrumentation/NMR/Introduction.
html. Accessed: 2025-06-29. 2023.
[85]
S. Rouskin and J. K. Hines. “NMR spectroscopy of intrinsically disordered pro-
teins”. In: Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 20.5 (2019), pp. 274–284.
[86]
A. Bax and N. Tjandra. “Using NMR to study fast dynamics in proteins”. In:
PubMed Central (2002).
[87]
M. P. Allen. “Introduction to Molecular Dynamics Simulation”. In: Computational
Soft Matter: From Synthetic Polymers to Proteins (2004), pp. 1–28. url: https:
//dasher.wustl.edu/chem430/readings/md-intro-2.pdf.
[88]
P. Koehl and M. Levitt. “A brighter future for protein structure prediction”. In:
Nature Structural Biology (1999).
[89]
Natasha Wood. An Introduction to Molecular Dynamics. 2017. url: https://
aidanbudd.github.io/ppisnd/trainingMaterial/natashaWood/What_is_MD.
pdf.
[90]
John R. Taylor. Classical Mechanics. Sausalito, CA: University Science Books,
2005. isbn: 9781891389221.
172
==PAGE:180==
[91]
Daan Frenkel and Berend Smit. Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algo-
rithms to Applications. Academic Press, 2002.
[92]
Flemming Y. Hansen and Gert H. J. Peters. Molecular Dynamics Simulations:
From Theory to Practice. Denmark: Department of Chemistry, The Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, 2024.
[93]
David A. et. al. Case. AMBER 19 (including AmberTools 19). https://ambermd.
org. University of California, San Francisco. 2019.
[94]
Niels Grønbech-Jensen. “Complete set of stochastic Verlet-type thermostats for
correct Langevin simulations”. In: Molecular Physics 118.8 (2020), e1662506.
[95]
R.K. Pathria and Paul D. Beale. Statistical Mechanics. 3rd ed. Elsevier, 2011.
[96]
Flemming Jensen. Introduction to Computational Chemistry. 3rd. John Wiley &
Sons, 2017.
[97]
KH Chow and DM Ferguson. “Isothermal isobaric molecular-dynamics simulations
with Monte-Carlo volume sampling”. In: Computer Physics Communications 91.1-
3 (1995), pp. 283–289.
[98]
University of California, San Francisco. AMBER 24 User Manual. 24th ed. Ac-
cessed: 2025-05-23. AMBER Molecular Dynamics Package. 2024, p. 31. url: https:
//ambermd.org/doc12/Amber24.pdf.
[99]
Daniel R. Roe and Thomas E. Cheatham. cpptraj: A Program for Processing and
Analysis of Molecular Dynamics Trajectory Data. AMBER 14 Reference Man-
ual, University of California, San Francisco. 2013. url: https://ambermd.org/
Cpptraj.php.
[100]
Le Wang et al. “Protein Structure Analysis Using Molecular Dynamics Simulation:
Inﬂuence of Force Fields and Sampling Methods”. In: Polymers 11.2 (2019), p. 282.
[101]
Amber Molecular Dynamics Community. Atomic Fluctuation (RMSF) - Amber-
Hub. https://amberhub.chpc.utah.edu/atomicfluct-rmsf/. Accessed: 2025-
07-11. 2025.
[102]
Lieny Lim et al. “Molecular basis of membrane targeting by the C2 domain of the
protein kinase C-2”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101.13
(2004), pp. 4840–4845.
[103]
Elizabeth Durham et al. “Solvent accessible surface area approximations for rapid
and accurate protein structure prediction”. In: Journal of Molecular Modeling 15.9
(2009), pp. 1093–1108.
[104]
Wolfgang Kabsch and Christian Sander. “Dictionary of protein secondary struc-
ture: pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features”. In: Biopoly-
mers 22.12 (1983), pp. 2577–2637.
173
==PAGE:181==
[105]
AMBER-Hub. Clustering a protein from multiple independent copies. Accessed:
2025-07-11. 2023. url: https://amberhub.chpc.utah.edu/clustering- a-
protein-trajectory/.
[106]
Bitesize Bio. Is Your Bacterial Culture Still Growing? https://bitesizebio.
com/41100/is-your-bacterial-culture-still-growing/. Accessed: 2025-02-
02. 2025.
[107]
Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc. Micro Bio-Spin 6 Columns, Tris Buﬀer, Pkg of 50.
Accessed: 2025-07-10. 2024. url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/
product/aldrich/z764744.
[108]
Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany and/or its aﬃliates. Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL
Centrifugal Filters for Biomolecules, 50 kDa cutoﬀ. Accessed: 2025-07-10. 2024.
url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/product/mm/ufsc05001.
[109]
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. NanoDrop 1000 Spectrophotometer. Available via Grizzly
Analytical. Accessed: 2025-07-10. 2024. url: https://grizzlyanalytical.com/
product/thermo-fisher-scientific-nanodrop-1000-spectrophotometer/.
[110]
MilliporeSigma. Amiconő Ultra-0.5 mL Centrifugal Filters Ultracelő 10K. https:
//www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/product/mm/ufc9010. Accessed: 2025-07-10.
n.d.
[111]
M. J. Bogusky et al. “Nitrogen-15 NMR Spectroscopy of Proteins in Solution”. In:
Biochemistry 28.6 (1989), pp. 2704–2711.
[112]
Isabella C. Felli and Roberta Pierattelli. “Intrinsically disordered proteins studied
by NMR spectroscopy”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell
Research 1868.4 (2023), p. 115295.
[113]
JASCO Corporation. J-1500 Circular Dichroism Spectrophotometer. Accessed:
2025-07-10. 2024. url: https : / / jascoinc . com / products / spectroscopy /
circular-dichroism/j-1000-series-models/j-1500-circular-dichroism-
spectrophotometer/.
[114]
Vladimir N Uversky. “Mysterious oligomerization of the amyloidogenic proteins”.
In: FEBS Journal 277.17 (2010), pp. 2940–2953.
[115]
Johnny Habchi et al. “Introducing protein intrinsic disorder”. In: Chemical Re-
views 114.13 (2014), pp. 6561–6588.
[116]
Attila Micsonai et al. “BeStSel: a web server for accurate protein secondary struc-
ture prediction and fold recognition from the circular dichroism spectra”. In: Nu-
cleic Acids Research (2015).
174
==PAGE:182==
[117]
Narayanan Sreerama and Robert W Woody. “Estimation of protein secondary
structure from circular dichroism spectra: Comparison of CONTIN, SELCON, and
CDSSTR methods with an expanded reference set”. In: Analytical Biochemistry
287.2 (2000), pp. 252–260.
[118]
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Slide-A-Lyzerő Dialysis Cassettes. https://www.thermofisher.
com/dk/en/home/life-science/protein-biology/protein-purification-
isolation/protein-dialysis-desalting-concentration/dialysis-products/
slide-a-lyzer-dialysis-cassettes.html. Accessed: 2025-07-10. 2024.
[119]
Konarev, Petr V. and Svergun, D. I. and Franke, Daniel. PRIMUS
A data
analysis tool in the ATSAS small-angle scattering suite. Software, EMBL Ham-
burg/BIOSAXS GmbH. Updated in ATSAS versions; cross-platform GUI PRIMUS/qt
in Franke et al., 2025. 2003. url: https://www.embl-hamburg.de/biosaxs/
primus.html.
[120]
AlphaFold Protein Structure Database. Predicted structure of protein Q8IWU9.
Accessed: 2025-05-22. 2021. url: https : / / alphafold . ebi . ac . uk / entry /
Q8IWU9.
[121]
Collaborative Computing Project for NMR. CcpNmr Analysis. NMR software for
analysis and assignment. latest release year or version year if known. url: https:
//www.ccpn.ac.uk/v2-software/analysis.
[122]
Inkscape Project. Inkscape. Free and open-source vector graphics editor. 2023.
url: https://inkscape.org.
[123]
Schrödinger, LLC. The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System. Version 2.5. 2021.
[124]
Wade M. Borcherds and Gary W. Daughdrill. “Using NMR Chemical Shifts to
Determine Residue-Speciﬁc Secondary Structure Populations for Intrinsically Dis-
ordered Proteins”. In: Methods in Enzymology. Ed. by E. Rhoades. Vol. 611. Aca-
demic Press Inc., 2018, pp. 101–136.
[125]
J. T. Nielsen and F. A. A. Mulder. POTENCI: Prediction of temperature, neighbor
and pH-corrected chemical shifts for intrinsically disordered proteins. 2018. url:
https://st-protein02.chem.au.dk/potenci/.
[126]
Xinwen Liang et al. “Characterization of methionine oxidation and methionine
sulfoxide reduction using methionine-rich cysteine-free proteins”. In: BMC Bio-
chemistry 13 (2012).
[127]
Jack Moskovitz et al. “Methionine sulfoxide reductase (MsrA) is a regulator of
antioxidant defense and lifespan in mammals”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 98.23 (2001), pp. 12920–12925.
175
==PAGE:183==
[128]
Aram J. Panay and Paul F. Fitzpatrick. “Single Turnover Kinetics of Trypto-
phan Hydroxylase: Evidence for a Pterin-Dependent Oxidation Mechanism”. In:
Biochemistry 49.35 (2010), pp. 7563–7571.
[129]
Iris Biotech GmbH. Modiﬁcations of Methionine. https://iris-biotech.de/
global / blog / modifications - of - methionine . html. Accessed: 2025-07-01.
2023.
[130]
Paul Emsley et al. “Features and development of Coot”. In: Acta Crystallographica
Section D: Biological Crystallography 66.4 (2010), pp. 486–501.
[131]
P Mark and L Nilsson. “Structure and dynamics of the TIP3P, SPC, and SPC/E
water models at 298 K”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 105.43 (2001),
pp. 9954–9960.
[132]
Knut Teigen et al. “Reduction and Oxidation of the Active Site Iron in Tyrosine
Hydroxylase: Evidence for a Non-Redox-Dependent Mechanism”. In: Biochemistry
44.8 (2005), pp. 2831–2839.
[133]
Aram J. Panay and Paul F. Fitzpatrick. “Single Turnover Kinetics of Tryptophan
Hydroxylase: Evidence for a Non-Redox-Dependent Mechanism”. In: Biochemistry
49.35 (2010), pp. 7563–7571.
[134]
Eric W. Sayers et al. “GenBank”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 49.D1 (2021), pp. D92–
D96.
[135]
Ok-Kyong Park-Sarge and Kevin D. Sarge. “Detection of Sumoylated Proteins”.
In: Methods in Molecular Biology 301 (2005), pp. 329–338.
[136]
Amber Development Team. Basic Tutorial 9: Using Amber to Model a Protein-
Ligand Complex. 2020.
[137]
Ramu Anandakrishnan, Boris Aguilar, and Alexey V. Onufriev. “H++ 3.0: au-
tomating pK prediction and the preparation of biomolecular structures for atom-
istic molecular modeling and simulations”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 40.W1
(2012), W537–W541.
[138]
David A. Case et al. Tutorial 4B: RESP Charge Derivation and AMBER Param-
eter Generation for a Novel Residue. https://ambermd.org/tutorials/basic/
tutorial4b/. Accessed: 2025-05-24. 2020.
[139]
MolView contributors. MolView. https://molview.org. Web application for
molecular visualization (accessed June 30, 2025). 2025.
176
