==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Improving thermophilic cell factories for
bio-plastic production
Oskar Møller Clausen
16th of July 2025
Master thesis
==PAGE:2==
Title Page
English Title:
Improving thermophilic cell factories for bio-plastic production
Danish Tilte:
Forbedring at termofile celle-fabrikker for bioplastik production
Student:
Oskar Møller Clausen
Student ID:
S203527
Credits:
35 ETCS
Project Type:
Master Thesis
Start Date:
13/01/2025
End Date:
16/07/2025
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department:
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
(DTU chemical engineering)
Collaborator:
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability
(DTU Biosustain)
Research Group:
Bacterial Cell Factories
Supervisors:
John Woodley
Sheila Ingeman Jensen
Stijn Kral
I of V
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As climate change is an ever pressing issue, moving away from petrochemical production is
essential. Therefore, alternative and more sustainable manufacturing options are needed. One
candidate is biomanufacturing, where microbial cell factories are used to produce a wide range
of industrially and commercially relevant products. Thermophiles such as Parageobacillus ther-
moglucosidasius hold great potential as novel cell factories for their reduced contamination
risk and cooling needs. This thesis aims at metabolically engineering P. thermoglucosidasius
to produce the industrially relevant 3-hydroxypropionic acid by a recombinant malonyl-CoA
reductase pathway.
This thesis has demonstrated that P. thermoglucosidasius could tolerate 3-hydroxypropionic
acid up to a concentration range of 40-60 g/L. Additionally, lactate was identified as an un-
desired side-product and its formation was repressed by a successful lactate dehydrogenase
knockout. Lastly, various heterogeneous malonyl-CoA reductases were introduced into P. ther-
moglucosidasius and tested for 3-hydroxypropionic acid production, achieving a titer 0.5 g/L.
All in all, this thesis has demonstrated P. thermoglucosidasius can be used as a putative novel
cell factory for the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid, justifying further metabolic engi-
neering and strain optimisation efforts.
II of V
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
3HP = 3-hydroxypropionic acid
P(3HP) = poly(3-hydroxypropionate)
pHi = internal pH
3HPA = 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde
LF = Left flank
RF = Right flank
USER = Uracil Specific Excision Reagent
UDG = uracil DNA glycosidase
U = uracil base
A = adenine base
RP = reverse phase
TM = Thermophile medium
ON = Overnight
YE = Yeast extract
III of V
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
II
Abbreviations
III
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Relevance of 3HP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
P. thermoglucosidasius as production host
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
3HP pathways and malonyl-CoA reductase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Uracil excision based cloning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Genomic integration via homologous recombination in P. thermoglucosidasius . .
9
1.7
HPLC analysis of metabolites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Methods & Materials
12
2.1
Bacterial strains, plasmids & primers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Bacterial growth conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
3HP toxicity study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Growth on 3HP and lactate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
USER cloning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1
USER reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2
Transformation of E. coli
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
P. thermoglucosidasius competent cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Transformation of P. thermoglucosidasius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.8
Integration via homologous recombination in P. thermoglucosidasius genome . .
17
2.9
Colony PCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.10 Gel electrophoresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.11 Pladsmid based 3HP production in P. thermoglucosidasius . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.12 Lactate production during aerobic cultivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.13 HPLC analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
IV of V
==PAGE:6==
3
Results & Discussion
19
3.1
Toxic effect of 3HP on P. thermoglucosidasius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Elimination of lactate production in P. thermoglucosidasius . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
P. thermoglucosidasius ability to grow on 3HP and lactate . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Production of 3HP in P. thermoglucosidasius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Chromosome overexpression of accDABC-birA operon in P. thermoglucosidasius
30
4
Conclusion & Future perspectives
32
Acknowledgements
33
References
34
Appendix
39
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
V of V
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The population keeps growing and consuming more and more of its non-renewable resources,
the climate is paying the price. The petrochemical industry is a major contributor to climate
change by their emission of greenhouse gases (GHG) [1]. However, the industry is responsi-
ble for producing everyday necessities such as the perfume we wear to the shoes we walk in.
Furthermore, petrochemical production produces compounds such as polymers and lubricants,
which are essential in, e.g., the packaging and automotive industries [2, 3]. Compared to the
petrochemical industry, biomanufacturing is proposed as a sustainable alternative production
method with advantages such as reduced GHG emissions [4]. Biomanufacturing is described
as the process of using microbial cell factories to produce specific compounds or proteins of
interest. A versatile set of products manufactured using cell factories includes bulk chemicals
such as ethanol and citric acid, as well as complex antibodies used in medicine [5, 6]. The two
primary microbes in biomanufacturing production are the bacterium Escherichia coli and the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae [5]. These two microbes are described as model organisms, as
they are comprehensively characterised and therefore easier to engineer [5]. However, they do
have limitations that need to be considered when choosing and engineering a cell factory.
The act of engineering a microbial cell factory can be defined by metabolic engineering. This
approach involves the selection of an appropriate host organism, pathway, and product, fol-
lowed by optimisation of the cell factory.
First, a host is selected based on their inherent
properties, such as product tolerance, growth rate, oxygen conditions (aerobic/anaerobic), and
importantly, their genetic toolbox [7]. The organism of choice must also be able to express and
produce the desired product in high enough titer, yield, and rates to expand into industrial
scale. Titer is defined as how much product is formed (g/L), yield is how well substrate is
converted into product (g/g), and the rate is how fast the organism can produce the compound
(g/L*h-1). If an organism has a high titer but an undesirable yield, pathway optimisation can
be performed. With a specific goal in mind, a rational or random approach can be used to
modify the organism and improve its yield, while still retaining an optimal titer. These modifi-
cations can be knockouts of gene encoding formation of side products, or integration of operons
which overexpress relevant enzymes . All of these steps are necessary to create a cell factory
that is industrially viable [8].
Page 1 of 39
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Thesis Aim
The overall aim for this thesis is to produce the industrially relevant small organic acid 3-
hydroxypropionic acid (3HP) in the thermophilic prokaryote Parageobacillus thermoglucosida-
sius by implementing a malonyl-CoA reductase (MCR) pathway via metabolic engineering.
This aim is broken down into three smaller objectives. The first objective is to determine if P.
thermoglucosidasius can tolerate 3HP in relevant concentrations. Then, evaluate whether the
determined concentration range is suitable for 3HP production by a toxicity study. The second
objective is to produce 3HP in P. thermoglucosidasius by testing a range of MCR enzymes from
a range of thermophilic organisms. This will be conducted by transforming an expression vector
harbouring the desired MCR genes into P. thermoglucosidasius and evaluate the production of
3HP by High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). The third and last objective, is to
introduce metabolic optimisations by knocking out the lactate dehydrogenase gene ldhA and
integrating a accBDAC-birA operon.
Page 2 of 39
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Relevance of 3HP
3HP is an important platform chemical with a large range of industrial applications, with
an estimated annual market potential of $10 billion [9].
3HP is suited for large-scale bio-
based manufacturing during, e.g., fermentation. Furthermore, 3HP can be used to produce
poly(3-hydroxypropionate) (P-3HP), which is a biodegradable plastic [2]. Therefore, P-3HP is
potentially a suitable substitute for fossil-based plastics [2]. 3HP can also serve as a precursor
to industrially important compounds such as acrylic acid, 1,3-propanediol, methyl acrylate, and
acrylamide. Most notably, acrylic acid, with 6.2 million metric tons being consumed globally
in 2020 alone [9]. Acrylic acid has many different applications in adhesives, coatings, and super
absorbent polymers, used in disposable diapers [10]. Acrylic acid is predominantly produced by
oxidising propylene, a product from the petrochemical industry. Therefore, a demand for acrylic
acid is essential in multiple industries, and its petrochemical origins underlines the relevance of
developing a bio-manufacturing process for 3HP.
1.3
P. thermoglucosidasius as production host
P. thermoglucosidasius is a moderate thermophilic facultatively anaerobic bacterium which is
a promising candidate for bio-manufacturing [11]. It was first isolated from soil [12], but has
since been found in marine sediments and desert regions [13]. The Gram-positive bacterium is
known to form endospores[12], which explains its presence in diverse environments, as spores
are highly resilient. It is able to utilise a range of C5 and C6 sugars as energy sources, as well
as acetate during aerobic conditions [14]. P. thermoglucosidasius grows in a temperature range
of 42-69 ◦C, with optimum at 60 ◦C [14], which is a desirable trait for industrial scale fermenta-
tion. Fermentation at higher temperatures allows for less cooling, reducing energy cost, along
with a reduced risk of contamination by mesophilic organisms [14]. The higher temperatures
would also allow for direct stripping of volatile compounds produced from the reactor, which
would decrease downstream costs and complexity [14]. However, high temperatures leave out
the option of producing products that do not tolerate high temperatures.
P. thermoglucosidasius has a developing genetic toolbox, with various promoters, fluorescent
reporter proteins, and plasmids [15]. The inducible promoter TetR-Ptet is optimal for protein
Page 3 of 39
==PAGE:10==
expression in P. thermoglucosidasius as it allows for control of when the gene of interest is
expressed. This, in turn, is responsible for the production of desired compounds. Fluores-
cent reporter proteins are useful when performing genetic manipulation screenings to assess if
transformation or integration has been successful. sfGFP is a thermostable Green Fluorescent
Protein (GFP) variant developed for use in thermophiles [16]. This makes the screening pro-
cesses in P. thermoglucosidasius easier and faster, by observing the phenotypic trait exhibited
by the organism. Modular vectors are useful when performing genetic engineering, as they
allow for fast and easy modifications to the genome of the cell. A series of modular vectors,
such as pMTL6000, were developed for P. thermoglucosidasius, with a variety of Gram-positive
and Gram-negative replicons, for cloning in E. coli [17]. The availability of molecular tools
makes P. thermoglucosidasius an appealing candidate for metabolic engineering.
With molecular tools available, optimisation of a host organism can be performed. One such
way is to eliminate the formation of unwanted side products during growth and expression
[7]. By conducting experiments and determining the side products formed under production
conditions, targets for downregulation or complete removal can be explored. Modification of
these genetic targets can be carried out via the available molecular tools and assessed for
improvements in titer, yield, and rate.
A challenge that might occur when optimising a cell to produce higher titers, is the potential
toxicity of the compound of interest [7]. Small organic acids, such as 3HP, have been shown to
cause potential toxicity to the production host, which can lead to complications that have to
be accounted for when performing metabolic engineering.
Potential complications can be due to small undissociated organic acids that freely pass through
the cell membrane [18, 19]. The undissociated organic acid can then dissociate into its anion
and proton, causing the internal pH (pHi) of the cell to decrease. The dissociated anion and
proton cannot pass back through the membrane, as they are charged and cannot pass the very
non-polar lipid membrane [20]. The freed proton decouples the membrane proton gradient,
lowering the energy within the cell. The increased acidity within the cytosol of the cell can
furthermore lead to damage to purine bases, which can cause detrimental damage to DNA
synthesis [21]. The increased concentration of organic anions can lead to increased transport
of potassium ions into the cell, resulting in increased turgor pressure. In return, glutamate is
Page 4 of 39
==PAGE:11==
transported out of the cell to try and keep the turgor pressure constant [22]. Cells have different
systems to deal with acidic stress, with some being transport proteins that can remove protons
and anions [19]. Regardless of the mechanism behind 3HP toxicity, a host organism producing
it needs a tolerance against it.
1.4
3HP pathways and malonyl-CoA reductase
Selecting appropriate enzymes and pathways for implementation into a host organism is an
essential aspect of metabolic engineering. For the production of 3HP, multiple distinct pathways
depending on the choice of substrate and host organism have been developed [2]. One widely
used pathway is the Coenzyme-A independent oxidation of glycerol into 3HP. Here, 3HP is
dehydrated by coenzyme B12-dependent glycerol dehydratase to produce the toxic intermediate
3-hydroxypropionaldehyde (3HPA), which is subsequently oxidised into 3HP by an aldehyde
dehydrogenase. Utilising this pathway, a highly optimised E. coli strain was able to produce
a titer of 71.9 g/L of 3HP [23]. However, this pathway is dependent on vitamin B12, which P.
thermoglucosidasius is not indicated to be produced during aerobic fermentation [24].
A second pathway was dubbed the malonyl-CoA pathway [2] and uses a bi-functional malonyl-
CoA reductase (MCR) to reduce malonyl-CoA into 3HP. This pathway was discovered in the
thermophilic bacterium Chloroflexus aurantiacus as part of its autotrophic CO2 fixation cycle
[25]. In this pathway, acetyl-CoA is carboxylated into malonyl-CoA, which is then reduced
into malonate semi-aldehyde, with a final reduction into 3HP. The 3HP is further used in the
cycle to fixate more CO2. The enzyme responsible for the two-step reduction is a bi-functional
MCR, which has an N-terminal alcohol reductase (mcrN) and a C-terminal aldehyde reductase
(mcrC) [25]. A sketch of the pathway is illustrated in Figure 1.
In the domain of archaea, similar CO2 fixation cycles are found. However, here the pathway
of converting malonyl-CoA to 3HP is performed by two distinct enzymes, a malonyl-CoA re-
ductase (MCR) and malonate semialdehyde (MSAR) [26]. When MCR is referred to in this
study, it is the bi-functional MCR. The MCR pathway can be accessed through the central
metabolism of P. thermoglucosidasius. Here, glucose and other sugars are converted into pyru-
vate, which can be reduced into acetyl-CoA, a precursor of malonyl-CoA. The accDABC operon
encodes the acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), which converts acetyl-CoA into malonyl-CoA by
Page 5 of 39
==PAGE:12==
carboxylation. ACC depends on the compound biotin (Vitamin B7) to function [27]. birA
encodes a biotin ligase, which binds biotin to proteins whose function depends on it [28]. If
the malonyl-CoA pathway is to be utilised, then balancing ACC with appropriate amounts of
biotin is important. As biotin biosynthesis imposes a significant metabolic cost to the cell,
implementation of overexpression of ACC should be carefully evaluated [29].
Figure 1: The proposed pathway of converting glucose into 3HP through a malonyl-CoA pathway. ldhA;
lactate dehydrogenase, adhE; alcohol dehydrogenase, ackA; acetate kinase, TCA; The Tricarboxylic Acid cycle,
accDABC-birA; ACC-BirA enconding operon, mcrC; C-terminal of malonyl-CoA reductase, mcrN; N-terminal
of malonyl-CoA reductase, mcr; malonyl-CoA reductase, msar; malonate semialdehyde reductase.
In Figure 1 glucose is converted to malonyl-CoA, where the glucose is derived from first gen-
eration feedstocks such as sugar cane or grain [30]. Another option is to use acetate instead
of glucose as the carbon source. Acetogenic bacteria can produce acetate through C1 (CO
and CO2) gas fermentation [31]. Acetate derived from C1 is more sustainable since it is pro-
duced from a renewable resource, compared to utilising glucose as the energy source. Acetate
has been used in Pseudomonas denitrificans to produce 3HP via a malonyl-CoA pathway [32].
This shows that acetate may be a candidate for a sustainable substrate for 3HP production in
P. thermoglucosidasius.
1.5
Uracil excision based cloning
An eﬀicient method for constructing vectors is Uracil-Specific Excision Reagent (USER) based
cloning. The method is based upon uracil DNA glycosidase (UDG), which can excise out uracil
bases (U) while leaving the rest of the sequence intact. If a uracil base is placed by primers
close to the 5’ end of a linear DNA fragment, digestion with UDG will destabilise the base
Page 6 of 39
==PAGE:13==
pairing and lead to a 3’ overhang [33]. This can be exploited when designing primers for PCR
reactions. If a primer contains a uracil with 8-10 basepairs (bp) between a final adenine base
(A) in the 5’ end of the primer, it is suitable for USER cloning, see Figure 2A. The sequence
between the U and A should correspond to an identical overhang for the complementary primer.
Any combination of nucleotides between the U and the A can then be inserted, making the
method versatile for combining multiple fragments at once. This can be seen in Figure 2B.
Here, two fragments are amplified with U-containing primers, introducing a U close to the 5’
end of the fragments. The fragments can then be digested with a UDG containing enzyme
mix, like USERTM [34], to create the 3’ overhangs. The overhangs on the fragments can then
anneal together, constructing the plasmid. This plasmid can then be transformed into a suitable
cloning host of choice.
Page 7 of 39
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2: The primer design and principles of USER cloning. A) Primer design for the application in USER
cloning. Here, a uracil base is placed within 8-10 bp of a 5’ terminal A. The bp between them defines the
overhang which are created by the forward and reverse primer.B) The different steps involved in USER cloning.
First fragments are amplified using PCR with U-containing primers. Then, digestion with a UDG containing
enzyme mix, followed by annealing. The final plasmid is then ready for transformation into a cloning host.
Figure adapted from Fernando Geu-Flores et al. [33].
Page 8 of 39
==PAGE:15==
1.6
Genomic integration via homologous recombination in P. ther-
moglucosidasius
To remove genes that produce unwanted products in P. thermoglucosidasius, the use of integra-
tive shuttle vectors and homologous recombination can be adopted. A visualisation is presented
in Figure 3 of the integrative vector pSK110 (unpublished). Here is an integrative vector for
P. thermoglucosidasius designed with an antibiotic resistance marker, sfGFP, and replicons for
cloning in E. coli. Here, the homology arm of the left flank (LF) and right flank (RF) of ldhA
are present. When the vector is first transformed, it can be screened for both antibiotic resis-
tance and the fluorescence trait. After successful transformation, the first recombination step
can occur when cells are grown above 65 ◦C, as the vector is temperature sensitive and cannot
replicate at those temperatures. This forces the organism to integrate the plasmid to keep
its antibiotic resistance gene. After the first recombination, Figure 3A , cells can be screened
for integration by resistance marker and fluorescence. The second recombination step, Figure
3B, can happen when the cells are grown with no antibiotic pressure, looping out the plasmid,
leaving either a wildtype reversion or the intended modification, in this case being a knockout.
If a gene is included between the homology it can be integrated into the into the genome of P.
thermoglucosidasius, which makes recombinant protein expression possible.
Page 9 of 39
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3: A visualisation of the mechanism behind a temperature-sensitive integrative vector pSK110 using
homologous recombination for genome integration. A) The first integration step is the transformation of the
plasmid into the cell. Integration via homologous recombination is used between the homology region in the
plasmid and the genome. Since pSK110 is temperature sensitive, the cells can be grown above 65 ◦C, which
will force the cells to integrate the plasmid to retain the resistance marker. B Colonies confirmed with the
integration can be grown without the antibiotic. Due to the lack of antibiotic pressure, a second recombination
can occur. Some colonies will recombine the homologous regions, which will lead to either a reversion to wildtype
or the intended modification.
1.7
HPLC analysis of metabolites
For the assessment of metabolites and products produced during fermentation, HPLC can be
employed. Depending on the analysis target, like organic acids, alcohols, ketones, and sugars,
the setup can be optimised for the detection of that specific compound or range of products.
A versatile method, such as HPLC, is advantageous when developing cell factories due to their
Page 10 of 39
==PAGE:17==
broad range of products. A simplified schematic of an HPLC setup is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4: A schematic of an HPLC setup. Here, the mobile phase is pumped into the column, containing the
stationary phase. The sample can then be injected into the column with the mobile phase and eluted into a
detector. Finally, the data from the detector can be analysed.
Here, A sample is injected through a mobile phased which is pumped through as column con-
taining a stationary phase. The column is placed within a column-oven in order to heat up the
stationary phase to a desired temperature. The mobile phase is commonly two solutions with
differing chemical properties, such as polarity. When compounds within the sample elute, they
are usually detected by infrared (IR) or ultraviolet (UV) detectors. The most utilised HPLC
method is Reverse Phase (RP) Chromatography, with a non-polar stationary phase and a polar
mobile phase [35]. When samples are injected, compounds bind to the non-polar stationary
phase and are then eluted based on polarity as the mobile phase polarity is increased. Therefore,
non-polar compounds elude first, and then polar compounds later. Normal phase chromatogra-
phy is when the stationary phase is polar and the mobile phase non-polar. Sometimes, ligands
such as metal ions are also included in the stationary phase to employ the properties of ion
exchange chromatography in RP Chromatography [35]. In anion exchange chromatography,
a positively charged stationary phase is used to bind negatively charged molecules. A mobile
phase with an increasing concentration of anions can be used to elute the molecules. The sta-
tionary and mobile phase has opposite charges in cation exchange. With the combined effect
of these RP and ion exchange chromatography, it can make the analysis of complex samples
from microbial studies less demanding [35].
Page 11 of 39
==PAGE:18==
2
Methods & Materials
2.1
Bacterial strains, plasmids & primers
The bacterial strains, plasmids, and primers used in this study are shown in Table 1.
Page 12 of 39
==PAGE:19==
Table 1: Bacterial strains, plasmids, and primers in this study. The table reads the strain/plasmid/primer
name, followed by a description regarding genetic components.
Strains
Description
Source
P. thermoglucosidasius
DSM2542/BGSC ID95A1
Wildtype isolate
Bacillus Genetic
Stock Center (USA)
P. thermoglucosidasius 4KO
DSM2542 ΔhbdH, ΔmmsA, ΔhbdH2, ΔiolA
Laboratory stock
P. thermoglucosidasius 5KO
DSM2542 ΔhbdH, ΔmmsA, ΔhbdH2, ΔiolA, ΔldhA
This Study
E. coli DH5α
E. coli for cloning; F-Φ80lacZ∆M15 ∆(lacZYA-argF) U169 recA1
endA1 hsdR17 (rk-,mk+) phoA supE44 thi-1 gyrA96 relA1 λ-
ThermoFisher Scientific
Plasmids
Description
Source
pMTL61110
Integrative shuttle vector for P. thermoglucosidasius
with thermosensitive replicon and ColE1 replicon for cloning in E. coli
[17]
pGB-sfGFP-best
pMTL61110 carrying P7-sfGFP
[36]
pSK110
pGB-sfGFP-best carrying flanking regions of ldhaA
Laboratory stock
pProUSER94J0F
Integrative shuttle vector for P. thermoglucosidasius; ColE1 origin,
kanR, repB, tetR, PtetA, ldhA upstream and down stream homology arms
[37]
pCS2
pProUSER94J0F with P. thermoglucosidasius accA, accB, accC,
accD and birA genes in between ldhA homology arms.
Laboratory stock
pSK27
Expression vector; ColE1 origin, repB, tetR, kanR,
sfGFP behind a PtetA promoter.
Labortory stock
pSK50
Expression vector; ColE1 origin, repB, tetR, kanR,
harboring MCR6 behind a PtetA promoter.
Laboratory stock
pSK54
Expression vector; ColE1 origin, repB, tetR, kanR,
MCR7 expressed separately behind a PtetA promoter.
Laboratory stock
pSK72
Expression vector; ColE1 origin, repB, tetR, kanR,
harboring MCR1 behind a PtetA promoter.
Laboratory stock
pSK76
Expression vector; ColE1 origin, repB, tetR, kanR,
Mharboring MCR2 behind a PtetA promoter.
Laboratory stock
pSK77
Expression vector; ColE1 origin, repB, tetR, kanR,
harboring MCR3 behind a PtetA promoter.
Laboratory stock
pSK78
Expression vector; ColE1 origin, repB, tetR, kanR,
harboring MCR4 behind a PtetA promoter.
Laboratory stock
pSK79
Expression vector; ColE1 origin, repB, tetR, kanR,
harboring MCR5 behind a PtetA promoter.
Laboratory stock
Primer
Sequence (5’-3’)
Description
OMC1
attcagaU AACAAGGTGAACATCGTGTGGATAC
USER ldhA right flank forward
OMC3
aactcU GCCATTATCATTTCCGT
USER acc operon forward
PNJ853
aactcU GCCATTATCATTTCCGTAATGCC
USER ldhA left flank reverse
SK185
attcagaU TTATGACTTCATAATATCATATAACTCAAGA
USER acc operon reverse
SK186
attcagaU TTATGACTTCATAATATCATATAACTCAAGA
USER birA reverse
SK329
agagtU TTATGACTTCATAATATCATATAACTCAAGA
USER birA forward
MM23
GAAAAGCGGCTTTTACTCCCCTCATCC
IdhA right flank downstream
MM24
CATCCATCATGCCGATGATGTACAACATC
ldhA left flank upstream
Page 13 of 39
==PAGE:20==
2.2
Bacterial growth conditions
Strains of P. thermoglucosidasius DSM2542 where grown habitually in SPY media (16 g/L Soy
Peptone, 10 g/L yeast extract (YE) and 5 g/L NaCl, pH = 7.0) at 60 ◦C under agitation (250
rpm). P. thermoglucosidasius strains were plated on Trypticase Soy Agar (TSA) plates (Becton
Dickinson, US). E. coli DH5α strains were incubated in lysogeny broth (LB) medium at 37 ◦C
with agitation. Additionally E. coli strains were plated on LB agar plates, with appropriate
antibiotics added (when necessary).
2.3
3HP toxicity study
The experimental set-up for investigating the toxicity of 3HP to P. thermoglucosidasius con-
sisted of seven different types of media that were prepared. Media 1 was Thermophile medium
(TM) supplemented with 20 g/L glucose and 2 g/L YE. Media 2-7 were the same as Media 1, but
supplemented with 10 g/L, 20 g/L, 30 g/L, 40 g/L, 60 g/L, and 80 g/L of 3-hydroxypropionic
acid (3HP), respectively. 3HP stock was adjusted to pH = 6.8 using NaOH. TM contains per
litre: 930 mL Six Salts Solution (SSS), 40 mL of 1 M MOPS (pH = 8.2), 10 mL of 1 mM FeSO4
in 0.4 M tricine, 10 mL of 0.132 M K2HPO4, 10 mL 0.953 NH4Cl, 0.5 mL of 1 M CaCl2, 0.5 mL
of trace elements solution and 1 mL of Wolfe’s vitamin solution, adjusted to a pH of 6.8. One
litre of SSS contains: 4.95 g NaCl, 1.45 g Na2SO4, 0.25 g KCl, 0.04 g KBr, 1.85 MgCl2·6H2O
and 0.89 g NaNO3. Per litre of trace element solution: 1 g FeCl3·6H2O, 0.18 g ZnSO4·7H2O,
0.12 g CuCl2 ·2H2O, 0.12 g MnSO4·H2O and 0.18 CoCl2·6H2O. Per litre of Wolfe’s vitamin so-
lution: 10 mg Pyridoxine HCl, 5 mg Thiamine HCl, 5 mg Riboflavin, 5 mg Nicotinic acid, 5 mg
Ca-D-(+)pantothenate, 5 mg p-Aminobenzoic acid, 5 mg Thiotic acid (Dithiolane Pentanoic
Acid), 2 mg Biotin, 2 mg Folic acid, and 0.1 mg Vitamin B12.
To 250 mL shake flasks, 25 mL of media was added, with triplicates for each media (media 1-7)
and strain, then inoculated to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.1 from an overnight
(ON) culture of relevant P. thermoglucosidasius strains grown at 52 ◦C with shaking (250 rpm).
The cultures were then grown at 60 ◦C with agitation (250 rpm). Samples were taken every
hour, and OD600 was measured. For data analysis, linear regression was performed on the max-
imum measured OD600 against 3HP concentration, achieved with Excel 365 (Microsoft, US)
built-in regression function.
Page 14 of 39
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Growth on 3HP and lactate
For testing relevant P. thermoglucosidaius strains’ ability to grow on 3HP and lactate, two
media were prepared. One was TM supplemented with 10 g/L 3HP, and the other was TM
supplemented with 10 g/L lactate. ON cultures of relevant strains were grown in SPY at 52
◦C. These ON cultures were then spun down at 3000 g’s for 5 minutes and resuspended in the
relevant 3HP and lactate media. In triplicate, 25 mL of each media was added to separate 250
mL shake flasks and inoculated to an OD600 of 0.1. OD600 measurements taken at hours 0, 4, 8,
24, 32, and 48. Following HPLC analysis, a two-tailed unpaired t-test was performed to obtain
p-values indicating significance, with the significance level being (α) 0.05.
2.5
USER cloning
2.5.1
USER reaction
For plasmid construction, Uracil-containing primers were used in PCRs with PhusionU poly-
merase (Thermo Fisher Scientific Co., US) to amplify two or more fragments for assembly
using USER cloning (New England Biolabs, US). A general PCR protocol can be seen in Table
2.
Table 2: General protocol used for PCR using PhusionU polymerase in a thermocycler.
Step
Temperature
Time
Repeats
First denaturation
98 ◦C
3 min
1x
Denaturation
97 ◦C
15 s
Annealing
Primer composition dependent
30 s
30x
Extension
72 ◦C
Dependent on primer length:
1 min per kb + 30s
Final extension
72 ◦C
5 min
1x
Hold
15 ◦C
Hold
1x
The PCR products for plasmid construction were purified from 1% w/v agarose gel using a
NucleoSpin© Gel and PCR Clean-up kit (Macherey–Nagel, Germany). Between 10-20 ng of
purified plasmid backbone fragment was added to a PCR tube. Then, 50-100 ng of each gene of
interest fragment was added to the same tube. Afterwards, 1.2 µL 10x CutSmart© Buffer (New
England Biolabs, US) was added, and DNAse-free water to a final volume of 11 µL. Lastly,
Page 15 of 39
==PAGE:22==
1 µL of USERTM enzyme (New England Biolabs, US) was added. The PCR tube was then
incubated at 37 ◦C for 25 minutes, followed by 25 ◦C for 25 minutes in a thermocycler. This
USER reaction was then used to transform into E. coli DH5α cloning host.
2.5.2
Transformation of E. coli
Transformation of E. coli was conducted using a heat shock method. Competent E. coli DH5-α
were thawed on ice, and 2 µL purified plasmid or 5 µL USER reaction was added to the middle
of the competent cells and left on ice for 30 minutes. The mixture of plasmid and cells was
heat shocked at 42 ◦C for 45 seconds, then incubated on ice for 5 minutes. Next, 1 mL of
preheated (37 ◦C) SOC (2% tryptone, 0.5% YE, 10 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10
mM MgSO4, and 20 mM glucose) medium was added to the cells and mixed, then incubated
at 37 ◦C with shaking for 1 hour. Following incubation, the cells were spun down for 2 min at
6500 g, and most of the supernatant was removed. The cells were resuspended in the leftover
supernatant and plated on relevant antibiotic plates and incubated overnight at 37 ◦C. Plasmid
constructs were then purified using NucleoSpin© plasmid kit (Macherey–Nagel, Germany) and
sequenced trough DNA sequencing service (Unveil Bio, Denmark).
2.6
P. thermoglucosidasius competent cells
Relevant strains of P.themoglucosidasius were made competent by first inoculating in 50 mL of
preheated (60◦C) SPY medium with several loopfuls from an agar plate. The cells were then
grown to an OD600 of 1.5. This was used to inoculate 30 mL of fresh SPY (preheated to 60◦C)
to an OD600 of 0.5, grown to a final OD600 of approximately 2.0. The culture was then cooled
on ice for 10 minutes and then spun down at 4,000 g’s at 4 ◦C. The pellet was then resuspended
and spun down in 15, 10, 10, 5 mL electroporation buffer (0.5 M mannitol, 0.5 M sorbitol, and
10% glycerol). A final resuspension in 1.5 mL electroporation buffer was performed, and the
cells were aliquoted into 60 µL portions in pre-chilled tubes on dry ice and stored long term at
-80◦C.
Page 16 of 39
==PAGE:23==
2.7
Transformation of P. thermoglucosidasius
For transformation of P. thermoglucosidasius, the previously made competent cells of a relevant
strain, were thawed on ice. To the thawed cells, 2.5 µL of purified plasmid was added and mixed,
then transferred into a pre-chilled 1 mm electroporation cuvette. The electroporation cuvette
was then placed in a Bio-Rad GenePulser Xcell with the parameters of: Exponential pulse,
voltage 2500 V, capacitance 10 µF, resistance 600 Ω. The cells were electroporated and quickly
resuspended in preheated (52 ◦C) SPYG (SPY media supplemented with 1% glycerol). Then
transferred to a 50 mL Falcon tube and recovered at 52 ◦C with shaking for 3 hours. The
culture was spun down at 3000 g’s for 2 min and plated into preheated TSA selective plates
and incubated at 52 ◦C overnight.
2.8
Integration via homologous recombination in P. thermoglucosi-
dasius genome
Following transformation of an integration plasmid into a relevant P. thermoglucosidasius strain,
single colonies were harvested from the plates and used to inoculate 2 mL of selective SPY
media. Then grown overnight at 64-68◦C. The ON culture was diluted 106 times, and 100 µL
was plated on selective TSA plates, incubated at 60 ◦C ON. Single colonies were picked and
screened for integration using colony PCR. Screening was conducted using a sfGFP marker
in the integrative plasmids and colony PCR. After integration was confirmed, one colony was
used to inoculate 2 mL of SPY medium and grown ON at 64-68 ◦C. Fresh passages were made
by transferring 20 µL of culture into 2 µL fresh media for 2-5 days with 1-2 transfers per day.
After the final passage was made and grown, it was plated on non-selective TSA plates and
incubated ON at 60 ◦C. Then, single colonies were picked and screened for successful second
recombination step by colony PCR.
2.9
Colony PCR
To perform colony PCR of P. thermoglucosidasius strains, a pretreatment was implemented.
Each colony was resuspended in 20 µL of 20 mM NaOH and heated to 95 ◦C for 10 minutes.
Then, 1 µL of the treated colony was used as a template for a PCR. The PCRs were run using
Page 17 of 39
==PAGE:24==
OneTaq© Quick-load 2x Master mix with standard buffer according to the manufacturer’s
specifications.
2.10
Gel electrophoresis
Gel electrophoresis was run during this project for the assessment of PCR products. 1 % w/v
agarose gel in 1x TAE buffer with 1x SYBRTM Safe DNA gel stain added. To the samples using
the PhusionU Polymerase, 6x DNA gel loading dye was added to visualise the bands. The gels
were run at 100 V for 30 minutes. The DNA ladder used was GeneRulerTM 1 kb DNA Ladder
(size range 250-10000 bp).
2.11
Pladsmid based 3HP production in P. thermoglucosidasius
For plasmid-based expression, relevant expression vectors harbouring different MCR genes were
transformed into a relevant P. thermoglucosidasius strain. The transformed strains were used to
inoculate ON cultures grown at 52 ◦C in SPY media. The ON cultures were used to inoculate
25 mL of TM supplemented with 20 g/L glucose, 2 g/L YE and appropriate antibiotic, and
grown at 52 ◦C. When a doubling in OD600 had occurred, the cells were induced using anhy-
drotetracycline (ATC) to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/mL and grown for 24 hours. Samples
were taken at hours 0, 10, and 24 for HPLC analysis.
2.12
Lactate production during aerobic cultivation
Relevant P. thermoglucosidasius strains were grown ON in TM supplemented with 2 g/L YE
and 20 g/L glucose. These ON cultures were used to inoculate 25 mL of the same media in
250 mL shake flasks with duplicates, to a final OD600 of 0.1. The cultures were then grown
until the stationary phase was reached, and samples were taken for HPLC analysis of lactate
production.
2.13
HPLC analysis
Samples to be analysed by HPLC were transferred into HPLC vials and loaded into a Dionex
Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 300 Diode Array Detector and
a RefractoMax 521 refractive index detector (IDEX Health & Science LLC). Samples were run
Page 18 of 39
==PAGE:25==
into an Aminex HPX-87X ion exclusion column kept at 60 ◦C. The mobile phase was 5 mM
H2SO4 at 0.6 ml/min with isocratic elution for 30-40 min. Data processing was executed using
ChromeleonTM Data System software 7.2.9 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Co., US) and Excel 365
(Microsoft, US). Compound concentrations were determined by calculating peak areas using a
calibration curve generated from known standards.
3
Results & Discussion
3.1
Toxic effect of 3HP on P. thermoglucosidasius
P. thermoglucosidasius was grown in a range of 3HP concentrations to investigate toxicity.
The hypothesis was that the tolerance against 3HP is above the titer that is achievable in P.
thermoglucosidasius. As a general rule, the titer needs to be between 10-100 g/L for any bio-
manufacturing process to keep production volumes and downstream processing reasonable. By
testing tolerance over this range, it was evaluated whether P. thermoglucosidaius was a suitable
candidate to produce this compound in industrially relevant concentrations.
A first assessment in shake flasks, described in Section 2.3, was performed using concentrations
ranging from 0 to 40 g/L of 3HP. This was not enough to exhibit a total inhibitory effect on
growth for either the wildtype or 4KO. P. thermoglucosidasius 4KO is a strain with four dif-
ferent gene knockouts to prevent 3HP and malonate semialdehyde assimilation into the central
metabolism. Another experiment was conducted using 0, 20, 60, and 80 g/L of 3HP to test if
even higher concentrations would inhibit bacterial growth. The second experiment is denoted
with (2), results of which are seen in Figure 5. For the second assessment, media containing
0 g/L and 20 g/L of 3HP were used to benchmark against the previous experiment, to ensure
that the results are comparable. Comparing the growth of concentrations 0 g/L and 20 g/L
3HP for the original and second experiment (2), the wildtype grew slower for both (2) and
did not reach as high of a final OD600. The 4KO grew to a similar final OD600 with 0 g/L
3HP. While with 20 g/L it was lower. Comparison of experiments is feasible as the results are
similar. The wildtype, Figure 5A, shows the highest absorbance (OD600) with no 3HP present.
The final OD600 decreased as the 3HP concentration increased. When exposed to 60 g/L of
3HP, growth was completely inhibited. The results from 4KO, Figure 5B, resembled those of
Page 19 of 39
==PAGE:26==
the wildtype, with no growth observed above 60 g/L of 3HP.
Figure 5: Results from toxicity study of 3HP on P. thermoglucosidasius.
The media used for this study
contained the following concentration of 3HP: Media 1 (M1) contained 0 g/L of 3HP, M2 had 10 g/L, M3 had
20 g/L, M4 had 30 g/L, M5 had 40 g/L, M6 had 60 g/L, and M7 had 80 g/L. The experiment was conducted
on different days, as indicated by the (2) in the legend of the graphs. Graphs are logarithmic (Log10) scale.
A) Graph of the growth of wildtype P. thermoglucosidasius with an increasing amount of 3HP present in the
media. B) Shows the graph of the 4KO strain growth in the different media with increasing 3HP concentration.
Error bars indicate mean ± standard deviation (n=3 biological replicates).
To visualise how specific 3HP concentration affected the growth of P. thermoglucosidasius, the
maximum OD600 was plotted against 3HP concentration for each strain, see Figure 6. Here, a
clear trend is observed where OD600 decreases as the 3HP concentration increases. This reflects
that elevated concentrations of 3HP has detrimental effects on bacterial growth. The dotted
lines represent the linear regressions made for wildtype and 4KO. At half the maximum OD600
Page 20 of 39
==PAGE:27==
reached, there is a point on the regression where it equates to a 3HP concentration. The 4KO
strain does not grow to quite as high absorbance (OD600), but shows better tolerance against
3HP. This might mean that 4KO is superior at dealing with the underlying action of toxicity of
3HP, compared to the wildtype. This is indicated by the slope of the linear regression, which
is not as steep as the wildtype. Still, both strains of P. thermoglucosidasius can grow in 40 g/L
of 3HP. The action may be that of acidic stress within the cell of P. thermoglucosidasius, as
described in Section 1.3. This should be mitigated as the acids are neutralised with NaOH to
a pH of 6.8. 3HP under this pH may still be in its undissociated form, as it is in equilibrium
with the dissociated form. As a result, acid stress in the cell would persist. Another possibility
is that the large amounts of NaOH used to neutralise the pH of the 3HP stocks may lead to
osmotic shock. The large concentration of Na+ would make the medium hypertonic, which
could lead to water loss in the cell. Also, high Na+ concentration might interfere with rRNA
synthesis, inhibiting cell growth [38]. Another possibility is the toxic compound 3HPA, which
is toxic to Bacillus subtilis at a concentration of 0.03-0.05 g/L [39]. So, if a portion of 3HP
is somehow oxidised to 3HPA, this could be responsible for the observed toxicity. Another
possibility is that malonate semialdehyde is toxic to cells [40]. Malonate semialdehyde could
be produced by promiscuous activity by dehydrogenases acting upon 3HP that has entered the
cell. The above-mentioned compounds’ involvement in bacterial growth could be interesting
for future investigation.
Page 21 of 39
==PAGE:28==
Figure 6: The average max OD600 reached for each concentration of 3HP for wildtype and 4KO P. thermoglu-
cosidasius. The dotted lines represent the linear regression for wildtype and 4KO, respectively, with their given
equations and R2. Error bars indicate mean ± standard deviation (n=3 biological triplicates).
Similar tolerance for 3HP was found in the acid-resistant E. coli W strain, which could tolerate
a 3HP concentration of 440 mM (∼40 g/L) [41].
So, a comparable level of 3HP tolerance
has been reported in a strain known for its high acid tolerance. The E. coli W strain was
then further optimised for 3HP tolerance through adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) [42],
which was optimised to tolerate 800 mM 3HP. They deduce that a deletion in a minor global
regulator yieP was the source of this increased tolerance. When the deletion was carried out in
non-acid-tolerant E. coli MG1655, its tolerance increased when tested at a concentration of 300
mM 3HP [42]. If the 3HP tolerance of P. thermoglucosidasius needs to be increased, an ALE
experiment could be designed and conducted, to test if the acid tolerance increases similarly
to what was proved productive in E. coli. However, ALE experiments are time-consuming and
resource-intensive, so careful considerations about the setup are needed.
There is a gap between the 40 g/L and 60 g/L 3HP data points in this experiment, and a study
using 50 g/L of 3HP could have given a better indication of the inhibitory 3HP concentration.
To summarise, the 3HP maximum tolerance of both strains lies between 40 g/L and 60 g/L.
Page 22 of 39
==PAGE:29==
With a good tolerance of 3HP, P. thermoglucosidasius can be proposed as a production host
contender for the production of 3HP. As tolerance optimisation is not needed for the first
investigation of 3HP production.
3.2
Elimination of lactate production in P. thermoglucosidasius
The removal of side products formed can converge flux into the main product, increasing yield.
For the case of P. thermoglucosidasius one important side product to consider is lactate, which
is a classic by-product of fermentation. To test the hypothesis that P. thermoglucosidasius
produces lactate during aerobic conditions, a screening for lactate production in the wildtype
and 4KO was performed. The results of which are depicted in Figure 7.
Figure 7: The lactate produced by wildtype and 4KO strains of P. thermoglucosidasius during aerobic growth.
The control is the media itself. The wildtype appeared to produce more than the 4KO strain, and both strains
are indicated to produce lactate. Error bars indicate mean ± standard deviation (n=2 biological replicates).
The final OD600 for wildtype was 2.0 and 2.3 for 4KO.
Both wildtype and 4KO strains produced some amount of lactate, under 0.4 g/L and 0.25 g/L,
respectively. Not a lot of lactate is produced during aerobic growth, but with high cell den-
sity, anoxic conditions can occur, which may lead to small amounts of anaerobic fermentation
products. Nevertheless, lactate is produced and therefore its pathway should be removed to
push the carbon flux into the desired pathway of 3HP, see Figure 1. For that reason, a ldhA
knockout strain would be desirable.
Page 23 of 39
==PAGE:30==
The integrative vector pSK110 was used to knockout ldhA in P. thermoglucosidasius 4KO as
presented in Section 2.8 and assessed by colony PCR as shown in Figure 8.
A successful
knockout would produce a band at 520 bp, while a failed one would show at 1680 bp. Colony 1
and colony 5 showed bands at the expected size, respectively. Colony 5 was discovered to be a
mixed culture of both knockouts and non-knockouts, as some colonies on the plate fluoresced,
while others did not. From the colony in lane 1, no fluorescent colonies appeared, and was
therefore chosen as the final 5KO strain.
Figure 8: Colony PCR for the knockout of ldhA. The expected size of the DNA fragment for the knockout
is 520 bp, shown with a blue triangle, while the wildtype would be 1680 bp, shown with a red triangle. Each
colony screened is abbreviated to Col. It is observed that lanes 1 and 6 show bands corresponding to the ldhA
knockout at approximately 500 bp; both of these colonies were saved in a 50% glycerol stock. The colony PCR
primers were located in the outermost region of each homology arm.
After the creation of the 5KO strain, an evaluation of the strain’s ability to produce lactate
should have been performed. There might be other dehydrogenases present that have promiscu-
ous activity on pyruvate to make a measurable amount of lactate. This would be performed by
Page 24 of 39
==PAGE:31==
running the same experiment as before, just with the new 5KO strain, and using the wildtype
and 4KO strains as benchmarks. An ldhA knockout was previously performed successfully in
P. thermoglucosidasius NCIMB 11955 [43]. Lau et al. showed that the knock-out mutant of
P. thermoglucosidasius NCIMB 11955 could grow under aerobic conditions, and the amount of
produced lactate was highly reduced compared to its wildtype. So, if 5KO showed less lactate
production than the wildtype, the knockout could be deemed a success in achieving the goal of
reducing side products.
Additional side products that could be targeted for removal of genes include adhE and ackA,
which encode for alcohol/aldehyde dehydrogenase and acetate kinase, respectively. These would
be some ideal candidates to eliminate from P. thermoglucosidasius. These knockouts, among
others, were performed in E. coli which implements the MCR pathway in a two-stage culti-
vation using glucose and acetate [44]. The knockouts created by Lama et al. increased the
production of 3HP significantly from 8 mM up to 32 mM. The study highlights the relevance of
eliminating unwanted metabolic products to enhance titers for production strains. From here,
establishing what the cell can grow on could be the next step in the metabolic engineering and
optimisation of the strain.
3.3
P. thermoglucosidasius ability to grow on 3HP and lactate
One thing that could happen when producing a product that contains carbon is that the host
organism utilises the products as a part of its central metabolism. This would lead to lower
yields and titers, which is detrimental to the purpose of the process. The hypothesis is that
while P. thermoglucosidasius wildtype can grow on 3HP or lactate, 4KO and 5KO cannot. Two
growth experiments were conducted with 10 g/L of 3HP and lactate, respectively. The experi-
ment is described in Section 2.12 and the results of the investigation can be found in Figure 9.
Page 25 of 39
==PAGE:32==
Figure 9:
P. thermoglucosidasius strains growth during aerobic conditions on lactate and 3HP as carbon
substrates. Graphs are on a logarithmic scale (log10). A) P. thermoglucosidasius wildtype, 4KO and 5KO
strains growth on 3HP as the sole carbon source. B) P. thermoglucosidasius wildtype, 4KO, and 5KO strains
grow on lactate as the sole carbon source.
Figure 9A shows that the 4KO strain could not grow on 3HP during 48 hours of incubation.
The OD600 did not exceed the starting OD600 of 0.1 during any of the measurements. The
designed purpose of this strain is to knock out genes that could assimilate 3HP into the central
metabolism. Hereby, the results correspond to the expectation that 4KO cannot grow on 3HP.
Both the wildtype and 5KO show the ability to grow with 3HP, each reaching a final OD600 of
0.3 and 0.4, respectively, Figure 9A. The wildtype does not seem to be able to grow 3HP well,
as it took 24 hours to get to an OD600 above the starting inoculation. However, it does appear
Page 26 of 39
==PAGE:33==
to grow slightly after 48 hours. The results for 5KO contradict the expectation, as this strain
is based on the 4KO strain, which does not grow. The additional knockout of ldhA should
not give the strain the ability to metabolise 3HP. Therefore, it leads to the possibility that the
flasks were contaminated with the wildtype strain, as the growth curves are similar.
There was no observable growth for any of the strains when lactate was the sole carbon source.
The final data point for the wildtype does exceed the starting OD600. Even so, the standard
deviation is large, and therefore, it is concluded that no growth is observed. Evaporation must
also be considered for both experiments. When growing for an extended period, 48 hours in
this study, there will be a loss of liquid during the experiment.
This will alter the media
concentration, and the present nutrient concentrations might affect the ability of the strains
to grow.
The OD600 can also increase due to the increase in cell debris during such long
experiments. For 5KO, the growth took place after 30 hours, which is longer than the usual
growth time between 6-10 hours for P. thermoglucosidasius [14]. This could indicate that the
observed increase in OD600 was due to evaporation and not bacterial growth. However, this
cannot be confirmed, and the experiment should be repeated to assess whether 5KO can grow
on 3HP accurately. Even without total confirmation that 5KO could not grow on 3HP, it was
used for the 3HP production experiment.
3.4
Production of 3HP in P. thermoglucosidasius
P. glucosidasius was transformed with a selection of MCR harbouring expression plasmids,
subsequently grown and induced to produce 3HP. The hypothesis is that it is possible for this
selection of MCR genes from thermophilic organisms to produce 3HP in P. thermoglucosidasius
5KO. During an attempt at this experiment, it was observed that growing P. thermoglucosi-
dasius in Thermophile Medium (TM) supplemented with glucose and YE resulted in lower
than usual OD600. It was discovered during HPLC analysis that there was little to no glucose
uptake. Therefore, an investigation was performed, and poor stocks of TM were deemed the
cause. New stocks were prepared, and the problem was rectified for this experiment. The
assessment is described in Section 2.11 and results visualised in Figure 10.
Page 27 of 39
==PAGE:34==
Figure 10: Production of 3HP from plasmid based expression in P. thermoglucosidasius 5KO, at 52 ◦C with
250 rpm of agitation. Analysed using HPLC. The red bars indicate samples taken six hours after induction,
and the blue bars indicate 20 hours after induction. Error bars indicating mean ±standard deviation (n=3
biological replicates).
P-values were compared for each enzyme against the control.
Control is pSK27, a
plasmid harbouring sfGFP behind a Ptet promoter. The statistical significance was assessed using a two-tailed
unpaired t-test (Welch’s t-test). *p<0.05. The exact p-values for each of the tested enzymes and time points
are provided in the figure.
The majority of the MCR enzymes produce a small amount of 3HP six hours after induction,
Figure 10. MCR3 and MCR5 both seem not to produce any, as they show similar concentrations
to the control. The control being pSK27, an expression plasmid harbouring a sfGFP behind
a Ptet promoter. MCR6 produced 0.07 g/L, MCR7 0.04 g/L, MCR1 0.04 g/L, MCR2 0.04
g/L and most notably MCR4 produced 0.2 g/L. However, after 20 hours of induction, only
MCR4 seems to have produced 3HP in higher quantity than the control at 0.5 g/L. A large
standard deviation is apparent for MCR4, which was caused by the fact that one flask in the
triplicate did not produce any noticeable amount of 3HP, while the two other flasks were close
together in production. Statistical significance was determined by unpaired Welch’s t-test; no
significant difference was observed between MCR4 and the control, with a p-value of 0.161 and
0.192 for 6h and 20h induction, respectively (α = 0.05). However, as seen in Figure 11, MCR4
has the highest fold change of all the MCR enzymes tested compared to the control. Even after
20h of induction, when all other enzymes had a fold change of 1 or below. So MCR4 might
not be statistically different, but there is activity present based on the fold change. However,
the experiment may need to be redone to establish statistical significant production of 3HP by
MCR4.
Page 28 of 39
==PAGE:35==
Figure 11: A volcano plot of the -Log10 p-values agianst the fold change in 3HP production. If the fold change
is 1, then there is no change in 3HP production compared to the control. Fold change < 1 means lower 3HP
production, and above 1 indicates higher 3HP production. A higher -Log10 p-value means more statistically
significant. Each MCR enzyme is highlighted for results from both 6h and 20h of induction.
This experiment was conducted at 52 ◦C, however, the different MCR genes might have activity
at higher temperatures, such as 60 ◦C. Therefore, another experiment that could be conducted
similarly by altering the temperature to 60 ◦C or above. This is due to the enzymes coming from
other thermophilic bacteria, which might have highly specific optimum temperatures for their
enzymes. Assessment using a range of temperatures with the same selection of MCR enzymes
might give radically different results. Upon initial implementation of the malonyl-CoA pathway
in E.coli titers of 0.71 mM (∼0.064 g/L) was achieved when glucose was the only substrate
present [45]. When using MCR in S. cerevisiae, first titers of 0.092 g/L [46] were reported. Both
of which are less than the levels observed for MCR4 in P. thermoglucosidasius in this initial
production attempt. MCR6 does have significant production after 6 hours, with 0.07 g/L,
which is comparable to the E. coli and S. cerevisiae initial titers. However, these titers do need
improving, which could be done by overexpression of ACC. When accDABC was overexpressed
in the E. coli strain titers improved to 1.6 mM (∼0.14 g/L) [45]. Similarly, a Pseudomonas
denitrificans strain grown on acetate was found to have a titer of 29.5 mM increase to 34.0 mM
when overexpressing native ACC [32]. Therefore, the strategy of overexpressing accDABC in
P. thermoglucosidasius could lead to improved titers as well.
Page 29 of 39
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Chromosome overexpression of accDABC-birA operon in P.
thermoglucosidasius
A method to increase the titer, rates, and yields of a production strain is to increase the
flux towards the pathway of interest. To assess this hypothesis, an integrated accDABC-birA
operon with native genes to increase the production of 3HP in P. thermoglucosidasius 5KO was
performed. An integration vector with a promoter-less accDABC-birA operon was designed,
and a sketch of the fragments and primers used can be found in Appendix A. The operon was
designed without a promoter to avoid expressing any of the genes. As previously experienced
in our research group, the operon was shown to be toxic to the cloning strain even under an
inducible promoter like Ptet (unpublished data). The inducible promoter can be leaky and have
some amount of expression even without the inducer present. This is exacerbated by the fact
that the integration vector used has a high copy number.
For the construction of the integration vector, three fragments were amplified. A backbone
fragment (pSK110), an acc fragment of the accDABC operon, and a birA fragment.
The
results of the USER fragment amplification are presented in Figure 12. The acc fragment had
an expected size of 3761 bp, and a correct band was identified on the gel, as seen in Figure 12A,
lanes 4 and 5. The backbone fragments’ expected size was 6569 bp, and a correct band was
identified around the ladder mark of 6000 bp, Figure 12B, lane 2. Finally, the birA fragment
was also correctly amplified, Figure 12C, lanes 2 and 3.
These fragments would then have been used in a USER cloning assembly to create the integra-
tion vector. If successfully done, the vector could be cloned into P. thermoglucosidasius 5KO
and integration could be performed by inserting the promoter-less operon into the genome by
homologous recombination. A second plasmid would have been designed with homology to
insert a PtetA in front of accD, creating an inducible system to be integrated in the genome.
This solution would ideally increase the flux towards 3HP, increasing titer [44], and thereby
make P. thermoglucosidasius an even more suitable host for production.
Page 30 of 39
==PAGE:37==
Figure 12:
Gels run with the different fragments used in the USER reaction for the construction of the
accDABC integrative vector. A) The gel shows the correct band for the acc fragments in lane 4 and 5. The
fragment size should be 3761 bp, and is indicated to be correct by the 3500 bp ladder marker. B) Here, the gel
for the backbone fragment is shown, with the correct fragment size being 6569 bp. The bright band in lane 2
just above the 6000 bp ladder marker was deemed to be the correct fragment. C) The birA fragment is just
above the 1000 bp marker on the ladder. This corresponds to the expected size of 1157 bp for the fragment.
Page 31 of 39
==PAGE:38==
4
Conclusion & Future perspectives
This thesis aimed to produce industrially relevant organic acid 3HP from an emerging ther-
mophilic cell factory P. thermoglucosidasius, via a MCR pathway.
It was assessed that P.
thermoglucosidasius could tolerate concentration of 3HP between 40-60 g/L. Furthermore, it
was determined that the enzyme MCR4 was able to produce 3HP in P. thermoglucosidasius
based on fold change, with a titer of 0.5 g/L 3HP. This means the titer can be optimised by two
orders of magnitude before toxicity becomes an issue. An optimised non-lactate producing 5KO
strain was also established, with the prospect of further knockouts of side product formation.
Lastly, USER fragments for an integrative vector harbouring an acccDABC-birA operon were
successfully amplified. Finishing the plasmid with this operon would allow for integration into
the 5KO strain and potentiality increase 3HP titers. These results shows that 3HP production
in P. thermoglucosidasius has great potential.
Specific experiments could push it to its full potential, which includes re-characterising the
MCR enzymes activity at 60 ◦C, completing the integration of the accDABC operon into P.
thermoglucosidasius, and additional knockouts of side products, such as ethanol or acetate. As
for P. thermoglucosidasius as a cell factory, this study has proven it to be a promising candi-
date. As the genetic toolbox expands and the organism is better understood, the possibility of
applying thermophilic bacteria to produce products, such as 3HP, on a more sustainable and
industrial scale is exciting.
Page 32 of 39
==PAGE:39==
Acknowledgements
First i would like to thank my supervisors, Stijn Kral and Sheila Ingemann Jensen for giving
me the opportunity to conduct my Master thesis with them. I would also like to thank John
Woodley for being my academic supervisor during this thesis.
I would like to thank all the members of the Bacterial Cell Factory and Sustainable Microbial
Applications groups for being welcoming and helpful when i had questions. A big thanks to all
the master students, Annie, Camilla, Kristine, Pauline, Rafa, and Victor for all of the laughs
in and out of the lab. You made this master thesis experience fun and memorable.
During my 5 years at DTU i met a lot of great people, but especially Cecille, Mathilde and
Mille who made the last 5 years so much fun and unforgettable.
Lastly, I would like to thank the rest of my friends and family who supported my through my
whole engineering degree. Mor, Far, Mie og Thea, tusinde tak for alt det i har givet igennem
min uddannelse, fra de opløftende ord til de hyggelige middage.
Page 33 of 39
==PAGE:40==
References
[1]
Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser. “CO￿emissions”. In: Our World in Data (2020). url:
https://ourworldindata.org/co2-emissions.
[2]
Xiaodi Wang et al. Production of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid from Renewable Substrates by
Metabolically Engineered Microorganisms: A Review. 2023. doi: 10.3390/molecules28041888.
[3]
Yashvir Singh et al. Sustainability of a non-edible vegetable oil based bio-lubricant for
automotive applications: A review. 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.psep.2017.08.041.
[4]
Corinne D. Scown. Prospects for carbon-negative biomanufacturing. 2022. doi: 10.1016/
j.tibtech.2022.09.004.
[5]
Gi Bae Kim, Ha Rim Kim, and Sang Yup Lee. “Comprehensive evaluation of the capacities
of microbial cell factories”. In: Nature Communications 16.2869 (Mar. 2025). doi: 10.
1038/s41467-025-58227-1.
[6]
Oliver Spadiut et al. Microbials for the production of monoclonal antibodies and antibody
fragments. 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2013.10.002.
[7]
Sang Yup Lee and Hyun Uk Kim. Systems strategies for developing industrial microbial
strains. 2015. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3365.
[8]
Eric Abbate et al. Optimizing the strain engineering process for industrial-scale production
of bio-based molecules. 2023. doi: 10.1093/jimb/kuad025.
[9]
Sarang S. Bhagwat et al. “Sustainable Production of Acrylic Acid via 3-Hydroxypropionic
Acid from Lignocellulosic Biomass”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering 9
(49 2021). issn: 21680485. doi: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c05441.
[10]
Tarek Dishisha, Sang Hyun Pyo, and Rajni Hatti-Kaul. “Bio-based 3-hydroxypropionic-
and acrylic acid production from biodiesel glycerol via integrated microbial and chemi-
cal catalysis”. In: Microbial Cell Factories 14 (1 2015). issn: 14752859. doi: 10.1186/
s12934-015-0388-0.
[11]
Miguel Paredes-Barrada et al. Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius as an emerging ther-
mophilic cell factory. 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2024.03.001.
[12]
Yuzuru Suzuki et al. “Bacillus thermoglucosidasius sp. nov., a New Species of Obligately
Thermophilic Bacilli”. In: Systematic and Applied Microbiology 4 (4 1983). issn: 07232020.
doi: 10.1016/S0723-2020(83)80006-X.
Page 34 of 39
==PAGE:41==
[13]
Daniel R. Zeigler. The Geobacillus paradox: Why is a thermophilic bacterial genus so
prevalent on a mesophilic planet? 2014. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.071696-0.
[14]
Marie Millgaard. “Sustainable production of volatile biochemicals using synthetic biol-
ogy”. PhD thesis. Yechnical University of Denmark, 2025.
[15]
Marie Millgaard et al. “The engineering toolbox ofParageobacillus thermoglucosidasius”.
In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 109 (2025), p. 163. doi: 10.1007/s00253-
025-13508-z. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-025-13508-z.
[16]
Elrike Frenzel et al. “In vivo selection of sfGFP variants with improved and reliable func-
tionality in industrially important thermophilic bacteria”. In: Biotechnology for Biofuels
11 (1 2018). issn: 17546834. doi: 10.1186/s13068-017-1008-5.
[17]
Lili Sheng et al. “Development and implementation of rapid metabolic engineering tools
for chemical and fuel production in Geobacillus thermoglucosidasius NCIMB 11955”. In:
Biotechnology for Biofuels 10 (1 2017). issn: 17546834. doi: 10.1186/s13068- 016-
0692-x.
[18]
Anne Walter and John Gutknecht. “Monocarboxylic acid permeation through lipid bilayer
membranes”. In: The Journal of Membrane Biology 77 (3 1984). issn: 00222631. doi:
10.1007/BF01870573.
[19]
Tanya Warnecke and Ryan T. Gill. Organic acid toxicity, tolerance, and production in
Escherichia coli biorefining applications. 2005. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-4-25.
[20]
James B. Russell and Francisco Diez-Gonzalez. “The effects of fermentation acids on
bacterial growth”. In: Advances in Microbial Physiology 39 (1998). issn: 00652911. doi:
10.1016/s0065-2911(08)60017-x.
[21]
Sang Ho Choi, D. J. Baumler, and C. W. Kaspar. “Contribution of dps to acid stress
tolerance and oxidative stress tolerance in Escherichia coli O157:H7”. In: Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 66 (9 2000). issn: 00992240. doi: 10.1128/AEM.66.9.3911-
3916.2000.
[22]
Debbie McLaggan et al. “Interdependence of K+ and glutamate accumulation during
osmotic adaptation of Escherichia coli”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 269 (3 1994).
issn: 00219258. doi: 10.1016/s0021-9258(17)42113-2.
Page 35 of 39
==PAGE:42==
[23]
Hun Su Chu et al. “Metabolic engineering of 3-hydroxypropionic acid biosynthesis in
Escherichia coli”. In: Biotechnology and Bioengineering 112 (2 2015). issn: 10970290.
doi: 10.1002/bit.25444.
[24]
Viviënne Mol et al. “Genome-scale metabolic modeling of P. thermoglucosidasius NCIMB
11955 reveals metabolic bottlenecks in anaerobic metabolism”. In: Metabolic Engineering
65 (2021). issn: 10967184. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2021.03.002.
[25]
Michael Hügler et al. “Malonyl-coenzyme a reductase from Chloroflexus aurantiacus, a
key enzyme of the 3-hydroxypropionate cycle for autotrophic CO2 fixation”. In: Journal
of Bacteriology 184 (9 2002). issn: 00219193. doi: 10.1128/JB.184.9.2404-2410.2002.
[26]
Hyeoncheol Francis Son et al. “Structural insight into bi-functional malonyl-CoA reduc-
tase”. In: Environmental Microbiology 22 (2 2020). issn: 14622920. doi: 10.1111/1462-
2920.14885.
[27]
S. J. Li and J. E. Cronan. “The gene encoding the biotin carboxylase subunit of Es-
cherichia coli acetyl-CoA carboxylase”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 267 (2 1992).
issn: 00219258. doi: 10.1016/s0021-9258(18)48362-7.
[28]
Vandana Chakravartty and John E. Cronan. “Altered regulation of escherichia coli biotin
biosynthesis in bira superrepressor mutant strains”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 194 (5
2012). issn: 00219193. doi: 10.1128/JB.06549-11.
[29]
Youjun Feng, Huimin Zhang, and John E. Cronan. “Profligate biotin synthesis in ￿-
proteobacteria - a developing or degenerating regulatory system?” In: Molecular Micro-
biology 88 (1 2013). issn: 0950382X. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12170.
[30]
Alison Mohr and Sujatha Raman. “Lessons from first generation biofuels and implica-
tions for the sustainability appraisal of second generation biofuels”. In: Eﬀiciency and
Sustainability in Biofuel Production: Environmental and Land-Use Research (2015). issn:
03014215. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2013.08.033.
[31]
Melanie Straub et al. “Selective enhancement of autotrophic acetate production with
genetically modified Acetobacterium woodii”. In: Journal of Biotechnology 178 (1 2014).
issn: 18734863. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.03.005.
[32]
Shengfang Zhou et al. “Sustainable Bioproduction of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid from
Acetic Acid by Engineering Malonate Semialdehyde Metabolism in Pseudomonas denitrif-
Page 36 of 39
==PAGE:43==
icans”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering (2025). doi: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.
5c01172.
[33]
Fernando Geu-Flores et al. “USER fusion: A rapid and eﬀicient method for simultaneous
fusion and cloning of multiple PCR products”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 35 (7 2007).
issn: 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm106.
[34]
Jurate Bitinaite et al. “USER™friendly DNA engineering and cloning method by uracil
excision”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 35 (6 2007). issn: 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/
gkm041.
[35]
Petar Žuvela et al. Column Characterization and Selection Systems in Reversed-Phase
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography. 2019. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00246.
[36]
Marie Millgaard et al. “An improved integrative GFP-based vector for genetic engineering
of Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius facilitates the identification of a key sporulation
regulator”. In: AMB Express 13 (1 2023). issn: 21910855. doi: 10.1186/s13568-023-
01544-9.
[37]
Kristoffer Bach Falkenberg et al. “The ProUSER2.0 Toolbox: Genetic Parts and Highly
Customizable Plasmids for Synthetic Biology in Bacillus subtilis”. In: ACS Synthetic
Biology 10 (12 2021). issn: 21615063. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.1c00130.
[38]
Ding Jun Jin, Cedric Cagliero, and Yan Ning Zhou. Growth rate regulation in Escherichia
coli. 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2011.00279.x.
[39]
Chiun Nan Chen et al. “Feasibility study using a natural compound (reuterin) produced
by Lactobacillus reuteri in sterilizing and crosslinking biological tissues”. In: Journal of
Biomedical Materials Research 61 (3 2002). issn: 00219304. doi: 10.1002/jbm.10153.
[40]
Kwang Seo Kim et al. “The Rut pathway for pyrimidine degradation: Novel chemistry
and toxicity problems”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 192 (16 2010). issn: 00219193. doi:
10.1128/JB.00201-10.
[41]
Ah Yeong Chun et al. “Elucidation of toxicity of organic acids inhibiting growth of
Escherichia coli W”. In: Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering 19 (5 2014). issn:
19763816. doi: 10.1007/s12257-014-0420-y.
[42]
Thuan Phu Nguyen-Vo et al. “Development of 3-hydroxypropionic-acid-tolerant strain of
Escherichia coli W and role of minor global regulator yieP”. In: Metabolic Engineering 53
(2019). issn: 10967184. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2019.02.001.
Page 37 of 39
==PAGE:44==
[43]
Matthew S.H. Lau et al. “Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius Strain Engineering Using
a Theophylline Responsive RiboCas for Controlled Gene Expression”. In: ACS Synthetic
Biology 13 (4 2024). issn: 21615063. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.3c00735.
[44]
Suman Lama et al. “Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from acetate using metabolically-
engineered and glucose-grown Escherichia coli”. In: Bioresource Technology 320 (2021).
issn: 18732976. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2020.124362.
[45]
Chelladurai Rathnasingh et al. “Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid via malonyl-CoA
pathway using recombinant Escherichia coli strains”. In: Journal of Biotechnology 157 (4
2012). issn: 01681656. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.06.008.
[46]
Yun Chen et al. “Coupled incremental precursor and co-factor supply improves 3-hydroxypropionic
acid production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Metabolic Engineering 22 (2014). issn:
10967176. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2014.01.005.
Page 38 of 39
==PAGE:45==
Appendix
Appendix A
Shown here is the sketch of the fragments and complete USER cloning strategy for design of
an integrative vector with accBABC-birA operon for P. thermoglucosidasius
Figure 13: Sketch of the different fragments amplified to produce an integrative vector with accDABC-birA
operon. A) Shows the two fragments, acc and birA, from the template of pCS2 with the primers used. B)
shows a sketch of the backbone, with primers.
C)Sketch of proposed integration plasmid pOMC1, with a
promoterless accDABC-birA operon.
With homology arms for integration into ldhA site on the genome of
P.thermoglucosidasius. Also contains kanR and GFP for selection markers.
Page 39 of 39
